HI1 STORY

O F
S CO TLAND AX D,

IL>tRJliVO T37E R EIG!NS O.F
QUEEN MARY, and of KI NcG JAMES VI.

TI L L
h~is Acc-ssIoN~ to the Crown of ENGlLAND.

,v -i r I[ A
REv-viE- of the ScoTT rs s HLrsror y previOus to tlhat Period;

And an A. I'ENDI Ix clntainingg ORIE INAL l'AXERS.

E y WILI-,A AI RO IE RTSON, Dh D.

7r) M11(11 15 !.OIY AsDDED,
_i/ ccn~rc Si'tar~e oJ' tJ~L'c (onrt;·ove~ji rc/p Ii Q~ MA r Y,

!No2 n an'suivrer d//j1o,, of biJ''.

L. D 1 N\ 11 U R G' 1 A

v1.I ;t SN , 1.R ~ii in:. (I

T; N, 1rtrd Ix

( xL~v n & Sr N
z.3 -i nr c~ ', Ednliai1,1rj'."

\~./ (oi~.r-~, citl.' a' I \.V. AN ui2.:o N, SD,' ·:C.

N\ I) C C 2> 1.

THE great fame which our Author has so jtifly acquired in the

literary world, and the part he has taken in a matter of so much
importance in Scots history, seems to require some apology for
our attempt to elucidate the controversy rerpecing Queen Mary,
a question which has long been an objeSL of political inquiry. Dr.
Robertson's character, as an hiforian, is no doubt sufficient to es-
tablifl, or at least to give a very considerable weight to any ar-
gument he makes use of; but in the present cafe, so many able
writers have espoused the cause of Mary, that we thought it
necessary to give some account of what has been fail by both
parties; and, if we have differed from our learned Author, we
hope that the reader will attribute it entirely to the force of evi-
dence lying on the other fide of the queflion. The Statement
which we have added to the present volume, contains the fuin of
most of the arguments that have been used at any time upon the
fubje&, and indeed almost the whole that feema pofltble to be made
use of by either party. Particular notice has been taken of the
assertions of Buchanan, and Leily Bishop of Ross ; who, being the
first that formally debated the cause, may reasonably be thought
to have almost exhausted what, at that time, could be urged upon
the subjee. Succeeding events and discoveries, however, have
brought to light many dark transactions and machinations whici
in those days were carefully concealed. These have now been
announced to the public by various elegant and fplcndid writ-
ers ; all of whom have been consulted on the prlfent occasion
so that, on the whole, the Editors hope that this edition will be
confidered as the most valuable ever offered to the public, as it
supersedes, in a great measure, the neceflity of recurring to many
volumes of considerable size, which our readers, perh:,ps, n:Ia
have neither time nor opportunity to peruse.

# BOOK SEVENTH. CONTENTS. THROGMORTON'S conspiracy. Designs of Mary's adherents. Severe proceedings against the banished Lords. Against the Clergy. Conspiracy against Elizabeth. Opposition to Mary. ...

THE
HI STORY

0F
S C O T L A N D.

BOOK SEVENTH.

CONTENTS.
TZIROaGoaTO;'s conspiracy. Designs of %iary's adherents. Severe proceed-

ings againli the banished Lords. Agailnft the Clergy. Conlpiracy againilt
Elizabeth. Oppofriton to MlIary. Gray, a new favourite. His interest.
Arran's corruption. Parry's confjiiracy. Severe statute against Mary. A
league againlt Elizabeth. Her wife conduct. Arran's power undermined.

lThe banifcled Lords return to Scotland. A parliament. Church affltirs.

League with England. Babington's conlifiracy.-Difcovcrcd. Miary accu-
fed. ler domestics and papers lfized. Ier trial. Ier defence. I-cr fcn-
tence confirmed by parliament. Elizabeth's dissimulation. France ilter-
poses in behalf of Inary. James endeavours to save his mother. Mary's
sentence published. vlary treated wvith great rigour. James fblicits in her
behalf. Of Elizabeth's anxiety. Warrant for NIary's execution signed.
Her behaviour at death. Her charaaer. Elizabeth endeavours to sooth: Janes.
Disgrace of Cray. Annexation of church lands. Of the Lesser Barons. Of
the Spaniih armado. Conducl of James on that occasion. A national cove-
nant. The armado tlefeated. Intrigues of Philip and the Popilh nobles.
James's lenlity to the conspirators. His marriage.

WTtlHLLE Scotland was torn by those intefline faflions, Elizabeth 13o0l VIr.
was alarmed witl the rumour ofa projcfl in agitation for setting V
1Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheflire gentleman, 15 84';

Thrognmor-

was fufpecled of being deeply concerned in the design, and on tol': con-
tlat suspicion he was takcn into cuflody. Among his papers were fpira"cy a-
found two lils, one of the principal harbours in tle kingdom, zabetlh.
withl an account of their situation, and of the depth of the water
in each ; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catholics in EIng-
laind. This circunfitance confirmned the fifpicion againt hlim,
and fomnc dark and idlcfriatc conspiracy vwas tippofed just redly
to break out. At firfl he boldly avowed his innocence, andl de.
clared that the two papers were forged by the Qecen's Minillcrs,

.V g/ume 11. A.

BooK VTI. in order to intimidate or enflnare him ; and he even endured the

v rack with the utmoll fortitude. But being brought a second time
I584. to the place of torture, his resolution failtd him, and he not only

acknowledged that he had held a secret correlpondence with the
QOeen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to invade
England. The Duke of G uife, he said, undertook to furniflh troops,
and to condu& the enterprie. The Pope and King of Spain were
to supply the money, necessary for carrying it on; all the Engliih
exiles were eager to take arms ; many of the Catholics at home
would be ready to join'them, at their landing; Mendoza the Spa-
niflh ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no
pains in fomenting the spirit of difaffeaion among the Englilh, or
in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poeffflion. This confession he retraced at his trial;
returned to it again, after fetitence was passed upon him ; and re-
traaed it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are aflifled in forming our opi-

nion of this matter, by the light which time and hiltory have
thrown upon the designs and characters of the Princes of Guise,
many circumflances in Throgmorton's confession appear to be ex-
tremely remote from truth, or even from probability. The Duke
of Guise was, at that juncture, far from being in a situation to un-
dertake foreign conqueils. Without either power or office at
court; hated by the King; and persecuted by the favourites; he
had no leisure for any thoughts of diflurbing the quiet of ncigh-
bouring flates, and his vatl and ambitious mind was wholly occu-
pied in laying the foundation of that famous league, which fliook
the throne of France. But about the time Elizabeth detected
this conspiracy, the close union between the house of Guise and
Philip II. was remarkable to all Europe, and as their great cn-
terprife against Henry Ill. was not yet difclloled, as tlcy en-
deavoured to conceal that under their thlcatcnir.gs to invade Eng-
land, Tliroginorton's (tilcovcry appeared to be cxtrccly prolb;!blec
:nd Elizabctll. \vllo lknew lhow a;rl:nm!y .all the parties mention-
ed by liim wiilled ller ldownfil, tllouighlt lat l !ic could nolt gunrd
her kinlltim willth too miuch care. 'I'hc ii '"!iileCtt 'Cl 1(' the

D,'firE nr E lnl i(I exiles ji(l:rt:lk'ld iher f l'a;is. ?Not l'ti.li cd vwilih inceflJunt
r\Tnr';s :l- outcries :.Iaiilnl l-r Ilc.c'ilv tc, wirds lQic Sctitili QClccl, and her
" I ll.i- cruel pcrlvicution of hILr -- Catholil: jcts, lor thinking it cnonlgh

tabt hat one Pole had tlhrleatcnc d h1 r , ithll Ii: llutellcc of cx'oiin'ii1i.

' Ilolin fIt.cd, 37 e.

cation, and another had a&tually pronounced it, they now began BooK VII.
to difrperfc books and writings, in which they endcavoured to g _
persuade their disciples, that it would be a meritorious aQion to
take away her life; they openly exhorted the maids of honour to
treat her, as Judith did Holoferncs, and by such an illustrious
deed, to render their own names honourable and sacrcd in the
Church, throughout all future ages*. For all these rcafons, Eli-
zabeth not only inflicted the punilhment of a traitor on Throg-
nmorton, but commanded the Spanifl ambhafador instantly to leave
Englalnd; and that (le might be in no danger.of being attacked
within the island, (he determined to use her utmofi efforts, in or-
der to recover that influence over the Scottifl councils, which fle
had for some time entirely loft.

There were three different methods, by which Elizabeth might She endea-

hope to accomplifll this ; either by furnillhing such cffctEual aid '1t,s' re.'c
to the banilhdd nobles, as would enable them to resume the chie-f infiu.-nce in
direction of aitairs ; or by entering into sucll a treaty with Mary, gcslaigAr. y
as might intimidate her ion, who being now accUiilomed togovern, ran.
would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than rcfign the fccptre
or admit an aiTociate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of
Arran, to secure the direaion of the King his mafler. Thec
lafl was not only the eafielt, and fpeedietl, but the moll certain
of success. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without lay-
ing the other two altogethler afidc. With this view, Ile sent
Davison, one of her principal fecrctaries, and a man of abilities
and address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hat-
ed by his own countrymen, and holding his power by the moil
precarious of all tenures, the favour of a young prince, accepted
Elizabeth's offers without hclitation, and efleemnd tlhe acquifi-
tion of her protection to be the mnoll solid foundation of his own
grcatnefs. Soon after, he consented to an interview with Lord l ftll 1n.
IIunfilane the Governor of Berwick, and being honoured with
the pompous title of Lieutenant General for the King, lie appear-
ed at the place appointed, with a fplc;.did train. In [itiifl;l:e's
lrefcncc, lie rnewetd his promilcs of an invi(oliljle and faiilhful
atta:clihnent to tile Engliil intercil, and affiuTd him that James
should enter into no negociltliun, which tended to iutcrilupt tlhe
peace between the two k;ingdiolns; and as l .lizabctli ber:!n to en-
tertaill the failme fears 1andl j ilulics concerning tlie King'. m::r-
i-ii!ce which had formerly difi;lictcld her r

illh regard to h;is mno-
thler's le undertookl to prevent J anls froi lillcning to any ovcr.

i Cmuiia. I,|7.

A ij

Booi VIL. ture of that kind, till he had previouily obtained the Queen of

' ' England's consent*.
1584. The banishcd Lords and their adherents soon felt the effets of

Severe pro.
ceedings a Arran's friendfliip with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
galeft the them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her Mini-
baniflied
Lords. fters were of opinion that (he ought to employ her arms in de-

fence of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which
restrained James and llis favourite, from proceeding to such ex-
tremities against them, as might have excited the pity or indig-
nation of the Englinh, and have prompted them to exert them-
selves with vigour in their behalf. But every apprehension of
this kind being now removed, they ventured to call a parliament,
Uugln22. in which an a& was passed, attainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and

a great number of their followers. Their cllates devolved to the
Crown, and according to the pratice of the Scottilh Monarchs,
who were obliged to reward the fatlion which adhered to them,
by dividing with it the fpuils of the vanquished, James dealt out
the greater part of theic to Arran, and llis associates*.

Againlt tle Nor was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. All mi-
C"2g). niflcrs, readers, and professors in Colleges were enjoined to sub-

fcribc, within forty days, a paper testifying their approbation of
the laws concerning the Church, enacted in lait parliament.
Many, overawed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience;
others flood out. The tlipends of the latter were sequestered,
some of the more a&cive committed to prison, and numbers com-
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the
suspicion of acting from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those
who suffered, acquired high reputation, by giving fucll convin-
cing evidence of their firmness and incerity. The judicatories of
tle Church were almolt entirely fuppreflcd. In some places, scarce
so many Minillers remained, as to perform the duties of rcligious
wor/hip; they soon funkl in reputation among the people, and being
prohibited not only from discoursing of public affairs, but obliged,
by the jealousy of the admliifiration, to frame every cfntirnent and
cxpreflon in such a manner, as to give tle court no of'fncc, their
ferrnons were deemed languid, inlipid, and contemptible. And
it beccame the general opinion, that together with the moos vir-
tuous of the nobles, and the mioll faithful of the clergy, the power
and vigotlr of religion woee nowv b1anlifled ou0t of the kilngdom :.

JtL..n '1v ile!, E.izat:llh \was canlryingll on one of tihol f'ruitlcfs
nngociaitions witlh the Ceccn of Scots, which it lIhd lbcome al-

Cald. 3 1,. .91 v. 3I'. Se' Append. No. Ii.

TI alcl j.-;7 i L itl. j
.7

mofl matter of form to renew every year. They served not on- eooK VII.
ly to amuse that unhappy princess with Iome prolpea of liberty;
but furnifled an apology for eluding the solicitations of foreign 1'84'
powers in her behalf; and were of use to overawe Jnmes, by
(lewing him that lie could, at any time, set free a dangerous ri-
val to dispute his authority. These treaties ihe suffered to pro-
ceed to what lengtlh fe pleased, and never wanted a pretence
for breaking them off, when they became no longer neceflfry.
The treaty now on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere than ma-
ny which preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered it
ineffedual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scot- Nc'-vcon-

fiArac)y a-

land, the flip on board of which he was a palfenger happened to gainil Lli.
be chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infelled the narrow :ab'lh.
seas. Crichton in great conftufion, tore in pieces tome papers in
his cuflody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary
accident, the wind blew them back into the Ihip, and they were
immediately taken up by some of the passengers, wllo carried them
to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great in-
dultry and patience, joined them together, and they were found
to contain the account of a plot, formed by the King of Spain,
and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The people were
not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the
conspiracy, in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and as
his discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by additional evi-
dence, not only all their former apprchenfions recurred, but the
consternation became general and exccivc. As all the dangers,
with which England had been threatened for some years, flowed
either immediately from Mary herellf, or from throe, whvlo made
use of her name to juflify their inlilrredcions and conrfiracies, this
gradually diminiincd the compafiion due to her situation, and the
English, inltead of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
beth, under whose wife and pacilic reign the Englilh enjoyed
tranquillity, and had opened sources of wealth unknown to their
anceflors, was extremely beloved by all her people a:nd regard
to her safety, not less than to their own interell, anlillmated th11(.
againll tle Scottllih Qucnc . In order to dilicourage her aderll nts, ,c;,lion.:
it was tlhougllt neceflary to conivince thlem, by Inie public deed, :' :1 ,l'i;-
of the attUccilinmeit of the Elnglifl to their owni Sovereigln, and pi,, ;lill
tat lany ;llempt againllt ler life would prove flat:l to hlie rival. I;.r.
\Vith thi; vic';v, :in y//lbc:'az.tio wv:s fraimed, tl hel flllctilbcs of 0o.l,.r 9
ivLlich {u. illd thc ben!'vcls lIy the tsl(ll 1blcmn oa:ths, " to decfend

BOOK VII. " the Queen againit all her enemies, foreign and domeRic; and

" if violence fliould be offered to her life, in order to favour the
4 " ,title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only engaged

" never to allow or acknowledge the person, or persons, by

whom, or for whom, such a detetfable ac fllould be commit-

" ted, but vowed, in the presence of the Eternal God, to prose-
" cute such person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue them,
" with their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow and ex-
' tirpation *." Persons of all ranks subscribed this combination.
with the greatest eagerness and unanimity -.

Which Mary confidered this combination, not only as an avowed de-
larmtlshe sign to exclude her from all right of fucccflion, but as the certain

and immediate forerunner of her deftrulion. In order to avert
this, fle made such feeble efforts as were itill in her power, and
sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers of more entire re-
fignation to the will of Elizabeth, in all points, which had been
the occasion of their long enmity, than her pall sufferings had
been hitherto able to extort . But whether Mary adhered in-
flexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sovereign, or yield-
ing to the neceity of her situation, endeavoured, by concefiions,
to sboth her rival, fle was equally unfuccesful. Her firmness
was imputed to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign aflift-
ance; her conceflions were either believed to be insincere, or to
flow from the fear of some present danger. Her willingness,
however, to comply with any terms was so great, that Walfing-
ham warmly urged his mistress to come to a final agreement
with her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that it was the spirit
raised by the association, which had rendered her so pallive and
compliant. She always imagined that there was something my-
iterious and deceitful in all Mary's adions, and fiufpeced her of
carrying on a dangerous correspondence with the Englilh Catho-
lics, both within and without the kingdom. Nor were her sus-
picions altogether void of foundation. Mlary had, about this
time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to
lhaflen the execution of what the calls the Great plot or Dcfin-
ment, without elcfitating on account of any danger in which it
might involve her life, which lhe would most willingly part with,
if, by that ficrifice, ihe could procure relief for so great a uliln-

Sie irl treat- ber of the opprclfed children of the Churchl 1. Inflcad, thlre-
-I with
gra tcrri. fore, of hearkning to the overtures which the Scottinl Qcee
' :ir.

Siate Trials, 1. 122. 1 Caimd. 499. Id. ilbid.
U stiyii;., j, ;_16.

made, or granting any mitigation of the hardships of vwlich file BooK VII.
complained, Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of
the Earl of Shrewvhury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and
Sir Druc Drury, to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged
his trust with great fidelity, during fiftcen ycars, but, at the
fame time, had treated Mary with gentleness and refpet, and
had always fwcetcncd harsh commands, by the humanity, with
which he put them in execution. The fame politeness was not
to be expected from men of an inferior rank, whose severe vigi-
lance, perhaps, was their chief recommendation to that employ-
ment, and the only merit, by which they could pretend to gain
favour or preferment *.

As James ,was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the banifl- Gray,a
ed nobles of Elizabeth's proteCtion, he appointed the Maner of "wt favo"'

rite of thc

Gray his ambassador to the court of England, and intrufled him King's.
with the conduc of a negociation for that purpose. An honour
for which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl
of Arran. Gray pofleffed all the talents of a courtier; a grace-
ful pcrlon, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a reft-
less and intriguing spirit. During his rcfidence in France, he
had been admitted into the moll intimate familiarity with the
Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his favour, had renounced
tlhe Proteflant Religion, and professed the utmolu zeal for the cap-
tive Q(een, wllo carried on a secret conelponcdencc with him,
from whlich flie expected great advantages. On his return into
Scotland, he paid court to James with extraordinary afiduity,
and his accomplifliments did nut fail to make their ulial impref-
sion on the King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him, began
quickly to dread his growing favour, and flattering himself, that
abfencee would efface any lentiments of tendcrnels from the mind
of a young prince, pointed himi out by his malicious praifis, as
the nmoll proper pcrfon in the kingdom, for an embatyl of fucli
importance ; and contriuted to raise him to that high dignity,
in order to hallen his fall. IElizabeth, who hald an admirable
dexterity in dilcovering the proper instruments for carrying on
her deligns, endeavoured, by carel'es, and by prelterts, to recure
Gray to her interelt. 'lThe former flattered his vanity, wliich
was great; the latter Il;ipplyed his profifenels, wlicl was llill
greater. lie abanldoned himlilf' without relerve to Elizableth's
directions, and not only undertook to preierve tle King under
tlhe inlluence of Elinl;ulan but aced as a li'y upon the Scottill

Canald. 50o,

BoK ViI. QOeen, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that lie cbuld

tr5"8 dcraw from her, by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.
is interclt Gray's credit with the Englifl court was extremely galling'to
with the the banillied nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing

hn'd er pdwer to realore them; he found it easy to govern Scotland,
bIy corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with
Gray's solicitations, ihe commanded the exiles to leave the north
Decem. 3r. of England, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This

rendered it dil:cult for them to hold any correspondence with
their partizans in Scotland, and almofl irpcflible to return thither
without her pcrmifion. Gray, by gaining a point which James
1nad so much at heart, rivetted himself more firmly than ever in
his favour; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable
of fcrving Elizabeth with greater fuccel'sf.

I 85' Arran ha:d now pofieffed, for some time, all the power, the

A rran's cor- riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could de-
inblernct. Iirc, or the fondless of a prince, who set no limits to his liberali-

ty towards his favourites, could beflow. The office of Lord
Chancellor, the highest and mofi important in the kingdom, was
conferred upon him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll,

1vho fuccedecd Athol in that dignity .. And the public beheld,
with ai'onihment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of
fortune, ignorant of law, and a contemner ofjufiice; appointed to
preilde in parliament, in the privy council, in the court of fef-
flon, and intrulted with the supreme disposal of the property of his
fellow fuibjecls. He was, at the fame time, Governor of the caf-
tles of Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scot-
land; Provoil of the city of Edinburgh and as if by all these
accumulated dignities his merit had not been fuflicienrly recom-
pensid, he was created Lieutenant General over the whole
kingdmrn. No person was admitted into the King's presence
.without his permilicn ; no faour could be obtained but by his
mediation. J.ncs, occupied with youthful arnufements, devoliv-
cl upon hin the whiole regal authority. Such unmerited ele-
v\:tion increallb hiis natural arrogance, a; d rendered it intoler-
-nlle. Ile ws:s no I, hgcr content witll the condition of a fu;bjcct,
but 1l-ctelidtL(c to; d'riv'e hili pecdigrCe fiom MIurdo Duke of Alba-
ny, nndi l.,ai.lc, olcnly, til.t his title to the cro:wn was prefer-
:ible to tihat of tlie i in:' hiinilelf. j3ut, together with thcee
tlu;olnl;ts of royalty, ihe retiiined the Icannlcfs, iuit::ble to li;s p:i-

· S* r,

si ,..;. .M,!. M,; i6. t; . CIJ. 3. (;,l- .
t Ci.;'.v£. Olii,. ¢':',;.:,', .\)', ,..1-.

.h .
:n mltive fIate. His venality as a judge was scandalous, and was BooK VII.

exceeded only by that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, -
! made herself a party in almost every question which came to be 58
decided, employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe the

'; judges, and almort openly dictated their decisions*. His rapaci-
. oufnefs as a minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the reve-

s' nues of so many offices; with the cfeate and honours which be-

7 longed to the house of Hamilton; or with the greater part of
i Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his liare; he grasped at the

poffeflions of several of the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell
to exchange part of his estate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil;
and because he was unwilling to quit an ancient inheritance for
a poffeflion so precarious, he stirred up against him, his old rival,
the Laird of Johnston, and involved that corner of the kingdom
in a civil war. He committed to prison, the Earl of Athole,
Lord Home, and the Master of Caffils; the firif, because he
would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the Earl of Gowrie,
and entail his estate on him; the second, because he was unwil-
ling to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his eflates; and
the third, for refuting to lend him money. His spies and in-
formers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves into
every company. The nearest neighbours diftrulted and feared
each other. All familiar society was at an end. Even the corn
mon intercourses of humanity were interrupted, no man knowing
in whom to confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is
not perhaps in history, any example of a miniiter so universally
detestable to a nation, or who more juffly deserved its detefta-
tion -.

Arran, notwithfsanding, regardless of the sentiments, and de-

spifing the murmers of the people, gave a loose to his natural tem-
per, and proceeded to acts still more violent. David Home of
Argaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banifled Lords, about private bufincfs, were condemn-
ed and put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels.
Cunninghame of Drumwhaefl, and Douglas of Mains, two gen-
tlemen of honour and reputation, were accused of having conlpi-
red, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A single
witness only appeared; the evidence they produced of their inno-
cence was unanfverable ; their acctrier himiielf not long after ac-
knowledged that he had been suborned by Arran ;
: d iall men

Cald. 3. 331. Scotftarvet's Sta-gcrilig State, 7.

j Spots. 337, 338.
Vo/h:t.c 1I. 3

BooK VII. believed the' charge againit them to be groundless; they were
i /,' found guilty, notwithfianding, and suffered the death of traitors *.
February 9. About the fame time, that there gentlemen were punifled for a
Parry'scon- pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's lifewas endangeredby a real one.
s'piracya-i Parry, a Doaor of laws, and a member of the House of Commons,
zabeth. a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit, had lately been re-

conciled to the Church of Rome; and fraught with the zeal of a
new convert, he offered to demonitrate the sincerity of his attach-
ment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Elizabeth.
Cardinal Allen had publilhed a book, to prove the murder of an ex-
communicated Prince to be not only a lawful, but a meritorious
a&tion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both there and
at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the design. The Pope
himself exhorted him to persevere 3 and granted him, for his ei-
couragement, aplenary indulgence, and remission of his fins. Car-
dinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But though
he often got access to the Queen, fear, or some remaining sense of
duty, retrained him from perpetrating the crime. Happily, his in-
tention was at last discovered by Nevil, the only person in England,
to whom he had communicated it; and he himself having voluntarily

March 2. confesscd his guilt, he fuffcred the punifnment which it deserved-S.
A revere These repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened
Aatute, the indignation of the Erigli(l Parliament, and produced a very
which prov-
ed fatalto extraordinary Statute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the
lia"-. Quecn of Scots. By this law the Association in defence of Eli-

zabeth's life was ratified, and it was further enaced; " that if
"any rebellion (hall be excited in the kingdom, or any thing
" attempted to the hurt of her Majesty's person, by orfor any
" person pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen shall em-
" .power twenty four persons, by a commission under the great
" Teal, to examine into, and pass sentence upon such offences;
" and after judgment given, a proclamation lhall he issued, de-
" claring the persons whom they find guilty, excluded from any
"right to the Crown ; and her Majesty's iubjeRs may lawfully
"pursue every one of them to the death, with all their aiders
"' and abettors. And if any design againll the life of the cQeen

take cffc&t, the perfbns, /y orjir whom, such a deteltable ad&

"is executed, and their )'/fiws, being any wife afcrnting or privy
' to tihe famc, shall be dilfialed for ever from pretending to
"i tc Crown, and' be piturucd( to deatll in the like manneri J."
This nac was plainly lcvellcei t the Q-cen of Scots; anid whc-

Srotf!s'. 33,,( . Caltd. .7P.}. -1 Stac 'J'ii;ls, \Vcl . I. c i3. Ibi. MJ .

ther we confider it as a voluntary exprefllon of the zeal and con- BooK VII.
cern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we impute
it to the influence, which that artful Princess preserved over her 1585.
parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it wvith the general
principles of justice, or humanity. Mary was -thcreby rendered
accountable not only for her own a.iions, but for those of others;
in consequence of wllich, she might forfeit her right of fuccef-
sion, and even her life itself.

Mary jufily confidered this aót, as a warning to prepare for the The rigour

with which

worfl extremities. Elizabeth's miniiters, it is probable, had re- flhe wa
fulved, by this time, to take away her life; and suffered books treated, in

crearel.u

to be publiihed, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel cre
and unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but jut *.
Even that short period of her days which remained, they render-
ed uncomfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which it was
in their power to inflict. Almost all her servants were difmimf-
ed; fle was treated no longer with the refpet due to a Qeen;
and though the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had brok-
en her conlfitution, flie was confined to two ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer, by reason of
cold. NotwithPRanding the scantiness of her revenue, fle had
been accuflomed to distribute regularly some alms among the poor
in the village adjoining to the caitle. Paulet, now, refused her
liberty to perform this pious and humane office, which had afford-
ed her great consolation, amidst her own sufferings. The callc,
in which she resided, was converted into a common prison; and
a young man fufpefced of Popery, was confined there, and treat-
ed with such rigour, under her eye, that he died of the ill uhage.
She often complained to Elizabeth of there multiplied injuries,
and expoltulated as became a woman, and a Queen; but as no
political reason now obliged that Princels to amuse her any longer
with fallacious hopes, far from granting her any redrcfs, she did
not even deign to give her any answer. 'The King of France,
closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom hle depcnded for alitiiance,
was afraid of espousing Mary's cause, with any warnmth and all
his solicitations in her behalf were feeble, formal, and inetTica.
cious. But Caflelnau, the Frencch anibafnadlor, whose coinp:.iion
and zeal for the unhappy Q(een supplied the dcfcCts i:n his iit.
ftrucionls, remonntrated with such vigour againit the indignitics,
to which slie was exposed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed
at length to have ler removed to Tuthbury ; though Illev w

t Slrype, 3' a'29

B ij

BOOK VII. confined, the greater part of another winter, in her present

wretched habitation *.

A breach
Mbrelch Neither the insults of her enemies, nor the negleet of her
between friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as the ingratitude of
MarY and.
her ionm her son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpe&t,

and had even entered into negociations with her, which gave
umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this
good correspondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return
into Scotland, found his favour with the king greatly increased
by the success of his embafy, pervaided him to write a harsh and
undutiful letter to his mother, in which he expressly refused
to acknowledge her to be Qeen of Scotland, or to confider
his affairs as conne&ed, in any wife, with hers. This cruel re-
quital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-
IMarch -4. row and deSpair. " Was it for this, said fie, in a letter to the

" French ambassador, that I have endured so much, in order to
" preserve for him the inheritance, to which I have a jufft right ?
" I am far from envying his authority in Scotland. I desire no
" power there; nor wish to set my foot in that kingdom, if it
< were nct for the pleasure of once embracing a son, whom I
" have hitherto loved with too tender affeaion. Whatever he

either enjoys, or expeas, he derived it from'me. From him,.
I never received afliftance, supply, or benefit of any kind.
"Let not my allies treat him any longer as a King 3 he holds

that dignity by my content; and if a speedy repentance does
not appease my just resentment, I will load him with a parent's

"curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pretensions, to
"one, who will receive them with gratitude, and defend them
" with vigour-." The love which James bore to his mother,
dwhom he had never known, nay whom he had been early taught
t) confider as the most abandoned person of her fox, cannot be
tfuppofed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
pains to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his
undutiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Popc-
ry, prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of disinheriting
her I;n ; or whether these thrcatenings were uttered in a sudden
fal!y of disappointed affteion ; it is now no cafy matter to deter-
mine. Some papers which are 111il extant seem to render the
former not improbable ..

Cares of another kind, and no less disquieting, occupied Eliza-

li:ii-inon of bcth's thoughts. The calm, which lhe had long enjoyed, feemled
lir.
ab.th,

* Jcbb, v. a. 576-S98. ' Ibid. .71. S7 $¢e App4ld. NO.X. . No. XI.

now to be at an end ; and such florms were gathering in every BooK VII.
quarter, as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring na- -
tions had undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. I5S
The great qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his
youth, and which raised the expectations of his subjects so high,
vanified on his ascending the throne; and his acquiring fu-
preme power seems not only to have corrupted his heart, but to
have imipaired his understanding. He soon loll the esteem and
affecion of the natiorn; and a life, divided between the aufteri-
ties of a fuperlitious devotion; and the extravagancies of the
most dissolute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible, as he
was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his profusion, and the
fondness with which he doated on two unworthy minions. On
the death of his only brother, those sentiments of the people burlf
out with violence. Henry had no children, and though but thir-
ty-two years of age, the succession of the Crown was already con-
fidered as open. The King of Navarre, a distant descendent of from the
the royal family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was progrelsof

the league;

a zealous Protestant. The prospeCt of an event, so fatal to
their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France, alarm-
ed all the Catholics in Europe. And the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romiflh faith, and the alfertor of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In order to unite
the party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diflinguifled by
the name of the Holy, League. All ranks of men joined in it with
emulation. The spirit spread with the irresistible rapidity, which
was natural to religious paflions, in that age. The dcftrudion of
the Reformation not only in France, but all over Europe, iem-
ed to be the objec and with of the whole party. And the Duke
of Guise, the head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired au-
thority in the kingdom, far superior to that, which the King
himself poffefled. Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had from le
greatly increascd the naval power of Spain, and had at last red,:. 1,''er o"
ced under his dominion that portion of the Continent, which lies
beyond the Pyrenean mountains, and which nature seems to have
dcefincd to form one great Monarchy. William Prince of O-
range, who firIt cncouraged the inhabitants of the Netherlands
to afl'ert their liberties, and wlhofi willdoin and valour formed and
protected the riling commonwealth, had fuilen by the hands of
an aflaflin. The fupcrior genius of the Prince of Parmna had
given an entire turn to the fate of the war in the Low Countries;

BooK VIr. all his enterprises concerted with consummate ikill, and execut-

ed with equal bravery, had been attended with uninterrupted fuc-
cess; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on the
point of falling under the dominion of their ancient master.

Her wvire None of those circumllances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto
an ivigo- owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no ad-
Xbilsco Cn-
duit. vantage fronm the jealousy, which had subsisted between France

and Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms.
The Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the
league; and little could be expeted from any diversion they
might create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long occupy the arms, or divide the strength of Spain. In this
situation of the affairs of Europe, it became necessary for Eliza-
beth to form a new plan of condu& ; and her wisdom in forming
it, was not greater than the vigour, with which ihe carried it on.
The measures, moIt suitable to her natural temper, and which
flie had hitherto pursued, were cautious and safe; those, flie now
adopted, were enterprising and hazardous. She preferred peace,
but was not afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by
necessity, not only of defending herself with spirit, but of attack-
ing her enemies with a boldness, which averted danger from her
own dominions. She immediately furnished the Hugonots with a
considerable supply in money. She carried on a private negocia-
tion with Henry III. who though compelled to join tle league,
hated the leaders of it, and wished for their deilruclion. She
openly undertook the protecrion of the Dutch commonwealth, and
sent a powerful army to its affiilance. She endeavoured to form
a general confederacy of the Protefant Princes, in opposition to

RColves to the Popifi league. She determined to proceed with the utmoll
puliUiil Ma- rigour againfl the Queen of Scots, wholc fuflerings and rights as-
rv, and to
gain thi forded her enemies a specious pretence for invading her domi-
in"Sg. nions. She resolvcd to redouble her endcavours in order to effe&t

:ia loser union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate her
inlluence over the councils of that nation.

She found it no dilficult mritter to induce moll of the Scottifll

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir Joln Maitland,
who had been advanced to the ollice of Secretary, which his
lIrotlhr formerly held, Sir Lewis 3ellenden the Jillice Clerk,
May 29, who had fuccccdcd Gray as the King's recldent at London, were

thc perlbns in whlom Ihe cliicly collfided. in order to dircd and
quicken their motions, !slc dif;::.ltclcd S' i Ed\Iard \Votoln along

with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, RooK VII.
and entertaining; he excelled in all the exercises, for which v '
James had a passion; and amused thc young King, by relating $5 '
the adventures he had met with, and the obfcrvations he had
nadc, during a long residence in foreign countries; but under
the veil of there superficial qualities, he concealed a dangerous
and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high favour with James,
and while he was seemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-
sions, he acquired influence over the public councils, to a degree
which it was indecent for a stranger to poffcfs*.

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to the nation, Poroo s.a

than the proporal he made of a flri& alliance between the two IJScwtland.
kingdoms, in defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid and
alarming progress of the Popifi league seemed to call on all Pro-
teflant princes, to unite for the preservation of their common faith.
James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention of July :S.
eflates empowered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament-s. The alacrity, with which James con-
curred in this measure, muff not be wholly ascribed either to his
o.vn zeal, or to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to Eli-
zabeth's liberality. As a mark of her motherly affe&tion for the
young King, she fettled on him an annual pension of five thousand
pounds; the fame fum which her father had allotted her, before
ile ascended the throne. This circumflancc, which (he took care
to mention, rendered a fum, which in that age was far from be-
ing inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to the King, whose
revenues, during a long minority, had been almost totally difii-
pated ..

But the chief obje& of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Ar- Undcrmines

ran. Whlile a minion, so odious to the nation, continued to go- p'''r'
vcrn the King, his afliltance could be of little advantage to Eli-
zabeth. And though Arran, ever since his interview with Huns-
danc, had appeared extremely zealous for lier interefi, she could
place no great confidence in a man, whore conduc was so capri-
cious and irregular, and who, nolwithilanding his protcfintions to
the contrary, lli]l continued a secret correlIpond'-nc e both witl

nvIary, and with the Duke: of Guise. 'Ilhe banified Lords v:c;'c at-
tached to England from affccion, as well as , p:incilel, and were
the only pcrtons anonrg the Scots wvl]o:m, in llny d:n;rci'rou. cxi-
gency, ilie could tlhorouglly tri:l!. Before Lcllcndcn left Lon-
don, they had been lilnimoncdi thither, urndlr colour of vindicat-

Mclv. 317. * S1 pots... 332 t Call. 3. 5^

BooK VIr. ting themselves from' his accusations, but, in reality, to conecedt

- with him the moss proper measures for refloring them to theit
I585- country. Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen

it for execution ; and it was greatly facilitated by an event, nei-
ther uncommon nor considerable. Sir John Forster, and Ker of
Ferniherft, the English and Scottish wardens of the middle
marches, having met, according to the cuflom of the borders,
about Midfurnmer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffel, the Earl of
Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This scuffle was
purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design
formed by Ker, at the infligation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of then should be de-
livered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he
was obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aber-

Affiftsthe deen. During his absence from court, Wotton and his affoci-
banimicd ates carried on their intrigues without interruption. By their
nobles.

advice, the banified nobles endeavoured to accommodate their
differences with Lord John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Cha-
telherault's two sons, whom Morton's violence had driven out of
the kingdom. Their common uflferings, and common interet,
induced both parties to bury in oblivion the ancient discord,
which had fubfifled between the houses of Hamilton and Douglas.
OLtober I6. By Elizabeth's permission, they returned in a body to the borders

of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered favour, insisted
on putting the kingdom in a posture of defence. But GFay, Bel-
lenden, and Maitland, fccrctly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued; others they
rendered ineffeRual, by the manner of execution; and all of them
were obeyed slowly, and with reluecance %.

WTotton's fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the design
was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the punishment his
treachery merited, he departed without taking leaves.

They r3- IVIeanwhile, the banished Lords hastened the execution of their
Scurn Ito enterprise; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join
Scctland, *tr
anl arc re- them, they entered ScotlaMd. Wherever they came, they were
colnclcd to welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the most ser-
thz1eing'.

vent prayers were put up to heaven, for the success of their arms.
They advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at
the head of ten thousand men. The King, though he had as-

V Sj'OtAw. 340. + lclv. 335.

fesbled an army superior in number, could not venture to meet Booc Vii.
them in the field, with troops, whole loyalty was extremely du-

x585.

bious, and who, at best, were far from being hearty in the cause;
nor was either the town or cafle provided for a siege. The
gates, however, of both were slut, and the nobles encamped at
St. Ninians. That fame night they surprised the town, or more Nov. e.
probably it was betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had
undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself by a preci-
pitate flight. Next morning they invefled the caltle, in which
there were not provisions for twenty-four hours ; and James was
neceflitated immediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
They were not so elated with success, as to urge extravagant de-
mands, nor was tlhe King unwilling to make every reasonable
concefllon. They obtained a pardon, in the most ample form, of
all the offences, they had committed ; the principal forts in the
kingdom were, by way of security put into their hands ; Craw-
ford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were removed from the
King's presence ; and a parliament was called, to ellablifh tran-
quillity in the nation .

Though a great majority in this parliament confifled of the Aparlia-
confederate nobles and their adherents, they were far from dif- mellt

Decem. Io0

covering a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an ac, re-
fioring them to their ancient honours and ellates, and ratifying
the pardon granted by the King, they seemed willing to forget
all palt errors in the adminifiration, and spared James the mor-
tification of feeing his minitlers branded with any public note of
infamy. Arran, alone, deprived of all his honours, firipped of
his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his country by
public proclamation, funk back into obscurity, and mutl hence-
forth, be mentioned by his primitive title of Captain James
Stewart. As he had been, during his umnerited prosperity, the
objet of the hatred and indignation of his countryvmen, they be-
held his fall without pity, nor did all his liti'erings mitigate their
refintment in the leall degree.

The Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no re- Church as'-

dress of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate ,'.
nobles had, all along, alteccl to be conlidcred as guardians of
the privileges and dlilcipline of the Church. In all tleir man.i-
fcllos they had declared their rcfolution to reflore there, and by
that popular pretence, had gained many friends. It was now na-
tural to expcdt sIn)ce fruit of thell pronl l ;cs, tand Ibmc rcturn'l; of

* Cal. 3. 79.
Tl ,lum:e 11. C

Boo! VII. gratitucde towards many of.the most eminent preachers, who haid

suffered in their cause, and who demanded the repeal of the laws
pafled the preceding year. The King, however, was resolute to
maintain these la-ws in full authority; and as the nbbles were ex-
tremely solicitous not to difguff him, by infifling on any disagree-
able requelt, the claims of the Church in this, as well as in ma-
ny former inflances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
TIhe' MIiniflers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and
their impatience under the dilappoiittment broke out in some ex-
preflions, extremely disrespectful even towards the King linfrelf .
i586. The Archbiflop of St. Andrew's too, felt the effets of their

anger. The Provincial Synod of Fife fulnmoned him to appear,
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Aflcmb-
lies, in presuming to excercife the function of a Biflop. And
though he refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the court,
and appealed from it to the King, a sentence of excommunication,
April J3. equally indecent and irregular, was pronouncedd againf him.

Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal
excommunication againfi Melvil, and some other of his oppo-
nellts.

Soon after, a General Assembly was held, in which the King,

vwith some difficulty, obtained an at, permitting the name and
ol. ce of a BiThop ntill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched, The exercife'of
ciiicipline, and the infpetion of the life and doctrine of the Cler-
gy, were coiymitted to Prefbyteries, in which Biflops flould be
allowvcd no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as perpetual
mocderators. They themselves were declared to be fibjecd, in the
fame manner as other partors, to the jurifdicdion of the General As-
fclrMly. And as the difcufionl of theArchbifhop's appealmight have
kindled unusual heats in the Assembly, that affair was terminated
ly a compromii-e. He renounced any claim of supremacy over the
Church, and pronrrifetl to denean hinfelf suitably to the chara&cer
of a B]iiliop, as described by St. Paul. Tle Anflcmbly, without
ex:;miiinig the foundations of tle ientence of excommunication,
declared that it Ihould he held of no efcl'c, and reflored him to
all tli. privilcrgeq, which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
Nort\ iihllaiiniiiig tiec ctll aordi;lry tclndernles filewn f'or the hon-
our of the fyodll, atre the delicacy and refi,et, witll which its
jrls;lli'Ion Vw:5 trealed, several members were so zuelous as to
p'otcef agaiill tlis tIccif!on ,1.

Spwotfw-. |,13. 'I- CI.1. 3. 894. SIpoLrw. 3.16.

The court of Scotland was now filled with perfols,fl wrmarnily Booc VII.

attached to Elizabeth, that the league between tlle two king- x8
rlons, proposed last year, met with no interruption, but from Aleague
D'Efuieval the French Envoy. James himfeif firll propofrcd to with S'ng-

land col-

renew the negociation. Elizabeth did not susser fhclh a favour- clided.
able opportunity to flip, and inllantly dispatched Randolph to
conclude a treaty, which lle so much desired. The danger to July 5.
wvhich the Protestant religion was exposed, by the late combina-
tion of the Popish powers for its dellruclion, and the nece.ity of a
ftri& confederacy among those who had embraced the Refornia-
tion, in order to obfrua their pernicious designs, were mentioned
as the foundation of the league. 'I'he chief articles in it were,
that both parties fliould bind themselves to defend thle Evangelic
Religion; that the league hlould be oflenfive and dcfcufive a-
gainll all, who shall endeavour to dilturb the exercise of religion
in cither kinigdom ; that if one of the two parties be iUiaded, the
other, notwithilanding any formcr alliance, flould not direEfly or
indirectly aflift the invader; that if England be invaded inl any
part remote from Scotland, James flould aflifl the Queen with two
thousand horse, and five thousand foot; that if the enemy landed or
approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the King ihould take
the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as lie would
do in defence of his own kingdom. IElizabeth, in leturn, under-
took to act in defence of Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the
fame time, lie assured the King that no ftep fiould be taken,
which might derogate in any degree from his prctenfions to the
English Crown '. Elizabeth expricfied great fatisfaaion v. ith a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an ufef'tl ally, Lillead of a dan-
gerous neiglhbour, and aflorded her a degree cf fccuri-ity on that
fide, which all her anceltors had aimed at, but none of them had
been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the bllffings
of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable
period, had so far abated the violence of national antilallhy, that
the King's condu& was universally acceptable to liis ovn people-If,

The acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, exposed James

to much and di'crvcd censure. This nian was deeply cngagecd in
the conspiracy againlt the life of the King his falctr. Both Mor-
ton, and Binny one of his own ifrvants, who ittl'rccd for tlit
crimne, had acculted hin of being uprclnt at the mult dcr§ . lie li;ad
efclzpced Iuntliflnlnt by flying into 1ng;l.ud1, ndl J.tlllcs 1:td oftell
reqruilred Elizabeth to deliver, up a perlon lo utiin\uiIthy of iher pro-.

Spotlr. 35r. '| Can1. 5j. 5 See. AlpliCl,. : . :II.

Cij

BooK VII. tetion. He now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to

return into Scotland; and after undergoing a mock trial, calcu-
lated to conceal rather than to dete& his guilt, he was not only
taken into favour by the King, but sent back to'the court of
England, with the honourable characler of his ambassador. James
was now of such an age, that his youth and inexperience cannot
be pleaded in excuse for this indecent transaction. It muff be
imputed to the excessive facility of his temper, which often led
him to gratify his courtiers, at the expence of his own dignity
and reputation *i

RifeofBa. Not long after, the inconsiderate affecion of the English Ca-
hington's conspiracy tholics towards Mary, and their implacable resentment againit
apainft Eli- Elizabeth, gave rife to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the

one Queen, left an indelible slain on the reputation of the other,
and prcfented a spectacle to Europe, of which there had hitherto
been no example in the history of mankind.

Docor Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priefls educat-

ed in the ferninary at Rhiems, had adopted an extravagant and
-nthufiaftic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. againfi Elizabeth
was dictated immediately by the Holy Ghoff. This wild opinion
they inflilled into Savage, an officer in the Spanifl army, noted
for his furious zeal, and daring courage and persuaded him that
no service could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the
April 26. life of an excommunicated heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the

crown of martyrdom, bound himfeif, by a solemn vow, to kill
Elizabeth. Ballard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza the Spanish ambassador
there, to procure an invasion of England, while the affairs of the
league were so prosperous, and the kingdom left naked by fend-
ing so many of the Queen's bell troops into the Netherlands.
Paget and the English exiles demonfirated the fruitlcffncfs of such
an attempt, unless Elizabeth were first cut off, or the invaders
secured of a powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could
be hoped that either of there events would happen, effectual aid
was promised; and in the mean time Ballard was sent back to
Mlay 15 Tenew his intrigues.

I-Ie communicated his dcfigns to Anthony Babington, a young

gentleman in Derbyflire, of a plentiful fortune, and many ami-
able qualities, who having contracted, during his residence in
France, a familiarity with the Archbilhop of Glaifow, had been
.ecommended by him to the Queen of Scots. -Ic col'curred

4p S otf 3.18 CalI.3.917.

nith Paget in confidering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary BooK VII.
preliminary to any invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an
end would soon be put to her days, and imparted to him Savage's 5
vow, who was now in London waiting for an opportunity to flrike
the blow. But Babington thought the attempt of too much im-
portance, to rely on a single hand for the execution of it, and
proposed that'five resolute gentlemen should be joined with Sa-
vage in an enterprise, the success of which, was the foundation of
all their hopes. He offered to find out persons willing to under-
take the service, whose honour, fccrccy, and courage, they might
safely trust. He accordingly opened the matter to Edward
WVindfor, Thomas Salilbury, Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne,
Robett Gage, John Travcrs, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Polly, all of them, except Polly,

hllofe bultling forward zeal introduced him into their society,
gentlemen of good families, united together in the bonds of pri-
vate friendship, strengthened by the more powerful tie of reli-
gious zeal. Many conlultations were held ; their plan of opera- June.
tions was at lall fettled ; and their different parts assigncd. Ba- Thcfcicnma
bington hiimfelf was appointed to refcuc the Queen of Scots; Sa- ftic.tor.l
lilbury, with some others, undertook to excite fevcral counties
to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the molt dangerous and
important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with
four associates. And so totally had their bigotted prejudices ex-
tinguilhed the principles of honour, and the fentirnents of huma-
nity, suitable to their rank, that without 'cruple or comrpunction,
they undertook an acion, which is viewed with horror, even
when committed by the mcaneft and must profligate of mankind.
This attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less honour-
able than it was desperate, and in order to perpetuate the memo-
ry of it, they had a piAure drawn containing the portraits of the
fix affanins, with that of Babington in the middle, and a mnotto
intimating that they were jointly embarked in some hazardous
d cfign.

The conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in- !Ditr'overr

fiance of vanity, seem to have thought a dilcovery scarce polliblc, 'y \';-i.
and neither dillrulted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubt- li:llbh'i.
ed the futccelf of their undertaking. But wlhile they believed
that their nlaclinations were carried on with the moll profound
and impenetrable lccrccy, every ltcp they took was fully known
to \Vallinglanm. Polly was one of his Ibics, and had entered into
.the conli)ir:acy nitih no uther dcfign than to betrny his afouciatcs.

Boox VII. Gilbert Giffo:d, too, having been sent over to England to quick-

-en the motions of the conspirators, had been gained by Walfing-

ham, and gave him sure intelligence of all their projecs. That
vigilant minifler immediately imparted the discoveries which he
had made to Elizabeth ; and without communicating the matter
to any other of the counsellors, they agreed, in order to under-
tand the plot more perfedly, to wait till it was ripened into
some form, and brought near the point of execution.

They are At lafi, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to ex-
seized and
puniiled pose her own life, and to tempt providence any farther. Bal-
AngulIt 4. lard, the prime mover in the whole conrpiracy, was arrefled.

His aibociates, disconcerted and flruck with aftoniinment, endea-
voured to save themselves by flight. But within a few days, all
of them, except Windsor, were seized in different places of the
kingdom, and committed to the Tower. Though they had under
taken the part, tley wanted the firm and determined spirit of as-
faflins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, discovered all they
knew. The indignation of the people, and tleir impatience to
revenge such an execrable combination againll the life of their
Sovereign, hastened their trial, and all of them suffered the death

Sept. 20 of traitors*.
AMary is ac- Thus far Elizabeth's condut may be pronounced botl prudent
culied ofbe-
inlgi ac- and laudable, nor can fle be accused of violating any law of hu-

tcoiplicc inl manity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were necefla-
v. i..
ry for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard

to which, posterity will pass a very different judgment.

The frantic zeal of a few rafll young men accounts fuflSciently

for all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But
this was not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Minilters
chose to place the conspiracy. They represented Babington and
his aflbciates to bc inflruments employed by the Queen of Scots,
the real though secret author of so many attempts agninfi the life
of IElizabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They produced
letters, which they ascribed to her, in llpport of this charpg.
These, as they gave out, had come into their hands, by a very
singular and myllerious method of conveyance. Gifolrd, on his
return into England, had been intruflcd with letters to Mary;
ln)t in older to make a trial of his lidclity or addlres, they were
only bl:nk I papers made up in tl:lt fmI'in. Thc'iL' being lilfely dc-
livered, lie was afterwards employed without farther Izruple. By
\':lllinghail's permiflion, and the connivance of l'aulet, lie bribed

,'i Camlli jIj. State T itis, \ ol. i. 10o.

a tradefinan in the neighbourhood of Chartley, whither MVary BoOc VI
had been conveyed, who dcpoitecd the letter's in a hole in the
wall of the cattle, covered with a loose lfone. Thence they iS8
were taken by the Queen, and in the fame manner, her answers
returned. All these were carried to Walsingham, opened by
him, decyphered, fealed again so dexterously, that the fraud
could not be perceived, and then transmitted to the persons to
whom they were direcred. Two letters to Babington, with several
to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the Englilhi fugitives, were -
procured by this artifice. It was given out that in these letters
Alary approved of the conspiracy, and even of the afiaflination ;
that fle dirclcd them to proceed with the utmost circumfpec-
tion, and not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to
join them ; that The recommended the Earl of Arundel, his bro-
thers, and the young Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons
to condu& and to add reputation to their enterprise ; that fle
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame time some commo-,
tion in Ireland ; and above all, besought them to concert with
care the means of her escape, fuggefling to them several expedi-
ents for that purpose.

All thefc circumnances were opened at the trial of the confpi- The inlI,

nation of

rators. And while the nation was under the influence of those teEnglifh
terrors which the allociation had raised, and the late danger had againfl her
augmented, they were believed without hesitation or inquiry, and ,. ,h;c- *
spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her religion was well
known ; and in that age, examples of the vic!c:l: and fanguina-
ry spirit which it inspired, were numerous. 1ll the cabals a-
gainll the peace of. the kingdom for many years had been carri-
ed on in her name ; and it now appears evidently, fitid the Eng-
lilh, that the fatcty of the one (ueen is incompatible with tlit:
of the other. Why then, added they, lilould the tranquillity of
E'.ngland be sacrificed for the fake of a fira:.cr ? Why was a
lifc fb dear to the nation exposl:d to the rcpcated aflaults of an
exatlicratel riv;al ? The cafe flppofcd in t le fl'ociation, lhas now
ihppcncld, the sacred peifon of our Sovereirgn has beenl threaten-
ed, and why Iliould not an injured people execute that jull re
vellre which they had vowedl

No lentiiments could be more agreeable than these to Eli/'i- II;/: '

rcn. lI;VC:, LIo

beth and her Minifers. lThey tllcmirlves had ;t firll propagated lr, tI ,
thlmcl ilaonig the people, and they now fervced both as an aolo;gy, IIl' lt''.It
and ;i motive, for thleir proccedlin to Inch cxtrcmiitics argainlll aril,~ he: .
Lhe Scottfli Queen, as tiley lrad long mnditated. 'I he more in-

Boo'c VII. juries Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the tore fir e feared and hate8

- - that unhappy Queen, and came at last to be persuaded that there

could be no other security for her own life, but the death of her
rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted so %ealonfly all.
her measures with regard to Scottilt affairs ; and had ated, with
so little relervc, in opposition to Mary ; that they had reason to
dread the most violent effecas of her resentment, if ever flc would
mount the throne of England; and therefore they endeavoured
to hinder an event so fatal to themselves, by confirming their
Miftrrcfs's fear and hatred of the Scottish Queen,

}ier Cronwf- Meanwhile, Mlary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and
tics, alale s, great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the
seizcd. conspiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to

acquaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which she
was loaded as accessory to that crime ; and he surprised her with
the account, just as fie had got on horseback to ride out along
with her keepers. She was firuck with aftonifliment,. and would
have returned to her apartment. But she was not permitted
and in her absence, hei; private closet was brolke open, her cabi-
net and papers were seized, fealed, and sent up to court. Her
principal domestics, too, were arrefled, and committed to difler-
Sept. o1. ent keepers. Naue and Curie, her two secretaries, the one a

native of France, the other of Scotland, were carried prisoners
to Lo.ndon. All the money in her custody, amounting to little
more than two thousand pounds. was fccured. And after lead-
ing her about, for some days, from one gentleman's house to an-
olher, she was conveyed to Fotheringay, a Itrong caflle in North-
ampton!llire *.

Delibcrates NTo farther evidence could now be expeaed againfl Mary, and
conclllrni^ nothing remained but to decide what Ihould be her fate. With
of procceed- regard to this, Elizabeth and thafe Miniflers in whom she chief-

i v .confided, teem to have taken their resolution; but there was

flill great variety of fentimcnts among her other Counsellors.
Some thoulght it futlicient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and
to keep her under such clole rcllraint, as would cut off all poli-
bility of corresponding with the enemies of the kingdom; and as
her conllitution, broken by long conelnlnenclt, and her lipirit (le-
jeced with so many cares ; coull not long- fulport such an addi-
tional loul, the Qt een and nation would loon be delivered from
all their fears. But though it might he eary to secure Mary's
own person, it was ilnpoluble to dilinil} the reverence which

Camd. S1 7'

tn'e Rdman Catholics had for her name, or to cxtinguifhthc corn- BooK VII.
passion with which they viewed her sufferings; while these con-
tinued, infurretions and invasions would never be wanting for I586.
-ler relief, and -the only effect of any new rigour would be to ren-
der them.more frequent and dangerous. lor this.rcafon the cx-
,pedient was rejeced.

A public and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was Determines

judged the moft.unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it to ''ti her
had at the fame time, .a.femblance of justice, accompanied with publ ily.
an air of dignity. It .was in vain to search the ancient records,
for any statute or.precedent, to jultify su'ch an uncommon ftcp, as
the trial of a foreign Prince, who had not enteredl the kingdom
,in arms, but had fled thither for rcfuge. The proceedings a-
gainft her were founded on the act of last Parliament, and by
applying it in this :ianner, the intention-of.thofe.who had framed
that severe ftatutc became more apparent.

Elizabeth resolved that no circumstance of pomp or solemnity

fllould be wanting, which could render this tranfacion such as
became the dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed, by
a commiflion under the great feal, forty persons, the molt illus-
trious in the kingdom, by their birth or ofices, .together with
five of the judges, to hear and decide :this great cauliS. Many
difficulties were started by the.lawyers, about the nan- .and title
by which Mary flould be arraigned ; and while .the efentials of
jutlicc were so grossly violated, the empty forms of it were.the
objects of their care. 'I'hey at length agreed that fie shou!d be
stiled, " Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King of Scots,
commonly called Qucen of Scots, and Iowager of France +.

After the many indignities which Ihe had lately suffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her destruction was determined.
She expeced every moment, to end her days by pofon, or, by
some of those secret means, ufially employed againa captive
Princes. And left the malice of her enemies, at the fame
time that it deprived her of life, Ihould endeavour likewise to
blast her reputation, flhe wrote to the Duke of G.uise, and vindi.
cated herself, in the firongeft terms, from the .imputation of en-
couraging or being accessory to the conspiracy for aff.ilin:tiiig
Elizabeth :. In-the solitude of her prison, the ti.iulge rclolution
of bringing her to a- public trial 'had not reached her ears, nor
did the idea of any thing so unprccedcntcd, and lo repugnan: to
.regal MIajefty, once enter into her thoughts.

* Crn.d S19. Johnft. Hilt 11r3. - Strvlle, 3. 362. t TJi, 2. 23.

r.- ! · · ~~

BOOK VII. On Hle eleventh of October, the conmifiioners appointed by

v Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they deliver-

i586. Thetrialat ed a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest re-

Fotherin- proaches and accusations, she informed her, that regard to her own
gay. safety had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a public in-

quiry into her condu&, and therefore required her, as she had
lived so long under the protedtion of the laws of England, to
submit now to the trial, which they ordained to be taken of her

Mary refi- crimes. Mary, though surprised at the meflage, was neither ap-
fes atfirltto
plead. palled at the danger, nor unmindful of her own dignity. She pro-

tested, in the most solemn manner, that she was innocent of the
crime laid to her charge, and had never countenanced any at-
tempt against the life of the Queen of England; but at the fame
time, refused to acknowledge the jurifdiEtion of her commifilon-
ers. " I came into the kingdom," said she, " an independent
" Sovereign, to implore the Queen's affifiance, not to subjee
" myself to her authority. Nor is my spirit so broken by its
" pall misfortunes, or so intimidated by present dangers, as to
" Hoop to any thing unbecoming the Majefly of a crowned head,
" or that will disgrace the anceflors from whom I am descended,
" and the son to whom I shall leave my throne. If I must be
"tried, Princes alone can be my Peers. The Queen of Eng-
" land's fubjeEts, however noble their birth may be, are of a rank
" inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in this kingdom, I
" have been confined as a prisoner. It's laws never afforded me
" any prote&i6n. Let them not now be perverted, in order to
" take away my life."

The commissioners employed arguments and entreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed ac-
cording to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on
account of her contumacy in refusing to plead; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline theirjurifdiAion. An argument
urged by Hatton, the Vice.Chamberlain, at lalt prevailed. -He
told her, that by avoiding a trial, she injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be more agreeable
to them, or more acceptable to the Queen their Mistress, than to
be convinced, by undoubted evidence, thart he had been unjustly
loaded with there foul afpcrfions.

CfNents o wonder pretexts so plausible should inipofe on the unwary

however to
do lb. Q(ecn, or that ihe, unaflifted, at that time, by any friend orcoun-

fellor, thould not be able to detcO and elude all the artifices of

Elizabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally melancholy, BooK VII.
and under circumlfances nearly similar, her Grandson, Charles I. -
refused, with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurped i586.
jurifdiaion of the High Court of Justice; and posterity has ap-
proved his condua, as suitable to the dignity of a King. If
Mary was less constant in her resolution, it mutf be imputed solely
to her anxious desire of vindicating her own honour.

At her appearance before the Judges, who were feated in the Otobcr r4,

great hall of the cafle, where they received her with much cere-
mony, she took care to protest, that by condescending to hear
and to give an answer to the accusations, which /hould be offered
againfther, she neither acknowledged the jurifdition of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and juflice of those aAs, by which
they pretended to try her.

The Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to
vindicate the authority of the court.

Then the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor opened the charge TheaccufiR

againfl her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy. ionagainft
Copies of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and
Paget were produced. Babington's confefion, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together with the declara-
tions of Naut and Curie her secretaries, were read, and the
whole ranged in the most specious order, which the art of the
lawyers could devise, and heightened by every colour, their
eloquence could add.

Mary liflened to their harangues attentively, and without emro-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who
was then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory
to the conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and generous
exclamation. " Alas! how much has the noble hou-e of How-
"ard suffered for my rake!"

When the Queen's council had finiihed, Mary flood up, and Tier

with great magnanimity, and equal prefcnce of mind, began her eee
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own situation,
that, after a captivity of nineteen years, during which fle had
suffered treatment no less cruel than unmerited, fle was ;:t last
loaded with an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of
her right of succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to
transmit her npme with infamy to future ages: That, withol;t
regarding the sacred rights of fovcreignty, fie was no: fubiec'cd
to the laws framed against private persons; though an anointed
Q2cen, commandcd to appear before the tribunal of fubjcetij

ij

BooK VII. and like a common criminal, her honour espofed to tile pefulent

tongues of lawyers, capable of wreRing her words, and of mif-
representing her a-ions: That, even in this dilhonourable situ-
ation, fle was denied the privileges usually granted- to criminals,
and obliget to undertake her own defence, without the pretence
of any friend with whom to advise, without the aid of council,
and without the ule of her own papers.

She then proceeded to the particular articles in the accusation.

She abfolutelv denied any correl]jondence with Babington: The,
name of Ballard was not lo tuch as known to her : Copies only
c-f her pretended letters to them were produced: Though nothing
ie's then her hand-writi:g or lfblfcription was Iufficient to con-
vi;t !her of ich an-odious erime: No- proof could be brought that
tie letters were delivered into her hands, or that any a.nfer was
rfturned by her diredion : The confeflions of wretches, con-
'mnerd :ndt executed for ftch a detellabe acion, were of little
weigh:; r.ar or hoope mirght extort from theni many things incon-
£i,'tent with truth. nor ought the honour of a Queen to be slained

i.- cth vile tetiimony. The declaration of her secretaries was

no: : :re concltuive promiies and threats might e-fily overcome
tc e reio.;ion t

of two it-angers; in order to screen themlelves. they

mlight throw the blamne on her; but they could discover nothing
to :e- Fprjud;ice, without violating, in the firl pylace, their oath
c-:n,.ei v; and th ir penury, in one initance, rendered them
i:.nw.rti: of credit in another: The le:ters to the Spanifn ambafr
i.dor w-cew either nothing more than copies. or contained only
whata was peef- ? in:-ocent : " I have often," continued the,
' ,-.J- -lch e orts for the recovery of my liberty, as are natu-

ral to a huian creature. And convinced, by the fad experi-
ence of so irany years, that it was vain to expect it from
tin i:;ce or geneoui:y of the Queen of England, I have fre-
qc::. ;; i -ted iareign Princes, and called on al my friends
.: cc-~;.;ay t. ci.- hole in:ereil for my relief. I have, likewtife,
' eCr.d;-'-ourCd to procure .or the Englilh Catholics some mitiga.

t;;i ncr t riCo.r wi'th lhi5ich :ht,: are now. treated ; and if I
' ca:; z-.e. by ry death. to iietver them from opprefTion, I
": n .2'.:'g to .ie for their Lke. I :vilL, however, to imitate
the e-pr.Ie of E::'Ir. no: fci J:dih. and would rather make
i. :rerce:n .'r: m:; pe--!=. th;,z lied the blood of the meanef
* c:e:-'.re. i.- orerr :o '.v-e tlem. I h.ve often checkrd the in-

"enver:~r:e ze oi my -here.t, when ei:her the fcverity
o .: ;-i{ cl;;:1 pr.:u;o-ii or indignation at the ' ..hcard-'fc

" injuries whlicr I have endured, were apt so precipitate thcni 3 BoK VII.
" into violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dan- ^"
" gers to which tlefe harsh proceedings cxpo1fd herfclf. And
" worn out, as I now am, with cares and fufftvings, the profped
" of a Crown is not so inviting, that I Ihould' ruin my foul in

order to obtain it. I am no llranger to the feelings of huma-

· nity, nor unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
"the deteRable crime of affafilnation, as equally repugnant to
"both. And, if ever I have given consent by my words, or
"even by my thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the
" Queen of England, far from declining the judgment of men,
" I lhall not even pray for the mercy of God. '"

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and

in every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity
of a Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modefly of a vwo
man.

The commifioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourn- Sentence a-

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Kaint'o;ier
Weflminfler. When. aflcmbled in that place, Naue and Curie
were brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath. And after reviewing their wylholc proceedings, the
commiflioners unaninoully declared Mlary " To be acccffory to
" Babington's conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters,
" tending to the hurt, death, and delhruAion of Eliznbeth, con-
"trary to the express words of the itatute, made for the security
' of the Queen's life. t"

It is no eai' matter to determine whether thle inu.flice in ap- TIrre.gtirl

ties in 0r'

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in eondncling it, were trial.
greatest and moll flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim
authority over an independnet Queen ? Was lary bound to
comply with the laws of a foreign kingdom? How could the
fubjecs of another Prince become her judges ? Or if such an in-
fult on royalty were allowed, ought not the common forms of
jullice to have been observed ? If the teitimony of Babington and
his associates was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare thern
for a few weeks, and by confronting them with Mary, over-
whelm her with the full convicion of her crimes ? NTaue ani,
Curie were both alive, wherefore dlid not they appear at Fother-
ingay, and for what rcafon were they produced in the St;r-
Chamber, where Mary was not present to hear what they de-
yofed'? Was this suspicious evidence enough to condenl. a (Qucen ?

' Camd 52o, &.c. + Ibid. 5,.

BooK VIL. Ought the meanest criminal to have been found guilty, upon fucki
-'-V feeble and inconclusive proofs?

- It was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial,

that the sentence againfi Mary was founded. That served as a
pretence to justify, but was not the cause of the violent steps
taken by Elizabeth and her lMniflers towards her deflru&ion ;
and was employed to give some appearance of jultice, to what
was the offspring of jealoufv and fear. And the nation, blinded
with resentment against Mary, and solicitous to fccure the life of
its own Sovereign from every danger, observed no irregularities
in the proceedings, and attended to no defeAs in the proof, but
grasped at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had been irre-
fragable demonstrations.

The parlia- · The parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounced
firm the againit Mary. In that illuitrious assembly, more temper and dif-
filltnncc, cernment, than are to be found among the people, might have

been expeced. Both Lords and Commons, 'however, were e-
qually under the dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and
the fame excefles of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the na-
tion, are apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with
impatience upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers
which threatened the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdom.
All the papers, which had been produced at Fotheringay, were
laid before them. And after many violent invcAives againit the
Qceen of Scots, both houses unanimously, ratified the proceed-
ings of the commissioners by whom flie had been tried, and de-
clared the sentence against her to be just and well founded. Not
satisficd with this, they presented a joint address to the Queen,

aumdemand beseeching her, as lhe regarded her own safety, the prefervatior.
tihe exicu- of the Protestant religion, the welfare and wifles of her people,

ton

of it.

to publiih the sentence; and without further delay to infli& on a
rival, no less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punifllment
which flie had merited by so many crimes. This rcquelt,
ditated by fears unworthy of that great Afemably, was en-
forced by reasons frill more unworthy. They were drawn not
from jullice, but from conveniency. The most rigorous confine-
mcent, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing liirit;
her address was found, by long experience, to be an overmatclh
for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The ftverelt
penal laws could not rettrain her adherents, who, while they
believed her person to be sacred, would defpilc any danger to
wiich tlhemlelvcs alone were exposcd . Several foreign Princes

were ready to Second their attempts, and waited only a proper BooK VII.
opportunity for invading the kingdom, and aflerting the Scottish
Queen's title to the Crown. Her life, for these reaobns, was in-
comptiable with Elizabeth's safety; and if Ihe were spared out of
a false clemency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties
of the kingdom, could not be one moment secure. Necessity re-
quired that flie should be sacrificed in order to preserve these;
and to prove this sacrifice to be no less just than necessary, several
examples in hiflory were produced, and many texts of scripture
quoted, but both the one and the other were misapplied, and
distorted from their true meaning,

Nothing, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth E1'zabeth's

than an address in this frain. It extricated her out of a situation, tion.
extremely embarrafling; and without depriving her of the power
of sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less appearance
-of blame. If she chofc the former, the whole honour would re-
dound to her own clemency. If flie determined on the latter,
whatever was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the so-
licitations of her people, rather than to flow from her own incli-
nation. Her answer, however, was in a tile, which flie often
trfed, ambiguous and evasive under the appearance of openness
and candor; full of such professions of regard for her people, as
served to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's
ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their indignation; and
of such insinuations that her own life was in danger, as could
not fail to keep alive their fears, In the end, flle bcfought them
to save her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a Queen,
her nearest kinfwvoman, to puniihment; and to confider whether
it might not Rill be possible to provide for the public security,
without forcing her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

The true meaning of this reply was easily underltood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former requell, with addi-
tional importunity, which was far from being either unexpeced,
or oftenfivc. Elizabeth did not return any anfwcr more explicit;
and having obtained fuich a public ian4tion of her proceedings,
there was no longer any rcafbn for protracting this fccn of dilfi-
mulation ; there was even fminc danger that her feigned difficulties
might at lalo be treated as real ones; fle terefrefr adjournled the
parliament, and reserved in her own hands the folc clifpJf;il of
her rival's fate *.

* Caned. 326. D'Ewts, 37S.

BOOK VII. All the Princes in Europe observed the proceedings agailrl:e

-' Mary, with aftonifhment.and horror; and even Henry III. not-

Fr-nnce in- withstanding his known aversion to the louse of Guise, was o-
teporesfce- bliged to interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the
blyirrbehalf
ofMlary. common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambassador,

and Bellievcre who was sent with an extraordinary commifflon to
Ioverm. 21. the fame purpose, interceded for AMary with great appearance of

warmth. They employed all the arguments which the cause na-
turaly fuggcited; they pleaded from justice, generosity, and hu-
manity; they intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all
there Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable, and having re-
ceived some intimation .of Henry's real unconcern about the fate
of the Scottish Queen, and knowing his antipathy to all the race
of Guise, Ihe trulled, that these loud remonstrances would be fol-
lowed by no violent resentment *.

James en- She paid no greater regard to the folieitation of the Scotti0i
dea'ours to King, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, merited
fa'e hissno- b
ther'slile. morc attention. Though her commissioners had been extremely

careful to sooth James, by publifliing a declaration that their fen-
tence againIt Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour,
or invalidate any title which he formerly possessed; he beheld
the indignities to which his Mother had been exposed with filial
concern, and with the sentiments which became a King. The pride
of the Scottish nation was roused, by the.infult offered to the blood
of their Monarchs, and called.upon ihim to employ the most vigo-
rous efforts in order to prevent or to revenge the QEeen's death.

At firfl, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would venture

*upon an action so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to render
the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times, flhe
vwas so remarkably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary lteps
which file took discovered her intention, he dispatched Sir Wil-
liam Keith to London ; who, together with Douglas the ordinary
ambaiTador, remontfrated, in the strongest terms, againit the in-
jury done to an independent. Queen, in fubjecling her to be tried
like a private person, and by laws to which fle owed no obedi-
encc; and efcought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by fiffer-
ing a fentencc unjult in itself, as well as diflonourable to the
Klin' of Scots, .o be ,put in execution-i-.

I'lizailcth rct:runing no answer to there remontfrances of his
nu!l):iiLdor, Janmes wrote to her with his own hand, complaining

C:,,mdl. 53r. 4' See Append. No XllI.

In. the bitterest terms of her condu&, not without threats that BooK VII.
both his duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her
friendship, and to aft as became a son when called to revenge his
mother's wrongs *. At the fame time he assembled the nobles,
who promised to Rand by him in so good a cause. He appointed
ambassadors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore
the aid of these courts; and took other steps towards executing
his threats with vigour. The high strain of his letter enraged
Elizabeth to such a degree, that she was ready to dismiss his
ambassadors without any reply. But his preparations alarmed
and embarrassed her Ministers, and at their entreaty file returned
a soft and evasive answer, promising to liften to any overture from
the King, that tended to his mother's safety; and to suspend the
execution of the sentence, till the arrival of new ambassadors
from Scotland -.

Meanwhile, fle commanded the sentence againfl Mary to be Dccrm. 6.
published, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- The fen-

tence a.

torted from her by the repeated entreaties of both houses of par- gainft Mary
liament. At the fame time, file dispatched Lord Buckhurft and publifsed.
Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunate-
ly the nation demanded the execution of it,. and though fle had
not hitherto yielded to there solicitations, she advised her to pre-
pare for an event, which might become necessary for securing the
Protefcant religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people.
Mary received the mneffage not only without symptoms of fear,
but with expreflions of triumph. " No wonder, said flhe, the
" Englifl should now thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince,
"they have often offered violence to their own Monarchs. But
" after so many sufferings, death comes to me as a welcome
"deliverer. I am proud to think that my life is esteemed of.
". importance to the Catholic religion, and as a martyr for it I
"am now willing to die $."

After the publication of the sentence, Mary. was itripped of Shelistreat.
every remaining mark of royalty. . The canopy of state in her a- cl with the

unmofl ri.

partment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap- gour.
proached her person without ceremony; and even appeared co-
vered in her presence. Shocked with these indignities, and of-
fended at this gross familiarity, to which Ihe had never been ac-
cuflomed, Mary once more complained to'Elizabeth; and at the
fame time, as her lafl requefl, entreated that flte would permit

* Birclh. N1 em. I.. f Spotrw. 25I. Cald. 4. 5.
t Camd. s58. Jc.bb, 291.
P/,,lme 11. E

BooK VII. herfervants to carry her dead body into France, to be laid among

. her ancestors, in hallowed ground; that some of her domeflics
I586' might be present at her death, to bear witness of her innocence,

and firm adherence to the Catholic faith; that all her servants
might be suffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy those
small legacies, which she ihould bellow on them, as teflimonies
of her affecion; and that in the mean time, her Almoner, or
some other Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her, and
to aflift her in preparing for an eternal world. She besought her
in the name of Jesus, by the foul and memory of Henry VII.
their common progenitor, by their near consanguinity, and the
royal dignity with which they were both invested, to gratify her
in there particulars, and to indulge her so far as to signify her
compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whether Mary's
letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer
was returned, and no regard paid to her requests. She was offered
a Protestant Biflop or Dean to attend her. Them flie rejeted; and
without any Clergyman to dire& her devotions, flie prepared, in
great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which file now be;
lived to be at no great distance *.

1587. James, without losing a moment, sent new ambassadors to Lon-

James re- don. These were the maiter of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil.
news his
iolizi:a- In order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Ma-
tions hlher fler would become bound that no conspiracy lhould be undertaken
January r. againlf her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's

consent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver
some of the mofl considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hoflages.
Js this were not thought sufficient, they proposed that Mary should
resign all her-rights and pretensions to her son, from whom no-
thing injurious to the Protestant religion, or inconfillent with
Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. The former proposal, Eli-
zabeth reje&ed as insecure; the latter, as dangerous. The am-
baffadors were then instructed to talk in a higher tone; and Mel;
vil executed the commiflion with fidelity and with zeal. But
Gray, with his usual perfidy, deceived his Mailer who trufled
him with a negociation of so much importance, and betrayed the
Qeen whom he was employed to save. He encouraged and ur-
ged Elizabeth, to execute the sentence againll her rival. He
often repeated the old proverbial sentence, " The dead cannot
' bite." And whatever flould happen, he undertock to pacify
the King's rage, or at Icaft to prevent any violent cffects of his
rceentmcnt -.

Camd. 528. Jtbb, 2. 95'. Spotiw. 35y. See Append. No XIV.

Elizabeth, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the most Boox VII.

-Violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She shunned society, 18
she was often found in a melancholy and musing poflure, and re- Eliz5be7t
peating, with much emphasis, there sentences which she borrowed anxietyand
from some of the devices then in vogue; A ut ser aut feri; ne tlio"m.l
feriare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness muff
be imputed to diflimulation; it was impossible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an
aAion, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life and
kingdom to danger, without reflecting deeply, and hesitating long.
The people waited her determination in fufpence and anxiety;
and left their fear or their zeal hould subside, rumours of dan-
ger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost indus-
try; Aubefpine, the French ambaflador, was accused of having
suborned an affaflin to murder the Queen. The Spanish fleet was
said by some to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others
affirmed that the Duke of Guise had landed, with a firong army, in
Suflex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were
up in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with
all their forces; and a conspiracy, it was wvhifpered, was on foot for
seizing the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every
day more violent, and the people, astonished and enraged, cal-
led for the execution of the sentence against Mary, as the only
thing which could restore tranquillity to the kingdom *.

While these sentiments prevailed among her fubjecs, Eliza- Warrant
beth thought she might safely venture to strike the blow, which for Mary's

execution

flie had so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the signed.
secretaries of state, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her be- Februaryr.
haviour, on that occasion, plainly shewed that it is not to hu-
manity, that we mufl ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the
very moment she was subscribing the writ which gave up a wo-
man, a Queen, and her own nearest relation, into the hands of
the executioner, she was capable ofjelling. " Go, fays she, to
" Davifoni, and tell Walsingham what I have now done, though
i' I am afraid he will die for grief when he hears it." Her
chief anxiety was how to secure the advantages which would arise
from Mary's death, without appearing to have given her consent
to a deed so infamous. She often hinted to Paulct and Drury, as
well as to rome other courtiers, that now was the time to discover
the sincerity of their concern for her safety, and that lhe expet-
ed their zeal would extricate her out of her prefcnt perplexity. But

* Camd. 533,, Y34

Eij ;

BooK VII. they were wife enough to seem not to underfiand her meanings

Even after the warrant was signed, file commanded a letter to be
I58 7 written to Paulet, in less ambiguous terms; complaining of his

remissness in sparing so long the life of her capital enemy, and
begging him to remember at lass what was incumbent on him as
an affectionate fubje&, and to deliver his Sovereign from continual
fear and danger, by ihortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet,
though rigorous and harlh, and often brutal in the discharge of
what he thought his duty, as Mlary's keeper, was nevertheless a
man of honour and integrity. He rejected the proposal with dir-
dain; and lamenting that he fihould ever have been deemed capa-
ble of ating the part of an affaflin, he declared that the Queen
might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but he would never stain
his own honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of infamy on his
poiterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a crime. On
the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extremely peevish;
and calling him a daint;r and pr-cfe fellow, who would promise
much, but perform nothing, flie proposed to employ one Wing-
field, who had both courage and inclination to Ilrike the blow*.
But Davison remonflrating againll this method, as no less danger-
ous than dishonourable, fle again declared her intention that the
sentence pronounced by the commiflioners flould be executed ac-
cording to law; and as ihe had already signed the warrant, flie
begged that no farther application might be made to her on that
head. By this the privy counsellors thought themselves fuffici-
ently authorised to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended,
by zeal for the Queen's safety, or initigated, as is more probable,
by the apprehenfon of the danger to which they would themfclves
be exposed, if the life of the Queen of Scots were spared, they
afiembled in the Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their
hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewibury and Kent, together
with the High Sheriff of the County, to fee the sentence put it\
execution f.

ar's be On Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So.

h::.vioiratr t.eringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her pre-
hcr death. fence the warrant fur execution, and required her to prepare to

die next morning. MIary heard them to the end without emotion,
and crofling herfclf in the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Gholt, " That foul, said flic, is not worthy of
the joys of Heaven, which repines because the body mull endure
the f;roke of the executioner; and though I did not expcct that

Eior. Britan. A.;i.;c D. :F.cn. ' Camd. 34., Stryp, ,
3. 36,4

the QIeen of England would set the firfl example of violating the BOOK VIL
sacred person of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that --'"
which Providence has decreed to be my lot." And laying her
hand on a Bible, which happened to be near her, l(e solemnly
protelted that flie was innocent of that conspiracy which Babing-
ton had carried on against Elizabeth's life*. She then mention-
ed the requefs contained in her letter to Elizabeth, but obtained
no fatisfa&ory answer. She entreated, with particular earnellnefs,
that now in her last moments, her Almoner might be suffered to
attend her, and that Ihe might enjoy the consolation of those pious
inltitutions prescribed by her religion. Even this favour, which
is usually granted to the vilest criminals, was absolutely denied.

Her attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the presence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish; but no fuoner did Kent and
Shrewsbury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and burst
out into the most paflionate expreflions of tenderness and sorrow.
Mary, however, not only retained perfect composure of mind, but
endeavoured to moderate their excefnive grief. And falling on her
knees, with all her domeflics around her, file thanked Heaven that
her sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that file might
be enabled to endure what still remained with decency, and with
fortitude. The greater part of the evening (he employed in set-
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Tetamnenr with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her clothes, lie distributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote
a flort letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender but magnanimousfentiments, and recommend-
ed her foul to their prayers, and her affliAed servants to their pro-
tcEtion. At supper, fie ate temperately, as usual, and conversed
not only with ease, but with cheerfulness; (he drank to every one
of her servants, and aiked their forgiveness, if ever (he had failed in
any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time file went
to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning file
retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in devo-
tion. At eight o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers entered
her chamber, and found her itill kneeling at the altar. She im-
mediately flarted up, and with a majestic inin, and a counte-
nance undifiayed, and even cheerful, advanced towards the place
of execution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was
drcefed in a mourning habit, but with an clegance and fplend&r

* Jcbb 2. 30l.

BoOR VI. which she had long laid aside, except on a few feflival days. An

8 ygnus Dei hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at
587. her girdle; and in her hand she carried a crucifix of ivory. At

the foot of the flair, the two Earls, attended by several gentle.
men from the neighbouring Counties, received her; and there
Sir Andrew Melvil, the makter of her household, who had beexn
secluded, for some weeks, from her presence, was permitted to
take his las farewell. At the fight of a Mistress whom he tender-
ly loved, in such a situation, he melted into tears; and as he was
bewailing her condition, and complaining of his own hard fate
in being appointed to carry the account of such a mournful event
into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not, good Melvil, there is
at present greater catufe for rejoicing. Thou flialt, this day, fee
Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares, and such an end put
to her tedious sufferings as she has long expeced. Bear witness
that I die conutant in my religion; firm in my fidelity towards
Scotland; and unchanged in my affe&ion to France. Commend
me to my son. Tell him I. have done nothing injurious to his
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all
;hose who have thirsted, without cause, for my blood."

With much difficulty, and after many entreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was ereted in the fame hall where fle had been tried, raised a
little above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion,
and block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the steps with ala-
crity, beheld all this apparatus of death w ith an unaltered coun-
tenance, and signing herself with the cross, ihe fat down in the
chair. Beale read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to
which flie listened with a careless air, and like one occupied in
other thoughts. Then the Dean of Peterborough began a de-
vout discourse, suitable to her present condition, and offered up
prayers to Heaven in her behalf; but file declared that file could
not in conscience hearken to the one, nor join with the other;
and falling on her knees repeated a Latin prayer. When the
Dean had finifled his devotions, file with an audible voice, and
in the Englilh tongue, recommended unto God the afflited ilate
of the Church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and for a
long life, and peaceable reign to Elizabeth. She declared that
she hoped for mercy only through the death of Christ, at the foot
of whose image, lhe now willingly flied her blood ; and lifting up,
and killing the Crucifix flle thus addrcficd it, '' As thy arms, (

Jesus, were extended on the Cross; so with the outftreached BooK VII
arms of thy mercy, receive me, and forgive my fins."

She then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil, and I587"

upper garments; and one of the executioners rudely endeavour.
ing to aflift, fle gently checked him, and said, with a smile, that
(he had not been accu'stomed to undress before so many fpe&a-
tors, nor to be served by such valets. ' With calm but undaunted
fortitude, fie laid her neck on the block; and while' one exe-
cutioner held her hands, the other at the second stroke, cut off
her head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her hair al-
ready grown quite grey, with cares and sorrows. The execu-
tioner held it up frill streaming with blood, and the Dean crying
out, " So perish all Qeen Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of
Kent alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpe&ators continu-
ed filcnt, and drowned in tears; being incapable, at that moment,
of any other sentiments, but those of pity or admiration *.

Such was the tragical death' of Mary Queen of Scots, after a Sentimentsg
life of forty-four years and two months, almost nineteen years of oflhi'ori-

ails con-

which she passed in captivity. The political parties which were cernulg
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsisted, under 'her
various denominations, ever since that time. The rancour, witl
which they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding
ages, and their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been per-
petuated, and even augmented. Among Historians, who were
under the dominion of all there passions, and who have either a-
fcribed to her every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imput-
ed to her all the vices, of which the human heart is susceptible,
Wve search in vain for Mary's real character. She neither merit-
ed the exaggerated praises of the one, nor the undiltinguifling
censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmofl elegance of exter- FTer cha-

hal form, fle added those accomplishments, which render their ter.
impreflion irrefiltible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal cafe and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments ; because
her heart was warm and unl'ufpicious. Impatient of contradic-
tion ; because flc had been accuftomecl from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No stranger, on some occasions, to (lifirnu-
lation ; which, in that perfidious court where tie received lier
education, was reckoned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with

* Camd. 5 S3. Spots, 355. Jcbb, 2, 300, Strype, 3. 3R ·

Booc VII. which almoit every woman beholds the influence of. her ct.I

v beauty.- Formed with the qualities which we love, not with the

7 talents that we admire; she was an agreeable woman, rather than

an illustrious Queen. The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently
tempered with found judgment, and the warmth of her heart,
which was not, at all times, under the restraint of discretion, be-
trayed her both into errors, and into crimes. To fay that flie
was always unfortunate, will not account for that long and al-
most uninterrupted fuccefflon of calamities which besel her; we
muff likewise add that flSe was often imprudent. Her paflion for
Darnly was rash, youthful, and excessive. And though the fud-
den transition to the opposite extreme was the natural effe& of
her ill-requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and bru-
tality ; yet neither these, nor Bothwell's artful address, and im-
portant services, can juflify her attachment to that nobleman.
Even the manners of the age, licentious as they were, are no
apology for this unhappy paflion; nor can they induce us to look
on that tragical and infamous scene which followed upon it, with
less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over this part of
her character which it cannot approve, and may, perhaps, prompt
some to impute her actions to her situation, more than to her dif-
positions; and to lament the unhappiness of the former, rather
than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's sufferings ex-
cced, both in degree, and in duration, those tragical distresses,
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her frail-
ties, we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve of
our tears, as if they were shed for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue.

With regard to the Qucen's person, a circumflance not to be

omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all cotemporary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of fhapc, of which the human form is capa-
ble. Her hair was black, though, according to the fashion of that
age, flie frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different co-
lours. Her eyes were a dark gray; her complexion was exqui-
fitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as
to flape and colour. Her flature was of an height that role to
the majeflic. She danced, fle walked, and rode with equal
grace. I-Ier tafle for music was just, and she both sung and play-
ed upon the lute, with uncommon fiill. Towards the end of
her life, flic began to grow fat; and her long confinement and the

coldness of the houses in which she was imprisoned, -brought on BooK VII.
a rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No
man, fays Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration
and love, or will read her history without sorrow.

None of her women were suffered to come near her dead body,

which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,
where it lay, for orne clays, covered with a coarfc cloth torn
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing fained with her blood, were redu-
ced to ashes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to
be buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the page-
arntry of a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those in-
juries, which laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his
acceflion to the Englilh throne, ordered her body to be removed
to Weftmilnfer-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs
of England.

Elizabeth affected to receive the accounts of Mary's death, F.lizabeth
with the molt violent emotions of surprise, and of concern. Sighs, :'l-ieasto la.

" e"e Nia-

tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display the ry's deth.
reality and greatness of her iorrow. Evident marks of diflimu-
lation and artifice may be traced through every period of Eliza-
beth's proceedings, againfl the life of the Scottilh Qneen. The
commission for bringing IMary to a public trial was seemingly ex-
torted from her, by the entreaties of her Privy Counsellors. She
delayed publishing the fentcnce against her, till ile was twice so-
licited by both houses of Parliament. Nor did file sign the war_
rant for execution, without the utmost apparent reluctance. One
feene more of the boldecf and molt foleimn deceit remftined to be
exhibited. She undclrtok to Inake the world believe that Mary
Ihad been put to death without her knowledge, and against her
will. And Davifbn, who neither luhlpeed her intention, nor his
own danger, was her inlfrumcnt in carrying on this artifice, and
fell a viclim to it.

It was his duty as fecrctary of flute to lay before her the war-

rant for execution, in order to be signed ; and by her command,
he carried it to the Great Seal. She ipretended, however, that
flic had chlirgcd him not to colmmuunicaite what lic had done to
any person, nor to fuiler the wa;rant to go out of his hands, with-
out her cxprels pc-million tha.t in contempt of this order, lie
had not only revealed tile matter to ieverul of her Mlinlifcrs, but
had, in concert with th':in, al'embled her Privy Ccunlfcllors, by

^/*/A"C II. £*~~~~I

BooK VII. whom, without her consent or knowledge, the warrant was iffuctie

and the Earls of Shrewibury and Kent empowered to put it in
I587. execution. Though' Davison denied all this, and with circum-

ltances which bear the firongell markls of truth and credibility;
though it can scarce be conceived that her privy council, com-
posed of the persons in whom' fle moll confided, of her Ministers
and favourites, would assemble within the walls of her palace,
and venture to tranfa& a matter of so much importance, without
her privity, and contrary to her inclination ; yet so far did fle
carry her diflimulation, that, with all the signs of displeasure and
of rage, she banished mol.f of her Counsellors out of her pre-
fence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harflly, and with
such marks of disgust that he gave up himself for loft, and in the
deepest afflicion wrote to the Queen begging leave to resign all
his places, that he might retire to his own ellate. Davison fle'
infiantly deprived of his office, and committed him a close prison-
March. er to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a folemni trial in-

the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a' fine of ten thousand'
pounds ; and to be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure. He
languished, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part
of her condut, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the repu-
tation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in'
her kingdom *

Elizabeth Tils solemn farce, for it deserves no' better'name, furnified
endeavours Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As
to sooth
James. the profpeft of his Mother's danger had excitcd the King's filial

care and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His subje&s felt the diflonour done to him,
and to the nation. In order to sooth both; Elizabeth infiantly
dispatched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdanc's Ions, with ,
letter expressing her extreme afflicion on account of that miser-
able accident, which, as flie pretended, had happened far con-
trary to her appointment, or intention. James would not permit
her messenger to enter Scotlandj and witli ome dilliculty, re-
ceived a memorial he sent from cBerwick. It contained the tale
concerning Davifun, dressed up with all the circunllances, whic h
tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and to throw tile whole bliamc ovn
his rafllcfs or treachery. Such a defence grive little liitis'raCion,

'Caned. 536. Str-;p, 3 37.

BooKVIL

.and was confidered as mockery added to insult; and many of -
.the nobles, as well as the King, breathed nothing but revenge. 1587.
Elizabeth was extremely solicitous to pacify them, and neither
.wanted infiruments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicetter
wrote to the King, and Walsingham to fecretaLy Maitland. They
represented the certain deltruetion, to which James would expose
:himself, if with the forces of Scotland alone, he fllould venture
to attack a kingdom, so far superior in power 5 that th ehitlory of
past ages, as well as his Mother's fad experience, might convince,
him that nothing could be more dangerous or deceitful than de-
pendence on foriegn aid ; that the King of France would never
wifl to fee the Britifi kingdoms united under one Monarch, nor
contribute to invelr a Prince so nearly allied to the house of Guise,
with such formidable power; that Philip might be a more acive
ally, but would certainly prove a more dangerous one, and under
pretence of aflifling him, would afecrt his own right to the Eng-
lihn Crown, which he already began openly to claim that the
fame ltatute, on ^,hich the sentence of death against his Mother
had been founded, would juflify the excluding him from the fuc-
ceilon to the Crown; that the English, naturally avcrfe from the
dominion of strangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hofti-
lities, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth was dilpofed to
repair the wrongs which the Mother had suffered, by her tender-
nelfs and affection towards the son; and that by engaging in a
fruitless war, he would deprive himself of a noble inheritance,
which, by cultivating her friendship, he muff infallibly obtain.
These representations, added to his consciousness of his own
wcaknefs, to the fmallncfs of his revenues, to the mutinous spirit
of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that facion, which was entirely at Elizabeth's devo-
tion, convinced James that a war with England, however just,
would in the present juncture be altogether impolitical. All these
considerations induced him to flifle his resentment; to appear fa.
tisfied with the punifihnent, inflicecd on Davison 3 and to preserve
all the fncmblances of fricndlhip with the Englillh court '. In
this manner, did the cloud which threatened lich a Rform pass a-
way. Mary's death, like that of a cnmmon criminal, remained
unavenged by any Prince; and :hatever infalny Elizabcth miglh
incur, lte was exposcd to no new danger, on that account

Spotfw. 358. Strype, 3. 377.

F ij

BooK VII. Mary's death, however, proved fatal to the MIafterof Gray

and loft him that favour which he had for some time poffcfed,

if7. f He was become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire

Disgrace of
the :.Iatcr power without merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually
of Gray, are. The treacherous part, which he had acted during his late

embassy, was well known, and filled the King, who at length
came to the knowledge of it, with surprise. The courtiers obferv-
ed the symptoms of 'disgust arising in the King's mind, his ene-
mies seized the opportunity, and Sir William Stewart, in revenge
of the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his Brother Captain
Mlay Io, James, publicly accused him before a Convention of nobles, not

only of having contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to take
away the life of the Queen, but of holding correspondence with
Popifll princes, in order.to subvert the religion established in the
kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the King, deserted by all, and
conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble defence. He was
condemned to perpelual baniflment, a punishment very unequal
to his crimes. But the King was unwilling to abandon one,
whom he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of justice;
and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and the other nobles wlih
had lately returned from exile, in gratitude for the zeal with whiclh
he had served them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

Having thus accompliflied the deflruftion of one of his enemies,

Captain James thought the junAure favourable for profecutiiqg
his revenge on them all. He singled out fccretary AIlaitland, the
moll eminent both for abilities, and enmity to him; and offered
to prove that he was no less acceffiry than Gray to the Queen's
death, and had even formed a design of delivering up the King
himfclf into the hands of the Englifl. But time and ablfnce had,
in a great measure, extinguilied the King's affection for a minion,
who so little deserved it. All the courtiers combined againfl him
as a common enemy. And inflead of gaining his point, he had
the mortification to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon
Maitland, who, together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power
tnld influence of a prime Minifler.

In the Aflmlbly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Biflops, and the fame jealoulf and fear of
their incroachmcnts, appcared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a parliament x;1is fiummoncd on that occasion, the Cler-
gy rcmained satis;fied with appointing some of their number to re-
prefcnt their gricvanccs to that court, from Vrhich grc;et thing0
vere expcst(Id.

Previous to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a 1ooK VII.

work worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which fubfifled be- -v
Ctveen many of the great families, and which were tranfinitted eS K7i

rThe King

from one generation tb another, weakened the firength of the attllipts to
kingdom ; contributed, more than any other circurilance, to pre- l"bt tLe
fcrve a fierce and barbarous spirit among the nobles 3 and proved
the occasion of many disasters to themselves, and to their country.
After many preparatory negociations, he invited the contending
parties to a royal entertailment in the palace ofHoly-rood-houfe;
and partly by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
their promise to bury there dissensions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he conducRed them, in folcmn proceflion, through
the tlreets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand,
with his enemy. A collation of wine and sweet-meats was pre-
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with
all the signs of reciprocal forgivencls, and of future friendflip.
Tle people, who were prefcnt at a tranlfa.ion so unusual, conceiv-
ed the most sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity
cflablithed in every part of tllh kingdom, and teflificd their satis-
faFtion by repeated acclamations. Unhappily the cflcfs of this
reconciliation were not correspondent either to the pious endea-
yours of the King, or the fond wifles of the people.

The first care of the parliament was the security of the Protef-

tant religion. All the laws paflted in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified ; and a new and severe one was enacded a-
gainfR seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose refllcls induflry in
making proselytes brought many of them into Scotland about this
time. Two ads of this parliament defervc more particular notice,
on account of the confequcnces with which they were followed.

'Ille one refpedled the lands of the Church. As the public G.'ncei:l ni.

revenues were not sufFicient for defraying the King's ordinary r!;'tji,'l1 o0
charges; as the adminiltration of government became more corn ln.J:.
plicated and more expensive ; as James was naturally profuse, and
a fIranger to ceconomy; it was necessary, oi all tllcle accounts,
to provide l'ome fund proportioned to lis cxigencies. ]!it no
coin(idclrbl)le Ilm could be levied on the Commons, who did not
enjoy the benelit of an extensive commerce. Tlhe nobles wire
unaccun omed to bear tle burden of heavy taxes. IAnd the reve-
nues of tlli Chlurch were tlie only oibrce \heince a i:rIJ:;cr fi;ililly
could be d(rawnll. Notwitlhllianiling ;11l the ctlprcdi;tio.; of tli
l.,ity finclc thl: l.'efornmation, and( the v;lrlous devices xlhich t1i y
2:d e(l nployed t ts'izc the Ch u;ch h;;i-ls. h {;.reiu cuofidcr:'llc plor-

BooK VII. tion of them remained flill unalienated, and were held eitler by
t--v- " the Biflops who possessed the benefices, or were granted to lay-

5 87' men during pleasure. All these lands were, in this parliament,'

annexed, by one general law *, to the Crown, and the King was
impowered to apply the rents of them to his own use. The
tithes alone were reserved for the maintenance of the persons who
served the cure, and the principal manfion-houfe, with a few acres of
land, by way of glebe, allotted for his residence. By this great
acceflon of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King, must
have acquired a vast increase of power, and the influence of the
nobles have suffered a proportional diminution. The very re-
velfe of this fecms, however, to have been the cafe. Almost
all grants of Church-lands, prior to this a&, were thereby con-
firmed ; and titles, which were formerly reckoned precarious, de-
rived from thence the sanction of parliamentary authority. James
was likewise autlorifcd, during a limited time, to make new alie-
nations; and such was the facility of his temper, ever ready to
yield to the solicitations of his fcrvants, and to gratify their most
extravagant demands, that, not only during that time, but through-
out his whole reign, le was continually emFloyed in bestowing,
and his parliament in ratifying grants of that kind to his nobles;
hence little advantage acrued to the Crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its revenues. The
lifhops, however, were great sufferers by the law. But at this
juncure, neither the King nor his Miniflers were solicitous a-
bout the interests of an order of men, odious to the people, and
pcrfecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with
the utmost zeal. The profpe& of sharing in their spoils induced
all parties to consent to it; and after a ifep so fatal to the wealth
and power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult matter to
introduce that change in the government of the Church, which
soon after took place [-.

LcnlrFIa- l c ch'"nge, which the other flatute produced in the civil con-
rolls.idnlllit- tfitution, was no lecf remarkable. Under the Feudal fyltem, e-

t t.l illtO p I 1-

;Ii,'tll't by very Freholder, or v;aflal of the Crown, had a right to be pre-
their reipc- lent in parliament. These Freeholders were, originally, few inr

numbAr, but poRlft'ed of great and extenfivc property. By de-
grees, t!cc vafl poffeflions were divided by the proprietors them-
fi.lvcs, or parcelled out by the Prince, or split by other accidents.
IThe number of Freeholders becarme grcater, and their conditiorA
mirc inequl:l; betides the ancient Barons!, who prefcrved tkeiz

* ra.rl. 1 ac. V:i .

C .
C 9. -[ st;. 3(65.

eltates and their power unimpaircd, there arose another order,- Booi VIL
vhofe rights were the fame, though their wealth and influence 7
-were far inferior. But, in those rude ages, when the art of go- 8
vernment was extremely imperfect, when parliaments were feldomn
assembled, and deliberated on matters little interefling to a mar-
tial people, few of the Lefflr Barons took their feats, and the
'whole parliamentary jurisdiction was exercised by the Greater
BaronI, together with the Ecclefiaflical order. James I. fond
of imitating the forms of the Englifi conflitution, to which lie
had been long accultomed, and desirous of providing a coun-
terpoife to the power of the great nobles, procured an at, in tle
year 1427, dispensing with the personal attendance of the ]efl5r
Barons, and impowering those in each county, to chufe two com-
tniflioners to represent them in parliament. iThis law, like many
other regulations of that wife Prince, produced little effect. All
she King's vassals continued, as formerly, poflfelcd of a right to be
present in parliament, and, unlel's in some extraordinary conjunc-
tures, none but the greater Barons attended. But by means of
the Reformation, the conflitution had undergone a great change.
The ariflocratical power of the nobles had been much increased,
andt the influence of the Ecclefialical order, which the Crown
usually employed to check their usurpations, and to balance their
authority, had diminifled in proportion. Many of the Abbies
and Priors had been erected into temporal peerages; and the
Proteflant Binlops, an indigent race of men, and odious to the
nation, were far from poffefling the weight and credit, which their
predeceflors derived from their exorbitant wealth, and the super-
Aitious reverence of the people. In this situation, the King had
recourse to the expedient employed by James I. and obtained a
law reviving the flatute of 1427 ; and from that time the Com-
imons of Scoiland have sent their representatives to parliament.
An at, which tended so visibly to a.bridge their authority, did
ilot pal': witlmhut opposition from many of the nobles. But as
hlle Kling lhad a right to filmmon tlhe leser Barons to attend in
person, others were apprelenfivc of feeing the house filled with a
multitude of his dependents, and conlteited the more willilnly
to a law, which laid them under the reltrilion of applaring only
by their reprelenltatives.

The year I588 began with an unlverfid eCxppCLation throughout r'~S'.

all Europe, that it was to be dillinguiihed by wonderful events IThe aP-
ancd revolutions. Several allrologers, according to the accounts of l' . s[,iifi
cotemporary hillorians, had predilced this: and the situation of ns- ;:rn!;aldo.
fairs in the two. principal kingdons of Etrope w.s fitch, that a

1tooK VII. fglacious ohfcrver, witlout any supernatural intelligence, nig it
i'SS. have hazarded the prediction, and have foreseen the approach ofó

some grand crifls. In France, it was evident from the aflonirning
progress of the league, conduded by a leader, whose ambition was
restrained by no fcruplcs, and whose genius surmounted all difi-
culties; as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic coun-
cils of Henry III. that cither that monarch riull submit to aban-
don the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by some fildden
and daring blow, cut oil his formidable rival. Accordingly, in
the beginning of the year, the Duke of Guise drove his Maiter out
of his capiital city, ;nd forced him to conclude a peace, which left
him only the fl1iadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he
himself fell a victim to Henry's fears, and to his own security.
in Spain,. the operations were ifch, as promised something still
more uncommon. During three years, Philip had employed all
the power of his European dominions, and exhaulled the treasures
of the Indies, in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest
that had ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Lif-
bon, and a numerous laud army was affcmbled to embark on board
of it. Its deifination was still unknown, though many circum-
fltancs ninade it probable that the blow was aimed, in the firfl place,
againPf England. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the re.
velted provinces in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded
them her protetion. A numerous body of her troops was in their
tervice; the Earl of Leicefler commanded their armies; she had
great fwav in the civil government of the republic; and some of
its most considerable towns were in her pofleflion. Her fleets had
inftited the coalss of Spain, intercepted the galleons from the
WVeit Indies, and threatened the colonies there. Routfed by so
many injuries, allured by views of ambition, and animated by a
filperfitious zeal for propagating the Rormifl religion, Philip re-
Jolvcd not only to invade, but to conquer England, to which his
el`cent from the houl'e of Lancafler, and the donation of Pope
Sixtus V. gave him, in his ovin opinion, a double title.

ContluC of Elizabeth saw the danger approach, and prepared to encounter
lales 011o
[ ll:ttoca it, with the utinoit intrepidity. The meaflres for the defence of
ii/om. her kingdom were concerted, nnd carried on, with the wifi!om

and vigour, which diltinguilh her reign. I-Hr chliif care was to
fccure tlhe fiiciilldfip of h1: lKing of Scots. She had treated the
(OwueC hi Mo,;llcr uith a rigour unknoviwn anmong Princes; fin:
llhai often uicld hiinllclf larlllly, and with c(ntempt; andl tlhough
le lhtd l iitnh.to ljril.ellyt lfilprcllcd his i.'ci:antlent of thele itija

Tics, fle did not believe it to be altogether extinguished, and was Boox VII.
afraid that, in her present situation, it might burlt out with a fatal --
violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with Scotland I.5.8
would facilitate his enterprise, courted James with the utmolt
afliduity. He excited hili to revenge his Mothcrs wrongs ; he
flattered him with the hopes of /haring his conquels i and offered
him in marriage his daughter the Infanta Isabella. At the fame
time, Scotlaud swarmed with priclts 'is emilffaries, who seduced
some of the nobles to Popery, aild corrupted others with bribes and.
promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a fa&cion,
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, ar-
riving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In or.
der to counter-balance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest
professions of friendship to the King, and Afllby, her ambassador,
entertained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He as-
fured him that his right of fucceflion to the Crown should be pub-
licly acknowledged in England that he flhould be created B
Duke in .that kingdom; that he should be admitted to some share
in the government; and receive a considerable pension annually.
James, it is probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth'S
arts, to rely entirely on there promises. But he underflood his
own interest in the present jun6ture, and pursued it with much
steadiness. He rejected an alliance with Spain, as dangerous,.
He refused to admit into his presence an ambassador from the Pope.
He seized Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. He
drove many of the trafficking lPriets out of the kingdom. He
marched suddenly to Dumfries, dil]aerfed Maxwell's followers,
and took him prisoner. In a Convention of the nobles, he declar-
ed his resolution to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng-
land; and, with outliltcning to the fuggeflions of revenge, detcr-
mined to a¢t in concert with Eiizabeth, aaiiint the common cne.
my of the Prote-tant faith. He put tihe kingdom in a potsure of
defence, and levied troops to obftliru the landing of the Spaniards.
He offered to Jlnd an army to Elizabeth's afltancc, and told her
ambassador that he expcc-ted no other favour from the King of
Spainu,.btt thiat which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that
when he had devoured all his companions, he would make him
his latt morfel'i'.

'The zeal of the people, on this occasion, .was not inferior to tA ciatnt in
that of the King; and the extraordinary danger with which they dffcnce ol

Reliijoin

* Calinad 544. Johslt. 139. Spotfwv. 369.
F/olume II. G

BOOK VII. were threatened, fuggefled to them an extraordinary expedient for

v'-- their security. A bond was fiamed for the maintenance of true
x588. Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,

in opposition to all enemies foreign and domeflic. This contain-
ed a confession of the Proteflant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the mofi solemn promises, in'the name,
and through the strength of God, of adhering to each other, in
supporting the former, and in contending against the latter, to
the utmotl of their power *. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy,
and the people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or un-
common as such a combination may now appear, many circum-
stances contributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render
the idea familiar to the Scots. When roused by any extraordi-
nary event, or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel
were accuflomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to
adhere to that Religion, which the Almighty had eflablifhed
among them; this the Scots confidered as 'a sacred precedent,
which it became them to imitate. In that nge, no considerable
enterprise was undertaken in Scotland, without a bond of mutual
defence, which all concerned reckoned necessary for their fecuri-
ty. The form of this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed
from those political ones, of which so many inflances have occur-
red; the articles, stipulations, and peculiar modes of expreflion,
are exaaly the fame in both. Almost all the considerable Popish
Princes were then joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
ed religion, and nothing could be more natural, or seemed more
ciffcacious, than to enter into a counter association, in order to
oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy. To there causes,
did the Covenant, which has become so famous in history, owe
its origin. It was renewed at different times during the reign
of Jamnes-1-. It was revived with great solemnity in the year
J638. It was adopted by the English, in the year I643, and
enforced by the civil and ecclefiaflical authority of both kingdoms.
The political purposes to which it was then made fubfervicnt, and
the violent and uiccanilitutiollal incafires which it was then em-
ployed to promote, it is not our province to explain. But at the
junturc, in which it was lirll introduced, we may pronounce it
to have been a prudent and ltudabile device for.the defence of the
religion and liberlics of the nation ; nor were the terms in which
'it w;., conceived, other thl;an might have )een expceced from men
,larmed with the impending danger of Popery, and threatened

Dunlop's CollcQ. of ConllTi:f .
2V . 2E. oS. Cald. 4. I39.

with an invasion by the most bigotted, and most powerful Prince BooK VII.
in Europe.

Philip's eagerness to conquer England did not inrpirc lim ci-

thcr with the vigour or dispatch, neceflary to ensure the fuccel's
of so mighty an enterprise. His fleet, which ought to have fail-
ed in April, did not enter the Englifli channel till the middle of
July. It hovered many days on the coast, in expectation of be-
ing joined by the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the
ports of Slanders by a Dutcl squadron. Continual difaflers pur- The Arma.
sued the Spaniards during that time ; successive forms and bat- '
ties, which are well known, conspired with their own ill condud,
to disappoint their enterprise. And by the blcffing of Providence,
which watched with remarkable care over the Proteflant Religion,
and the liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered and de-
stroyed the Armado on which they had arrogantly beflowed the
name of Invincible. After being driven out of the English seas,
they were forced to fieer their course towards Spain, round Scot-
land and Ireland. Many of them fuffcred ilhipwreck on these
dangerous and unknown coasts. Though James kept his fubjcts
under arms to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent
their landing in an hostile mainer, he received seven hundred
who were cast ashore by a tempeR, and after supplying them with
necessaries, permitted them to return into their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambafador

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity, he had discovered during a conjunture so
dangerous. But none of Afhlby's promises were any longer re-
membered; that Mrinifter was even accuscd of having exceeded
his powers, by these too liberal offers; and conscious of his own
falsehood, or afl;hmed of being dibowncd by his court, he with-
drew fecrctly out of Scotland `.

Philip, convinced by fatal expericnce of his own raftlncfs in at- Pllhilp's in-

tempting the conquefl of England, by a naval armament, equip- triT'tst i1
ped at so great a diflance, and subjected in all its operations, to
the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from leas and
winds, resolved to make his attack in another form, a:nd to adopt 589.
the plan which the Princes of Lorrain had long nimlitiated, of in-
vading E'nglaiid through Scotland. A body of his troops, lie
imagined, miiht be ealily wafted over from the Low Countries
to that kingdom, and i' they could once obtain footilng, or pro-
-,re afflinance there, the frontier of England w;as open and dle-

* Jolhnn. 3... Carmd. 5.1.i

C- ij

BooK VII. fenceless, and the northren counties full of Roman Cathblics

who would receive them with open arms. Meanwhile, a dcfcerit
might be threatened oin th fiitheren coast, which would divide
the Englifl army; diftraft their couiicils, and throw the whole
kingdom into terrible convulsions. In order to prepare the way
for ihe execution of this dcfign, he remitted a considerable fum
of money to Bruce, a seminary Priest in Scotland, and employed
him, together with HIay, Creighton and Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits,
to gain over as many persons of diftintion as possible to his in-

Popifi no terest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful insinuations of these
bles con.
spires - emifaaries; induced several of the nobles to favour a measure,
gainfl the which teided so mahifeftly to the deflruAion of their country.
Ksing. luriitly, though the King had lately married him to the daugh-

ter of his favourite, the Duke bs Lennox, continued warmly at-
tached to the Romnilh Church. Crawvford and Errol were ani-
mated with the zeal of new converts. .They all engaged in a
.orrefpondence with the Prince of Pai-ma, and in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of fix th6ufand men, to render him matter of Scot-
land, and to bring so many of their vaffils into the field, that he
should be able to enter Englandt with a numierous army. Francis
Stewart, gralidfoii of Jimes V. whom the King had created Earl
of Bothwell, though influeficed by no motive of religion, for he
itill adhered to the Proteflant faith, was prompted, merely by
caprice, and the reflleffnefs of his nature, to join in this treason*
*able correfpordence.

Allthefe letters were intercepted ii England; Elisabeth, alarrim

'ed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom, gent them
immediately to the King; and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popish party, called upon him to check this

hth King's formidable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James, though
fraxims firmly attached to the Protfttant religion, though profoundly
'oi Poregar versed in the theolbgical controversies between the Reformers and

the Church of Rome, though he had employed himself, at that
early period of life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations
in which he proved the Pope to be Antichriflt, had nevertheless
adopted, already, those maxims concerning the treatment of the
Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through.the reft of his life.
The Roman Catholics, were at that time a powerful and aAive
party in England; they were far from being an inconsiderable sac-
tion in his own kingdom. The Pope and Kiig of Spain were ready
.to take part in all their machinations, and to second every effort

br-their bigotry. The opposition of such a body to Ils fucceflion io*: Vl.
to the Crown of England, added to the averseness of the English s
from the government of ftrangcrs, might create him many diffi-
iculties; In order to avoid these, he thought it neccffary to sooth
rather than to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to .rcconcile
them to his fucceffipn, by the hopes of gentler treatment, and
some mitigation of the rigour of those laws, which were now in
force agaiiill them. This attempt to gain one party by promises
*ofindulgence and -as of clemency, while he adhered, with all
the obstinacy of a disputant, to the docrines and tenets of the
other, has given an air of niyftery, and even of contradi&tion to
this part of the King's characer. The Papists, with the credu-
Jity of a set firuggling to obtain power, believed his heart to be
-wholly theirs3 and the Proteflants, with the jealousy infeperable
from those who are already in pofetlion, viewed every at of lenity
'as a markl of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy. And in or-
der to please both, James often aimed at an excessive refinement,
mingled with dissimulation, in which he imagined the.perfe&ion
of government, and of King-craft, to consist.

His beheaviour on this occasion was agreeable to theef general Hirs excef-

maxims. Notwithstanding the solicitations of the Queen of Eng- fiove lc' it'Y
land, enforced by the jealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a coiiiira-
short iAnprifonment was the onLy.punifhment he infliated on Hunt- tor.
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent of an at
of clemency, so inconfificnt with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to as-
femble their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Anril i.
M'aitland, an able Minister, but warmly devoted to the Englili
interest, from the Kinges councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by
Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their own ill condu&, they
were forced to retire to the North, where they openly erected
the flandard of Rebellion. But as the King's government was
not generally unpopular, or his Ministers odious, their own vas-
fals joined them slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause.
And the King, in person, advancing againfl them with such forces
as he could luddenly levy, they durlt hot rely so much on the fide-
lity of their troops, which though superior in number, followed
them with reluCtance, as to hazard a battle ; but fuffcring them April :o.
to disperse, they surrendered to the King, and threw themselves
on his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Bothwell were all
brought to a public trial. Repeated ads of trcasbn were caiily

BoolVll. proved agailnf them. The King, however, did not permit any

---v-- sentence to be pronounced; and after keeping them a few months

in confinement, he took occasion, amidst the public festivity and
rejoicings, at the approach of his marriage, to set them at
liberty *,

The !King's As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of
^ith l'ne Scotland, in the direct line; as all hopes of. uniting the Crowns
ofDen- of the two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl
mark. 9

of Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the
King's marriage was on all these accounts, an event which the
nation desired with the utmost ardour. He himself was no less
desirous of accomplifiing it; and had made overtures, for that
purpose, to the eldest Daughter of Frederick II. -Ring of-Den-
mark. But Elizabeth, jealous 6f every thing, that would render
the acceflion of the house of Stewart more acceptable to the Eng-
lifl, endeavoured to perplex James, in the fame manner she had
done Mary, and employed as many artifices to defeat or retard
hismarriage. His liinifters, gained by bribes and promises, second-
ed her intentions; and though several different ambassadors were
sent from Scotland to Denmark, they produced powers so limited,
or infifRed on conditions so extravagant, that Frederick could not
believe the King to be in earnell; and fafpecling that there was
some design to deceive, or amuse him, gave his daughter in mar-
riage to the Duke of Brunswick. Not discouragcd by this difap-
poinutmcnt, which he imputed entirely to the condu& of his own
Miniflcrs, James made his addresses to the Princess Anne, Fre-
derick's Ifcond daughter. And though Elizabeth endeavoured to
divert him from this, by recommcnding Catharine the kiiig of Na-
varre's fitcer, as a more advantageous ratch ; though she pre-
vailed on the Privy Concil of Scotland to declare against the al-
liance with Decnmark ; he perfilled in his choice. And despair-
ing of overcoming the obilinacy of his own Minillers, in any
otler manner, he fecrctly nccouraged the citizens of Edinburgh
to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chancellor,
whoml they accuscd asi the person, whose artifices had hitherto dif-
appointed the wifles of the King, and the expectations of his peo-
ple. In consequence of this, tie Earl Mlariflal was sent into
lDenncark, at the hle:ad of a fplcndid cmbafi'y. He received ample
powers and inllrucEions, dIl'an with the King's own hand. 'IThe
manlrri;igc articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young Qccin
set !ii! to'.v:lrds Sc'otlalnd. Juamcs ninde glrc;t preparations f cr

* Sn.:-C 33. Ca.1l. -. 'C3.

reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a Boon3 \'i
lover; when tile unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tern- 8-
pest had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a con-
dition so shattered, that there was little hope of its putting again
to sea, before the spring. This unexpc&ed disappointment, he
felt with the utmost sensibility. He inflantly fitted out some filips,
and without Gommunicating his intention to any of his.council,
failed, in person, attended by the Chancellor, fevcral noblemene, Ot. 2.
and a train of three hundered persons, in quetl of his bride. lie
arrived safely in a small harbour, not far dillant from Upllo, where
the Queen then resided. There the marriage was solemnized. No-. :,t.
And as it would have been rafli to trust tlofe boisterous fe:s, ia
the winter season, James accepted the invitation of the court of
Denmark, and repairing to Copenhagen, pafled several months
there, amidst continual feafling, and amusements, in which botl
the Queen and himself had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation

from his general character, than this sudden sally. His fort
Charles I. was capable of that excessive admiration of the other
sex, which arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by
elegance of tafle; and the romantic air of his juzrney to Spain
suited such a disposition. But James was not fuileptible of any
refined gallantry, and always exprefied that con.tcnpt for the fe-
male character, which a pedantic erudition, uniciuaetaintcd with
politencfs, is apt to infpirc. He was fretted, however, at the
many obitacles which had becn laid in his way. -ec was anxious
to secure the political advantages, which he c: c pcted from mar-
riage; and fearing that a delay might aflord Eiizabeth,l and
his own Minitrers, an opportunity of thwarting, hlii by new in.
trigues, lie suddenly took the resolution of preventing them, by
a voyage from vwhich he expected to return in a few weeks. Tlie
nation seemed to applaud his conduct, and to be pleased with this
appearance of amorous ar'dour, in a young Prince. Notwitlltanld-
ing lhis absence so long beyond the time le .cxpctled, the noliics,
the clergy, and the people, vied with one another ill lovalthy ;:.d
obedience; and no period in the King's rei.;n was nmore remllrk-
able for tranquillity, or more free from any eruption of thi:)l
i:;ltions, which so often difluried the iingldom.

* Mclv. 352, S'potIv. 377

# BOOK EIGHTH. CONTENTS. THE King and Queen arrive in Scotland. Disorders in the kingdom. An attempt of Bothwell's against the King. Presbyterian Church government established. Conspiracy of the Popish ...

THE
HI -STO RY

o F
SCOTLAN D.

BOOK EI GHTH.

CONTENTS.
'1'r1l. King and Ouen arrive in Scotland. I);lbrlder's in the kingdom. An at-

tempt of Botl\well':; ag.inlt tie King. Irefbyteri:an Cllurch governmlent
ellablifned. Conlipiracy of tle 'Popii; Lords. Tlhe people's zeal, and the
King's proceedings liotliwell filrpriFes tile King. IHe recovers his liber-
ty.q ';ulpCted of ftvouring tlie Popifi Lords. l'is lenity. A new attemlipt
('f nothwell's. Freth dangels fiom the Pophil Lords. Battle of Glenlivat.
'ollill Lords driven out of the lilngdom Both\\ell flies to Splain. Change
in Adminiillr:tion. Violence. of the nation againLt the Popiflh Lords. Ralil
proceedings of the Clergy. Of Black's rclditious doditrine. Elt;oui'ld by the
Clergy. Tumnnilt in Edinburih Tlhe King's danger. Ilis proceedlings
agai;inl tle Citizens. Powvelr of the Churchl humnbled. Citizens privileges
abridged. Regulations in the Church. Popifi Lords pardoued. Eccleli.alics
reflored to Parliament. Jamles gains .I party i.n F:.nLland. Acctuled of Lorrel-
ponlding with the Iope. Endeavours to gain thle 1Roman Catliulis. Gowry's
confipiracy. Sprot's (cil'overy. Conjlijures concerniing the conlrir;Laors. Tile
King's account ditllelieved. ]roceedings of the Parliament. Efiex's confpi-
racy against Elizal)eth. His correljrondence with J:anes. Cautious condutl
of James. Wild attermpt of Ellex. 1!isdeath. James continues his in-
trigues. Attempts to civilize thie lighlanlders. Elizabethl's illness and
dea:il. ller cliaraaer. J:anes prolaimecdn King of Engl;id. ''akies poll
imffrion of the throne. View of the Revolution in Scotlarnd, since ltie :ccelf
of James VI.

ON the firfi of ,Iay tlle King andl Quccn arrived at Leith, and Rooc: \'II.
were rcccived by their futjecfs with every possible cxprcfiioun of "
joy. 'IThe folcnmnity of' the (.ceen's coronation was conductcd l. c59i
witli great magnilicence and lo low haid the order of billiops f;il- :nnd Qlcern
en,, ill the opinion of the pulblic, tllat none of tlhem werc lprclcent ' ie intl

Scoti aind,

on that occasion, andl IVr. Rlolbert: B3rucc, a Prclblyteri:n Minilllr
of great reputatiol, set thle CroVwn on her ieacld, :Idmifilillcre tlle
I:cr(ld uncfioLm, and pcrlf)rmncd the othler cullolmlry ccrcillollics.

I'i//1e .1L. F

BOOK VIII. The zeal and success, with which many of the Clergy had con-
' ' tributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom, dur-

9 ing his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their per-

sons, and even to the Presbyterian form of government. In pre-
August 4. fence of an Affenmbly, which met this year, he made high enco-

miums on the discipline, as well as the doEtrine of the Church,
promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the assem-
bly to frame such ats, as gradually abolifled all the remains of
episcopal jurifdi&ion, and paved the way for a full and legal efta-
blifhment of the Presbyterian model *.
x591. An event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy no

small triumph. Archbilhop Adamson, their ancient enemy, hav-
ing fallen under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of
the revenues of his fee in consequence of the act of annexation,
and being oppressed with age, with poverty, and diseases, made
the meanest submission tothe Clergy, and delivered to the Assem-
bly a formal recantation of all his opinions concerning Church
government, which had been matter of offence. Such a consef-
sion, from the most learned person of the order, was confidered as
a testimony, which the force of truth had extorted from an ad-
v'erfary -.

Dilbrdcrs Meanwhile the King's excessive clemency towards offenders
in the king-
dom. multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such acs of violence,

as brought his government under contempt, and proved fatal to
many of his fubjets. The hiflory of several years, about this
ime, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between the
great families, and of murders and afaflainations perpetrated in
the most audacious manner, and with circumstances of the utmost
barbarity. All the defeEts in the feudal aristocracy were now
felt more sensibly, than at any otlier period in the hiltory of Scot-
land, and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree,
scarce consistent with the preservation of focicty. While the
King, too gentle to punifl, or too feeble to at with vigour, sus-
sered all these enormities to pass with impunity.

An attempt But though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which
of -'ot ih-
veli''s1 . is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and those
gainit the fufpeted of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. Many

King. persons, neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were

uliually held to be certain indications of this crime, but mailers of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle nge of
life, were fcized and tortured ; and though their confeflions con-

(Cald. 4. 2^4. ( sportw. j8. Cald. .1. 24.

tained the moflt absurd and incredible circumstances, the King's BooK VIII.
prejudices, those of the Clergy, and of the people, conspired in " '
believing their extravagancies without hesitation, and in punishing 1591.
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers ac-
cufed Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and of having employed their art, to
i aife the forms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that
nobleman was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty
spirit could neither submit to the restraint, nor brook such an in-
dignity. Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and im-
puting the accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancel-
lor, assembled his followers, under pretence of driving him from
the King's councils. Being favoured by some of the King's at-
tendants, he was admitted, by a secret paffagc, under cloud of
night, into the court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He ad-
vanced directly towards the royal apartment, but happily, before
he entered, the alarm was taken and the doors shut. While he Decem. 27.
attempted to burf open tome of them, and to set fire to others,
the citizens of Edinburgh had time to run to their arms, and he
escaped with the utmofl difliculty; owing his safety to the dark-
ness of the night, and the precipitancy with which he fled*. 1592.

He retired towards the North, and the King having unadvised-

ly given a commiiflon, to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him,
and his followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour of execut-
ing that commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded
the house of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Feb. 8.
Murray himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such pro-
mifing virtues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the darling
of the people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of
Edinburgh rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were
restrained, by the care of the magistrates, from any aEt of violence,
they threw aside all refpcft for the King and his Minillcrs, and
openly insulted and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit
continued, James thought it prudent to withdraw from the city,
and fixed his rcfidcnce for some time at Glasgow. There Hunt-
]y surrendered hinifelf to juflice; and, notwithstanding the atro-
cioufincfs of his crime, and the clamours of the people, tie power
of the Chancellor, with whom he was now closely confederated,
and the King's regard for the memory of the Duke of Lennox,
whole daughter lie heid married, not only protetled him from the

* Mclv. 38 o. 'otf. 386

I-I ij

nooKVI11. sentence which such an odious ation merited, but exempted hir.

even from the formality of a public trial *.

rf59.yte A itep of much importance was taken, soon after, with regard
an Church to the government of the Church. The Clergy had long com-
gveri1nccdntplhined of the encroachments made upon their privilege and ju-
by law. rifdiftion, by the a&s of the parliament 1584, and though these

laws had now loft much of their force, they resolvcd to petition
the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in form.

The juncture for pufling such a mneafire was well chosen. The

King had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity towards the
Popifli fitlion, and still more by his remissness in pursuing the mur-
derers of the Earl of Murray. The Chancellor had not only a pow-
erful party of the courtiers combined againit him, but was become
odious to the people, iwho imputed to him every false flep in the
King's conduc&. Bothwell Itill lurked in the kingdom, and be-
ing fecrctly supported by all thc enemies of Maitland's admini-
ftration, was ready, every moment, to rcncew his audacious enter-
prises. James, for all these realons, was extremely willing to in-
dulge the Clergy in their requel', and not only consented to a law,
whereby the ats I 58- were rcfcindcd or explained; but he car-
ried his conplaifance still further, and permitted the parliament
to efcablifl the Preibyterian government, its General Alfentblies,
Provincial Synods, Preflytcrics and Kirlk ICffons, with all the dif-
ferent branches of their dilcipline and juril'diclion, in the molt
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the admiilnitration of lRegents, fionm whom they might have
expec-cd thlc molt partial favour, could not obtain the fanmlion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclefiaflical government.
No Prince was over less dilfofel than James. to approve a Iyllem,
svhofe icpubllican genius inspired a palion for liberty, so repug-
nant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
avcrfion be more inveterate than llis, to the austere and uncom-
plying charac&er of the Prefl)ytcrian Clergy in that age; who,
more eminent for zeal, than for policy, often contradi&ted his
opinions, and ccntured his conlduc, with a freedom, equally offcn-
fivc to his dogmatifin as a Theologian, and to his pride as a King.
His situation however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to
difiT:mllce his fcntimcerns; and as lie often ldifgultled his fbjciits,
by indulging the Popilh lti'tion more than they approved, he cl-
dcavoured to atone for tlis, by conccflions to the Prc!'ivtc;ia
Clcigy), greater than hci liinll'tl' woul othcrwifci have c)lol'cn-[-

Si)oro. 387. 1 C ! . 1i',
: . ,. S'ots. /;.

In this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents wcere attaint- nooK.ViII.

ed. But he soon made a new attempt to fcize the King at Falk-
land; and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly 159
defended by others,\who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chan-
cellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigi-
lance of Sir Robert Mclvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's
aflociates "*.

This danger was scarce well over, when the nation was alarm- A neCXconl.

ed with the discovery of a new and more formidable conlpiracy. Ithe 1i.pitl
Georgc Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being fcizecl as he Lords.
was ready to let fail for Spain, many fulpicious papers were found
ili his custody, and among there, fevcral blanks signed by the
Earls of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary pre-
caution they hoped to escape any danger of dilcovery. But Ker's
resolution flrinking when torture was threatened, he confefccd
that he was employed by thelc noblemen, to carry on a negoci-
ation with the King of Spain ; that the blanks fiiblcribed with
their names were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that
they were inltrucled to offer the faithful service of the three
]Earls to that Monarch ; and to solicit him to land a body of
his troops, either in Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with
-which they undertook, in the firit place, to ellablini the Roman
Catholic Religion in Scotland, and then to invade England, with
the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintry,
and Barclay of Ladyland, whom he accused of being privy to the
conspiracy, were taken into cuflody, and confirnmd all the cir-
cumrfances of his confession --

The nation having been kept for some time in continual terror I 93.

and agitation by so many fucceflive conspiracics, the diicovery of lO'1 , '"
this new danger completed the panic. All ranks of llen, as if
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to fland forth in defence of their country. The Mli-
niflers of Edinburgh, witlout waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be ablent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commillioni, atflinbilc
a considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to l-ovide
an iniannt remedy againlt the impendilng danger. Ihecy fci.cd
the Earl of Angus, and co:nmittcd hiim to the c:lllc ; t!:cy c:x-
aminled lci-; and pl)repared a remlonlltrnlnce to be laid cbefore the n'l'1 !rT-
lhillu, concerning tlhe late of the nation, :nd the l;Ccellty of t1, Kil
i.;'o!:ccntilag the colfijirators with ccomlil, viaour. alit. 'i'iL

'' R!m.cr, i6. r .
1 9

BooKVI:t though jealous of every encroachment onhis prerogative, and of-

r' fended with fubjccts, who inflead of petitioning, fcemed to pre-
r593' scribe to him, found it necessary, during the violence of the ser-

ment, not only to adopt their plan, but ev.n to declare that no
consideration should ever induce him to pardon those, who had
Jan. 8. been guilty of so odious a. treason. He summoned the Earls of

Huntly and Errol to surrender themselves to justice. Graham of'
Fintry,. whom his Peers pronounced to be guilty of treason, he
commanded to be publicly beheaded; and marching.into. the
North at the head of an army, the two Earls, together with An-
gus, who had escaped out of prison, retired to the mountains.
He placed garrisons in the cafiles which belonged to them; com-
pelled their vaflals, and the Barons, in the adjacent counties, to
subscribe a bond containing professions of their loyalty towards
him, and of their firm adherence to the Protestant faith; and,
the better to secure the tranquillity of that part of the kingdom,
conflituted the Earls of Athol, and l'arfhall, his Lieutenants
there *.

iTarch 18. Having finilhed this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,
Elizabeth folicitshim where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
to treat the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the difeovery of a
them with
figour. conspiracy, which fle confidered as no less formidable to her own

kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
remissness, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, to pu-
nifh this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not appre-
hend the persons, at leaf to confiscate the estates of such audaci-
ous rebels. She weakened, however, the force of these requefls,
by interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom,
according to her usual policy in nourifing a factious spirit among
the Scottill nobles, (he had taken under her protecion. James
abfolutly refuted to litfen to any intercefion in favour of one,
who had so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both
his government and his person. With regard to the Popifil con-
i'jirators, he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vi,
gour; but that he might be the better able to do so, he demand-'
ed a finall fum of money from Elizabeth, which flIc, dliflrultful,
perhaps, of the manner in which he might apply it, thcwed no
inclination to grant. The zeal, howcvcr, and importunity of his
own fuljccts obliged him to call a parliannent, in order to pals an
.ta of attainder againfl the three Earls. But before it met, Ker

* pots. 391. CalIl. 4. 29:.

made his escape out of prison, and on pretence, that legal evi- BooK VII,
dence of their guilt could not be produced, nothing 'was con-
eluded against them. The King himself was.univerfally fufpea;- 593.
ed of having contrived this artifice, on purpose to elude the :re-
quells of.the Queen of England, and to disappoint the wishes of
his own people. And therefore, in order to sooth the Clergy,
who exclaimed loudly againfl his conduct, he gave way to the
passing of an at, which ordained those who obilinately contemn-
ed the cenlfres of the Church, to be declared outlaws *.

While the terror excited by the Popilh conspiracy poffeffedthe nothwell

nation, the court had been divided by two rival factions, which the King
contended for the chief direcion of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the
Queen's displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Athol,
Lord Ochiltree, and all the name of. Stewart espoused her quar-
rel, and widened the breach. And James, fond no less of do-
meflic tranquillity, than of puplic peace, advised his favourite to
retire, for some time, in hopes that the Queen's refcntment would
subside. But as he flood in need, in the present juncAure, of the
affifance of ib able a Minister, he had recalled him to court. In
order to prevent him from recovering his former pcwer, the Stew-
arts had. recourse to an expedient no less illegal, than desperate.
Having combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame surname,
they brought him back secretly into Scotland; and seizing the July 24.
gates of the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with
a numerous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by
all his courtiers, and incapable of rcfiftance, discovercd more in-
dignation than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, cal-
led on the Earl to finifi his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign
to the heart. But 'Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refuse his demands.
And a few days after he ligned a capitulation with this fucccf-
ftl traitor, to whom he was really a priboner, whereby he boundl
himself to grant him a remission for all pall offences, and to precure
the ratification of it in parliament, and in the mean tine, to dif-
mils the Chancellor, the Mnfter of Gki-mis, Lord Homne, and Sir
George IHome, from his councils and pretence. liotlihwell on
his part, conftnted to remove from court, though lie left tlierc as
nany of his allociates, as he thought luflicicnt to prevent the re-
turn of the advesci: fadion.

' Cald. 4. 343. Slpotlf 393. Pail. i3. Jac. VI . c. 64.

DootVIII.' But it was now no cafy matter to keep the King under tlh

fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often fubje& during

e 59ov his minority. He difco.veicd so much impatience to fliake off his
lie recovers
his liberty, fetters, that thole who imposed, durst not continue, the restraint,
Septecm. 7. They permitted him to call a convention of the nobles at Stirlingj

and to repair thither himfnelf. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to
be io, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the inlult offered
to the King's person and authority to be high treason, and declar-
ed him ablolvcd from any olligation to observe conditions, ex-
torted by force, and which violated so efientially his royal prero-
gative. James, however, fill proffired him a pardon, providetl
he would fie for it as an aft of mercy, and promise to retire out
of the kingdom. 'These conditions Bothwell rejecCed with dif-
dain, and betaking hilmfclf once more to arms, attempted to fur,
prise the King, but finding linl on his guard, fled to the bor-
ders t.

Slpciert of lThe King's ardour againflt Eotlwell, comipared wvith his flow
tifvollrill and evasive proceedings againfl the Popillb Lords, occasioned a
Lords. general diigufn among his fulbjci.s; and was imputed either to an

exceflive attachment to the persons of tllofe confpilrators, or to a
secret partiality towards their opinions ; both which gave rife to
no unreasonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardcians
of the Proteflant Religion, thought thcmfcives bound, in fucll a
juncAure, to take extraordinary leps for its preservation. And
Sept. 25. tle provincial fynod of rife happening to meet at that time, a

motion was made to excommunicate all concerned in the late
conspiracy, as obllinate and irreclaimable Papills. And though
none of the conflpiratols resided within the bounds of the fynodl,
or were fulject to its jurif(liclion, Illchwas the zeal of the mem-
bers, that, overlooking this irregularity, they pronounced the fen-
tcnce of excommnuniication, to which tlhe aft of lall parliament ad-
ded new terrors. And left this lhould be imputed to a few men,
and accounted the ait of a small part of the Church, deputies were
appointed to attend the adjacent If nods, and to desire their appro-
balion and eoncurrence.

His leiiity An event happened, a few weeks after, which incrcafcd the
t[o\earls people's fuipicitons of tllhC iilng. As lie was mairching on an c<-
O 7. ;7. pcdition aga;inll the ordtrers, tlie tllree Earls, comining tudclcnly

into his tprcfcnce osiered to l;ti):nit tlicnl; lvcs to a ICgal trial, and
James, without colmmlling them to ctilodly, appoijltcd a day for

that purpose. The conspirators prepared to appear with a f'ormid- nooK VII.
able train of their friends and vafllIs. But, in the mean time,
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, assembling at 1593
]Edinburgh, remonstratcd againfl the King's extreme indulgence
with great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular course ofjullice, to commit to sure cuflody persons charged
with the highest aCats of treason, who could not be brought to a
legal trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the
Church; and to call a Convention of ellatcs, to delibrate con-
cerning the method of proceeding againfl themn. At the fi;mc
time, they ofcredl to accompany hlim ill arls to the place of trial,
lelt such audacious and powerful crlninllls fliould overawe jtlticc,
and dictate to the judges, to whlom they pretended to fulmiit.
James, though extremely ofIended both with the irregularity of
their procedings, and the prefumptioi of their cemands, found
it expedient to put off the day of trial, and to call a Convention
of eflates, in order to quiet the fears and jealoulies of the people.
By being humoured ill this point, their fulpicions began gradually
to abate, and the Chancellor manaaged the Convention so artfully,
that he himfclf, together with a few other members, was empowered
to pronounce a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much
deliberation, they ordained that the three l.arls, and their afloci- :.ov. 2S.
ates, fliould Le exscmptcd fron all further inquiry or prosecution,
on account of their corrlfpondenlce with Spain ; that, before the
first day of February, they llhould either submit to the Church,
and publicly rcnounce tlic errors of Popery, or remove cut of
the kingdom; that, befure the firll of January, they (liould declare
which of thefc alterniutives they would cnl.brace tlhat they ilhuuld
find surety for their peacc;.ible dlmcalotr, for the future; and
that if they failed to ilgnity their choice in due time, they l;hauld
lose the Lenefit of this act of ab/,'ilai, and liailn exposed to all
the pains of law *.

By tlis lenity tow:ards thie coiiliir.ators, Janmes incurred much

reproach, and ;i ned o adv autagc. IDevoted to tlie l'opifli l- ;9
pcrflition, lheLziilicv to all tle diclatcs of tlhir pli ill, and bluov-
cd up with lopcs ;an prlrO il; s ,f l'origii aidl, the thlice Eulis rc-
fuledl to accept of tice condlitions, a;mid couilirlued their trc:afi.nljl:
correI'ICIpndenc witI thll court (i- Sp.aiin. A onvclutiol oi' lll.tcs TJt ,;:.i, ,.
pironouInced tlicrn to hiave florci'ciltc ti(e b)Cl it of tlhe iii, lc,;,

hllichl were olfe e.l i nd tlc Kin;

arn lti'cd hiliu, y ly '; ;il:tii ),
mo fiurrendier th'IIIilvcs to julliie. 1'll 1): lci' c of the lll.; lil

J "cl. . . ;

i s. 1,
o

Booil VIII. amblaflador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of tlhcf procc'c..

ings. Elizabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and imput-
ing his reluctance to punilll the Popilli Lords to a secret appro-
bation of their designs, had lent Lord Zouche to reprcfent, once
more, the danger to lwhich he exposcd himself, by this false mo-
deration; and to require him to exercifi that rigour, which their
crimes, as well as the poflure of aflirs rendered nccffary. And
though the llcps now taken by the King silenced all complaints'
on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful of his charalcer as an ambafla-
dor, entered into private negociations with such of the Scottifl
nobles, as diCapproved of the King's measures, and held almoll an
open correspondence with Bothwell, who, according to the usual
artifice of malecontents, pretended much solicitude for reforminir
the disorders of the commonlwealth; and covered his own ambi-
tion with the fiecious veil of zeal against those Counsellors, who
rcltrained the King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the
Protellant faith. Zouche encouraged him in the name of his
IliiRrefs, to take arms against his Sovereign.

A new at- Meanwhile, the King and the Clergy were filled with mutual'
Botllt .of difrutf of each other. They were jealous, perhaps to excess, that

his afiertions leaned too much towards the Popilih faeion; he sus-
pecled them, without good reason, of prompting Bothwell to re-
bellion, and even of supplying him with money for that purpole.
Little infiigation, indeed, was wanting to route such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwell's to any daring enterprise. He appeared luddenly
within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of four hundred horse.
The pretences, by which he endeavoured to juilify this infurrec-
tion were extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Pope-
rv. concern for the King's honour, and for the liberties of the na-
tion. James was totally unprovided for his own defence ; hellad
no infantry, and was accompanied only with a few horl'emcn of
Lord Home's' train. In this extremity, he implored the aid of
the citizcns of Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to act
with zeal, lie promised to proceed against the Popiil Lords with
the utmotl rigour of law. Animated by their Minillcrs, they
,ali checrfilly to their arms, and advanced with the King at their
head againli Bothwell; but he, notwilltlanding his tlucccl" in
putting to ilight Lord lionme, who had raflily charged himn with
a far ifer-ior number of cavalry, retired to D:lkeith without d.'r-
1rg to attack the King. IHis followers abandoned him iooul afl' r,
a lid dilcourad by f ii av !ucceflivc dillppointments could lIc-
;:cr aft-rwardlis be brouhllt to venture into the lield. I-ie betool.

I hinifelf to his usual lurking places, in the North of England ; but IoolK VIIT.
]'lizabeth, in compliance with the King's rcmonltrances, obliged

594'
him to quit that retreat*.

No lboner was the King delivcred from one danger, than he l'efli d;ln-

was called to at

to ted anothcr. The Popilll Lords, in confe- i';e [fro

'luencc of their ncgociations with Spain, received, in thc spring, Iordls.
n supply of money from Philip. WVhat bold designs this might April 3-
inflire, it was no cafy matter to conje&urc. From men under
tile dominion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
thle moll defpcrate actions were to be dreaded. 'Ihe assembly of
tile Church inmmediately took the alarm; remonfirated against
them with more bitterness than ever; and unaninoufly ratified
the fentcncce of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of
Fife. James himlclf, provoked by their obflinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only be generally
dilplcafing to his owvn ilibjccts, but give rife to unfavourable sus-
picions among the Englilli, exerted liimfelf with unullual vigour.
He called a parliament ; laid before it all the circumflances and June 8.
aggravations of tlh conlpJiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and fcvcral of these connected with the confpi-
rators by blood or fricndlhip, lie prevailled on them, by his iin-
fluence and inportunity, to pronounce the molt rigorous fentencc
the law can inllid. They were declared to be guilty of high
treason, and their estates and honours forfeited. At the flme
time, flatutes, more severe than ever, were cnacted againflt the
professors of the Popifll Religion.

How to put this fiontence in execution, was a matter of greater Battle of

dilliculty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the Glenlivat.
country almost inacccffible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottifli Monarch. No entreaty could prevail on
Elizabeth to advance the money, ncceflary for defraying the ex-
pences of an expedition against tcm. 'I'o attack them in person,
with his own forces alone, might cxpoli him both to dcilgrace
and to danger. Ie liad rccourfe to the only expedient which
remaincd, in flich a situation, for aiding tl.e impotence of So-
vereign authlority ; lie delegated Iis authority to tle Earl of

lrg!yle, and Lordl lor'bes, tlle leaders of tivo cl:ins at ninmity
with the conflpir;ltors; and gave them a commilffon to invadlc
their lands, and to seize the calllcs whiclh belonged to tliem.
!3othlilell, notwithliandlinlg all hlis high pretenfiuons of zcil for the

* Spoll: .103. Cald. .1. y9.

I ii

BooK VIII. Protcflant Religion, having now .entered into a clbre confederacy

1-V with them, the danger became every day more urging. Argyle,
594. solicited by the King, and roused by the Clergy, took tile field

at the head of seven thoulilnd men. HI-ntly and Errol met him
at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in number, but compos-
ed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted on horfi-
Olobcr3. back, and who brought along with them a train of field pieces.

They encountered each other with all the fury, which heredi-
tary enmity and ancient rivalflip add to undilciplined courage.
But the Highlanders, disconcertcd by the firfl discharge of the
cannon, to which they were little accullomed, and unable to re-
fill the impreflion of cavalry, were toon put to flight. And Ar-
gyle, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his friends
out of the field, weeping with indignation at their disgrace, and
calling on them to Itand, and to vindicate the honour of their
name *.

On the first intelligence of this defcat, James, though obliged to

pawn his jewels in order to raise money 1-, afiembled a finall body
of troops, and marched towards the North. IHe was joined by
the Irwines, Keiths, Lelleys, Forbeses, and other clans at en-
mity with Huntly and Errol, who having loll several of their
principaljfollovers at Gletlivat, and others restsing to bear arms
agSainft the King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James walled their lands ; put garrisons in fomc of their
callecs ; burnt others; and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieu-
tenant in that part of the kingdom, with a body of men fuflici-
ent to refirain them from gathering to any head there, or from
infefling the low country. Reduced at lall to extreme (liflrels,

Popiilt by the rigour of tle season, and the dcl'crtion of their followers,
yvel, rtt oi they obtained the King's pcrmillion to go beyond seas, and gave
tile king- fccurity tlat they mliould neitler return without his licence, nor
donm.

engage in any new intrigues againll the Protellant Religion, or
the peace of the kingdom t.

1595. By their exile, tranquillity was re-eflabliflcd in the North of'

The R.man
C:uhoics Scotland ; and the firnincti aind vigour, which James had dil]lay-
inccueildi- ed in his laIl proceedings agailnfi them, regained him, in a g'rcat
'":tislit "
J:tles. degree, the confidence of his Protcllant fi;lljecls. But lie funk,

in tlhe fame proportion, and for the fame rcalon, in tie clfecci of
the Romn.i Catholics. They had afierted his mothler's right to
the Crown of Engl;anl with 1 much arth, that tlicy could not,
with any decency, rcject his. And the indulgence, with which

' C:ll, . ;c. 4c l'. Pillh, ?:c r,. r.

iV6 . .
SpoItrv. 40. Cal.!. , ;.:

he affeed to treat the professors of that religion, inspircd them EooKVIII.
with such hopes, that tley viewed his acceflion to the throne as "
no undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King pur- 95
sued the conspirators, and the fevcre flatutes agailaft Popery to
vwhich he had given his content, convinced them that these
hopes were visionary ; and they began to look about in. rjueft of
some new successor, whose rights they might oppose to his. T'he
Englilli Papills turned their eyes towards the Earl of Eefex,
xwhofe generous mind, though firmly eflablifhed in the Protcflant
faith, abhorred the severitics inflited in that age, on account of
religious opinions. Thole of the fame fed, who were in exile, form-
ed a bolder scheme, and one more suitable to tleir situation. They
advanced the claim of the Infanta of Spain ; and Parsons the Je-
ilit published a book, in which, by falfl quotations from history,
by fabulous genealogies, and absurd arguments, intermingled
with bitter inveftives againlt the King of Scots, he endeavoured
to prove the Infanta's title to the Englifl Crown to be preferable
to his. And Philip, though involved already in a war both with
France and England, and scarce able to defend the remains.of
the Burgundian Provinces againll the Dutch commonwealth, ea-
gerly grasped at this airy project. The dread of a Spanifli Pre-
tender to the Crown, and the opposition which the Papifis began
to form against the King's fuccclsion, contributed not a little to
remove the prejudices of the Protcflants, and to prepare the way
for that event.

Bothwell, whose name has been so often mentioned as the dif- Bothxlill

forced to

turber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the kingdou, fly ;into
was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Q.een of Spaini.
England, on account of his confederacy with the Popifl Lords
excommunicated by the Church, for the f.ame reason ; and desert-
ed, in his diflrefs, by his own followers; lie was obliged to fly for
safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after re-
nouncing the Protellant faith, he led, many years, an oblcurc and
indigent life, remarkable only for a low anti iinamous debauch-
cry. The King, though extremely ready to flcrifice the Ilrongelt
refrcitmclts to the lligliteft acknowledglments, could never be floft-
Uncd by his fulimiflions, nor be induced to lillen to any intcrcl-
sion in hill s b, alft' '

'his year the Kingll loll Chancellor Maliill:udi, :;i able Iiniif-

ter, on whomi lie ihad long devolved the lolc wxci jit of puilic
;i(l,;iS. .AS TJ:iles loved hlimi whilc :!i;', lie wrote, iln lOI.nour of

\V;11W.Mn. i. . Spotl: Lio.

Boo VIII. his memory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the

compositions of that agc, are far from being inelegant *.

IS9S' Soon after his death, a considerable change was made in the
159G6 adminifiration. At that time, the annual charges of government

A change far excecded the King's revenues. The (Qeen was fond of ex-
in the ad-
minitlra. pensive amusements. James himself was a flranger to (cconory.
pion. It became necessary, for all these reasons, to levy the public reve-

nues with greater order and rigour, and to hulband them with
more care. This important trull was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law -, who from their number were called O6favias.,z
The powers vested in them were ample, and almoll unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their content:
and knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alie-
nation of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the trca-
fury, ihould be held valid, unless it was ratified by the fubfcrip-
tion of five of the commillioncrs; all their acts and decisions were
declared to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in ci-
vil courts ; and in consequence of them, and without anyother war-
rant, any person mightbe arrefled, ortheirgoods seized. Such exten-
live jurisdiction, together with the absolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the government into
their hands. United among themselves, they gradually under-
mined the reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucra-
tive or honourable office. Tle ancient servants of the Crown
repined, at being obliged to quit their flations to new men. 'Ihe
favourites, and young courtiers, murmured at secing the King's
liberality flinted by their prescriptions. And the Clergy ex-
claimed against some of them as known apoflates to Popery, and
fufpe&cd others of secretly favouring it. Thcy retained their
power, however, notwithllanding this general combination againfl
them; and they owed it entirely to the order and clcoioniy which
they introduced into the adminiflration of the finances, by which
the necenffay expences of government were more cafily defriycd,
than in any other period of the King's reigln .

'Violence of The runiour of vailt preparations which J'hilip wals flidl to be
t,':niellth carrying on at this tiCe, filled both England and Scotland wilit
i ''I'i,111 ' Spotl/ .t1 1.

1'[' Alexaendlr Scaton Pefidlent (if thc Srefioln, \Valtcr Stelwart Colllaml'illitr

o1 li:llltl.r , l.orll I'ivy SC:ll, 1i)viil (t'Irn );y, Jolhn l-indll":!, J:nllt, I''llllill(;-
.tonll, 'I'lOll:l:. Ilmiltoll, Jollni Skcle Clerk I;c(gill c, anlid l'crtcl \'r Von '; 1' l1Cr.

t.
l .r.

) im. 413· ~', J^.

tie dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the BooK VIII.
defence of his kingdom. But tilefe did nbt satisfy the zeal of'the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive; 196
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their eflates, and to live in their lioufes, they charged
him with rendering the ac of forfeiture incfcftual, by supporting
the avowed enemies of the Protcitant faith. The Aflekmbly of MarcIh 24.
the Church took under confidcration the Ilate of the kingdon,
and having appointed a day of public falling, they solemnly re-
newed the Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere
to the Proteflant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors. A
committce, confitling of thle moit eminent Clergymen, and of ma-
ny Barons, and Gentlemen of diltination, waited on the King, and
laid before him a plan for the 'ccurity of the kingdom, and the
preservation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the
eflates of the banified Lords, as a fund for the maintenance of.
soldiers; to take the flricaeft precautions for preventing the re-
turn of such turbulent fi.bjeds into the country ; andi to purfine
all who were fulpected of being their adherents, with the utmolt
rigour.

Nothing could be more repugnant to the King's schemes, or The Kini':;
n-ore dif-greeable to his inclination, than these propositions. A- remillic;

with rcgard.

verse, through his whole life, to any course, where he expected to thim.
opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the
charaler of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed
with concern the prejudices against him, whicl were growing-
amiong the Roman Catholics and resolved to make some atone-
nment for that part of hisi condu"Li, whic had drawn on him their
indignation. Elizabeth was now well advanced in ye:rs; lher
life had lately been in danger; if any Popilli competitor flhuld
arile to difpjute his right of lfccefnion, a fadlion, so pow;eiful as
lh:t of the biniflied Lords, might be extremely formidable 3 and
any division among his own ftiljecs mighlt prove fatal, at a junc-
ture, wvhich woultl requiire lheir united and mnofl vigorous eftorts.
In lead, teelrcr re, of tlle adlditionial fevclities which the afl'cmlly
roplo1n'OlI, Jiimes hlaid tliougllts of iilitiga:tilg. l le lpiililimnt, ahich
ilicy alrac;ly fiilfcrcd. And a; they v'ere sI IlioldcI, durig'lleir
rciidcnce in Inociga parts, lby Philip's euniflis5i: ; as rclfitllnent
iniil.Lt tdiofc theln t, lillten inore f:ivun;ibly, thaln ever, to thlic'
h:ilgellio.ls j ; tfs tl.i:iir might drive tlem to 1 ill more atrocious
:Iici)n ; lie rel;,lvtc to recall thelm uiider c(rt.in cniitioiis, inio
tllhir untlive contlry. Encoulraged by thele l' cntiinets ot thel

BooK VIII. King in their favour, of which they did not want intelligence,

and wearied already of the dependant and anxious life of exiles,
they ventured to return fecretlyirito.Scotland. Soon after, they
presented a petition to the King, begging his permiflion to reside
at their own hloufes, and offering to give security for their peacc-
able and dutiful behaviour. James calljd a Convention of eflates
to deliberate on a matter of such importance, and by tleir advice,
he grantcd the petition.

Tle ratnl So soon as they were informed of this, the members of a com-
proceedings miittee, appointed by the lfil aiTembly, met at Edinburgh, and
of the Cler-
gy and peo- with all the precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions

. as they thought ncccflary for tle safety of the kingdom. They

wrote circular letters to all the PrelLyteries in Scotland; they
warned them of the approaching danger; they exhorted them to
flir up their people to the defence of their jult rights; they com-
manded them to publifl, in-all tlieir pulpits, the at excommuni-
cating the Popish Lords; and enjoined them to lay all those who
were fufpecled of flvouring Popery under the fame censure, by a
summary l:entence, and without observing the usual formalities of
trial. And as the danger seemed too pressing to wait for the
Itated meetings of the judicatorics of the Church, they made choice
of tile moil eminent Clergymen in different corners of the kingdom,
appointed them to reside constantly at Edinburgh, and to meet
every day with the Minillers of that city, under the name of the
Stanldizg Cozncil of tShe Churci., and vested in this body the supreme
authority, by cnjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the Church fliould receive no detriment.

T'iesei proceedings, no less unconflitutional than unprecedented,

were manifefi encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold
lceps towards open rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jus-
tilled in some degree such excesses. His lenity towards the Pa-
pills, so rcgugnant to the principles of that age; hlls pardoning the
conspirators, notwithllanding repeated promiifes to the contrary;
the refpecl lie paid to Lady 'Iuntly, who was attaclicd to the Ro-
mlillh religion, no lc;s than her hufland ; his committing the care
of his daugliter, the Princcls Eliza:)eth, to Lady Lcving lin, wlio
vwas infcclcd withll the fame (ilperllition ; the contempt willi which
lhe talked, on all occasions, both of the ci:i:lacrrr of Milliilers,
and of their fiintllion ; were cilcii:ilunflcs vl!ic'l might have fil-
led Illindl:;, nolt Iprone y Inaltire to j aluiifl , \x'itli Co e fuljiicilns;
tiind iiiglbt aive prcIecipit;ttdl into ralli coulcil, tho, l wlo were
f.t I' cliu\'i',! 1 florn intemilperate zeal, 1lut, hlo;wver powerful the

THE HISTORY OP SCOTLAND. 73

Miotives might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laud- Boox VIII.
able the end they had in view, they condu&ed their measures, V
with no address, and even with little prudence. James discovered i596.
a strong inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and, jea-
lous as he was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many
conceflions for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the
Privy Counsellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the Clergy, and inquired whether Huntly and his affoci-
ates might not, upon making proper acknowledgments, be again
received iito the bosom of the Church, and be exempted from
any further puniflment, on account of their part apoftacy and trea-
sons. They replied, that though the gate of mercy flood always
open for those who repented and returned, yet as there noblemen
had been guilty of idolatry, a crime defeiving death both by the
law of God, and of man, the civil magifirate could not legally
grant them a pardon 3 and even though tht Church should absolve
them, it was his duty to inflict puniflrnent upon them. This in-
flexibility in those, who were reckoned the most compliant of the
order, filled the Kingwith indignation, which the imprudence and
obflinacy of a private Clergyman heightened into rage.

Mr. David Black, Minifler at St. Andrew's, discoursing in one Seditious
of his sermons, according to cunlom, concerning the iRate of the clod'line

taught by

nation, affirmed that the King had permitted the Popish Lords to Black.
return into Scotlard, and by that ation, had discovered the treach-
ery of his own heart; that all Kings were the Devil's chil-
dren ; that Satan had now the guidance of the court j that the
Queen of England was an atheist 3 that the judges were rifcre-
ants and bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy
Counsellors cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayer
for the Queen, he used these words, We muff pray for her for
fafliion's fake, but we have no cause, the will never do us good.
James commanded him to be summoned before the Privy Coun- Nov. 1o.
cil, to answer for such seditious exprclTions ; and the Clergy, in- Te ,lLrghi
secad of abandoning him to the punilhment, which such a pctu- defence.
lant and criminal attack on his superiors deserved, were so impru-
dent as to cfpoufe his caulc, as if it had been the comrnmn one
of the whole order. l'he controvcrly concerning the immunities
of the pulpit, and the rights of the Clergy to tcllify agalnil vices
of every kind, whlich had been agitated in 584, was now reviv-
ed. It was pretended, that with regard to their fhcred funfion,
Miniflers were subject to the Church alone; that it belonged on-
ly to their Ecclcliatlical fuperiours to judge of the truth, or fulfe-

J'0o/miea II. K

BOOK VII. hood of doctrines, delivered in the pulpit; that if upon any pre-

. tence whatever, the King usurped this jurifdition, the Church

would, from that moment, fink under servitude to the civil Ma-
giftrate; that inflead of reproving vice, with that honer bold-
ness, which had often been of advantage to individuals, and falu-
tary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to flatter the pafions
of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of others; that the
King's eagerness to punish the indefcretion of a Proteflant Minis-
ter, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of Popish con-
fpirators, called on them to Rfand on their guard; and that now
was the time to contend for their privileges, and to prevent any
encroachment on those rights, of which the Church had been in
possession ever since the Reformation. Influenced by these con-
fiderations, the council of the Church enjoined Black to decline
the jurifdidion of the Privy council. And he, proud of such al
opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose,
and with the utmost firmness refuscd to plead, or to answer the
queltions which were put to him. In order to add greater
weight to these proceedings, the council of the Church transmitted
the declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom,
and commanded every Minister to fufcribe it, in testimony of his
approbation.

James defended his rights with no less vigour than they were

attacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority
mluf fall, if the clergy should be permitted, publicly, and with
impunity, to caluminate his Afinifters, and even to censure
himself; and knowing, by former examples, what unequal repa-
ration for such offences he might expect from the judicatories of
the Church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and
issued a proclamation, commanding the members of the council
of the Church to leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own
parishes. Black, instead of submitting, renewed his declinature;
and the council, in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that
as they met by the authority of the Church, obedience to it was
a duty still more sacrcd, than that which they owed to the King
himself. The Privy council, notwvithlllnding Black's reftifing to
plead, proceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pro-
nounced him guilty of the crimes of which he had been accu'cld
But refelrred it to the King, to appoint what punifihent he
ilould susser.

Mlc:iLnwliile, many cndeavours were used to bring matters to
lc;oo.nmmodiation. Almost every day produced floie new fchelec

· reconcilement; but through the King's fickleness, the obfti- Booc VIII.
nacy of the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all '
proved ineffectual.. Both parties appealed to the people, and by '596.
reciprocal and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render
each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes,
with which James charged the Clergy ; while they made the pul-
pits resound with complaints of his excelfive lenity towards Pa-
.pifts, and of the no less exceflive rigour, with which he opprefed
the eflablifhed Church. Exasperated by their bold inveatives, he,
,at last, sentenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to
-reside there during his pleasure ; and once more commanding the
members of the sanding council to depart from Edinburgh, he re-
quired all the Miniflers in.the kingdom to lubfcribe a bond, oblig-
ing themselves to submit, in the ame malnncr as other fubjets,
to the jurisdiction ofthe civil courts, in matters of a. civil nature.

This decisive meafurc excited all the violent passions, which A tumultin

possess disappointed fations, and deeds no less violent immedi- Edinburgh.
ately followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices
of some courtiers, who expcRed to reap advantage from the ca-
lamities of their country, or who hoped to lcffen the authority of
the O&avians, by engaging them in lhofilitics with the Church.
On one hand, they informed,the King that the citizens of Edin-
burgh were under 2rms.ev ey night,.and had planted a firong
guard round the houses cos their Miniflers. James, :in order to
put a flop to this imaginary insult on his government, iffncd aprocla-
mation, commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave
the town, within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to
the Miniflers, advising them to look to their own safety, as
Huntly had been secretly admitted to an interview ,ith the
King, and had been the author of the severe proclamation against
the citizens of Edinburgh *. They doubted no more the of truth
of this intelligence, than.the King had done of that which he rc-
ceived, and fell.as blindly into the snare. The letter came to
their hands, just as one of their nulpber was going to mount the
pulpit. They resolvcd that he ihould acquaint the people of their D:c. 17,
danger ; and he painted it, with all the ltrong colours, which

Though matters were induflrioufly aggravated by pcrfons, who wished

,both parties to purfuc violent meairulcs; neither of thcl e

r epolt- were alrogc.

ther defliulte of foundation. As their blini!tcrs were rfipFordl to he in dan;gcr,
some of the more zealous citizens hiad determined to defend them, by force of
arms. Birch, Mem . 250. o. IUntly had been privately in Edinburghl, where
'he had an intcrvicw, if not with the King, at leall with some of hi.s liaiti.c:,
kirch, -Ibid. ; J

icij

BooK V/I. men naturally employ, in describing any dreadful and instant es-

156. lamity. When the sermon was over, he desired the nobles and
x596'.

gentlemen to agfemble in the Little Church. The whole multi-
tude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded thither; they
promised and vowed to stand by the Church; they drew up a pe-
tition to the King, craving the redress of those grievances, of which
the Clergy complained, and beseeching him to deliver them from
all future apprehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the Protefant Re-
ligion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgesses, and two

The King Ministers, were apppointed to present it. The King happened
in danger. to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef-

sion was fitting. The manner in which the petition was deliver-
ed, as well as its contents, offended him. He gave an haughty
reply ; the petitioners infifled with warmth ; and a promiscuous
multitude pressing into the room, James retired abruptly into an-
other apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut behind
him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were frill as-
fembled, and to whom a Minifler had been reading, in their ab-
fence, the flory of Haman. When they reported that the King
had refused to liften to their petitions, the Church was filled in a
moment with noifp, threatenings, execrations, and all the out.
rage and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their
arms; tome to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, the
sword of the Lord and of Gideon; and ruflhing out with the most
furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolhooth, threatening the
King himself, and demanding some of his Counlellors whom they
named, that they might tear them in pieces. The Magiflrates of
the city, partly by authority, partly by, force, endeavoured to
quell the tumult; the King attempted to sooth the malecon-
tents, by promising to receive their petitions, when presented in
a regular manner; the Ministers, sensible of their own raflnefs in
kindling such a flame, seconded both ; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and
the King returned to the palace; happy in having escaped from
an infurreftion, which, though the infiantaneous and unconcert-
ed effet of popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent dan-
.ger, and was coifidered by him as an unpardonable affront to his
authority F.

As loon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents affemb-

led, in order to prepare their petition. The punifhmcnt of the
Popish Lords; the removal of those Counsellors; who were sus-

Spotfw. 417,. ec. Cald . 5, .
4, . irch, Mem. 2. 235.

pecedl of favouring their persons or opinions; tle repeal of all Book VII.
the late acs of council, subversive of the authority of the Church; 'v
together with an aft approving the proceedings of the itanding I596'
council; were the chief of their demands. But the King's indig-
nation was fill so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpole,
durlt not venture, that night, to present requeits which could not
fail of kindling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with He leaves
all his attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow ; the felnion, and other Edinburgh,

and pro-

courts of juflice, were required to leave a city, ,where it was ceedswith
no longer conlfitent either with their safety, or their dignity to severity al

gainss the

remain; and the noblenmen and barons were commanded to re- citizens.
turn to their own houses, and not to reassemble without the King's
ermi-flion. The vigour, with which the King aqied, firuck a
damp upon the spirits of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible
how much they would susser by his absence, and the removal of
the courts of juflice, repented already of their conduct. The Mi-
niflers alone reiolved to maintain the contest. They endeavour-
ed to prevent the nobles from dispersing; they inflamed the peo-
ple by violent inve&ives againfl the King; they laboured to pro-
cure subscriptions to an aflociation for their mutual defence ; and
conffcious what lustre and power the juntion of some of the great-
er nobles would add to their cause, the Minillers of Edinburgh
wrote to Lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the word of God,
and provoked by the injuries offered to the Church, had taken
arms ; that many of the nobles had determined to proteEt the
Proteflant Religion, which owed its eftablili-ment to the piety
and valour of their ancestors; that they wanted only a leader to
unite them, and to inspire them with vigour; that his zeal for
the good cause, no less than his noble birth, entitled him to that
honour: They conjured him therefore not to dii:appoint their
hlopes and wishes, nor to refuse the suffering Church that aid,
vwhich she so much needed. Lord -Hamilton, inflead of comply-
ing with their desire, carried the letter directly to the King,
whom this new intult irritated to such a degree, that he command-
ed the Magifirates of Edinburgh infiantly to seize their Minis-
ters, as manifll: incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The
magistrates, in order to regain the King's favour, were preparing
to obey; and .the 'linilters, who saw no other hope of lafety, fled
towards England *.

This unsuccessful infurrcion, inflcad of overturning, cflahlifh- The King

fed tlieJKing's authority. Those concerned in it were confound- ipowetofthe
,"(dI and difpcrfed. And the refl of his fulbjcCs, in order to avoid Chrech.

* Spotfw. 4,5. Cald. 5, t~6.

gpoK VIII. -suspicion, or to gain his favour, contended who should be.mJnft for-

.ward to execute his vengeance. A .Convention of eflates being
T5197. called, pronounced the late infurreclion to.be high treason.; or-

dained every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission
to the King's.jurifdi&ion, in all mnltters civil and criminal; em-
powered magiltrates to commit, inftaRitly, to prison any Minister,
..-who in his sermons, should utter -ndecent refleaions .on the King's
condu&.; prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, -with-
out the King's licence ; commanded that no person fhould.be ele&-
.ed a magistrate of Edinourgh, for the future,..without the King's
.approbation; and that, in the mean time, the present magitlrates
fiould either discover, and infli& condign punishment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself fhluld be fubjeated to
all the penalties of that treasonable ation *.

Abri'ges Armed with the authority of these decrees, James resolved to
the privi-
leges if the crush entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjets. As the Clergy
citizens of had, hitherto, derived their chief credit and strength from the

g favour and .zeal of the citiz-ns of Edinburgh, his first care was to

humble them. Though .the inagiftrates.fubmitted to him in the
nmoft abje&c terms; though they .vindicated themselves, and their
fello:v citizens, from the mofl dillant intention-of violating his
royal pcrfon or authority ; though, after the ftriEteft scrutiny, no
circumltances that could fix on them the suspicion of premeditated
rebellion had been difcovcred; though many of the nobles, and
such of the Clergy as flill retained any degree of favour, interced-
ed in their bchalf; neither acknowledgements, nor intercessions,
ws-ere of the lcatl availt. The King continued inexorable, the
Tb::rbi'ry8. city wvas declared to have forfeitedcits privileges as a Corporation,

and to be liable to all the penalties of trcafon. The capital of
.the kingdom, deprived of mngiftrates, deserted by its ministers,
abandoied by the cpurts ofjullicc, and prolcribed by the King,
remained in dcfolation and despair. Tihe courtiers even threaten-
ed to raee the city to the foundation, and to ere& a.pillar where
it flood, as an evcrlalling liionument of the King's vengeancc, and
of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in compliance with Elli-
zabeth, who interposed in their favour, and moved by the con-
3Iarchl. r. tinual solicitations of his nobles, James ablblved the citizens from

the penalties of law, but, at the faime time, he firippcd them of
their moll important privileges; they were neither allowed to elet
their own magifrates, nor their own minillers; many new bur.
dens were imllofcd on thenm; and a great fum of money was cse
atced by way of pace.;loffcringS.

* CA!l. 5. x..7. ' C;ll. j. 149. t Spots\. 434,. 144.

James was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, and rno lcfs successful, Bbn;, VII.

in circumscribing the jurifdidion of the Church, Experience -
!lad discovered that to attempt this, by ats of parliament, and I597.
sentences of privy council, was both inoffe&ual, and odious. He latiN g's-
had recourse, now to an: expedient more artful, and better calcu- r-cgald to
lated for obtaining his end. The Ecclesiastical judicatories t hr
were composed of many members; the majority of the' Clergy
were extremely indigent, and unprovided of legal ftipands; the
Ministers in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithltandinig
the parity eltablifhed by the Prcbyterian government, had afurm-
ed a leading in the Church, which filled their brethren with
envy; every numerous body of men is susceptible of sudden and
Itrong impressions, and liable to be influenced, corrupted, or over-
awed. Induced by these considerations, James thought it poifible
to gain the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to, subdue.
Proper agents were set to work all over the kingdom; promises,
flattery, and threats were employed 5 the usurpations of the bre-
thren near the capital were aggravated ; the jtaloufy of their power,
which was growing in the distant provinces, was augrmented; and
two different General Assemblies were held, in both, which, not-
withstanding the zeal and boldness, wherewith a few leading Cler-
gymen defended the privileges of the Church, a majority declared
in favour of thoe nmeafures, which were agreeable to the King.
Many praclices, which had continued since the Reformation,
were condemned ; many points of discipline, w;ich had hitherto
been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
licence, with which Minrifters difcourfid of politic:dl Lnatters, was
reltraincd ; the freedom, with which they inveilghed ag.rinlt par-
ticular persons, censurcd; sentences of fumrinary excommunication
declared unlawful; the convoking a General A;fe'mblly, witlour
the King's permifflon, prohibited; and the right of nominating
Ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown. Thus,
the Clergy themselves surrendered privil.ges, which it would have
been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily fjlbmitted to a yoke,
more intolerable than any James would have ventured to impolc
by force; while those who continued to oppose hlis mcafurcs, in-
Itcad of their former popular topic of the King's violent encroach-
ments on a julifdition which did not belong him, were olli-gcd
to turn their outcries againit the corruptions of their own ord
.. ..

ly the authority of tllfc afllemblies, the Popifih Eails were :,l. !':,i'.:
iowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were abl'ulv- :2''.; ll.

* Bporfw. 43o. Cald. 5. -y, 3J

BOOKVIII. ed fronm the sentence of excommunication; and received into' she
--.J bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapscd
J397. into their former errors, were again reconciled to the Church of

Rome, and by their apoftacy justified, in some degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

The IIinifters of Edinburgh owed to the intercefflon of these

assemblies, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridg-
ed their power. The city was divided into ditlinct parishes; the
number of Ministers doubled 5 persons on whose fidelity the King
could rely were fixed inr the new parishes ; and these circumftan-
ces, added to the authority of the late decrees of the Church,
cqntributcd to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefiaflical
affairs, which James poffcffed during the remainder of his reign.

The King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfations of this period scarce deserve to be remem-
bered. The Ocavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split-
ing into factions among themselves, resigned their commifilon
and the administration of the revenue returning into its former
channel, both the King and the nation were deprived of the be-
nefit of their regular and frugal oeconomy.
Dec. x9. Towards the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

to reflore Huntly, and his affuocates, to their estates and honours,
by repealing the act of forfeiture passed against them. The au-
thority of this supreme court was likewise employed to introduce
a farther innovation into the Church ; but conformable to the
fyitem which the King had now adopted, the motion for this

Ecclcefaftics purpose took its rife from the Clergy themselves. As the at of
,lat in ptar general annexation, and that cllablilhing the Presbyterian go-
1itment. vernment had reduced the few Bishops, who still survived, to

poverty and contempt; as those who pofleffed the Abbeys, and
Priories, were mere laymen, and many of them temporal Peers,
few or none of the Ecclciialtical order remained to vote in par-
liament, and by means of that, the influence of the Crown was
conliderably diniinilhcd there, and a proper balance to the power
and number of the nobles was wanting. But the prejudices, the
nation had conceived agaiufl the name and characftc of Bifiops,
were Co violent that Jaines was obligcd. with the utmost care, to
avoid the :npear:ince of a defi3n to revive ihat order. He pre-
vailed therefore on the comnulition appointed by 1;,1 allcmnbly to
conpla.il to the parli;uncnt, that the liuich was the only body
in the klihdo!nl detfitute of its rcprcfentativcs in that luprcme

o)'llrt, where it so nearly concerned every order to have some, 13Boo VIi.
Who were bound to defend its rights and to crave that a corn-
petent number of the Clergy thould be admitted, according to 1597.
ancient custom, to a feat there. In compliance with their re-
quest, an act was passed, by which those Miniltcrs, on whom the
King fhotlld confer the vacant Biflhopricks and Abbeys, were en-
titled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy might con-
ceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their privileges, it was
remitted to the General Aflembly, to determine what spiritual
jurifdiion or authority in the government of the Church there
pcrfons fllould possess *. I598

The King; hlowvever, found it no easy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclefaftical judicatories, in which the at of
parliament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy
perceived how much lustre this new privilege would reflec upon
their order; though they were not insensible of the great accef-
lion of personal power and dignity, which many of them would
have acquired, by being admitted into the lupreme council of the
nation, their abhorrence of Epifcbpacy was extreme; and to that,
they sacrificed every consideration of intcreft or ambition. All
the King's profeflions of regard for the proeent conflitution of the
Church did not convince them of his sincerity ; all the devices
that could be invented for restraining and circumscribing the ju-
rifdiction of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did
not diminish their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had
taught them, with what ininuating progress the hierarchy advan-
ces, and though admitted at firit with moderate authority, and
under specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.
" Varnish over this scheme, Iaid one of the leading Clergymen,
with what colours you please deck the intruder with the utmolt
art; under all this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The
rame sentiments prevailed among many of his brethren, and in-
duced them to rcject power and honours, with as much zeal, as
ever those of their order courted them. MIany, however, were
allured by the hopes of preferment ; the King himself and his
Ministers employed the fame arts, which they had tried bo fluc-
cclsfully 1all year ; and arter lon,. debates, and much oppolition,
the General Antlmlnly declared that it was lawful for MIinillers to Marzh -.
accept of a leat in p;irliamcnt ; that it would be highly leneficial
to the Church, to have its reprefeutatives in that blprclne court;
andl that fifty-one perluns, a number nearly cqu;al to that of the

* Sp, wT-. jo.. P';rl. i5tl, Jac. VI. c. 235.

lr I
I-

BooK VIII. Ecclesiastics, who were anciently called to parliament, should be

S-

V chosen from among the Clergy for that purpose. The manner of
IS98' their eleion, together with the powers to be vested in them,

were left undecided for the present, and furnished matter of fu-
ture deliberation *.

1599. As the profpeA of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

James en- nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it cer-
deavolll-s withliicccfs tain. And as he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany
to gail a by his marriage, he sent amniaffadors extraordinary to their feve-
I-:'.gland. ral courts, in order to explain the jultnefs of his title to the Eng-

lifh throne, and to desire their afliflance, if any competitor should
arise to difplte his undoubted rights. These Princes readily ac-
knowledged the equity of his claim ; but the aid they could as-
ford him was diflant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce
abbot of Kinlofs, his ambassador at the Englifl Court, felicited
Elizabeth, with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by
lome public deed, and to deliver her own subje&s from the cala-
mities, which are occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fuccef-
sion. But age had strengthened all the paflions, which had, hi-
tlelito, induced Elizabeth to keep this great quetlion obscure, and
undecided ; and a general and evasive answer was all that James
could obtain. As no i.aprefi7on could be made on the Queen,
the ambassador was commanded to found the disposition of her
Lfbjefts, and to try what progress he could make in gaining
thenm. Bruce possessed all the talents of secrecy, judgment, and
addrcrs, requisite for conducting a negociation, no less delicate,
th?. important. A Miniller of this characer was entitled to the
confidence of the Englihll. Mlany of the hilgeft rank unbofonm-
ed themselves to him v;ithout refervc, and gave him repeated as-
faurances of their resolution to aflcrt his mtfter's right, in oppofi-
tien to every pretender -f. And as several pamphlets were di'-
peried, at this ltime, il England, containing objections; to his
title, James employed some learned men n his kingdom to an-
f.ecr thesc cavillers, and to explain the advantages which would
·rcfllt to both kingdonis, by the union of the Crowns. T'helC
books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to reconcile
the Engplish to thlat event. A honk piblifllcd this year, by the
K(i,;: himrfelf, produced anl cfltl ILill more favouralle. It was
intilled Bf/ii/'con Duion, and contained precepts concerning the
art of govcrnnl':nt, nddlrclfed to Prince I-tCnry his lion. Notwith-
tlanding the grc;t altecrations and rclincmcnts in national t:iel

~" Kiioir. .yo. C;ild1.^.21.-.S*I oil.:4

since that time, we must allow this to be no contemptible per- BooK VIrl.
formance, and not to be inferior to the works of mroft cotempo-
rary writers, either in purity of fiyle, or justness of composition. 1599
Even that vain parade of erudition with which it abounds, and
which now difgulls us, raised the admiration of that age ; and as
it was filled with those general rules, which speculative authors
deliver for rendering a people happy, and of which James could
discourse with great plausibility, though often incapable of put-
ting them in praftice ; the English conceived an high opinion of
his abilities, and expeced an increase of national honour and
prosperity, under a Prince so profoundly skillcd in politics, and
vwho gave such a specimen both of his wifdoin, and of his love to
his people '.

The Queen of England's f;ntiments concerning Jameus, wCre

very different from there of her fiLijects. His excelfie indiul-
gencc towards the Popifi Lords; the facility with vwhiti lihe par-
doned their repeated treasons; his rcilring Beaton, the Popiil
Archbilhop of Glasgow, who had lied out of Scotland at the time
of the Reformation, to the poffctKion of the tcmporalities of tlat
benefice; the appointing him his Anliibaitldler at the court of
Francej the applause lie bellowed, in the B:filicon Doron, on
those who adhered to the (ucen his mother, lizabeth conlidcrcd
as so many indications of a mind alienated from the Pr-otciluanlt rc-
ligion; and fflpecled that he would soon revolt from tLh pi:roi'f-
sion of it. These suspicions feemied to be fully contirnmccl, liy a Accu/i-
discovery which came from the MIVticr of Gray, wvlio rcided at 11"'I"1 'o.W-
that time in Italy, and who, rather ti;hn fIfclr his intlizuiing liirit ,wil ,l,
to be idle, de.meaned himself so far as to acl as a Ijv for tlle ing- I '(1)
lill court. I-He conveyed to Elizabh:th the copy of a ltter, writ-
ten by James to Pope Clement VIII. in which the King, after
many exprcltonts of regard for that Pontill, and of gratitude for his
favours, declared his firm rcfolution to treat the Ku man Catholics
with indulgencle and, in order to render the iutercourlfc betcween
the court of l(oni; and Scotland niore frcquentit and f.Iiailiar, lie
solicited tlhe PoIpe to promote Drumniondc, HJilblop of \';izon, a
Scotfinan, to the dignity of a Cardlial --. ]E.liz.ietlh, wxlio had
received, by another channel 4i, folm. ilnpcrfci: t ilicliill cnce of
lh)is correfi)ondclce, wVas filled with jul l iir;li 'c, n.I'l iI (cdtt Iy
dlilpatclied J3owes into Scotlllnd, to inquire more Ifully inlo thei
truth of thle mautlr, and to reproach j;lanlc; or an :ll li.t' fib unlec-
coming a l'rotehult Princ.e l-e was o
s i tfs a illt:cd at tile

Camd.1 Sploti: .)57. ;-' C;ll '3"1.
2 \in v. iMcm. vol. i. 2', 52

, ij

BoOn VIII. accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing but the consci-

oufnefs of innocence could infpirc, affirmed the whole to be a
1399. mere calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies,

on purpose to bring his sincerity in religion to be fufpe&ed. El-
phingflon the Secretary of State denied the matter with equal so-
lemnity. It came to be known by a very singular accident,
which happened some years after, that the information which Eli-
zabeth had received was well founded, though at the fame time
the King's declarations of his own innocence were perfectly con-
fiftent with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply which he
published to a controversial treatise, of which the King was the
author, accused him of having abandoned the favourable senti-
ments which he had once entertained of the Roman Catholic re-
ligion, and as a proof of this quoted hisletter to Clement VIII.
It was impoflible, any longer, to believe this to be a fition ; and
it was a matter too delicate to be passed over without frid in-
quiry. James immediately examined ElphingRon, and his con-
session unravelled the whole mystery. He acknowledged that he
had Ihufled in this letter, among other papers, which he laid be-
fore the King to be signed, who, fulifeaing no such deceit, sub-
fcribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained ; that he had no other motive, however, to this acion,
but zeal for his Majefly's service ; and, by flattering the Roman
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government,
he imagined that he was paving the way for his more easy accef-
lion to the Englifl throne. The Privy Council of England en-
tertained very different sentiments of the Secretary's conduct.
In their opinion, not only the King's reputation had been exposcd
to reproach, but his life to danger, by this rafl impolture ; they
even imputed the gunpowder treason to the rage and disappoint-
ment of the Papills, upon finding that the hopes which this letter
inspired were frufirated. The Secretary was sent a prifoncr into
Scotland, to be tried for high treason. His peers found him gull-
ty; but by the Q.uecn's .intercellion, he obtained a pardon *.

According to the account of other hillorians, James himself

was no stranger to this correfpondcnce with the Pope; and, if
we believe them, Elphingilon being intimidated by the threats of
the Englilh council, and deceived by tlh artifices of the Earl of
D)unbar, concealed 1onic circiniflances in liis narrative oftthistranf-
leiion, and falifiied others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, cndeavourcd to draw a veil over
this part of his Mafler's condlufl .

Spots. 4;6, 507. JoIhnf. .;48. '| C;lld l. v . . 322. vi. 1.17.

But whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre- iootK VIII.

tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that, '
about this time, James was at the utinoft pains to gain the friend- 1599'

Jaitcs at

fhlip of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precaution to- great p;ins
wards facilitating his accession to the Elnglifh throne. Lord to *.ain the

m_, , ;- ,. -,

. . ,', . ^ ~ Romian

H1ome, who was himlielf a Inpift, was intru!ied with a secret corn- Ca:holics.
mission to the Pope*; the Archbifllop of Glasgow was an aEtive
infirument with thofc of his own religionl-. The Pope exprcf-
fed such favourable fentimcnts both of the King, and of his right
to the Crown of England, that James thought himself bound,
foice years after, to acknowledge the obligation in a public man-
nert. Sir James Lindsay made great progress in gaining the
i'ngliih Papills to acknowledge his Mlajelty'; title. Of all tilefe
intrigues Elizabeth received obscure hints, fr-om different quar-
ters. The more imperfecdly the knew, the more violently ihe
fufpc&ed the King's designs, and the natural jc;loufy of her tem-
per increasing with age, lhc observed his conduct with greater
solicitude than ever.

The queflions with regard to the elction and power of the

representatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by 160o.
the General Assembly, which met at Mlontrofe. That place was M'arlh R.
chosen, as moll convenient for the Minillers in the noith, among lis 'eguli-

lions wvith

whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And although great num- rg:iri to
bcrs resorted from the northern provinces, and the King employ- tle Lhurch.
cd his whole interelt, and the authority of his own prelfncc, to
gain a majority, the following regulations were with dilliculty
aigreed on. 'That the General Assembly lhall recommend fix per-
sons to every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a leat in Par-
liament, out of whom the King (hall nominate one; that tile plIr-
son so eletled, after obtaining his feat in Parliament, fliall neither
propose, nor concfnt to uany thing there, that may assec the intc-
refl of the church, without special inlliuctions to that purpofc;
that he flall be anlivcrable for his conduil to every General As-
fembly ; and filbnit to its censure, without appeall, upon pain of in-
famy and excommiunication ; that he llall dilifcharge the duties of
a IPailor, in a particular congregation ; that lie (hall not ulurp any
cclcftiaflical jurilli tiol, IfLperior to tlhit of his otiher brethren;
that if the church inlliCt on hiim the ccnlure of deprivation, he
(hiall thelrely, forfeit his flat in l';uliaocnt ; that lie lliall anilual-
ly rcfign lis coirn-iiilioii to tie (C;cncr:al All'tfebly, whiclh may be
lellored to iiin, ur not, as the iAfcllibly, with the King's appro-

'\ Winw.. Mcli. v4l1 ii. 57. '1 Call. vol. vi. 11,;. t!b;l. vol. v. 6c4.

B1o:c VIII. bation, shill judge most expedient for the good of the churchl.

6oo. Nothiig could be more repugnant to the idea of Episcopal govern-

ment, than there regulations. It was not in, consequence of rights
derived from their office, but of powers conferred by a commis-
sion, that ecclefiaflical persons were to be admitted to a feat in
Parliament; they were the representatives, not the superiors of the
clergy. Dcfiitute of all spiritual authority, even their civil jurif-
diation was temporary. James, however, flattered limfelf that
they would soon be able to fliake off these fetters, and gradually
acquire all the privileges which belonged to the Episcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he contended for, and
they opposed the nomination of these commiflioncrs, not so much
on account of the powers then veited in them, as of those, to
which it was believed they would soon attain-1-.
Go'.v'ry's During this fumnicr, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-

lity. The clergy, after many itruggles, were brought under great
fubljetioa; the Popish earls were rellored to their estates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the confentof the
church; the rfci of the nobles were at peace among tilemfelves,
and obedient to the royal authority ; when, in the midfi of this
security, the King's life was cxpofed to the utmofl danger, by a
conspiracy altogether unexpected, and alcmft inexplica)le. T'he
authors of it ;were John lRuthven Earl of Gowry, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl ¥who was beheaded in the
year IS584. Nature had adorned both these young men, cfpecial-
ly the elder brother, witlh many accomplifllments, to which edu-
cation hlad added its imof elegant improvements. More learned,
than is usual mniong persons of their rank; more religious, than
is common at thecir age of life; generous, brave, popular ; their
countrymen, far from thinking them capable of anyatrociouscrime,
conceived the moll sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Not-
wvithlianding all these noble qualities, some unknown motive en-
gaged tlem in a conspiracy, which, if we adhere to the account
conmmonly received, mtiu le tranlinittcd to pollcrity, as one of
the mofl wickedi, as well as. one of the worf concerted, of which
hiltory nm:k!;es any mention.

On the fitllh (f Auguif, a:I the King, who resided during the

}iunting fr:ln Ia his palace of F1al;khlam{ , was goin;.; out to lis lport
(arly in tlihe inonliini. lie was accolicld bIy Mir. Alexander 1utll1-
v\'n, whn,

V willth a;n i of gre t iniiportimncc, tlold thie .King, tlhat
t'he (cVnih' g h ifrC he li:d net :lin unll: nwn lun, of a fuliiciOuL;

';'Cr'il'. .3. , :, v. ol.

C Iv,;l .

VI. !. . I ;
, .15. l'

afpecl, walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's houfr at ,oo; VTII.
Perth; and on ifarching-him, had found, under his cloak, a pot
filled with a vast quantity of foreign gold ; tlat he I-ad imnrdi- ''
atcly seized both him and his treasure, and without commtunicat-
ing the matter to any person, had kept him confined and bound
in a solitary house ; and that he thought it his duty to impart
such a singular event, firlt of all to his Majesty. James imme-
diately fufpeced this unknown person to be a trafficking npielt,
supplied with foreign coin, in order to excite new colmnotioni
in the kingdom; and reiolv.ed to empower the Magillrates ot
Perth to call the person before them, and inquire into all the cir-
cumllanccs of the flory. Ruthven violently opposed this refolu-
tion, and with many arguments urged the King to ride directly
to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mhean-
while the chafe began ; and James, notwithftandiag his paflion
for that arnufement, could not help ruminating on the ltranngcnels
of the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At lali he called
him, and promised, when the sport was over, to set out fur Perth.
The chafe, however, continued log ; and RLIIthvcnI, wlio all the
while kept close by the King, was iill c.;lli,., on !lit -to make
haste. At the death of the buck, lie w:ould nut ailo.-t James to
itay till a freisf hIorfc was brought him r; and obfcrvir:! the Duke
of Lennox and the Earl of Mar preparing to Pccompany the
King, he entreated him to countermand them. Tlis James re-
fused; and thogllh Ruthvcn's impaticnc- and -an::ity, as ,vell a-
the apparent perturbatio n his whole behaviour, raised fumre si-
picions in his mind 5 yet his own' curicfity, and Rl ut'lven's bfli-
citations, prevailed on him to i;'t out fur lPerc!:. \-Ven withil
a mile of the town, Ruthven rotd forv ard to i:fr;m his biatlitr
of the King's arrival, though he had alreacly dibi)atched two me!'
fengers for that purpose. At a little diflance frowl the town, the
Earl, attended by several of the citizens, met the King, who hid
only twenty persons in his train. No preparntions were made for
the King's entertainment; tlh Earl appeared pensive and cmbar-
raffed, and wvas at no pains to atone, by his courcely or hol,)it:lity,
for the bad fare with lwhich lhe treated his .ruclls. 'Vheln the
King's repall was over, his attendants v-erce Ied to dine in inotdlcr
room, and he being clft almofl alone, Rudivcnli w liiicrc(ld hlin,
that now was the time to go to the clhamber where the unknown
person was kept. James conmmanded liini to brinlg Sir Thorma;
Elrrk:ine along with them i butt, inllc;la of that, (utlivhe order-
e(d himn not to follow: and conduilin; the King ip a !i:iir-c.atc,

B330K VII. and then thiough several apartments, the doors of which Rie

'-'
~ locked behind him, led him at last into a small itndy, in whicl

there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword alid ddgger
by his fide. The King, who expeced to have found one diC-
armed and bound, itarted at the fight, and inquired if this was
the person; but Ruthven fhatching the dagger from the girdle
of the man in armour, and holding it to the King's breast;
" Remember," said he, " how unjultly my father suffered by
" your command ; you are now my prisoner; submit to my dii-
" pofal without reiiftance, or outcry; or this dagger shall in-
" ftantly avenge his blood." James expoftulated with Ruthven,
entreated, and flattered him. The man, whom he found in the
fidy, flood, all the while, trembling and dismayed, without
courage either to aid the King, or to fccond his aggrcffor. Ruth-
ven protested that if the King raised no outcry, his life should be
ffc ; and, moved by some unknown reason, retired in order to
call his brother; leaving to the man in armour the care of the
King, whom he bound by oath, not to make any noise during
his absence.

While the King was in this dangerous fituatiori, his attend-

ants growing impatient to know whither he had retired, one of
Gowry's attendants entered the room hastily, and told them that
the King had just rode away towards Falkland. All of themr
rurned out into the street i and the Earl, in the utmost hurry,
called for their horses. But, by this time, his brother had re-
turned to the King, and fwvearing that now there was no remedy;
.he behoved to die offered to bind his hands. Unarmed as
James was, li scorned to submit to that indignity ; and doling

'ith the affCafin, a fierce struggle enlued. The man in armour
tlood as formerly, amazed and motionless; and the King drag-
ging Rilthven towards a window, which during his absence lie
had perlfaded the person wvith whom he was left to open, cried,
with a wild and alriglhted voice, " lreeifon ! Trenfon ! Help
'; 1 am murdered !" His attendants heard, and knew the voice
and lav, at the window, a hand wlhich gralied the King's neck
with violence. T'hey tlew with precipitation to his allifllncc.
L[.cno:; and Mnr, with the greater lnumber, ran up the principal
fltir-cali, where tlhey found all the doors illut, whicll they bat-
tcrcd with the utmoll fury, endtlcaouring to burl tihcm open.
Biut Sir John Rainfay. entering by a !iack-tlair, which led to the
np.lrtmiCit where tlle Kin;' was, Iti.:nit tlhe door ope!n and rufl-
illg upon Rutllven, who was ill itruggling withl the ing, flruck

irim twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the flair-cafe, i3orK VItI.
where Sir Thomas Erikine and Sir Hugh Herries met, and kill-
ed him; he crying with his last breath, " Alas ! I am not to 6o
"blame for this ation." During this scuffle, the man, who had
been concealed in the study, escaped unoblervcd. Together wvith
Iamfay, Erskine,, and Ierries, one Wiilfon, a footman entered.
the rooin where the King was, and before they had time to lhut
the door, Gowry rushed in with.a drawn sword in each hand, fol-
lowed by seven of his attendants well aried, and with a loud
voice threatened them all with ingtant death. They immediate-
ly thrult the King into the little tfudy, and fluttlng the door up-
on him, encountered the Earl. .Notwithilanding the inequality
of numbers, Sir John Ramsay pierced Gowry through the heart,
and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his followers
having received fevcral wounds, immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conslicL. A
dreadful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many
pcerons laboured in vain to force a passage and the King being
assured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it
vas opened on thd inlide. .''hey ran to the King, wvhom they
unexpectedly found safe, with transports of .cngratulation ; and
he, falling on his knees, with all his. attendants around him, of-
sered solemn thanks to God for such a wonderful deliverance.
The danger, however, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provost Gowry was, and by whom he was ex-
tremely beloved; hearing the fate of the two brothers, ran to
their armsj and surrounding the house, threatened revenge, with
many insolent and opprobrious fpcecho& against the King. James
endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by ilpeaking to themn
from the window; ihe admitted their Magiilratcs ilto the house
related to them the xlwole circmuflances of the fad; and their
fury subsiding by degrees, they difpcried. On searching the Earl's
pockets for papers, that might diicovter his dcfigns and accompli-
ces, nothing was found but a firr.ll parchment bag, full of ma-
gical charactcrs, and \words of enchantmeut; and if we may be-
lieve the account of the conspiracy publinfed by the King,
" while thele were about him, the wound of which lie died, bled
" not; but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed
"out in great abundiance." After adl the dangerous adventures of
this busy day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland,
having committed the dead bodies of tlle two brothers to the cutl'
tody of the M'agilkratcs of Perth.

'oA/ine 1I. IM

BOOK VITI. Notwithstanding the minute detail,which the King gave of ai

6 the circumfiances of this conspiracy against his life, the motives
t 6oo.

The mo- wvhich induced the two brothers to attempt an ation fo.deteft-
tives of the able, the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose
confpira-
tors not ea- aid they depended, were altogether unknown. The words of
filyexplain- Ruthven to the King gave some grounds to think, that the desire

of revenging their father's death had instigated them to this at-
tempt. But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it is
scarce probable that they could impute them to the King, whose
youth and fubjeaion, at that time, to the violence of a fa&ion,
exempted him from being the objec of resentment, on account
of ations which were not done by his command. James had
even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the father had sus-
sered, by benefits to his children; and Gowry himself, sensible
of his favour, acknowledged it with the warmest exprefflons of
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being convited of
assisting him in this assault on the King's servants, were executed
at Perth;, but they could give no light into the motives, which
had prompted their master to an ation Co repugnant to these ac-
knowledgments. Diligent search was made for the person con-
cealed in the study, and from him great difeoveries were ex-
peced. But Andrew Henderson the Earl's steward, who, upon
a promise of pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as.
much a firanger to his malter's designs, as the reft; and though
placed in the study by Gowry's command, he did not even know
for what end that fiation had been afigned him. The whole
tranfa&ion remained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two-
brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme without
either confident or accomplice, with unexampled fecrccy, as well
as wickedness.

Sprot's diC- An accident, no less strange than the other circumstances of
coverics the story, and which happened nine years after, discovered that
concerning
;t. this opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the

two brothers had' not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among some persons that
he knew fcvcral fccrets relating to Gowry's conspiracy, the privy
council thought the matter worthy of their attention, and order-
ed him to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary, and
partly forced from him by torture. According to his account,
Logan of Refnarig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of
diffolutc morals, was privy to all Gowry's intentions, and an ac-
complice in his crimes. Mr. Rutlivcn, he said, had frc(quent in-

'terviews with him, in order to concert the plan of their opera- BooK VIII.
tions the Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpolfe; 6O
and one Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret,
and carried the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters
written both by Gowry and Logan, on that occasion; and in
confirmation of his teftinmony, several of Logan's letters, which a
curiosity fatal to himfclf had prompted Sprot to ifeal from among
Bour's papers, were produced *. These were compared, by the
privy council, with papers of Logan's hand writing, and tile re-
fermblance was visible. Persons of undoubted credit, and well
.qualified to judge of the matter, examined them, and swore to
their authenticity. Death itself did not exempt Logan from pro-
fecution, his bones were dug up, and tried for High Trcafon, and
7by a fentcnce, equally odious and illegalt-, his lands were for-

Logan's letters were five in nnmber. One to Bour, another to Gowry,

and three of them without any dire&ion; nor did Sprot declare the name
of the person to whom they were written. Logan gives him the appella-
tion of Right Honourable, It appears from this, however, and from other
words in the letter, Crom. 9.5. that there were several persons privy to the
conspiracy. The date of the firlt letter is July s8th. ilr. Ruthven'had com-
mulicated the matter toLogan only five days before. Ibid. It appears fi-om
the original Jfemmons of FofJrucltlmze against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though
he had letters addrelfed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally dan-
gerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read. " Jacobus

Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, diCti Georgii opera in legendis emnibus
fcriptis ad eum millis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altog.tlher

strange; and nothing but the capricious charader of Logan can account for
his chufing such a coifident.

f By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of lligh Treason might

be tried even after death. This practice was adopted by the Scots, without
any limitation, Parl. j40o. c. 69. But the unlimited exercifte of this power
was ioon conceived to be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper
refltiaions, by an aa, A. D. s542, which has never been printed. The
words of it are, " And because the said Lords (i. e. the Lords of Articles)
tlink the laid aal (viz. in 1540) too general, and prejudicial to the Blarons
in the realm, therefore flattltes and ordains that the laid. a&l (hall have no
place in time comning, but againit the heirs of them that notoriously com-
Imits or shall commit lele majecly against the King's person, againlt the re-
alm for everting the l'ine, and againIt them that ihall happen to betray
the King's army allenarly, and heing notoulrly known in their time; and
the heirs of thelc perions to be called and judged within five years after
thle ctlceal.' of the :aid pc-rfons committers of the said crimes; and the said
time being bypalt, the a.idl heir; never to he punried for the fame." T'he
lintence againit Logan violated this flatute in two particulars. lie was not
notourly known cduring his life to he an accomplice in the crime for which

w,; *wasi ric!;; , :heirs -,vcre c.lllcd in qusltion more than five years al'-

Mij

BiOoK VIII. feited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot was condemns-

ed to be hanged for misprision of trealon. He adhered to his
c. onfeflion to the last, and having promised, on the scaffold, to
give the fiectators a sign in confirmation of the truth of what he
had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was thrown off
the ladder by the executioner *.

ter his death. It is remarkable that this statute seems not to lave been
attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular-
circuniftance defervcs notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no person
can be tried in abfencc; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their
forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving them, they con-
trived tlhat in any procefi; againit a dead: person, his corpse or bones lhall
b)e presented at the blar. Examples of this occur frequently in the ScottiHh
history. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Hiunt-
ly was prelfiited in parliament, before ftintence of foorfaotltz-e was pronounl
ced againfl him. For she fame reason tie hodies of Go7wry and his bro-
rher lwere preserved, i1 order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug uIp. Mackenz.
Crim. Law, Book. 1. 'Iit. 6. Seft.

It appears that Archbiflop Spotfwood ,-as present at the execution of

Slrot, Cro)t. ,S; ;.and yet he feemns to lave given no credit to his diicove-
iies. The manner in 5\lvich he fpraks of him is remlttikable, " Whether

or not I fhoulld mention the arraignment a nd execution of George Sprot,

' who fil!i'cred at Edinburgh, I ant doubt lul. Ils confeflion, though vo-
"luntary and confiant, carrvying finall probabilit-. This man depoied, Uc.
It feemncd to be a very fi&ion, and a mere invention of the mails own
"brain, for neither did he Illcw the letter, nor could ary wife man thi-.lk

that Gowry, who went about the treason so secretly, would have com-

" municated the matter to lilch a mian as Logan was known to bc." p. 5o8.
Spotlifood could not be ignorant of the folemniry with wlhich Logan had
been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity ofl his letters. lc
himliief was probably present in parliament at the trial. The Earl of Dun-
baru, of whonm he always speaks with the highielt rel'lelt, was tie plerJf,ll
vwhlo direcedl the procels against Lngan. Such a peremnptory declaration a-
gainft the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithf llandilng all thele circumltan-
ces, is furprifini . Sir Thom:is llamilton, the King's advocate at that time,
and afrer'wards: F.arl of l:tdlilgton, rcpreents the proof Iprodluced at I.o-
gIn's triHl as extremnely convinci g; anod in an original letter of his to tlh
l;ing, i ift of litMc i6or,. (in ibl. 1,':ult. Jurid.) after mcntioiling the man-

nler in hllicil theI trial itcl be c ondt;llci, he thius goes on. " \hen tle

probaition of the f lmmonls w:s li.''fr.'r[ t1o tlte Lords of Articlc's x t-.:, tlI.v
toulld til ltt nitilil' , l i ¢, vloic,.

v.it I 'lid ti1llniotin s tso he ot cle rIl' prouvel,

rltat they si ,lncd to coi;:tiL! who Ihol!d li ;i)le mollo zealonlly to t.\pl'cl

_ 1he' (:ati ,failton of ii; : ln art, I't oniy hy thi moll pith by v.'ords, hut by tera. :
1, ol' jo>y; (livs rjt of tihe hell r:link ( 'tilli t, llhat that whereof they detlxid(

, at their ent ry into the t, ll.it : w Ir; i clv 1o i:l lt tii :t, l tilt v i)c ic.v c
d to tllelent

themn traitors, who fltould : lat g.ir rcio.tl;t to

dIcls ' c lhir ;e!lu:fcl rchllt
tpan of tilhce truth of hi;t trc. i'., "

But though it be thus unexpectedly discovercd that Gowry BOOK VIII.

Aid not a& without associates, little additional light is thrownil
by this discovery, on the motives and intention of his conduct.
It appears alnmot incredible that two young men of such diftin-
guiihcd virtue, should revolt, all at once, from their duty, and
attempt a crime so atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign.
It appears till more improbable, that they should have concerted
their undertaking with so little foresight and prudence. If they
intended that the deed fliould have remained concealed, they
could not have chosen a more improper scene for executing it than
their own house. If they intended that Hcnderfon flould have
firuck the blow, they could not have pitched on a man more def-
tiiutc of the courage, that mull direct the hand of an affaflin; nor
could they expect that he, unsolicited, and unacquainted with
their purpose, would venture on such a desperate ation. If Ruth-
vcn meant to flab the King with his own hand, why did he with-
draw the dagger after it was pointed at his breast ? How could
he leave the King, after such a plain declaration of his intention ?
Was it not prepolterous to commit him to the keeping of such a
timid and false associate, as Henderson ? For what purpose did he
waRte time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man, whom he
might easily have dispatched with his sword ? Had providence
permitted them to embrue their hands in the blood of their So-
vereign, what advantage could have accrued to them by his
death ? and what claims or pretensions could they have opposed
to the rights of his children * ? Inevitable and initant vengeance,
togetler with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences they
could expec to follow such a crime.

On the other hand, it is impoflible to believe that the Kinrg had

formed any design againt the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-

* It has been afferled, that, in confecqielnce of the King's death, the lcT:r!

of Gowry might have pretended to the Crow(n Cf Engl.anl, as lhe foil cf
)orothca; Stew:art llldaghlter.of Lord Mletlivcn iy >.larglr-it of ]glrl:c!.d, ;\ho
after her divorce from the Earl of Ang.i, tool: th:at nrcl.!cr :;ai n; lher tlhil'r
hulfband. BUnl- et lliii. of his ownl tinic:. But this afilrtio, l i ill fr.u:: dc.l.
Itappears, from uiirloIotloi,. evideince that .')l rd I t't lv had onll v (ot chlild by
Q(uecn MaIrgaret, wiricil died in is ilf:tn:acy, anrd l)r<otlica i.:v('. R vthe
va:ts not tile (d.iughl r Of QlcCn .lar;;:h'et, rl,*t f J:aneIt S. e ,'::. t ri

. 'Mc:'.h-

vr'n's ficcond wife, :t di:ightcl ' fJ

hll l''. ll
hi' A.'i\':l. C:'atwl. I'Le'r. 325:.

And ti

t il1ugh ('r Cow y li .t( really hc. ii (';,' lh.,rl r,.m

,h': r l' i.-:d ri-;;l 'f

'igl:ari d, ltl ' Kllng i:td at that t liat :l ; .1 d.'

a .:; ','i ; and Ibeildt;

tiheri, l,: I- A ralsiLl.r Sl.',:-rt d¢a.rh1i'l r ('{ C .'.;.": L. :'. a' n ' L..::;:: l.:a J.
rI';IcsIr:blo till: 'o ;!' C.'e.', n of L:Elt ....

iBoor VIII. gree, the obje6s of his jealousy or hatred *; nor was he of a spirit

so sanguinary, or so noted for ralh and dcfperate valour, as to have
attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were
surrounded with many domestics, hc only with a slender and un-
armed train; where they could call to their afliftance the inhabi-
tants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a
distance from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for
his associates, in such an enterprise, the Earl of Mar, and the
Duke of Lennox, the former conne&ed in close friendship with
the house of Gowry, and the latter married to one of the Earl's
fillers.

Aconjec Whichsoever of these opposite fyltems we embrace; whether
ccrningthe we impute the intention of murder to Gowry, or to the King;
intenti'n of insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf-
itre conifj)i
rator.s. tery, and contradidtions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-

ipiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from g
more remote caule, we may discover it to be less criminal.

To keep the king of Scots in continual dependence, was one

great object of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, she some-
times soothed him; and fometimss bribed his Ministers and fa-
vourites; and when file failed of attaining her end by these means,
she encouraged the Clergy to render any adminillration fie dif-
trusted unpopular, by decrying it, or firred up fonle fation of

s Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes tihe

death of the two brothers to a cause not mentioned by any of our Hiftori.
ans. " Out of Scotland we hear that there is no good agreement, but ra-
ther an open diffidence betwixt the King and his wife, and many are of
opinion that the discovery of tome afl'eeion between her and the Earl of
Gowry's brother (who wa:s killed with him) was the truelt caife and mo-
tive of that tragedy." Winw. IMen. Vol. I. 274. WVhether the following
pa.flges in Nicholson's letters be any confirmation of that fifpicion, is sub-
mitted to the reader. In his letter, Sept. 22. 16o2, he mentions the return
(,f Gowry's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, "' The coming in
o' thefr two, and the Qtueen of Scots dealinlg with thiem, and fending away
and forni(liing Mrs. lBeatrix [tlcir fitter] with such information as Sir
'l'Tomils Erf:ine li:s given, li.tlh bred great lilfpicion in the King of Scots,
tliat they come not in lhul upon folme dangerous plot." In another letter,
anu;naury i. 16o3. " The day of writing my lalt Mrs. Beatrix Ituthiven was
brnoi;ht l>y the L[;ly Paificy, andi Mirs. oi' Aligo. ab one of (heir gentlewo-
mecn into the court il the cvening, and lIr:ecl in a chamber preparedl for
lhe' by the. Qu(Iee's ' ,(lilrihon, wxirt lle Ql en lIat1 l Cl I liC hne and confer-
ence with her. Of tlisi the King got llolice, and fllcwcl his; dillil:e there-
of to thie Q:e'n, gently reproving her for it, ;awl cxaniinig quietly of the
<_leen's fervalnls of the Itlme, aldl of otherl n;tcl:; thel-ctinto bulongillU
wit Iti ch dil'cretic-. a;Il f;crccy as rtq'lirz" litsh a nmttcr.

the nobles to oppose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted BooK VIIt
with the arts of undermining a Minitfry by intrigues, had re-
course to the ruder practice of rendering themnfelves mailers of the
King's person, that they might thereby obtain the directions of
his councils. Those nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of
Ruthven, were instigated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in
all his wild attempts, enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat
in her dominions. The connections, which James had been form-
ing of late with the Roman Catholic Princes, his secret negoci-
ations in England with her subjects, and the maxims by which
he governed his own kingdom, all contributed to excite her jea-
lousy. She dreaded some great Revolution in Scotland to be ap-
proaching, and it was her interest to prevent it. The Earl of
Gowry was one of the most powerful of the Scottish nobles, and
descended from ancefsors warmly attached to the Englifl intcrcit.
He had adopted the fame systen, and believed the welfare of his
country to be infeperably connc6ted with. the fubfiltence of the
alliance between the two kingdoms. During his residence at
Paris, he had contracted an intimate friendflip with Sir Henry
Neville, the Queen's ambafiador there, and was recommended by
him to his Court, as a person of whom great use might be made *.
Elizabeth received him, as he passed through England, with dif-
tinguiihcd marls of respect and favour. From all these circun-
flances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the corfpiracy a-
gainft the King was formed at that time, in concert with her.
Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the letters of
Nicholson, Ellizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
dctitute of foundation. An Englifli ship was observed hovering
for some time, in the mouth of the firth oT Forth. The Earl's
two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill success of
the conspiracy, and were proteted by Elizabeth. And James
hinifelf, though he prudently concealed it, took great umbrage at,
her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scot-
land tended to hurt the King's person, but only to circumscribe
his authority, and to thwart his Ichemes. His life was the (lirelt
safeguard of her own, and rlterained the Popill pretenders to her
Crown, and their abettors, from defpcrate attempts, to whicl.
their impatience and bigotry might, otherwifc, have urged them
on. To have encouraged Gowry to murder his Sovereign, would,
on her part, have been an aft of the utmost imprudence. Nor
does this ccm to have been the intention of the two brothers,

"' Winw. i. .156.

30oK VIiI. Mr. Ruthven, firR of all, endeavoured to decoy tile King to Pertlf.

without any attendants. When these proved more numerous than
was expe&ed, the Earl employed a itratagem in order to feperate
them from the King, by pretending that lie had rode away to-
wards Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses, that they
might follow him. By {hutting James up, meanwlhile, in a dif-
tant corner of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands;
their design feeims to have been rather to seize, than to aflaflinate
him. And though Gowry had not colle&ted his followers, so as
to have been able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of
the kingdom, by open force, he might soon have been conveyed
aboard the Englillh Ihip, which waited perhaps to receive him,
and he might have been landed at Faft-Caflle, a house of Logan's,
in which, according to many obscure hints in lls letters, foime
rendezvous of the conspirators was to be held. Amidfl the fur-
prise and terror, into which the King mull have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natural for him to
conclude that his life was fought. It was the interelt of all his
followers to confirm him in this belief, and.to magnify his danger,
in order to add to the importance, and mecrit of their own forvices/
And thus, his fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity anc
wonder, which the contemplation of any great and tragical event;
when not fully underllood, is apt toinfpire, augmented the whole
tranfaclion. On the other hand, the extravagance and improba-
bility of the circumitances, which were added, detraced from the
credit of those, which really happened; and even furniflied pre-
tences for calling in queltion the truth of the whole conspiracy.

Many diG- isle account of what had happened at Pertlr reached Edinburgh,
believe the niext morning. The privy conncil commanded the Minillers of'
biaccunt py' tat city inltantly to assemble their people, and, after relating to
hei King. them the circumllances of tle conspiracy formed againfl the King's

life, to return public thalnks to God, for the protecion, which
he had so vifibly'afforded him. But as the first accounts tranf-
nilted to Edinburgh, written in hurry, and while the circumfan-
ces of tlle conspiracy were but imperfestly known, and the lpaf
lions which it excited lIrongly felt, were iidillinct, exaggerated,
and contraditory, the ivliiniiters laid hold of this, and though tlcey
oli:rcd to give public tlhanls to God for the King's faiety, they re-
.ufiftd to enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from the
chair of truth, what appeared to lie fill dubious and uncertain.

A few days after, the King returned to Edinburgh a and though
Gallo\3y, the iinriflcr of his own Chapel, mtande an harrangue to

tlie people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circunm- BooK VIII.
stances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing, -
confirmed his account; though lie commanded a narrative of the

lwhole tranfaclion to be published; the Miniilers of that city, as
well as many of their brethren, fcill continued, incredulous, and
unconvinced. Their high efleem of Gowry, their jealousy of
every part of the King's conduct, added to some false and many
improbable circumltanncs in the narrative, not only led them to
fufpec the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility.
But at length, the King, partly by arguments, partly by threats,
prevailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that
they were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He could be
brought no further than to declare, that hc reverenced the King's
account of the tran!at&ion, but could not fay that he liiirmelf was
persuaded of the truth of it. The scruples or obilinacy of a single
man would have been little regarded, but as the fame spirit of in-
credulity begun to fprcad among the people, the example of one,
in so high reputation for integrity and abilities, was extremely
dangerous. The King was at the utmost pains to convince and to
gain Bruce, but finding it impoflible to remove his doubts, he de-
prived him of his benefice, and after repeated delays, and many
attempts towards a reconcilement, banifihed him the kingdom "'.

The proceedings of parliament were riot retarded by any scruples Proceed-
of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced liTgsof1' r.

liai,.nt a-

there, according to law; an indilcment for High Treason was gtinit the
preferred against them; witneles were;:xaminc d; and, by an una- con'fira'

tors.

nimous sentence, their citates and honours were forfeited; the
punilltncnt due to Traitors w'as inflicted on their dead bodies; and,
as if the puni(mncnt hitherto in use did not exprsfs fuilicicnt de-
tellation of their crimes, the parliament ena&ecJ that the ftlrname
of Ruthven flould bIe aboliihed; and in order to prelcrve the
memory of the Kin,g's miraculous escape, and to declare the fcnl'
which the natlun iad of the divine Goodnosr;, to all fiitu;e ages,
appointed the fifth of Aitgutf to be oblr'lcd, annually, as a day of
public thanksgiving --.

Spoilr. 461, Lc. C;lkl. . 3. t , a:c.

-1 A fwv wet ks after thle dlcath of the two brothers, the 1iing pulblifled

a d('liofL . of ,/ iit'j q/; e indL u:tnuialtu'il co1nspiracy ragryie.:'/ hs 1:J/. In thi
year 1713 ,
1 c relg }i.":ar oIf (,',r,'rrly llpllifi ,l a:1n * Ilill<)ricr: l :Ic(roont of

"t)e confl'[;tcy },y the iarl of f oy an:d }Rlcter Lostan ofl llclnIri e a.t
a" g:tiiif K;ing Ja;nic VI." I I; (Gl..t'i not to lh:tve c

I n tle account which
the Li:ng hiirn; ls lhad gi:.'v ofi t1lat mattlr, ;nd borrows the whole hiitori.

1,.,!/":c If. N

BooK VIII. Though Gowry's conspiracy occasioncd a sudden and a great,

ó-" alarm, it was followed by no coufequences of importance; and

having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any
associates, or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain so,
the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after,

Eie x's con- a conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
galId Eli- the lirfl danger was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effeas,
yabeth. rthat rendered the close of that )ueen's reign difinal and unhappy.

As Janmes was deeply interefled in that event, it merits our par-
ticular notice.

cal part fi-om Spotfwood, and other authors; but he has c,:traaed from the
public records the dcpofitions of the witnelfes produced by the King's Coun-
cil, in order to make good their charge againfl the two brotlers and Lo-
gan their albci;ate. Fr-om tlleie two treatises, our knowvledge of all the
material circun:tanrces of the conipiracy is derived. The evidence which
tlley contain, one would expeEt to be authentic and decisive. An account
of a fa&, i'ill recent, publified by royal authority, and the original depo-
fitions of perfoils examinled in preelnce of the highest court in the nation,
ought to convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in hillorical relations,
;:id to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But as every thing
with regard to this tran falcioln is dark and problematical, the King's ac-
count a:nd the tlipc.litio:- : of the wxitneleTs not only vary, but contradict each
o;her- in so many circiumftances, that much room is still left for hesitation,
anil hifllorical fcepticifin. The telimony of Hlenderfon, is the fullest and

init important:, bhot in leveral particulars the King's account and his are

cntraldiilory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was
i odling the dagger at his breall, "the fellow in the fludy flood quaking
:ind trembling-." Dife. 17. But Henilerflon iays that he himieif wrclled the
dt-gger out of M'r. Ruthven's hand. Disc. s3. Crom. So. Henderson lice-
\ vifi boalled to his wife that he had that d:y twice laved the KIin from
being ilabbed. Dil:. 4. Crom. 53o . 11. 'Til King alfertts that Hlenlerfon o-
IpeI-d the windlow iluring ir\. Rulltivei's abfclnce. Dif. 23. TTenderfon de-
l .':;a that he was only attemptilig to open it when 'Mr. Ruthven returned,
an.l that dnring the itruggle betwe\en the King and hil, he opened it.
Iiic. 33, j5l. Crin- . 1, 51. 11I. If we ma,' believe the King, the fellow in
he. Itul! i:sood, dtiin lg tile firugglc, behind the King's back inactive and
Irl nibling all tlle tlin. Dilc. 27. But lendter(nll ahlrlmst that he finlcllhed
ax;ay the garter with x ihiclh Mri . illthivell attempted to bhin the Kling; that
h;l p:ilie:l balk l::-.n;'s han:1 wh ie hi \was e ndleavolring to flop the King's

,int'.lli, altd thii:t he ol.':ii thit wr'iotlr:. iC. i ron. C1r. Vro

. l

. y tlih

I;iln;'; Icacc,,iiill, 31r. 'Ll11vt.i I.f1t 1ill' ill tim 1t(i!dy, and welit away il or-
d(,r t mIt.: '..'i ih lh;i:i ' n:: , andil lth t the l:al I claml Lu) the l.;ii;.s fir tle lille
p.,ipoI;?. hii:,. 23. li i

il: rliil c h'tl le:; that iwhet n lMr. Rlithv'le left the KIini-,

"he lclic'.'et that lie d(ll tn, p1;.1; flron the door." Cronil i. It is alparent
both I'rinll t fituti:i, l t ol' tit ,rit'i, 1 J.1tl fromli other circtllinlallae:'s, thlat
there couldl not piiiliy liav; been anly illtcview\ between tlle brothers Lt
this tilnr. Dil'c, 23.

The court of England was, at this time, divided between two Bool VIII.

powerful fations, which contended for the supreme direcion of "ó-
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'cvreux, Earl of
Efrcx; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Trcafurcr Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the molt accom-
plifihd, and the most popular of all the Englilf nobles; brave,

Ienderfon was twice examined, first at F;alkland Ibeccre the privy coun-

cil in August, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliaiment in Novcmber.
Not to mention Come lesser variations between there depositions, we shall
point out two which are remarkable. Il his firfi depolition iMri. l-enderfon
relates the most material circumstance of the xvlo.le in thic.le words. S 'Mr.
" Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger arl held the fame to l:i . Ma-
"jefty's breast, faying, renliemer yotu riJof m fo.br's murder; yt Jftlzl wit,e'
" diefor it, and minting to his H-ighnclfc's heart with til dagger, the dc-
"ponent threw the faime out of BMr. RuthvT:'s han s, and fivore tl.:.t .s
" God flall judgec his foil, that if Mr. Rulihven had retl:ild the dagLtre in

his hand, the fPae

f a cman may go fix Pc.p he v:culd !i:i.v liriciknc thc

' King to the hilts with it." Disc. . . But ;at his fecord c:amni:!arion he
varied from this in tvwo materir.l ci-cumtanrcus. Fir-I the vwords vwhlli he
at that time put in Mr. Ru'hven's mouth while he held the cldag:-r n: the
ling's breast arn, Sir 'you titn bIe my priiJ:r t; ernr en:ber on myl Jtiller's
" death." Sezondly when he thrzetenc;l hli;. vih death, it was cl!; to de.
ter him from makin any noifc. " - ricrd o:ir togu:.r o' bdy L't: jJl oul,:Il!
"die." 2. Tn his fir-fl delo'lilin, the wxvr li f ;1-r. Ru: hveu whein li: re-
turned to the chamber wher lie he had left the K al ;, :irc '7 Tl irs 10no ,cr-
" td,, by CGod you jnfl die." But in his f.-con: c!:ipc' ii ::, "' !y (;ccd he-c i.:

no remnedy, an. ollfred to bind his Iajclli's ha;l:i." Ciomn. r. 'ihte ma-

terial words yon mrftl die ;ire omitted. The firfat dcpoflrT, f;- msl p;:iily to
intinatc that it was irltthvcn's intention to lmurder *.c Ki'.i;. ''].e fcond
would lead us to conclude that lie had no other dei tn tltir. to detain him
as a prilbnor.

There are likewise some remarkable contra.di:.ions ii the tc.ilnoilic:.- of

the other witnefTes. r In the difcourte pbilii!hcd iby authority it is inlintu-
atcd that the tumult of tle inhabitants s raised ;tg:tin(l the liir!, andl
that it required some art to pacify them. )ifc. 3y. The Dul;e of le'nnox
confirms tl ihis hi deposition. Crom.i. . An afn of privy coulcil Ib:!llln-
ing tlie Magiftruaes of Perth to anufwer for that riot is fill ct-tant. Anl
yet Atlndrewv Roy, one of the Baillics of the town, declpes tlht h hi mfrlf
railed the peoplc, and that they tool: arms in order to allill the King. Crnm.
66. 2. Ileinde.rlii d(lreo)es that he gave an cvafive :anfi.cr to Mr. Jciti:

loncrief, whlo inquired. where he had l:een that mt)ring, li t.

rili thie K;it-I

had commanded hint not to let any man know that lie hald lc-,i e lV::lil:, d.
I)il'. 1. Moilcrief tdepoles to the i'Ime purl porf(. (Cro;.. 6 1. A:ld y; (;corce
lay, aftelrwatrds Lord K1innolul, :and Cli (nlucllo of Scetllln, :til !'r

l l - I ;y,
depoth that the Earl in their llref'll n:, allc: l 1-Icilt rllmi, " XVIlll lie fil(nlll

with the King at ialkll and ?" Crom. 7 , 71, XVhich qucltioi lcrcna to
prove that he did not ;ilil :at klerpillS tit joulllrney a fcrl it,

N ij

BooK VIIT. Though Gowry's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a great

ó0'' alarm, it was followed by no consequences of importance; andi

having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any
associates, or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain so,
the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after,

Eilex's scon- a conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
aui'KnEl1- the first danger was inflantly dispelled, produced tragical effects,
Ziabethl. that rendered the close of that Q(eenis reign difinal and unhappy.

As Jamnes was deeply interefled in that event, it merits our par-
ticular notice.

cal part friom Spotwood, and other authors; but he has ctraced from the
public rccords the depoeitions of the witnefes produced by the King's Coun-
cil, in order to make good their charge againlt the two brotlers and Lo-
gan their afloci;te. From tlletle two treatises, our knowledge of all the
material circunrfiances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which
they contain, one would expe& to be authentic and decifivc. An account
of a fait, till recent, publifled by royal authority, and the original depo-
litiins of persons examined in prelence of the highcft court in the nation,
ought to convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in historical relations,
;lnd to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But as every thing
with regardl to this tranfaclion is dark and problematical, the King's ac-
cournt and the c-pc,.itio.s of the wvitneffcs not only vary, but contradiA each
o; hcr in so many circumstances, that much room is ltill left for hesitation,
andl liflorical fcepticiin. The telimony of H-enderson, is the fullest and
nlmo! implort-:t, but in several particulars the King's account and his are
conitra.cii lory1. . Accordin to the ing's accot, while Mr. Ruthen was
]hclding the dagger at his breast, the fellow in the fludy flood quaking
a:nd trembling'." Disc. 17. But Henderson fays that he himIfelf wrclled the
di^gger out of M.-. Rutlhven's hand.ic .

D 3. Crom. ro. Henderson like-

xw;idi boaflecd to his wife that he bad that day twice iaved the Kilng from
being ft:bbed. Dil: ,. Crom. 3-. II. Tihe King afnerts that lHenlerfon o-
pe'ed the window during I'\r. ltllhvcn's abfcnce. DiE. 23. -Tenderfon de-
1:o'-s that he was only attempting to open it when BMr. Ruthven returned,
and that duiin.g the Itruggle betwvecle the Ki-ng and him, he opened it.
Dii'c. 53, j,. Croui. 5i, 52. 111. If -e may: believe the King, the fellow in
the fclhdy hlood, duin'lg the ftrugglec, bhlilnd lthe King's back inaclive and
Iremnbling all the tille. Dilc. 27. ul -lt endi-lon anlirms that he ilatched
away the garter i lh whicl Mr. Tillilven attempted to bind the King; that
hi: pulled back Iul'ithvn's ha: n while he e was endeavouring to flop the King's
miouthil, and tihat h)e.' op-t:, th} th wmr'.lov,'. I)ic. Cr. m.

ro .

5 1. lV. By thl:

IUng's acCuint, BMr. 'itllitv l It lil' in ti"- lt(dy, and swent aLway in or--
d,'r t m: t ire h hi ' le, nti thal the

li I: a 1 canll up the ll;iirs for- tlie filne

p p ,I.;:. Dii.:. 23. li lmi,..:riiT ClsIrl;;'jis tllat whell M]r. Riutlhven left the Kinlg,
" !e believc:; that lie dl;l i(o: I;l.; froll the door." Cronm 51. It is lapparent
both fromi th!le tu:lri, n o' i til honlii, :aml from other cilcumll:mces, that
there could not (itpoiuly hIav been ally interview between the brothers nt
tlis tinr'. Dific. 23.

The court of England was, at this time, divided between two BooK VIII.

powerful fadions, which contended for the supreme direeion of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'cvreux, Earl of
Eflfx; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Trcafurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the moil accom-
plifhed, and the moRs popular of all the Englifli nobles; brave,

FIenderron was twice examined, first at Falkland Ibeore the privy coun-

cil in August, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliament in BNovember.
Not to mention some lelTer variations between these dcpofitions, we: lhall
point out two which are remarkable. In his firfrt deposition Mr. IVenderfon
relates the most material circumfl.ace of the vwh;cle in tlhee xovrds. Mr.
' Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger arl held the fame to hi3 Ma-
" jelly's breast, faying, re/elniber yoeu of

mJ, fo!,err's nmulrer; yon7 Jt.it/i 7lzoqt

" die for it, and minting to his I-iglnefc's heart wit the dagger, the dc-
" ponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthvrn's hands, and ifwore tl;at as
"God fllall judge his foul, that if Mr. Rulthven had ret:in(il the dagrcr in
" his hand, the space a man may go fix flops, lie V;cnid ihae l.ricken the
" King to the hilts with it." Disc. '2. But at his second eh:ami:raion he
varied from this in two material circumilances. Firlt the words vx;lich'he
at that time put in iMr. Ruuthvn's miouth while he hell the ldagei- an the
IKing's brealt are, " Sir you 7011 7 be my rj,

pifj:'t. ; reneItrtbc on 7myl j'ltrber'

"death." Sezondly when lie threatencid hlim :.h death, it w'as en' l to de(
ter him from making any noise. "Holi yo:,r tor,'.0:5 or hby' iL'.:l youJltall

die." 2. In his fitfl d'eloliion, the wvcri of Mr. ls R;lhvel wlhen he re-

timned to the chamber where he had left the K:.g, are " 7Ther,- ir no rc,,t.
" dy, b)y God you nm/I die."l But in his fceond dp'.::i,

". G;Cod thee- i.:

no remedy, andl oflere(l to bind his MajeCy's handi."i Croml. r. 'iThe ma-

terial words youl mil/ die .re omitted. Tlhe firlt dctl.pfiriiritn fr s plainly to
intinate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder tlc Kil:g. ''lie Icond
would leitd us to colclude that he had no other deiign thlan to detain him
as a prilfober.

There are likewise some remarkable contradii.:ions isi the te.imonics of

the other witnelles. I. In the discourse publiihld iy aluthnrity it is infinl-
ated that the tumult of the inhabitants wals raided iag:iinf tllhe inh, and
that it required some art to pacify them. )ifc. 3;. The Dul;e of Lennox
confirms this in his deposition. Crom. 44. An as of privy council tuminllon-
ing the Tagiftrates of Perth to answer for that riot is flill ec:<;int. And
yet A\ndrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town, deposes illht he hilnfelf
raised the people, and that they tool: arms in order to aflill the King. Cronl.
66. 2. Ilelderlion drpofes that he gave an evalive anflvcr to MJ. Jolm
Moncri:f, who inquired wher e

he had ieen that mornilng, bctauli tlhe ;arl

had commanded him not to let any nlman Inow that he Ihad Ie-.ii at 1: lll:dtl.
Dis'c. 51. Moncrief depoles to the fltmer purpof'. Crmo. 6.1. Andl y.r GeorKe
llay, arterwardls Lord Kinnoul, and Clhaincllto r of .Sc;tltlnd, :ndl l'c:cr l la)-,
depoflS that the Earl in their prefmence, afl:e:l ' lendlrlln, '" \'Vllnn he foinl,
" with tlle King at italkl:ad ?" Crom. 70, 71. VWliich quellini lfecml to
prove that hie did nlot ailm at lkce'ping tl;at jourlney a ICcr't.

N ij

Boos VIII. generous, affable; though impetuous, yet willing to lifter to the

-v" councils of those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implac-

able enemy; a friend no less conffant, than warm; incapable of
dirguifing his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for the camp, than for the court; and of a genius
that qualified him for the firrf place in the administration, with a
spirit whlich scorned the second, as below his merit. He was soon
difinguilhed by the Queen, who, with a profusion uncommon to
her, conferred on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho-
nours, and moss important offices. Nor did this diminish the e-
fleem and afecrion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he
was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the
people. Cecil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and
trained under a father, deeply ikillcd in all its arts, was crafty,
insinuating, induflrious; and though possessed of talents, which
fitted him for the highefa offices, he did not rely upon his merit
alone for attaining them, but availed himself of every advantage,
which his own address, or the mistakes of others, afforded him.
Two such men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Effex de-
spifed the arts of Cecil, as low and base. To Cecil, the Earl's
magnanimity appeared to be presumption and folly. All the mi-
litary men, except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Moll of the cour-
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly refcmbled
their own.

His corref. As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle between these
pondence fations became more violent. Eifex, in order to strengthen him-
with the
Scotti(h self, had early courted the fliendflip of the King of Scots, for
King. whose right of fucceflion he was a zealous advocate, and held a

close correspondence both with him,'and with his principal Mini-
flers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen alone, rote daily to new ho-
nours, by the assiduity of his services, and the patience, with which
he expected the reward of them. While the Earl's high spirit
and impetuosity sometimes exposed hir to checks from a Mistress,
who, though partial in her all'clion towards him, could not cafi-
ly hear co'ntradiction; and conferred favours often unwillingly,
and al\vavs slowly. His own solicitations, however, fcconded
maliciously by his enemies, who wilhcd to remove him at a dif-
tance from court, advanced him to the corm:mand of the army emi-
ploycd iu Ireland, againif Tyronne, and to the office' of I.ord
Lieutenant of that kingdom, with a cornmiffion almoll unlin-iled.
-l'is ficcel';, in that expedition, did not equal either his own pro-
mis's, gc the expectations of Ellzabcth. The Queen, pcevifll frorr

'er disappointment, and exasperated againfl Effex by the artifices Eoor.VItr
of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accusations and L

16oi.

reproaches. These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in
the firif transports of his refentmcnt, he proposed to carry over a
part of his army into England, and by driving his enemies from
the Qc een's presence, tp reinilate himself in favour, and in
power. But, upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rafi
lefign, and setting fail with a few officers, devoted to his person,
landed in England, and posted dire0.ly to court. Elizabeth re-
ceived him, without any fymptorn either of afiecion or of difplea-
furc. By proper compliances and acknowledgments, he might
have regained his former ascendant over the Qecen. But he
thought himself too deeply injured to submit to thele. Elizabeth,
on the other hand, determined to subdue his haughty temper;
and though her severity drew from him the most humble letters,
ihe confined him ,to the Lord keeper's house, and appointed com-
rnifioners to try him, both for his condult during his government
of Ireland, and for leaving tlhat kingdom without her permiflon.
By their sentence, he was lihfpended from all his offices, except
that of Mlailer of the horse, anl continued a priiner during the
Quen's pleasure. Satisfied with having mortifiledhis pride thus
far, Elizabeth did not ifuticr the !intence to be recorded, and foonl
after allowed himn to retire to his own house. During these tranf-
acions, which occupied several months, Efle:x iuElutatcd between
the allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire of re-
venge; and Cometimes leaned to the one, and furnetimcs to the
other. In one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he sent Jlmcs';caut
a meifenger into Scotland to encourage the King to assert his own di,
right ~o the filccefllon by force of arms, and to promise th:t, be-
fdes the alttilance of the Earl and all his fiiends in England,
Lord Mouatjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join
him with five thousand men, from that kingdom. But James did
not chufe to hazard the losing a kingdom, vwhich was jull ready
to fall into his hands, by a premature attempt to seize it. i\Mount-
joy, too, declined the enterpri:, and Eircx adopted more dutiful
i.hcemes ; all thoughts of ambition appearing to be totally e!hfced
<,t of his mind.

This moderation, whichl wns merely the citict of !digftl and T'hc v;i!{

diflippointmcnt, was not of lon'g ountinouuncIu. Anld Ihel Q(iC(, li';cx
having not only refuficd to renew a incral;ve grant, which she
had formelrly bell.owed, but to adnmiit hliin inilo lhr pi.cltnc;, llait
ew injury drove; a teillcpr, naturally iml)a-ticint, andl Iio;v nlulc

BooKVIII. fretted, to ahfolute despair. His friends, inlead of soothing his

rage, or reltraining his impctuofity, added to both, by their im-
. prudent and interested zeal. After many anxious consultations?

he determined to attempt to rcdrcfs his wrongs by violence. And
conscious how unpopular such an enterprifc would be, if it ap-
peared to.procced from motives of private revenge alone, he en-
deavoured to give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the King of Scotland's initcrcft with his own. He wrote to James,
that the fation, which now predominated in the Englif court,
had rcfolved to support the prctenlions of the Infanta of Spain to
the crown, that the places of the greatefi importance in the king-
dom were put into the hands of his avowed enemies; and that
unless le sent ambassadors, without delay, to inflft on the imme-
diate declaration of his right of fucceflion, their measures were
so well concerted, that all his hopes would be desperate. James,
who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would be to the
Qeen of England, was not willing raflly to expose himself to
.her difpleafitre. But Effex, blinded by refentmcnt, and impati-
ent for revenge, abandoned himself to these paff.ons, and atcd
like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompletely armed, he attempted to assault a
throne, the best efabliflled in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
out of his own house, lhe called on the citizens of London, if
they either valued his life, or wished to preserve the kingdom
from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow
his standard. He advanced towards the palace, with an inten-
tion to drive Cecil and his faaion out of the Qceen's presence,
aind to obtain a declaration of the Scottish King's right of fuccef-
lion But, t, hough almost adored by the citizens, not a man
would join him in this wild entecprifc. Dispiritcd by their in-
difference, deicrted by tome of his own attenldants, and almost
furrolntlcd by the troops, which marched under different leaders
into the city, he retreated to his own, louise and wlithout any
bold effort, suitable to his prcfent condition, or worthy of his for-
mcer reputation for courage, he surrendered to his enlcmies.

As sIOn as JIamies hlcard of Ef'.ex's ill lilccels, le appointed the

]Earl of M\ar, ;und the Abbot of Kiiilol', to repair as his ambafi'a-
dors to the court of nIhgland. The fornlcr of thecl was the ppr-
ion, by w'l11io lncnni .L'Rlx Ih:d carried on hIis corrcwfpondenc wilth
the King. I-I' w;as a pai onate adinirer of the .T'a'l's clhranler,
and dilpiolCd to attemlpt every thillg that could contribute to his

'' Uiir;.P\lc M n. ;. ;'177.

safety. Bruce, united in a close friendflip with Mar, was ready Boo13 VIII.
to fccond him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the cm- -1.
baffy less friendly to E1ffx, than the choice of the ambatl'adors ; they
were commanded to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the
Earl's life, and if they found that the King, by avowing his
friends, could either promote their designs, or contribute to their
safety, they were empowered to lay aside all difguifc, and to pro-
mise that le would put himself at their head, and claim what was
due to him, by force of arms *. But before the ambassadors lis leat'n.
could reach London, Effex had fuffcred the punifiment he merit-
ed by his treason. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in order
to obtain his pardon, hatlened his death. Elizabeth continued,
for some time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could not bring
herself to consign into the hands of the executioner, a man, who
had once possessed her favour so entirely, without a painful
struggle between her resentment againlt his late mifcondu&, and
her ancient affetion towards him. The diflrefs to which hewxas
now reduced tended naturally to soften the former, while it re-
vived the latter with new tcndernefs and the interccllion of one
faithful friend might perhaps have laved his life, andl have pro-
cured him a rcmiflion, which, of herelf, the Queell was afliamcd
to grant. But this generous noblenan hadl at that t;ine no flch
friend. And. llizabeth, solicited inceflantly by her Mlinifers,
and offended xvithl the haughtinels of Elitex, xvho, as heic imagined,
feorned to sue for pardon, at lait commanded thle f:ntence to be
put in execution. No sooner was the blow flruck, than Ihe re-
pented of her own rashness, and bewailed his death with the
deepest sorrow. James always confidered him as one, who hant
fallen a martyr to his 'ervicc, and after his acccfnoon to thle Eng-
lifi throne, reilored his son to his honours, as will as all his ;i'-
fuciates in the conspiracy, and diftinguifhecd them with his favour I-.

'IThe Scottill albhaffldors, finding that they had arrived too Ilate .llcs con-

to execute the chief bufinef committed to thcir charge, not on- tiliiul'. lIii
ly concealled that part of their inlfrutlions, viitll tlle utmof care ; L, n'laid.
hlut congratulated the Queen, in ticir lMficr's name, o u her
IhapPly efcaape from Iach aln audacious coiilpiracy. Elzalbc),
though no £Iranger to the King's corre!iondcncie ;witlh 1ll', or
to tliat nobleman's intention of :tilcrting James's right to Iite
Crown, was not willing that these Illould lIe knownv to the pe)o-
ple, anld, for that rclobn, received the con!l athllltills of tihe
St-ttiill ambaflladors witli all pofiblec mlarks of credit, andl good

J.!P. ,9 . jinrcll MT.m. , 2. 5lo. i C:rind. Spott: 4;.l.

BooncVIII. will ahd in order to tooth James, and to preserve the appear-

i6o. ances of union between the two courts, increased the subsidy

which fie paid him annually. The ambassadors resided for some
time in England, and were employed, with great success, in re-
newing and extending the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly
entered into with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the Englifli turned their eyes more and more towards
Scotland, and were eager to prevent each other in courting the
favour of their future Monarch. Affurahices of attachment, pro-
feflions of regard, and promises of support, were offered to James
from every corner of the kingdom. Cecilliimfelf, perceiving-
wlwat hopes Elffex had founded on the friendfdip of the Scottifli
King, and what advantages he might have derived from it,
thought it prudent to stand no longer at a distance from a Prince,
-who might so soon become his Master, But being fenfiblc, at
the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Miflrefs naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew
itronger with old age ; though he entered into a correspondence
with him, he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution ne-
ceffary in his situation, and peculiar to his character. And James,
having gained the man whose oppofitior and influence he had
hitherto chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfeci securit:y, till that e-
vent lhould happen, which would open his way to the throne of
:England. It was, with some dilficuity, that he refIrained, with-
in proper bounds, his adherents in that kingdom, who labouring
to diflingui(h themselves by that officious zeal, with which a
Prince, who has a near profpea of mounting the throne, is always
fi:rved, urged him to allow a motion to be made in parliament
for declaring his right of fucccffion to the Crown. James pru-
dently discouraged that design; but it was with no small lt:tisfac-
lion that he observed the alcendant he was acquiring in a court,
vhofe ditates he had been, so long, obliged to obey; and which
had either prescribed or thwarted every fIcp he had taken during
the whole course of his reign *.

16072. Notwithllanding the violent frugiigles of the political falions

A'tieits to whlich divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which had
i-i.hll.nd- halpp'ened there, since the King firli took the reius of government
ers" into his own hiinds. Scotland hlad enjoyed unifuitll tranquillity, be-

illn' iindifturbeld aby nyore itll enemy, atin free Ir in nany intet-
lin c conlmotion of lon; coiltiinuance. JDurilg this period, Janices
endeavourcd to ci' iii.' the l-nighl;lnds and the llles, a part of his

mominions almost totally negleaed by former Monarchs, though Booc VIII.
che reformation of it was an objeft highly worthy of their care. -

1(0 2.

The long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of sub-
duing the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of refiraining their
depredations, often no lets ruinous to their countrymen, than to
their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gra-
dually, to forget tlhe use of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the H-ighlanders, retaining their natural fierce-
ncfs, averse from labour, and inured to rapine. infested their more
industrious neighbours, by their continual incursions. James be-
ing solicitous not only to reprels their inroads, but to render them
useful fubjed's*, had at diiTerent times enated many wife laws
extremely conducive to these ends. All landlords, or Chiefs of
Clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their estates,
who could not find sufficient surety for their good behaviour;
they were required to make a lilf of all suspicious persons under
their jurifdicoion, to bind themselves to deliver them up to jullice,
and to indemnify those who should susser by their robberies; and
in order to ascertain the faithful performance of thcfe articles, the
chiefs themselves were obliged to give holtages to the King, or to
put pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a
retreat for the inlduirious, and a nursery for arts and commerce,
were appointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one
in Cantyre, another in Lochaber, and a tlird in the Isle of Lewisi
and in order to draw inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Royal
boroughs were to be conferred.upon them. Finding it, however,
to be no easy matter to inlipire the inhabitants of those countries
with the love of induliry, a resolution was taken to plant among
them, colonies of people from the more industrious counties. The
first experiment was made in the fllc of Lewis; and as it was ad-
vantagcoully situated for tle lifsling trade, a source from which
Scotland ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony tranf-
ported thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants of which
were well skilled in that branch of commerce. .But before they
had remained there long enough to manifelt the good effets of
this inifitutiol, the illanders enraged at secing their country oc-
cupied by those intruders, took arms, and surprising tlhen in the
night time, murdered fonme of them, and compelledl the rcll to a-
bandon the lettlerecnt. The Kinig's attention being soon after
turned to other obljects, we hear no more of this Lalutary projc&.
Though Jamelrs lidl not plifuc the delign, with that ilcady appli.

B .il. Dor. is(.

TVJuliiC r. v/

BOOK VIII. .cation and perseverance, without' which it is impossible to change'

vó. the manners of a whole people, he had the glory, however, not

only of having first conceived the thought, but of having.firit
pointed out the proper method of introducing the civil arts of life
into that part of the Island *.

Elizabeth's After having long enjoyed'a.:god state of health, the effe&t of
last illness
and death. a found conflitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and'-

temperance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having
1603. removed on a very stormy day from WVeflminRfer to Richmond,

whither she was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She
had no formed fever; her. ullf was good; but {he, ate little, and
Janualy 3r. could not sleep. Her diRempcr seemed to proceed from a deep.

melancholy, which appeared both in her countenance and beha-
viour. She delighted in solitude; ihe fat conflantly in the dark;:
and was often drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons.

of all ranks, and'of all different sets and parties, redoubled their
applications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in:
professions of attachment to his person, and in promises of fubmif-
sion to his government. Even some of her own servants, weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid-
of the burden of gratitude for palt benefits; and expc&ing to share
in' the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert her. And crowds
of people harried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the fa-
your of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

Meanwhile, the Queen's disease increased, and her melancholy'

appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjedures were
formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which she seem-
ed to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some
imputed it to her beirrg forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-.
don the Earl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for many years
created her ib much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from
observing the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her.
people, who beheld lher health declining with most indecent in-
difference, and looked 'forward to the acceflion of the Scottish-
King, with an impatience, which they could not conceal. Thell-
most common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the molt proba-
ble, was, that it tlowed from grief for the Earl of Eflcx. Shie re-
tained an extraordinary regard for the memory of that unfortunate

P Parl. 1597, 1J59'1, 197. Spots, 468.

-nobleman and though she often complained of his obstinacy, fel- BOOK VIII.
dom mentioned his name without tears *. An accident happened -v
soon after her retiring to liichmond, which revived her affetion 6
with new tenderness, and imbittered her.forrows. The Countess
of Nottingham, being on her death-bed, defiredto see.the Queen,
in order to reveal something to her, without discovering which,
file could not die in peace. VWhen the Queen came into her
chamber, (le told her, that while Effex lay under sentence of
death, he was desirous of imploring pardon in tlle manner which
the Queen herself had prescribed, by returning a ring, which du-
ring the height of his favour fie had given him, with a promise
that, if in any future difirefs, he sent that back to her as a token,
it (hould entitle him to her protection; that Lady Scroop was the
person he intended to employ in order to present it; that by a
miltake, it was put into her hands inltead of Lady Scroop's; and
that lie having communicated the matter to her husband, one of
Essex's mot implacable enemies, he had forbid her either to car-
ry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The Coun-
tefs, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the Queen's forgive-
ness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice of the Earl's
enemies, and how unjustly file had fufpeced him of inflexible ob-
itinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never can;" and
left the room in great emotion . From that moment, her fpi-
rit funk entirely; flie would scarce taite food; fihe refused all the
medicines prescribed her by her physicians; declaring that she

Birch, Memr. 2. 505.

t This anecdote concerning Elizabethwas ftrl publilhed by Osborne, Mem.

of Eliz. p. 23. is confirmed by the tefRimony of de Maurier, Meam. z60. and
by the traditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, publishld by Dr.
Birch, Negoc. 2o6. Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as
one of the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain which
zprove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birch, Mem. 2. 506.
But Eflex had been beheaded two years before her death, and there seems to
have been no other reason, but that which we have afligned, why her for-
row fiho!ld revive with so much violence at so great a ditlance of time. As
the death of tle Countlcs of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before
the Queen's death, the coincidence of thele events, together with the other
evidence mentioned, adds so much probability to the story related by Olborne,
as will entitle it to a place in history. The only'objecition to the account we
have given of Elizabeth's attachment to Erlcx, ariles from her great age.
At the age offixty-eight, the amorous paflions are commonly abtlndantly cool,
and the violence of all the panions, except one, is much abated. But the
force of this objjcaion is entirely removed by an author who has illlltfrated
many pafnlges in the Englilh -liftory, and ;a.orned more. Catalocue of Roy.
intd Nob. Authors. Article Enflx.

o ij

BnOoK vii. wifled to die, and would live no longer. No entreaty could pre.
1603. vail on her to go to bed; fle fat on cushions, during ten days and

nights, pensive, and silent, holding her finger almost continually
in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The
only thing to which flhe seemed to give any attention, were the
a&s of devotion, performed in her apartment, by the Archbifllop
of Canterbury; and in these Jhe joined with great appearance of
fcrvour. Waited, at lait, as well by anguish of mind, as by long
abflinence, she expired without a firuggle, on Thursday the 24th
day of March in the leventieth year of her age, and the forty-fifth
of her reign *.

Her charac- Foreigners often accuse the Englifll of indifference and difre-
te r.

sped towards their Princes. But without reason ; no people are
more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the Englifi of this age, with the fame warmth, as they were
by those, who flared in the bleflings and fplcindor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is fRill adored in England. And the
historians of that kingdom, aftcr celebrating her love of her peo-
ple ; her sagacity in discerning their true interefi; her fleadinefs
in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her Minillers; the
glory ihe acquired by arms; the tranquillity fle secured to her
subjects; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all these justly rank her among the
most illullrious Princes. Even the defects in her characer, they
observe, were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excef-
five frugality was not accompanied with'the love of hoarding;
and though it prcvented some great undertakings, and rendered
the success of others incomplete, it introduced cuconomy into
her adminiflration, and exempted the nation from many burdens,
xwhich a Monarch, rmore proitfc, or more cnterpriling, mull have
imposed. Her flowncfs in rewvarding hier Ifrvants fomctimes dif-
cournged useful merit; but it prevented the undeferving from ac-
quiring power and wealth, to which they had no title. Her ex-
treme jcaloufy of tlioft princes, who pretended to dispute her right
to the Crown, led her to take such precautions, as tended no leit
to the public farety, thlni to her own ; and to court the airnccliu.a
of her people, as tllh firmenll irflpi)rt of lher throne. Such is the
piflare tltL Engli il draw of tl is ;grct OQueen.

\'lhoever undertakes to w'rite tie liflory of Scotland finds
hlinfelf obliged, frequently, to view her in a very diffrent, and

C' Camce. IjBrch. Mem. ? . Pr. i-cl. Xcgoc. 206. Strypc, ,. 37.,

in' a less amiable light. Her authority, in that kingdom, during BOOK V.IIl.
the greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which fih% '"
possessed in her own. But this authority, acquired at first by , I6o3
service of great importance to the nation,, ihe exercised in a man-
ner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By her induitry in so-
menting the rage of the two contending factions; by supplying
the one with partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes
by balancing their power so artfully, that each of them was able
to distress, and neitherof them to subdue the other; hle rendered
Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion, and bloodfled: and
her craft and intrigues, effeding what the valour of her ancefRors
could not accomplish, reduced that kingdom to a Rate of depend-
ence on England. The maxims of policy, often little consonant
to those of morality, may, perhaps, juflify this condu&. But
no apology can be offered for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a
scene of dissimulation without necessity; and of fcverity beyond
example. In almoit all her adtions, Elizabeth is the objec of
our higheil admiration ; in this, we must allow that fle not only
laid aside the magnanimity, which became a Queen, but the feel-
ings, natural to a woman.

Though Elizabeth would never permit the queflion concern- Jar.espro,

claimctI

ing the right of succession to the Crown to be determined in par- Kinil of
liament ; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point, lngland.
which ihe wished to remain an impenetrable mystery; fle had,
however, formed no design of excluding the Scottilh King from
an inheritance, to which his title was undoubted. A ihort time
before her death, fihe broke the silence, which she had so long
preserved on that fubjeEt, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral,
" That her throne, was the throne of Kings ; that fle would
have no mean person to ascend it, and that her Cousin the King
of Scots liould be her hucceflor." This lhe confirmed on her
death-bed. And as toon as fle breathed her lalt, the Lords of
the Privy Council proclaimed James King of England. All the
intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of the Infanta, all
the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to support the titles of
Lady Aralella, and the Earl of -Hartford, ditlippearcd in a mo-
ment ; and nobles, and people, forgettin their ancient hofiliLies
with Scotland, and their avcrlion lor the dominion of lthangcrs,
teltified their fi:isfaiion with louder accl:mitions, than were
usual at the acccllion of their native Princes. Amidll this tu-
:nult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who proposcd to
p.rcl;ribc Iolne conditions to the fuilcefor, l and to exadc fiom hlim

.BOK VII. the redress of some grievances, before they called him to the

" throne, was Pcarce heard ; and Cecil, by ftiffling it, added to his

Rc fock of merit witl his n'w Master. Sir Charles Percy, brother
of the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of
Worcester's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to
the King, signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors then in
London; informing him of the Queen's death, of his acceflion
to the Throne, of their care to recognizehis title, and of the univer-
fal applause, with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost haRle to deliver this welcome
meflage; but were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey,
Lord Hunfdane's youngest son, who setting out a few hours after
Elizabeth's death, arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as
the King had gone to bed. He was immediately admitted into
the royal apartment, and kneeling by the King's bed, acquaint-
ed him with the death of Elizabeth, saluted him King of Eng-
land, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of the truth
of the intelligence which he brought, presented him a ring,
which his filler Lady Scroop had taken from the Queen's finger
after her death. James heard him with a decent composure.
But as Carey was only a private meflenger, the information he
brought was not made public, and the King kept his apartment
till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles were so-
lemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjecs expressed no less joy,
than the Englifl, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people
were extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepar-
ed to set out for that kingdom, without delay. HPie appointed
his Queen to follow him within a few weeks. He committed
the government of Scotland to his Privy Council. I-Ie intrufeed
the care of his children to different noblemen. On the Sunday
before his departure, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and
after hearing a sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the
greatncfs of the divine goodncif in raising iim to the throne of
lich a powerful Kingdom without opposition or bloodllhcd, and
exhorted him to exprels his gratitude, by promoting to the tt-
imot, the happinels and prosperity of his litll)bjls; the King rose
up, and addressing himself to the people, inade many prof(flions
of unalterable affection towards them; promi'el frequently to vi-
fit Scotland ; assured them that his Scottifli fruljecqs, notwith-
ilanding his abl'cncc, Iliould feel that lie wvas their native Prince,
no leIs thal when h lie resided :un3ng
:' i:''*n ; a::d n:ight fill trust

that his cars should be always open to their petitions, which he Boor VII'.
would answer with the alacrity and love of a parent. IIs words --
were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience;. 603
who, though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted.
into sorrow by these tender declarations *.

On the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid, Takes poC-
tit not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick. feflion of
WVihcrever he came, immcnfe nmultitudes were assembled to wel-
come him; and the principal persons, in the different Counties
through Which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnifi-
cence in entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Eli-
zabeth had reigned. so long in England, that mofl of her subje&s&
remembered no otlier court but her's ; and their notions of the
manners and decorum suitable to a prince were formed upon what
they had observed there. It was natural to apply this itandard
to the behaviour and actions of their new Monarch, and to com-
pare him, at first fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he was
to be placed. James, lwhofe manners were extremely different
from hers, suffered by the comparison. lie had not that flowing
affability, by which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her peo-
ple ; and though cafy .among a few vwhom he loved, his indo-
lence could not bear the fatigue of renderihng himfclf agreeable
to a mixed multitude. He was no less a firanger to that dignity.
with which Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And initead of
that well-judged frugality, with which-. fle conferred titles of ho-
nour, he heflowed them with an undifiinguiflling profusion, that
rendered them no longer marks of diftin&ion, or rewards of me-
rit. But these were the reflections of the few alone ;. the multi-
tude continued their acclamations; and amidst these, James en-
tered London on the 7th of May, and took peaceable poffefflon
of the throne of England.

Thus were united two kingdoms, divided from the carliefi ac- Cor.;:!ijr,

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one
great monarchy. And by this jundion of its whole native force,
Great Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in sEurope-
which England and Scotland never could have attained.

The Scots ll;td so long confidercd their Mionarchs as next hicirs A view ,r

to the Englifl throne, that they ;had full leirure to rcllect on all tlhc tRev"l:-
the confqcuenccs of their bi'ing a!vanced to tliat dignity. But coli.l!ti,...
dazzled willi the glory of giviing a Sovercirei t, thcir powerful (i.l cotl"H''
encmy, relying on the parti;litv of their n:nive 'Pricc, :end in crilli >,

. 5s)oitl 4.76.' ," V.,

BóOK VIL. full expeclation of l(aring liberally in the wealtl and honduis hi

would now be able to befiow, they attended little to the most-
obvious consequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his ac-
cession to the throne of England, as if it had been no less bene-
ficial to the kingdom, than honourable to the King. They soon
had reafoni, however, to adopt very different sentiments; and
from that period, we may date a total alteration in the political
confiitution of Scotland.

The feudal Aristocracy, which had been fubvcrted in most na-

tions of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had been un-
dermined by the progress of commerce, flill fuhltted with full
force in Scotland. Many calues had contributed gradually to
augment the power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Reform-
ation, which in every other country where it prevailed, added
to the authority of the Monarch, had increased their wealth and
influence. A King, pofflTed of a finall revenue, with a prero-
gative extremely limited, and unsupported by a standing army,
could not exercise much authority over such potent fubjeEs. He
wvas obliged to govern by expedients; and the laws derived their
force not from his power to execute them, but from the volun-
tary fubmitlion of the nobles. But though this produced a fpe-
cies of government feeble and irregular beyond example; though
Scotland, under the name, and with all the outward ensigns of a
lVonarchy, was really subjec' to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy ; and even in this wild form of a confli-
tution, there were principles, which tended to their security and
advantage. The King, checked and overawed by the nobles,
durlt venture upon no adt of arbitrary power. The nobles, jea-
lous of the King, wvhofa claims and pretcnfions were many,
though his power was finall, were afraid of iritating their de-
pendents by unlrealfonabl] exaslions, and tempered the rigour of
: riflocratical tyranny, with a mildness and equality to which it
is naturally a itrangcr. And while the military genius of the
feudal governmnient, remained in vigour, the vafl'als both of the
Crown and of the JBarons were not only free from oppreflion, but
courted by their fupcriors, whofc power and importance were
founded on their attachment and love.

But, by Ilis accclon to the thllrone of England, James acqnired

fich an inmiienlle t accrcniionii walth of power, and

of,

o plndor,

1lhat the nobles, anflOnilll e and intilnidaitcd, thou.ght it v.il to
(Irlngle for privilh;gcs which tlley were now unable to defend.
Nor was it r 'ona fiur alone that they filbmlittcd to the yokel

James, partial to his countrymen, and willing. that they should BOOK VIII.
partake in his good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours;
and the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of his power,
in taming their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the
Prince became the fuprerne law in Scotland, and the nobles drove,
with emulation, who ihould most implicitly obey commands, which
they had formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied with
having subjected the nobles to the Crown, the King left them in
full polfeflion of their ancient jurifdition over their own vassals.
The e.xtenlive rights, vefled in a feudal Chief, became in their
hands dreadful instruments of oppression, and the military ideas.
on which there rights were founded being gradually loft or difre-
garded, nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the rigour with
which they were exercised. The nobles, exhautling their for-
tunes by the expence of frequent attendance upon the Englifi
court, and by attempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their
more wealthy neighbours, multiplied exations upon the people,
who durst scarce utter complaints which they knew would never
reach the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any
redress. And from the union of the Crowns, to the revolution in
s688, Scotland was placed in a political situation of all others
the mofl singular and the mole unhappy; fubjeted at once to the
absolute will of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurifdi&ion of
an Ariltocracy, it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both there
forms of government. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were
slaves and tyrants; and. the people groaned under the rigorous
domination of both.

During this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

stake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency.
After the death of James, the Scottiih nation was no longer view-
ed by our Monarchs with any partial affetion. Charles I. edu-
cated among the Englilh, dilcovcrcd no peculiar attachment to
the kingdom of which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiv-
ing the sceptre to be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a
Prince with whom they had little connection, and over whose
councils they had little influence, no longer Iubmitted with the
fame implicit obedience. Provoked ly (bnmc encroachments of
the King on their order, and apprehensive of others, the remains
of their ancient spirit began to appear. They complained and
rcmonntrated. And the people being, at the fame time, violently
diljlutted; at the innovations in Religion, the nobles secretly
heightened this difguflt and their artifices, together with the ill

Volume 1i. P

BoOK VIII. condut of the court, raised such a spirit, that the whole nation:

.. took arms against their Sovereign, with an union and animosity

of which there had formerly been no example. Charles brought
against them the forces of England, and notwithstanding their
own union, and the zeal of the people, the nobles must have funk
in the struggle. But, the disaffection which was growing among
his Englifll fubjeAs, prevented the King from acing with vi-
gour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms. And after ma-
ny battles and revolutions which are well known, the Scottith
nobles, who first began the war, were involved in the fame ruin
with the throne. At the Restoration; Charles II. regained full
possession of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the nobles,
whose eflates were wafted, or their spirit broken by the calamities
to which they had been exposed, were less able and less willing
than ever to refill the power of the Crown. During this reign,
and that of James VII. the diaates of the Monarch were receiv-
ed in Scotland with most abjet submission. The poverty to which
many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner slaves,
and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always ne-
glected, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

The Revolution introduced other maxims into the government

of Scotland. To increafc the authority of the Prince, or to fe-
cure the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almost the
oble obje&t of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were cifregarded, or unknown. Attention be-
gan, henceforward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By
the claim of right, their liberties were secured. And the num-
ber of their representatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in Parliament. As they
came to enjoy more security, and greater power, their minds be-
gan to open, and to form more extcnsive plans of commerce, of in-
lutftry, and of police. lut the ariflocratical spirit, which ilill
predominated, together with many other accidents, retarded the
improvement and happiness of the nation.

Another great event completed what the Revolution had be.

gun. Thel political power of the nobles, ulready broken by the
union of the two Crowns, was almolil annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Infcad of making apart, as formerly, of ihe
fuprmc ;all'cmbly of the na;ion, inflcad of bearing the most con-
fiderable sway thure, the Scottifl nobles are admitted into the

Britilh Parliament by their representati-ves only, and form but an Boox VIII.
inconsiderable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative ''
authority is veiled. They themselves are excluded absolutely
from the House of Commons, and even their eldest sons are not
permitted to represent their countrymen in that auguR assembly.
Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to compensate for this
extin&ion of their political authority. As commerce advanced
in its progress, and government attained nearer to perfeEtion,,
there were insensibly circumscribed, and at last, by laws no less
salutary to the public, than fatal to the nobles, they have been
almost totally abolished. As the nobles were deprived of power,
the people acquired liberty. Exempted from burdens to which
they were formerly fubje&, screened from opprefilon, to which
they had been long exposed, and adopted into a constitution,
swhofe genius and laws were more liberal than their own, they
have extended their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated the arts and
sciences.

This survey of the political slate of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three seras, from each of which we may
date some great alteration, in one or other of the three different
members of which the supreme legislative assembly in our coniti-
tution is composed. At the .ccefion, the Kings of Scotland,
once the most limited, became in an instant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their
Parliaments were unable to controul, or their nobles to refill.
At the Union, the feudal aristocracy, which had fubfilted tb ma-
'ny ages, and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the
Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences,
peculiar to their order, and reduced themfclves to a condition,
which is no longer the terror and envy of other tfubjels. Since
the Union, the Commons, anciently negleced by their Kings,
and despised by the nobles, have emerged into dignity; and be-
ing admitted to a participation of all the privileges, which the
English had purchased at the cxpence of so much blood, mufl
now be eftcemed a body not less considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

The church felt the cffects of tnhe absolute power which the

King acquired by his accfclion; and its revolutions, too, arc
worthy of notice. James, dluring the latter ycars of his admini-
tration in Scotland, revived the name and oflice of Bilhops.

P ij

BOoKV II But they possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdiEtion or pre-eminence

their revenues were inconsiderable, 'and they were scarce diftin-
guifhed by any thing, but by their feat in Parliament, and by
being the objec of the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred.
The King, delighted with the splendor and authority which the
English Bifhops'enjoyed, and eager to asset an' union in ecclefi-
aftical pQlicy, which he had, in vain, attempted in the civil go-
vernment, resolved to bring both Churches to an exa& copnformi-
ty with each other. Three Scotsmen were consecrated Biftops
at London. From them, their brethren were commanded to
receive orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were imposed.
And though the clergy, lcfs obsequious than the nobles, boldly
opposed there innovations, James, 'long pracUifed and well ikilled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length their compli-
ance. But Charles I. a fuperflitious Prince, unacquainted with the
genius of the Scots, imprudent and precipitant in all the measures
he pursued in that kingdom,. preling to6 eagerly the reception of
the Englilh liturgy, and indiscreetly attempting a resumption of
church 'lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the people
being left at liberty to indulge their own wiflies. the Episcopal
church was overturned, and the Presbyterian government and
discipline were re-e'fablifhed with new vigour. Together with
Monarchy, Episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A form of go-
vernment, so odious to the people, required force to uphold it;
and though the whole rigour of authority, and all the barbarity
of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion of the
nation was insurmountable, and it fubliffed with difficulty. At
the Revolutiol, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legillature, the Presbyterian g6vernriment
was again cftablifled, and being ratified by the Union, is till
maintained in the kingdom.'

Nor did the influence of the Accefflon extend to the civil and

ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its
talle and spirit, things of a nature flill more delicate, were fenfi-
1bly affeated by that event. When learning revived in the sis-
teenth and fixtcenth centuries, all the modern langu'ages 'were in
a state equally barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and eveni
of perspicuity. No author thought of writing in languaiges so ill
adapted to express and embellish lhis fentirhcnts, or of erecting a
work for immortality, with such rude and pCriflingp materi:ils.
Atnd as the spirit, which prevailed at that time',' did not owe its
ife to anly original effort of the hulltan mind, but' was excited by

admiration of the ancients, their compositions were efleemed not Bopx VI[I.
only the flandards of taste, and of fentihnent, but of style; and ~
even the languages in which they wrote were thought to be pe-
culiar and alnoft consecrated to learning and the Mlufes. Not
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but their language
copied; and, extravagant as the attempt may appear to write in
a dead tongue, in which men were not accultomed to think, and
which they could not speak, nor even pronounce, the success of
it was aitonifhing. As they formed their Rtyle upon the purelt
modles, as they were uninfeded with those barb2rifms, which
the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the affecation of courts,
intercourse with strangers, and a thousand other causes introduce
into living languages, many moderns have attained to a degree
of elegance in their Latin compositions, which the Romans them-
selves scarce pofleffed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.
While this was almost the only species of composition, and all
authors, by using one common language, could be brought to a
nearer compariCon, the Scottilh writers were not inferior to
those of any other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan, e-
qually formed to excel in prose and in verse, more various, more
original, and more elegent, than that of almost any other modern
who writes in Latin, refleds, with regard to this particular, the
greatest lua're on his country.

But the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for their induitry which authors met
with, who could be read and admired only within the narrow
circle of the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of wall-
ing half their lives in learning the language of the Romans, be-
gan to refine and to polial their own. The modern tongues were
found to be fufccptiblc of beauties and graces, which, if not e-
qual to those of the ancient ones, were at lcalt more attainable.
And the Italians having firll let the-example, Latin was no long-
er used in the works of taft ; it was confined to books of fcicnec;
and the politer nations have baniihed it even from theflc. The
Scots, we may prcflme, would have hiad no catliC to regret this
change in the public tafec, and would llill have been able to
maintain ome ecqualily with other nations, in their pursuit of li-
tcrary honour. The IEnglhn and ScottiIi languages, derived
from the lhanc fourccs, vwer, at the cnd of the ti.xtcnth century,
in ' fl;te nealy flililar, dillcrinh from one another 1umcivwhat in
ortlbograpily, thoiglh nlot only thei words, but the idioms w-erc
'inuch the . .d; e
'1 letters of fevcral Scottilh liatelincn o'fthat

Booi; VIII. age are not inferior in elegance, or in purity, to those of the.

'v' - English Ministers with whom they corresponded. James himself

was maiter of a tfyle far from contemptible; and by his example
and encouragement, the Scottish language might have kept pace
with the English in refinement. Scotland might have had a
scrics of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin language, to
boafl of; and the improvements in taste, in the arts, and in the
sciences, which spread over the other polifled nations of Europe,
would not have been unknown there.

But, at the very time when other nations were beginning to

drop the use of Latin in works of tale, and to make trial of the
firength and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy which the Accession at
sirs occasioned, were soon over; and the Scots, being at once
deprived of all the objects that refine or animate a people, of the
pretence of their Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the fplen-
dor and elegance of a court, an universal dejecion of spirit seems
to have seized the nation. The Court being withdrawn, no do-
meitic standard of propriety and correctness of speech remained
the few compositions that Scotland produced were tried by the
Elnglifh fandard, and every word or phrase that varied in the
least from that, was condemned as barbarous; whereas, if the
two nations had continued diftina, each might have retained
idioms and forms of ipeech peculiar to itself; and these, render-
ed fashionable by the example of.a court, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been confidered in
the fame light with the varieties occasioned by the different dia-
lecAs in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties,
and, in many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of both
nations. But by the Accession, the Englilh naturally became
the sole judges and lawgivers in language, and rejected as sole-
cifms, every form of speech to which their ear was not accultom-
ed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse between the two
nations was inconsiderable *, and ancient prejudices were still so

· A remarkable proof of the little intcrcourfe between the English and

Scots, before the union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers,
one publifcied by Haynes, the other by Strype. In the year I567, Elizabeth
commanded the Bishop of London to take a survey of all the strangers with-
in the cities of London and Weltminfter. By his report, which is very
minute, it appears that the whole number of Scots at that time was sil'ty-
eight. tl;lyncs 4;5. A survey of the fame kind was made bly Sir Thomas Row,
Lord Mnyor, A. D. 1568. The number of Scots had then incrcafed to

Violent as to prevent imitation, possess the means of refining their Boo13 V1It.
own tongue according to the purity of the Englifli fandard. On - '
the contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from every different
source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age, were more emi-
nent for piety than for learning; and though there did not arise
many authors among them, yet being in poffeflion of the privi-
lege of discoursing publicly to the people, and their sermons be-
ing too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty productions
could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrec modes of
expression may be traced back to that original. The pleadings
of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that profession
having furnished more authors, and the matters of which they
treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many of
those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scottzcimns,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did ei-
ther the language or public taste receive any improvement in
parliament, where a more liberal and more corre& eloquence
might have been expeEted. .All business was tranfated there by
the Lords of Articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the
court, that few debates arose, and none were conduced with the
spirit and vigour natural to a popular assembly.

Thus, during, the whole seventeenth century, the English were

gradually refining their language, and their talic in Scotland
the former was much debased, and the latter almnot entirely loft.
In the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out
of barbarity ; but the distance between them, \ hich was then in-
considerable, became ,bcfore the end of it, irrmcmle. Even after
science had once dawned upon them, the Scots tieered to be finll-
ing back into ignorance and obfcur'ty ; and naive and intclli-
gent as they naturally are, they continued, while other nations
were eager in the purlsit of fame and knowledge, in a slate of
languor and ftupefa-Lion. This, however, mull be imputed to
the unhappincfs of their political situation, not to aly defcd ofu
genius; for no sooner was the one removed in any degree, tha'
the other began to display itself. The aft abolifling the power
of the Lords of Articles, and other atlulary laws passcd at the
Revolution, having introduced freedom of debate into the Scot-
tiih Parliament, elo(quence, with all the arts that accompany or

eighty-cight. Strype, 4. Supplement No I. On the Acce(fion of J:ames : con-
itlera:ble number of Scots, cipecially of the higher rank, rclortcd lo l''ng-
:llnd; but it was not till the Union that the intcrcourl bc:vtcea tlit t.v:
kingdonms became great.

BO°o VIII. perfet it.; became immediate objeEts of attention ; and the. A.-
C-~ ~ ample of Fletcher of Salton alone is fufficicnt to ihew that the

Scots were fill capable of generous sentiments, and, notwith.
Sfanding some peculiar idioms, were able to express themselves
with energy, and with elegance.

At length the Union having incorporated.;the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diftintions. which had sublisted
for many ages gradually. wear av-ay; peculiarities disappear; the
fame manners prevail in both parts of the island the faen au-
thors are read and admired the farne entertainments are fre-
quented by the elegant and polite; and the. fame fiandard of
tafle, and of purity in language,. is eftablilhed. And the Scots,
after being placed, during a whole century, in a situation no left
fatal to the liberty than to the tatle and genius of the nation,
were at once put in possession of privileges more valuable thart
those which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and every ob.
itruction that had retarded their pursuit, or prevented their ac,
o.iilition of literary fame, was totally removed.

# APPENDIX.

APPENDIX.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 96.)
A MIE IM ORI AL of cert.tilz points meet for the reftor-

ing the realim of SCOTLAND t t the Lancient weakc.

IMP RIM is, it is to be noted, that the blcf worldly felicity that l4t Aingn
Scotland can have, is either to continue in a perpetual peace with .5 tOSYi.-

ton. JLib.

the kingdom of England, or to be mavle one monarchy wilh Eng.- Cal. B. ic.
land, as they both make but one island, divided from the reft of folt nl.
the world. Cco)py in Se-

If the firlt is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with Eng- csil': h't. i

land, then mult it ncefarci y be provided, that Scotland be not
lbo fhtljeat to the appointments of France, as is prfently, which,
being an antient enemy to England, feeketh always to make
Scotland an infirumcnt, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon
England, and to make a foot-stool thereof to look over England
as they may.

llhercfore, when Scotland flall come into the hands of a mere

Scottilh man in blood, then may there be hope of fucl accord,
blt as long as it is at the commandment of tlh French, there is
no hope to have accord long betwixt thece two realms.

Therefore, feeing it is at the French king's commandment by

rcafon of his wife, it is to be confidered for the weal of Scotland,
that until (lie have children, and during her absence out of the
realn, the next heirs to the crown, being the house of the Hla-
iniltons, liould have regard Iicrcto, and to sec that neither the
crown be imposed nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobili-
ty and commonalty ought to force that the laws and the old ctlf-
toms of the realm be nut altci ed, neither that the country be not
ipiioverillicd by taxes, cnilpriil, or uew inmpots, after the man-
!ier of France ; for provision wherein, both by the law of God
ani l man, the French king and his wife may.be moved to rclfon
theilr llifgovernlancc of the la1nd.

And sot this purllo(f, it wcc le good tllt the nobility aind cui.

inons joined with the nllext l.s iif ltilhe rov;wn, to le:ek due rcl;rll;ni
of fi'ch li grc;lt abulfs as tend to the ruil of' tileir cotuntry, wlicli
2aull be done before tihe t Fiiul grow too Itrong and inlblcnt.

i ¢h,.~,'t JI .;t_

Fir/?, That it may be provided, by consent of the three efai.te

of the land, that the land may be free from all idolatry like as
England is, for justification whereof, if any free general council
may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the feat of judg-
ment, they may offer to fhcw their cause to be most agreeable to
Christ's religion.

Next, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules

and offices, by the antient blood of the realm, without either
captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all other princes govern their
countries, and especially that the forts might be in the hands of
mere Scottilh men.

rThidly, That they might never be occasioned to enter into

wars againll England, except England should give the first cause
to Scotland.

Foirtlh/y, That no nobleman of Scotland hlould receive pension

of France, except it were whlilft he did serve in France, for
otherwise thereby the' French would shortly corrupt'many, and
betray their own country.

Fifih/y, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given

to any but mere Scottiflh men, by the assent of the three eltates
of the realm.

Sixth, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the

queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in those cafes
not to be direaed by the French.

Seventh/l,, That it be by the said three estates appointed how

the queen's revenue of the realm shall be expended, how much.
the queen hiall have for her portion and estate during her ab-
fence, how much fllall be limited to the governance and defence
of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

In these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be

found unwilling, and will withfland these provisions for the weale
of the land, then hath the three estates of the realm authority,
forthwith, to intimate to the said king and queen their humble
requefis ; and if the fame be not effetually granted, then hum-
bly they may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of
the crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and antient
*ights of the realm.

Fina//y, If the queen fiall be unwilling to this, as it is likely

Ihe will, in rcfpe& of the greedy and tyranous aflelion of France,
then it is apparent that Almighty God is pleased

l t toransler fron

her the rule of the kingdom for the -wal c of it, and this time mult
be uscd with great circuniilfcclion, to avoid the dcccipts and
tromperies of the I'rc;nh.

And then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once

,made free, what means may be devised by God's goodness, to
accord the two realms, to endure for time to come at the plea-
fare of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of-all princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 133.
A4 Letter of Maitland of JLetbhi ton's, tthus cirected,

To n' Iovngfrieznd Jazmes. Be this de/lvcred at London.

I UNDERSTAND by the las letter I received from yow, that dif- 2othJan.
coursing with zour countrymen upon the mater of Scotland, and cSt Lib
comoditeys may ensew to that realm, hereafter giff ze presently cal. lg. ix.

From the

aflift ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre of the contrary advile, original in
douting lhat we fall not at length be found trusty frends, nor his ow0n

harnd.

mean to contynew in conRant araetye, albeit we promile, but on-
ly for avoyding the present danger make zow to Ccrve our turnc,
and after being delivered, becum enemies as of before. For prose
quharcof, they allege things have palt betwixt ws heretofore, and
a few prelutmptiones tending to the fam end, all grounded upon
rniftruft ; quhilks, at the first ficht, have some flhewe of apparcnce,
.if men wcy not the circumfRances of the mater; but gif they
;vill confer the tyme past with the present, confider the nature
of this caus, and cftate of our contrey, I doubt not but jugement
si l be able toC banitl miltruft. And first, I wad with ze fliould
examyne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of
England and Scotland, and quhat moved our anceftours to enter
into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks by our lioreys and regiftres
off antiquiteys appear to be thefc. The princes of England, some
tyme, allcdging a certainc kyndl off foveraintye over this realm;
fomne tymc upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our
bordourarcs, and semblable occ:lions, mony tymes cntcrprifcd
the co:aqucil of vis, and si far furth prcilt it by force off armes,
tlhat we wcr dryvcn to great extramitcys, Iy lots of our princes,
our noblemcn, and a good part of our cuntrey, fll that experience
i taiuglit wvs that our owne 11 rcngtl was fcarfe I'ufiicient to owitilland

the force of lnIlanud. 'I'he Frcncle zour auncient cnemyes, confi-
dcerig'vwell how natlure had Ii. placed ws in a ill:an wvith zow that na
nati ,ni was able fa to annoyc lengl nd asw e being eneylmcs, foucht to
joine ws to theym in liguc, tending iby that meanc to detourne zotur

l., Qij
(: O/j

armyes from the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the de-
fence off zoar country at hame, offering for that ef;ct to beflowe
some charges upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choy-
fed a tyme to propone the mater, quhen the frefche memory oft
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely prented on
our hartes, that all our myndes were ocupyed how to be rcveng,
cd, and arme ourselfes with the powar off a f6rayne prince against
zour enterprises thereafter.

This wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At

quhill tymc, our cronicles maks mention, that some of the wyfeit
forfaw the pcrril, and finall frute should redound to ws thereof at
lenth: zit had affction fa blinded jtgement, that the advise of
the maist part owercamc the bell. The maifi part of all querells
betwixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came
on our fvde, hes ever fallen out by theyr procuremant rather
than any one cans off our self's : and quhen.ifaever ve brack the
peace, it come partly by theyr intyfenments, partly to efthew the
conquest intended by that realm. But now hes God's provi-
dence fa altered the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary,
that now hes the Frenfche taken zour place, and we, off very
jugement, becum difyrous to have zow in theyr rowme. Our
eyes are opened, we elipy how uncareful they have been of our
weile a aall tynes, how they made w-s ever to serve theyr turne,
drew us in maifl dangerous wcys fur theyr commodite, and never,
thelefs wad not ftyck, oft tymes, againit the natour of the ligue,
to contrak peace, leaving wvs in weyr. \Ve icc that their sup-
port, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any alffeion they bare to
ws, for pytie they had off our eftatc, for rccompenfe off the lykc
fricndlhip fchawin to theym in tyme off theyr aiTli&ions, but for
ambition, and infaciable cupiditc to reygne, and to mak Scot-
land ane accessory to the crown of France. This wvas na friendly
office, but mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the propor-
tion of theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defence of a palt.
W\e f;c theym manifeltly attempt the thing we fuifpccted off zow;
we feared ze mnent the conqcitl off Scotland, and they a-re
planely f:tllen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we h:ltd ;ze
nmclt evill towards wvs, and il ;ll we love theymi. nuhlll:s Ie:tring
the name offi Ircinls, a,;o tllout to bring ws in manll vile Icrvitudc?
Gif by zuur frcndlly iipport .t this tynim, xc 1a11 declare tliit not
only lute zec not the r 1yne our country, hut ',vill pr. lCrve 1t..c
lillertic tlcreof firo conlqucfl lv tlra:ngc:ir s, f.ll nut tiec occa.
sion of all inlinity with zolw, a! .

l!ig ucn with th'y'n, I,:: t::l-cn
t.-

vway? The causes being removed, how fall the effcses remane .
'The fear of conqucll, made ws to hate zow and love theym, the
::tis changed, quhcn we fee theym planely attempt conqueit, and
zov fchaw vs frendnlip, fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ?
Gif we have fchawne fa great conflance, continuing s;i mony
zears in amity with theym, off quhoms we had fai fniall commo-
ditie, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that o'f all nationes
my do ws greatefl plefour ?

But ze will fiy, this mater may be reconcyled, and then frends

as off before. I think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off
tllis ze may be assured, we iwill never fa far trust that reconcili-
ation, that we will be content to forgo the ametyc of England,
nor do any thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, flould we
not bcfydes the loffe off estimation and diferediting of ourselfes, per-
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifefl danger, and
becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid could we implore, be-
ing dcftitute of zour fricndfiip, gif they off new wald attempt
thlcyr formar enterprise ? QEhat nation myghlt help ws giff they
waldl, or wald gift they myght ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will
not flick hereafter to tak theyr tyme off ws, quheu (lilplefour and
grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feing ambition has fa
impyrit ower their reason, that before we had ever done any thing
inyght offend theym, but by the contrary plcated theym by right
and wrang, they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our
hale fRate. I wald ze fllould not efteme ws fa blVrayne of jugement
that we cannot forefe our awne perril; or fa foolifchc, that we
will not fudy by all gode mean:; to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk confiles all in the rl;lying of zour frencdfips.
I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the days of zour pritn-
ces off malit noble memory kIing eIcnry the VIII. and king Ed-
ward the VI. meanes wer opened off aniityc betwixt liaith rcalms;
was not at all tymes the difference of religion the oncly flay they
wer nolt emb-aced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents fubvcrt the devises of the better f'.t ? B13t now
lhas God olT Lis mercy removed that block furth off the way: nowv is
not thcyr padtflil;c lyke to tak placc any inare, lwhen we ar coin1;I
to a conformity oil' tdotrine, a;mi profcs the fame rcligion vitai
z.ow, (juliilk I tlake to be the (lraytel knot off am:tiiye can be (i -
vilkcd. Gift it may Ihe alleged, tltt fuome oi oLur countrylmen, ',t
ony tyme, violatcd theyr promis ; giff zc lil]: to way the circunl-
anurwcs, zc lill y1 ln the plo(mis is ra.tlhir bjrlu ,lh on by nccc!l:,

after a great overtlraw off our men, then comme off frceill, and
tending ever to our great incommodite and decay off ourhaill fate
at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libertie be infcperably joined with the kcping off promefl:, and
tle violation off our fayth cast ws in miailt miserable servitude.
Sa that gifF neyther the feare of God, reverence of man, religion,
othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes futilcient to bynd ws,
yet fall the zeale off our native countrey, the maintenance off
our owne fate, the safety of our wyffcs and childrene from slavery,
compell ws to kepe promille. I am affnred, it is trewly and fin-
cerely ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametyc with zowv
it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be as defyrous of it
as we ar, assurances may be devyfed, quharby all partyes will be
out of doubte. There be gode meanes to do it, fit instruments
for the purpos, tyme serves weill, the inhabitants off baitll realmes
wifll it, God hes wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties
a certaine fiill agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at cnes to knyt it up, the disposition of a
few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I
hope he quha hes begun this work, and mainteyned it quhile now,
by the expeaation of man, sale perfyte it.

I pray zow, let pot zour men dryve tyme in consultation,

quhether ze fall support ws or no. Scyng the mater fpeaketh
for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence off our cans,
giff ze have any refpeat for zowr awne weill. Their preparatives
in France, and levying of men in Germany, (quheyroff I am late-
ly advertised) ar not altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark
they ihote at; they feke our realine, but for ane entrey to zours.
Giff they fihould direitly fchaw hoflilite to zow, they knaw zo
wald mak redy for theyme; therefor they do, by indire&t meanes,
to blind zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte.
They feme to invade us to th' end that having assembled tleyr
'hale forces ia nere zour bortlours, they may unlok it to attack
zovw: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchev to one place,
to lyglht on ine other. Remember how covertly zour places a-
bout Boulougnc were afliizeit, and carrycd away, ze lciing in
peace as now. IHow thel enterplilf of Ca:lis was fcyncly dinfcml-
ilcd, I think ze have not ;'i ione forgttlcn. Ie\varc of lhe third,
prevent theyr policy by prudence. CGill ze fe not the lykc dif-
polition prelntily in thecym, ze le nathlin:. It it a gri l: igno-
r:tinc to mifin:t;v, whl:lt al! ntions l,!;lay fpcks oil'. Tak ehd
:.c fliy not hereafter, " IHad I vil.;" aa:ic unconicly feantence to

Procedc off awyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on td
zow, quhilk zow commonly wiscd, that this countrey myght be
divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to pass as was maift
expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfemcnt we had taken
the mater in hand, ze myght have Lfuliead we would have been
ontrulty frends, and na langer continued fledfafle, then perril had
appeared. But now, quhen off our self, we have conceyved tlle
hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing
with ws lies deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they
fall fynd ws cnnemryes in- ernest, that lI ungently hes dcnmeyned
our countrcy, and at quhais Lands we can look for nathlin but
all extremitye, giff ever they may get the upper hand. Let not
thlis occasion, fa happcly offered, c!:apc zow ? gilY ze do, neglec-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode lluk
conmmie flcaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemyc waxe
to great, and fa 1trang, that afterwards quhen ze wald, zc fall not
be able to put him dolwn and tlien, to zour finart, after the
tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze lave felt, by expe-
rience, quhath arme cometh ofF oveilight, and trufling to zour
enelnyes promcfle. We offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour
former lofTes may be repayred. Q.liilk gif ze let over ilyde, sus-
fering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall itay the
Frenfche, that they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, tick is
their lull to reygne, that they can ncyther be content with theyr
fortune present, nor relt and be satisfied when they have gode luck,
but will Rlill follow on, haviig in theyr awne brayne conceaved
the image of fa great a conquell, quhat think ye fal be the end ?
Is ther any of fia finall jugcment, that he doth not forcfee already,
that theyr lbail force lall then be bent againil zow ?

It fal not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be

prelcntly. Theyr eflate is not always fa calme at hame as every
man thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr great redincs for
weyr made theyn to tak this mater on hand, at this tyme, but
rather a vayne trull in their awne policy, thinking to have found
na refiflancc, theyr opinion lies deceaved theym, and that makes
them now umacid. 'l'ei eflates oiT the crupire (as I lihare) h:is
futed reflitution off th' Imperial towns, Metz., 'l'oull, and Verdun,
quhilk may grow to lfme bc ncs n anld all tlilng is not a clain,:
w;tlhin thieyr awne coritrey, thle lcel lti they lie prei'utly for wxeyr,
the mlare oportune : llienie ye the tylne for zow. Gi(l the like oc..
cation wcr (offered to the Flreinlie aga;inil Z.ow, v;ey, Iow gladly
would they embnrace it. Are ze not clihamed of . our ileuth, to

,/pate theym that hes already cornpaffcd your dcfliuiorn, giff the'
wer able? Confider with your self quhilk is to be choylcd ? To
weyr against theyrn out with zour realme or ?ithin ? Giff quhill
ze fleape, we fill be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute
zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote flole to overloke
zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly
to thin!; they aaid not giff they war able, quhen before hand they
flick not to giff zour armes, and ulurpe the style of zour crown.
Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr awne bounds
or without, it is manifest. GilS twa armyes llould camp in yowr
country, but a rnoneth; allict ye receaved na other harme, zit
Ihould zowvr lofle be greatar, nor all the clarge ze will nede to
bellow on our support will draw to, befydes the difionour.

Letnot men, that cythcrlackg ode advise, or ar not forperticular

rcfpcas veill affeiled to the caus, move zow to fubtrat zour help-
ing band, by alleging things not apparent, for that they be possible.
It is not, I grant, unpoflible that we may receave conditiones of
peace; but I ice lyttle likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws
fik as will remove all miRlrull, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow
not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles, and cdifiames our
juit qterell vith tlhe name of conspiracy against our foverayne. It
is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme
-e study to preserve, with the hazard off ourlyves. We are not
(Gold knawetlh) comme to this poynt for wantoncs, as men im-
pacient of rewll, or willing to fchakc off the zoke of government,
hut ar drawne to it by neceflite, to avoyde the tyranny of Itran-
gearcs feaking to dtfraude wvs off lawful government. Gill we
{hould fufler ftrangcares to plant themifcliles peaceably inall the
ftrenthesof our realme, fortify the Sey-portes, andmaill important
places, as aneentre to a plain conquefl, now in the minoriteof our so-
verane, beyng furth of the realme, lhould wc not be thought oncareful
cff tlhe comrnon weill, betraynres of our native countrey, and evill
hiiljcós to hir majelle? Q hat other opinion could fche have of
ws ? 1\'light Llic not julily hereafter call \ws to accompt, as negli-
gcnt miiii lieres ? Gif' Sit.rangcres fiiouldl be thus fuluered to broke
the chcfe o blics, bca re the hail rcl] ],aler and perveit our lawes
:n11 liberty at thcyr pldc:our; myght not the people clfccr our no-
Ilelcmn unlvorLlik ltl place of' cui:!toL;rs ? W'c Ica n nia vwyc to
(ilbtrakl our obedience i'i run ort' bveranc, to d:fralud hir livcnes oil
iil dew rIve'LncC, rClets aind rlevcnues til' hitr crown. vVe feke
athillng but that S:ctlai!J rilay remain, :: us !' cforc, a fre rta:n%

rewlit by hir hyenes and hir minifleres borne men of the fimn; and
that the fuccefRion of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I wald not ze fould not fa lyttil efteme the friendihip of Scot-

land, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na
small commodite for zow to be delivered off the anoyance of so neir
a nyghtbour, quhais inirnitye may more trouble zow, then off ony
other nation albeit twyfs as puissant, not lyeng dry marche with
zow. Befydes that ze fall not nede to feare the invaflon off any
prince lackyng the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand.
Confider quhat superfluous charges ze befowve on the fortification
and keping of Barwick; quhilk ze may reduce to a mean fowme,
having ws to frendes. The realne of Ireland being of natour a
gode and fcrtill countrey, by reason off the continewalld unquiet-
nes and lak of policy, ze ;knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow
then great advantage; and giff it were peaceable may be very
commodious. For pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to
zow quhat service we ar.abill to do. Refuse not theyr commodi,-
teys, besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I
study not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other countrey able to
offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be embraced, for that
zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maift erneftly futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it.. The mater hes al-
maift caryed me beyond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will
leave to trouble zow, after I have gevcn you this note. I wald
iwifs that ze, and they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former
orations of Demolthenes, called OlynthyacEe, and confidre quhat
counfall that wyfe Oratour gave to the Athenians his countrymen,
iin a lyke cafe; quhilk lies so great affnite with this cause of ours,

that every word theroTfmyght be applyed to our purpos. There
may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed, when zour
nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill.
From Sant:Andrews, the zoth of January, 5S59.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 39.)

, Part of a Letter from I7Jo. Ra;2rdc`p.b to Sir f'V!i;izm Cecil,
gi .fromnt the camp before Leith, ^t), oc).pril, 1556D.

l I WI.L only, for this time, discharge imyfelf of my promise to the A11 Orii-

earl of I-Iuntly, who so defirtlll to be recommended to you, as oflic c.
one, who with all his heart fakvourctl tlls cai('e, to the ul;crmolt
of Ihis power. IHalf the words that comt out of his mouth were

R.

able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak fartler in his be- i
half, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to
judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself
always measure my thoughts, as he fllall deserve to be spoken of.
With much difficulty, and great persuasion, he hath subscribed with
the reft of the lords to join with them in this action; whatfomever
lie can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to
do, with solemn protestation, and many words; he trufteth to ad-
join many to this cause and faith surely that no man shall lie
where he taketh part. He hath this day subscribed a bond be '
tween England and this nation; he faith, that there was never
thing that liked him better. :

-No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 146.)

Ranzdolph to Cecil, oth AZ/gfjt I560. From Fdinbuzrg b, .

Anl inl't" SINce the 29th of Jnlyi at what time I wrote last to your honour,
Palper Of- I have heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this prefert it

may plcafe you to know, that the most part of the nobles are here
arrived, as your honour lhall receive their names in writing. The
earl of IKuntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chofcn speaker
of the parliament, or harangue-maker as these men term it. TIh
first day of their fitting in parliament will be on Thursday next.
Hlitherto, as many as have been present of the lords have com-
muned andl devised of certain heads then to be propounded, a',
who shall be lent into France,. who into Es.gland. It is much
eaficr to find them than the other. It eeinstlh almost tobe resolved
upon, that for Englandthe Mafterof Mlaxwell, and laird of Liding-
ton. For France, Pitarrow and the Jiflice Clerk. Also they have
eonfllted whom they tlink meeteft to name for the XXIV. of
the which the XI[ counsellors mufl be chosen. They intend,
very fliortly, to fendt away Din.gwall the herald into France, with
the names of those they flhall chule ; and allb to require the king
and queen's conlent unto this parlianment. Tlicy have devised how
to have thl contratt with cl:ng]lnl conllfrmed by autillority of par-
liiac1Lmnt; ': )\v ;1o to htave the nriticlhs of the agrcenment between
lilcml and their lkinG and queen ra.tiied. Thtc( things yet have
oinly bccn lihad in cumminlic:t;i. o For the confirmation of the
tlotr;;rl vith i n;:l;ind I hlave no doui)l; for that I hear many mlen
-v'sy .vcll like the i'acme, as tlhe cll olf Atol,l the earl of Suther-

land, the L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with the lord Jams.
The L. James requested me this present day to bring the contrai
unto him. I intend also, this day, to speak unto the L. Gray,
in our L. Gray's name, for that he promised in my bearing to fbh-
scribe, and then presently would have done it, if the contraf: could
have been had. For the more assurance against all inconvcni-
ents, I would; besides that, that I trull it shall be ratify'd in par-
liament, that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument,
tho' the aA of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it migh',
therefore, fiand with your advice, that the lords mi;ht be wriv-
ten unto, now that they are here prcfent to that ciTcC, or that I
might receive from your Honlr. some earncll charge to travnl hict -
in, I doubt not but it would fcrvc to good purpose. If it niil'.t
be also known with what substantial and effctious words or chares
you desire to have it confirmed, I think no great ditficultv v-o;ld
be made. The Earl MIarlial has oft been moved to fulibrihe, ie
ufcth mo delays than men judged he would. His tin teid ine ycf-
terday, that he would speak with me at leisure, so did a1io Druml-
lanrick; I know not to what purpose: I have caused lord Ja;,nrs
to be the earneller with the L. marthal, for his au&ority ' lal} ,
whien of late it was in consultation by what means it mighlt be
wrought, that the amity between thef: two realms nmiiht be pC-

A petual; and among diverse men's opinion, one laid that lie kn:i ,
; Qs no other, but by making them both one, and that in 1o' ,c

of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever bc Il
i granted; the earl of Argyll advised him carneflly to Itick unto

that, that he had promised for it, that it should pass his powe. and
all the crafty knaves of his counnel, (I am bold to ufc unto your
H. his own vrords) to break lo godly a purpose. This t:ik li-.d
well the assisters, howfoinever it pleaic:d him to whom it a:s fp:)-
ken unto. The barons, who in time pall have been of the prli.i-
mcnt, had yeficrday a convention among tlhcfclves in Ilic churcll,
in very honelt and quict fort; they tll(,oght it good to rcqltire to
be restored unto tleir ancient liiherlv, to lihve voice in pili:ninicnt.
Tlhey prefcntcd that diay a bill onto the lords to that cfflct, a copy
t whereof lh1ll be sent as tOon as it can Ie I1lid. It was anfweLlc.

unto gently, and tiaken in goocd l:rit. It v:as reftrred unto tle
Vi lords of the articles, whenll they ;ae li4;1'n, to rcl;lve iti rcipoln..

Here /ol' (7 alout />r iatr/wi/,/' ',*:tre''

,:'i' t/,:1 /i'tfic-a 't of Q/Dult-

bar, &:c.-l''his present morninT, vr., the 9th, I niltrti') ., th:t
the lords intended to be ut the parliaulnlu, which causcd Ie.

ti$.\S~~1 K ij

somewhat to flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn
worth the reporting unto your Honr. The lords, at ten of the
clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where the duke lieth;
from thence they departed towards the tolbooth, as they were in
dignity. Each one being set in his feat, in such order as your H.
shall receive them in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword,
were laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the L.
of Lidingion began his oration. He excused his insufficiency to
occupy that place. He made a brief discourse of things past, and
of what neceflity men were forced unto for the defence of their
country, what remedy and support it pleated God to fend them in
the time of their necessity, how much they were bound heartily
to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the perfua-
sion that was in many men's minds that lay back, that misdeemed
other things to be meant than was attempted. He advised all e-
flates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend themselves wholly
to the true service of God and of their country. He willed them
to remember in what slate it had been of long time for lack of
government, and exercise of justice. In the end, he exhorted
them to mutual amity and hearty friendship, and to live with one
another as members all of one body.--Ie prayed God long to
maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially betwixt
the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so
ended. The clerk of register immediately flood up, and afied
them to what matter they would proceed: It was thought necef-
fary, that the articles of the peace fhculd be confirmed with the
common consent, for that it was thought neccfiary to fend them
away with speed into France, and to receive the ratification of
them as soon as might be. The articles being read, were im-
mediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to have certain of
the nobles fuhfcribe unto them, and to put to their foals, to be
Sent away by a herald, who ihall also bring the ratification again
with him. The barons, of whom 1 have above written, required
an anfwcr to their rcqueft, Somewhat was said unto the contrary.
The barons alledged for them cuflom and authority. It was in
the end rcfolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the
lords of the articles, and that if they, after good advifcmenit, flould
find it right and necessary for the commonwealth, it f(ould be ra-
tify'd at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed-
ed immediatcly hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the ar-
ticles. 'The order is, that the lords spiritual henufe the temporal,
and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgefcfs their own. There

were chosen as in this other paper I have written. This being
done, the lords departed and accompanicd the duke, all as far as
the Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high firect) and
many down into the palace where he lieth. The town all in ar-
mour, the trumpets founding, and other mufick such as they have.
Thus much I report unto your honour of that that I did both
hear and fee. Other solemnitics have not been used saving in times
long past the lords have had parliament robes, which are now with
them wholly out of use.

The names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal as
are aflembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athe ns.
Ctawford. Sommervill. The bifliop of the Isles.
Carils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors I
IIarfhall. Humc. know not how na-
Morton. Livingston. ny.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. 13oyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Flcmiing.
Monteith. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochiltrie.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles,

Sp.iritual Temporl Barons elecled to be of
Spiritual. Temporal. t Articles.

the Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Isles. Argyll. Tillibardine.
Lord James. Marlhall. Cunninghamhead.
Arl)ro:ttlh. Alhole. Loclienvar.
Ncwbottle. Morton. Pitarrow.
Lindoris. Glencairn. Lundy.
Cowpar. Rutllvvcn. Ten Provosts of the
Kinross. Ers!kine. chief towns, which
Kiliinning. 1loyd. lallb arc of the Ar-

Lindfty. tides.
So that with the Subprior of St. Andrcws, tlh whole is 36.

It were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition,

and chiefly the affections of these men, that are at this time chof-
en Lords of the Articles. May it satisfy your Honr. for this time,
to know that, by the cornmon opinion of men, there was not
a more fubftancialler or more fuficient number of all forts of men
chosen in Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had great-
er hope of good to -infue. This present morning, viz. the Ioth
the L. of Lidington, made me privy unto your letter; he in-
tendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France..
He alledgeth many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that mov-
eth him most, which is the example of the last, that went on a
more grateful meefage than he Ihall carry, and flood on other
terms with'their prilce than he doth, and yet your honour know.
eth what the world judgeth.

,Petition of the Le#2r Barozs to the Parliament, held

4Aug. I560.

Tnclofcd in IMVY lords, unto your lord Cfips, humbly means and shows, we the
Randolph's
letter to Ce. barons and freeholders of this realm, your bretheren in Chrifi,
cil. isth That whereas the causes of true religion, and common well of
.Aug. xo. this realm, are, in thlis present parliament, to be treated, order-

ed, and eflablifhed, to the glory of God, and maintainance of
the commonwealth; and vve being the greatest number in portion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are ready
to bear the greatest part of the charges thercuntill, as well in
pence, as in war, both with our bodeis, and with our goods; and
sccing there is no place where we may do better lervice now than
in general councils and parliaments, in giving our bell advice,
and reason, vote and counfell for the furtherance tbcreof, for the
maintainance of virtue, and puuifhlment of vice, as ufc and cuf-
toin had been of old by ancient acts of parliament olferved inl
this realm ; whereby we underfland tlht we otight to be heatrd
to realon, and vote in all caufcs concernilng the commonwealth,
as well in counfells as in parliaments; otherwise we think that
vlvhatomcevcr ordinances and flatutes be made concer!niin us and
our eflate, we not being required and Lifflcrcd to rc:ion :ird vote
at the m;aking thereof, that the fame Ihould not oblige us to ll;.nd
thereto. Therefore it will plcafe your lorlllips to ta;ke confl-
deration thereof, and of the chargc bchrn, aid to be liorn by us,
since we are willing to f;rve truly to tlle conmlln well cos tlhi;i

realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this prefentparliament,
and all counfells, where the common well of the realm is to be
treated, take our advice, counfell and vote, so that, without the
fame, your lordships would susser nothing to be passed and con-
cluded in parliament or councils aforesaid; and that all ads of
parliament made, in times past, concerning us for our place and
estate, and in our favour, be at this present parliament, confirm-
ed, approved, and ratified, and acd of parliament made thereupon.
And your lordships answer humbly beseeches.

Of th success of thir pelition, the following account is given by

Randolph; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. I560o The matters conclud-
ed and past by common consent on Saturday last, in such solemn
fort as the first day that they assembled, are these. First, that the
barons, according to an old ad of parliament, made in the time
of James I. in the year of God 1427, shall have free voice ia
parliament, this at passed without any contradilion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 152.)
A Letter of IToma; Randollph, the EzgifJ reJident, m

the right woJrJhipful Sir ,William Cecil, knt. principal
secretary to the queen's inLzajety.

I HAVE received your honour's letters of the sirs of this month, 9 Aug.
wvritten at.Ofyes in Effex, and'alfo a letter unto the lord James, j.;i,' . c .
from his kinsman St. Come, out of France, in this they agree so. 32.
both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed of her pur-
pose in home coming. 1 aflure your honour that will be a flout
adventure for a tick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well
what may happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily
flhe may be received when file cometh to land of a great numbcr,
who arc utterly persuaded that (he intendeth their utter ruin,
come when ll(e will; the preparance is very small whenfoevcr
that fle arrive, fearfcly any man can be persuaded that (he hath
any such thought in her head, I have flewn your honour's let-
ter unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Ledington, they
will as your honour doth, that fle might be flayed yet for a space,
and if it were not for their obedience fake, some of them care
not tho' they never law her face. They travel what they can to
prevent the wicked dcvilis us tichre milfclievou; purpofrs of lhic
miniilcrs, but 1 scar that that will always be found that filij hu-
jus fcculi, they do what they can to sand with the religion, ald.

to maintain amity with their neighbours; they have also need to
look unto themselves, for their hazard is great, and that they fe:.
there is no remedy nor safety for themselves, but to repose themr-
selves upon the queen's majesty, our sovereign's favours and sup-
port. Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may trufl at home. There are in mind shortly to try what they
may be assured at of the queen's majefiy, and what they may as-
{luredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties.
This the queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this
lie feeketh by all means to prevent; and hath caused St. Come,
in her name, earnetfly to write to charge him that no such things
be attempted before her home coming; for that it- is said, that
they too already arrived here out of England for the purpofce
what femblant fomever the noblemen do make, that they are
grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far from their
hearts. They intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I have
my anfwer,ready enough for them. If flie thrust all E ngliflimen
out of this country, I doubt not but there will be some of her
own that will bare us some kindness. Of me she Ihall be quit,
so soon as it pleafeth the queen's majesty my miftrcfs no longer to
use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that they
are of mind that immediately of the next convention, I shall re-
pair towards you with their determinations, and resolutions, in all
purposes, wherein your honour's advice is crnefily required, and
flortly looked for. Whatfomever I desire myself, I know my
will ought to be fubjeEt unto the queen my sovereign's pleafare,
but to content myself, would God I were so happy as to fcrve her
majesty in as mean a slate as ever poor gentlemen did to be quit
of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of her majef-
ty's service, but because my time and years require some place of
more repose and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also
my iafufficience when other troubles in this country arise, or ought
fliall be required of me to the advancement of her majesty's ferv-
ice, that either my will is not able to compass, or my credit fuffici-
cut to work to that cil'ce., as perchance ihall be looked for at my
hands. As your ho'our h th been a means of my cohtinuance in
this room, i;> 1 trufi that 1 mhall (nld that' continual favour at your
Lands, that so toon as it fhr1l fland with the queue's majlcfy's
plcarire, I may give this place unto li'one f;ir worthier than 1 am
n.yfelf, and in the mean feafbn, have my courl direlced by your

good advice how I may by my contrivance do some such service,
as may be agreeable to her majesty's will and pleasure.

These few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of my-

self. For the reft, where that is wiihed that the lords will itout-
ly continue yet for one month. I assure your honour that there
is yet nothing omitted of their old and accultomed manner of
doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and
should now prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I find not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I

doubt more her money, than I'do her fair words; and yet can
I not conceive what great things can be wrought with forty thou-
sand crowns, and treasure of her own here I know there is no sure
or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth no-
thing at this time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satis-
fye your desire, in knowledge of the present state of things here.
Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever best, that flie
come not; but if she do come, to let her know, at the first, what
she shall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if she
embrace Christ, and desire to live in peace with her neighbours.
By such letters as you have last received, your honour somewhat
underftandeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, what is
determined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never to
leave him until God have taken his life, and thus together with
what comfort fomever it will please you to give him by your let-

.
ters, that the queen's majelfy doth not utterly condemn him, or

at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged with by his
own queen, that her majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt
not but it will be a great comfort unto him, and will content ma-
ny others; his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with
England, and that God will never susser men to be so ungrate, as
by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deftruetion of them,
that have saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty.
:jki I leave farther, at this time, to trouble your honour, desiring God

; to fend such an amity between these two realms, that God may
be glorified to them of this world.-At Edenbourgh the 9th of
August, IS61.

:i)S
^1i:

No. VI. (Vol I. p.158 . j

A Letter of tQleen Elizabetb to ,uieezn Marty.
To the right excellent, right' high and iszghtJ princSe, our righf

dear and well beloved/Ji/ler and coziftn the tueen of Scotland.

i6th of RIGHT excellent, right high, and'mighty princesse, our right dear

,

Aug. is6*r.
Paper Of- and right-well beloved fitter and coufin,we greet you well. The
fice from a lord of St. Cofme brought to. us your letters, dated the 8th of '

CoY this present at Abbeville, whereby ye signify, that although by

the answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have
had occasion to have entred into some doubt of our amity, yet as- :
tcr certain purpoes - pafled 'betwixt you and our ambassador, you
would assure us of your goodr meaning to live with us in amity,
and for your :purpose therein ye require us to give credit to the -
liid St. Cosine. \'e have thereunto. thought good. to answer as '"
followeth. The fame St. Cofinm hath made like declaration unto
us on -our part, for your excuse in not ratifyingthe treaty asyourfelf
made to our ambassador, and we have briefly answered to every
the fame points, as he can fliew you; and if he fitall not so do, yet
Icail in the meane feaobn you might be induced to think-that your
rcafons has satisfied us,. fomerally we afure you, that to our re-
quests your answer cannot be reputed for a fatisfafion. For we
require no benefit of you, but that you will perform your promifo
Nihercunto you are bound by your real and your hand, for the re-
fufal whereof we fee no reason alledged can fervc. Neither co-
vet we any thing, but that which is in your own- power as queen
of Scotland, that xwhich yourself in words and speech doth con-
fess, that which your late 'husband's our good brother's ambassadors
and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were
made privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quietncfs be-
twixt us, yea that, w ithout which, no perfet amity can continue be-
twi:xt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt not but ye
will perceive, allow and accomplilh. Ncvcrthelefs, perceiving
lv :he report of the bringer, that you mean furthllvith upon your
'(oulin1i; iho3cme, to follow herein the advise of your council in Scot-
Linl,. we are content to furpcnd our conccipt of all urtkildncls,
;il1 d)o ;,iluic ou that we be fully resolved upon this being per--
iunricd, to unite a fitre b1and of amity,- and to live in neigliliour-
Boold itlh yui :is quietly, friendly, yea as a'urcdly inl the knot
)f iririlliip), ;is vC\c be in the knot of latuie uad blood. An(d

'1-erein w;e be so earnefily determined, that the world f(ould fee
if the contrary should follow, (which God forbid) the very occasion
to be in you and.not in us; as.the flory witncetcth the like of the
king your.father, our uncle, with' whom our father fought to have
knitt 'a perpetual bond, by inviting to come in tis. reaJrn to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us,, andt we
think with you, sundry witneffes-of our fathe.'s earpell- good mean-
ing, and of the error whereunto:divers..evil coiulfcelloys induccl
your.father; or'finally where it fcemceth that report hath beeu
made unto you,'that we had sent dur admiral to thle seas witl0 our
navy to ernpeache your p.ffage, both.your servants do well under-
stand how false that is, knowing for a truth that we have n'ot any
more than itwo or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
.certain pirates, being'thereto entreated, and almost compelled, by
the earnest complaint of the ambassador of our good brother the
k;ing of Spain, 'made of certain Scottifhmen haunting our seas aS
pirates, under pretence. of letters of.marq'le of which matter also
we earnestly require you,.at your coming to your re-alnie, to have
some good consideration, and the rather for teflpcEl tlat ought to
be betwixt your realme 'and the countries of us, of France, of
Spain, and'of the house 6f Burgundy. And so, right e:ccllenti
right high' and mighty princess, we. recommend us to you :ith
mofl earnef. requefft, not to neglect these our friendly, and fiflerly
ofitrs of friendship, which, before God, we mean and intend ko acc
camplifli. Given under our signet at Henyngham the 16tl of
Auglnf, 'in the third.year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 178.)
A Letter of, Rnmdolph to the ri q-ht bonourable Sir Williainl

Cecil, knixght, principarl fccretaiy to the queei's 1/za-

OF late, until the arrival of imonfieur la Croch, I had nothing. T.ill of
worth the writing unto your honour.-Beforie his coming, we had il la.r ol(3'
so little to hint upon, that we did nothing but pals our time iln ic' lfom

the 0,r'-i.

t'teals, banquetting, mafliing, and running at the ring, anld fi;ch. ln:l1.
like. HIe brought with lIim fluch a number of letters, andl such
;alundlince Of news, that for the flace of thrce days, we gave our-
selves to nothing clil but to rcaling of writings, ;rnd Icarings of
. tales many so trucly reported, thal they might be compared to any;

s ij

that 'ever Luciane did write de veris natrationibus. 'Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as
an undoubted truth, which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine,.at his i
being with the emperor; moved a marriage between his youngest
{on, the duke of Auitruclie, and this queen; wherein he hath To
far travailed, that it has already come unto this point, that if The !
find it good, the said duke will out of hand fendhither his embaf-
fador, and farther proceed to the consummation hereof, with as
convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her mind may be
the better known, la Croch is sent unto her with this meflage from j
the cardinal, who hath pror.ifed unto the emperor; to have word
again before the end of May; and for this cause la Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both day and night. This
queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many means,
hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein,
but would never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn
what her meaning is, or how {he is bent. She ufeth no man's
council, but only this man's that last arrived, and assuredly until
the L. of Lidington's return, she will do what she can to keep that
secret, and because resolution in his absence cannot be taken, she
will, for this time, return la Croch with request, to have longer
time to devise; and after, with the most speed ihe can, {he fully
purpofeth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardinal, of her
mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I
know not whether by some intelligence that he had before his de.
parture, or since his arrival in France, divers letters have. passed
between her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as much
as was written in sypher, is kept into themselves. Whither also
the L. of Lidington hath had any conferrence with the Spanifli
ambaffadQr in England of this matter, or any like, I leave it unto
your houour's good means, to get true knowledge thereof. Guef-
fes or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to write for
verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the em-
peror hath offered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county
of Tyroll, which is said to be worth thirty thousand franks by
year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a letter unto this
queen, out of France, not long since. This is all that presently
I can write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther
knowledge, your honour shall be informed.

I have received your honour's writings by the Scottish man,
that lat came into these parts, he brought also letters unto this

queen from the L. of Lidington, their date was old, and contain-
ed only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that New-
haven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature,
but that I know they will fay as much as they dare do, I wilt
not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' From
hence I do aTfure them, what means fomever they make, or how
pitiful fornever there mone be, they are like to receive but small
comfort, for all their long allie. We stand daily in doubt what
friendship we shall need ourself, except we put better order unto
our misruled papists, than yet we do, or know how to bring to
pass, that we may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the isth of this instant, the queen departeth of

'this town, towards Edenbourgh. If my hap be good, you miall
thoroughly hear some merry tidings of the Bp. of St. Andrews;
.upon Wednesday next he shall be arreigned, and five other priefis,
-or their mafling at Eaiter last. Thus most humbly I take my
leave ; at St. Andrews the isth of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol, 1. p. 184.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the queen's .ma-
jefty.
VMAT it please your honour, the 7th of this infiant, Rowlet, this roth of

April, 1363.

queen's secretary, arrived here; he reporteth very honefily of his Paper Of-
good usage, he brought with him many letters unto the queen fice from

the Origin~

that came out of France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She .al i his
received from the queen mother two letters, the one contained own Hand,
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the state of
France as then it was, in what fort things were accorded, and
what farther was intended for the appealing of the discords there,
not mistrusting but that if rearon could not be had at the queen
of England's hands, but that the realm of France flhould find her
ready and willing to support and defend the right thereof,. as by
friendihip and old alliance between the two realms fhc is bound.

How well there words do agree with her doings, your honour

can well confider, and by her writings in this fort unto this queen,
(which I assure your honour is true) you may assuredly know,
that nothing shall be left uqdone of her part, that may move de-
bate or controvcrlie between this queen and our sovereign,

It was much mnufed 'at' by the queen herself, how this new.

*kindness came about, that at this time she received two long let-
ters written all.with her own hand, faying, all the time since her
return {he never received .half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can rnyfelf tetfify by the queen's own faying,
and other good assurance, where hitherto.I have not been deceiv-
ed. I can also farther assure your honour, that this queen hath
fayd that flie kuoweth now, that the friendship of the queen's
jiajefty m .sovereign may stand her more in .fead, than that of
her goo.d mother in France,, and as lle is desirous of them both,
so will she not lose the. one for. the other. I.. may also farther as-
sure your honour, that .whatfomever the occasion is, this queen
hath some 'what in her heart that will burst out in time, which
will manifest that some. unkindn.ess hath passed between them,
that will not be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself,
she faith that the queen mother might have used the matter other-
wife than lie hath done, and doth much doubt what fliall be. the
success of her great delire to govern alone, in all things to have
her will. Seeing then that prcfently they fland in such terms
one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her in that mind,
(this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause
her to conceive bettei of the other. And yet I am asured she
shall receive as friendly letters, and as manygood.words from
this queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the queen
mother will speak any thing unto the L. of LydingLon of that
purpose {lie did write unto tlis queen of, I know not,'but if fihe
do, I think is hard if your honour can get.no favour. thereof,
at his return, or perchance by some means here. It may, per-
chance be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, .or understand what mind file beareth unto the
queen's. majesty our sovereign. The, queen knoweth now that
the earl Bothwell is sent for to London. She caused a gentle-
man of hers to enquire the cause I anfwcred, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and
that it flould be judged there. I know that file thinketh much
that he is not sent into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that
if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil inltrument. If
the lord of .Lidington have not been plain with your honour
herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but
tnoft of all to himfclf. 'I'llcrc comes a vulture in this realm, if
yfr that man come agair. into credit.

The Oration made by William Maitland of Lethingto7,

youngerfecretaryfor the tinze, in the parliament hold-
&I by our sovereign the king's msother, queen of this
realm for the ti4ze, the time of the refjitution of Um-
qubile Matthew Earl of Lennox.

MY lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has
pleased her majesty most graeioufly to utter unto you, by her
own mouth, ye may have sufficiently conceive& the cause of this
your present assembly; yet having her majesty's commandment
to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee
deceased, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more at
large.

Notour it is, how, in her Highness's minority, a process of

forfaultour was decreed against my Lord of Lennox, for certain
offences alledged committed by him, specified in the dome and
cenfement of Parliament given thereupon; b y reason whereof
he has this-long time been exiled7 and absent forth of his na-
tive country, how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has
well appeared by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her
Majetly's knowledge, not only containing most humble and due
fuibmiffion, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to
her Majefcy his natural princess, and earncft affecion he had to
her Highpefs molt humble service, if it flhould plcafe her Majef-
ty of her clemency to make him able to enjoy the benefit of a
fiubj.et ; many refpeas might have moved her Higihcfs favour-
ably to incline to his requefl, as the antiency of his house, and
the firname he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her ma-
jefty by affinity, by reason of my Lady Margaret her highness's
aunt, and divers other his good considerations, as also the effec-
tuous requefl of her good fiflcr the Q0ecn's Majefcy of England,
whose earnefl commendation was .not of leaRf moment, bcfidcs
that of her own natural, her majefly has a certain inclination to
pity the decay of noble houcfs, :and as we' heard, by her own re-
port, has a great deal more plac:fure to be the instrument of the
uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient blood,
thal to have nmattc 'r minillred of the decay or overthrow of any
good race. Upon this occasion, her lmajefty the more tender)l

looked upon his request, and her good sifter the Q0een of Eng.
land's favourable letter, written for recom'mendation of his cause,
in consideration whereof not only has she granted unto him her
latter of restitution, by way of grace, but also lifcenfed him to
pursue, by way of redution, the remedies provided'by the law
for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment, unorderly
led, and to have the process reversed; for examination whereof,
it has pleased her majesty presently to assemble you the three
estates of this her realme, by whose advice, deliberation, and de-
cifion at her majesty's mind, to proceed forward upon his. corn
plainis,- as the merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and prac-
tice observed in such cafes, will bear out. The fumn of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus as it
were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have in
hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far dif-
ferent from the fame fubje2, wherein I would extend the cir-
cumfiances more largely. If I feared not to offend her highness,
whose presence and modest nature abhors long speaking and adu-
lation, and so will compel me to speak such things, as may feetn
to tend to any good and perse& point; and leaf it should be
compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I Ihould omit to put
you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this, and the
like demonflrations of her gentill nature whose gracious beha-
viour towards all her fubjees, in general, may serve for a good
proof of that felicity, we may look for under her happy govern-
ment, Co long as it ihall please God to-grant her unto us; for a
good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the fubje6ts muff be reciprocque; as by her
majelty's prudence we enjoy this present peace with all foreign
nations, and quietness among yourselves, in such fort, that I think
justly it may be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that present-
ly lives, was in greater tranquillity ; so is it the duty of all us
her loving fubjets to acknowledge the fame as a inoft high be-
liefit, proceeding from the good government of her majesty, de-
claring ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma-
jefly such due obedience, as a jufft prince may look for at the
hands of faithful and obedient ifuje1ts. I mean no forced nor
unwilling obedience, which'I know her nature does detest, but
such as proceeds from the contemplation of her modest kind of
regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof.
A good proof have we all in general hld of her majesty's benig-
nity thcfc three years, that ihe has lived in the government over

you, aa3 many of you have largely tafled of her large liberality
and frank dealing; on the other part her highncfs has had large
appearance of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to con-
tinue, as we have begun, in consideration of the many notable
examples of her clemency above others her good qualities, and
to abhor and detest all falEe bruites and rumours, which are the
most pefilent evils that can be in any common weil, and the
sowers and inventors thereof. Then may we be well assured to
have of her an molt gracious princefie, and fle mosR faithful and
loving subje&s ; and so both the head and the nembers, being
encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the politick
bodies, whereof I made mention before, as the glory thereof
flall partly appertain to her majelty, so shall no small praise and
unfpcakable commodity redound therethrough to you all univer-
sally her fubjecs.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. I95.)
The perils and troubles that lmay presently elbfie, and in

time to come follow, to the o

leen's mCajly of Eng-

land, JandJ ate of this realm, upon the marriagre of
the G-izeen of Spots to the Lord Dar,'y.

FiRST, the minds of such as be affe&ed to the QOccn of Scotts,
either for herself, or for the opinion of her pretence to this cro-vn,
or for the desire to have charge of the form of religion in this re-
aim, or for the dircontentation they have of the Queen's ma-
jefly, or her fuccenion, or of the fuccellion of any other be-
fide the Queen of Scotts, fball be, by this marriage, erected,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring their
defiirs to pa[s; and to make flme enimate what persons those are,
to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed ; the
L fame may be compafled in those forts either within the realm or
vwithlout.

The firif are such as arc specially devoted to the Qu.een of

Scotts, or to the Lordl Darlcy, by bond of blood and alliance; as
tl fll all the house of Lorrain and Guile for her part, and the Earl
of Lcnnox and his ivife, all lhch in Scotland as be of their blood,
; and have received dililcatlrcs by the Duke of Ciihltlretault and
the Ilamiltons. The fccond are all manner of persons, both in
this rcalin and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and minilikc of the religion now received; and in thcfe

Volume 11. '1'
~I~

two forts are the substance of them comprehended, that (hall take ;,
comfort in this marriage.

Next therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles these
kind of men shall intend to this realm.

First, the general scope and mark of all their desires is, and

always lhall be, to bring the queen of Scotts to have the royal
crown of this realm; and therefore, though the devifccs may vary
amongfl themlelves for the compassing hereof, according to the
accidents of the times, and according to the [inlpedilients which
they shall find by means of the queen's majefy's aoions and
governments, yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and prac- *i
tices, flall wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts
queen of this realm, andt to deprive our fovcreign lady thereof:
and in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confi-
dered, whereof the one is far worfc than the other: the one
is iitendcd by them, that either from malicious bliudnefs in re-
ligion, or for natural affeccion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord
Darley, do persuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts
hath presently more right to the crown tl'an our sovereign lady
the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on buth fides, and
all such as are devoted to popery, cither in England, Scotland,
Ireland, or eliewhere ; the other is meant by them, which, wvith
less malice, arc perfuadced that the queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majcfty and her
issue, of which fort few arc without the realm, but here within,
and yet of them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from these
two forts falll the peril devises and pracices proceed. From the
first, which imagine the queen of Scotts to have perpetually right,
are to be looked for there peril3. FirlY, is it to be doubted the
devil will inset foine of them to imagine the hurt of the life of
our dear l;)vereign lady, by tchl means as the devil flhall figgcft
to them, although it is to be assuredly hoped, that almnighlty God
will, as he hath hitherto, graciouny protec and frcferve her

f'roln r'lclh dangers. Secondly, there will he attecmpted, by pcr-

I;ua(ions, I-y bruit^s, by rumours, and fich like, to aliznat: the
nrti ds olf g<:oof :i! jcics from the queen's mnjetiy, and to connc i-
lihate thiem to the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf tle fron-
tiers andl lhe north will be much folicitcti and lahturcd. Third-
ly, there will be attemptedl c:il(cs of ;inc tumults antd rc)llio):;,
f[>eci:ll' in the nortll tcvwards Scotland, so as thereupon lmy fil-
low {(.) n; openl enterpri4ze Ltl. lv violence. FIlourtllly, there will
he, by the siid qleele''s counlil and f(ilndsci a new lcagce rmade;

with.France or Spain, that shall be offensive to this realm, and
a furtherance to their title. And it is also very likely, that they
will let a foot as many pratices as they can, both upon the fron-
tiers and in Ireland,. to occasion the queen's majcfty to encreafe
and contir.ae her chc.rge thereby, to retain her from being mighty
or potent, and for the attempting of all these things, many
devises will bc imagined, from time to time, and no negligence
will therein appear.

F rom the second fort, vwhich mean no other favour to the queen

of Scotts, but that Ihe flould facceed in tittle to the queen's majcf-
ty, is not much to be feared, but that they will content them-
selves to fee not only the queen's majelly not to marry, and so to
impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts ihall have issue,
which they will thinkl to be more pleafible to all men, because
thereby the crowns of England and Scotland-fiall be united in one,
and thereby the occasion of war (hall cease; with which persuasion
nmany people may be reduced, and abused to incline themselves to
the part of the queen of Scotts.

The remedies against these perils.

A Duplicat.
lAfurznmary of the con.jfcltation and advice given by the 4tllJune,

lords and others of the privy council. Collected out of Lib. Cal.
the Jii'2dy andJ .ueralfpeeches of the said counf.liors. s's. L"'

Lord Keeper. MIr. Comptroler.
Lord Tireafurer. Mr. Vice Chamberlain.
FDerby. Mr. Secretary.
Earlsofq Bedford. Cave.

LLeiceiter. Peter.
Lord Admiral. Mason.
Lord Chamberlain.

QeftRions propounded were thcfc two.

FIRST, what perils might enue to the queen's majefly, orthis re-
aim, of the marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts, and.the Lord
.Darnly.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the Firfl.

The licrils being lundry, and vcry many, were reliccdl l by fume
AH ~ counfcllors into only one.

s *''*; '

n' * *~~~~~~T
i

i. Sirs, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (Leirig- nlut

married) a great number in this realm, not of the worfi ifujets,
might be alienated in their minds from their natural duties to her
majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage of Scotland,
as a mean to eflabliflu the fucceiTion of both the crowns in the iflue
of the fame marriage, and so favour all devises and practices, that
should tend to the advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them;

which furthered the marriage of the lord Darnly, was laid upon
the trust of such as were papists, as the only means left to reflore
the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both in this
realm, and Scotland, the papists would molt favour, maintain, and
fortify this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for further-
ance of facion in religion, devile all means and praciccs that could
be within this realm, to diflurb the eflate of the queen's majefly,
and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchive their pur-
poses by force, rather than fail. By some other, these periis hav-
ing indeed many branches, were reduced, though somewhat other-
w 'ife, into two forts, and there were in nature such as they could
not be cafiiy fevered the one from the other,.but were knit and
linckcd together, naturelly for maintaining the one with the other.
The firlt of these fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the
lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further the pretend-
ed title of the queen of Scotts, not only to succeed the queen's
majelly, as in her best amity ihe had profefned, but that to occi1-
py the queen's cilatc, as when lie wais in power, file did mani-
fctly declare.

The second was, that hereby the Romish religion fliould be c-

rected, and increared daily in this realm, and these two wcre thus
knit together, that the furthcrance and maintenance of the title
iceod in furthering of the religion of Rome within this rcalim and
in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the
title, for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the firll.) And to prove that the intention to ad..

vance the title to diflurb the queen's mi.jefly, mnull needs cenfle,
lw'as confidered that always the intention and will of any pierloi
is moil: nanifcft, when their powcr is grcatcll, and contr;iry when
] o)\cr is fiall, thln tllhe intlltion nnd will of every person is co-
vcred and less (clil. So as \. hn tihe queen of Scotts poevr v:;is
* .ia itt, by lr ire arrilg c wi.li tle

l ollu plin of l'rancc, being l:if-

tcr\, a:rds I:".'-nch kingl it :lni'fly allc;aretl of xwliat mind (lie,
. all liher friends were ustin; thllcn niunifefily all thle mncas that

could be devlfed to impeach and dispossess the queen's majesty'
firlt by writing and puLlilhing herfilf in all countries queen of Eng-
land ; by granting charters, patents, and commissions with that
file, and with the arms of England, both the lrench and Scotts,
which charters remain flill undefaccd; and to profccute it with
cffe&, it is known v;lat preparations of war were made, and sent
into Scotland; and what other forces were afentibled in foreigl
countries; yea, in what manner a fhalmeful peace was made by
the French with King Philip, to cmploy all the forces of France,
to purfuc all the matters by force, which by God's providence,
and the queen's majefly contrary power, were repelled; and as-
terwards, by her hufbaid's death, her fortune and power being
changed, the intention began to hidz irfelf, and altho' by the
Scottill queen's conimiltarys an accord was made at Edenbrough,
to reform all those titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this
day, by delays and cavillations, the ratification of that treaty
hath been deferred. And so now, as soon as she fliall feel her
power, (le wvill set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of
1iich errors as were committed in the firfl, her friends and allies
vill amend the fame, and proceed fubltantially to her purpose.
By fume it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater of this
marriage wvith the lord )arnlcy, being a subje&t of this realm,
than with the mightiest prince abroad; for by this, he being of
this realm, and having for the cause of religion, and other refpets,
made a party here, flould cncreafe by force, with dirmunition of
the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make
Ily the faaion of the papist, and other difeontented persons here,

ihould be as it were deduaed out of the power of this realm; and
by the marriage of a firanger, file could not be aflured of any
part here; so as by this marriage fle fnould have a portion of her
own power to serve her turn, and a small portion of adversaries at
Lome in our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble
the lile abroad; whereof the examples are in our own tlorics
many, that foreign povers never prev;tiled in this realm, but with
the lihlp of Linme at home. It was also rermembcereld, that feeing
now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and mnlifeltly
iccn, that in eve y corner of the realm, thc faction thl.t moll fuvour-
eth the Scottihli title, is grown flout and boll, yea fct n mani-
fellly in this court, both in hlall and chamlber, it could not be
(but except good heed xwere fipecdily given to it) by this mar-
ringe, and by the :radtice of the hfutors thereof, the fmine faElion
would fhortl' clyncrcafe, and gvov lo grcat and ldangcrous, as thl:

iedrefs thereof would be almost desperate. And to this purpofc
it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the fubftancc of
the juflices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly
a third was found fully assured to be trusted in the matter of re-
ligicn, upon which only string the queen of Scotts title doth hang,
and fomc doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Lennox,
and his, had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and there-
by made avant now in Scotland, that their party was so great iii
E-ngland as the queen's majesty duril not attempt to contrary his
marriage. And in this fort, was the fuin of the perils declared,
being notwithstanding more largely and plaitily set out, and made
ib) apparent by many sure arguments, as no one of the counci!
could deny them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second teiftion.

Ti queiton of this consultation was what were meet to be

done to avoid these perills, or else to divert the force thereof
from hurting the realm; wherein there were a great number of
particular devises propounded, and yet the more part of them was
reduced by some into three heads.

T. The first thought necefflriy by all persons, as the only thing

of the rcoft moment and effcacy, to remedy all there perrils, and
many others, and such- as without it, no other remedy could be
iound fulicient, and that was to obtain that the queen's majeliy
would marry, and make tlherein no long delay,

2. The second was to advance, eltablinl, and fortify indeed

the profetTion of religion, both in Scotland, and in England, and
to dcminilh, weaken, and feeble the contrary.

3. The third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to difap-

puint and break this intended marriage, or, at the Ieail, thereby
to.procure the fame not to be so hurtful to this realm, as other-
wife it will be.

The first of these three Lath no particular rights in it, but an

carnell and unfeigned (dclre and suite, with all humblcnes, Ly
pr,'er to Almighty God, and advice and council to the queen's
inajcely, that file \voulil dlcr no more time from marriage, vIhcrc-
by the guod fuljjec's of the realni miglht flay their hcarts, to de-
pend upon hI1-r majcfly, and the ifluc of her body, wiliout vlwicl
no fIuclty can he deviled to afccrtain any person oF cointilala:c
of their fainllics or pofEcric. to enjoy that \'1hich otllcrwite situ!!
LomeC to thl-rni

Serond, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both trutIA
and policy were joined together, had these particulars.

Firti, whereas of late the ad.rcrfaries of religion in the realm

lhave taken occarion to comfort and increase their ihaion, both in
England, Scotland, and abroad, with a rumour and expeaation
that the religion shall be fiortly changed in this realm, by means
that the bifflops, by the queen's majesty's' commandment, have
of late dealt ftrcightly with some persons of good religion, be-
cause they had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like
things, being more of form and accidents, than of any fubflance,
for that it is well known that her majefly had no meaning to com,
fort the adversaries, but only to maintain an uniformity as well
in things external, as in the substance; nor yet hath any inten-
tion to make any change of the religion, as it is eftabliflcd by
laws. It was thought by all men very neceiT'ry for the fupprell-
ing of the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries, indirct:ly here-
by to notify, by her special letters to the two areh-biflops, that
her former commandement was only to retain an uniformity, and
not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her majelf
ty, in the change of any part of religion, but that Ilte did deter-
mine firmly to maintain the form of her religion, as it was efla-
blilhed, and to punifi such as did therein viqlate her laws. And
in these points, forre also vwifhed that it might please her arch-
blithops, that if they should fee that the adversarics continued in
taking occasion to fortify their facion, that in that cafe they
flould use a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order might be de-
vil'ed, and cllablifhed, for such ceremonies, so as both uniforiity
and gravity might be retained amongfl the clergy.

The second means was, that the quondam billlops, and others,
vwhich had refused to acknowledge the queen's majelly's power o-
ver them, according to the law, and were of late disperscd in the
'plalgu time to tindry places abroad, where it is known they cease
not to advance their f;ation, might be rcturned to the tower or
l mie otler pribon, where they might not have such liberty to fe-
luce and invegle the queen's majelty's fubljeats, as they daily do.

'1 'lc thliul Dcans was, tha th he bifilops do conlilain that

' tly d(alr n '.t (scxcute the cccl :llaflical laws, to the fturtlerci;ce of
rc igionl, for f(:;r; of tlhe lireinunirc, whcrewith the juidges and
It,' ,y r';: of lthl r.:;llm, b)'in^- nuot Ih fl ;naf<:&lcl in reliiion, do
t!r';trn til.'in, :I!;.l iln i;imny; calcfs Ictt not to pinlch and dCrfiace

mi.h, t, tli.,t i,, ['.i tch) c,:L; o1pcc:J f[,,mc convcnicnt aulliority

rnight be given them, from the qucen's majelty, to continue
during her pleasure.

The fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and

unlawful books in English brought from beyond seas, and are bold,
ly received, read, and kept, and especially in the North, fcdu-
cing of great numbers of good fubjeas, the like boldness whereof
was never fuifered in any other princess's time, that some itreight
order might be given to avoid the fame, and that it might be con-
fidered by the judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to main-
tain such books, made direcly against her majesty's authority, and
maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the rcelm.

The fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and

'uch lewd pcrfons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in Eng-
land, especially in the North, as curates of churches, and all filch
of them as are not found honest and conformable may be banifl-
ed out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in
the realm, in many places, and now will.increafe their doings.

The sixth, where sundry having ecclefiaflical livings are on the

other fide the Tea, and from thence maintain sedition in the realm;
that livings may be better bestowed, to the commodity of the re-
alm, upon good fubjeLAs.

The seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no frmall

authority in this realm in governance of all property of the realm,
might be fw~rn to the queen's majelfy, according to the laws of
the realm, and so thereby they should for conscience fake main-
tain the queen's majefly's authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this
marriage, or to divert the perils.

Firfl to brcak this marriage, conlidering nothing call likely do

it, but i;tirc(, or fear of force, it is thought by Tome that there
means fullowing might occasion the breach of the marriage.

1. Tlhat the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
z. Th t the vorks at Berwick be more advanced.

'. 'hiat the garrison lie there incrca:ed.

4. ''lhat all the wardens put their frontiers in order with Ipccd
to be r:e'.dy at an hour's warning.

5. 'rIIht ;mc

i noble pcrfon, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl

of Salop, or fichl other, be lcnt unto Y'orldlhire, to lc lieutenant
i'cncral in the North.

6. Tliitt prcpanrtions be made of a power, to lbe in rcaclinefs tc
lrrvc, citlhcr at Berwvick or to invade SCcotland.

%. That presently the lady Lenox be committed to some place,
where flue may be kept from giving, or receiving of intelligence.

9. That the earl of Lenox and his son may be sent for, and

required to be sent home by the queen of Scotts, according to the
treaty; and if they (hall not come, then to denounce to the queen
of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
hostility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame
be done in deeds and not in (hews) that the marriage will be avoid-
ed, or at the leaf that it may be qualified from many perils; and
whatfoevcer is to be done herein, is to be executed with speed,
whilt (lie has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the marriage,
and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France or
Spain.

Some other allows well of all these proceedings, saving of pro-

ceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and also to these
particularities following.

.o.' That the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's refusing,

should be seized and bellowed in gift or custody, as fhall'pleafe
her majefly, upon good subje&s.

ii. That all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or

elefwhere, be inquired for, and that they be, by sundry means
well looked to.

12. That enquiry be made in the North, who have the flew-

ardfhip of the queen's majeity's lands there, and that no person,
deserving mitruft, be suffered to have governance or rule of any
of her subje&s or lands in the North, but only to retain their fees,
and more truity person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. That all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scot-
4 land, be restrained to all Scottilh men, saving such as have safe

condu, or be especially recommended from Mr. Randolph, as
favourers of the realm.

14. That fome'intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as
i favour not the marriage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. That the queen's majesty's houthold, chamber, and pension-

ers be better fecn unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used
by sundry against the slate of the realm.
',' 6. That the younger fun of the earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles,
,; be removed to some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. That confideringthe faction and title of the queen of Scotts
'i :thl now, of long time, reccived great favour, and continued, by

the queen's majesty's favour herein to the queen of Scotts and her
miniltcrs, and the lady Catharine, whom the aid queen.of $cotts
! I'~o/lmc II. U

accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it inay
please the queen's majesty, by some exterior at, to shew some re.
mission of her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hertford,
thato the queen of Scotts thereby may find some change, and her

td
friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein. ?

18. That whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph i
Sadler may accompany him. :

19., That with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to ..
a'new governor. .7

to. Finally, that these advises being confidered by her majesty; i,

it may please her to choose which of them {he. liketh, and to put |'
them in execution in deeds, and not to pass them over in consul.
tations and speeches.

For it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all means

to put their intention in execution. Some by praaice, some by
force, when time shall serve, and no time can serve so well the
queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before
the queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

(No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 202.)
Randolph to the earle of LeicefJer, fiom Edinburgh the

3 Il of Juy, 1565.

Cott. Iib. MAY it please your lordship, I have received your lordship's let-
Cal. B. 9.
fol. z8. An ter by my servant, sufficient testimony of your lordflip's favour
Original, towards me, whereof I think my self always so assured, that what

other mifliap soever befall me, I have enough to comfort my self
with; though I have not at this time received neither according
to the need I fland, nor the necessity of the fervife that I am im-
ployed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with patience, than
trouble your lordship to be further futer for me, when there is so
little hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt not but
your lordship hath heard by such information, as I have given
from hence, what the present ltate of this country is, how this
queen is now become a married wife, and her husband, the fclf
fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires, hither-
to, they h:ve found so much to their contentment, that if the
reft succeed and prorper accordingly, they may think thicmlelvcs
much happier. than there is appearance that they flall be, fti
many difconutnted minds, so much mifliking of the fubjeais to

pass; I never heard, of any marriage, so little hope, so little
comfort as men do talk, was never seen, at any time, when men
should most have fliewed tllemfelves to rejoice, if that confidera-
tion of her own honour and well of her contry had been had as
appertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the o-
verthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the queen's ma-
jefty, and the deltruaion of as many of the nobility as fle hath
mifiiking of, or that he liketh to pitch a quarrle unto. To fee
all these inconveniencys approaching, there are a good number
that may sooner lament with themselves, and complain to their
neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them, some at-
; tempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do.any

good, what is required otherwise, or what means there is made-
your lordship knoweth ; what will be anfweared, or what will be
.done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your intent be
½ never so good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that

our ruin lhall prevent your support when council is once taken.

r Nothing so ncedfull, as speedy execution. Upon the queen's ma-
i jelly, we wholly depend, in her majelty's hands it flandeth to
. save our lives, or to susser us to perith; greater honor her ma-

jelly cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her iriajefly's power,
to do for us; the fums are not great, the numbers of men are not
i many that we desire; many will dayly be found, though this will

be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this time, I think
her majesty fiall loose but few , her friends here being once taken
' ;; away, where will her majesty find the like; I speak leafl of that

. which I think is most earnefily intended by this queen, and her
; huiband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared more for
mfL the papists in England, than he did for the protestants in Scotland;

if therefore, his hops be so great in the papifis of England, what

, may your lordship believe that he thinketh of the proteflants there;
t for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honor he hath to be of P ine

to the queen my mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's
majesties worf fubjefls to those that arc her belt, he declareth what
: mind he bearcth to the queen's majetlies fclf, any man may fay it

is slenderly rewarded and his duty evil forgotten; he would now
4;,,! fcem to be indifferent to bothll the religions, fle to ufc her mass, and

lie to, come sometimes to the preaching; they were married with all
the folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mass;
' his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he ftin fecin

to the world that he were of some religion; hlis words to all men,

?~~:t~x,,',4, U ij

against whom he conceiveth any displeasure how uhjufi soever it
be, so proud and fpitfull; that rather he feemeth a monarch of'the
world, than he that. not long. since, we have seen and known the
lord Darnley ; he looketh now for reverence of many, that have
little will to give it him; and rome there are that do give it, that
think him little worth of it; All honor that may be atributed '
unto any man by a wife, he hath it-wholly and fully s all praises .i
that may be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself; all dig- ;
nities that she can indue him with, which are already given and
granted; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him; and what ;
may I fay more, fle hath given over to him her whole will to be
ruled and guided as himself belt liketh; Ihe can as much prevail
with him, in any thing that is againit his will, as your lordship
may with me to perfwade that I flould hang my self; this last :
dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, she would have
it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or he had been !
himself of z2 one years of age, that things done in his name
might have the better authority. He would, in no cafe, have it
deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is rifin amongeft our men of law whether she being clade with a
husband, and her husband not twenty one years, any thing with-
out parliament can be of strength, that is done between them;
upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in debateing.
And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king.
This was the night before the marriage; this day, Monday at
twelve of the. clock, the lords, all that were in the toun, were
present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man said so
much as amen, saving his father that cried out aloud God save
his queen. The manner of the marriage was in this fort, upon
Sunday in the morning between five and fix, she was conveyed
by divers of her nobles to the chapell; {he had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning
hood, not unlike unto that, which she wore the dolfull day
of the buriall of her husband; fle was led into the chapell, by
the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was fie left untill her
huiband came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the mi-
niiRer priefis, two, do there receive them, the bands are asked the
third time, and an instrument taken by a Notour that no man said
against them, or alledged any cause why the nmarriage might not
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three,
the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her finger; They kneel

together, and -many prayers said over them, (he tarrieth out the
mass, and he taketh a kifs, and leaveth her there, and went to
her chamber, whither within a space she followeth ; and being re-
quired, according to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave
aside those forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for maner faie than
grief of heart, she fuffereth them that flood by, every man that
could approach to take out a pin, and Ifobeing commited to her
ladies, changed her garments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to
the world, that it was not luff that moved them to marry, but
only the necessity of her country, not, if God will long to leave
it deflitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of
all things to make the worit, would that it should be believed, that
they knew each other before that they came there,' I would not
your lordlhip should so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to
the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an aft done, I
would not believe it. After the marriage followeth commonly
great cheer and dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed by
the whole nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried 5 mony
thrown about the house in great aboundance, to such as were hap
py to get any part; they dine both at one table, {he upon the up-
per hand, there serve her these earls Athole Sewer Morton, Car-
ver Craufoord cupbearer; these serve him in like offices, earls
Eglington, Cassels, and Glencairn; after dinner they danced a-
while, and then retired themselves till the hour of supper; and as
they dined so do they fupe, some dancing there was and so they
go to bed; of all this I have written to your lordfhiip I am not
Oculatus telfis, to this, but of the verity your lordship ihall not
need to doubt, howfoevcr I came by it; I was sent for to have
been at the supper, but like a curri(h or uncourtly carle I reflued
to be there; and yet that which your lordship may think might
move me much, to have had the light of my mifrefs, of whom
these eighteen days byjuft account I got not a fight, I am my lord
taken by all that fort as a very evill person, which in my heart
I do well allow, and like of imyfelf the better, for yet can I not
find either honelt or good that liketh their doings; I leave at this
time further to trouble your lordship, craving pardon for my long
silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, 1 walls now
more abroad by night than by dlay, and the day too little to dif-
charge mylflf of that which 1 conceive, or receive in the night,
As your lordflhip, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write
to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he hlall be to this, to save

me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take-
my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of July, i565.

No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir Wil.

liam Cecil, knt. her majeJiy's principal secretary, and
one of her higz nes's privy council.

aSdof Sept. AFTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon, Captain
.56Sb. Paper
Office from Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the queen's ma-
the Origin- jefly's letters containing her full resolution, and pleasure for all

things he had in charge to give information of, saving that for
the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing deter-
mined, or at the least expressed in the fame letters, and for that
purpose received I, this morning, a letter {ubfcribed by the duke,
the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to be holpen with
300oo harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better defence.
And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and
the queen's majefly our sovereign's good will, and care towards
them; and do also understand that it were very requisite to have
them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner de-
cided, and that it now standeth upon their utter overthrow and
undoing, since the queen's part is at the least 5000, and they
not much above Iooo; besides, that the queen hath harquebusiers,;
and they have none, and do yet want the power that the earl of
Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs;
I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means, to learn
her majcfty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I shall an-
fwer them, or otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their ex-
treme necessity. For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their ut-
ter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable subversion of religion
there; and, on the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few Ioldiers, for a nmall
.time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradven-
ture, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the mean time to
leave the place unfurniihed, (having in the whole but 800) with-
out any grant of new supply for the fame; and by that means al-
so, to leave the marches here the more fulijce to invasion, while
in the mean season new helps are preparing ; to this know not L
whlat to fay, or how to do. And to much more I marvel thert-

es, as that having To many times written touching this matter, no
resolute determination cometh. And so between the writing,
and looking for answer the occasion connot pass, but must needs
proceed and have success. God turn it to his glory; but surely
all mens reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a push it is
now come unto, as this little supply would do much good to ad-
vance God's honour, to continue her majesty's great and careful
memory of them, and to preserve a great many noblemen and
gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affeaion that way, I do nothing mistrust, and here-
in hall take such good advice, as by any means I can. I receiv-
ed from there lords two papers inclosed, the effee whereof shall
appear unto you. For those matters that Captain Brickwell
brought, I shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you
two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day. By him
you (fall hear that the protestants are retired from Edenborough
further off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid shall come
in time, if it come with spe-ed, for that they will not now so pre-
fently need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you to
God. From Berwick, this 2d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)

The queen to tbe earl of Bedford.

UPON the advertizements lately received from you, with such 12 sl-pt.
other things as came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Ran- PI,,er
dolph, and upon the whole matter well confidered, we have thus Onil-e.
determined. We will, with all the speed that we can, fend to
you 30001. to be thus used. If you shall certainly underhand
that the earl of Murray hati such want of money, as the imprest-
ing to him of loool. might stand him in flead for the help to de-
fend himfclf, you shall presently let him fecrctly to understand,
that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so wo
will that you let him have, in the most secret sori that you can,
when the said fum shall. come to you, or if you can, by any good
means, advance him some part there before hand.

The other 20001. you llall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if

it be not that you ihall fee necessary cause to imprest fomc part
thereof to the now numbers of the 60o footmen, and loo horse-
Tnen; or to the calling out of wages of fuchl workmen, as by sick-
ness, or otherwise ouglt to be diicharge;d. And where we per-

me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take-
my leave at Edinburgh, the lait day of July, 1565.

'No. XII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, knt. her majefJy's principal Secretary, and
one of her bighnefs's privy council.
&d of Sept. AFTER, my hearty commendations, this day at noon, Captain

l56l. Paper

Office from Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the queen's ma-
the Origin. jefly's letters containing her fall resolution, and pleasure for all

things he had in charge to give information of, saving that for
the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing deter-
mined, or at the leaf exprefled in the fame letters, and for that
purpose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the duke,
the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to be holpen with
300 harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better defence.
And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and
the queen's majesty our sovereign's good will, and care towards
them; and do also understand that it were very requisite to have
them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner de-
cided, and that it now itandeth upon their utter overthrow and
undoing, since the queen's part is at the least 5000, and they
not much above Ioo ; besides, that the queen hath harquebusiers,,
and they have none, and do yet want the power that the earl of
Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs;
I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means, to learn
her majcfty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I flall an-
fwer them, or otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their ex-
treme necefeity. For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their ut-'
ter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable subversion of religionr
there; and, on the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few ibldiers, for a finall
.time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradven-
ture, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the mean time to
leave the place unfurnished, (having in the whole but 800) with-
out any grant of new supply for the fame; and by that means al-
so, to leave the marches here the more fubjcLt to invasion, while
in the mean season new helps are preparing ; to this know not I
wrlat to fay, or how to do. And so much more I marvel there-

of, as that having so many times written touching this matter; no
resolute determination cometh. And- so between the writing,
and looking for answer the occasion connot pass, but mufit needs
proceed and have success. God turn it to his glory; but surely
all mens reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a push it is
now come unto, as this little supply would do much good to ad-
vance God's honour, to continue her majefly's great and careful
memory of them, and to preserve a great many noblemen and
gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affeaion that way, I do nothing mifirufR, and here-
in shall take such good advice, as by any means I can. I receiv-
ed from these lords two papers inclosed, the effect whereof shall
appear unto you. For those matters that Captain Brickwell
brought, I shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you
two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day. By him
you shall hear that the protestants are retired from Edenborough
further off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid shall come
in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so prc-
fently need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you to
God. From Berwick, this 2d of Sept. i565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 204.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

UPON the advertizements lately received from you, with such 1- Sept-
other things as came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Ran- P.per
dolph, and upon the whole matter well confidered, we have thus. Onice.
determined. We will, with all the speed that we can, fend to
you 3000o. to be thus used. If you shall certainly underfiand
that the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprest-
ing to him of Ioool. might Rand him in Read for the help to de-
fend himself, you shill presently let him fecrctly to underhand,
that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so wo
will that you let him have, in the molt secret fort that you can,
when the laid fum shall come to you, or if you can, by any good
means, advance him some part there before hand.

The other 20001. you llall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if

it be not that you flall fee necessary caule 'to imprest some part
thereof to the now numbers of the 600 footmen, and xoo horse-
men ; or to the calling out of wages of such workmen, as by sick-
ness, or otlerwife ought to be dis'cha.rgcd. And where we per-

ie, by your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl

of Murray and his aofuciates, that they might have, at the least,
300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also write, that
tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we
would but wink at your doing.herein, and seem to blame you for
attempting such things, as you with the help of others fliould
bring about, you doubt not but things would do wells you siall
underltand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many re-
fpecIs to maintain any other princes fubjeEts, to take arms against
their sovereign ? neither would we willingly do any thing to give
occasion to make warrs betwixt us and that prince, which hath
caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power to let them
be aided with any men. But now, confidering we take it, that
they are pursucd, notwithstanding their humble fulbmilsion, and
offer to be ordered and tried by law and juffice, which being re-
fuCed to them, they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our
weft marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and add-
ing thereunto the good intention that presently the French king
pretendeth, by fending one of his to join with some one of ours,
and jointly t'o treat with that queen, and to. induce her to for-
bear this manner of violent and rigorous proceeding against her
bilbjeEs, for which purpose, the French ambassador here with us
hath lately written to llat queen, whereof answer is daily look-
ed for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords fllould not
he opprcffed and ruined, fur lack of some help to defend them,
we are content and do authorize, if you shall fee it necessary for
their defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and with-
out notifying that you have any direcion therein from us) to
have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken either in whole
bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you flall fee
cause. And to cover the matter the better, you (hall fend these
numbers to Carlifne, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time, that such powers are on the other
part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you shall
fee caule to dircE of, the fame numbers or any of them may most
covertly repair to the said lords, when you lhall exprcfly adver-
tize, that you fend them that aid only for their defence, and not
therewvith to make war against the queen, or to do any thing
that may offendi her pcribn, vlhcrein you shall so precisely deal with
themn, that they may perceive your care to be such as if it flhould
othcrwice appear, your dangter lhould be Ib great, as all the friends
you h!ave couldt:not Cbe al.e o frve you towards us. And lo we assure

i

o ouur conrcietce moveth us to charge you, so to proceed with
them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not
yield to give them aid of money, or men: And yet we would
not that either of these were known to be our a&s but rather to
be covered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 212.)
.Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565-6.

/MY humble duty confidered what to write of the present slate An Origin.
of the country I am so uncertain, by realon of the daily altera-
tions of mens minds, that it maketh me much flower than other-
wife I would. Within there few days, there was some good hope
that this queen would have fiowed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin should have returned unto them with
comfort, upon ibme conditions. Since that time, there are come
out of France Clernau by land, and Thorneton by sea; the one
from the cardinal, the other from the biflop of Glasgow. Since
wvhofe arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appear-
ance of any good intended them, except that they be able to per-
fwade the queen's majesty our sovereign to make her heir appa-
rent to the croun of England. I write of this nothing less than I
know that she hath spoken. And by all means that fle thinketh
the belt doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately
devised, in which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain,
the duke of Savoy, with divers princes of Italy, and the queen-
mother fufpeted to be of the fame confederacy to maintain pa-
piffry throughout Chrifliandom; this band was sent out of France
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof
remaining with her, and the principal to be returned very flort-
lie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willlbn, a fit minister for such a
dcvilifh devise; if the. coppie hereof may be gotten, that shall be
rent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet came to this
toun upon MVonday, he spoke that night to the queen and her
husband, but not long; the next day ho had long conferences
with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any
whereof they intrcated, I cannot fpcak with any that laltl any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by him,
though it is said that he hath very good will to do so to the
uttermolf of his power. He is lodged near to the court, and liv-
eth up on the qucen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given,

AS

whereat means made to many to be present that day at the rtmal.
Upon Candlemass day there carried their candles, with the queen
her hufland, the earle of Lenox, and earle Athole; divers o-
ther lords have been called together and required to. be at the
mars that day, some have prornifed, as Caflels, Mongomerie, Se-
ton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Livingflon,
Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and of them all Bothell is' the
f itoutet, but worR thought of; it was moved in council that mars
lhould have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was ra-
ther to tempt men's minds, than intended indeed: She was of
w ~ late minded again to fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such

as he trufteth in amongst the queen's majesty's fubjeits, of whose
good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not in time
to be ware, and provide for the worf ; some in that country are
thought to be privie unto the bands and confedercie of which I
have written, whereof I am sure there is some things, though
perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers
quarles, contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as to
maintain mischief and disorder, David yet retaineth flill his place
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign guid-
ed chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do
any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that shall be the
firIt voyage that she will make after she is delivered of her being
with child; the bruit is common that she is, but hardly believed
of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there have of late
appeared some tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. T. p. 217.)
Part of a Letter from the earl ofBedford and Mr/. th.o.

Randolph to the lords of the council of 2England from
Barwick, 27thJ of March, 1566. An Original in
the Cotton Librar,, Caligula B. io. fol. 372.

May. it p/eaSe your honours,
17 Marchl, IIERING of To maynic matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varcetie

in the reportes, we have myclie ado to decerne the veritic: which
maketh us the flower and loother to put any thing in wrytingc,
to the entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
queen's mnjellic, our foverigne, fliould not be adrvotild but of

she verie trothe as we can pofible. To this end we thought good
to fend up captain Carewe, who was.in Edenbourge at the tyme
of the last atemptate, who spoke there with diverse, and after that
with'the queen's self and her husband conforme to that, which we
have learned by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the
fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and as-
fyfters unto these that were executors of the atec.

TI'his we fynde for certain, that the queen's howfband being

entred into a vehment suspicion of David, that by hym fome:thynge
was commytted, which was molt agynfte to the queen's honour,
and not to be borne of his perte, fyrlte communicated his mynde
to George Duglafs, who fynding his sorrowes so great fought all
the means he coulde to put some remedie to his griefs; and com-
municating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's command-
ment, no other waye coulde be found then that David fholde be
taken oute of the waye. Wherein he was so earnest and daylye
pressed the fame, that no refte coulde be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton,
and Lord Lindfaye should be made previe to th' intente that
theie might have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to assemble so mayny, as thaie thought sufficient a-
gainit the tyre, that this determination of theirs Should be put in
executione; which was determined the ixth of this inltante 3 daies
afore the parliament should begyne, at which time the fayde
lordes were assured, that the eries Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and
their complices iholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not
be persuaded through this means to be their friends; who for the
defyre he hade that this intent should take eftfcEt th' one waye,
was content to yielde without all diflicultie to t'other, with this
condition, that thaie fholde give their contents, that he might
have the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee these
things he saw, and were daylye brought to his eares, that he day-
ly pressed the said lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer de-
laye; and to the intent yt myght be manifcfte unto the world,
that he approved the aó[e, was content to be at the doing of that
hi mfelf.

Upon Saturdaye at neight neire unto VIII of the clock the

king conveycth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and
two others, throwe his owne chamber by the privic slayers up to
the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
xii foot f(luare; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table
ut the which theyr were fitting at the supper the qucene, the la,

Xij

dy Argile, and. David with his capp upon his head. Into ths
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who willed
David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The
queen said, that it was her will. Her howfband anfwerede, that
yt was against her honour. The lord Rothen faide, that lie sioide
lerne better his deutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm,
David took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put him-
self behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him: But
the kin;liaving loosed his hand, and holding her in his armes,
David was thrust out of the cabinet thorow the bed chamber in-
to the.chamber of prefens, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey,
who intending that night to have reserved hym; and the next day
to hang him, so mane being about hym, that bore hym evill will,
one thurft him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a
great many others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds.
It is told for certayne, that the kinges own dagger was left flick-
ing in him. Wheather he stuck him or not we cannot here for
certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as was said,
but going down the ftayres out of the chamber of prefens.

There remayned along tyme with the queen her howlband and

the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great intercession, that
lie liold have no'harm. She blamed greatlee her howlband that
was thee actor of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did answer,
that David had more companie of her boddie then he for the space
of two months; and therefore for her lhonour and his own content-
ment he gave his consent that he should be taken away. " It is
not" (faythe lihe) " the woman's part to reek the hulband," and
therefore in that the fault was his own. He said that when he
came, lile either wold not, or made herself sick, " WVell," fythe
file, " you have taken your lall of me and your farewell." Then
were pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majefly's huiband
and must yield dutie to each other. " Why may I not," faythe
flie, " leave him as well as your wife did her hulband ?" Other
have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that fle was lawfully
divorced from her husband, and for no such caufc as the king found
himself grevc. Bcfydes this man was mean, baflc, encmic to the
nobilitie, shame to her, and deftrution to herlclf and country.
" Well, faith lhe, that (hall be dear blude to foime of you, yf his
" be fpylt." God forbid, ihyth the lord Ruthen; for the more
your grace mwowe yourfclf offended, the world will judge the worse.

-Ier hulland this tynic fpcaketh little, herself continually weep.
cth. The lord Ruthen being ill at cafe and weak cnlleth for z

drink, and 'faytle; " This I nuft do with your majesties pardon,"
and perfuadeth her in the befi fort he could, that she would paci-
fie herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

In this mea:n time there rose a nombre in the court; to paci-

fie which there -went down the lord Ruthen, who went itrayt to
the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to quiet them, and to as-
sure them for the king that nothing was intend against them.
These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard thataiy lord
of Murray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them,
Huntly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and Glandores (who
was lately called Dyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of tle court by the lord of Liding-
ton. Theie went that night to such places, where they thought
themselves in most fauftie.

Before the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the

lord Ruthen flie was. contents that he shold lie with her that
night. We know not how he * * himself, but came not at
her,-&nd excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

There were in this companie two that came in with the king;

the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would
have itroken her with a dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, bro-
ther to the jutice clerk, who also her grace fayth, offered a dag. a-
gainfl her belly with the cock down. We have been earnefily
in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he afiour-
eth us of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the
lord Robert, Arthur Arfiin, one or two others. They at the
first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen drawd his dag-
ger, and 4 mo weapons then that were not drawn nor seen in her
prcfens, as we are by this lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dun-

bar-Caftle, whether resorted unto the lords Huntly and Bothwell:
That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find themselves left by
the king for all his fair promises, bonds and subscriptions. That
he had protefled before the council, that he was never consenting
to the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " That
" of the great fubihace David had there is much spoken, some
" fay in gold to the value of i mr. His apparel was very good,
' as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose. His chamber well furnifi-
" cd, armour, dagger, pylloletts, harquebulcs, 22 swords. Of
" all this nothing ipoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. 1tc

¢c had the cuRtody of all the queen's letters, which all were d.-
"' livered unlooked upon. . We hear of a juill, that he had hang,
" ing about his neck of some price, that cannot be heard of. He
" had upon his back, when he was flayn a night gown of damagk,
c' furred, with a fatten,dublet, a hose of ruffet velvet."

:!'; .o. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 223.)`

Parrt of a Letterfromn Randolph to Cecil, fan. 16, 565-6

---I CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been between
her grace and her hulband, he preffeth earnestly for the matrimo-
niall crown, which she is loath hastily to grant; but willing to
keep somewhat in store, until Ihe know how well he is worth to
enjoy such a foverignity; and therefore it is thought that the par-
liament, for a time hall be deferred, but hereof I can write nq
eertainty,

From Mr. Randolpb's Letter to Secretary Cecil.

4 April, THE juflice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause than

ffi. Pfrper any desert, and as far as. I can hear the king of all other in worst,
the original for neither hath the queen good opinion of him for attempting of

any thing that was against her will, nor the people that he hath
denied so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them
that did as he willed them, This Scott, that was executed, and
Murray that was yesterday arreigned, were both accused by him.
It is written to me, for certain, by one, that upon Monday last
spoke with the queen, that she is determined that the house of
Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was.. The earl con-
tinueth sick, fore troubled in mind; he flaith in the Abby, his son
has been once with him, and he once with the queen, lince fle
came to the cattle. The queen hath now fccn all the covenants
and bands that paflcd between the king and the lords, and now
findeth that his declaration, before her and council, of his inno-
cency of the death of David, was false; and glicvioufly offcndcd
that, by their mcans, he should feck to come to the crown matrix
monial.

art of a Letter from Randolph to Cecilfrom Berwick,

25 Apr]il, 1566.

-- THERE is continually very much speech of the discord be-
tween the queen and her husband, so far that, that is commonly
said and believed of himself, that Mr. James Thornton is::gone to
Rome to sue for a divorce between them. It is very certain thai;
Malevafier had not spoken with hin within these three days. He
is neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman; attend-
ed upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or seven of the
guard; at liberty to do, and go where, and what he will, there
have no hope, yet among themselves of quietness.

·--David's brother, named Joseph, who came this way with

Malevafieur, unknown to any man here, is become secretary in
his brother's place.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 225.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Augift, 1566.

THE queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather
worse. She -eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keep-
eth company with him, nor loveth any such as love him. He is
so far out of her books, as at her going out of the cattle of Edin-
burgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what
she said of him. One Hickman, an Englifl merchant there, hav-
ing a water-fpaniel which was very good, gave him to Mr. James
Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure which he saw the kingl
had in ifch kind of dogs, gave him to the king. 'The queen there-
upon fell marvellonfly out with Melvill, and called him diffenbler
and flatterer, and said ihe could not trult one, who would give
any thing to such one as lte loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, .rluiz 8.

ThE diragreement between the qtreen and her husband continueth,
ox rather increafetl. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, with-
in twelve miles of Edinburg, could not tell where to find the Queen,
filh which timne ihc is conme to Edinburgh, and had not twelve

horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that I can hear
of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company.
The king her husband is gone to Dumfermling, and paffeth his
time as well as he may; having at his farewell, such countenance
as would make a hulband heavy at the heart.

Sir yohn lForJIer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

THE queen hath her huflband in small estimation, and the Earl of
Lennox came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Si*r ohn Forqier to Cecil. i Irt Dec.

THE Earl of Bothvvell is appointed to receive the ambassadors, and
all things for the chrifieningare at his lordship's appointment, and
the fame is scarcely well liked of the nobility, as is said. The
king and queen is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater fa-
miliarity than he was all the while past.

Advert f'mrents o ot o Scotlandfrom the earl of Bedrord.

Auguif THAT the king and the queen agreed well together two days, as-
'..46. Paper
ofice,fromn ter her coming from -- , and after my lord of Murray's corn-
the ri. ing to Edinburgh, some new discord has happened. The queen

hath declared to my lord of Murray that the king bears him evil
will, and has siid to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
ing fault that she doth bear him so much company; and in like
manner, hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king,
which he did a few nights since in the queen's presence, and in
the hearing of divers. The king confessed, that reports were made
to him, that my lord of Murray.was not his friend, which made
him speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmcd, that
the king lhad fpokcn such words unto her, and confessed before the.
whole lioufe, that site could not be content that either lie or any.
other Ilould be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of Mur-
ray enquired the famle floutly, and utied his speech very modeflly,
in the mean time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear
that the queen flould use fanmiliarity either with man or woman,
and cljecially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Alarre, who
keep molt company with her. Mly Lord of Murray and Both-
welllhaat been at evil words for the L. of Ledingtol, before the.

queen, for he and fir James Balfoure had new come from Leding-
ton, with his anfwver upon lich heads or articles as Bothwell and
he fliould agree upon, which being reported to.the said earl in the
queen's pretence, made anfver, that e'er he parted with such lands
as was desired, he illould part with his life. Mly lord of Murray
said stoutly unto him, that twenty as honell men as lie should lose
their lives ere he rcafte Ledington. Tlie queen spake nothing,
but heard both; in thele terms they parted, and since, that I hear
of, have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Eden-
burgh, and carryeth the prince thence to Sterling with her. This
lali Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthven's, who
confefled that lie was in the cabinet, but not of council of the f.t.
''he queen hath alib opened to my lord of Murray, that money
was sent from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for
what purpole it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 235)
Part ofa Letter from Iizabet bto Alaiy, Feb. 20, 1569.

1 copy interlined by Cccil. It contains an anfweer to
a coamplaining& letter of AIrly's z)pon the iniprfoni/iln
of the bj/hop of R,)/.

---AFTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how patiently
did I bear with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty ac-
corded by your own commissioners, whereby I received no finall
unkindncfs, betides the manifold caulf of fufpiciol that I might
not hereafter trult to any writings. Then followed a hard man-
ner of dealing with me, to entice my subjec and near kinsman,
the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits for land, to come
into the realim, to proceed in treaty of marriage with him with-
out my knowledge, yea to conclude the fame without my aftent or
liking. And how many unkind parts accompany'd that fit; by
receiving of my lubjeds that were bale runnagates and offenders at
home, and enhanfing them to places of credit againlt my will, with
many such like, I will leave, for that the remembrance of the fame
cannot but be noyfome to you. And yet all these did I as it
were fupprels and overcome with my natural inclination of love
towards you; and did afterwards gladly, as, you know, clrillen
your son, the child of my siid kinfinan, that had before tl ul,-
loyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other undu-
tiful usages towards me his lfvcreign. IIow friendly also dealt I
by nlmelages to reconcile linm, beinlg your lhulfand, to you, whein

V1'lum IIL Y

others nourified discord betwixt you, who as it seemed had more
power to work their purposes, being evil to you both, than I had
to do you good, in refpe& of the evil I had received. Well I
will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow.
ing my council. And then in your mofl extremity, when you
was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from your noto-
rious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remembrance
of any former unkindness you had shewed me. Nay, how void
was I of refpcet to the designs .which the world had seen attempt-
ed by you to mny crown, and the fccurity that might have ensued
to my f-ate by your death, when I finding your calamity to be
great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatened
some as were irritated againf you, that I only may fay it, even I
was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 246.)
Letter e9 Elizabeth to ., of Scots. Thus marked ón

the back with Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarum Regitm
Majeftatis ad Reginam Scotorum. VIIIo. Aprilis.
Pap.. ice. MADAME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de Crocq, je n'euffe eu

si peu de consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens
de chariti vers les ruinez, et les prieres des miserables ne m'y
contraignafient. Je entens que un edit a ete divulgue de par vous,
madame, pue ung chafcun, que veult jullifier que ons eflc les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire
le xiime de ce mois. La quelle chose, comme c'efl plus honor-
able et neceflaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, ine y cllant caclh
quelque miflere ou fincife, ainfi le pere et amis du mort gentel-
hommc m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de prolongue
le jour, pource qu'ilz cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combinis
par force de faire ce que par droiEt ils ne pourront pas faire ;
partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui
il touche lc plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter ]e leur conceder cette rcquellc, laquclle, si elle les feroit
nie, vous tourncroit grandemcnt en foupeon, de plus que j'efpere
ne pensez, et que ne voudricz volonticrs ouyr. Pour l'amour de
Dieu, madamc, ulcz do tclle fincerite & prudence en cc cas qui
vous touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous
livrcr conime innocentc d'ung crime si cnormc, chose que si ne
lftcs, ifcricz digeinecint clbloy/ hors de rancz de princcfl'cs, &

nlon fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fonhaiterois une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie
maculec; vous voiez madame, queje vous traite comme ma fille,
et vous promets, que si j'en euffe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx,
que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me porte tefmoignage,
a qui je prie de bon coeur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera
plus a honneur, et a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres
cordialles recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le
plus de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De WeR.
ce 8 jour de Janvier en hafle.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 256.)
4 Letter froilz England concerning the murder of king

Henry Darnley.

HAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to E. of Mor.
write a few words unto you. I have reed. some writs from you; CtniesAs
and some I have seen lately sent others from you, as namely to Bundle B.
the earl Bedford of the 6th. of May. I haye participat the con-'

r 5'

tents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mckle I can assure
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue,
for there was not one papitl nor proteltant which did not consent
that justice should be done, be the queen my fovns. aid and sup-
port, against such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & boldness did not
rife from Ihch .as were called to council, but from fuchl as fliould
give life and execution thereunto. And further, I assure you,'
I never knew no matter o£ eRfate proponed which had so many
favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto
you, no man promoted the matter with greater affeaion, than the
Spanifli ambafiador. And sure I am, that no man dare openly
be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever is guilty of
this murder, handfasted with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I
fliall not need to tell you, which lie our letts and flayes from all
;ood things here. You are acquainted with them as well as I.
Neds I mult confess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit,
honour, and furcty; it behoveth your whole nobility, and name-
ly luch as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow
of llodwell, to prosecute with sword and juflice the punifunemnt
of those abominable als, though we lend you but a cold aid, and
albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and honclt, be

.A miltake in thel date correed with Cecil's lhand V11°. Aprili.

Y ij

well known to me, and sundry others here, to be juffifiable in all
their actions and doings; yet think not the contrary but your
whole nation is blemihled and infamit by these doings, which
lately passed among you. What we fllall do I know not, ncithcr
do I write unto you assuredly, for we be fubjecl unto many mu-
tations, and yet I think we flall either aid you, or continue you
in the defence and safeguard of your prince, io as it appear to us
that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own dcferuClion, if you be un-
adviscd. I know not one, no not one of any quality or cftate in
this country, which does allow of the queen your fnvereign, but
would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame were
done without farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary juffice.
This I fend the 23d M.lay.

NO. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 261.)
Pa;t of a Letter f om Sir 1Nicol7s 7. I roSZ-o7ortonz to Cecil,

I ith of 7Ju, 1 567, from Berewick.

AnP Origin- ---SIR, Your letter of the 6th Jolly, I reccived the otlh at
Oli;e, Berwick. I am sorry to fee that the queen's majelly disposition

altereth not towards the lords, for whlen all is done, it is they
which muff iand her more in itead, than the queen her cousin,
and will be better instruments to work some benefite and quiet-
ness to her majerry and her realm, than the queen of Scotland
which is void of good fame.
A Letter frnom Sir Nicolas rTbrogmzorton to Cecil firom

F/IcnflZe, I2th of

7" ly, 56 7.
Paper Of- SIr, as yow might perceive by my letter of the I Ith July, I

lodged at Faftcaflle that night, accompanyed with the lord Humc,
the lord of Ledington, and James Melvin, where I was intreated
very well, according to the slate of the place, which is fitter to
lodge prifoncrs then folls at liberty, as it is very littel, so it is
very firong. fly the conference I have had with tlhe lord of
Ledington I find the lords his allociitcs and he hath left nothing
unthought of, which may be either to their danger-, or woik
them ruerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likewise they confider the fame of
England; but as farr as I can perccave, to be plain with yow,
they find more perril to grow unto thc:n through the q';ccni's ma-

jefty's dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faclion amongeft themfelvcs, for they assure themselves
the queen will leave them in the brycrs if they run her fortoun,
and though they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them,
as to the realm of England by her majestys doings at Leith,
whereof they fiy mutually her majesty and both the realms have
received great fruit; yet upon other accidents which have chan-
ced since, they have observed such things in her majellys doings,
as have ended to the danger of such as file hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little to the fuerty
cf any party; and upon these considerations and discourses at
length, me thinketh I find a dilfofition in them, that either they
mind to make their bargain with France, or else to deal neither
with France nor yow, but to do what they (hall think meet for
their slate and fuerty, and to use there remedys as occation lmall
move them; meaning neither to irritate France nor England, un-
till such time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one
of yow; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both
for awhile pari paflu, for that was my lord of Lcdington's terms.
I do perceave they take the matter very unkindly, that no better
anfwver is made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her ma-
jefty, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to their satis-
faAion, I have answered as well as I can, and have allcdged their
own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen, and their uncertain-
ty hath occationed this that is yet happned, and therefore her
majesty hath sent me to the end I may inform her througly of the
state of the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds and
intents to such purposes as flall be by me proposed on their ma-
jeflys behalf unto them, they flall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At these things the lord of Lcdington smiled and llook
his head, and said it were better for us yow would let us alone,
than neither to do us nor your fclves good, as I fear me in the
end that will prove; Sr if their be any truth in Ledington, La
Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man
of like quality, and to deliver them of their queen for ever, wh:o
flall lead her life in France in a abby rcclufcd, the prince at
the French devotion, the reallll r.overncd by a council of their clcc-
tion of the Scottilh nation, the forts conmmitted to the cullody of
such as shall be clihocn amongcll thcmf'c!vcs, as yet I find no great
lieclichlood that I (hall have access to the queen, it is oljeccc.
they may not so difi)lcal'e the French king, unlels they were finl
to find the quc'un of Engl:nd a good flicnd; and when they once

by my accels to the queen have offended the French, then they
fay yow will make yofir profit thereof to their undoing; and as
to the queens liberty, ihichi was the firfl head that I proposed,
they Iaid that thereby they did perccive that the queen wants
their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly
to talk of them the liberty going before; but said they, if yog
will do us no good, do us no harm, and we will provide for our-.
selves. In the end they said, we shou]d refuse our own commodi-
ty, before they concluded with any other, which I should hear of
at my coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the
band concluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly and that faction,
not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr, as that which
was sent into France ; thus having no more leasure but compell'd
to leap on horteback with the lords to go to Eldinr, I humbly
take my leave of from Faflcaflle the 12th July i567.
To Sir Nicolas 2%rogmoriozn beizng inz Sotland. By the

queen the Itb / iily 1567.

Paper Of- TRUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think
lice, that the causes will often change upon variety of accidents, yet

this we think, for sundry refpefs, not amiss, that as yow flall
deal with the lords having charge of the young prince for the
committing of him into our realm, so shall yow allt do well, in
treaty with the queen, to offer her that where ler realm appear-
eth to be subjea to sundry troubles from time to time, and there-
by (as it is manifafl) her son cannot be free, if fle flall be con-
tented that her son may enjoy fucrty and quietness, within this
our realm, being so near as ihe knows it is; we hllall not faill to
yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as can be devised
for any that might be our child born of our own body, and flall
be glad to flow to her therein the trew effct of nature ; and here.
in flhe may be by yow remembred how much good may cnfue to
her obn to be nourillied and acquainted with our country ; anti
therefore, all things confidered, this occation for her child, were
rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us; and to this end, we mean that yow fihall li deal witl her, both
to t..y her in deed from inclining to the 'Fiencli praflife, which
is to us notoriouts to convey ler and the prince into France, and
:ill' to avoid any jufl offence, tl;ht. elic tigl!t hereafter conceive,
it' lhc should hlc: r thaL '.t i nlonud d:e l witlh tlli lords for the prince.

APPENDIX. 55
$ir Nicolas Ti rogmorton to quecz; Elizabe'th, I 4tlh uly

I 567, from E!dinburgh.

IT may please your majcfly to be advcrtifed, I did fignifie unto An Origin-
1Vr. Secretary b y my letters of the th and 1 2th of July, the 'ri1EPpe
day of mine entry into Scotland, tie caufcs of my stay, my lodg-
ing at FalRcaftle a place of tlle lord H-umes, where i was met by
the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had passed in
conference betwixt us, vwhilcel I was at the laid FaLtcafi!e. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and with 400
horses by their appointment for my better condu:t, I came to
Edinl' the I2th of this present. The 13t'l being Sunday appoint-
ed for a folemne communion in this town, and alSo a folemne fast
being publilhed, I could not have conference with the lords which
be assembled within this town as I desired, that is to fay the
earls of Athole, and Mnorton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
ton, Sir James Balfuur captain of the castle, MIr. James M3cGill
and the president of the fciion.

Neverthelcfs I made means by the lord of Lidington that they

would use no protrace of time in mine audience, so did I likewise
to the carle of Morton, whom I met by chance; I was anfwcred
by them both, that albeit the day were deflined to sacred exer-
cifcs, such as were there of the council would consult upon any
moyen touching my acccfs unto them and my conference with
them, and said also that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I should hear from them. About 4 of the clock in the
afternoon, the laid I3th day, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto me on tile behalf of the lords and
others, that they required n:e toliave patience though they had clef-
sered my conference with them, which was grounded princip.'l-
ly upon the absence of the caries of Mar, and Glencairn, the lords
Semple, Crighton and others of the council, faying also that
they did confider the matters which I was on your be-
Ihalf to trecte with them of, wcre of great importance, as they
could n.ot fattisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor give nme
anfwcr without the advice of the lords, and others their alYociatcs,
the lord of Lidington also laid unto me, that -hlere he percciv
ed, by ilis private conference with me in mny journy ithl-
wards, th:t I prefncd greatly to h.ave ficedy acccf to tle (lu.cll
their fuvcreign, he perceived, ly the lords an! others w cil we\: :
here, th.lt in that matter there was great tdiil'cultv for mai:r rc-
fieLs, but fIecciall y Lcc;t.ie they had lc fucled to thle 1 'iccl l :iri-

baffad6r the like acccfs, which being granted unto me,. might
greatly offend the French, a matter which they defired'and intend-
ed to cfchew; for they did not find by your majeltys dealings
with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate the French
king, and to loose his favour and good intelligence with him; I
answered that as unto their refufall, made unto the French ambaf-
fador, monsieur de Ville Roye was difpalclied forth of France be-
fore these accidents here happened, and his special errand was to
impeach the queens marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so in-
deed since my coming hither I learned his commiflion tended to
that end, and to make offer to the queen of another marriagc)
and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could have no order. forth of
France concerning these matters since they happened; and there-
fore they might very well hold them fufpeded to have conference
xvith the queen, lcaft they might treate of matters in this time
vithout inltruslions and so rather do harm then good; but your
nmajefly being advertized of all things which had chanced had sent
lim hither to trcate with them, for the well of the realm, for the
conlervation of their honors and credit, and for their fuerty ; and
I might boldly fay unto him, that your majefly had better deferv-
ed than the French had. lie laid, for his own part, he was
much bound unto your majefLy, and had always found great favour
and courtesy in England, but to be plain with you Sir fayed he
there is not many of this alfembly that have found so great ob-
ligation at the queen your fovercigns hands, as at the French kings;
for the caries of Morton and Glencairn be the only persons lwhich
took benefit by the queens majcllys aid at Lcith, the rell of the
noblemen were not in the altion, and we think laid he, the queens
nlajeily your sovereign, by the opinion of her own council, and
all the 'world, took as grcat benefit, by that charge as the realm
of Scotland, or any particular pellon; and not to talk with yo:v
as an ambaflfador, but with Sir Nicolas Throgmorton, miy lord
l'.sorton, and iich l as were in pain for the death of Dlvie, fcondc
lut cold favour at the queens majeflys hands, when they were ba-
nilh'd forth of their own contry; but I would all our whole com-
pany were as well willing to accomplifn the queen your fovereiig
intents and desires as I am, for mine own part, 1 am but out, ;and
hat of the meanell fort, and they be many nioblenCen and flilh as
lhave great interell in the llatter, mlary yow fliall be afiilred I
\vill ilploy nilyfel to imploy my credit, and all that 1 may do,
to fhtisfil tie

t queen your nillrels, as mucli as ly.tl. in nte,
and fulr yur Cown part )yu .have :I great manlly fienlds ill llis :aIl

APPENDIX. 57

Rmnbly, with many.other good words. But for conclusion I must
take this for an answer to htay untill the other lord were come,
and thereupon I thought meet to advertize your majelty what
hath passed, and how far forth I have proceeded; your expec-
tation being great to hear from hence.

And now to advertize your majeily of the state of all things,

as I have learned since my coming hither, it may please your ma-
jefty to understand as followeth.

The queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the castle

of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the
owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is employed in another
commission, because he began to Ihow great favour to the queen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys
4 or 5 gentlewomen, and 2 chambcrers, whereof one is a Frenclh
woman. The earle of Buchan, the earle of Murray's brother,
hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure the lords afore-
said, which have her in guard, doe keep her very straitly, and as
far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order from
these men, becaule that the queen will not by any means be in-
duced to lend her authority to prosecute the murderj nor will not
consent by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her liuf-
band, but avoweth conflantly that (lie will live and die with him;
and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquifli her crown
and kingdom or the lord Bothell, lhe would leave her kingdom
and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and that Ihe will
never consent that he Ihall fare worse, or have more harm than
herse!f.

And as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her deten-

tion is, for that these lords do fee the queen being of so fervent
affeeqion towards the earle Bothell as fle is, and being put at as
they lhould be compelled to be in continuall arms, and to have
occation of many battles, he being with manifest evidence noto-
rioully deteted to be the principall murderer, and the lords meahll
ing proiccution of juflice againlt him according to his merits.

The lords mean allb a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as

a marriage not to be liffered for many refpe&s, which fcperation
cannot take place if the queen be at liberty, and have power in
her hands.

'IThey do not also forget their own perill, conjoinl' with the

danger of tlle prince, but as far'ns I can perccavc, they intend not
either to touch the queen in fuerty or in honor, for they do Ipeak
of her with reflpet anil reverence, and do atEirm, as 1 do learn,

'hnrc IL. Z

that the conditions aforcfaid accomplished, they will both put her
to liberty, and restore her to her cftate.

These lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqubufhers

which be in very good order, for the entertainment of which com-
panys, untill all matters be compounded, they did sue unto your
majefly, to aid them with such fum of mony, as hath been mention-
ed to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons writting, amount.
ing as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand crouns of the

They were latly advertized that the French King doth mind

to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell dcz Ursine, a knight of the
French order, and always well affecionate to the house of Guyfe,
and howsoever la Forest, Villaroye, and du Crocq have used lan-
guage in the queens favour and to these lords disadvantage there,
to your majelty; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as
shall be little to the queens advantage; so as it is thought the
French king, upon his coming to his presence, will rather fatisfie
the lordsi than pleasure the queen; for they have their party so
well made, as the French will rather make their profit by them,
than any other way.

Herewith I fend your majesty the lafi bond agreed on, and sign-

ed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and sundry
others at Dumbarton.

Nevertheless, since my coming to this town, the I-Iamiltons

have sent unto me a gentleman of their surname named Robert
Hamilton with a letter from the biflop of St. Andrews and the
abbot of Arbroth, the coppy whereof I fend your majesty and mine
aniifer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of some
things, as these did by him unto me.

The earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me

with a letter and credit, I have used him as I did the others, the
coppy of both which letters I fend your majefiy also. The lord
H-arrys hath also sent unto me- but not written, and I have return-
ed unto him in like fort.

Againfl the 20th day of this month there is a gencrall assembly

of all the churches, Ihircs, and boroughs towns of this realm,
namely of such as be contented to repair to thcee lords to this
town, where it is thought the whole slate of this matter will be
handeled, and I fear me much tothe queens difladvantage and dan-
ger; unless the lord of Ledington and some others which be bcfi
affeced lunto her do provide fbie remedy for I perccave the
great number, and in manner all, but chiclly the common people,
.which have affiPled in there doings, do greatly dinfonour the

tqrccr, and mind seriously either her deprivation, .or her deftruc-
tion; I used the belt means I can (confidering the furie of the
world here) to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth to me to
ble'the belt remedy; I may not speak of dissolution of it, for that
may not be abiden, and I should thereby bring my self into great
hatred and perril. The chiefeft of the lords which be here pre-
sent at this time dare not show so much lenity to the queen as I
think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be most furious and impudent againlt the queen, and
yet the men be mad enough; so as a stranger over butie may soon
be made a sacrifice amongeft them.

There was a great bruit that the I-Iamiltons with there adhe-

rents would put their force into the fields against the 24th of this
month, but I do not find that intent so true, as the common
bruit goeth.

The earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trou-
ble among his own contrymen.

The earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and

I do believe your majelty may so use him, and direct him, as lie
(hall be able to promote your purpose with there men.

The earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.--

I do find amongeft the Hamiltqns, Argyll and the company
two strange and sundry humours.

Hamiltons do make llow of the liberty of the queen, and pro-

fecute that with great earnestness, because they would have these
lords destroy her, rather than flie should be recovered from them
by violence ; another time they seem to dcfire her liberty, and
Bothell's deftrftion, because they would compass a marriage be-
twixt the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

The carle of Argyll doth affcEt her liberty, and Bothell's de.
Ltrution, because he would marry the queen to his brother.

And yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open concur-

ance, (as appeareth by their bond) doth discover their minds to
each other, nor mind one end; Knox is not here, but in the weft
parts, lie and the reft of the miniflers will be here at the great
assembly, whos austerity againll the queen I fear as much as any
man's.

By some confcrrencc which I had with Come of this councill, me

thinketh that they have intelligence that there is a difpolition in
the queen of Scotland, to leave this realm, and to retire hcrfelf
either into England, or into France, but moil willingly into Eng-
landl for fichi--and milikings as fie knowcth hath been, and

. ij

is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a
number of perfcns deleagued, and authorized by her or to some
one or more.

And it please your majefly, I think it not amiss to put yo.v'in

remembrance, that in cafe the said qucen come into England by
your allowance, without the French king's confcnt, ihe lhall
lose her dowery in.France, and have little or nothing from hence
to entertain her; and in cafe she do go into France with the
King's contentment, she may be an inltrument (if fle can reco-
ver favour, as tine will help to cancell her disgrace) either by
matching with foxie husband of good quality, or by some other
devise, to work new unquietness to her own contry, and so con-
fequently to your majesty's.

Therefore it may plcafc your majefly to confider of this mat-

ter, and to let me know your pleai;lre with convenient speed,
how I fiall answer the fame, if it be propounded unto me, either
by the queen, or by the council!, as a piece of the end and corn-
position. For I am sure, of late, file hath fteemed very delirous
to have the matter brought to pars, that ihe might go into Eng-
land, retaining her eflate and jurifdi&cion in herself, though lie
do not exercise it; and likewise 1 underlland that ibme of this
council which be leaif affetled to her safety do think tlere is no
other way to f.ive her. Thus Almighty God prcferve your rna-
jefty in health honor and all felicity ; at lidinr the i.th July 1567.
Sir Nicolas Thro07m0^orton to Qcr-c'n Fii,,beth the si 8t

7JlUy J 567, fJ om Edlinbl/g,.

An Origin. IT may please your majclty, yow might perceave by my letters
aL. apcr of the x6 h, how far I had proceeded with thcle lords, and what

was their answer; since whic time 1 have spoken p:articularly
with the carle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and Sir James
]3alfour captain of this cafllc, at whose hands I cannot pcrccave
that as yet accc's to the rtuccn to Loclleven will be granted me,
flaying thcmnfelves flill IJy the absence of the lords an(l others
their a:lociates, whiich (they fay) tlicy looL for within two d(ays ;
and fior tlmt I find, by likelihood and apparent prcflliptionls, tli:t
mine access to the queen will hardly ie granted, I have thouliht
good not to defer this dirfpatch untill I have a rcllute anfvcr in
that lmatter.

Mvay il therefor plcafc your majefly to undell fland Robert Mcl.
vil returned from the queen ini Lochlevcn, to this tosn, the 6:.'I

of july, and brought a letter from her written of her own hand
to these lords, which doth contain as I understand matter as fol-
loweth-A request unto them to have consideration of her health,
and if they will not put her to liberty, to change the place of
restraint to the cafle of Stirling, to the end flie might have the
comfort and company of her ton, and if they will not change her
from Lochleven, she required to have some other gentlewomce
about her, naming none.

To have her apothecary, to have some modes mnilifter.-To

have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as (lie would he oc-
cupied about, and to have a varlet of the chamber--Touching
the government of the realm, sic maketh two offers, which are
but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not lle-
cified, but refered to Robert 1'Ielvin's credit, the one is to com-
mit it only and wholly to the carle of Murray; the other is to
the lords whose names ensue, tifilted wlit h foch others, as they
fllall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the
earls of Morton, Murray, Mar, and Glencairn.

She hath written unto them that I might have access unto

her.--She requireth further that if they will not treat her and
regard her as their queen, yet to lfe her as the king their fovc-
reigns daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their prince's
mother.--She will by no means yield to abandon Bothcll for her
husband, nor relinquish him; which matter will do her molt harm
of all, and hardencth there lords to great severity against her.

She yeildeth, in words, to the pro'ecution of the murder.
I have the means to let her know that your majelly hatll sent
:ne hither for her relief.

1 have allo perfwaded her to conform herrelf to renounce Both-

ell for her husband, and to lie contentcd to Cuflnr a divorce to pals
betwixt tlem ; (le hath sent me word that Ilic will in no ways
consent unto that, but rather die; grounding hersel upon this rea-
Con, taking herself to be ecven Mweeks gone with child, by re.
nouncing Bothell, flie lhould acknowledge herself to be with
child of a baflard. and to have forfeited her honor, which llic will
not do to die for it I have perfwadtlcd her to save her own life
and her child, to choole the Icall hard condition.

JMr. Knox arrived here in llis to^ l tlhe 6 of this montlh, witil

1\lhonl I haive had lbine cuinlcicncc, aind xillh Mr. Crailg all'o, the
pith('r miniiler of this town.

I haive pcrfwadt d v itli them to plrcitt' and p:' vIad lenity, I
jil.d thelil botlh very ;1se::1..; illt i c *:s . r:n ^, v. hit they i(All do

hereaft;c I know not, they are furnished with many arguments,
some forth of the scripture, fume forth of histories, some ground.
ed (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon practices
used in this realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made
by their prince at her coronation.

The bishop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntly hath sent

hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle and some others
of that fide, may, at Linlithgow or at Stirling, have some com-
munication with some appointed on this fide, assuring them that
there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to con-
curre with these, afluring further that they will not dissent for
triffles or unneceflary things, and (as I am given to understand)
they can be pleased the queen's refiraint be continu'd, untill the
murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the feperation of the
queen and Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the
security for all men, and a good order taken for the governance
of the realm in tranquility.

Captain Clerk, which hath folongferved in Denmark and ferv-

ed at Newhaven, did the x6th of this month (accompanyed
with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier as the greater fame
goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and fich a one as had great
efiimation with these lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, honesty,
and willingness in this acion ; whereupon Clerk hath retired
himself; their quarrel was about the Ihip which took Blackcter,
which (hip was appointed by these lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the passage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he
went either to the illes, or to any other place; by the death of
this man this cnterprize was daflcd.

The bilhop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth de-
fire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

The abbot of Killwinning hath sent for Sir James Balfourcanp
tain of the callle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majcfly in my lali, the Hamiltons now

find no matter to dilfver thefc: lords and them alinder, but would
concurr in all things (vea in any extremity against the queen) so
as that tlhiy might be alrurcd the prince no Scotland were crouned
king, and Ilhollld l ie withllot i(ffit, that the earle of Lenox's Con
living fhionld not inlicit the crotin of this realnl, ns next heir to
his ncphcw.

And althougf!: the lords :;;d counielors l)ceak reverently, mildly,

and clrlhritably o1' their In .cn, 'u is I canncat gather by their liecccl
an-y intention to -crueltv or violence. v: I do bind by intelligence,

that the queen is in very great peril of her life, by reason that the
people assembled at this convention do mind vehemently the de-
ftrution of her.

It is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongst all e-

states, (aving of the counselors) that their queen hath no more
liberty nor priviledge to commit murder nor adultery, than any
other private person, neither by God's law, nor by the laws of the
realm.

'The earl Bothwell and all his adherents and affociats, be put

to the horn by the ordinary juflice of this town, named the lords
of the itffion; and commandment given to all flirriffs, and all
other officers, to apprehend him, and all other his followers and re-
ceiptors.--The earl of Bothel's porter, and one of his other
servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confessed uchl
sundry circumllances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said
earl was one of the principal executors of the murder, in his own
person, accompany'd with sundry others, of which number I can-
not yet certainly learn the nanes but of three of them, that is to
fay, two of the Ormilton's of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bol-
ton; the lords would be glad that none of the murderers ihould
have any favour or receipt in England, and hereof their desire is,
that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell doth
fill remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming,
which have been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do re-
pair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth grow daily betwixt
these lords, and those which held of 5 and notwitlllanding theic
lords have sent an hundred and fifty harqubufhers to Stirling, to
keep the town and passage from furprize; and so lave they clone
in like manner to St. Johnflon, which be the two passages from
the north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain of
Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do mcrvile the
carriages be not impeached otherwile than they be.

Of late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the

faiil calle, which hath been furprizcd ; and thereby inatter is
lifcovercd which maketh little to the queen's advantage.

'I'hus, h-ving none other matter worthy your nimjelly's know-

ledge, I hclech God to prosper your mnajclly with long life, per-
fe& health, and profiterous felicity. At 'Edinbutilh the I th of
July, 1i567.

Lctlei- of Sir Nicholas IThrojgmorton to the ih'ght hotouai

able the earl of LeiceJter, knt. of the order, and. one
of the lords of her mnijeJf/y's moJi honourable prijvy
Cozincel.

24 of July, BY my former dispatches fenit to her inajefly, and Mr. Secretary,
Papr Of- since the 12th of July, your lordflips might have perceived the
fice, from slate of this country, and to what end these matters be like to
the Origin-
al. c oie; so as not to trouble your lordship with imainy words; this

queen is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
sori to be crownedl king, and file detained in prison within this
realni, aiid the fiamei to be governed, in the young king's name,
by a couicel, confilling of certain of tlie nobility, and other wife
meli of tlis realm ; so as it is easy to be seen that the power and
ability to dO any thing to the commodity of the queen's majefly,
and the realmn of Eiingand, will chiefly, and in manner wholly,
ellt in the hands of these lords, and others their affociats, aflem-
bled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majefly will fill perfilf
in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (unto whom
she shall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that these
lords and all their aocomplices will become as good French, as
the French king can wilh, to all intents and purposes; And as
for the Iamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that sac-
tion, they be already tb far inchanted that way, as there needeth
little devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is
the state of things f;) come to pais of this country, that France
has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them, to all pur-
poUes, as ever it wac ; and whiat an infrument, the young
prinlce will prove to unquiiet England, I report me to your lord
llips wisdoms, and therefore confidering the weight of the tn.tterj
and all the circumifances, I trluf your lordihips will vvell bethink
you in timc, (for 'tis higli time) how to advise her majefly, to
leave nolhling undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be
in her polffclionl, or, at the lealt, to be at her devotion. A.nd a-
mongfl other things, that I c:n imagine, for the first degree, no-
thing is more meet to bring' this to cffcd, than to allure this com-
pany here afll'mbled, to bear her ma:jclly their favour. Some talk
h:art punTcd l bctw(en the lurd of ',idtldin,toln andi mc, in certain
conferences, ablout tili; mlattcr. By Lilm 1 find, that wihen ]ln-

anjefly fliall have won thecr men to her devotion, the principal

point that . Ull makt e them coidonir , veblc
to icliver their pi incc in..

to England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling
him to the fucccfion of the crown of England, for fault of issue
of the queen's majetly's body, some other things will allo be re-
quired, as the charge of the said prince and his train, to he at
the charge of England. I do well perceive that there men vill
never be brought to deliver their prince into England, without
the former condition, for the succession of England; for (faith
Liddington) that taking place, the prince liall be as dear to the
people of England as to the people of Scotland; and the one willbe
as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise, he faith,
all things confidered, it will be reported that the Scottifhmen
have put their prince to be kept in flafety, as those which commit
the (seep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion, your
lordflips may perceive here will be the scope of this matter. As
nnto the delivering of him upon hostages, he fayeth, let no man
think, that the condition of the fucceflion not being accompliflled,
the nobility and the gentry will never content to leave themselves
dctlitute of their lovereign, upon any hoflages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It
vwere not good for yourfclves (faith he) that the matter were so
handled; for then you ihould adventure all your goods in one
hlip, which might have a dangerous effest, coniidering the un-
willingness of the queen your fovercign to consent to eflablifling
any faccelfor to the crown. And then, how unmetc were it, that
her majelly having in her pofleflion already all such persons as do
pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have our prince
also in her cuflody. For so their might follow, without good ca-
pitulations, a strange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen your
mirtrefs do think that fitch imaginations could not proceed
but from lufy heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf.
What is conie to pafl since my lat d(ispatch, and how far forth
things are proceeded I refer your lorlniip to be informed by my
letters sent unto her majelly, at this time. And to I pray al-
mighty God, prclerve your lordlfip in much honour, and felicity.
At Eldcnburgh this 2qth of July, 1567.

It may plc:tfe your good lordihip to make my lord Stuard part-
ner of this letter.

The queen 'L9 Sir N\Ticolaif Thockmorton.

By the Qceein.

Tik.surY and rillt well beloved, we greet you well, for as much 6thloFAng,
:s we do confider tlat you have now a long time remained in 567'

V/ui/ame. 11 A a

those parts, without expedition in the charge committed onto yon,
we think it not meet feeing there hath not followed the good ac-
ceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that state, which
good reason would have required, that you fliould continue there
any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, that you shall, immediately
upon the receipt hereof, fend your servant Middlemore unto the
lords and estates of that realm, that are assembled together, willing
him to declare unto them, that it cannot but seem very strange un-
to us, that you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to
deal with them, in matters tending so much to their own quiet,
and to the benefit of the whole eflate of their country, they have
so far forgotten themselves and so slightly regarded us and our
good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is tlran-
gell of all, in not vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And
altho' these dealings be such, indeed as were not to be looked for
at their hands, yet do we find their usage and proceedings towards
their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the relf, in so firange
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world be-
fides, cannot but think them to have therein gone so far beyond
the duty of fubjeAs, as must needs remain to their perpetual
touche for ever. And therefore he flhall fay, that we have tho't
good, without coniuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you
to our pretence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and pafport
so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we will that you
make your repair hither, unto us, with as convenient speed as you
may. Given, &'c.

Indorfcd 6th August, 1567.
Throgn'orton to the right honourable Sir /tilliiaml Cecil,

knight, one of her majeJfy's privy council and princi-
pal Jfecretary, give these.

lIth Au-1 WHIAT I have learned, fince'the arrival of my lord of Murray,
Paper C'f- and Mons. de Linnerd, you shall undertand by my letter to her
flicee, fromn
the Origi- majesty, at this time. The French do, in their negotiations, as
nal. they do in their drink, put water to their wine. As I amn able

to lfe into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether ile live or die, whether fie be at liber-.
ty or in prizon. The mark they (hoot at, is to renew their old
lcaguec and can be as well contented to take it of this little king,

(howsoever his title be) and the fame by the order of thefc lords'
as otherwise. Lyneroll came but yesterday, and me thinketh
he will not tarry long; you may'guefs how the French will seek
to displease these lords, when they changed the coming of La
Chappelle des Ourfins for this man, because they doubted that de
la Chappelle f(ould not be grateful to them, being a papist. Sir,
to speak more plainly to you than I will do otherwise, me think-
eth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and
be partaker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitter-
ly againit the tragedy, and the players therein, than he, so little
like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Ledington
is to go into-France, which I do as much mislike, as any thing,
for our purpose. I can assure you the whole protestants of France
will live and die in these mens quarrels; and, where there is
bruit amongst you that aid, should be sent to the adverse party,
and that Martigues should come hither with rome force ; Mons.
Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that infiead of Martigues
coming against them, he will come with as good a force to fuc-
cour them: And if that be sent under meaner conduEl, Robert
Steuart shall come with as many to fortify them. But the con-
itable hath assured these lords, that the king meaneth no way to
offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and
speed you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it
be to kindle these lords more against us. Thus I do humbly take
my leave of you, from Edenburgh the i2th of August, 567.

Yours to use and command,

ThYe S')teen to Nicholas 2h°brocknmoton.

TRUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within
these two days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 2oth,
22d, and 23d, of this month, having not before tholf received
any seven days before; and do find, by these your letters, that
you have very diligently and largely advcrtifed us of all the hasty
and peremptory proceedings there ; which as we nothing like, so
we trust in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive some re-
formation. For we cannot perceive, that they with whom you
have dealt, can answer the doubts moved by the Hamiltons, who
howfoevcr they may be carried for their private rcfpcts, yet
those things which they move, will be allowed by all reasonable
persons. For if they may not, being noblemen of the realm, be
u!hfrcld to hear the queen their ifvcrcign declare her pind con-

A a ij

cerning the reports which.are made of her, by fuich as keep aer
in captivity, how flould they believe the reports, or obey thein,
which do report it ? and therefore our meaning is, you lhall let
the Hamiltons plainly undcrfiand, that we do well allow of their
proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the queen
their fovcreign for her relief) and in fucl things as shall appear
reasonable for us therein to do, for the queen our filler, we will
be ready to perform the fame. And where it is so required, that
upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should deal with the
lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we
are well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize the
lord Scroope hereof by your letters, and to will him to shew him-
self favourable to them in their aicens, that may appear plainly
to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that
upon your message done to the earl of MIurray, you might return,
ib our meaning is you niall. And if there our letters (liall meet
you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the lord
Scroope, Ind the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 4ug, 1567.

No. XXII, (Vol, I. p. 264.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmnorton to the archbi/h7op of St. An-

dre.'s and tJe abbot of Arbrothc.

I3 Aug. AFTER my good commendations to your good lordflilps, tlis nfhll
1567. Pa- be to advertize you, that the queen's mnjelty my sovereign hav-
per-Ofice, ing sent me hither her amballhador to the queen her filler your
fromn a co-n
py vhich fovercign, to communicate unto her such matter as fle thought
fir Nicholas
felt to tle mncet, confidering the good amity and intelligence betwixt them,
queen. who being detained in captivity (as your lordllips know) con-

trary to the duty of all good fubjeEs, for the enlargement of
whofc person, and the rcnitution of her to her dignity, her na-
jelly gave me in charge to treat with these lords afficnbled at
Edenburgll, offering them all rcalbnable conditions and means as
might le, for the tile:guartl of the young prince, the punifhlnmut
of the late horriljl nmurder, the dlifolution of the marriage le-
twi\t the queen anld llie carl ol Bodwell, and lallly for their own
fiurtties. In the ;ncgjxtation of whichll mattcrs 1 have (as your
lordlhips well know) (lent a' lon,, time to no purptifc, not being
Phle to prevail in nly thling with tlloli lords, to llhe (een my so-
vcreign's f'':isfacilion. Of which Llrange proceedings toward', her

mjcfly, and undutiful behaviour towards their sovereign, I have
advertised the queen's majesty ; fie (not being minded to bear
this indignity) hath given me in charge to declare her further
pleasure unto them, in such fort as they may well perceive her
majefly doth dilallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath
revoked me. And further hath given me in charge to commu-
nicate the fame unto your lordlhips, requiring you to let me
know, before my departure hence, (which (hall be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you) what you and your
confederates will assuredly do, to set the queen your sovereign at
liberty, and to restore her to her former dignity by force, or
otherwise; fieeing these lords have refused all other mediation, to
the end the queen's majesty my sovereign may concur with your
lordships in this honourable enterprize.

And in cafe, through the dispersion of your aff6ciates, your

lord(lips can neither communicate this matter amongQt you, nor
receive resolution of them all by that time, it may pleafi you to
iend me the opinions of so many of you as may confer together,
within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in
this town by Monday or Tuclday next at the furthest, being the
g9th of this August ; for I intend (God willing) to depart to-
wards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I most hum-
bly take my leave of your lordllips ;t Edenburgh, the I3th of
Aug. 1567.

Indorfed r3th of Aug. 1567,

Sir Nicholas Throclkmorton to thJe lord Herry.r.

YOUR good lordfiip's letter of the i3th of August I have receiv- 2^ Ang.
ed the i9th of the fame. For answer whereunto it may like pci.-O7flc'.
your lordflip to understand, that I will fignilie unto you plainly, f'om" a co.
how far forth I am already thoroughly infiruced of the queen's fir Nico1l-
majelty my fovercign's plcafurc, concerning the detention of the :"' l}.'ut t

tcc're' ary
queen your fovcreign, and concerning her relief. Ctc l.

To the firnf her majefly hath given in clarge, to use all kinds

of perfualfon in her name, to move tllclt lords aflenibled at I len-
burgh to desist from this violclit and undutiful lehaviiour, which
lhey use toward their fovcrcign. And in tliis patt, besides tlim
lhew of many rcalons, and 'unldry erlfualioln; olt amicable treaty
with them, her mrijefly lathl willed me to ult: iniec pl:in and fe-
vcrc fpccech unto them, tendlinl Ib I.ar fortl, as if they would nlt
be better adviscd, and rclori thcf thelir outrageous procccdi;igs

exercifcdregainft their sovereign, that then they might be aifured
her majelty neither would, nor could indure such an indignity
to be done to the queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

And notwithitanding these my proceedings with them, they

have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as yet neither
will they consent to the enlargement, neither susser me to speak
with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to treat any
more with them after this manner. WVhereupon I have adver-
tifed the queen's majefly my sovereign, expecting daily her ma-
jefty's further order; and as I flall be advertised thereof, so will
not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship; and in the
mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordship
hath written unto me. Thus with my due commendations to
your good lordship, I commit the fame to almighty God, refling
always to do you the pleasure and service that I can lawfully,
At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, I567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 271.)
,Account of lord fierreis's behaviozr in the parliament

held December I 5, 567.

Paper Of- THE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the
Pfie. duke and himself, their friends and adherents, (the duke him-

self, the earl of Caffilles, and the abbot of Kilwinning being also
present) to persuade the union of the whole realm in one mind.
Wherein he did not spare to set forth filemnly the great praise
that part of this nobility did delerve, which in the beginning
took means for punifhmeint of the earl 13othwell, as also feeing
the queen's inordinate aifeRlion to that wicked man, and that fle
could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
fequeflring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of
noblemen. That their honourable doings, which had not spared
to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their native country
from the ilanderous reports that were oiikcn of it among other
nations, had wecll dcfirv cl thiat all their I,:t recren Ihould join
w;ti tlihem iln 10 good a caulc. ' hat lie and tihey, in whofle names
he (lid ljeak, wouldi willingly, and withoul any comlpulfion, en-
tcr thlenilvcls in the fame yoke, nnd put their lives and lands in
ile like hazard, for maintenance of our icnlif. lAnd if the queenl
hcrfzllf were in Scotland, accollpanidi w\ith 20,000 men, they
· j,i; 'bt: of the fhinlc mind, and fight in our qlarrel. He hoped

tlte remainder noblemen of their party, IIuntly Argule, and
others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would
come to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnefily
move thell. And if they will remain ofltilate, and refuse to
qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and their friends, join
with us to corred them, that otherwise will not reform them-
selves. So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our
party, none of ourselves could have made. He did not forget
to term my lord regent, by the name of regent, (there was no
mention at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at
every word, when his speeches were direced to him, accompa-
nying all his words with low courtesies aftcr his manner.

No, XXIV, (Vol. I. p. 085.)
Part of a Letter from 7fir Francis Knwolls to Cecil, tlb

iAg. 1568, from Bolionl.

--BUT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to An oi;i:i-
favour the form, but also the chief article of the religion of the al. Pa'.!''L
gospel, namely, justification by faith only: and ihe heareth the
faults of papeftry revealed, by preaching or otherwise, with con-
tented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and (lie doth not
seem to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a Letter, from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 2 :

Septemper, 568, from Bolton.

---IT came to this queen's ears of late that (lie was bruitcld to
be lately turned to the religion of the gofpell, to the great dillil-
ing of the papills hereabouts, which thing flie herself corrfefled
unto me, and yellerday openly in the great chamber, when the
alffembly was full, and some papists present, flhe took occalion to
1'peak of religion, and then openly lile profefed herTclf to be of
the papill religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame,
more earnefily than llle had done a great while afore, altho'
her defences and arguments were so weak, that the es'e;t of icer
iccch was only to siew her zeal; and afterwards to me alent,
when I mniliked to fee her become so confidently backward in
leligion,, y, aid (hi, would you have Inc to loolf France and
Spain, and all my friclnds in other places, by iccming to change
my religion, and yet I am not affired tile queen my good (illt r
will be my assured friend, to the fatisfai.lion of niy Lonllaor :.:;d
zexpct&tion.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

tleen Elizabeth to the earl of Mlurray.

Paper-Of. RIGHT trufly and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well,
lice. From
a copv cor. Where we hear fay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts
rcaed by of Scotland, that whatloevcr fliould fall out now upon the hear-
lecretaiy y
Cecil. ing of the queen 9f Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to

acquit the said queen concerning the horrible riurder of lier late
husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereof, as we
cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and therefore we
have tlhoght good to asure you, that the fame is untruly devised
by the authors to our difhionour. For as we have been always
certified from our said fitler, both by her letters and mefiTges,
that ifh is by no means guilty or participant of that murder, which
we wifil to be true, so surely if ftle flould be found juitly to be
guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it should behoove us to confider
otherwifc of her cause than to latisfy her dcfire in restitution of
her to the government of that kingdom. And so we would have
you and all others think, that shall be dilpofcd to conceive ho-
nourably of us and our a&ions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)
Sir Francis IKolllys to Cecil the 9tb of Oitober, 156S,

.from Ylork.

.An o,.;;iil. --- Iy lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to
:1sl.i'atr- attend upon him here Th'lurfcl.y las, I made my repair hither

accordingly, mcanin to flay here until Munday next; as touch-
ing the matters of the comminifon, tllt his grace and the reft have
from her highncfs, his grace hath imparted unto me of all things
thecrcunto appertaining, and \vhllt hath hitherto pal'cd, and altho'
tlhe matters be too vciglhty for my weak capacity, to prcifrne to
iuter any opinion of mine own il hrcof, yet I fee that my lord
llcrris for his parte labourctlh a rcconciliallon, to he had without
the extremity of odious accuiltions; my lord of Ledlington a;io
fiith to me, tlilt lie coutld \iili tlicle matters to Le ended in dulce
mianer, so tlat it milght be done witlli nilty; of lthe refn you c:al
conccive, lIy tlhe aIlvcr',i'mncntu andti vritllngs, fcnt up lIy oxr;
colnlll iiu t crs.

A Zetter from the bio7p of Ross to the queen of Scots,

from rork, October 1568.

PLEIS your majesty I conferred at length with A. ane great part Cott. Lib.
of a night, who aft'urit me that he had reasoned with B. this Sa- Calz. c'
turday C. on the field, who determinate to him that it was the D.
determinit purpose not to end your cause at this time, but to hold
the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, to make the
E. pursue extremity, to the effect F. and his adherents might ut-
ter all they could to.your dishonour, to the effet to cause you
co:ne in disdain with the hail subjects of this realm, that ye may
be the mair unable to attempt any thing to her disadvantage. And
to this effet is all her intention, and when they have produced
all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter inflantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there, till she
think time to shew you favour, which is not likely to be hastily,
because of your uncles in France, and the fear she has of yourfllf
to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that ye write
an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your sub-
jcas which has offendit you.---This in effect that your majelly
hearing the eflate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you could
not gudely remit your fubjeets in such fort as they might credit
you hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay of this contro-
verfy to be ended. And therefore persuading her D. effeAually
not to trust any who had made such narration. But like as ye had
rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living;
si prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald ufc her
counfell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her fricndnlip to all
others, as well uncles as others, and assure her to keep that thing
ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice. And if D. dif-
credit you, ve wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be remov-
ing within her realn in secret and quiet manner, where her G;
pleased, until the time her G. were fully satisfied, and a:ll occa-
sion of diferedit removed from her. So that in the mean time
your realm were holden il quietness, and your true fuibjcs re-
stored and maintained in their own eflatc, and sic other thing;
tending to this cffEct. And affirms that they believe tlh;: thi.!
may be occasion to cause her credit you thait ye offer so fir; and
it may come that within two or three months she may lbecomti
bctter.mindcd to your grace, for now Ilie is not well minded, UwA
will not fliew you any pleal're for the caufcs forceaid.

Pibf7/Ui i/. B b

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following
key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethingtori.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 296.)
Deliberation of secretary Cecil's co;cerningr Scotlanj,

Dec. 21, I568.
Paper Of- THE bell way for England, but not the eafiefl, that the queen of

. Scotts might remain deprived of her crown, and the slate conti-

nue as it is.

The second way for England profitable, and not so hard.----

That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some perfwafions,
to agree that her son might continue king, because he is crown'd
and herself to remain also queen and that the government of the
realm might be committed to such persons as the queen of Eng-
land should name, so as for the nomination of them it might be
ordered, that a convenient number of persons of Scotland ihould
be first named to the queen of England, indifferently for the queen
of Scotts, and for her son, that is to fay, the one half by the queen
of Scotts, and the other by the earle of Lcnnox, and lady Len-
nox, parents to the child; and out of those, the queen's majefly
of England to make choice for all the offices of the realm, that
are, by the laws of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of
the land.

That untill this may be done by the queen's majclly, the go-

vernment remain in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is, pro-
viding he shall not dispose of any offices or perpetuals to continue
any longer but to these offered of the premises.

That a parliament be summoned in Scotland by several com-
mandments, both of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

--That hostages be delivered into England on tlh young

kling's behalf, to the number of twelve persons of the earle of
MIurr;y's pairt, as the queen of Scotts sh:ill name; and likewise on
the queen's behalf to the like number as the earl of Murray hlall
name; the fline not to be any, that Ihve by inheritance or office
caule to be in this parliament, to remain froi: the beginning of,
te fummmono of that parlianment, untill three mnloths after the par-

Iiament; which hostages fiall be pledges, that the friends of ei-
ther part Ihall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this parliament
it be concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England
shall devise for the government of the realm, (being not to the
hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor contrary to the laws of Scot-
land for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the parlia-
ment at Edinr. the Decemr, 567) (hall be eftablifled to be kept
and obeyed, under pain of high treason to the breakers thereof.

- That by the fame parliament also be ftablilhed all execu-

tions and judgments given againit any person for the death of the
late king.

That by the fame parliament, a remislion to be made uni-

verfally from the queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also
from every one fubjca to another, saving, that restitution be made
of lands and houfcs, and all other things heritable that have been
by either lide, taken from them which were the owners thereof,
at the committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

That by the fame parliament it be declared who flall be fuc-

ceffors to the crown next after the Q.of Scots and her issue; or
else, that such right as the D. of Chatelherault had, at the mar-
riage of the Q. of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be conserved
and not prejudized.

That the Q of Scots may have leave of the queen's majety of

England, twelve months after the said parliament, and that ihe
ifiall not depart out of England, without special licence of the
queen's majefly.

That the young king (hall be nourished and brought up in Eng-
land till he be years of age.

It is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition between

the queen and her fubjecs may be made with certain articles,
outwardly to be seen to the world for her honour, as though all
the paits (hould come of her, and yet for the furcty of contrarys,
that certain betwixt her and the queen's majeity arc to be con-
cluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 298.)

Thc queen to Sir Francis JKollcys, 22z ll. I 5t-9.

WE greet you well, we mean not, at this.point, be any writing, Paper.Ot
to renew that which it hath plealed God to make grevions to us, ice.
and foirowful to vow; lbut forbca;ring the fame as unmeet at this
point, having occasion to commrnd yow in our Iervice,nnd yow airo
vwhilell yow are to flrve us. \Ve require yow to confider of thi;

B b ij

that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hitherts
yow have accuftumate in our fervife; at the time of our las let-
ters written to yow the fourtecnth of this month for removing of
the queen of Scots, we had underfianding out of Scotland of ccr.
tain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongfi
the which one is found to contain great and manifcrt untruths
touching us and others also, as shall and may plainly appear unto
yow by the coppy of the fame, which likewise we fend yow, and
because at the fame time we were advertised, that it fliould be
fliortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we
thought good firfl to remove the queen, before we would disclose
the fame, and then expeEt the iflue thereof; and now, this day
by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained, that
since that time the fame matters contained in the writting, are
published in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought
it very meet, for the difeharge of our honor, and to confound the
falsehood contained in that writting, not only to have the fame
reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
vwhereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to
charge that queen therewith, so as she may be moved to declare
the authors thereof, and persuaders of her to write in such flan-
derous fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, we have
here flayed her commiffloners, knowing no other whom we may
more probably presume to be parties hercunto, then they, untill
the queen flall name some other, and aquit them 3 who being
generally charged without expressing to themn any particularity,
do use all manner of Ipceches to discharge themfclves; wherefore
our pleasure is, that yc flial, after ye have well perused the cop-
py of this writting sent to yow, speedily declare unto her, that
we have good underflanding given us of diverse letters and writ-
tings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand, a-
mongeft wvhich one writting is sent with her commandment ex-
prefsly as now it is already publiflled, as we are much troubled
in mind that a princess as ihe is having a ca:ife in our hands so
implicated with difficulties and calamitys, filould cither conceave
in her own mind, or allow of them that ilould devise such false,
untrue, and improbable matters againll us, and our honor, and
ipecially to have the aventurc to have the ifane being known lb
untrue to be published; and you flhall alfb liy, bccau;lf we will
not think to ill of her, as tlat it fiould proceed of her fell; but
rather lihe hath been counsellcd thereunto, or by ab)ulfc ma;de to
think fomc par: t!hcrof to be true, we re(luicr her, even as flei

may look for any favour at our hands, that file will disburden
herself as mu/ch as truly she may herein, and name thenm which
have been tlhe authors and perfwaders thereof, and so flie flall
make as great amends to us as the cafe may require ; after you
have thus far proceeded, and had some an'wer of her, whether
fie fllall deny the writing absolutely, or name any that have
been the advisers thereof, you f(all fay unto her that we have
rfayed her commissioners here, until we may have some answer
hereof, because we cannot but impute to them some part of this
evil dealing, untill by her anfwcr the authors may be known ;
and as soon as you can have direc answers from her, we pray
you to return us the fame ; for as the cafe ilandeth, ve cannot
but be much dif(uicted with it, having our honour so deeply
touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any thing we
know in our judgment, the earl of lMlurray and others named ia
the fame writing vuid of thought for the matters, to them! there-
in imputed ; you may impart to the queen of Scots ehher the
contents of the slanderous letter, or ftew her the copy to read it,
and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to join
with you there as you fihall think' met.
Sir Francis Knli/'ys to qzuCCZ EiizL'beth, fro;n l , 'tbi-'[y

tbr 2t Sth J'',anuzary, 1568.

--IWILL fupprefsmy own griefss, and pass them over with fillence, AnOrigr.al
for the present learning of your majefly-and for this queen's pi: (rEIce.
answer to the coppie of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I
muff add this unto my brother's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary
yeflernight late in process of time, she did not deny but that
the firlf lines contained in the faime copic, was agreeable to a
letter that file lad sent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of
Murray's promise to deliver her bon into your majefly's hands,
and to avoid that the fame should not be done without her con-
sent, made her, tle faith, to write in that behalf; flie faiith also
that hle wrote that they fliould cause a proclamation to hi made
to fir her people to defend my lord of Murray's intent and pur-
p)fe, for delivering of her flaid lon, and impunge his rebellious
government, as lhe termed it, but flie utterly dcnyeth to have
written any of the other flluderou.) parts of the slid lettcr
touching your majlly y Ile liid allo, tliat ic fi!i)ctLcd that a
''rcnchnmia, now in Scotlla;d, miglit be the a-thor of losme
Scotch letters dcvildl in her name, but ilce would not allow me
to write thlis for aly part of lher ani\vcr.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 303.)
Sir Nicholas ibrognfmorton to the right honourable the

lord of Liddiington.

20th of Ju- YouR'letter of the 3d of July, I have received the irth of the
!Fro, the fame. For answer whereunto you ihall understand, that friends
Original. here to my lord regent and you do wish such a concurrence in al}

doings, as in matter and circumstances there arise no ditfention,
or at the leafl, no more nor other than the difference of countries
doth necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consummation of the matter
in hand, which principally to advance, your allowance, profecu-
tion, and speedy promotion, in Scotland, is most requisite, for
you are so wife, and well acquainted with the ilate of the world,
and with all our humours, as you know that some do allow and
disallow for reason, some for refpeEt of multitude, rome for re-
fpe& of persons, and so the cause is to go forward as men do like
to set it forward. You are not to seek that some will use cau-
tions, some neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly im-
pugne it. And yet all and every of these forts will alter their do-
ings, when they fiall fee the regent and his favourers accord
with the bert and greatest part there, and agree with the wisest
and firongeft party here. Tho' the matter has taken its begin-
ning here, upon deep and weighty considerations, for the well of
both the princes and their realms, as well presently, as in time
to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent and
the realm of Scotland, by you, fiould propose the matter to the
queen our fovercign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
or be disposcd to leave but a scar, and no wound of the hurts past.
I would be glad that this my letter should come to your hands
before the convention, whereat it fceems your queen's restoration
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk fliall be propounded, either
to wynne in them both allowance or rejection. To which pro-
ceedings, becaufs you pray mc to write frankly, I fay and reaon
thus, me thinketh you tfe a propoflerous order, to dcmand the
consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good
end hath rather been felt or prepared, and tllerefore there muof
necds follow either a univerlhl rcrufll, or a licl1ions division a-
ningnl you, whereby a lblouflclIing intelligence mull needs come
to queen E'lizabeth of the inteddeld marria;ge f oni thence, which
ought to have been fecrctly and advisedly propoun(dedl unto Les

highness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing;
her majesty shall be made inexorable, an so bring the matter to
'uch passe, as this which fhoiild have wrought surety, quietness,
and a flay to both the queens and their realms, shall augment
your calamity, and throw us your befl friends into divorfe with
you, and into unhappy division amongst ourfelvcs; for you may
not conjecure that the matter is now in deliberation, but expet-
eth good occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so
slenderly of the managing of this matter, as to think we have not
cast the worst, or to enter therein so far without the alfifrance of
the nobility, the ablef, the wifcft, and the mightiest of this rc,
aim except queen Elizabeth ; from whom it hath been concealed
until you, as the fittest minister, might propound it to her, on
the behalf of the regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How
far mafler Wcddes deamations do carry them of queen Eliza-
beth's affie6ions, and master secretary's, to assist the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scotts, I know not, nor it is not materi-
al ; but I do assuredly think, that her majcfty will prefer her
surety, the tranquility of her reign, and the confcrvation of her
people, before any device, which may proceed from vain dif-
course, or imperfections of passions, and inconsiderate affecions.
And as for Mi. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh
not to go too fast afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far be-
hind, and special when the reliqucs be of no great value or
power. If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently,
you may repose as well of him in this matter, as of the duke of
Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, Bedford,
Shrewsbury, and the reft of the nobility ; all which do embrace
and protefte the accompliflmient of this cafe. I have, according
to your advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the
fame zeal and care of his well-doing that I owe to him,
whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto him
the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he
feemcth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be as 1 trust, haflen
your coming hither, for it is very neccenary that you were here
presently. Qc Elizabeth both doth write to my lord Regent in
such fort. as he may pcrccive Mr. Wood's dilcourfes of her ma-
jecfy's aifeclion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary othercvife bent
than he coinjclureth of him, the cIectt of which her maIjelly's let-
ter you Ihall underfland, by my lord Lciceller's letter unto you;
at this dispatch. At the co:rt, 20th Jul-, I569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 304.)
Part of a Letter from the earl qs Murray- to L. B. pro-

bably Lord Burleigh.

T,6). BECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small motions, and

Harl. Lib.
-7. B. 5. so. that the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my fovercign's
43- mother, and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while pals been very

frequent in both the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her majefly's
ears. I will, for fatisfa-lion of her highness, and the discharge
of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interest,
and medling in that matter,' from the very beginning, knowing
whatsoever is prejudicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to
the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me. What confer-
rcnccs was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able to de-
clare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt
him and me, either at that time, or since. And to the end her
majefly may understand how I have been dealt with, in this mat-
ter, I am compelled to touch some circumfiances, before there was
any mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the
commifiloners, I found very--and neutral dealing with the duke,
and others her highness's commiflioncrs, in the beginning of the
cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely, and so
further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flick-
ing at our just defence in the matters that were objeced against
us, by the iaid queen's commiflioners, looking certainly for no o-
ther thing, but summary cognition in the cause of controversy,
with a small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day,
the Lord Lithington's fccretary rode with the duke to Howard,
what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that night.Lithington re-
turning, and entring in conferrcnce with me upon the slate of our
acion, I was advised by him to plfs to the duke, and require fa-
miliar conferrence, by the which I might have onme feeling to
what issue our matters wcuild tend. Acccording to which advice,
having gotten time and place convenielTt in the gallery of the
house where the duke was lodged, nlter renewing of our firll acquaint-
ance made at 3erwick, the time before the aflize of Ltith, and
some fpcclchs palsed betwixt us ;' le began to aly to me, how he
in England had favour and credit, and 1 in Scotland had will and
fricnldfliip of many, it was to be tllo't there could be none more
fit inflruinents, to travel for the continuance of llhe amily betwixt
the rcalmsi, than we two. And fb that difoul.fC upon the p'ircnl:

state or both, and how I was entered in that a&ion tending so fat
to the queen's diflonour, I was willed by hiim to confider how
matters flood in this, what honour I had received of the quecn,
and what inconvenicncies herdefimation ill the matters laid to her
charge might breed to herpoflerity. Her refpet was not little tothe
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my
unfriends had the next refpedt, and that I should cfteem the iffuc
of her body would be the more affecionate to me and mine, than
any other that could attain to that crown. And so it (hould be
mectelt, that ille afirmed her diminion made in Lochlevin, and
vwe to abftrad the letters of her hand write, tlat file flould not
be def:itned in England. My reply to that was, how the matter
lad passcd in parliament, and the letters seen to manyi so that the
abflrafing of the fame could not then secure her to any purpofce
and yet Ihculd we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us.
Aflirming it would not be fair for us that way to proceed, feeing
thc queen's nimjefly of England was not made privy to the matter
as she ought to be, to be in refped we were purposely come in
Ei.ngland for that end, and for the - of the grants ofiour caule.
The duke's anrwer was, he would take in hand to handle matters
well enough at the court. After this, on the occasion of certain
articles, that were required to be resolved on, before we entered
on the very declaration of the very ground of our action, we came
up to the court; where 'ome new commiflioners were adjoined to
the former, and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the
parliament house at VJeftlinfler, in presence of which commis-
fioners for the said queen, and-- through the-- rebuking of
the queen of England's own commissioners, we uttered the whole
of the aslion, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations,
as we had, which might move the queen's majelty to think well
of our cause. \V7hereuion expecting her highness declaration,
and secing no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given,
but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, Hland-
ing in hazard and danger, Wve were put to the uttermost point ofi'
our witt, to imagine vuhercunto the matters would tend, tho'
albeit we had left nothing undone for jufljlicatiol of our causes,
yet appeared no end, but continual Inotions made to come to bome
accordwith the queen, and rcllore her to whole or half reign. I lad
no other anllwer to give tlhcn, but tllhat 1 Illould neiCther do againt
eonlf:iencc nor honour in that matter. Notwithilanding feeing thia
my pluin anl .cver wvrotiult o endl, nor dispatch to us, annd that I was

c

in formed that the duke began to mislike of me, and tofpeak of mc, a!
Probably that I had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her-----.

ere and murderer, I was advised to pass to him, and give him good

words and to purge myself of'the things objeted to me, that I
flould not open the sudden entry of his evil grace, nor have him
to our enemy----- confidering his greatfiefs. It being there.
withal whispered, and hlewed to me, that if I departed, he stand-
ing discontented and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such
trouble in my way, as my throat might be cut before I came to
Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough appear to her
marriage, -I should not put him in utter difpair, that my good will
could not be had therein. So few days before my departing, I
came to the park in Hampton-court, where the duke and I met
together, and there I declared unto him that it was come to my
ears, how some misreport should be made of me to him, as that I
should speak irreverently and rashly of thle Said queen my fove-
reign's mother, such words as before expressed, that he might

Probably --- thereby my affecion to be so alienate from her, as that i
fJi/pea. could not love her, nor be content of her preferment, howbeit he

might persuade himself of the contrary, for as flhe once was the
person in the world that I loved best, having that honour to be
io near unto her, and having received such advancement and hon.
our by her, I was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wish her
body harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of me,
(howsoever the truth were in the self) and as to the preservation
of her son, now my sovereign, had moved- me to enter into this
'cause, and that her own pressing was the occasion of that was ut-

Probably tered to her-- whensoever God flould move her heart to re-
"dz/onoz. pent of her by past behaviour and life, and after her known rc-

pentance, that the flould be separate from that ungodly and un-
lawful marriage that the was entred in, and then after were join-
ed with such a godly and honourable a personage, as were assec-
tioned to the true religion, and whom we might trull, I could
find in my heart to love her, and to fliew her as great pleasure,
'favour, and good will-, as ever I did in my life;. and in cafe, he
should be that personage, there Was none whom I could better
like of, the quee n-- in-- of England being made privy
to the matter, and (ie allowing thereof, which being done, I
flould labour in all things that I could, to her honour and plea-
sure, that were not prejudicial to the king my fovercign's eflate,
and prayed him not to think othcrwife of me, for my aflection was
rather. buried and hidden within me, awaiting until' God should
direEt her to know hclrflf than utterly alicnitcd and ablradcd

from hser; which he feemedto accept in very good part, faying,
Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing, whereunto I will
make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing I came to my lodging, and by
the way, and all night, I was in continual thought and agitation
of mind, how to behave myself in that weighty matter, first, ima-
gining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempted without
the queen's Majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this
realm and I myself in particular having received such favour and
comfort at her hlghlnefs's hands, and this whole isle such peace
and quietness, since God possessed her majesty with her crown.
And on the other part, feeing'the duke had disclosed him to me,
protefling, none other were or should be privy to our speech, I
tho't I could not find in my heart to utter any thing, that might
endanger him ; moved to the uttermost with these cogitations, arid
all desire of leep then removed, I prayed God to fend me some
good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfafdion of my
troubled mind, which I found indeed; for upon the mori, or
within a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my
lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the court, where he began
to find firange with me, that in the matter I made so difficult to
him, flanding so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had
in my communication with the duke, come so far- and there
he made some discourse with me, about that which was talk be-
twixt us, I perceiving that the duke had--- the matter to my Probably
lord of Leicetler, and thinking me thereby discharged at the di/clofed.
duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in
every point to my lord of Leicester, who desired me to (hew the
fame to the queen's majesty, which I refused to do, willing him
if he tho't it' might import her highness any thing, that he as
one- by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her
highness's hands is obliged to wilh her well, should make declara-
tion of the fame to her majesty, as I underfland by some fpecch
of her highness to me, he did. ''his my declaration to the duke
was the only cause, that tIaid the violence, and trouble prepared
for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways understand. The fame
declaration I was obliged to renew (ince in writings of---- fnt
to my servant John Wood. The film whereof, I truf, he flew-
ed the duke, and something also I wrote to himself, for it was
tho't this ihould redeem some time, that the duke ihould not fud-
denly declare him our enemy, for his grcatnefs was oft laid be-
fore me, and what fricndflmio he had of the chief of the nobility

C c ij

in England, so that it might appear to the quecn's majefly 'if
England--to cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly that
might feemi favourable for us, we had Ibinc caulc to furfped that
her highness flould not be contrarious to the marriage when it
fhlould be propoled to her. The lharp mcfleage sent by her majcl-
ty with the lord Boyd, who had the like cominiiiion from the
duke tending so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were
proposing one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think
that her high]ncis had been foreseen in the duke's dcfign, and that
site might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was de-
viled in England, that the lord of Lethington floulcl come as
from me, and break the matter to her highness, as her majesty in
a letter declared that she sooke:l for his coming, yet that devirf
proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convcnticn could
Pmrhably no wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned,

but altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the lfame, great incon-
veniencies, to the surely 'nd q'ictncfs of this whole illc ; for our
proceedings have declared our mi'!liing and dli'.loklwaunce of the
purpose from the bcginnlig, and if \e haid pI;llt:d, he was ready
for the journey, Alnd in likcwifCe it was dcviked to give confllet,
tlhat the----letween ilhc filid quen anld lothlwell, flhuni( l e
Ilih'red to proceed ill tlis rcalin, as it was dcfircd by the said loril
loyd, by refon we could not underlland what was the qucen's
maijetly's pleasure, and allowance in tlhat bells -- nd where-
as ye mean, that her highness was not made privy of any faich in-
tention, the fault was not in nme. The rfir motion being declar-
cd, as 1 have vritten, to my lord of Leicefler, and by him im-
parted to her maefiy, u far as I could pcrceivc by fame fp.ech
of her highness's to mie, before my depalrting. Thus I have p!la.n-
ly declared how I have cbeen dealt wvitlal for this marriage, and
how just neccityv moved me not to reqoire direly,. tlhat which
the duke appeared so-.-- unto. And for my threat :ings, to
arent to the fame, I iave exprfeied the mpnnner; the persons, tliat
laid the matter befoire me were of my own company. lpit tl,
duke since hath fpcken, that it was his writing '0high foved lmy
life at that time. In conclufon I pray you persuade her nimjefly,
that lic let no fi;ccc:cs nor any other thing palied and pbjcEed to
my prejudice, move her majiely tp a!tcr icr favaur--towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my afTured conltancy towarc'.s her
highness; for in any thing; whichl mlay tend to her Lonour and
surety, I will, vhile I live, hIflow myfclf, and all th.it will do
for me, notwithltanding my hazard or danger, a.s proof lih;il c.
clarc, when her m:ijcefy fnds tiime to employ me.

# APPENDIX TO THE VI. VII. and VIII. BOOKS.

T-- -*** ' j" - *'. '_ /- ^1TJ~_ -..._--_'_-.- - , ---- . ..- _-- - -_T - ._. __ -- "..
A P P E N D I X

TO TH E VI. VII. and VIII. B OOKS.

No. I. (Book VI. . 312.)
7iliam Mattlrzand 6f Ledinton, to nmy lord of LeiceJfer,

Adarch 2ith, i 570, from Lcdinjton.

.i- ul great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be the divi- An Or;g;in
sions thereof in dangerous faAlions, doth pre!s me to frame my
lettcrs to your lordflip, in other fort, then were behovefull fir
me, if I had no other rcfpcEt, but only to maintain my private
credit; therefor I am driven to furnish them with matter, which
I know not to be plaulible, whereupon by mifconflruing my mean-
ing, some there may take occasion of offence, thinking tlhat I ra-
*hcr utter my own p tflions, tlan go about to inform your lordflip
truly of the tfate ; hut I trutf my plain dealing fiall hear rccord
to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame fcnfible, I will
lay before your lord(liip's eyes, the plat of this country ; which
first is divided into two fadcions, the one pretendin:g the nainte-
nance of the king's reign, the other alledging the queen to have
been cruelly dealt withall, and unjufftly deprived of her fate;
the former is composed of a good number of nobility. gentlcme;,
and principal burroughs of the rcalmc, who flall have, as Mr.
Randolph bearcth us in hand, the queen's majelty your fovcrrcin's
allo.vace and proteRion; the other hath in it some molt princi-
pall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the infe-
ri.)r fort, throughout the whole realm, which allo lool alfrlredly
that all hings do allow their quarrel and will aid them acco:ding-
ly. WVhat conlclquence this division will draw after it, 1 leave it
to your lordlliip's confidciation, there is fallen out anothcr Civi-
sion, accedlcntally, by my lord regent's deiath, which i k

like to

*chang, hlle li;Lit; e f tle other two Iaclions, to incre:fe t!: one,
aiti di lirdihilli the other, lwhich i,; grounilcd u:;;on tie rcgime:: t et
the realm,. Solme nunllnbr of noblcmnii a.fi:l to t 1hei govern:ent,
p:'rc.!(.li'g right. l. t.clto by rz';:ln of the cit.c .-', dicniullon of tl-

Froun, and her commiflion granted at that time for the regiment
during the king's minority, another faAion doth altogether re-
pine against that division, thinking it neither fit nor tolerable,
that three or four of the meanest fort amongst the earls, fiall
presume to challenge to thenmfelves a rule over the whole re-
alme, the next of the blood, the first in rank, the greatest al-
way both for the antientry of their houses, degree, and forces,
being negleckted; this order they think prepoflerous, that the
meancr fort Ihall be placed in publick funcion to command, and
the greater flall continue as private men to obey; betides that,
they think if the commiflion had in the beginning been valew-
able, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not be ex-
tended to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed
are ccafed, and so the effect of the whole void; the letter part of
this division hath many pretences, for besides the queen's faction,
which is wholly on that fide, a great number of there that have
heretofore professed the king's obedience, do favour the fame,
and will not yield to the government of the other, whose prefer-
ment for refpeats they mislike, when the queen's facion flall be
increased, with a part of the king's, and these not of leait sub-
fiance, and yow may judge what is like to infue; an other inci-
dent is like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given
out here in Scotland, that the queen's majefly is setting forth
some forces towards the border, which shall enter this realm, to
countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the
contrary faction, and bruts are spread, that the fame fllall be here
out of hand; these that think themselves of cqual force with their
contrary fation at home, or rather an over-match to them, yet
not able to encounter with the forces of another prince, rather
than yield to their inferiors, will I fear, take advise of necessity,
and evil councillors, and seek also the maintenance of some so-
reign prince, whereby her majelly (allho no further inconvenient
were to be feared) must le driven to excessive charges, and it
would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at one
time to set us together by the cars, for now vl).cn the rumour of
your iorccs coming towards the border is flpread abroad, even n:a
the falmn timnc is arrived at I)umbarton, a galzeon with a ncffecn-
ger lbcnt cxprcfly from tlhc king of lrance, to that part of the no-
bility, that favours the queen, to learn the alate of the country,
and what lupport they lack or delire, either for furtherance of her
afairs, or for thlicr own fafcy; af'iuredly this meflsrgc will be
vcell received, andt fufered accordingly, tlis is the presen.t nlat

6f Scotland. ' Now if your lordship would also know my opinion,
how to choice the best, as the cafe standeth; I will in that also
iatisfie your lorflip, I am required from them to deal plainly, and
your lordlhip fllall judge wither I do so or not; for I think it
plain dealing, when I simply utter my judgement, and go not a-
bout to dilfuife my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realne of Scotland, which file
hath gone about to purchase, with beflowing great charges, and
the loss of some of her people; this desire is honourable for her
highness, profitable for both the contrys, and of none to be dif-
allowed5 specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the
whole realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn;
nor will it prove commodious for her to suit the friendflhip of a sac-
tion of Scotland, for in so doing, in gaining the belt, file may
lose the more, and the fame would bring all her actions with us
in suspicion, if (le fllould go about to nourifli faQtions amongfl us,
which meaning I am lfre never entered into her majesty's heart;
then if it be the friendlhip of the whole flhe doth demand, let her
not, for pleasure of one part, go about to overthrow the remnant,
which will not be so faifable, as onme may give her to underfrand;
but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
state, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means
to an uniformity, so llhall she give us all occasion to think well of
her doings, that fie tendeth our wealth, and provoks us univer-
sally to with unto her majelty a moil prosperous continuance; by
the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, file will fend forces to
iupprels these whom they millike, ind so consequently offend mua
ny ; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage to pro-
vi'de for their own fafty, and not only will embrace the means
partly offered, but will also procure further, at the hand of other
princes. 'This for mine own part, I do abhorr, and protest I de-.
fire never to fee forces of firangers to set foot within this land,
yet I know not what point necefTity may drive men into, as if men
in the middle of the sea were in a flip, which suddenly should b<:
set on fire, tie fear of burning would make them to leap into the
sea, and soon after the fear of the water would drive them to
cleivc again to the fired fiip, so for avoiding prefcnt cvill, menc
will many times be inforccd to have rccourfe to anotlher, no lel.
dangerous. Trull mc forces will not bring forth any good fruit
to her majjcfy's behove, it must be obme wiay of treaty llhall serve
the turn, wherein by my former letters your lordliip doth know
already what is my judglmelnt ; yow i'e hovw plainly. I do v:ritc,

v'ilhout consideration in what part my letters may be talkei, yet
mly hope is that lifch as will favourably interpret them, flall think
that I mean as well to her majelly, and that realme, as tlefe that
.will utter other language. I will the continuance of the amity
betwixt the two contrys, without other relifc, and will not con-
ceal from her majelty any thing to my k:owvlcdge, tending to the
prejudice tllereofj if I illall perccave her majelty taking frank
dealings in evill part, I Ihall from thenceforth forbear; in the
mean season I will not ceale to trowble your lordflip, as I fihall
have occasion to write, and li I take my leave of your 1ordfliip.

No; IL. (Book VI. p. 316.)
A L;tter- of queen /if./:betb to the earle of SzGeks, 7itly

2d, 1570.

Callce. R. IGHT truily and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day
M. S. Hil'
tory. V. :. we have received your letters of 28 the lafl month, with all o-
P'* I.
i ther letters; sent from Scotland, and mentioned in your letters,

whereunto answer is desired to be given before the tenth of this
month; which is a very lfort time, the weightiness of the mat-
tersj and the diltance of the places confidered ; nevertheless we
have, as the shortness could susser it, relolved to give this anf-.cr
following, which we will, that yow, by warrand hereof, fiall
cause to be given in our tame to the earl of Lennox and the reli
of the noblemen conveend witl them. Where it is by them, in
their letters, and writtings alledg'd, that fur lack of our resolute
einiwer concerning the ellablilhing of the regiment of the realm
urder their young king, great inconveniences have happneld,
and therefore they have deferred now at their lalt convention to
determine of the famine, who lhall have the place of governour,
until the 211t this month, before v;which time they require to
h:ive our advise, in what perlon or perlons the government of that
reala Iliall be citetlliflied, we accept very thankfull the goold will
ind reputation they have of us, in yieldling so frtnkly to require
and follow our adviie ill a matter, that touchct thle tate of their
king, their lld.ves, and rCealml si near, \vhlerein as we perceive,
t!:at by our illfoilr forblvarili to intermelllellC tlIercin, they have
taikeln l;me ili inn'frt, ts tlloughl tlhat we would not have regard to
thrir (Il;te und ii:crty, i¥ oni the other part, they ct' tlicir widclons
oulght to lliirk, that it minght be by tlhi; whole world cvill intcr-
jri-ted in us to appoint thernl a forll of g,ovr'm1llcn t, or a g;ovcr-
ntinll Iy naitr.:, ifr tllat holvlytc\'r t.'c 'ithouid rc.inl well if we

should do so, yet it could not be without some jealousy in the
heads of the estate, nobility, and community of that realm, that
the government thereof should be by me specially named, and
ordain'd; so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking
most that they should take any dicfomfort by our forbearing to
show our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed,
confidering with ourselves how now that realm had been a good
space of time ruled in the name of their king, and by reason of
his base age, governed heretofore by a very carefull and honour-
able person, the earle of Murray, untill that by a mischievous
person, (an evil example) he was murdered, whereby great dif-
order and confusion of neceflity had, and will more follow, if de-
termination be not made of some other fpcciall person, or per-
sons, to take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpcciall,
for adminifIration of law and justice, we cannot but very well al-
low the desire of these lords to have Come Ipecial governour to be'
chosen; and therefore being well affurecl, that their own under-
flanding of all others is best to confider the state of that realm,
and to discern the abilities and qualities of every person meet and
capable for such a charge, we fllall better fatisfie ourselves, whom
they by their common consent shall firfi choose and appoint to
thaf-purpofe, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly nam-
ed, and that becaule they Ihall perceave that we have care of the
person of their king, who by nearnels of blood, and in refpcct of
his so young years, ought to be very tender and dear to us, we
shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they ihall all accord
to name his grandfather, our cousin, the carl of Lennox, to be
governor alone, or jointly with others, (whlom we hear to be in
the mean time by their common content appointed lieutenant ge-
neral) reason moveth us to think that none can be chofcn in that
whole realm, that llall more desire the preservation of the king,
and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being
next to ihim in blood of any nobleman of that realm, or cll'e-
where, and yet, hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to thcm
this choice, except they llall of thcmfclves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well alfurcd, that
whatfocver reports of devises, are, or lhall be fprcad or invented,
that we have already yielded our mind to' alter tie slate of the
king or government of that realm, the fame are withiout joft
caile or ground by us given, for as we have already adveitifid
them, that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour
we could not refuTe, what the c::ccn of Scots or her part filall

FIo~mI' If. D d

f;y arid offer, not only for her own affirance, but for'the vealt,'
of that realm, yet not knowing what the faime will be, that fiall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and justice,
by advancing her cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we
fliall deliberately and afluredly fee, upon the healing of the whole,
some place necessary, aid just cause to do ; and therefore finding
that realm ruledc by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that
realm, and thereof invested by coronation and other folemnities
used and requisite, and generally so received by the whole eltates,
we mean not, by yielding to hear tle complaints or informations
of the queen againff her son, to do any aa whereby to make
conclusion of governments, but as we have found it, so t6ffuffer
the fame to continue, yea not to susser it to be altered by any
nieans that we may impefle, as to our honor it doth belong, as
by your late actions latll maniffilly appeared, untill by foae j.us-
lice, and clear cause, we lhall be direcqly induced otherwise to
declare our opinion ; and this w:e would have them to know to
be our determination and course that we -mean to hold, whereon
we trufl they for their king may fee how plainly and honourably
,'e mean to proceed, and how little aaufe they have to doubt of
us, whatsoever to the contrary they have or nfall hear- and on
lhe other part, we pray them of their vilkloms to think how un-
lIonourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us, when
the queen. of Scotland doth so many ways- require to hear her
, cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for
matters betwixt ourselves and ler, as b- tv'ixt herself and her ion
and his party of that .realm, agailnf which offers no reason could
nmove us to refule to give ear, that we fllould aforehand openly
anld direfly, before the causes be heard and confidered, as it
ivere, give a judgement or sentence either for ourlclves or for
them, whom fle maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye f!all
adconilih them, that they do not, by misconceiving our good
mleaning toward tlem, or by indireil afl'rtions of their adverf ry
grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in Iich
fort, thatour good meaning tow rds them fliall not take such effect
i)\w;ird- them, as they flwll dcfire, or thlcniflves have need of.
All this our anfwcr ye fliail cauii,. lbe given them, and let them
l:nov, tliat for the Ihortnefs us timeu, this bein;'; the end of the
clcond of this month, we neillChr could make ainy longer decla-
r:iliuo of our mind, nor yet write any f'cvcral letters, as if time.
;xi:.Il h1avs served we would have done. 2 July, 157s..'

APPEN..IX .91

No. III. (Bok VI. p. 3I6.)

the bi/bop ofRofs tofecrctaryLidingtolnrom C'hat ifwcrtlb.

i ,AVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chat- w, Jun.
tirworth, the ioth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had '
written to you at length, like as the queen did with my lord Le-
vingflon, by .the which you will be resolved of nmany points con-
tained in your said letter. 1 writ to you that 1 received your
letter and ceedit from Tilos. Cowvy at London, and sent to Lci-
ceaer to know the queen of England's mind wvhether if you floold
come hlere or not. I-le fcnt me word, that Ie wili no ways have you
come as one of the commriflioncrs, becaul:e lle is yet ofi'cldcd \eill
you; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hith:r, Ibut
remain where you are, to ule your wilfdom and diligenccc, ;'s may
bell advance the queen's afftirs, for I perceive your weil and safe-
ty depends thereon, in respect of the great feid and cnnllity born
againfl you by your Scots people, and the great hcirlhip taicn
of your father's landis; both were sure dlemontfrations o' their
palice. Yet I am encouragcd by your stout and dcliberatc min:d.
Aflure yourself no deligence fliall lie omitted to procure 'luppolts
fJrth off all parts Wlere it may be had. W'e will not reftl; tle
aid neither of papifi, Jew, nor Gentil, after rmy advic,; ; niln to
this end, during this treaty, let all things le well prepared. And
feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into Slanders, the queen
thinks it very necessary that he so do, for the duke D'zAlva has
gotten express command of the king of Spain to give fIpport, and
I am sure that there he flall have aid both of Slanders and the
pope, for it abides only on the coming of some men of counte-
nance, to procure and receive the lame. He mull needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty, which : ill
l)e a great furtherance to the llame here. The queen las already
V;rittcn to the duke D'Alva for tllis cfcc', ad.'ertizing cf hi.
coming; there is certain fumns of money coning for fupicrt of tl.c
r.Unglilhmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope. W\here-
ulon wvould lie had a general conuniflion to deal for them, and
Icceive fuclich ;iins as (hall be given. 'i i means il.1 lsc found to
':.Lure you le anlflerit of thle linlls you writ 1;'r, to Ie(' ijnlli u1lo0
Ille ftlrnl iling of the ca;llc of .'.ilt'lv ir l, l) being fili: hlncl
:!nd true man wvcrc sent to Flandecrs to recci;e it, as f:li is, wh!ich
I would you prepareI d

; fd lInt. Orders (1all be taken ifor tle
e'.: :las yoeu writ of. We 1hav proponit your aivc' i.l t; 'ti' m'

D d ij

to treat with the queen of England, for retiring of her forces
puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen are
tho't very good, but above all keep you well out of their hands,
in that cafe, eflote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may take ex-
perience with the hard dealing with me, how ye would be used
if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of danger being in medio
nationes pravae; alway no fear, with God's grace, fiall make me
ihrink from her majesty's service. Since the queen of England
has refused that you come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft
fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Ca-
thenes might by'any means be procured to come, they were the
mofl fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet if he and I were
not both of one firname; so the treaty would get the less credit
either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend the belt
may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come with them
whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure; in my last packet,
with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a let-
ter of the queen's own hand writing to him, which I trust ye re-
ceived. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to
have had by your presence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do.
The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying God to fend you
health. From Chattifworth the I5th. of January,

No. IV. (Book VI. p. 3-28.)
The dieclzration of obn Cais to the lords of Grain7ge and

Lethington zowziare zupon the 8th day of OR. I571.

WVuERaEAs you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure, what
ihe will do for appeasing of these controversies, and therewith has
offered yourselves to be at her commandment, touching the com-
mon tranquility of the whole ille, and the amity of both realms;
her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye flould leave off the mainte-
nance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king,
whom fie will maintain to the utmost of her power.

And in this doing, flie will deal with the regent and the king's

party, to receive you into favour, upon realfnable conditions for
security of life and livings.

Also lhe fays that the queen of Scotts, for that fhc has praclifed

with the pope and other princes, and alto with her own fllbjcfls
in Englhand great and dangerouts treasons against the slate of her

own country, and also to the deftrudion of her own person, that
she shall never bear authority, nor have liberty while fie lives.

If ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you, fle will

presently aid the king's party, with mei, ammunition, and, all
necessary things, to be had againfi you.'

Whereupon her majefly requires your answer with speed, with.
out any delay.

No. V. (Book VI. p. 335.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general a/Jembly, Autgult 5tb,

1572.

FIRST, desiring a new aa to be made ratifying all things concern- Caldc-xv.
ing the'king and his obedience that were enaBed of before with- MvI.S. Hitlo
out any change, and that the ministers who have contraveend the ry.. .56,
former ats be corrected as accordeth.

That fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility rnaintain-

ing the king's cause, that whatloever proceedeth in this treaty of
peace they be mindful the kirk be not prejudg'd thereby, in any
fort, and they specially of the miniftcrs, that have been robbed of
their possessions within the kirk during the time of the troubles,
or otherwise dung and injured, may be reflorcd.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other

benefice be given to any person, contrary to the tenor of the a&ss
made in the time of the firlt regent of good memory, and they
that are given contrar the said asss, or to any unqualified person,
may be revoked and made null be an a& of fccret council, and
that all bifhopricks so vacand may be presented, and qualified per-
sons nominat thereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof,
according to the order taken in Leith be the commilliontirs of
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January lall, and in
special to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick of Rots to the
lord Methvcn.

That no pections of benefices, great or small, .be given be fim-

ple donation of any lord regent, without content of the possessor
of the saids benefices having tittle thereto, and the admission of the
fupcrintcndent or comminifoners of the province where this bene-
fice lycth, or of the bishops lawfully cleced according to the said
order taken at Lcith ; and dcfire an aft of council to be made
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine may be
fpccially inaitcd, with inhibition to the lords of f'cfion to give any
clttcrs or dccrccts, upon lich simple gifts of beneficcs or pentions

rot 'beig given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk prew
fently affermbled declare all ftch gifts null so far as lycth in their
power.

Tlhat the first form ofprefentation to benefices, which were in

the firfl and second regents time, be not chang'd, as now it is
commqnnly: but that this clatfe be contained in the presentation,
that if tile persons presentcd make hot residence, or be flalnderous
or found unworthy either in life or do&rile be the judgment of
the kirk. (to which alwif e lie llall be subject) or meet to be
tr;llfported to anotlier room at the fight of the kirk, the iiaid pre-
fentaticn and all that Illall fall there-upon fliall be null and of no
force nor cff.ct ; and this to have place also in the nomination of
the bituops.

That an a& be made in this af'embly that all things done in

prejudice of the kirk's nfrumptions of the thirds, either be papills
or others, by giving of fews, life-rents, or tacks, or any otherwise
difponing the said aifumned thirds, be declared null with a folemi
protetlation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

That an act be nmade decerning and ordailialng all biflhops, ad-

mitted to the orler of the kirk now received, to give accouit of
tlheir whole rents, and intromillions therewith once in the year,
as the kirk ihall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may easily-
confider the iame to be mnlt expedient and neceflar.

Ancnt tie jurifdlicion of the kirk, that the fame be determin-

ed in this afembly, because this article hath been long pofpond
to make lute to the regent and council for remedy againfi messen-
gers and excommunicate persons.

Lail that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who

procure ngainlf mrnii'ters and miniflry, and for fatting ofjuftice of
the kirk's a&cions in the felicn.

No. VI. (Book VI. p. 338.)
DLc'c7.-',aicn cf ilHenry v Ki/irtCwI, EfqS ; v_,OI, teC &P acc

ccc/idcidI tle 231 d Fb. 15 7 .

Bs it -:own to all men, by there presents, that I IIcn:y Iilli-
g-cweC, E!;i; anmba.iidor for the queen's najcly of Englnnd,
Foura2'rucil as, at tle earncfl motion :nd iolicitation bein, ,i;idc,' Iu
me. on her highliefs': ; 1't.half, t lcre is accord andl pc ilincatiol (,o
the public troubles and civil w\ar witlin this rc:ilin rs Scotll.ii
:,greed and concluded, and the famne favourably cxlcnldcd tonvird-.
tLc right hcr.nurable George carl of -Ituntly, Ich:l CJc!i:'it n..

.taidzeiioch, and the lord John Hamilton, foi to tl.'e dukec's Grice of
ChafRellarault, and commnendatour of the abby of Abirbrothock for
the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, thei'r
kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depend'-
ing on them; in treating of the which laid pacilication, the mur-
derers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax
grandfather, late regent to the king's majclty of Scotland his re-
alm and lieges, as allb an article touching the dicliharge for the
fruftis or moveable goods, which the said persons have taken fra
perfonis profefling the king's obedience, or for the damages done
or committed by theni, ince the iSth day of Junij, 1567, and
before the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the com-
mon cause or any plhing depending thereupon, being thought by
the king's commilaries materis of such wveclt and importance, as
the king's present regent could riot conveniently, of himself, re-
mit or discharge the famne. Yet in rifpcft of the inecefit-y of th-.
present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and com-mo:.
quietness of this realm and leiges, it is accorded, that the mat-
ters of remiifon of the laid murderers, and of the discharge of
the said fruatlis, moveable goods, and other dan:ages, moved by
the persons desiring the laid remiflions and difclha-ge to the quceei5
majesty my sovereign, as to the princess nearelt both in blood and
habitation to the king of Scctts. And whatftcvcr her majcfny
Riall- advise arid' counccl touching the said reriiflin' a:n. dif harge,
the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and universal. quiet-
ness of tlh realm of Scotland, llhall perform, oblerve, and fulfill
the fame. And in likewilf, the s.icd earl I'untly, and commen-
datour of Abirbrotlock, beiing urged to have delivered pledge3
and hollages for observation of the conditions of the fiiid accord
and p.tcification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majef-
ty's riame, by virtue of my corminion, .to prornife for them that
they ihall truly and faithfully observe and keep the iiid pacifica-
tion, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their parts, antd
that it would plealb her mrajelly to interpore herrelf, as surety
and cautioner for them to that .cffcct, to the king's majclty of
Scotland their fovcrcign and hlis liid regent, which I have done,
and promis'e to do, by virtue of his majelly's commiiion,, a:; by
the honourable and plain dealing of the liid earl and lord, tli ir
intention to peace well appcars. the lhme being mull agrcc.ill to
tile niind of tile queen'"s inljelly Ily IOvere',ign, whic liI long byi
her miiiflers li.,tli travelled for the finl pacification, ,ind ill tl
enmd, at her :.tI".ion an.i !l.!i;iti.ti,i, the lo1nc is a:eert Icd. l;n'v-

not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk pret
fently assembled declare all su'ch gifts null so far as lyeth in their
power.

That the first form ofprefentation to benefices, which were in

the firfL and second regents time, be not chang'd,. as now it is
commonly: but that this clause be contained in the presentation,
that if the persons presented make hot residence, or be slan.derous
or found unworthy either in life or dortrine be the judgment of
the kirk, (to which alwife he shall be subjed) or meet to be
trnrfported to another room at the fight of the k:irk, the said pre-
fentation and all that lhall fall thereupon illall be null and of no
force nor effect and this to have place also in the nomination of
the bilhops.

That an at be made in this assembly that all things done in

prejudice of the kirk's assumptions of the thirds, either be papists
or others, by giving of fews, life-rents, or tacks, or any otherwise
difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null with a solemn
protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

That an at be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, ad-

mitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give account of
their whole rents, and intromifions therewith once in the year,
as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may easily-
confider the fame to be molt expsdient and necefiar.

Anent the jurisdiction of the kirk, that the fame be determin-

ed in this assembly, because this article hath been long pofpond
to make fute to the regent and council for remedy againli messen-
gers and excommunicate persons.

Last that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who

procure againlt minillers and ministry, and for futting ofjuftice of
the kirk's actions in the fciou.

No. VI. (Book VI. p. 338.)
.Declcra:io.z of IIentry il2 igrew7 , Efq; .upob' Zbc pe'-cc

concluded? thl 23 F Jb. 15 72.

BE it ,known to all men, by tlhere prefcnts, that I Hecnry li!li-
grewe, El] ; amnbali'dor for the queen's ni:jclly of Ingland,
Forafinucli as, at the ean'fl miotiun iand Iblicitation beiuto nl;:ie li
me, on her higlieft's 1 tlialf, there is accord and p:Ici icatioii (,
the public troubles and civil vair witliin tllis rcilAnl tc SculI..nd
agreed and concluded, and the fune flavourably ctcended to\\ar.-
tLc rihllt honouirable Ceorge carl of JIuntly, t
Ic CGO.I! ?n'll

aiaidzehoch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to tl:c dlulke's Grace cos
Chaftellarault, and commrrendatour of the abby ofiAbirbrothock for
the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, thc'r
kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depend'-
ing on them; in treating of the which said pacification, the mur-
derers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax
grandfather, late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his re-
almt and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
frucis or moveable goods, which the said persons have taken fra
perfonis profefling the king's obedience, or for the damages done
or committed by them, since the i5th day of Junij, 1567, and
before the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the com-
mon cause or any shing depending thereupon, being thought by
the king's commifaries materis of such wecht and importance, as
the king's present regent could riot conveniently, of himself, re-
mit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpec of the inceffity of thi
present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and conmmo:
quietness of this realm and leiges, it is accorded, that the mat-
ters ofremiffion of the said murderers, and of the discharge of
the said fructis, moveabli goods, and other damages, moved by
the persons desiring the said remilfions and difcllarge to the queen'
majelly my sovereign, as to t;e princess r.earell both in blood and
habitation to the king of Scotts. And whatfucver her majefly
faiall dvife adid'counccl touching the said reniilijrn and difzharge,
the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and universal quiet-
ness of the realm of Scctland, ihail perform, oblerve, and fulfill
the fame. And in likwcvile' the i-,id earl Huntly, and commen-
datour of Abirbrothock, being urged to have delivered pledgcs
and hofages for obfcrvation of the conditions of the liid accord
and pa.cification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majcf-
ty's name, by virtue of mny commilLion, .to promirfe for them that
they thall truly and faithfully observe and keep the said paciica-
tion, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their parts, and
tlhat it would pleafl her majelly to interpose herself, as furcty
and cautioncr for t!em to that cR'ctA, to the king's m.jctly oi
Scotland their iovcrcign and his l;.id regent, vw!lich I have duon,
and prolmiie to co, by virtue of his majceiy's commitlion, a. by
the honourable and pl;ini dc:iling of the litd earl and lord, tLc ir
intention t,) peace well a:plars the llneic being mlall agreea.le to
the mind of* tile quccn'se Ii.ijciy myv Ibvrciign, whiiclh l lonlg y
her miitl2.:s i:,!h travelle(l for tile Iliid pacification, ;nil in thi
t-::Cd, at h1'r ::.' i an " :l i;t!!-;vt:t:!iJ' the 1'tne is ;.:cor'.!ed. l-nw.v-

lng her majefly's godly desire, that the fame may continue utn-
violate, and that the noblemen and others now returning to the
king's obedience flall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Thercfore in her majesty's name, and by
virtue of my commission, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good
means, the said remission and discharge shall be purchased and ob-
tained to them, their kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers,
now properly depending upon them, (the persons specified in the
firt abftinance always excepted) as also that the said pacification
fllall be truly observed to them, and that her majesty llall inter-
pose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour herself to
cause the fame to be truly. and sincerely kept in all points and ar-
ticles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to this
present subscribed with my hand, and fealed the fame with mine
own feal the I3th day of Febry, Anno Domini, 1572. And
this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof, and the
parliament which shall be appointed for their restitution, or at the
furtheit before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The ifstop of GlafJgow's note concerning the queen of

Scotland's dowry.

^576. THE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowr,
Cal. B. IV. besides other possessions, the dukedom of Turrene, which was

solemnly contra&ed and given to her by the king and estates of
parliament; which dukedom she pofleffed peaceably till I576,
and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his
brother, to augment whose appennage this dutchy was given, to
which the queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes,
who were her near relations, provided the equivalent which was
promised her flould be faithfully performed. So that year, after
a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, flie l..d grant-
ed her the county of Vermaudaifc with the lands and bailiwicks
of Seulcyand Vctry ; tho' 'tis known that county, and the other
lands were not of equal value with Turcnc, but was promiseed to
have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal 'va-
lue. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were con-
firmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court
of aids, chamber of the treafuriy, 'and others neccciary; upon
which file entered into poffleflion of that county, &c. After-
wards, by a valuation of the commuifionrs ofthe che chamber of ac-

oinipts, it was found, that the revenue of that county, &c. did
not amount to those of Turene by 3000 livres. But intlead of
making up this deficiency according to julltice, some of the privy
council, viz. MI. dc Cheverny, the presidents of Bellievre, Ni-
cocholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithltand-
·ing of her aforesaid lofies, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy of Litaimpes, to madam de Monpenfier, from
whom the king received money; of which sale lthe councellors
aforesaid obliged themselves to be glarantees, which lhath hind-
red the aforelaid queen to have juflice done her. So that madam
de Monpenfier hath been put in pollTflion of there lands of Sen-
lis, contrary to all the declaration, proteltation, and assurances of
the king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difpofflffed of her dowry, contrary to all
equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Book VI. p. 34I.)

A tLetterfrom thelord ofLochlevin to the regent Mortowt.

IT will please your grace, I received your grace's letter, and has 3d Marcl:,
confidered the fame. The parson of Camsey, was here at me be- ", 77,,. 1;t
fore the receit thereof. direced fra my lord of Mlar, and the Arl-ci,'-cs,

Bund. 2.

mafner ancnt my lafI written, wliich was the anfwcr of the writ- No. y.
ing that the imallcr sent to me, which I fend to your grace, de-
firing me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given
my answer before the receipt of your grace's letter, that I be-
huiffit to be besyd San& Androis, at ane friends trylt, which I
tnight not omit I understand by my laid cousin, that the king's
majeffy is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent
your lordflip's trial, and that he had witten before his depart-
ing to my Lord Monthrois. I undertand , likewifc, he will
write to your grace to come there for the fame effcct, which I
tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace, for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the bell, and
not to ccep in security, but to turn you with unlfci;,nd heart to
God, and to confider with youirelf, that vwhen the kinli's inajif-
ty was very young, God made him tlle inllrumcnt to divell his
mother from her authority, l who was : tu ral princeI;, for oLl;-nd-
ing of his divine majclty, and that there r anI no vice in liLr, Iut
that the lame is as largcLly in you, except that your grace condc-
scended not to the dcl truli on of your wife. For as to hi:rlotry,
and ambition, 1 think your grace has as far offended God, and

VZolume Il. . e

far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left uiplagueo,
except speedy repentance, which I pray God grant to your grace,
forotherwife your grace canneverhav the love of God nor man. I
pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace believes
that ye have the good will of them that are the king's good-will-
ers, ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfetly that your own
particulars are not contented, lat by the reft, and that moil prin-
cipally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace, heir with me
that I am thus hamlie, for c, rtainly it proceeds from no grudge,
but from the very affection of my heart towards your grace, which
has continued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, be-
cause the matter stands in your grace's handling with the king's
majefly, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I
fee not how ye flhall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to
God, and look on the bell, and call from your grace both your
vices, to wit, ambition and avaritioulhefs. I am riding this day
to SantS Androis, and trust to return on Wednesday at the farth-
eft. If your grace will command me in any offices that are ho-
neff, that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise.
of your grace's mind, and shall do to my power and knowledge,-
and this with my heartilie, &c. &c.

To our irrtJ7y cotint the lord Lochleven.

rrom the TRUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, we receivw
Original,
E. of Ior- ed your letter of the 3d of March, and as we take your plainness-
lon's Ar- therein in good part, as proceeding from a friend and kinsman,
chicves,
Bund. B. in whose good affe&ion towards us we never doubted, so ye may
0'o. 31. not think it firange that we purge ourself so far of your accufa-

tion, as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended in. As
touching our offence to God, we intend not to excufc it, but to
submit us to his mercy ; for ambition surely we thinl none can
jufly accuse us; for in our private estate we could, and can live
as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without fur-
ther aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the government of
the realm, indeed, mon lead us, or any other that fliall occupy
lhat place, not simply to refpe& ourself, but his m:ijclfy's rowme
which we ftipply, and therein not transcending the bounds of
meafuire, as, we truf, it liall not be found we have done, it
ought not to be nttri;lutcd to any ambition in us. For as soon as
ever his majefiy shall think hinifelf ready and able for his own
govcrnment, none fliall more willingly agree and advance the
fame nor J, since 1 think never to ilet imy face ..ainil him, who(l.

hionour, safety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor I
\vill never believe to find otherwise at his hand than favour, al-
though all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him, to
perfuadc him to the contrary. Ab we write unto you, our friend-
ly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully
acquit; as we trull yourself confiders, .ut because tlhe ambaffa-
dors of England, my lord of Angus, the chancellor, treafuter,
and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we pray
you heartily address yourfeli to be theic as soon as ye can, and as
ye lhall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we have
tlio't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from Sterling rides
to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protetion of God.
At Holyroodhoufc, the 4th of MarcLh, 1577.

For the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in

us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to latisfy all cravers,
nor never (hall any sovereign and native born prince, let be any
officer, cfchew the difdais of such, as thinks them judges to
their own reward ; in many causes, I doubt not to find the assist-
ance of my fi.ends, but where my adLions fiall appear unhoneft,
I will not crave their afliltancc, Lut let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Book VI. p. 369.)
.3he coppy of' the king of Fr- ance his dirclionls Jfnt to

Scotlan/d viril) Seilcur dc ia Iotte Fenelon. Tan/fat-
ed out of the erench.

FIR'ST, on their majeltys moll chriflian part, lie aflll make the Caldcrw.
molt honourable salutation and visiting to the mofl: lCrnce king of M s. Slli

toy, \'vtl..

Scotland, their good brother and little son, that in hlim is pof- p. 208.
fable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and ftuch like

as they have written to him with their hands, and to (how cx-
prefly the perfecl friendihip and singular affcclion, that their ma-
jcllys bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

To take hend to the things which touch near the mofl fercne

king, to the effect that his perll may be il no danger, but that
it may be inoft flirely prfclrved.

And that he be not hindrled in the honelf liberty that lie ought

to have, and that no greatcr, or flraiter guards bc about him than
he had before.

E c i

And such like, that he be not impeached in the'authority, that

God hath given to him of king and prince ibvereign above his
fubjedts, to the effeEt he may as freely ordain and command in
his affairs, and in the afflairs of his country, with his ordinary coun-
cil, as he was -used to do of before.

That his nobility, barons and commonality of his contry mny

have their free liberty to resort to his serene majelty, without sus-
pic;on of greater guards or more armed men about his person then
the u[e was, that they be not afiraid and hindered to resort; and
further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and
freely speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re.
¢ftabliiling of that that may or hath been changed or altered.

And that lie may know if the principalls of the nobility, and

other men of good behaviour of the towns and commonality of
the contry conveens, and are content with the form of goverment
presently with th- said fierne king, to the end that if their be
any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that
he return not without the certainty of the famine.

And if he may underlland that there be any who have not used

them so reverently towards the said serene king their sovereign
lord as the duty of their obedience required, that he may pray
on this behalf of his majelty molt chriflian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame,
and exorting them to do their duty towards his majelty, in time
coming, in all refpeEs with the obedience and true fubjecion
they ought him.

And if the said fegnieur De la Motte, percevcs the said serene

king to be in any manner confirained of his person, authority, li-
berty, and disposition of his effairs, than he used to be, and not
convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty of a prince
does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honell to place
him in the famine, and that he cnlploy as much as the credit of
hin mol chriffian majefly may do toward the nobility, and sub-
jccs of that contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottifli nation, the which he loves and
confides in as much as they were proper rcenchmen.

tAnd that he wittnefs to the faiid serene king, and his fclates,

of.his concent, and to all the nobility and principall perbonages of
the contry, that his molt Chriflian majetlie will continue on his
part in the moll ancient alliance and confederacy, which lie hath
had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobi-
lity and contry, with his principill ftbjccas, to pcrfcvere in thle

famine, in all good underlfanding and friendship with him ; the
which, on his part, he shall do, observing the famine molt in-
violable.

Further his most chriltian majelly understanding that the fercne

king his good brother was contented with the duke of Lennox,
and his fervife, the said iignieur De la Motte had charged to pray
his serene m'ajcily that he might remain befidc him to his con-
tentment, believing. that he should more willing intertain the
points of love and confedracc, betwixt their m;ijcftys and their
contrys, because e was a good flbjet to them Loth ; and if he
might not remain, without ibme alteration of the tranquility of
his eflate, that he might retire him to his own lioule in the said
contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to return to France that he
might fuerly-and if it pleases his fcrcnc mnjelty, to caule cease
and flay the impcacihments, that are made of new upon the fron.
tiers, to the cffeEf that the natural Frenchmen may enter as free-
}y into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

And that there may be no purpose of diffamation, or no speech

but honourable of the most Chrillian king, in that contry, but
such like as is.fpoken rmolt lhonourably of the serene king of Scot-
land in France.

He had another head to propone, which he concealed till a lit-

tle before his departure, to wit, that the queen, the king's mo-
ther, was content to receive her son in afiociation of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 4.)
,Lord HuznJifane to fir Francis kWatlfinbam, the VIlh of

Augl7z, I ,1584, fri-om Berwick.

SIR,

,ACCORDING to my former letters, touching my meeting with the Calderw.
carle of Arran upon Wedinfday lalt, there came hitlhr to me from '1. s I lfto,

r7, Vol. 3'

the earle, the jultice clerk, and fir William Stuart, captain of y, 374 3
Dumbarton, both of the king's privic council, to treat with me
about the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to appoint
the hour, and the number we lhould meet withal; so as we con-
cluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and
the number with ourlc:lvcs to be 13 of a fide; and the relt of our
troops to lland a :h of them a mile from tle toun; the one on the
one i de, the other on the other fidl, so as our troops were two
miles asunder; I was not many hlorflmen, Iut I fLpplied it with
footmen, where I had oo fliot on horfl, but they were very near
joo horse well appointed; According to which appointment, we

gnet yesterday, and after rome congratulations, the earle fell In
the like protefiations of his good-will and readiness to fcrve the
.queen's majesty, before any prince in the world, next his fove.
reign, as he has done heretofore by his letters, and rather more
with fucli earnest vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her
majefly may dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him, and
Ib near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge
the king or him with any unkind dealing toward her majesty, ac-
cording to my inftrluions, which without any delay he anfvered
presently, as ye shall perceive by the said answers, sent herewith;
but I replying unhto him, he amplified thleln with many moe cir-
cumftances, but to this cftFd. Then I dealt with him touching
the point of her majefly's fatisfacqion, for the uttering such prac-
tices as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her ma-
jelly and her eflate, who thereof made sundry difcourfcs, what
marriages have been offered to his majefly by fundrie princes, and
by what means the earle has fought to divert them, and for what
causes; the one, for that be marriage with Spain or France, he
must also alter his religion, wvhich as he is sure the king will never
doe, so will he never iuffer him to hearken unto it, so long as he
lias any credit with him ; he dcnys not but the king has been
dealt withal be praclices to deal againlt her majefly, which lie has
so far denied and refuscd to enter into, as they have left dealing
therein, but whatfoevcr the ling or lie knoweth therein there
shall be nothing hidden from her majelly, as her majefly lhall
know very fliortly ; surely it seems by his fieecles, that if the
king would have yielded thereunto there had been no small com-
pany of French in Scotland ere now to difquict her majesty.--
This being ended, I dealt 'with him earnellly for the llay of this
parliament, which now approachcth; or at the lealt that there
may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice of these noblemen
and others now in England, for the forfaulting of their livings and
goods, hereupon lie made a long difcourle to me, firfl of the earle
of Angus dcaling about the earle of Morton, tlhen of Ils going
out, notwitflllanding of fundrie gracious offers tle king had maide
him, then of the road of Ruthven, how tlat prelciitly after they
had tle King's m:,jelly in their h:lnds, they imprilblcd himniflf,
dealt with the king' for putting of the duke out of the realm, the
]king refuicd so to do, they told him plainly that if lie would not
he llhoulld have the rle of Arrllans head in a dilit; the king ask-
ed what oflence the earle hli.d inmdc ? andlu they aalnered it must
pe fe, and should be so; hercupon fur the lf;'guard of Arran's

life, the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet Arra-r
afterwards futndrie times in danger of his life; I allcdged unto hin
the king's letter to tile queen's majesty, and his acts in council,
that they had done nothing but for his fcrvife, and with his good
liking and contentment, who answered me lie durlt do no other-
wife, nor could not do any tiling but that which pleased them, with
such a number of other their dealings with the king whilefl he was
in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if they
were true; I said the king might have let the queen's majefly's
ambassador have known his mind secretly, and her m;jefly would
have relieved himn; he anfwcred that the king was not ignorant-:
that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded from rlIr. Bow's
praclice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him, and yet
the king was content, and did give remiflion to as many, as would.
acknowledge their faults, and alk remilflon, and such as would
not, he thought fit to banifl, to try their further loyalty, in which
time they contlired the king's second apprehlcnftin, and the kil-
ling of the earle, and others, and fLduced the minillers to their
facion, and yet not satisfied with thele confpliracies and treason-
able dealings, (as he terms them) are entered into a third, being
in England under her majelly's prote&icn, to dilhonour her ma-
jeRfy as far as in them lyeth, or at leall to cauCe the king conceive
btmle unkindness in her majelly, for harbouring of them; I wrote
to yow what the conspiracy was, the taking of the king, the kil-
ling of the earle of Arran, and some others, the taking of the
caltle of Edinr, and bringing home the earles, to take the charge
of the king; all which (lays he) is by Drumminond confefied, and
by the provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
liable of the caltle thereupon fled ; the earle brought Drummniond
with him as far as Langton, where lie lay to have conlcllcd the
conspiracy before me, but having, at his lighting, receivedl a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring hiini no l'i thlcr, I re-
plyed that I thought verily they would not work ainy ifch prac-
tices, in refpec of the queen's majelly, aliding within her realme,
and if there be any fuclh praIrices, they have procccded from o-
thers, and they not privic unto thcin; and lthat if it be not tp-
parently proved againll therm, that it will be thought to be foumt
praclice to aggravate the fault, and to make them the more odi-
ous to the king. I.1 . answered mne, that it lhoull lbe provted 1'
fulliciently, tlhat they Ifhould not be able, with trilth, to deny it,
for their own l:ands is to be flhowed to part of it, alnd thelrelore
oncl utlled that if her in:jclly fliuul1 lb ;'- i-f the linlg flrl th I

it this time, that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty,
nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides he as-
fured me, that if he would, he dare not, this lalt matter being
fallen out as it is; and fuerly if this matter had not fallen out, I
would not have doubted the refsoring of the earle of Marr very
lhortly, if her majetfy would have employed me theiein, but for
the earl of Angus, I perceive the king is perfauded that both he,
and the reft of the Douglasses, have conceived so mortall an hat-
red against him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the earl
of Morton, as if they were at home, tomoYrow next, they would
not leave to prascice and conspire the death of them both, and
therefore a hard matter to do any thing for him: finally, he con-
cluded and required me to assure her majelly from the king, that
there shall nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone
that may fatisfie her majesty with reason, and that the king shall
never do any thing, nor content to have any thing done in her
prejudice, so long as he had any credit with him, or authority
under him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to flow me
his comniiflion, which is i.ndce the great feal, to himself only,
which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of the privic coun-
eel there with him, but not one in commiflion, nor prelent, nor
near us all this time; hliving spent almost five hours in there mat-
ters; he presented to me the Matter of Gray, who delivered to
me a letter from the king in his commendation. vhom 1 perceive
the king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore requires a
safe conduct for his piffage. which I pray yow procure, and so
fend it so soon as you nay ; I let him underlland of the lord Sea-
ton's negotiation with the French Iking. le swore to ne, that
Scaton was but a knave, and that it was partly againfl his will,
that he should be fGnthither. B1ut his commission and infiruc-
tion being of no grcat importance, he yielded the ltoner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond iiis inll'rucions, which Arran drew him-
self, lie will make Seton finart for it. Touching William New-
gate, and MIark Golgan, he protestcd lie never heard of any fitch;
he fiys there was n little poor Ioul, with a black beard, come
thither a bcglfing', who fiidl lie was an enemy to Defclond, to whom
he gavegv a croun, I)t niivcr hliardi of hiin ii icc. and for any Scots
man going into Irel'inr, he lb., s the!e is no such matte'; if there
be, there may le Cfome few r.alkels. hat he knows not of; and
touching the coinlig of ainy jelilits into Scotland, lie lays it is
but the ilanderous dcvil;: of the king's enemy's, and such as would

ilave the world believe the king were ready to revolt in religion,
who the world lhall well fee will continue as conflant therein, as
what prince soever professed it most; and the earle himself dos
protest to me, that, to his knowledge he never saw a jesuit in his
life, and did aflure me if there was any in Scotland, they should
not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if
they preach such dotrine as they did in Scotland; and touching
one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from Mr. Col-
vil, the earle avows constantly that he knows not, nor hath not
heard of any such man, but he would inquire at the justice clerk,
and would inform me what he could learn of that; thus I have
made yow as Short a discourse as I can of so many matters, so long
dicfourfed upon, but there are the principal points of all our talk,
so near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to
the Almighty. At Berwick, the i4th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
J pray yow know her majefly's pleasure.
Arran's anzfwers to the griefs or articles proponed to

the lord iHunfdane, Jet down in another form.

As to the firait and severe persecution of all such, as have been
noted to have been well asseted to the queen's majesty, it cannot
appear they were either for that cause punished, or hardly dealt
with, since his majesty of late has been so careful and diligent to
choice out good infiruments to deal betwixt her majcfly and him,
as his majesty has done in elcEting of your lordship and me ; be-
fides that in all their accusations, their good will and affection
born to her majesty was, at no time, laid to their charge, but ca-
pital actions of treason many way tried now be the whole three
cftates, and more than manifell to the world,

As for his majefly inhibiting, be publick proclamation, fuch'as

were baniflcd, not to repair in England; the bruits and whisper-
ings that camq to his majefly's ears, of their conspiracies, and
treasons, which since fyn they accompliihed, so far as in them lay,
moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near
his majesty's realm, 'aft they fmould have atempted these things,
which lhortly they did atcmpt, being farther off, and more distant
both by sea and land.

Hh

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majesty fugitives,

and not delivering them according to his promise, as your lordlhip
propones, his majeIty would be most glad that so it might fall out
by your lordflips traviles, that no fugitive of either renlme flonld
be received of either, and when so hiall be, it fliall not fail on his
majesty's part, albeit in very deed this time by gone his majelly
.las been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fu-
gitives, contrar his good naturall, since her rmajefty hath receipt,
in effe&, the whole and greatef rebells and traitors his majefly
in his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his majcfty's
mother anent their afiociation, his majefly has commanded me, in
presence of your lordlhip's servant, to affurc her majesty and your
lordship, in his majesty's name, that it is altogether falle, and an
untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majeity has also comman!ed me to assure your lordflip,

that it is also false and untrue, that his majefly has, by any means
direct or indirect, sent any mear,ge to the pope, or received any
from him; or that his majefiy has dealt with Spain or any so-
reigners, to harm her majelly or her realm, which his majesty could
have no honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majcety's mini,

flers, sent unto his majefly, his niajefly uled none of them so; and
if his majefly had, fuflicient canfe was given by them, as rome of
their own writs do yet teflify; as I more particularly fhlewed your
lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 2.)

Letter of , Mar, ty to . Elizabetl,

Iladaric ma bonne Scur,

Cott. Lib. I.M',ASSEUR.ANT quc vous avez eu communication d' une lettrc de
Col. B.VIII.
Fol. 147.An Gray que voflre hommrc Semer me livra hicr foubz le nom dc
Original. mon filz y recongnoifrit t quail de mot a mot ]cs inefnes raisins

qu le dcit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre errant dernii .ement pres do
VOLIS defmontrant la futriftance & bonne intention du personage ja
vous piicray feulemcnt ftivtnrt ce que si dcvant jc vous ay tant
inft:ntement importunt qlue vous me pcrmtticz ldcclaircir libre-
ment & ouvcrtcmcnt cc point de l'aflociation d' entre moy & moan
filz &C meI d(L lier les mains pour proclder avec lui comme je juge-
ray clrc recluis pour fuon bien & Ic nlin. Et j'cetrlel, rncl (l'uy

iqe 1'on vous die & puiffe en rapporter de faire mcntir ce petit
brouillon qui perfuad6 par aucuns de vos minifres a entrepris
cette fcparation entre moy & mon enfant, & pour y commencer
je vous fupplie nm'octroyer que je puiire parlcr a ce jullice clerk
qui vous a cfte nouvellernent envoyc pour mander par lny a mon
filz mlon intention liur cela, ce que je me promis que ne me refu-
serez, quant cc ne feroit quc pour demonilrer en effe& la bbnne
intention que vous m'avez affeurce avoir a 1'accord & entretien
de natural devoir entre la mere & l'enfant qui dit en bonnes ter-
mes eftre empefche pour vous me tenant captive en un defcrt ce
que vous ne pourrez nieux dc'nmcntir & faire paroitre voftre boa
defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d 'y proceder, &
nlon m' en retenir & cmpccher comnie aucune de vos. miniltrcs
pretendent a fin de laii'er toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiltrcs
pvaftiques cntrc nous, La lettre porte que l'aflbciaticn n'cft pas
paffie, aufli ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bienquc mon filz avoit ;cccp-
t ; & que nous en avioiis convenu enfeemblc, cornme l'an2e fgnó
de fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, quc en France cn font soy,
ayant donne cc meme temoignage de fa bouchc proprc a plufleuis
aihaffadeurs & perfunne de credit, s'excutlnt dc ne l'olfr faire
publicr par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour vous
refinler l'avant de ie declarer si ouvertenent eflant journellement
persuade au contraire par vos miniftrcs qui luy prometoyent avec-
que une entreire a Yorck le faire declarer votre heretier. Au
iurplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe mallheurcux que de
s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impicte & ingratitude vers moy, je
he puis pcnlfer que voius non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretientó Ic voulifliez en cela applaudir ou meintcnir pour luy
fayre acquerir ma maledicion, ains que plutos introviendre. z pour
luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & evidant devant Diet
& les hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays
donner avec droit cc qu'il tient par ulurpation. Je ic fuis du
tout commife a vous, & fidelenment faites si il vous plell que je ne
en foye pis qu' aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale
defvant la vcrite vers vous, pour bicn recevant mal, & la plus
grande affliilon qui me Icaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon
fils. Jc vous fupplie de me mander en cas qu'il perilfie en cctte
m'cfconnoilis.lnce de son devoir, que de luy on dc moy il vous plaift
advoucr pour legittiine roy ou royne d'lEcofle, & ii vous aves a-
greabl e le pourfulive avec moy a part la tr:ilt commence entre
nous de quoy jc vous: requires fans plus attcndre ie ic refonce de
cc m:l gouvcrnc enfantt vous en requerrant avec autan;t d' aEfcrion

II 1 ij

que je fens mon cocur opprcffd d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenie
vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre pro-
tetion me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il
vous viueille preserver de touts vos ennemys & diflimulez amys,
commeje le desire de me consoler & de me venger de cculz qui
pourchaffent un tel malheur entre la mere & l'enfant. Je cefie-
ray de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive
quelque consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le fuip-
plie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xIr Mars.

Vofire fidelement vouee foeur

& obeiffante coufine,

A la reyne d'Anglcterre

madame ma bonne faeur & MARIE Q.
coufine.

No. XI. (Book VII. Vol. I. p. .2.)

A Testament by Z. Mary.

Cott. Libr. N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. zM
Vefpas. I.
i6. p. I45. Crawford late regius profeflor of church hiflory in the uni-

verfity of Edinburgh. Part of this paper, according to him,
is written by Naue Mary's secretary, the reft with the
queen's own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's
hand.

CONSIDERANT par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie humaine, si
incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt affeurer, finnon
foubs la grande et infinie misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant
prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pour-
roient inopinement furvenir en cette captivit6, mcfmcs a cause des
grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete6 detenu6 jufques a pre-
Jent; j'ay advise tandis qui j'ay la commodit6, ou raison en juge-
ment, de pourvoir aprcsma la falut de mon ame, enterrcmcnt de
mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, ellat, & affaires, par cc
present mon tellament et ordonnance de mon dernier volonte, qui
s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Perc, du Filz, et du benoife St. Eiflrit. Premiere-

ment, me recongnoiffant indigne pecherefle avec plus d'oflences
envcrs mon Dieu, que de fatisfatcioi par toutes les advcrfites que
j'ay fouffert ; dont je la loue fa bont6. Et m'appuyant fur la
croix de nimn Sauvcur ct Icdcimptcutr jesus Clrilt. Je recom-

fte'ndc mon ame a la benoifte et individue Trinite, et aux prieres
de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges faints and fainc-
tes de paradis, efpcrant par Icur mnerites et intercession, eftre aydce
a obtenir de efire faile participante avec eulx de felicite eternelle.
Et pour m'y acheminer de cucur plus net et entier, defpouillant
des a present tout refentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et
aultries offenses, qui me pourroint avoir cfti fai&es durant ma
vie, par mes fubjcts rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retrict la
vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme assec-
tion, que je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et
celles pue je puis avoir offense de faiAs ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs con-
tain lireEilons concerning the place and circunflancc of her buriali.

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et confcrvation de

1' Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la quelle je veulx
vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe mon filz ypeuft etre reduiet
contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres grand re-
gret en l'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe feul et
unique hcritier de mon royaume d'Efcofie, de droiEt queje pre-
tende juftement cn la couronne d'Anglcterre et pays que en de-
pendent, et gencrallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et im-
meubles qui rcfteront apres ma mort, et execution de ce present
teflament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefic,

Je cede, tranfporte, et faite don ".de touts et chacuns mes
" droils, que je pretende et puis pretendre a la couronne d'Ang-
" leterre, et aultres droias, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en depen-
" dantz, au roy catlolique, on aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira,
' avefqucs advis, confentment de fa faintet6; tant pour le vouyr
" aujourdhuy le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique que
" pour reconoiffancc de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens

recommandez pa rnoy, ont avons receu de luy en ma plus grande

"necefllt; ct regluard auffli an droit que luy mefme pcut prc-
" tendre a ces ditz royaulmcs ct pays, jc le fupplie qu'en rccom-
"pence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et-fi il cc
" pleut de celle de Guifc, pour memoire de la race de laquclle jc
"fuis foltie au cofle de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon perc,
"que mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholiqie j'ay tousjours
"vouc pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de i'acccptcr, ou
" faillant unc de fes niepccs marice comme fa fille.

" Je layffe mon filz a la protc6tion du roy, de prince, ct dues
" de Lorrayne ct de Guilf, ct du nayne, aux puclz jc rccom-

mende ct bnl ceflat en EfcofTe, et mon droic& en Angletetre,.
"si il eft catholique, ct quelle le parlie de cefe royne."

Je fautz don au " compte de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu

par feu son pere, et conmmande mon filtz, comme mon heretier
et fuccefleur, d' obeyr en ceft en roit a mon volonte.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe trove-

ront par moy deues, tien mis cause dc doic eftre faits " a.Lohli-
ven" etre promptement payes et acquittes, et tout tort et griefs
reparis par lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la confcieilce..
Oultre, &c. LFollow two or three paragraphs concerning parti-
cu/ar /r-acys, and then is addedj FaiSt au manoir de Sheffield en
Angleterre le jour de-- Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

if'ter a b/aink paNe foloos inS the queen's hand.

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude H-arnil,

" ton lequel ie montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus conflant
' en religion, an jugement de Dues de Lorraine et de
"Guyle, ou je le rapport fur ce de cculx a que j'auray donnay
' la charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condi-
"tion de fe mnarrier ou allier en la dite mayfln ou par feur
" advis."

Fu//ow neai' itzo pages ofpaiticti/ar legacj,.

" Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droicst quelle peut pre-

' tcndre a la contz* d' Angous avant I'Pcort fait par mon com-
" mandment entre ma dite tante de Lenox et le comte de Mior-
"ton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,
' iur ]a promelfe de fa fidelle afifiance, si luy et moy encourions
"dangier et belbing d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendantt secrete-
"ment au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu' attemtprient contre fa vie,

et pour cell affle pris Ics armes, et ont porte les bannieres dcf-

" pjloies, contre nous, je revoque aufli toute autre don que je
" ly ay fait de conlt de Morton fur promeffes de fes bons fcr-
"vices a advenir, et entends que la dite Cont6 foit rcunic a ]a
" ourconc, si ell fe trouvc y partenir, comme fes trahilons tant

en la mort de moon feu Mary, que en mon banifement, ct

" pourfuit de 1; nmienne l'ont merita. Et defends a mon filz die
" fe j.inays Ifrvire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a
" les parcnts, la quelle je crains ne s'ellendle jjtilqlues a y, le

couiioifl'tnt du tout afli'cioiinc aux cnnemis dc moll diuite en
"ce rl,)oyanm. il.u qucl il cll pcnconnaire.

-'" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et
" ]y commande detenir pres de luy lavfle le bien du contc de
'' Boduel son oncle, en refped qui'l efi de mon fang, mon filleul,
" et ma eftl laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

"- Je declare qie mon frere bafllard Robert Abbe de St. Croix

" na'en que par circbnvention Orkenay, et que le' ne fut jamays
" mon intention, comme il apret par la revocation que j'ay fayte
" depuis, et ete aufli faite d'avant la afge de xxv. ans, ce que
" j'aimois deliberer si il ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de
"defayre aulx elats je veulx done que Orkenay foit reune a la
5' couronne comme une de plus neceffaires, pour mon filz, et fans
4' la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Les filles de Morra ne parvient accefli heriter, ains revient

" la cont6 a la Conronne, si il luy plct luy donner fa ou
" fille en marriafge, et il home l'en iienne ligne."

No. XII. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. I9.)
/ Letter froizm zMr. Archibald Do/uglas to the queen of

Scots.

PLEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the date the 1 2th April.
of Novr, and in like manner has seen some part of the contents H':l. l.ih.

37B. 9.

of one other of the fame date, directed to M/onfr. de Movifir, i-6.
ambaflador for his majesty the molt Christian king, both which
are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your high-
ness dellres to know the true cause of my banifhmcnt, and offers
unto me all favour if I (hall be innocent of the heinous fasts com-
mitted in the person of your hulband of good memory, so by the
other the laid ambassador is willet to declare unto me, if your
Ihufland's murder could be laid juilly against me, that you could
not fbllicit in my cause, neither yet for any person that was par-
ticipant of that execrable fad, but would leek the revenge therc-
of, when you (hould have any means to do it; your majelty's of-
ser, if I be innocent of that crime, is molt favourable, and your
delire to know the truth of the fame is moll equitable ; and
therefore that I lliould with all'my simplicity, finccrity and truth
infwer lthereunto is mofl rcafonablc, to the end that your princce-
!y dignity may be my help, if my innocence llhall fnilicicutly
:rppear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culplbl( in anly
matter, except in tlie knowledge of the evil dil'polcd minds of
the moll part of your nobility againlft your tiild hullband, anld not
. cvciildg of it, which I amn atircd wV:n lliicliccntly known to

himself, and to all that had judgment never so little in that re-
alm ; which also I was constrained to understand, as he, that was
specially employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
of your nobility, that they might with all humility intercede at
your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters as are more
specially contained in the declaration following, which I am con-
firained for my own justification, by this letter to call to your
majesty's remembrance. Notwithflanding that I am assured to
my grief, the reading thereof will not finally offend your prince-
ly mind. It may please your majesty to remember, that in the
year of God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majesty, and ba-
niihed your realm for insolent murder committed in your majef-
ty's own chamber, which they alledged was done by command
of your husband, who notwithftandin, affirmed that he was com-
pelled by them to subscribe the warrant given for that effet,
howsoever the truth of that matter remains amongst them ; it ap-
pertains not to me at this time to be curious; true it is that I
was one of that number, that heavily offended against your ma-
jefty, and passed in France the time of our banishment, at the
desire of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chris-
tian king, to interceed that our offences might be pardoned,
and your majesty's clemency extended towards us, albeit divers
of no small reputation, in that realm, was of the opinion, that
the said fa& merited neither to be requisite for, nor yet pardon-
ed. Always such was the careful mind of his majeity towards
the quietness of that realm, that the dealing in that cause was
committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was dirceted at that time
to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your
son, whom Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve
in happy eflate and perpetual felicity.; the careful travel of
the said de Movifir was so effe&ual, and your majesty's mind
so inclined to mercy, that within (llort space thereafter, I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Murray,
Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and fecretY Ledington, in the name
and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Rcven, Linfay, and re-
mancnt complelis, that they might make offer in the names of the
said earl, of any matter that might satisfy your majcfty's wrath,
and procure your clemency to be extended in their favours ; at
my coming to them, after I had' opened the eflect of my mefr.age,
th:Cy declared that the marriage betwixt you and your bulfband
lad been the occasion ailrcady of great evil in that realmi, and if

rour hufbaiid should be suffered to follow the appetite and iniid
of such as was about hlim, that kind of dealing might produce.
with time worse effects ; for helping of such inconvenience that
might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it con-
venient to join themselves in league and band with lbme other
noblemen, relolved to obey your majelty as their natural fovec
reign, and have nothing to do with your husband's command
whatsoever, if the said earl would for himlelf enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to humbly
requell and travel by all means with your majeliy for his pardon,
but before they could any farther proceed, they deleird to know
the said earl's mind herein; when I had anlvered that he nor
his friends, at my departure, could not know that any such like
matter would be proponit, and therefore was not inftrutcl't what
to anliver therein, they desired that I llould return fulliciuntly
inf'ruSted in this matter to Sterling, before the blaptifin of your
fun, whom God might preserve ; this mefrage was faithfully de-
livered by me at Newcastle in England, where the lfrid earl tlien
remained, in pretence of Ilis friends and company, where tley
all condescended to have no farther dealing with your hulband,
and to enter into the said band. With this deliberation 1 re-
turned to Sterling, where at the requelt of the Most Chriflian
king and the queen's majetly of England by their ambafladors
prfelnt, your majesty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condilion always that they flould remain banifilcd
forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther during
your majesty's plealure, which limitation was after mitigated.
at the humble request of your own nobility, so that itnmecli
ately after the said earl of Morton repaired into Scotland to Q^-hit-
tingaimei where the earl Bodvell and fccretaiy Ledington coume
to him ; what fpccch pafled there amonglt them, as God lthall be
my judge, I knew nothing at that time, but at their departure I
was rcquelled by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl lBd-
veil and fecrctary to Edenburgh, and to retumin with l'uch anl'wer
as they should obtaii) of your in:ljufly, which hIing given to mec by
the (aid perlbns, as God llhall b'c my judgec, was no other tlan thcif
wordes," Schawto the earl Mortoll tht te queen will hear no li(ceIc
' of that matter appointed unto him" l when I crafit that the anl-
fwer might be mnade more lfnlilc, I'ecrltary Lcdliiigonii litit, tl:at
the earl would iutlliicntly uiiderilkiiad it, ;:llai lw\v or Lnoic at
that tinie unlcrl;lnd wli.tl p)i'lld aniongtl themn. It is known to
:ll men, :al; veill lej riilling letters p:ll betwixt the litld carl and

ss-alt:,; If.. 1 i

1idington when they become in divers factions, as alfo'ane buck
sett furtht by the minillcrs wherein they affirm that the earl of
Morton has confessed to them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling away off the
king your husband, to the which proposition the said earl of Mor-
ton affirms that he could give no answer unto such time he might
know your majesty's mind therein, which he never received. As
to the abominable murder, it is known too by the depoiitions of
many persons that were executed to the death for the committing
thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and at the com-
mand of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for that effe&
by this unpleasant declaration, the most part thereof known to
yourself, and the remainder may be understood by the aforesaid
witnesses that was examined in torture, and that are extant in the
custody of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency so far
as may concern any sac does appear sufficiently to your majesty.
And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged
therein, but as what would accuse the vessel that preserves the
vine from harm, for the intemperancy of fucl as immoderately
use the fame. As for the special cause of my banishment, I think
the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was
able to accuse the earl of Morton of so much matter as they al-
ledge himself to have confessed before he died, and would not be
induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part thereof. If
this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punifl-
ment I should deserve I remit me to your m.jefy's better judg-
ment, who well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman should be
of his fame, reputation, and honour, and how far ever ilk man
illould abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would have
been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin,
notwithflanding all the injuries I was contlraincd to receive at his
hand all the time of his government, and for no other cause, but
for shewing of particular friendship to particular friends in the time
of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff,
be such kind of dealing obtained that name of. Ingrate. Always
'or my own part, I have been banifled my native country those
tlrcc years and four months, living in anxiety of mind, my holl
gnuds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and difponit
u pmn, and has continually since the tiine I wvas relieved out of my
lail troubles at the dclire of Monfr. dc'iMovifir, attended to know
>our in;i(fly's pleailcire, and to await upon What fcrvice it hlould

please your majefly for to command. Upon the 8th of April
your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I Ihould retire myself
where I pleased, I declared unto him I had no means whereby I
might perform that desire, until such time as I fiould receive it
from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highnefs'to direc me, until such time as I should have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by
permiflion, I have taken the hardrefs to write this present letter,
whereby your majesty may underlfand any part of my troubles
past, and firait present. As to my intention future, I will never
deny that I am fully resolved to spend the reft of my days in your
majesty's service, and the king your fol's, wheresoever I ihall be
directed by your majrfty, and for the better performing thereof,
if so fllall be your majefly's pleasure, to recommend the tryal of
my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding nar-
ration, to the king your son, with requefi that I may be pardoned
for such offences as concerned your majefly's fervicc, and var com-
mon to all men the time of his les nige and perdonit to all, except
to me, I should be the bearer thereof myself, and be dirceted in
whatsoever service it flould please your majelly for to command.
Most humble I beseech your majefly to confider hereof, and to be
so gracious as to give order, that I may have means to serve your
majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning, and so cxpcAt-
ing your majefly's answer, after the kissing your hand with all
humility, I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 32.)
Letter fron the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Dog/glas

his azmbaQcidorh in En 'land, OQtober, 1586.

RESERVE up yourself na langer in the carnefl dealing for my mo- cott. 1. .
ther, for ye have done it too long; and think not that any your An Origin
travellis can do goode if bir lyse be takin, for then adcu withl my al in the
dealing with tlailne that are the special inltrumentis thairof: And lh.i d.
theirfore, gif ye looke for the contineuance of my favour tuwrtir:;
you, rpair na pains nor plainnes in this cacc, but rcade my letter
wrcttin to Williaime Keith, an:d conform yourlblf (luliollic to the
contentis thairof, ;nd in this rccquciit let me reap the fruiclis of
youre great credit there, athcr now or never. Fairwcll. O'quo-
her 58G6.

) i i)

Letter tofir William Keith, ambafoador in England, pro:

bablyjronmzfecretaiy .Matitland. Nov. 27, 1586.

A copy in BY your letter sent by this bearcr, (albeit concerning no plea-
the ry,~le'
ot fir A. sant subjet) his majesty conceives well of your carneftnefs and
l)ick Vol. fidelity in your negotiations, as also of MIr. Archibald's activity

and diligience, whom you so greatly praise and recommend. I
wish the issue correspond to his mrajefly's opinion, your care and
travell, and his great diligence as you write. His majelty takes
this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply in heart, as
a matter greatly concerning him both in honour and otherwise.
His highncffes actions and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of
that process, and of what moment he efteerns it. There is an
ambaffade flortly to be dircced, wherein will be employed an
earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend the con-
tinuance or dilrolution of the amity and good intelligence be-
tween the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther
extremity be uscd, and his majeflty's {;it and requcft disdain-
ed, his highneis will think himself dilhonoured and contemn-
ed far betides his expectation and dclerts. Ye may perceive his
majelly's disposition by his letter to you, which you shall impart
to Mr. Archibald, and both deal according thereto. I need not
to recommr-.:d to you care, concerning your mailer's service both
in weil and in honour. As you and your colleague shall behavp
yourself in this behalf, so for my own part, will 1 interpret your
affetion to your masser. I ar glad of that I hear of yourself,
and I do fully cre(it that you write of Mr. Archibald, whose
friends here make great account of his professed devotion to the
queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majefly her son.
Farther 1 am constrained to remit to next occaflon, having fcarc:
time to scribble these few lines (which of themselves may bear
xwitnefs of my haflc.) Wi(hing you a prosperous issue of your
negotiation, I commit you, &c. Hal!yrudl:oule, Novr. 27th, IS86.

The people, and all estates here arc so far moved by the rigor-

ous proceedings againfl the queen, that his nmjecly, and all thlt
have credit are importuned, and may not gro abroad fol excla-
mations againll them, and imprecations againll the queen of Eng-
land.

No. XIV. (Book VII. Vol. II. p. 34.)

To the king's mlajjftj, from Mr. Airc,ibld 0Doutglas.

PLEASE your majclty, I received your letter of the date the 28th 16 o0.
of Septembcr, the 5.1 of OGtuber, which was the fame day tl;:ht ¥,.m the
I direced \Vm. Murray towards your hb ghnefs; by such letters ovialln iqn

the colltcr.

as he carried, and others of fiveral dates, your nlmajiy may pcr- of i- A.
ceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my tr.:vcl might reach )iCki ' ol.

B. foX. 32,1.

unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in
the said letter belfr the receipt thereof, which by thele preflnts
I mufl repeat for answering of the faidis. As to the first, lo flr
as may concern the intercecding for the queen your m.njcly's mo-
ther her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled
with this queen in that matter, specially to kno; what her full
determination mutl be in that point, and could never bring lier
to any further answer, but that this proceeding againll her by
order ofjullice was no less againit her mind, than againit their
will that loved her betl: As towards her life ihe could give no
answer there unto, until such time as the law hath declared whether
fle was innocent or guilty. Herewithall it was her pleasure thus
far to inform me, that it was a number of the affociants that c:ar-
neIly pressed her that the law might proceed againlt her, giv-
ing reasons that so long as file was fiffered to deal in matters,
so long would never this realm be in quiet, neither her life,
neither this slate in assurance, and in the end they used this pro-
teflation that if Ihe would not in this matter follow their advice,
that they Ihould remain without all blame whatlbever llould fall
out; 3lhereupon nhe had granted thenm liberty to proceed, least
such as had made the request, might hereafter have charged licr-
self with inconvenience if any lhould happen.

And by myself I know 'this her fpeccl to be true, because both

papif and proteflant has behaved them, as it hath been her plea-
ture to declare, but upon divers refiJes, the one to avoid fifipi-
cion that otherwise was conceived a:ainll them, the other upon

cteal and care that they will be known to have for prclfrvation of
their lovcreiign's life and slate in this perrclous time, upon confi-
dleration whereof, I have been coniflr:ined to enter into lunei
dea:ling vwith both, wherewic itl I made her miijelly acrjliltiiitcd ;
the pirontfl:its, :and flite as in otlier lmatters will be l.liowv to
bs;ar nvoliall favour uut ovour m;aj i!ly's fl'rvicc,l ath prayed tl;tt tley

may be excused from any dealing in the contrary of that, which
by their oath they have avowed, and by their speech to their
sovereign requetled for, and that before my coming in this
country; if they should now otherwise do, it would produce
no better effect but to make them subjet to the accusation of
their sovereign, when it should please her to do it, of their
inconstancy, in giving councel whereby they might incur the
danger of ill councellrs, and be consequent worthy of punish-
ment. Such of the papists, as I did deal with, went immedi-
ately, and told her majefly what I had spoken to them, who
albeit file underflood the matter of before, sent for me and
declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to them, will-
ing me for the well of my maifter's service to abstain from deal-
ing with such, as were not yet sufficiently moved to think of my
mafler as flue did. I craved leave of her majelty, that I might
inform them of your majesty's late behaviour towards her, and
the state of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave
her content. At my late departure from court, which was upon
the 5th of this instant, and the day after that the lords of this
grand jury had taken their leaves of her majefly to go northward
to Fothringhame, it was her pleasure to promise to have further
fpieech in this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to
give full anfver according to your majefly's contentment to the
remainder matters, that I had proponit in name of your majcfty.
As to the 2d part concerning the alfociation, and desire that the
promise made to the malter of Gray concerning your majefly's title
may be fulfilled ; it appears by the said letter, that the very
point, whereupon the quellion that may bring your majesty's title
in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said letter
confidered, which I take to have proceeded for lack of reading of
the adt of parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promi'e made by
the queen to the said maller, and nothing may now cause any
doubt to arise againfl your said title, except that an opinion ifhoild
be conceived by thelf lords of this parliament that are so vehe-
ment at this time againfl the queen your majefly's mother, that
your majefly is, or may be proved liereafter affcnting to her pro-
ceedings, and some that loves your majesty's service were of that
olillion that too carlnci rcquclcf miight nmove a groundl , vllercuol
f'ulIiicionil mig1ht grow in me1n lb ill ::l-eted in tlhat imat:tecr, \which
I tlo't Inirlit bei liclped by obtailiing of a ccl:mation in parlia-
mnent of your numjcely's innocence at this timiu, anl by 'Ceaibn
iht rnuo:l nature a:!! public lhn.'llly would cn lrii':in yOLI to iln.

tercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with
itself, without any further, some suspicion that might move
ill affe&ed' men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly
craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws, might
be moved to advise with the words of the association, and the mi-
tigation contained in the at of parliament, and withall to advise
what suspicious effets your majesty's request might work in thefc
cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might be beds
moved to receive reason; and upon all thefc considerations they
might have formed the words of a declarator of your majesty's in-
nocence to be obtained in this parliament, and failing thereof,
the very words of a protestation for the fame effec that might
belt serve for your majesty's service, and for my better informa-
tion. Albeit this was my simple opinion, I shall be contented
to follow any direction it fllall please your majesty to give; I have
already opened the substance hereof to the queen of this realm,
who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty
to deal therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any
doubt of mind. This being the fum of my proceedings in this
matter, besides the remainder, contained in other letters of fcve-
ral dates, I am confirained to lay the whole open before your ma-
jefty, and to humbly pray that full information may be sent unto
me what further to do herein, in this midde time, while I ihall
receive more ample direction I shall proceed and be doing ac-
cording to such dire&ion as I have already received. And so,
most gracious sovereign, wishing unto your majesty all happy fuc-
cess in your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London, this
16th of OAr I586. Your majesty's most humble fubje& and
obedt servant.

1 memori orl is mJaje/ly by the Mlcr.er of Gray.

I, will please your majesty, I have tho't meetcr to set down all 12,TLn.
things as they occur, and all advertifcments as they came to my An Origi-

hal: illn hia
ears, then jointly in a lettre. owVn hand

I came to Varc the 24th of Decr. and sent toWVnl. Keith, and in the c(--

leet. of fir

Mr. Archiblld Douglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they A. Dick.
did at their audience. She promised the queen your majefly's Vdl. A. li,.
mother's life flhould be lparcd till we were heard. 'Ihe 27th, 2
they came to Varc to me, the which (lay fir Robt came to Varc,
wliere they liewedl us how far they had already gone in their
negociation, but for that the difcouiTf of it is fit down in our

grieral lettcr, I remit me to it, only this far I will tefliiy urrtb
your majelly that Wm. Keith hath used himfelfright honeilly and
juffly till our coming, refpeating all circumflances, and chiefly his
colleague his dealing, which indeed is not better than your ma-
jefly krlows already.

The 29th day of Decr. we came to L,ondon, where we were

io ways friendly received, nor after the honess fort it has pleated
your majesty use her ambafladors, never man sent to welcome or
convey us. This fame day we undcrflood of Mr. de Bellievre
his leave taking, and for that the cultomi permitted not we sent
our excuses by MIr. George Young.

The itl day of JanrY, Wm. Keith and his colleague according

to the cuflom sent to crave our audience. We received the an-
i\ver contained in the general letter, and could not have answer
till the 6th day, what was done that day your majefly has it in
the general, yet we was not out of expectation at that time albeit
we received hard answers.

The 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicefler, where our

conferrence was, as is set down in the general. I remarked this,
that he that day laid plainly the detaining of the queen of Scot-
land prisonei was for that fie pretended a fucceflion to this crown.
Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majesty as ye thall hear
a little after.

The 9th day we speak with the French ambassador, whom

we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse of all his pro-
ceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we tlihnked him in your mnajclty's
name, and opened ilich things as we had to treat with this queen1
save the last point, as more largely set down by our general.

It is tho't here, and tome friends of your minajey's atdvllcd mej

that Bellievre his negotiation * as not eficclual, and tlat the refi-
dent was not privy to it. as indeed I thinlll is true, for since Bel-
lievr:e his perting, tlere is a talk of this Charleuineuf his i'rvants
taken with his whole papers and panleucts, Which he was lending
in France, for that they cliarge him. Wvith a con.ifiracy of late
against the qucen here her life. It is a:l!cdgJd his fcti'int has
conlcffTed the matter, but whom I fliall truslt I lniiow not, but till
I lce proof I l!i:ll account hIim an hloncll mn: , for indeed lb he
appears, and one (wvitiiout doubt) vho hall i. en very iniilant in
tii mI:Itter. I1 IllwC himn tllt tlic q1.cen anld earl ot Liiccfler
tlad deisiie to Ijtcalk with mc in' pliv :t, and craved lii:; opinion
li:e g;.,v it freely thal lie tlio't it icltefl, i li. ev llim cth rc:lbr.
Ihy I communiUcate tlhat to hliii, for that l h-d been ft'li.c.lcd ly

*rome df.hcr: majesty's friends inl France to have donc'evii officcs
in- he' service, that he (hould' be- my witness that my earnest deal-
ing in this (hould be a sufficient teRfimony that all was lyes, and
that this k-ave'Naue who now had betrayed her, liad in that
dohe evilobfflees ;- he desired me, feeing (he' saw only with other
folks eyes, that I should no ways impute it to her, for the: like
flie had done to himself by Naue his perthafion. I answercd he
lhould Be my witnefs'ily that.

The 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got

the .oth-day;- at the first, fle said a thing long looked for Jhould
ee-wvelcome whlen, it comes, I' would:now fee your mailer's ofelrs.
I answered, no man makes offers but for tome- cause ; we wotld,
and- like your majefly, sirs kinowv the cause to be extant for which
iwe ofer, and'likewife tha-t it be extant till your rmajeRly has heard
us. I tliink it be extant yet, but I will not promil'e for an hour,
but you think to s(ift in that fort. I anrwered we mind not to
shift; but to offer from our sovereign all things that with rce;!ln
may- be ; and in fpecitil; we orffred as is set down in our genera!,
all' was- refused' and tho't notlhing. She called on the three tl)it
were in the house, tle earl of. Leicecfer, my lord adliiral, aiid
ciamberlain, and very- dcl'itefully repeated all our ocills in pie-
fence of them all. Iopcned the last part, and said, Madam, for
what refpefl is it that men' deal against your person or elate for
her cause ? She answered, because they think (he flall succeed to
me, and for that she is a papill, appearingly said I botli the causes
may be removed, (he said (he would be glad to underlland it.. If
Madam, fhid 1, all that (he has of right of succession were in the
king our sovereign's person, were not all hope of papifls removed.
She anfwei-ed, I' hope to. Then Miadam I think the' queen his
mother flall willingly demit all her rights in his perlun. bhe
answered flee hath no right, for ihe is declarcd un:ble. 'I'en £
laid, if flle.have no right, appearingly the hope ceases already, i,
that it is' not to he feared lthat nny man attempt for her. lhe
queen answered; but the palpits ;llow not our declaration ; tlen
let it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her afignatiun. T'lc
earl of Leicelter anlfered, Slie is a prisoner, how can ilie thicnit.
I answered the demiilion is to) her I'on, by the advice of all tih
friends file has in l uropc, ard in ca(f, as God forbid, tiat ;ny
attempt conttit tlhe queen h1er away, who lhall party with licr
to prove the deiniilion or a!lignation to l)c inefl'clual her son being
oppolite party :and hiaving all the princes her f'iicn ds for linm, hav-
1n;, bonded for the cllicacy of it wit Iis ninjtfly of blfore. 'l'lc

rr< /ls 11. ,. k

queen made.as she could not comprehend my meaning, and fir
Robt opened the matter again, she yet made as tho' Ihe under.
tsood not. So the earl, of Leiccfler answered that our meaning
was, that the king ilould be put in his mother's place. Is it so,
the queen anfwcred, then I put myself in a worse cafe than of bec
fore; by God's paflion, that wcre to cut my own throat, and for
a dutchy, or an carldome to yourself, you or such as you would
cause some of your dclperate knayes kill me. No, by God, he
ihall never be in that place. I anfwvered he craves nothing of
your majesty but only of his mother. The earl of Leicelter an.
fwered that were to make him party to the queen my Iniltrefs. I
said, he will be far more party, if he be i1l her place thro' her
death. She would stay no longer, but said ihe would not have
a worse in his mother's place. And said, tell your king what
good I have done for himn in holding the crown on his head since
he was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now flands
between us, and if he break it lhall be a double fault, and with
this minded to have bidden us a faiewell ; but we efcheuit. And
I speak craving of her that her life may be spared for fifteen days
lie refused. Sir Robt. craved for only eight days, she said not
for an hour; and so geid her away. Your majelty fees we have
delivered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for flhe and
her councel has laid a determination that they mind to follow
forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council than herself, which
I like the worse ; for without doubt, fir, it flall cut off all friend-
ship ye had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned
well to your majesty, yet rernembring themselves, that they have
medled with your mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope
great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further
your majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I proponit,
if they had meaned well to your majesty, they had used it other-
wife than they have done, for reason' has bound ther. But I
dare not write all. 1 mind something to speak in this matter, be,
cause we look fiurly our letters shall be troucit by the way.

For that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their de-

termination, altho' the queen again and the earl of Leicester has
desired to speak with me in particular; I mind not to speak, nor
flall not ; but assuredly shall let all men fee that I in particular
was no ways tyed to England, but for the refpef of your majelty's
service. So albeit, at this time, I could not effetuate that I de-
fired, yet my upright dealing in it shall be manifefled to the
qwrld. We are, God willing, then to crave audience where we

mind td use fliarply our inftrutions, which hitherto we have uicd
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's caufc, fay no less for
your majelly, than tle French ambaffidor has said for his mailer.

So.I prny your mnajelly conlider my upright dealing in your

service, and not the effc&, for had it been double by any I might
have here had credit, but being I came only for that caule I will
not my credit sllall serve here to any further purpoce. I pray
God preserve your majelly anc( fend you a true and fineere friend-
fliip. From London this I2th of Jan. 1586.

I understand the queen is to fend one of her own to your rna-

jelly:
To the riitt hof. /ly lord vice chancellor and secretary

to his nzajefty, 'from the niafler of Gray.

MY lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to his majefly, '2th Ja1 l
wlhereby your lordnlip lhall underfiand how matters'goes here. iigi,];al in
And before all things I pray your lordlhip move his majefly to 'fe si' '.
xerpet my diligence, and not the effct in this negotiation, for I Dick. Vol.
swear if it had been for the crown of England to myself I could A. fol. 17.9
do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the
vworld lhall fee tnat I loved England for his majefly's service only.
I look Ihortly to find your lordlhip friend as ye made promifc,
and by God 1 fliall be toyou if I can. W,,1. Keith and I desired, if
matters had gone well, to have run a course that your Iordfhlip
might have here been in credit and others disappointed, but now
1 will do for you as for myself ; which is to care for no credit
hlere, for in conscience they mean not honestly to the king our
sovereign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is bone
or shortly to go, therefore my lord v ithout all kind of scruple £
pray you to advise him the belt is not this way. They lay here,
that it has been said by one who heard it from you, that ye de-
fired not the king and England to agree, becaulf it would racl4
the noblemen, and give an example of it by king James the fourt,
I answered in your name that 1 was anlured you never had fpo-
ken it. Mr. Archibald is the I(peakcr of it, wlio I aWlure your
lordfhiip has been a poifo n

i this matter, for they lean very

mickle to his opinion. He cares not, he lays, for at length the
king will he fain to deal this way, eitiler by fair means or neI-
cellity, so that when lie deals this couiii' lie is afitred to be wel-
come ; to set down all that is panl of tle like purputes, it wuuld
conflime more paper than I have here, lb I defer it to meetinl.

K kij

There is a new conspiracy alledged againit the queen to havc
been intended, for the French ambassador resident three of hii
men taken, but I think in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr.
Stafford, who is ambassador for tlhis.queen in France, is :touched
witl it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this 'harm
in our negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till this in-
vention was found forth. I remit all other things to.the inclosed.
We minded to have sent tohis majefly a discourse, which we have
set down of all our proceedings since our hither coming, but we
are surely advertized that the bearer is to be truffant by the. way
for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our own coming; this I
have put in a privy part beside the pacquet. We fliall I think
take leave on Fryday the I3th day, where we mind .exacly to
follow the rigour of our inftrutions, for it cannot stand with the
king's honour that we fay ess 'than the French ambassador, which
was, le roy mon maiftre ne peult moins faire que fe refentir. So
that about the 24th I think we fliall, God wxilling, be at home,
except that some flay come which we look not for. The queen
and the earl of Leiceiler has dcfired to speak with me. I refu-
fed save in presence of my colleagues, by reason .I fee a determi-
nation whicll particular credit-cannot help, and I' crave no credit
but for that cause. It will -please your lordlhip retire the inclof-
ed from his majelty and keep it. So after'my service commend-
ed to yourself and bedfellow, I commit you to God. From Lon-
don the 12th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's mcjjtyj7, frc,./ Robert lielvi/!.

_ctih Jan. Ir may please your majesty, since the dicrction of our former let-
1.8. An
Original i ters, we had audience, and her rnajefly appeared to.tal.e our over-
his o>wn tures in good part in presence of her council; albeit no offence
Ii in 1 in the'
,ri-ith. of w"ould take place with them, havingo talken resolution to proceed
fir A. Dick. with extremity, not the less it plealkd ler majeily to defirc us to
Vol. A. sol.
,l "s s l. nlay for two days on taking our leave, until £he had advised upon

cur propositions; lince which time, her majefly is become more
lard by some letters (as we are informed) has come fiom Scot-
land, making some hope to believe that your. najefty takes not
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in cfet'c, and had
of before removed the like opinion out of her majelly's mind,
which by finiller info:,mation was credited, their reports lnas liin-
erced our comi-nillion, uid abuifcd this queen, fearing in like min-

ner we fliall be flayed until answer come from Scotland by such
person as they have' intelligence of. And albeit that it will be
well enough known to all men how heavily your majefly takes
these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have by this
occasion ib persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our ne-
gotiation. As allb Allynour Stewart is to be directed in their
party, by our knowledge, who has awantyt more of his credit,
than I believe he may perform, and we willed him to desist from
this dealing, faying it does harm, and he is not meet for that pur-
pose, remitting to your majesty's good direcion to take order
herein as we ihall be answerable to your majefly not to omit any
point we have in charge, as the truth is, the mafler of Grhaye
has behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this charge,
and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who were of before
his friends. We have been behalding to the mcnflrals who has
horn us best company, but has not been troubled with others.
Vylzeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he had in charge.
As for mafler Archibald he has promised at all times to do his
dewoyr, wherein he shall find true report made to your majefly,
craving pardon of your majesty that I have been so tedious, after
I have kissed your majefly's hand I humbly take my leave. Pray-
ing God to grant your majefly many good days and happy, in
whose protection I commit your majesty at London, the 20th of
Jan. 586.

SIR.,
A LB EIT Malter George has not been in commission, he is

not inferior in his fervicc to any of us, as well by his good ad-
vice and diligent care he takes for the advancement of your ser-
vicc, wherein we have not been a little furthered.
To the kind's manjefj , from the ml/qef of Gray and fir

Robert Melvili.

PLEASE it your majefly in the lafi audience we had, since our laflt 2" J3n.
advertizement, by 'l"m. MIurray, we find her majclly at the re- Origi;al in
fLminfi our offers fometlLing mnitigated, and inclined to confider te "collc!.

o it*fi I\.

more deeply of them, e lore we got our leave, at our rcalntiiig, Dick. \Vl.
certain of the council, namely my lord of Leiceller, fir Chriflo- A i. flC. '.
plier Haton, my lord HIunfllon, and my lord -lawart, being prc-
ticlt in the chamber, gave little (hare of any great contentment
to have her from hler former ref'llution, now caffin iln perplexity

what she should do, always we left her in that ltate, and finedd
lave daily'preffed confcrrcnce with the whole coutlcil; which to
this hour we have not yet obtained. This day we have sent
down to crave our leave. The greateit hinder which our nego-
tiation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have here that ci-
ther your majesty deals superficially in this matter, or that with
time ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great diffi-
culty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters written
to them of late from Scotland has found some place of credit with
them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special message, they have made choice of fir
Al.exander Stewart to try your highness's meaning in it, and to
persuade your majesty to like of their proceedings, wherefronm
no terror we can lay out unto him is able to divert him, he has
given out that he has credit with your majefly, and that he doubts
not to help this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there
that errand, we think your majesty will not oversee the great
difOrace that his attempts flall give us here, if he be not tane or-
der with before that he be further heard, and iffo be that any other
be directed (as our intelligence gives us there fiall/) our humble
fiit is to your niajefty, that it may please your highness to hear
of us what we find here,' and at what point we leave this matter
with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the causes
whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your ma-
jefty for the present to God's eternal proteflion. From London
this 2Ift of Jan. x586.

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

A'D D ITI ON AL

A P P E N D IX.
1 had no opportunity of feeing Jfveral of the following paperr, ti/l

thofi Jheets of the hfiory, to which they relate, were printed of,
For this reqaon no references are made to them there; but I have
.fipp/ied that defed by m arkirg the particular ,pqja aes in the hi/.-.
ry which theyferve to illuflrate,

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 253. line 3T.]
Account of the fintence of divorce between the earl of

Botbwell and lady yean Gordon his wife. From a
manuscript belonging to MIr. -David Falconar, advo~
cate. Fol. 455.

IUPOUN the 29 of Apryle I567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert
jVIaitland dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson doAor in the
laws, two of the senators of the college of juiticc, Mr. Clmennt
Little, and Mr. Alexander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edenr;
.ompeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for Jean Gourdoune
countes of Bothwell, conflitute be her for pprcwving of ane pro-
ces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James crle Botihwell
herhufband for adultery, committed be him with Befie Craufurde,
the pursuers servant for the time; and sickly kc, for tl)e fliid crie,
compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, wl4o efter he had perfilcd and cra-
ved the pursuer's procurator's oath de ciltiinnia, if he had just
caus to perfcw the said aftion, and obtened it, denyd the lybell,
and the said Mr, H'arrie took the mornc, the last day of Apryle,
to prove the fanle pro primla. The quhilk day, having produced
fume witnesses, he took the next day, being the I of May, to do
farther diligence. Upop thc .quhilk i of May, he produced some

oce witnefles, and renounced farther probatioune. After quilk,
be desired a term to be aflignedto pronounce fentcncc. To whom
the said commilTars afnigned Scttcrday nest, the 3 of May to pro-
iuounce fintcnce therein, fecundumn alligata t probata, (luilk ac-
sn'rdingly was given that day in favour of the perfewar,

At the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl

of Bothwell contra his-lady, for to. have their marriage declared
null, as being contraced against the canons, without a difpenfa-
tion, he and his lady being within degrees defendand, viz. ferdis
a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a com-
miflioune grantit to the archbillop of St. Androis to cognoce and
determine it, and Rot. biflop of Dunkeld, William bishop of
Dumblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glargow, and parson
of Elgelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creiclitoun, and Mr. George Cook
chancellor of- Dunkeld, alid to Mr. Johne lVanderftonne, .chanon
in Dunbar and- prcbendar'of-Peltoune, or any ane of them. This
commillione is datit 27 Aprile r567, was prefented-to two of the
saids commissioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfurd and Mr. John Man-
derfloune on- Setterday-3; May, by lr.. Thomas HIepburne parson
of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the erie of Bothwell, who ac-
cepted the.delegatioune; and gave out their citation by precept,
direted, Decano Chrillianitates de Hadingtone, nec non vicano
feu curato eccle. parochioe de Creichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri
capallano debite requifitis, ser summoning at the said erles inflance,
both of the lady personally if Ihe could be had; or otherwise at the
parofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at her dwel-
ling place before witnesses, prim6, feoundo, tertio et peremptorie
unico tamen contextu protuplice edicao. And likeways- to b'e wit-
neffes in the said matter, Alex. bifnop of Galloway, who- did mar-
ry the siid erle and his lady, in Halyreud -house kirk, in Feb. r'S6,
fir'Jbhn Bannatyne of Auclhnoulejuftice'clerk, Mr. Robert Crcich-
toune of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr.' David Chalmers pro-
voft of Crciclitoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael - abbot
js Mlelrofs, and to compear before the saids judges, or any one of
them, in St. Geil.s kirk in Ederi''. on l\Ionddy tlie 5 of MVay, be
thlamrelves, or their pirocurators. Upon the said 5 day, MIr. John'
MVanderlloune, one of the juges dclegat oily being present com-
peared the fime procurat'ors for bothl tlie parties that were in the

Two words fdrmer proces, MIr. E'dnmoid Hiay ( nrticultllie )
ill tie p)- and some of tlie witneit'is funlmond 'produced, and received for
rcInt -i ells
illegible. proving of the fi.nc. Tlle faicd'procurator renounced farder pro-

batiou'ne, and the judge affngncd the morne, the6thl of May, ad
publicandum produclib, nempe delpofitiones pfurumn telliuni. 'The
cqulill cldy, poll publicatas (clpofitioncs prtedil;as, MIr. I-Hn.
lKinifl'e, procurntor for the lady inflnnter objecit objeclioncs ju-
ris gencra;liter, colltra Ipro d.1u1 c, infilpcr renunciavit ulltecrioi
'Jcfcnlfioni proinde conclufa de confcni'u procuratorumn hiuc iitdc

caufa, judex prxediEus flatuit craftinum diem pro tcrmina, ad pra-
nunciandam fuam fententiam definituram, ex deduEtis corari co,
in prasfenti caufa et proceffa. Conform hereunto, on Wednesday
the 7th of May, the said judge gave out his sentence in favors of
the erle, declaring the marriage to be, and to have beenl null from
the beginning, in refpe&t of their contingence in blood, which
hindered their lawfull marriage without a dispensation obtained of
befoir.

No. XXXII. (Vol. I. p. 284. line 24.)

,wzeen AMIaLy to ,ueen Elizabeth.

MA DAM,

ALTIOUGCI the necessity of my cause (which maketll me to be Cott. t.ih.
importune to you) do make you to judge that I am out of the Acol' an.il,
way ; yet such as have not my paflion, nor the rcfpcts whcrcof plrolatl.iy
you are perluaded, will think that I do as my caufc doth require.
Madam, I have not aocufed you, neither in words, nor in thouglt,
to have used your self evil towards me. And I believe, that you
have no want of good underllanding, to keep you from perfwalion
againlt your natural good inclination. But, in the mean time, I
can't chufe (having my senses) but perceive very evil furtherance
in my matters, since my coming hither. I thought that I h;ad
sufficiently discoursed unto you the di!commodities, which this
delay bringeth unto me. And cfpecially that they think, in this
next month of Augut, to hold a parliament againfl me and all
my servants. And in the mean time, I am flayed here, and yet
will you, that I fliould put niyfelf forthcr into your country,
(without feeing you) and remove me further from mine; and
there to me this dishonour, at the requests of my rebels, as to fend
commiffloners to hear them against me, as you wold do to a mere
fubjce&, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have
promised you to come to you, and having there made my :oan
and complaint of thclLc rebels, and they coming thither, not as
pofilefrs, but as fubjjccs, to answer. I would have belought you
to hear my julfification of that, which they have fallly Ift furth
againfl me, and- if I could not purge my('lf thereof, you might
then discharge your hands of my canles, and let me go for ficlh
as I am. But to do as you l.Ly, if I were culpable I would be
better advis'd ; but being not lo, I can't accept tlis dilihon-
our at their hands, that being in polleflion they will come and
accufc me before your couniiilUoncrs, whereof I can't like : Ani(

Vo(rUlum 1, LI.1

feeing you think it to be againfl your honour and confignage to
do otherwis', i beseech yotu that you will not be mine enemy,
untill you may fee howv I can discharge myself every way. And
to susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain
me ; or at the leaf to go into Scotland, with assurance that if
there come any flrangers thither, I will bind myself for their re-
turn without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do
thus, I protest that I will not impute it to fallhood, if I receive
strangers in my country, without making you any other discharge
for it. Do with my body as you will, the honour or blame ihall
be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my faithful ser-
vants may be succoured (tho' you wou'd not so) by Itrangers,
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive,
in time to come, particular commodity. There be many things
to move me to fear that I (hall have to do, in this country, with
others, than with you. But forasmuch as, nothing hath followed
upon my lait moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I
have as lees to ,

d my fortune, as to seek it, and not find

it. Further, it pleated you to give licence to my subjects to go
and come. This hath been refused by my lord Scroop and Mr.
Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, because I would not
depart hence to your charge, until I had answer of this letter,
tho' I shewed them that you required my answer, upon the two
points, contained in your letter.

The one is to let you briefly underhand, I am come to you to

make my nman to you, the which being heard, I would declare
unto you mine innocency, and then require your aid, and for lack
thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to God, that
I am not heard in my jull quarrell, and to appeal to other princes
to have refpca thereunto, as my cafe requireth ; and to you, ma-
dam. sirs of all, when you shall have examined your conscience
before him, and have him for witnefs.-And the other, which is
to come further into your country, and not to come to your pre-
fence, I will esteem that as no favour, but will take it for the
contrary, obeying it as a thing forced. In the mean time, i bc-
fcecl you, to return to me my lord Ilerries, for I can't be with-
out him, having none of my counfal here, and also to susser me, if
it plcalf you, without further delay, to depart hence whithersoever
it be out of this country. I am sure you will not deny me this
simple rcquefl, for your honour's fake, feeing it doth not plcafe
you to u1se your natural goodness towards me otlerwifi, and fece

ino tliat of mine own accord, I am come hither, let me depart
again, with yours. And if God permit my caures to succeed
tell, I shall be bound to you for it; and happening otherwise,
yet I can't blame you. As for my lord Fleeming, feeing that
upon my credit you have suffered him to go home to his house, I
warrant you he shall pass no further, but shall return when it (hall
please you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) de-
ceive you. But from Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Perhapi
Fleeming ihall be in the Tower. For they which are within it, for'
will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't assure them of
yours ; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them
in charge, to have more refpe& to my servants and to my eflate,
than to my life. Good sifter, be of another mind, win the heart,
and all f(hll be yours, and at your commandment. I thought to
fatisfyyou wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the
serpent, that floppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your
sifter and natural cousin. If Crefar had not disdained to hear or read.
the complaint of an advertiser, he had not so died ; why should
princes ears be flopped, feeing that they are painted so long ?
Meaning, that they (hould hear all and be well advised, before
they answer. I am not of the nature of the bafiliik, and less of
the chameleon, to turn you to my likeness, and tho' I llou'd be
so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you are futffciently arm'd
with constancy and with juitice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to use it well with long and happy life. From
Carlile, the 5th of July, x568,.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 285. line 35.)
A Letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop anclJir

F. Knollir. September 3d, 1568.

MVr lords, pleafit your honourable lordfiips, I am informit by Cott. Lib.
James Bortlhwic'k, lately come from the queen's niajcely your so- t: 7;.

,:

vcrane, that it is fchawin to her hi;ghness, I liuld have ridden in his own
Crawfuirdmure, fen my lall cuihing into this realm, upon the c;li] i 1.e .
of IMurray's dependants. And that I fuld have caufit, or been of
counlall to Scottifincn to have ridden in I ngland, to flay or imul-
zie her majefly's fubljedts.

LMy lords, I thought it right needful becaufL your loIrdliips is,

be your fovcrane, cominanded to attend upon the queen's majilty
my mlillrefs, I havinlg daily accels in thir matters, to declare upon

Llij

the truth; humbly desiring that your lordlhips will, for God's
cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife has had

knowledge of ony Scottifiman's ryding in England, to do the sub-
jeds thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fene the siege of Leith; and
as I underlland it Ihall be fund true, that gif ony sic open hurt be
done, it is by the queen my sovereign's disobedients, and that I have
not ridden nor hurt no Scottilhman, nor commanded any hurt to
be done to them, fen my coming from the queen's majefly of
England, it is well kend, for that never ane will complain of me.

I have done more good to Crawfurdmure, nor ever the earl of

Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them any harm, than
he will. Except the queen's majesty your sovereign, command
lic false reports to be tryit, quhereof this is altogidder an inventit
leafing, her grace fall be trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men
here, quhom of sic report fall be made, tlat baith would fcrve hir,
and may, better than they unworthy liars.

My lords, I underfand the queen's majesty your sovereign is

not contented of this bruit, that there fhuld ony Frenchman come
in this realm, with the duke of Chattlerault. Truth it is, I am
no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor has no sic Ser-
tainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report fromn the queen's
majesty your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is
true indeed, her grace self is all the wyitt, and the counfal that
will never let her take order with my mailtrefs cauCe. For that
our sovereign havanld her r.njefly's promise, be writing, of lufY,
'riendnlip, and assistance giff need had so requirit, enterit that
realm, upon the 16 day of May, fen that time the quecn's ma-
jefly has commanded me diverle times to declare she would ac-
cept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in peaceable pol-
feilion of this realme, and when I required of her majefly, in my
naillrefs namc, that her highn.ess wold either do for her, (as lier
special trufR was lle woil) according to her former proinifes, or
ntherwire gif her counfal wold not content, (as I ihow her grace
I sand diverse repugnant) then that fle would permit her to pals
in France, or to some other prince, to fekl support, or failing
hei;cof, (quhill was ngains all reafbin) that flue wold permit her to
retur;i in her awiin comntrie, in sic lemnpil nianner as Ihe came out
of i, ald l;lil to her Imnjclly ann of tlhir, of I'her honour, would not
l:e rlcui;ll, Ic:i;and that Ilhe was comred in her re:ilmi upon her wsrit-
it!;'s and pJroliilfi of J'icenldllip. And itclile, I faiid to her hligh-
r.:c!', gi' my Illid(lCrels 1aId the like plronilf of her nubilily nt!'

efiates, as fle had of herself, I should have reprovit them highly,
gif thay had not condefcendit to one of thir three, and so I fay,
and so I write, that in the warld it ihall be maift reprehendable,
gif this promise taketh not other good effect, nor yet it does.
Notwithstanding, I get gud answer of thir promises of friendfiip
made to my fovcreign, and- to put her grace in this her awin
countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary working by Mr.
Middlemore, direftit from her highness to flay the army that cuift
down our houses. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pre-
tendit parliament, promised twenty days before the time to myself
to have caused it been difchargit. And yet contrary to this pro-
mise, have they made their pretendit manner of forfaulture of 3 r
men of guid reputation, bishops, abbottis, and barronis obedient
subje&s to our sovereign, only for her cause.

They have also difponit, fen our sovereigns cause was taken up-

on hand be the queen's majesty of that realm, an hundred thou-
sand pounds Scots worth of her awin true fubje.ts geir, under the
color of their law, groundit upon their false, treasonable, flowin,
authority.

The murders, the oppreflions, the burnings, the ravifiing of

women, the dellrusion of policy, both ecclefiaflical and tempo-
ral, in this mean time, as in my former writings 1 said it vas Ia-
mentable to ony chrilian man to hear of, except God gif grace,
the profelfion of the evangile of Jesus Chrill profcelit be your
prince, counfall and realre, be mair myndit, nor the auld in-
amity that has fland betwixt the realms, many of my country-
men will doubt in this article, and thir proceedings puttis my
self in sant Thomas belief.

Now my lords, gif the queen's majeflty of that realm, upon

quhais promise and honour my maifirefs came there,. as I have
laid will leave all the French writings, and French pllrafes of
writings, quhilks amongis them is over meikle on baith tle fides
unfit, and plainly, according to the auld true cullom of Ingland
and Scotland, quherein be a word promift truth was observed,
promise, in the name of the eternal God, and upon the high ho-
nour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhlereof Ihe is defclndlit, and prfclcntly wears the diadem, that
lhe will put my m;lilrefs in her awlln country, and canul; her as
queen thereof in her authority and flrength to be obeyit, and to
do the fame will appoint ani certain day within two months, at
tih: fartlhell. As we undLcrllind this to be our weil, fua will we,
(or the naifl pl;rt of us vll, fellow u11pn it, leavi g the Frcencl-

neri, and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore, and

for the true perpetual friendfliip of that realm, will condition,
and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God, keep sic heads
and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men can conde-
scend upon, for the weill of this haill island; As I have been part-
lings declaring to the queen your sovereign, quhilk I shew to
your lordships felfis, both in religion, in the punishment of the
earl Bothwilie, for the queen's last husband's slaughter, and for
a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amaingis us.

Doubtles, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and

friendful working, as may gif us occasion baith to forgett Mid-
dlemore, and this late pretendit parliament, we will turn the leafy
leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where she is, under
the promise of friendihip. As I have baith laid, and will ever
afirm, made be your sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her
graces coming in that realme, and seek the help and moyen of
French, or Spar.ifh, till expulfe this treasonable and false pre-
tendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us,

My lords, I desire your lordships confider, that it is he, that

inailt desires the amity betwixt Ingla-id and Scotland to continue,
and of a poor man bell cause has, that writes this.

Mly brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your

lordihips communing with him, it appearit to him, your mind
was we shold susser the earl of Murray to work, altho' it ware
agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's majefly,
and her highness wald fee it reformit. My lords, her mujclty
will be over meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have sus-
tainet already. For I am iure, gif reason and juflice may have
place, our nmialrefs, and we her jubjecs, have received express
svrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds ilerling, in the
time of this unhappy government, secing the reformation of fa
great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlic, and the ungodly law
of oblivion in sic matters so mcilkle practis'd, I think nowther for
the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordfuips would fua mean,
nor that it is god to us to follow it. And that yc will give
your sovereign lic advertifi:mcnt hereof, as your good wiifdoms
fliall find in this catif'c meet. It will be true and fricndful work-
ing for us, indeed, ;nd nowthlr Frencphliralcs, nor boafling,
and finding little 'lther cflct.al tlht will caul: us to hold away the
Frcnchmlnc. This, is plainly vritten, andi 1 tdlire your lord-
fliFs pl;iin nnfwvcr, ifr in trutli and plainncls lanngen continues
gudl 1'ricndlhip, quhilk in this matter I pray God i:ay lang con-

tinue, and have your lordships in his keeping. Off Dumfrcis,
the 3d day of September 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

HERRIS.

.,zeen Mary to . Elizabeth.
MADAME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refccu de vos lettres, d'une mef- 27 Au g.

, 6.I Cote.

me date ; l'une, ou vous faites mention de l'cxcufe de Mons'. de Li,. l. t,
Murra pour tenir son prctendu parlement, qui me fernble bien An Crigin.
froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que je m'eftois perfuad'c
in'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant a n'ofer donner commiflion de
venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblefle alors,
je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatre d'avantage. qui eul-
-sent auffi bien dit leur opinion hors de parlement, qui n': clli tenu
tant pour cette effe&, mais pour faire cc qu' expreffement nous a-
vions requis efire empefches, qui etl la forfalture de mes lubjcits
pour m'avoir eft6s fidelles, ce que je m'affurois, jufques a hicr, a-
voir eu en promefle de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup
e Maiftre Knoleis votus induire a ire contre culx, voirc, a les en-
fayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je Pay mal pris, j'en fuis plus
marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il m montrrent, ct ]cur
parole, je 1'ay si divulguement affuray que pour vengeance que
j'cn defirafle, ii non nicttre difference entre leur faux deportmenmls,
et les miens sinceres. Dans voflre lettre aufli datde du Icnm
d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. "' I think your adverse party,
" upon my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all;
' and if they do, it (hall be only in form of an aflembly, to accord
" whom to fend into this realm, and in what fort; for othervife,
"if they flall proceed in manner of a parliament, with any act
" ofjudgement againiI any person, I flall not, in any wife, allo\

thereof; and if they (lall be fb overfecn, tlen you may think

" the fame to be of no other momlent, tllan the former procedures;
" and by such their raflh manner of proceeding, they fliall molt
< prejudice themfelvc ; and be assured to find me ready to con-
"' dcmn them, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay contremand(: necs
fcrviteurs, les faifant retirer, fouffrant Illon voflre comnimanditment
d'ctre fauflrcmcnt nommt's traitres, par ceulo, qui Ic font de vriy;
ct encore d'etre provoques par efcarmons dies, et par prinl(fs id
;ncs gens et lettrcs, et an contraire vous ctcs inforlnde que mncs

fubjels ont evallis les voftres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'est
pas hormme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont efces
mes rebelles depuis le commencement; enquires vous, s'ils n'ef-
toient a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois offri refpondre de fa frontiere,
cc qui me fut refuse, ce qui m'endevroit asses defcharger, nean-
moins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelit6, et de lear falfite, s'il
vous me fayte donner le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier, je
commanderay res fubjets les ppurfuivre, ou si vous voules que ce
foit les vofires, les miens leur ayderont; je vous prie m'en man-
der voltre volont6, au refle mes fubjeas fidelles feront refponfables
a tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voflres, ni les
rebelles, defpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux
Francois, j'efcrivis que 1'on m'en fit nulle pourfuite, car j'efperois
tant en vous, queje n'en aurois befoign,-je ne fgeu si le did au-
ra en mes lettres mais, je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fgay
chose du monde de leur venue, que ce que m'en aves manday, ni
n'en ai oui de France mot du monde, et ne le puis croire pour cell
occasion, et si ils si font, c'eft fans mon fceu ni confentement, Pour-
quoy je vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis
prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mefler Knoleis, et vous
assure que vofire amite, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera rescue avant
toutes les choses du monde, quant France fervit la pour presser
leur retour a cefle condition, que prenies mes affaires en mcin, en
foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma France eft en vous; mais une
chose feule me rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre o-
Teille, laquelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes aalions
vous font derguif6es, et falfement raportees, par quoi il m'efl im-
poflible de m'aflurer de vous, pour les manteries (lu'o( vous a fait
pour defiruire vollre bonne volontó de moy i par quoy je desire-
rois bien avoir ce bien. vous faire entendre ma sincere ct bonne
anrc&ion, laquelle je ne puis si bicn defcrire, que mes enemis a tort
pc la decolorc. Ma bonne focur, gagnes nicy; cnvoy6s moy que-
rir, n'entris en jalousie pour faulx raports de cclle qui me desire
que votre bonne grace ; je me remettray hfr Mefler Knolcis a qui
jC me fuis librement dcfcouvcrte, et apres vous avoir baisSe les
mains, je priciay Dieu vous donner en flantc, longue ct heuretii'
vie. De Boton, ou je vous pronets, je n'cfperc partir, qu'avcques
voltre bonne grace, quoyquc Ics nicnteurs mcnteIt. Cc 2,C
d' Aoull.

' A1PEND IXA X:37

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 350. line 25.)
fLetter of Wa1lzlghaii's to Randolph, Feb. 3. 1580-1. tt Lib

Cott. Lib.

S I Rx .Calig. C. 6,

i HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter
of the z5th of the last direted unto his lordship, containing a re-
port of your negotiation with the king and his councill, in your
second audience, wherewith having made her majesty acquainted,
fle seemed somewhat to mi/like, that you should so long defer to
dealfor the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made answer in
your behalf, that I thought you were directed by the advice of
the said EmpedoclesJfriends, in the folliciting of that cause, who
knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal therein, with
most effet, and bell success, with which answer, her majesty did
in the end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

Your putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won

at her majefsy's devotion, was at first interpreted to have been
ironic spoke by you. But since it fecmeth you insist upon it, I
could with you were otherwise persuaded of the man, or at least
kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose
.of his coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently prov.
ed, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and reception into
that government, to overthrow religion, and to procure a foreign
match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you
may use to good purpose there, fliall partly give you some light;
there is no man here can be persuaded that he will change his
purpose, for so small advantage, as he is likely to.find by it, and
therefore you flhall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
firing, as I have already written to you. The prince of Orange
fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do any;good, for besides
that these people are in themselves flow in their resolutions, their
own affairs are, at present, so great, their slate so confuted, and
the prince's authority so finall, that he cannot so soon take order
in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or
careless in the matter, having more than three weeks pafl, sent
one about it, from whom nevcrthelefs I do yet hear nothing. The
letters, you dcfire should be written thither by the French mini-
flers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrcw to procure, who, I
doubt not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I fiall have

Volumne 11. M m

them to fend you by the next. And so I commit you to God.
At Whitehall the third of February i 580.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGIAM.
This letter is an orgmna, andinfomeparts of it wrote in cyphers

and explained by another hand. By Emnpedoclex is undlerJlood
Morton, by Villeniaru the king of Scotr, D.'Auubigney is mar-
ked thus o - o.

3 Feb. T580o
Sundry Note.s athered upon good diliigenceigiven, and

in time to be better manifefqed, being now thought meet
to be in convenient fort tfed, and laid again/t .D'Au-
bigny, to prove hinz abin.g the kizg,, the nobility,, and
that fJate.

Cott Lib. FIUST, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubig,
CAOrigin- "6ny was privy and acquainted wilh La Naue, the king's mother's
a1. secretary, coming into Scotland, and of his errand there, tending

chiefly to persuade the king, to think and esteem it an evil prefi-
dent for princes, that subj3'&s might have power to deprive their
lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by any mean, to defeat him, either of the present government of
that realm, or yet of the 1 offeffion of the crown and inheritance
thereof, but rather to assure the fame to him; and that for. the
accomplishment of that assurance, the king should have been ad-
vised and drawn to have governed, for some llort'time, as prince,
calling D'Aubigny to rule as governor of the prince, by commis-
sion from the queen his mother, until the king's enemies were sup-
pressed; after which time, D'Aubigny should have power given
to establish and resign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's
voluntary content, whereby all such, as had before been in action
against the queen or her authority, might be brought to stand in
the king's mercy. And for that the king might live in more
surety, D'Aubigny flould be declared both second person in fuc-
ceflion of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and
that D'Aubigny, before Ihis departure out of France, received
commission from thc king's mother to the citecs remembered, or
near the fame. 'That in this behalf he had conference with the
biflops of Glasgow, and Ross, and witl Sir James B3Lford, with
which pcrfons, and wi:h the Duke of Guifc, he had and biath fre-
quent intelligence, and by Sir Jamis Baford he was advilftl, to

confer with the Lord John Hamilton before his repair into Scot-
land, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one John
Hamilton to the said Lord John to excuse him in this part, al-
ledging, that he did forbear to come to him, left thereby he should
marr or hinder greater effcts to be executed by him in Scotland.

That before his coming into that realm, the nobility and coun-

try were well quieted, and united in good concord, with great
love betwixt the king and nobility, and amongst the noblefie, but
he hath both drawn the king against sundry of the chicfeft of his
nobility, that have been most ready and have expended their
blood and possessions to preserve religion, and defend the king's
person, his government and estate, and also hath given occasions
of great suspicions and offence to be engendered betwixt the king
and his nobility, and elpecially with such as have been in adion
againit the king's mother, and her authority, who by force and
means of the laid commifflon and practice, should have been
brought into molt dangerous condition; and who also may find
themselves in no small peril, whiles he pofleffes the king's car,
abufeth his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and
ports of his realm, as he presently enjoyeth.

That he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great be-

nefits done to him and his realm, by the queen's majefly of Eng-
land, but also to requite the fame with sundry signs of great un-
thankfulness, and wounding therewith the honour of her majefly,
and thereby hath adventured to flake the happy amity long time
continued betwixt those princes.

And whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters

and good offers, to have pafred, and been done betwixt them:
In which refpec, the king and council having resolved to write
to her majefly, for her her highness' better fatisfation in the late
negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had giv-
en order to the king's fecrctary to frame that letter: He mind-
ing to break the bond of amity in 'under, willed the secretary to
be sure that nothing lhould be inserted in that letter, whereby
the king (hould crave any thing at her hands, fccking thereby to
cut off all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the declaration
of the laid fecrctary may be better learned, and thereupon further
approved.

That under the hope and encouragement of I)'Aubigny's pro-

te&ion, Alexander King presumed with that boldness to make
his lewed harangue, and by his means hath hitherto cfcaped chaf-
tifement and corretion, due for his offence.

Mmr j

That' Sir James Baford, condemnd of the slaughter of tlie lting9'

father, hath been called into that' realm by Lennox, without the pri.
vity of the king, And whereas tlie said Sir James found in a
green velvet deik, late the earl of Bothwell's, and saw, and had
in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that mur-
der, and can belt declare and witness who were authors and' exe-
cutors of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to' suppress the truth,
and to accuse such as he himself knoweth to be innocent; and as
by order of lar, will be so found, if they may have due trial,
which, contrary to all justice, is by Lennox means denied.

7his is the charge again/j D'Aubigny, mentioned in the foregoing
letter by Wagnghamz but; bh, Baford they mean Sir Yame.' Ba/four.

No. XVI. (VoL II. p. 6. line 27.)
The Scott/h) queen's offers upon the esea of her liberty

propounded by herJfecretary Naw, November I584.

Cott. Lib. TIE queen my mistress being once well aflured of your majefiy's
Calig. C. 8. amity,
A copy. amity,

I. Will declare openly that she will (as it is sincerely her

meaning) firaitly to join unto your majesty, and to the fame to
yeild and bear the chief honour and refpe&, before all' other
kings and princes in Chriflendom.

2. She will swear, and protest filemhly, a sincere forgetful-

ness of all wrongs whicl flhe may pretend to have been done un-
to her in this realm and will never, in any fort or manner what-
soever, ihew offence for the fame.

3. She will avow and acknowledge, as well- in ler own parti-

cular name, as also for her heirs and others descending of her for
ever, your majesty for just, true, and lawful queen of England.

4. And confcquently, will renounce, as well for ierfelf, as for

her said heirs, all rights and pretences which flie may claim to the
crown of England, during your majesty's life, and other prejudice.

5. She will also revoke all aAs and flews, by her heretofore

made, of pretence to this said crown, to the prejudice of your
majecty, as may be the taking of the arms and ftilc of queen of
England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord and
liulband.

6. She will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may be

expounded to turn in her favour, and for her behoof, touching
the deprivation of your majefly, and 'will declare that file will
never help and serve herlFlf with it,.

7. She will not prosecute, during your majesty's life, by open

force or otherways, any publick declaration of her right in the'
fucceflion of this realm, so as secret assurance be given unto her,
or at the leaf publick promise, that no deciding thereof flall be
made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, during your
majesty's life, nor after your decease, untill such time as they
have been heard thereupon, in publick, free, and general assem-
bly of the parliament of this said realm.

8. She will not pratife, diretly or indirecly, with any of

your majesty's subjects, neither within nor out of your realm,
any thing tending to war, civil or foreign, against your majesty
and your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for civil and'
politick government.

9. She will not maintain or support any of your fubjcts de-
clared rebels, and convicted of treason against you.

I, . She will enter into the alfociation, which was shewed her

at Wingfield for the surety of your majesty's life, so as there be
mended or right expricated some clauses, which I will fliew to
your majesty, when' I ihall have the copy thereof, as I have be-
fore time required.

I. She will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any

war or trouble against this Riate, and will renounce, from this
time, all enterprises made or to be made in her favour for that
refpe&t.

12. Furthermore, this realm being alTailed by any civil or so-

reign war, fliewill take part with your majefly, and will assisi
you in your defence with all her forces and means, depending of
herself, and with all her friends of Chriflendom.

13. And to that effe&t, for the mutual defence and maintain-

ance of your majesty, andsthe two realms of this isle, she will
enter with your majesty in a league defensive, as hiall be more
particularly advised, and will perfwade as much as in her the
king her son to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad
remaining, firm, and especially the antient league between France
and Scotland, in that which fihall not be against this present.

14. She will enter into a league offensive, having good allur-

ance, or secret declaration and acknowledgment of her right in the
fucceflion of this crown, and promise, that happening any breach
betwixt France and this realm, (which lhe praycth God never to
happen) the just value of her dowry flall be placed for her in
lands of the revenue of the crown.

g5. For assurance of her promires and covenants, the doth of-

ser to abide herself in this realm for a certain time, (better hofi-
age can the not give than her own person) which, so as she be
kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in cafe to escape
secretly out of this country in the sickly Rfate (he is in, and with
the good order which your majesty can take therein.

I6. And in cafe your majefly do agree to her full and whole

deliverance, to retire herrelf at her will out of this realm, the
said queen of Scots she will give sufficient hofiage for such time
as will be advised.

17. If fle abide in this realm, the will promise not to depart

out of it without your licence, so as it be promised unto her that
her slate, in such liberty as flall be accorded unto her, (hall not
be in any fort altered, until after tryal to have attempted against
your life, or other trouble of your estate.

IS. If lile go into Scotland, fhc will promise to alter nothing

there in the religion which is now used there, She being suffered
to have free exercise of hers, for her and her houfhold, as it was
at her return out of France; and further, to pull out every root
of new division between the fubjeEts that none of the fubjeAs of
Scotland shall be sifted for his conscience, nor constrained to go
to the service of the contrary religion.

19. She will grant a general abolition of all offences done a-

gainft her in Scotland, and things shall remain there as they are
at this present, for that refpet, saving that which hath been done
againfl her honour, which she meaneth to have revoked and an-
nulled.

20. She will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation

between the nobility of the country, and to cause to be appointed
about the king her son, and in his council, such as shall be fit for
the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the country, and the
amity of the realm.

21. She will do her belt to content your majesty, in the fa-

vour of the Scots lords banished, and refuged hither, upon their
due fubmiflion to their princes, and your majefly's promise to as-
lilt the said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they hap-
pun to fall into their former faults.

22. She will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with
the advice and good counsel of your majesty.

23. As fle will pair nothing without the king her son, so doth
the dcllre that he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, for

the greater and perfeter assurance thereof; for otherwise any thing
can hardly be eflablifhed to be found and continue.

24. The said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king her

good brother, according to the good affedion which he hath al-
ways fliewed her, and hath been afresh testified unto me by
Monfr. de Manniffiere for this said treaty, will very willingly
intervene, and will assist her for the surety of her promises.

25. And so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following
the will of the said king, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of Christendom, fle will assay

to obtain the like of them, if for greater solemnity and approba-
tion of the treaty it be found to be necelTary.

27. She doth desire a speedy answer, and final conclusion of

the premisses, to the end to meet in time with all inconvenien-
cies.

28. And in the mean time, the more to strengthen the said

treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, the defireh that
demonstration be made of forne releafemcnt of her captivity.
ObjeEtions agaiij7 the Scott/i/j queen, lnder secretary

Wa/fingbame's hand, November 1584.

Tim queen of Scots is ambitious, and frandeth ill affe&ed to her
majesty, and therefore it cannot be but that her liberty should
bring peril unto her majefly.

That her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and other

ill affected fubjecs, and greatly advance the opinion had of her
title as successor.

That as long as she flall be continued in her majesty's posses-

sion, the may serve as it were a gage of her majelty's surety, for
that her friends, for fear of the danger llc may be thrown into, in
cafe any thing should be done in her favour, dare not attempt
any thing in the offence of her majcfly.
November r What course were fit to be taken withl the

I5 Q

S4. c2queen of Scots, either to be enlalged or

THE course to be taken with the faiid queen may be confidercd of Co.t. T.S.
in three degrees ; either,

I. To continue her under cultody in that state fle now is.
2. To rcfrain her of the prcrent liberty fle now hath,

3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. Touching the first, to continue her under cuflody under that

slate she now is; it is .to be.confidered, that the princes that fa-
vour that queen, upon the complaint ,he maketh of hard usage,
are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and promise
to do their endeavour for her liberty, fr .w.hich purpose, her mi-
nifiers follicit them daily.

And to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquainteth

them with her offers made to her majesty, which appeared to be
.no less profitable than reasonable for her majefly, so as the refusal
and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cause to think her
hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with .the better ground
and reason, attempt fomewhaf for the setting of her at liberty.

It is also likely that the said queen, upon this refifal, finding

her cafe desperate, will continue her practic.e under hand, both
at home and abroad, not only for her delivery, but to attain to
the present possession of this crown upon her pretended title, as
dhe'hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is molt manifest by let-
ters and plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of
Scotland, which hath proceeded altogether by her diretion,
whereby a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majesty's ene-
mies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping her, with
such number of persons as {he now hath, and with liberty to write
.and receive letters, (being duly confidered) is offensive to the
princes, the said queen's friends; rather chargeable, than profit-
able to hermajely ; and subjet to all such practices as may peril
her majesty's person or fate, without any provision for her ma,
jefty's safety, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. Touching the fecoud, to refirain her in a more firaighter
degree of the liberty fire hath hitherto enjoyed.

It may, at firfl fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop the

.ourfe of the dangerous pracices foflered heretofore by her: For,
true it is, that this remedy might prove very profitable, if the
realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to her majefly, as
few years past it did ; and if the king of that realm were not
likely, as well for the release of his mother, as for the advance-
lnent of both their pretended title, to attempt somewhat against
.this realm and her majcfiy, wherein he should neither lack so-
reign afliftancc, nor a party here within this realm: But the king
and that realm lt:nding affected as they do, this rcltraint, infleacd
,of rcmcdying. is likely to breed thcfe inconveniencies following:

'Firt, 'It-will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft
.cf the princes her friends that mifliked of her restraint.

Secondly, It will give them just cause to take foame way of
redress.

Lastly, It is.to be doubted, .that:it may.provoke.fome desperate

ill disposed person, all hope of her liberty removed, .to attempt
somewhat against her majeity's own person, .(a matter above all
others to be weighed) which inconveniency being duly confider-
ed, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in a straighter
degree, is likely to prove a remedy subject to very hard events.

The latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen .at

liberty, minifreth some cause of doubt, touching the manner of
the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be performed, whether to
be continued here .within the realm, or to be restored into her
own country.

But first, this proposition, before the particularities be weigh-
ed, is to be confidered in generality.

For it is very hard for a well affeaed fubje&, that tendreth

her majesty's surety, and weigheth either the nature of the Scot-
tifh queen, being inclined to ambition and revenge, or her former
aaions, what practices flie hath set on foot most dangerous for
-her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not
:made acquainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make
it less perilous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may,
in some fort, be devised to prevent both her ambition and malice;
and therefore to make this apparent,

It is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother,

is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title flie
doth: Such as do affeEt her, both at home and abroad, do affedt
him: (and he is the more dangerous for that he is unmarried,
which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man,
whereby he may enter into adtion in his own person) where fle.
'is reisrained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now altogether,
at his devotion, and the party asseted to this crown abfaed; of'
as the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty nor iefiraint
doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majesty, unless
by such promises as may be made by way of treaty with her, the
danger likely to grow from the king her son be provided for.

But in this behalf it m:ay be objected, that so long as the mo.

,lher remains in her majclty's hands, the ki >g will attempt nothiing
for fear of his mother's peril.

Vo/znum IIc. N n

To this objetion it may be anfwered,-firft, That theyhope that

her majeRy, being a prince ofjuilice, and inclined to mercy, will
not punifl the mother for the son's offence, unlcfs fle iaall be
found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily, That men will not
be over-hafty, confidering in what predicament the king flandeth
touching his expeEtation of this crown, to advire any thing that
in time future may be dangerous to the giver of such council as
may reach to his mother's peril.

And lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being firong in

the field through both foreign afiftance, and a party here within
the realm, will appear so weak a remedy, (which may rather ex-
afperate both him, and her party, to proceed with more courage
and -heat to revenge, if any such hard measure fliould be offered
unto her) as they will suppose for the rearon above specified, that
no such extremity will be uscd.

It may also be objected, that the setting of her at liberty will

greatly encourage the papists both at lhme and abroad; but
herein, if the provision be duly confidered, that may be made by
parliament both here and there, they shall rather find cause of
discomfort than otherwise.

These two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the

mother appearing mofi manifefily to be seen in the son accom-
panied with more danger, with due consideration had also of such
remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the dangers,
that her liberty may miniller juss caule to doubt of; tlere will
be good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed be-
iefit than perils.

Now it refieth, in whlat fort the said liberty flall be perform-

ed ; if it flall be thought meet flhe flall be continued within the
realm with tome limitation, cfpecially in tlat place where fle
now refideth, the country round about being so infecaed in reli-
gion as it is, it is greatly to he doubted that will very much in-
crease the corruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides,
flie lhould have commodity, wihili much more cafe, and speed, to
entertain pracices within tills realm, than by being in her own
country.

If abroad freely withorut lir:itatiln ellicr in Scotland or France,

llicn shall her majefly lolc the gages of her flifety, then fill fuie
le at haind to give advice in flrtherancc of lilch praclices, as Ilve
lIein laidl for to ili'l tdouble in thijs realm, whercin flie llath lbecn
p principal party.

t4'

For .the. first, it is answered before, that the re'pcte of any periis

that may blfal unto her, will in no fort restrain her son. For the
other, if it be confidered what harm her advice will work unto
herself, in refpe& of the violation of the treaty, and the provifioll
that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought, that
fdie will then be well advised, btfore the attempt any Iuch matter,
which now fle may do without perrill. Besides such princes, as
have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot with hon-
our assist her, wherein the French King will not be found very
forward, who, in moll friendly fort, hath lately rejeded all such
requests, propounded either by her, or her son's miniflers, that
might any way offend her majefly. And so to conclude, feeing
the cause of her grief shall be taken away ; the French king gra-
tified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, tlhat, by any
Spanish pracice, flue Ihould be drawn to violate her faith ; that
the reft of the princes shall have no julf cause of offence, but ra-
ther to think honourably of her majefly, confidering the Scottifl
queen's carriage towards her, which hath deserved no way any
such favour; the noblemen of Scotland flall be reflored, who
will be a good flay of such counfells as may tend to the troubling
of this realm, especially having so good a ground of warrant as
the parliament to htand unto ; the charges and perrills which her
practices might have bred to this realm shall be avoided ; and
laltly, the hope of the papists Ihall be taken away, by such good
provilions, as in both the realms may be made, w'hereby the perils
that might fall into her majesty's own person, (a matter of all
others to be weighed) shall be avoided, when by the change that
may grow by any such wicked and ungodly pra&Lice, they flall
fee their care no way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce hler minjej/y to proceed in the treaty

under Secrettary llgaijtnl bam's band.

TuAT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to Cott Lib.
the raising of trouble within this realm) have grown from thc,Calig C. 8.
Scots qucen's miniflcrs and favourers, not without her allowance
and seeking: Or,

That the means used by the said minitlers, to induce princes

to give car to the said plots, is principally grotided upon tonic
commiseration had of her rellraint.

''hat the ilav, wliy thte aid plots have not bcn put in e.e'cu-

Nnij

tion, hath proceeded, for that the said princes have, for-the molt
part, been entertained with home and domeflick troubles.

That it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin

to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempted in her favours by
the said princes.

That it is also to be doubted, that Somewhat may be attempted

By rome of her fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of
ler majesty.

That for the preservation thereof, it shall be convenient for her

majesty to proceed to the finifhihg of the treaty, not long fithence
begun between her and the said queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 24. 1. 25.).

A Letter farom S. Amias Pawlet.

S IR,

Origin.Cal. I DID forbear, according to your direcion signified' in your letters'
' 9 of the 4th of this present, to proceed to the execution of the con-

tents of Mr. Waades letters unto yotu, for the dispersing of this
lady's unnecessary servants, and for the fearing of her money,
wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (al-
though in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th of
this instant, which I doubt not are with you before this time;
but upon the receipt of your letters of the Sth, which came noi
unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by reason as did ap-
pear by indorfement, that they had been milsaken, and were sent
back to Windsor, after that they were entered into the way to-
wards me, I confidered, that being accompanied only with my
own servants, it might be thought that they would be intreated
to fay as I would command them, and therefore I thought good,
for my better discharge in there money matters, to crave the
afiflance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who repairing unto me the next
morning, we had access to this queen, whom we found in her bed,
troubled after the old manner with a defluxion, which was fallen
down into the fide of her neck, and haid bereft her of the use of
one of her hands, unto whom I declurcd, that upon occasion of
her former praftifcs, doubting left fle would perfiit therein by
corrupting underhand Conic bad members of this fate, 1 was cx-
prcfly commanded to take her money into my hands, and to relt
anrwerable for it, when it Iliall be required ; advising her to de-
iver the f.id money unto Ime with ,Luictncfs. After l:1my de.

;ials, many exclamations, and many bitter words agailft you, (I
fay nothing of her railing against myself ) with flat affirmation
that her majesty might have her body, but her heart {he should
iever have, refusing. to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called
my servants, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
upon lhe yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waadc's remembrance, five
rolls of canvass, containing five thousand French crowns, and two
leather bags, whereof the one had, in gold, one hundred and four
pounds two (hillings, and the other had three pounds in silver,
which bag of silver was left with her, afTliring that she had no
more money in this houle, and tliat he was indebted to her ser-
vants for their wages. Mr. Waades note maketh mention of 3
rolls left in Curle's chamber, wherein, no doubt, he was mifrec- Curle can
koned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths of tell yol the

'.Y -

. . ~~truth of

diverse persons, as also by probable conjectures; to as in truth we lilismatter.
found only two rolls, e¢ery of whiclh containeth one thousand
crowns, which. was this queen's guifte toCurle's wife at her mar-
riage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain
worth by effimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one
bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore
and fix pounds eighteen flillings. All the forelaid parcells of
money are beflowed in bags, and fealed by Mr Richard Bagot,
saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I refcrve in
my 'hands, for the u'e of this houthold, and may be repayed at
London, where her majesty fllall appoint out of the money, re-
ceived lately by one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I
feared lefl the people might have dispersed this money in all this.
time, or have hidden the fame in some fccrct corners, for doubt
whereof, I had caused all this queen's family, fiom the highef to
the lowell, to be guarded in the several places where I found
them, so as yff I had not found the money, with quictnefs, I lhad
been forced to have searched firif all their lodgings, and theli
their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a fin-
gular blefling, tlat that falleth out so well, fearing lelt a contra y
fuccels might have moved Tome hard conceits in her majefly.

Touuching the dispersing of this queen's lervants, 1 trult I have

done so much, as may furlice to satisfy her niajelty for the time,
whercin I could not t.tkc any abll;)tle courfc, unlill I heard again
from you, partly becatufe her inljelly, by Mr. Mia.ide's letter,
doth refer to your consideration to return ficlh as luill be dilcharg-
ed to their several dwellings and countrys, wherein, as it fcmcth,

you have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that 5i
yet, I have received no answer from you; of your resolution, upon
the view of the Scottifli fmily, sent unto you, what persons you
will appoint to be diflnift; only this I have done, I have beflow-
ed all such, as are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four
feveralsrobms, as the fame may suffice to contain them, and that
their meat and drink shall be brought unto them by my servants.
It may please you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what
fort, and for what course, I Ihall make their passports, as also, if
they shall fay tlat they are unpaid of their wages, What I flall do
therein. Yt is said that they have been accuflomed to be paid of

This L.ady their wage at Christmas, for the whole year. Her majefly's charge
hathi od will be somewhat diminished by the departure of this people, and
ney at pre- my charge, by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the per-
enhillil so"s, all save Baftian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there
a.Abafla- wis no great caure to fear their pracices, and upon this ground,
or'shiands. I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all this dismissed train

flould have followed their milltrcfs, until tle next remove, and
there to have been discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that
the said remove might be delayed, yf she did fear or expe& any
hard measure.

Others shall excnfe their foolish pity as they may 5 but for my

part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing
that I have said, written, or done, I have had any other refpeEt
than the furtherance of her majefly's service; and so I fihall most
earneflly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not seasing
of the money by Mlr. Manners, the other corrmiflioners and my-
self, I trulf Mlr. Waade hath answered, in all humble duties,
for the whole company, that no one of us did ob much as think
that our commillion reaching only to the papers, we might be
bold to touch the money, so as there was no lepecch of that all to
uny knowledge, and as you know I was no coinmiflioner in this,
i'fi;u'L, but had my hands full at Tyxhall, discreet servants are
r.,t ihlialy to deal in great matters, w-ithout warrant, and efpeci-
;.lly whlere lie cause is iilch as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

V>.ur advertiftl-nllt of that happy remove hath been greatly

co:!i'ml tablel unto ne. I will not liy, in rcfpcfi of myfclf, becaulc
rty 'rivatle inlterell hath no measure of compaiilon with her ina-
jcily's Eifclty, aind w\ith the quiet o' this realin. God grant a hap-
'Y aind fpi .ccly yvlc to thclei good and godly counels ; and so I
coinnlit ,oul to his merciful p)rctec!ionl ilimn C!:artlcy the Icth
of S-3!,l:u:ele;- 15iY.

iNo. XVIII. (Vol. II. p. 39. line I6.)
oCopy of a Letter from the earls of ShrewJbury and Kent,

&c. touching tbeirproceedings with regardto the death
of the Scottijf queen, to her majeJqy's council.

IT may please your honble good lordflips to be advertired, that,
on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Robert Beale came to the
house of me the earl of Kent in the county of -- to whom
your lordflip's letter and message was delivered, and her majesty's
commiflion flewn; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts
for the flaying of such hues and cries as had troubled the country,
requiring the officers to make flay of allfuch persons, as flhould bring
any such warrants without names, as before had been done, and
to bring them to the next justice of peace to the intent that upon
their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites
might be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the
said earl of Kent should on the Monday following, come to Lyl-
ford to Mr. Elmcs, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale came
to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commission,
&c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by renfon that
fir A. Pawlet was but late recovered and not able to repair to the
earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix miles of; it was
thought good that we fir Drue Drury arid Robert Beale should go
unto him, which we did on morning; and together with
the delivery of her majefly's commiiflon, and your lordfnip's let-
ter, imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent and we thought
meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordship hither the clay
following, to confer with me the said earl, concerning the fame;
which his lordship promised. And for the better colouring of the
matter, I the said earl of Shrcwfbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice
of peace of the county of H-untingdon next adjoining, to whom I
communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under your
lordflhip's hands, for the flaying of the hues and cries, requiring
him to give notice thereof to the town of Peterborough, and c-
specially unto the jufiices of peace of I-Iuntinclonfliirc, and to
cause the pursuers anld bringers of such warrants to be flay c:d, and
brought to the next juflicc of peace; and to bring us word to So-
thcringay canfle on Wednclilyay moning what liU had done, and
wvhat hle lhould in the me.an time undcritand of the authors of such

:brites. Which like order, I also fir Amias Pawlet had taken.or
Monday morning in this town, and other places adjoining. The
.fame night, the sheriss of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your.lordlhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were
sent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention
and meeting here. on Tuesday by,noon; and otlher letters ~were
also sent with their.lordfhips assents to fir Edward Montague, fir
Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, .&c. to be here on Wed-
.nefday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time it was
thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday,
we the earls came hither, where the iheriffmet us.; and upon eon-
-ference between us it was resolved, that the care for the fending
for the fargeons, and other necessary provision should be commit-
ted unto him against the time. And we forthwith repaired unto
her, and firif.in the presence of herself and her folks, to the in-
tent that they might fee and report hereafter that she was not o-
·therwife proceeded with than according to law, and the form of
the statute made in the 27th year of her majefly's.reign, it wa?
thought convenient that her majesty's commission should be read
unto her, and afterwards she was by sundry speeches willed to prc-
pare herself against the next morning. She was also put in re-
*memlrance of her fault, .the honourable manner of proceeding
with her, and the necelffty that was imposcd upon h.er majesty to
proceed to execution, for that otherwise it was found that they
*could not both stand together,; and however, fithence the lord
Buckhurfi's his being here new conspiracys were attempted, and
so would he still, wherefore since she had now a good while since
warning, by the said .lrd and Robert Bele, to think upon and
.prepare herself to .die, we doubted not but that fle was, before
,this, fettled, and therefore would accept this message in good part.
And to the effect that no christian duty might ibe said to be omit-
;ted, that might be for her comfort, and tend.to the salvation botl
*of her body and foul in the world to come, .we offered unto her
that if it would plcafe her to confer with the billop and dean of
Peterborough, ilic might: which dean, we had, for that purpose,
appointed to be lodged within one mile.of that place. Hereto flie
replied, crofllng herfclf in ,the name of the Father, the Son, and
:he Hloly Glhol, faying that flic was ready to die in the catholic
Roman faith, which her lnccllors had professed, from which flie
aou(l not be removed. And albeit we uscd many pcrfuafions to
the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing ; and therefore, when (lie
demanded the admittance of her pricfi, we utterly denied that unto

her. Hereupon, file demanded to underfhand what answer we had
touching her former petition to her majesty, concerning her pa-
pers of accounts, and the beflowing 'of her 'body. To the firfi we
had none other answer to make. but that we thought if they were
not sent before, the fame might'be in Mr. Wade's custody, who
was now in France, and feeing her papers could not any wife
pleasure her majelty, we doubted not but that the fame should be
delivered unto such as {he should appoint. For, for cur own parts,
we undoubtedly thought that her majesty would not make any
profit of her things, and therefore (in our opinions) flie might let
down what she would have done, and the fame should be impart-
ed unto her majesty, of whom both the and others might expec
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her majefiy's
pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her petition (hould
be deny'd, or granted. For the practice of Babington, she utter-
ly denied it, and would have inferred it, that her death was for
her religion; whereunto it was eftsoons by us replied, that for
many years ihe was not touched for religion, nor should have been
now, but that this proceeding againif her was for treason, in that
she was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for destroying her ma-
jerfy's person; which (he again denied, adding further, that al-
beit she for hcrfelf forgave them that were the procurers of her'
death, yet the doubted not but that God would take vengeance
thereof. And being charged with the depositions of Naua and.
Curl to prove it against her, (he replied, that she accused none,
but that hereafter when she shall be dead, and they remain alive,
it shall be seen how indifferently she had been dealt with, and
what measure had been used unto her; and aiked whether it had
been heard before this, that servants had been prafifed to accuse
their mistress, and hereupon also required what was become of
them, and where they remained.

Upon our departure from her, for that it seemed by the com-

mifflon, that the charge of her was in the difpolition of us the
earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Druc Druric to re-
ceive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number of Ibldicrs to watch that night, and that
her folks (hould be put up, and take order that only four of them
should be at the execution, remaining aloof of, and guarded with
certain persons, so as they Ihould not come near unto her,
which were Melvil her steward, the physician, furgcon, and a-
pI;tllecary.

V[oluZmec . 0 a

Wednesday morning, after that we the earls were repaired un'

to the castle, and the sheriss had prepared all things in the hall.
for the execution,' he was commanded to go into her chamber,
and to bring her down to the place where were present, we which
have signed this letter, Mr. Ienry Talbot, efq.; fir Edward
Montague, knt. his,fon and heir apparent, and William Monta-
gue his brother, fir Richard Knichtly knt. Mr. Thomas Brude-
nell, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forelt,
and Raynor, Benjamin Piggotr Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and
others.

At the ftairfold, Ihe paused to fpeal to Melvil in our hearing,

which was to this cffea, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honest
servant to me, so I pray thee continue-to my son, and commend
me unto him. I have not impugn'd his religion, nor the religion
of others, but vwifl him well. And as I forgive all that
have offended me in Scotland, so I would that he should also ;-
and beseech God, that he would fend him his holy spirit, and il-
luminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would so do, and
at that inflant, he would beleech God to aftifl him with his spirit.
Then fie demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied
unto her, the rather for that (he came with a fuperflitious pair of
beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have her women to
help her, and upon her earnefi request, and faying that when o-
ther gentlewomen were executed, flhe had read in chronicles that
they had women allowed unto them, it was permitted that fli'
flould have two named by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and
Kennedy. After fie cameto the scaffold, first in presence of
them all, her majeitie's commilfion was openly read ; and after-
wards IA'r. Dean of Peterborough, according to a direcion which
lie had rccc'ved, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd have
made a godly admonition to her, to repent and ldye well in the
fear of God and charity to the world. But at the first entry, lhe
utterly refuted it, flying that flie was a catholique, and that it
were a folly to move her, being so rclblutely minded, and that our
p'ayers would little avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it
might appear that we, and the whole aliftmbly, had a chri(lian
de!ire to have her die well, a godly prayer, concciv'd by, MIr.
Deat, was read and pronounced by us all. " That it would
lc;iafe lAlmighty God to fend her his holy spirit and grace, and
;ls), if it were rhis will, to pardon all her offinces, and of hi:,

mercy-to reccive her into .is heavelly and everlasting kingdom,
,apd finally to bless her majesty, and confound all her enemies ;"
whereof Mr. Dean, minding-to repair up Ihortly, can flhew your
lordship a copy.

This done, she pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this es-

Ifet, " To beseech God to fend her his holy fiirit, and that fle
.trusted to receive her salvat4ion in his blood, and of his grace to
*be received into his kingdom, hefought God to forgive her en-
nemies, as flie forga.ve them ; and to turn his v;rath from this
land, to bless the queen's majeflie. that fie might serve him.
Likewise to be merciful to her son, to have compaflion of his
church, and altho' the was not worthy to be heard, yet fie had
a confidence in his mercy, and prayld all the faints, to pray unto
her Saviour to receive her." After this, (turning towards Jer
fcrvants) Ihe desired them to pray for her, that her Saviour would
receive her. Then, upon petition made by the executioners, file
pardon'd them ; and laid, fle was glad that the end of all her
sorrows was so near. Then fle millik'd the whinning and weep-
ing of her women, faying, that they rather ought to thank God
for her resolution, and kiffiog them, willed themn to depart from
the scaffold, and farewell. .And so resolutely knel'd down, and
having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck,
whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incon-
tinently removed, and order taken that none llould approach un-
to her corps, but that it f(ould be embalmed, by the surgeon ap-
pointed. And f4rther her crosse, apparell, and other things are
retained here, and not yielded untq the executioner for inclonve-
niences that might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by
such as sent him hither.

This hath been the manner of our dealings in this fcrvice,

whereof we have thought good to advertifl your lordflips, as par-
ticularly as we could, for the time, and further have thought
good to signify unto your lord(hips helides, that for tle avoiding
of all finiller and slanderous reports, that may be raiced to the
contrary, we hlave caused a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the
litme cftc& in writing, which we the saids lords have subscribcd,
vwith the hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen a-
bove named that were prefcnt at the anlion. Anld so cieccch-
inlg Almighty God long to bless her majclly with a moll profl
pcroys reign, and to confound all his and her enemies, we

o0 ij

take our leaves. From Fotheringay Caflle,. the 8th of Februa-
ry 1586, in hall.

Your lordlhips at commandment.
N.' B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix,

is taken from a collecion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drum-
£oy, historiographer to QLAnne, now in the library of the
faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omit-
ted to mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be
found.

No. XIX. (Vol. II. p. 42. 1. 25.)

7,se objecsions againJf Mr. Davison, in the catfe of the
late Scottih queen, mnu/ concern things done either,
I. Before her trial at Fotherinogay. 2. During that
fefion. 3. After the fame.
Cott. Lib. 1. BEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had

any hand at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing
whatsoever, concerning the fame directly, or indirctly.

2. During that session, he remained at court, where the only

interest he had therein, was as her majefly's fecretafy, to receive
the letters from the commissioners, impart them to her highness,
and return them her answers.

3. After the return thence, of the said commissioners, it is
well known to all her council,

I. That he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatfo-

ever, in parliament, or council, concerning the cause of the said
queen, till the fending down of her majesty's warrant unto the
commiflioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. That he was no party in signing the sentence, passed aginflt
her.

3. That he never penned either the proclamation publifling

the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any other letter, or
thing whatsoever, concerning the fame. And

That the only thing, which can be specially and truly imput-

ed to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto her majelly
to be signed. She fending a great counsellor unto him, with her
pleafurc to that end, and carrying it to the great feal of lEngland,
by her own special direEtion and commandment.

For- the better clearing of whicl truth, it is evident,
I. That the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was

delivered by him unto Mr. Davison. with her majefiy's own pri-
vity, to be ready for to sign, when flie flould be pleased to call
for it.

2. That being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or

fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry it up, till the
sent a great counsellor unto him for the fame, and was Ilharply
reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majesty's own presence.

3. That having signed it, she gave him an express command-

mnent to carry it to the feal, and being fc:l'd to tend it immedi-
ately away unto the commissioners, according to the dircEtion.
Herself appointing the hall of Fothcringay for the place of exe-
cution, mifliking the court-yard, in divers rcfpe6ts, and in con-
clufion absolutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let
her hear any more thereof, till it was done. She for her part,
having (as the said) performed all that, in law or reason, could
be required of her.

4. Which directions notwithflanding, he kept the warrant

seal'd all that night, and the greatest part of the next day in liis
hands, brought it back with him to the court, acquainted her ma-
jefty withal, and finding her majefry resolved to proceed tlhrein,
according to her former directions, and yet delirous to carry the
matter to, as she might throw the burden from herself, he abfo-
lutcly resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. And hereupon, went over uato the lord treafurcr's chamber,

together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his preicnce
rellored the fame into the lands of the said lord treasurer, of
whom he had before received it, who from thenccforth kept it,
till himself and the reft of the council sent it away.

\Vhich, in fubilance and truth, is all the part and intcrefl the

said Davison had in this caufc; whatsoever is, or may be pretend-
ed to the contrary.

Touching the fending down thereof unto the commissioners,

that it was the general act of l;cr mnajefy's council, (as is before
mcntioled,) and not any private nai of his, may appear by

i. Their own confcflion. 2. Their letters sent down there-

with to the commiflioncrs. 3. IThe tefimonies of the lords and
others to v;hom they were dircfIcd. As also I. of Mr. ecale,
by vhlom they were fcnt. S. T'he tenor of her majefly's {iitf
comlmifflon for their calling to the flar-.chalnlcer for the fame, and

158 APPENDIX.

private appearance and fubmilinon afterward inllead thereof, be.
fore the lord chancelor Broomley. 6. The confetiion of Mr.
Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By the fen-
.tenlce itrelf upon record. 8. Besides a common aa of council,
containing an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottifl
ambassador then remaining here, avowing and juflifying the
fame.

Now where tome suppose him to have given rome extraordina-
ry futherance thereunto, the contrary may evidently appear by

r. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of association,
being earnestly pressed thereunto by her majesty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commiflioner,

in the examination of Eabington and his complices, and avoid-
ing the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to flay the commifflioners from pronoun-

cing ps the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they
should return to her majeffy's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefent-

ed, without once offering to carry it up, till her majcfiy sent ex-
prefly for the fame to fgn.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was seal'd unto the

commiifoners, as he was specially commanded, flaying it all that
night, and the greatest part of the next day in his hands.

6. And finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the lord
treasurer, of whom he had before received the fame.

Which are clear and evident proofs, that the siid Davison did

nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of thp
place lec then held in her majclly's fervicc.

Cal. C. 9.

This seems to be an original. On the hack is this title,

The innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scot-
tinl queen.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. o. 04 line o2.)

Fr,,nm tTle Letter fr/om c, Si ] ou, Rolct C,'ri/, to J.is njfrti/ly Kil
O)riginal

)ib. r:ic. ali/..

Jlr . l.lil.
A1 . 3-1 A'IOSTr wvorthy princc, the depending (d:11igcis upon your affclc Rin.

ates have been lilch, as Illath inforccd filcnce in llin, vll is faith-

jully devoted to your pcrfon, and in due time of trial, %,ill nn-
dergo all hazards of fortune, for the maintenance of the julf re--
gal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is
invelted in your royal person. Fall not then, mofi noble and re-
nowned prince, from him, whose providence hath in many dan-
gers preserved you, no doubt to be an initrument of his glory, and
the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have been revealed
to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited person near your majefly i'n council and favour; no man
in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath no foundation
from any, with whom, for your service, I have held correspond-
ence; otherwise, I had, long since, been disabled from perform-
ance of those duties, that tle thoughts of my heart endeavoureth:
being only known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one
noted in all parts of Chriflendom for his fidelity to your perlon
and Rate, and to Mr. David Fowlis your molt loyal servant, my
first and faithful correrpondent; and unto James Lliludicne, whoml
I have found in all things that concern you, mofl frcrct .ncd :il-
fured. It may, therefore, please your majelly, at the humb-Lle
motion of o, which jawgon I dcfire to be the indlorfcmcnt of your
oommands unto me, that by sone token of your faucur, le n-;ay
understand in what terms you regard his fidelity, frcrecy, and siC--
vice. MIy palfionate affetion to your person, (not as you arc a
king, but as you are a good lking, and have juill titl, after my
sovereign, to be a great king) doth trannport Ime to prcfl:nptio'.
Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

i. I, therefore, first bclecch your majcfly, that for the good

of thore, whom God, by divine Providence, liath dcflilned to
your charge, that you would be pleased to have an c:.tracrdinary
care of all prad-icers, or praftices, againil your perlbn ; for it iY
not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, eitiler out of nm-
bition, faaion, or fear, there are many that dcfire to lihve tlieir
fovcreign in minority, wherel)y the fovcrcignty :and fl tte mighlt
be f\vnyed by partiality of iubalternate perlons, rather Ilhan l i
true rule of power and juilice. Preserve your pcrtbn, and c;ar
not the praclices of m:an upon the point of your right, which wvill
be prcrerved and muaintained ;againllt all ;nflaults of comllCpetition
whatever. Thus I leave the protelcion of your pc1rfb, :1nd rly;:l
polterity, to tile Anlmigltly Cod of Ileaven, who blelis and prc-
iirve you andc! il yours, in all rcegal lnpillincfs to his glory.

2. Next to the prefl;rvation of your person, is the conservation

and secret keeping of your councells, which, as I havefaid, are
often betrayed and discovered, either out of pretended zeal in
religion, turbulent fation, or base conception, the which your
majelly is to regard with all circumfpecion, as a matter most
dangerous to your person and fRate, and the only means to ruin
and deltroy all those, that fland faithfully devoted to your majef-
ty's service. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I
make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this
nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majefly may be fur-
ther informed.

^. The 3d point considerable is, that your majefiy, by all

means possible, fecurc yourself of the good afeteion of the French
king aud States, by the negotiation of some faithful secret confi-
dent ; the French naturally diflafting the union of the Britilh
Ifands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you
/ have many allies and friends, but by reason of their remote slate,
they do not so much importe this affair, which must be guided by
a quick and fuddcn motion.

4. \.hen God, by whose Providence, the period of all persons

and times is determined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her
rr:jclft, (aitho' I do afiuredly hope that there will not be any
qluellion in competition, yet for that I hold it not fitting to give
any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature) I do hum-
Lly bcelech your rmajcfly to design a secret, faithful, and expe-
xienced confident servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity
:nd judgment, continually to be here resident, whose negotiation,
it were convenient your majelty fliould fortific, with such secret
trust and powers, as there may not need 14 days rerpite, to post
;or authority, in a cause, that cannot endure Io hours respite,
without varieties of danger. In the which it is to be confidered,
that all ifch as pretend leafr good to your eflablifhment, will not
,i: publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambition,
vill iccek to gain time, by allcdging their pretence of common
good to the faitc, in proi:oniiding of good conditions for dif-
birthelning thel comnmon wcale, of divers hard laws, heavy im-
pllitions, corruptions, opprefions, &c. which is a main point to

'lead the popul;ir, who are muchl di!igulled Vwill many particulars
,if thl; natule. It were thcrcfore convenient, that thlicz motives,
out of youir m:jcltly's providence, fliould be prevented, by your
£:'c :'."rr in .!-: r: po.ints followil, viz.

i. That your majesty would be pleased to abolish purvaiors and

purvaiance, being a matter infinitely offensive to the common
people, and the whole kingdom, and not profitable to the prince.

2. That your majesty would be pleased to dissolve the court

of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of
this realm, by base matches, and evil education of their children,
by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. The abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally re-

piaed against by the fubje&, in regard of their uncertainty, being
many times altered from their true meaning, by variety of inter-
pretation.

4. That your majesty will be pleased admit free outport of the

native commodities of this kingdom, now often restrained by sub-
alternate persons for private profit, being mol prejudicial to the
commerce of all merchants, and a plain deftrudion to the true in-
dultry and manufadture of all kingdoms, and against the profit of
the crown.

Thefc, being by your majesty's confidents in the point of time

propounded, will afluredly confirm unto your majeltie the hearts
and affections of the whole kingdom, and abfo utely prevent all
insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of pretext
of common good, would seek to patronize themfclves in popular
opinion and power, and thereby to derogate from your majefy's
bounty and free favour, by princely merit of your moderation,
judgment, and justice.

Your majefly's favour, thus granted to the subjed, will no way

impeach the profits of the crown, but advance them. The dil-
proportionable gain of rome chequer oficers, with the baIe and
mercenary profits of the idle unneccffary clerks and attendants,
will only filffer foie detriment; but infinite will be the good unto
the kingdom, which will confirm unto your majesty the universal
love and affedion of the people, aid eftlblifll your renown in the
highefl efeem to all pollerity.

The Lord prcfcrve your majeflie, and make you triumphant
over all your enemies.

My care over his person, whose letters pals in this pacquet, and

will die before he leave to he yours, shall be no lets then of mine
own life, and in like efleemi will I hold all your faithfull conli-
dents, notwithlandling I vwill hold niyfclf rcefrved from being
I'nown unto any of them, in my particular devoted afl'ctions unto

Vol/ume II. P p

your majesty, only this extraordinary worthy ran whole aflociate
1 am in his misfortune. doth know my heart, and we both will
pray for you, and if we live you shall find us together.

I beseech your majesty burn this letter, and the others ; for
altho' it be in an unusual hand yet it may be discovered.

Your majef¢y's most devoted

and humble servant,

pi

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
CRITICAL

D I S S E R T A T I O N
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness

of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

IT is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which
the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary to Bothwell,
have given rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any particu-
lar author, who hath treated of them. To repeat, and to expose
all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points, which
have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from partiality,
from malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no less irksome
to myself, than unacceptable to mofl of my readers. All I pro-
pose, is to aflift others in forming some judgment concerning the
facts in dispute, by stating the proofs produced on each fide, with
as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame atten-
tion and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scottish hiitory.

In order to account for the King's murder, two different

systems have been formed. The one fuppofcs Bothwell both to
have contrived and executed this crime. The other imputes it
to the Earls of Murray, Morton, and their party.

The decision of many controverted sacs in hlitory, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They Rtand detached ; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the flory
remains untouched. But the faet under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and essential one, and accouing to the opiniun
which an Historian adopts with regard to it, lie mutt vary and
dispose the whole of his fu)biquent narration. An hiltorical
fyftcm may be tried in two different ways, whetcher it be conllt-
ent with probability, and xlhether it be Lupported by proper evi-
dence.

Ppij

Those who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue ir

the following manner ; and though their reasonings have been
mentioned already in different places of the narrative, it is ne-
ceffary to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they,
was a sudden and youthful paflon. The beauty of his person
was his chief merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the
Quecn a disgust, which broke out on different occasions. His
engaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust
into an indignation, which fle was at no pains to conceal. This
breach was perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable ; the King cer-
tainly wanted that art and condescension which alone could have
repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and fettled hat-
red effaced all remains of affection. Bothwell observed this, and
was prompted by ambition, and perhaps by love, to found on it a
scheme, which proved fatal both to the Queen, and to himself
He had served Mary at different times with fidelity and success.
He insinuated himself into her favour, by address and by flattery.
By degrees he gained her heart. In order to gratify his love, at
learf his ambition, it was neceflary to get rid of the King. Mary
had rejected the proposal made to her for obtaining a divorce.
The King was equally hated by the partizans of the house of
Hamilton, a considerable party in the kingdom ; by Murray, one
of the mofl powerful and popular persons in his country; by
Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived; and whom
Bothwell had bound to his intereil by a recent favour. Among
the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He cx-
peaed, for all these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pass without any inquiry. And to M\ary's love, and to his owlv
address and good fortune, lie trufled for the accomplishment of
the reft of his vwihes. What Bothwell expected really came to
pass. MIary, if not privy herself to the dcfign, connived at an
aflion which rid her of a man whom file had such good realbn to
detest. A few months after, ihe married the person who was both
fufpcEed and accuscd of committing the murder.

Those who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party rcafon

in this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless am-
bition. Notwitllflanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had
early formed a design of urffrping the Crown. On the Queen's
return into Scitlnd, lie insinuated hinmfelf into her favour, and
cngroflscd thit whole power into his own hands. He fit himilf
againlt every propoll of marri;nig which was made to her, lell
his own chance of fuicceding to the Crown flould be destroyed.

He hated Darnly, and was no less hated by him. In order to b'
revenged on him, he entered into a sudden friendfllip with Both-
well, his ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to perpe-
trate the crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the QOccn.
All this was done with a design to throw upon the Queen herself
the imputation of being accessory to the murder, and under that
pretext, to deltroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, and to
seize the sceptre which he had wrested out of her hands.

The former of these systems has an air of probability, is con-

-fifent with itself, and fqlves appearances. In the latter, some as-
fertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effects
appear, of which no fufficicnt cause is produced. Murray, on the
QOeen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and by
his prudent adminifration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with cale to quash a formidable infurrecion
raised by himself in the year 1565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Qucen, by her ne-
gled, had reduced to the lowest fate of contempt, and who, after
a long disgrace, had regained (according to the moil favourable
fuppolition) the precarious poleflion of her favour only a few days
before his.death ? It is dificult to conceive what Murray had to
fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we fuppofc that the Q:ieen had no
previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chi-
merical than a lchcme to pcrfuade lier to marry a man, wvhofe
wife was lill alive, and who was not only fufpecd, but accuihd,
of murdering her former hufbrand. 3ut that such a scheme
ihould really succeed is still more extraordinary.-If Murray had
infligated Bothxvell to commit the crime, or had himlelf been ac-
cefory to the cornmiflon of it, what hopes were there that Both-
well would lilently bear from a fellow climinal all the pereccu-
tions which he fuflered, without ever retorting upon him the ac-
cufation, or revealing the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient
and deadly feudl had lhbfilted between Murray and Bothwell; the
Queen with difficulty lhad brought them to lbme terms of agree-
ment. But is it probable that lMurray would chuife an enemy,
to whom lie had been f; lately reconciled, for his confident, in tinh
commiflion of litch an atrocious crime? )r, on the other liand!.
would it ever clter into the imaginlatioll of a wife man, iirll to
raicl his rival to liulcici powcr, iin hopes that afterwards lie lliould
find lomin opportunity of deplrivinLg him of that power ? T he muolt

adventrous politician never hazarded such a dangerous expeniment-
The most credulous folly never trailed such an uncertain chance.

But however strong these general reasonings may be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we
now proceed to examine.

That Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, I. From

the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary hitlorians,
2. From the confeflion of those persons who suffered for afiafting at
the commission of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumstances. Anders. v. 2. I65. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commissioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
v. 2. 213. 4. From the express testimony of Lefly Biflop of RoEs
to the fame cffec with the former. Def. of Q' Mary's Hon.
And. 2. 76. Id. v.. p. 31. 5. Mlorton, at his death, declared
that Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in
.the coinfpiracy formed against the life of the King; and that he
was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that
Bothwell was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The
letter from Douglas to the OQeen, published in the Appendix to
Book VII. vol. II. No. 12. confirms Morton's testimony. 6. Lord
Herries promises, in his own name, and in the name of the nobles
who adhered to the Q(een, that they would concur in punilhing
Bothwell as the murderer of the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23.

The most dirce charge ever brought againfl Murray is in thele

words of biflop Lefly, " Is it unknown," addressing himfclf to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your face open-
" ly, even at your own table, a few days after the murder was
" committed ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of
" the fame murder? Did not he, nu//a circuit/one rfts, flatly and
" plainly burden you, that riditng in Fife, and coniing with one
' of your most assured and trusty lervants the fame day wlhereon
"you departed fiom Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk,
" This night e're morning Lord Darnly flall lose his life ?" Dcf.
of Qi Mary, Anders. v. 2. 75. Iut the aflertion of a man so
heated with faction as Lefly, unless it were supported by proper
cvidence, is of little v:eight. The servant, to whom Murray is
said to have fpokcn these words, is not named; nor the manner in
which this 'ecrct convcrlition was brought to light mentioned.
Lord llerreis was one of the molt zealous advocates for Mary,
and it is remarkable that in all his ncgociation at the court of Eng-
land; lie never once repeated this accusation of Murray. In an-

fwering the challenge given him by Lord Lindsay, Heireis ha4
a fair opportunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the mur-
der; but though he openly accuses of that crime some of those
who adhered to him, he industriously avoids.any insinuation a-
gainft Murray himself. Keith, Pref. XII. Mary herself, in a
conversation with Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and Mait-
land of being privy to the murder, but does not mention Murray.
And. 4. 55. When the Bishop of Ross and Lord Herries them-
selves appeared before the English council, January 11, 1569,
they declared themselves ready, in obedience to the Queen's com-
mand, to accuse Murray and his associates of being accessory to
the murder, but, " they being also required, whether they or any
" of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said Earl in special,
' or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty thereof;" tlty
answered, " that they took God to witness that none of them did
"ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or were
" in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither who were dc-
"vifers, inventors, and executors of the inme, till it was publick-
"ly discovered long thereafter by some of the iaffafils vlio sus-
" sered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These words
are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herries themselves,
and seem to be a direct confutation of the bilhop's assertion. The
bishop himfellf repeats the fame thing in flill fironger terms.
And. 3. 31.

The Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protefation touchb:lg

the murdler of the Kiiig of Scots, after mentioning the conference at
Craigmillar concerninga divorce, of which wehave given an account
vol. I. p. 233. add " So after these premiffies, the murder of tile
"King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold for cel-
" tain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Lething-
" ton were authors, inventors, counsellors and caufcrs of the lin;e
" murder, in what manner, or by whatfomevcr persons the fame was
"executed." Anders. v. 4. 188. lBut, I. This is nothing more
than the private opinion or pcrfonal aflirmation of these two no-
blemen. 2. T'he conclusion which they make has no connection
with the prcmiffes on which they found it. Icecaule Murray pro-
posed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband with
her own consent, it does not follow that therefore he committed
the murder without her knowledge. 3. I-Iuntly and Argyll wIre
at that time the leaders of that party oppofile to MIurray, and a-
nimated with all the rage of fucalion. 4. lBoth of them were Mur-
'ay's pcrfunal enemies, -Iuntly, on account of the treatment

-which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Ar.
gyll was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he
lived on no good terms. .Knox, 32j. and by whom he had no
children. Crawf. Peer. 19. ihe was Murray's fifler, and by his
interest he had obfirucled.that design. Keitl, 55I. These cir-
cumftances would go far towards invalidating a positive teftimo-
ny; they more than counterbalance an indeterminate suspicion.
5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntly and Argyll ever
subscribed this proteltation. A copy of.fuch a protellation as the
Qeen thought would be of advantage to her cause, was tranf-
mitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4. I-86. The proteflation itself
publilhed by Anderson is taken from an unfubfcribed copy with
blanks for the date and place of fubrcribing. -On the back of this
copy is pafRed a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer of the
" Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Huntly and Ar-
" gyll." Anders. 194, 195. But it can scarce beefleemed a reply
to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date
st London, January 19, i568. The Queen's letter, in which
hle inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton,
January 5, 1568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy
could be fcnt into Scotland, be subscribcd by the two Earls, and
-be fen and answered by Murray within so fliort a time. Mur-
ray's reply seems intended only to prevent the imprefifon which
the vague and uncertain accusations of his enemies might make
in his absence. Cecil had got the original of the Queen's letter
into his custody. Anders . v. 4 86. This naturally leads us to
conjecLture that the letter itself, together with the inclosed pro-
*Zeflation, were intercepted before they came to the hands of
-Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjecture alone. The
-lttcr to IIu;mtly, in which the proteflation was inclosed, is to be
-*ound. Cott. Lib Cal. C. 1. fol. 280, and is an original litblcrib-
ed by M\ary, though not written with her own hand, because file
scldom chofc to, write in tlle .'EglilI language. The protestation
is in the fime volume, fol. 282, and is manifeflly written by the
a;Hme person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is a clear proof
that both were intercepted. So that much has been founded on
a paper not filbfcribed by the two 1Earls, and probably never fcen
by thelic. Besides, this metliod which the Queen took of lending
a copy, to .the two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
with regard to a conference held in their own prclccnce, appears
foincwhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and not
.ic liable to any inifinterprctatiou, to have delired them to write

the most exact account, which they could recollet of what had
pafled in the conversation at Craigmillar.

The Qcen's commiflioners at the Conf'rences in England ac-

cufed Murray and his associates of having murdered the King.
Good. 2. 28 . But there accusations are nothing more than loose
and general afFirnations, without dcfcending to such particular
circumstances, as either ascertain their truth, or discover their
falsehood. The famre accusation is repeated by the nobles afein-
bled at Dumbarton, Sept. 1568. Good. 2. 359. And the fame
observation may be made concerning it.

All the Q2een's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by fujpofing that it was done on pur-
pose, that he might have a pretence of dillurbing.the Queen's ;cd-
minifiration, and thereby rendering incffctual her general Re-
vocation of Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his
alTociates of the belt part of their estates. Lelly Def. of Mary's
Hion. p. 73. But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scot-
tilh Monarch, will lee that luch a revocation could not be very
formidable to the nobles. Elvery King~of Scotland began his reign
with such a revocation ; and as often as it was renewed, tlhe power
of the nobles rendered it ineflfetual. The belt vindication of
Murray andl his party from this accusation is that which they prc-
sented to the Queen of England, and which hath never hitherto
been publishcd.
A/fivers to the objections and alledg.ance of the .lteeni

alledrlgins the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl
of Morton, l'Marr, Glencairn, Humne, Rzuthben, ec. to
have been moved to armour, for that they abhorred
and 1miigh't not abide her revocation of the alienation
made of her property.

Ir is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it ap- Iaper Of:
pears God has bereft, the alledgance of all wit aud good remem- hic.
brance, for thir realons follsiwng.

Imprimis, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to

grudge thereat, in refcldR llhe queen made himl privy to the fame,
and took resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordlhip know sic would allturedly in the flamin exceptt all things
ile lhad given to him, and rarefy them in the next parli:ament, as
lihe did indeed; and for that c:lllf wified miy Lord to lI.:ave behind

}n..'zir I., Q.1

him Mailer John Wrood, to attend upon the fame, to whom she
declared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it flould
be provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before ever he
demanded, as it came to pass without any let or impediment, for
all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the Parlia-
ment, but any difficulty.

Item as-to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

Only my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property

qiilk alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him in the said
parliament preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of
miscontent of that revocation, far less to have put their lives and
heritage to so open and manifest ane danger as they did for sic ane
frivole caufc.

Gyf ever any did make evill countenance, and llow any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpcciall, (iuha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents
to the Queen herself, and did complain of tle manifest corruption
of ane at of Parliament palt upon her majesty's return, and fa
did lett any revocation at that time; but the armor for revenge of
the King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there
was no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thereof.

Having thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to enquire whether the Qucen herself was accessory to the mur-
der of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than strong

suspicions arose, among some of her fubjec6s, that Mary had giv-
en her content to the commiflion of that crime. And. 2. I56.
WVe arc informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Arch-
biflop of Glasgow, that the fentimcnts of foreigners, on thissead.
were no less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many Of her
nobles loudly accused her of that crime, and a great part of the
nation by supporting them, seem to have allowed the accusation
to be well founded.

Some crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce
admit of a positive or dircft proof. Deeds of darknvfs can feldonr

be brought perfectly to light. WVhere persons arc accused not of
being Principals, but only of being AIccefar-ies to a crime; not of
having committed it themselves, but only of giving consent to the
commiflion of it by others; the proof becomes still more difficult
and unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by
circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attain-
ed. Even in judicial trials, such evidence is sometimes held to
be sufficient for condemning criminals. The degree of conviScion
which such evidence carries along with it, is often not inferior to
that which arises from positive tcltimony ; and a concurring series
of circumrlanccs satisfies the underfianding no le's than the ex-
press declaration of witnesses.

Evidence of both tlelfe kinds has been produced against Mary.

WVe liall firfI conider that which is founded upon circumitances
alone.

Some of these suspicious circumflances preceded the King's

death: others were subsequent to it. W\ith regard to the for-
mner, we may observe that the Queen's violent love of Darnly
was soon converted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conducS, and exccffes of every kind were
such, that if they did not juflify, at lealt they account for this
sudden change of her disposition towards him. The rife and
progress of this domeitic rupture, I have traced with great care in
the hiflory, and to the proofs of it which may be found in papers
published b; other authors, I have added those contained in
App. N.. XVI. and XVII. The Earls of Murray, ]Morton, Both-
well, Argyll and Huntly confidered the scheme of procuring for
the Queen a divorce from her hulhand, as one of the moll fluttcr-
ing proposals they could make to her, and employed it as the mol:
powerful inducement to prevail on her to consent to a measure,
vlhich they had much at heart, but from which they knew her to
be extremely averlc. And. 4. p. 2. 188. Du Croc the Frencl
ambassador, who was an eye witncfs of what he dcfcribes,,not
only reprcfents her difgufl at Darnly to be extreme, but de-
clares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " 'he OQcen is in the hands of' phyficiaus, andl I do as- Deccnilmer
lure you is not at all well ; and do believe the principal part of 12,' 66.
her dilkcafe to confilt in deep grief and sorrow ; nor does it seem
poflille to make her forget the fme.. Still fie repeats there
words, 1 could qvtl to be denad. You know very well that the
injury lie has rcceived is c:ccecding great, and her Majefly will
tlever forget it.---To fpleak my mind freely to you, I do nolt

Q-_,j ij

expet, upon several accounts, any good underflanding between
them [i. e. the King and Q.eenJ unless God effetually put to
Decem. 23. his hand. His bad deportment is incurable, nor can there

ever be any good expected from him for several reasons, vwhich
I might tell you was I present with you. I cannot pretend to
foretel how all may turn, but I wiil fay, that matters cannot filb-
sift long as they are, without being accompanied with sundry bad
consequences." Keith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural
death, at this juneure, it must have been confidered as a very
fortunate event to the Queen, and as a seasonable deliverance
from a husband who had become altogether odious to her. Now
as Henry was murdered a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing
had happened to render the Queen's aversion to him less violent,
the opinion of those who confider M'ary as the author of an event,
which was manifeily so agrccait!e to her, will appear perhaps to
some of our readers to be neither unnatural nor over refined.
If we add to this, what has been cbfcrvcd in the hiflory, that in
proportion to the incrcafe of Ilay's hatred cf lher liufband, Both-
wvell made progress in her favour; 1and that he became the objet
not only of her confidence but of her attachment, that opinion
acquires new firength. It is easy to obfervc many advantages
which might redound to lMary as well as to Bothwell from the
King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could de:ive the least benefit from that event.
Bothwell, accordigly, murdered the King,"'and it was, in that
age, thought no violent imputation on Mary's charac&cr, to fuip-
pose that ihe had conCented to the deed.

The fleps which the Queen took after her hulband's death add

strength to that supposition. i. Mielvil, whlo was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, asserts that " every body fuf'pcct-
ed the E.rl of Bothwell ; and those who durfR iieak freely to
others, siid plainly that it was IHe." p. I55 . 2. 'Iary having
iffled a proclamation, on the 12th of February, oilering a re-
ward to any perlon, who should discover those who iadl murder-
ed her huilband ; And. . -,6, a paper in answer to this Vwa- aiiix-
ed to the gates of thc T'olbooth, Fcl,-lary 1, , in wliich Bithw!c;
wsl. n!:l:(ld rs thie cthit t' plito guilty of thlat crime, and thi
Queenl hcrflelf v.':s nccif-i e r f 1!nving givfin I r confl.tlt t, it.
An . 2. .

2 . ::.

. :. : :! f:t T lbi-narv 2C, the I:!'i1 tof i..cilis:,

the Kin:l's falh:r, wtcre to MTary, crpjutiiig i er, by ever ' nro-
tive, to p'ro'ccute tlhe n.:rl(rir.; ithll tlc ietmt ll rigc:ur. It

plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell, and pointed out
a method of proceeding against him, and for discovering the other
authors of the crime, no less obvious tlan equitable. He advilcd
her to seize, and to commit to sure cultody Bothwell himself, and
ihofe i\ho were already named as his accomplices; to call an As-
fembly of the nobles; to issue a proclamation, inviting ]Both-
well's accurers to appear ; and if, on'that encouragement, no per-
fEn appeared to accuse them, to hold them as innocent, and to
difinifs them without further trial. And. I.. 4o. Archbi-
flop Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to MIary,
MIarch 9th, employs arguments of the utmoll weight to perfuadc
her to prosecute tile murderers with the greatest feveritv. " I can
conclude naething, (fays he) by quhat zour Majefly writes to
me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to take a
rigorous vengeance therof, that rather than it be not actually
taine, it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life
and ail. I alk your MIajeslie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can
heir neatl.ing to zour prejudife, but I ,man confiraindly writ the rl?/
lamin, that all may come to zour k!laledec; for the better re-
mede may be put.thereto. Heir it is needfull that ze forth hawv
now rather than ever of before, the greite vertue, m-gnanimitie,
and conflance that God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope
ze fall overcome this molt heavie envie and difplcfir of the co:n-
mitting thereof, and conserve that reput'tioun. in all godliness,
ze have conquift of lang, quhich can appear na wavis mair clear-
lie, than that zow doJick jullice that the hail/ warld may declare s,,i
zour innocence, and give tefiimonv forever of thair treason that '"c
has committed (buit fear of God or man) so cruel and ungodlie
a murther, quhairof there is fa mneik/l ill spoken, that I am con- ;i,,!,
flrainit to asP. zow mercy, that neither can I or will I make tle "t '
rehearsal therof, which is owr odious. But alas ! Madame, all
over Europe this day there is na purpose in head fa frequent as o/
zour lajltic, and of the prefLnt slate of zour realm, quhiilk i;
in the moll part interpretit linilterly." Keith, Pref. i:;. - . I-li-
zabeti, as appears from _Append. Vol. 1. No. XIX. urged the
l.inc thling in llrong terms. 6. The ciicumliances of the cafe it-
ftlf, no lcfs than there folicitati,,ns and rcmonflrances, r:!lied f(.r
thc utmolt vigour in her proceedllgs. -Ier liull,iid had been
r:.irdercd in a cruel :nancr, nrai!'[ in her ownl prlreirice. JI:r
;bjiec;ts wcre filled with the utmino! hor:or at thlit crinme. Ji h-
v.11h, one cf her principal favourites, had !cen publickly accufid
i .s :th!or c.: it. l'.::!.: ';:5;,s, t.xtr:nclvy d;:ici;a.rab;i'lc :1; hlLic(,;

had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of justice,
did not prompt her to purfae the murderers with ardour, dccen-
cy, at least, and concern for vindicating her own character,
ihould have induced her to avoid any appearance of remilhefs or
Vnant of zeal.

But inflead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her ac-

tions, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell, i. On the Isth
of February, five days after the murder, she bestowed on him the
reversion of the superiority of the town of .Ieith, which in the
year 1565 she had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This
grant was of much importance, as it gave him not only the com-
mand of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of
keeping poflefion of it *. 2. Bothwell being extremely dcfirous
to obtain the command of the castle of Edinburgh, the Quecn, in
order to prevail on the iarl of Vliar to furrendcr the government

CoI'foy n fom the original in the Charter-.:otzf of tce city of ,Edinzbrg:h of an.

./IJg:uation to the revecfone of the /pi criori t of Leith ly A/ern _iiary to the
Enrl of Bothweel.

Miaria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus pr-bis lominiiil s flits ad quos

prlirCntes literx pervenerint falutemn. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam re-
ducentes multiplex bonumn verum ct fidele ferviium, non tanturn quondam
noftl-a, chariffima matri lNaria: Regilna regni nofiri pro tempore in nohli-a
minorirate faltum et impenfilm, verum etiamn nobirimet ipfis, tam intra par-
tes Gallis quam intra hoc noflruin regnum, ad extentionelm noitri honoris et
auttolitatis in puitiolne fl-uri, nclefaaorum, et tranfgreeforum infra idem,
per noftrumn confilum conifalguinium et cSnfiliari inu Jacohiuin comiteim Both-
uile, dominum H-lalis, Creighton et Liddifdale, magnum adiminrallum regni
noftri, comniifliolem et onerationem ald hlunnc effeclum habentem, per equas
ipfe fiunm corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac ctiami, in peror-
matione et extentione in offti di'ri fe rv iii, fuam hereditaten, filpra filmman
viginti milliumn mercarum htijus noltri regni, allenavit ac lalit. Et nos co-
gitantes quod, ex no/Ira principali honore et dcvoria, diqulnm noflrium con-
flitin confi:giniieulm & confiliatium cin quodam macidente Ct gratitudine re-
co!:nlpenl'hle et gratificare incumbit (qucl nos comood fLbi comcedc:el potIoteri-
mnus, unle ipfe mnagis habilis omnibus aflil'turis temporibus effc poterit, ct
ad litjufliinodli perfolrnan!duin in omniibus calfi.:; rCu eveutiliaus: In rccomipen-
fatiolncm el orumn pra;lnifolrum, ac pro cdiv'erfis aliis noltlis r:ltiollbililus cau-

cis ct conlfidral'ionibiss mnos nvctili.;, I'ecimlus, a&c. tdiJIni JacobuIl co-
mnitei l otullil, &c. ac silos hI:rcdes maltfctlos cqt olulilq':e ntollros legittimo s,

i-c. afllignitos in et :ad literas l:vclrflinis laflas, &c. per ;ytloinieic P'rcllto

tie c,'ciem miliic'm, pri'cpo!iitlilu, balivos, confiti!'s, et colnmniilliitattein hlujils
nolftri ui l

gi de l:dhililghi, pro l'fipfis ac'fiis (licc llrril)ll;, &c. nobis, nollril'

qc ie hcr'dilllu, icccllbilbus, , t afiignatis pro rcdlleiptiollc, Ec. fiilplerioitatlii
roitus vill:cdel.eitll,t&c. inlpiglorat;lclpers dinispil -lllit ,,&c. flbrlcvcliont

of it, offered to commit the young prince to his cuflody. Mar
consented; and ihe inflantly appointed Bothwell governor of tlhe
callle. And. I. Pref. 64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Botlhwel's trial, seems to have been condu-t
ed with the utmnoll remilhcls. Buchanan exclaims loudly against
this. And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as
is evident from a circumilance in the alfidavit of Thomas Nclfon,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his maflcr
was-murdered, and was dug up alive out.of the rubbilh. Being
examined on the MIonclay after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fcllare, and the Queenis
fervandis the kcyis of her flialmir. Quhilk the Laird of Tilli-
bardin hearing, said, Hald thuir, here is ane ground. Eftcr quhilk.
words fpokin, thai left of, and proccdit na farther in the inquifi-
tion." And. 4. P. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to
learch into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much
importance merited the moil carefil inquiry. 4. Notwithfiand-
ing Lennox's repeated follicitations, notwitbflanding the reason-
ablenefs of his demands, and the necelfity of complying with them,
in order to encourage any accufcr to appear againit Bothwcll, fls
not only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remoie:
him from her presence and councils ; And. r. 42, 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances,
discovered an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not
avoid bringing Bothwell to a public trial; but fle permitted
him to fit as a member in that meeting of the Privy Council,
which direded his ownv trial; and the trial itfclf was carried on
with fucl:unneceflary precipitancy, and with so many other urfpi-
cious circumflanccs, as render his acquittal rather an argumcnt of
his guilt than a proof of his innocence. 'hefe circum ilances have
all been mentioned at length, Vol. I. p. 243, &c. and therefore
are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days aftcr the trial, Mary
gave a public proof of her regard for Bothwell, by a'pointing Iiin

alicnrat: contincnltis finummam itccm milliutm nm:crcaan monct. prrcric;iri
nulmerlad;ain et calculandt:am in piarochliali ccclI'-li; te F-diilhbighl, lIpcre
premonitione q:iaidrigintl dlicrnom, uit noris cft, vclliti in dicliu rcverlionis li-
teris, &:c. de dcata £.vo Clob. i.6.,, &c. (lhe r-ll is rirm, aiid contains a
Claulf ofl i bfi)lute wa;rr;ll ice.) Ix c ji i;i o 11: '..;:'l i:l ON ln:. irn:llCi ills liSai-
Jum figillum noltriLn i applOi fc'cillim. Apedl Eli:ildmiir;), dcciiioquintoili,
mnilcnus Febiu;t)rii, anlo Doi)lmii milll-i:nO qn.li(:lemo f-'x :i)llho Ii

u Xio
*:t r; gtni ::oltri vi'c.c;l.h o ;lUi:'.I c.

'T'h Jr- .t !.;! c. tiA il .

to.earry tle sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliamelt.
(eith, 378. 7. In that parlianent, flie granted him a ratifica-
tion of all the vast poffellions and honours, which fie had confer-
red upon him, in which was contained an ample enumeration of
all tle lfervices he had performed. Anidi 1. 117. 8. Though
WI;elvil, who forclaw that her attachment to Bothwell would at
lengthi induce her to marry him, warned her of the infamy and
ldanger xliclh would attend that alion, the not only disregarded
this liilutary admonition,.but discovered what had pafled betweven
them to Bothwell. which e.xposed Melvil to his indignation.
.Mielv. 156. 9. JIothwell.f'eized Mary as fle returned from, Stir-
ling, April 24. If he had done this, without her knowledge and
conient, such an insult could not have failed to have filled her
with the molt violent indignation. But according to the account
of an old M. S, ' 'The friendly love was so highly contracted
between this great princeis, and her enormous fulject, that there
was no end thereof' (for it was conflantly eflemed by all men
that either of them loved other carnally) it that lie suffered pa-
tiently to be led where the lover lifl, and all the way ncither
:nade obRflcle, impediment, clamour or reliflance, as in such ac-
cidents use to be, or that file might have done by her princely
autlhorty, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Iuntly, and
eccretary iviaitliicl of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil, who
was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the officer,
by -Ewom he was seized, informed him that nothing was done
.itlhout the Queen's consent. Melv. iS8. io. On the I2th of
]:-iy, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that lhe
was then at iull liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended
her by Il:izing her pc:e:ln, ihe was so much satisfied with his duti-
i'il behaviour iincc that time, and so indebted to him for past ser-
\ices, that le!, not only forgave that oflence, but resolved to pro-
inote him to higher honours. And. I. 187. ii. Even after
he confedaerate nobles had driven Bothwcll from the Queen's pre-
i;nct, tand thouih nie !'h. that lie was confidered as the murder-
'r1 of lher former hluiand by lo great part of her fubjecis, her as-
fclioti dlid not ;n the lc Il: abate, and flie continued to e;;preis
the mnltl u aIllter;ia)lc ttaclinlCin to lim. " I can perceive (fIys
:;ir N?. 'I lrognmoilil) thiat the- ri;our wit hich the Queen is
i..e ]t, proc:>l;,il l by orl,.r f'o.m t lltn: men, blecufc that the Qicen

. ill n1, , l, aiy nmeans, i iilU(.d t, to lend :r thoity to ro-
i'; .ltc ilic t ricitrt;cr l; nor \,ill not crnfent bIy 'any pcrlLalion to :-
bt:. .i:-i th.

ll .o l . Lot.;i.:- ' .':: !.r hiulLand, b iu'. avo :veth
c ol -

-itantly that (le will live and die with him; and faith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquil( her crown and kingdom, or
the Lord Bothwell, fle would leave her kingdom and dignity to
go a simple damsel with him, and that (he will never consent that
he shall fare worse, or have more harm than herself. App. p. 57.
See also p. 6I. From this long enumeration of circumflances,
we may without violence, draw the following conclusion. Had
MIary really been accessary to the murther of her huff)and ; had
Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her consent, or at her conm-
mand; and had fle intended to stifle the evidence againfl him,
and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, bhe could scarce have
taken any other steps than those (he took, nor could her conduc
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of prudence and of
decency.

The pofitivc evidence produced againfP Mlary may be classcd
under two heads.

I. The depositions of some perlons who vecrc.employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This pcrlfon, who
was Bothvell's servant, and much trufled by him, was t\vice ex-
amined, and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of
the other, are frill extant. It is pretended, that both these are
notorious forgeries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and
na'ivtei which it is almost impoftible to imitate; they abound with;
a number of minute fads and particularities, which the moit dex-
terous forger could not have easily afl'mbled, and conncEcd to-
gether with any appearance of probability; and they are filled
with circumftanccs, which can scarce be supposed to have entered
the imagination of any man, but one of Paris's profeflion and cha-
racer. But, at the Lame time, it must be acknowledged that his
depositions contain some improbable circumftanccs. -He fecins to
have been a foolilh talkative fellow; the fear of death; the vio-
lence of torture; and the desire of pleasing those in whose power
lie was, tempted him, perhaps, to feign tome circuimlances, and
to exaggerate others. To lay that some circumflances in an alli-
davit are improbable or fall'c, -is very different from faying that
the wlole is forged. 1 fifpcA& the former to be tile cafe here, but
I fce no appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some of the
molt material f-ads in Paris's altidavits rclt upon Iiis single tclli-
mnony; and for tliat rc'fion, I have not in the Hiilory, nor (hall
i il this place, lay any lrelfs uplon t!em.

,'/,.,"!,', II. P. 1

2. The letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. These

have been frequently published. The accident, by which the
Queen's enemies got them into their pofleffion, is related Vol. I.
352. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may.be ascertained either by external or internal e-
vidence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

I. External proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. I. MAur-

ray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon their word
and honour, that the letters were written with the Queen's own
hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2. 64, 92.
2. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament of Scot-
land, December 1567, Good. 2. 360; and were so far confidered
as genuine, that they are mentioned, in the act against Mary, as
one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3. They were
1hewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commiflioners at York. In the ac-
count which they give of this matter to their Mistress, they seem
to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion of any
forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter contain-
c' ed in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and de-
" vised by any other than herself; for that they discourse of
" ome things, which were unknown to any other than to herself
" and Bothwell; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so the
' matter of them, and the manner how there men came by them
"is such, as it feemeth that God, in whose fight murder and
" bloodshed of the innocent is abominable, would not permit the
' fame to be hid or conceaied.' Good. 2. 142. They seem to
have made such an impreflion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a
subsequent letter to Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has these
words, " If the matter fiall be thought as deteflable and mani-
" fell to you, as for ought we can perceive it feemeth here to us.'"
Good. 2. 154. 4. After the conferences at York and Welimin-
Itcr were fininied, Elizabeth rieolved to call together the lEarls
who were then at court, and to lay before them the whole pro-
ceedings againfl the Scottish Queen, particularly that " the let-
" trs and writings exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of
"Scots letters and writings, lhould aT;fi be fliewcd, : rn(l onser-
" nce [i. c. comparison] thereof made in their fight, with the
; letters of the finid QOeen's being extant, and hercto[fore written
< with her own hand, and fcnt to the Qceen's mn;jelly; wlhercby
" may be fearcllcd ;ind examined what ditlercnc is betwixt theim.'
Good. 2. 252. lhey allliblcl, accordingly, at -lanllton Coult,

December 14 and 15, i568; and " The originals of the letters
"supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand, were
"then allb presently produced and perused; and being read, were
"duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and

falhion of orthography, with sundry other letters long fiuce

" heretofore written, and sent by the laid Queen of Scots to the
" Queen's MajeRfy.- In collation whereof no difference was
" found." Good. 2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical
letter for her conduct to the Countess of Lennox, July To, 1570'*,
lile tianfinitted it to her huland then in Scotland; and he return-
ed to the Countess the following answer: " Seeing you have re-
"mittit to me, to answer the Queen the King's iMother's letters
' sent to you, what can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir
" writ the belt she can for hirfelf, but to feame to purge hir'
" that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly perfuadit of tle
" contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knawlcdge, but by
" her handvritt, the confeflionis of men gone to the death, and
"uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that is hable

* Mary's letter has never been piblilhied, and ought to have a place here,

where evidence on all fides is fairly produced. ' Madam, if the xwrang and
';lfe reportis of rebellis, inemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and
alace to muche trulted of me by zoure advice, had not so far Iturred you
aganis my innocency, (and I mut fiay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have
not onelie as it were condenpnit me wvrangfullic, bot o hlated me,. as lbone
wordis and opcne deideis les teflifeit to all the warlde, a m:nyvfeit lmif-
I -king in zow a;ganis zowr awn blude) I would not lhve omitit tlhs lr.ng my
cesvtie in \w ryting to zow excuting me of tlhofi untrevw reportis made of Inc.
eot hloping with Godis grace and tyme to have my innoccicy knawin to zow,
as I trust it is already to the mailt pairt of all indiilf:rent perfonis, I thocht
it belt not to trouble zow for a tyme till thalt flch a matter is moved thlr
tuichis us bayth, qulilk is the transporting zoure littil lfnc, and my onelie
clild in this cuntrey. To the quhill; albeit I be never fa willing, I wvald
be glaid to have zoure advyfe therein, as in all lther thingis tuichlin;g hil. 1

:ave bolrn him, and God knawis with quhat dlaunger to him anid ime boit l;
and of' ow lie is dil'cendit. So I mcane not to forzet my dcwxvti to zow, il
fiehewin herein any unklynchiels to zow, how ulkyndliic tahat ever ze have

-I'lt with me, bot will love zowV as my awnt, and reliea zoew ais nly illoder
in lhw. And gif ye ples to knaw fjtl'ther of nwy m dllle inll tiat an( ;ldl uther
1lhinges betwixt xis, mly aiibafltl(orl tihe Iilhop of Rlots iall bI ready to cor:-
t';r with zol. Aud laster my Ilairllic c )minl]icln(tiiolis,, i remiittinll 1gm to nmy
. ide :tmbatfildor, and zoul betterl ceililidclriatotii, I colln it zow to tile i)J-
tinicuin of Almy,;lity CGod, qiluhonm 1 pray to pre'irvc zow an:d c y Il.roIlhr'
(lh:lu'clts, anld caus zovw to kinaxv nil pailrt belter xil r ze do. FIroil Clhati
w:llh thliis x of July ij7o.

'I'o m1y L:id 1enii Yo.ox c 'tlir a:tttiial l

,gde Nic.
mly Inlodxr ill l;w. :and lv lyg doclul .

R r ij

c tb put' a' iiattir fo'notorious ili oblivioun, to mak blackl quhyt;,
"or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa weill knawin.
" The maif indifferent,.I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
"and my cause, and of the just occasion of our milykyng; Hi;
" richt dewtie to'zow and me, being the parties interest, were
"hir trew confeflioun and- unfeygned repentance of that lament-
" able fad, odious for liir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us
" to think of. God is jult, and will not in the end be abused;
" but as he has manifested the trewth, so will he puneife the ini-
¢" quity." Letnzox,'s Orig. Regf/. of LCelerJ. In their publick
papers the Queen's enemies'may be fufpcced of advancing what
would be molt subservient to their cause ; not what was agree-
able to truth, or what flowed from their own inward convicion;
But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox had nd occasion
to dissemble ; and it is plain, that he not only thought the OQeen
guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to Bothwell.

2. With regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of

the Queen's letters to Bothwell3 we may observe, I. That when-
ever a paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness
of the forger to establish the point in view, his follicitude to cut
off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncer-
tainty, always prompt him to use exprcffions the molt explicit and
full to his purpose. The passages foifled into ancient authors by
HIeretics in different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romif-
faints; the suppositious deeds in their own favour produced by
monasteries; the'falfe charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 8.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim seems to be more
certain than this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much,
but seldom. falls into the error of proving too little. The point
whichlthe Queen's enemies had toeltablilli, was " that as the Earl
" of Bothic.ll was chief executor of tle horrible and unworthy mur-
" ther perpetrated, b'c. so was flle of the foreknowledge, counfcl,
"device, persuader, and commiander of the said murder to be
"done." Good. 2. 207. But of this there are only impcrfet
hints, obscure intimations, and clark exprcflons il the letters,
which however convincing evidence they might furnifli if found
in real letters, bear no relcnmblance to that glare and fuperlluity
of evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All the advo-
cates for Mniry's inn(lccncc in her own agc, contend tlat'thlere is
nothing in the letters which can:lerve as a proof of her guilt,
,Lclley, ]3lackwood, Turner, .'c. abound witll paflhges to this
purpore; nor are the ccntilncllts of timic in the
l rcle:nt age (linf'e-

ent. '" Yet Rill it might have been expeaed (fays her latcre
11 defender) that some one or other of the points or articles of
"the accusation flould be made out clearly by the proof. But
" nothing of that is to be seen in the prcfcnt cafe. There is no-
"thing in the letters; that could plainly flew the writer to have
" been in the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder,
" farlefsto'have persuaded or commanded it; and as little.is there
"about maintaining or justifying any murderers." Good: x. 76.
How ill advised were Mary's adversaries to contra& so much
guilt, and to praftife so many artifices in order to forge letters,
which are so ill contrived for establishing the conclusion they had
in view ? Had they been so base as to have recourse to- forgery,
is it not natural to think that they would have produced fonmc
thing more explicit and decisive ? 2. As it is almofl impoflible to
invent a long narration confilting of many circumstances, and to
connec it in such a manner with real sacs, that no mark of fraud
liall appear; for this reason skilful forgers avoid any long detail
of circumstances, especially of foreign and superfluous ones, well.
knowing that the more these are multiplied, the more arc the
chances of detecion increased. Now Mary's letters, efpeci::llv
the firrt, are filled with a multiplicity of circumfiances, extreme-
ly natural in a real correspondence, but altogether foreign to the
purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would have beer
perse& folly to have inserted if they had been altogetler imngi-
nary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and reality of le-
veral circumfiances in tle letters, and these, too, of no very pu-
blick nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence.
Lett. r. Good. 2. p. I. The Queen is said to have met one of Len-
nox's gentlemen, and to have tome converfltion with him. Tiio-
mas Crawford, who was the person, appeared befcre lizabell's
comminfloncrs, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this cir-
cum[tance. He lilkewif declared, that during the Queen's Il;iy
at Glasgow, the King repeated to him, every nighlt, whatever lad
paired, through the day, between her Majelly and him, and tlha:
the account ,iven of these conversations in the firfl letter, is neal-
ly the fame with what tlc King communicated to him. Good. 2.
245. According to the lame letter there was much difcourlse be-
tween the King and Qten concerninlg Mynto, I-iie git, and \\r:l-
car. Good. 2. 8, jo, ir. .W'lht tlis; might !e, wnas lt(cgether
unlknown till a letter (; l;fary'; p:cli:rcd in tlhe Scots Collenge at
'alris, and publilllcd, k I'Prcf. vii. discovered it to lj an afl'.i
of lo much importance as merited all tlie attention (fh p;ld to it

.t that tithe. It appears by a letter from the Frcnch ainb.fldor,.
that Mary was fubje& to a violent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid.
This circumRance is mentioned, Lett. I. p. 30. in a manner tf
natural as can scarce belong to any but a genuine prodution. 4. If
we shall flill think it probable to suppose that so many real cir-
cumitaices were artfully introduced into the letters by the for-
gers; in order to give an air of authenticity to their producion;
it will scarce be possible to hold the fame opinion concerning the
following particular. Before the Queen began her firfl letter to
Eothwell, Ihe, as is usual, among those who write long letters
concerning a variety of subjects, made notes or imemorandums of
the particulars she vwifled to remember; but as lei fate up writ-
ing duiring a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
asleep; her paper failed her, and the continued her letter upo:n
the fame flleet, on which (lie had formerly made her memoran-
dums. This lle herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for
it: " It is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you,
" yet now after the kissing of your hands, I will end my letter.
" Excuse my evil writing, and read it twice over.. ]xcufe that
" thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper zfclerday, quhen I wrait
' that of the memorial." Good. 2. 28. Tlhcfe memorandums fill
appear in the middle of the letter; and what we have fiaid seems
naturally to account for the manner how they might find their
way into a real letter. It is scarce to be supposed however that
any forger would think of placing mcmorandums in the middle
of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so absurd and so un-
natural an appearance. But if any lhall still carry the:r refine-
nlcnt so far, as to fuppofc tlllt the forgers were so artful as to
throw in this circumstance, in order to prelcive tile appearance
of genuineness, they muff at leafl allow that the lQueen's enemies,
who employed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the dcfign
and meaning of thece flort notes and memorandums but we find
them rillaking them so far as to imagine that they were the cre-
dit ( 'the bearer, i. e. points concerning whill thle Queen had
givcn him verbal inllruotions. Good. 2. 1 2. 'Ihis they cannot:
poflilly be ; for the Qlecn herclf l v rites vitlh so much exatinef;
concc;lning t!he clif'icilt poinlts in the nclinlorainilms, that thecre
was n! nced! of giving' any crid'a or inliruclions to the bearer con..
ccrliiig' thlem. The iemoradnums ate indeed the conte/:.r of til-.
lettlr. 5. M\lary, nmentioniiil. lher coivcrfittions with tlhe lKing a-
bout the allfair of l\IlIi:o, llgit 'i, '. T()'s, " e ,'1i ne r[ i. C.
tu-morrov.' I wYilil i 'ik to !ii;u upon tl:,. ptoiut j'" uanl ll hcil a;d

' As to the reft of Willie Heigait's, he confcflit it; but it was
-the morne, [ i. e. the morning] ofter my cumming or lie did it.''
Good. 2. 9. This addition which could not have been made till
after the convcrfation happened, seems either to have been in-
ferted by the Queen into the b'ody of the letter, or, perhaps, flie
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence into the
text. If we su.ppose the letter to be a real one, and written at
different times, as it plainly bears, this circumflance appears to
be very natural; but no reason could have induced a forger tu
have ventured upon such an anachronifn, for which there was no
necessity. An addition, perfectly similar to this, made to a ge-
nuine paper, may be found, Good. 2. 282.

But, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that there letters were forged by
:her enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to jullify
their own rebellion. It is not necclfary to take notice of the ar-
guments, which were produced, in her own age, in fuppo t of
this opinion ; the observations which we hv ive already made, con-
tain a full reply to them. An author, who has inquired into the
affairs of that period with great induflry, and who 'l: sacquir-'
ed much knowledge of them, has lately publiflicd (as he as-
firms) a demonfiration of the forgery of Mary's letters. ''his
demontlration he founds upon evidence both internal and xtcr-
nal. WVith regard to the former he observes that the French co-
py of the Queen's letters is plainly a translation of Buclian;til's
Latin copy ; whichIatitin copy is only a translation of the Scottifl
copy; and by consequence, the assertion of the Quen's enemies,
that fle wrote them originally in French, is altogether ground-
less, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. Iie accounts for
this firange succession of translations, by supposing that when the
forgery was projected, no person could be found capable of writ-
ing originally in the French language, letters which would pals
for the Queen's ; for that reason they' were firll composed in
Scottifli; but unluckily, the iFrench interpreter, it would fcem,
lid no)t undeirand that language ; and therefore Buchanan tranf-
lated tiemn into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered in-
to French. Good. i. 79, 8o.

It is scarce neccnfl'ry to oblfrve tlhat no proof whlatcver is pro-

'liced of any of thlecf l:p)iofitions. 'Ilic maniners of tlhe Scots,
in tliit aigc, when almioll every man of raink licnt a part of his
'outlil ill France, and thel intcrcoulrfc between the two lnation-

was great, render it altogether improbable that so many compli..
catcd operations flould be ncceflfry, in order to procure a few
letters to be writtcn in the French language.

Iut without infifling farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove tlat the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced
by I'lurray and his party in the Scottifl parliament, and at York
and WVcflinmiflec. But this lie has not attempted; and if we at-
tend to the hiflory of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious,
mufl hvave been unfucccfsful. .The leltters were first publifled at
the end of Buchanan's Dcteiion. The firll edition of this treatifc
was in Latin, in which language three of the Qteen's letters
were subjoined to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571.
Soon after a Scottish translation of it was publified, and at the
end of it we reprinted likewise in Scottish, the three letters whicl
had formerly appeared in Latin, and five other letters in Scottish,
vwhich were not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French
translation of the Deteclion, and of seven of the letters ; this
bears to have been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas WValtem 1572.
The name of the place, as well as of the printer, is allowed by
all parties to be a manifelt impolture. Our author, from obfcrv-
ing the day of the month, on which the-printing is said to have
been finiflled, has afTerted that this edition was printed at Lon-
don; but no firess can be laid upon a date found in a book, where
every other circulmllance with regard to the printing is allowed
to be false. 1lackvwood, who (next to Lclly) was the best in-
formcd of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that the
I'rcnch edition of the Dctcdlion was publilced in France: " I!
\ Buchlian]. a clpuis adjouRti a cefc declamation un pctit libellc
Ju pretcndu m;iriagc du Due dc Norfolk, et de la fa on de fi"n
F.roces, ct ];a tout cnvoyc aux frcrcs a la Rochelle, lefrluels ro.-
;irl; qi'il ipou v

nit irvi'ir a la c'aufc, l'ont traduit en lr;an( ois, (L

Iccluny Ifu iillrlln.'i a .ICliniourg, c'cll a dire a la Rocliclie, par
'liomnas \V;iltcmi, no;n a1poll0 ct t;it a plaifir. .,lartyr(e de lIit.

cllb. 2. 25G. ' The author of the I2,ncctec. . 2ilr,,:

A ,, gocs fir-

tcr(, 1and ni;llnes the lrenclh tr.rill.ltor of tllhe DtcItlion. l'L
_"',-t'liy plr'nirci:l'C;t co:noClL- (cOmi'C il fcminblc) lar Geoige .i-

hntri;ii 1 .li'oll'oy:,, ct dcpi'l is tt:cltiit nll langtie ' i pa)ir ;t i
i ltitii '),it, I'uitcvin (;ldvccait . dc voc lation) C:llu7.z, IC;V dliflnt
;'Cttiilt AhonII , ct t1:11 ic p)ls l n l: (uczu. l 'tlitii't x dtc l''r;1li.

ILJb. t. ', .!i 3
;. The C'c'e:' ing tciin:on)y e. t. o cotlcro-

tary authors, whose residence in France afforded them sufficient
means of information, must outweigh a flight conjeture. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the original Frcnch
letters as written by the Qeeen herself; he expressly declares that
he translated them from the Latin. Good. I. o03. Had our
author attended to all these circumflances, he might have saved
himself the labour of so many criticisms to prove that the present
French copy of the letters is a translation from the Latin. The
French editor himself acknowledges it, and so far as I know no
person ever denied it.

We may observe that ihe French traiflator was so ignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French,
partly in Scottifli. Good. I. Io3. Had this translation been pub-
blilhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his dire&ion,
so gross an error would not have been admitted into it. This
error, however, was owing to an odd circumfiance. In the
Scottish translation of the Detecion, there was pcrfixed to each
letter two or three sentences of the original French, which break-
ing off with an &c. the Scottilh translation of the whole follow-
ed. This method of printing translations was not uncommon in
that age. The Frenrch editor observing this, foolishly concluded
that the letters had been written partly in French, partly in
Scottiih.

If we carefully confider these few French sentences of each

letter which flill remain, and apply to them that fpecics of criti-
cifm, by which our author has examined the whole, - clear proof
will arise, that there was a French copy not tranllated from the
Latin, but which was itfclf the original from which both the
Latin and Scottish have been translated. This minute criticism
must ncccfarily be disagreeable to many readers, but luckily a
few fentenccs only are to be examined, which will render it ex-
tremely (hort.

In the firli letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, yfaf/oit bon. It is plain that this expreftion vel ce
quoc peCt un corps fan cacur is by no means a tranllation of cur..
plane nde fprind nm atqu o colypu /w corde. 'The whole ftntencc:
has a spirit and elegance in the Fecrich, which neither the Latin
nor Scottifli have retained. 7/qfitucs a /I diumre is not a tranllatiol
of toto prandilt tnc.pore ; the Scottilli tranllation quh/l/' l ',ncr- li'm
exprtffcs the fenlf of the Frenclh more properly ; for anciently
qn/u/ive signified n/till as well as dturtc . t' /e '/j) pas titt grandi
pro/o.r is not jufly rendered neq:e contu/,i'crn JfrmoneIm culm Nuo

Vohutme IL S f

quaim; the lhrafe used in the French copy, is one peculiar to tlia:,
language, and gives a more probable account of her behaviour,
than the other. ugeantdt bicn qu'it/ 'y fafboit bon, is not a
translation of ut quijuidicarent ide non c'e ex ufli. The Frencll
sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with apprendre. It is evident
that both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted alto-
gether there words, et toutefoisje nepuis apprendre. 1lTh1 French
sentence prefixed to-Lett. 3. ends with pre/enter. '`aye vei// plus
tard la blut is plainly no translation of diutilus i/ic moratafiitm;
the sense of the French is better expressed by the Scottifl Ihave
wa/kit /alit er ere-up. Again, Pour excifer voJlre faair-e is very
different from ad evciifandum noiflra negotia.. The five remaining
letters never appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their
being ever translated into that language. Four of them, how-
ever, are published in French. This entirely overturns our au-
thor's hypothesis concerning the necessity of a translation into
Latin.

In the Scots edition of the DeteEtion the whole sonnet is

printed in French as well as in Scottish. It is not possible to be-
lieve that this Scottish copy could be the original from which the
French was translated. The French consists of verses which have
both measure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far
from being inelegant. The Scottish confilts of an equal number
of lines, but without measure or rhyme. Now no man could
ever think of a thing so absurd and impraaicable, as to require
one to translate a certain given number of lines in prose, into ar
equal number of verses, where both meaufre and rhyme were to
be observed. The Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifeltly
to be a translation of the French ; the phrases, the idioms, and
many of the words are French, and not Scottish. Besides, the
Scottifl translator has in several inflances miflaken the sense of
the French, and in many more expresses the sense imperfcAly.
Had the sonnet been forged, this could not have happened. The
dire&ors of the fraud would have understood their own work. I
shall satisfy myself with one example, in which there is a proof of
both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je voux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy toute vertu de fuivre j' ay envie.
For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to cnfue courage.

uttendin the first line is not a Scottilh but a French phrase

·the two last lines do not express the sense of the Frcnch, and are
,absolute nonsense.

Thel eighth letter was never translatcd into French. It con-

tains much refined myflicifm about devicer, a folly of that age, of
-which Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circum-
itances, particularly from a letter concerning imnprefai by Drum-
nond of Hawthornden. If Mary's adversarics forged her let-
*ters, they were certainly employed very idly when they produ-
ced this.

From there olfcrvations it seems to be evident that there was

a French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottifl
were only trannlations. Nothing now remains of this copy but
those few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish translation.
The French editor laid hold of these sentences, and tacked his
own translation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a ser-
vile and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin; where-
as in those introducory sentences, we have discovered firong marks
of their being originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

It is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottiflh tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Scottish translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the
Latin. And as it appears that the letters were very early tranf-
lated into Scottish, Good. 2. 76 ; it is probable that Buchanan
made his translation not from the French but from this Scottish
copy. Were it neceflary, eiveral critical proofs of this might be
produced. One that has been already mentioned seems decilive.
DizliNu i/lic tmorata finoh bears not the leafs resemblance toj'ay
veillc plus tard la haul; but if, inflead of Iwalki [i. e. watched]
/aiter there.up, we suppose that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. this
mistake, into which he might so easily have fallen, accounts for
the error in his translation.

These criticisms, however minute, appear to be well founded.

But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the other
arguments with regard to the internal evidence remain in full
force.

The external proof of the forgery of the Qoeen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already examined. According to Mlur-
ray's diary, Mary let out from l.dinlurgh to Glasgow Jalnu;ry
2, 1567 flie arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the

Ss ij

27th; ( ne, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the
28th, flayed in that town only one night, and returned to Edin-
burgh before the end of the month. But according to our author,
the Queen did not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th;
as fie flayed a night at Callendar, file could not reach Glasgow
sooner than the evening of Saturday the 25th, and file returned
to Linlithgow on Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the first
letter which supposes the Queen to have been at least four days
in Glasgow, as well as the second letter, which bears date at
Glalgow Saturday morning, whereas she did not arrive there till
the evening, must be forgeries. That the (Qe.en did not set out
from Edinburgh sooner than the 24th of January; is evident (as
he contends) from the public records, which contain a Precept of
cotfrmation of a lAjc-rent by James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers
granted by the Queen on the 24th of January at Edinburgh;
and likewise a letter of the Queen's, dated at Edinburgh on the
fame day, appointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son.
That the King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow on the
28th, appears from a deed in which they appoint Andrew Ferrier
keeper of their palace there, dated at Linlithgow January 28.
Good. i. II8.

This has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by
Mary; but how far it falls short of this, will appear from the
following considerations.

i. It is evident from a declaration or confelfion made by the

]inhop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of Ocober 1568, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters
which her subjects accused her of having written to Bothwell.
Brown's trial of the Duke of Norolk, 31, 36. It is highly pro-
bable thrt the Biflop of Ross had fecn the letters before lie wrote
the defence of Queen Mary's honour, in the year 157o. They
were publihned to all the world together with,.Bucllanan's De-
tecion, A. D. T57I. Now if they had contained any error so
gross, and so obvious, at that time, to diCcovery, as the iippofing
the QOecn to have passed several days at Ghlfgow, ililc Ille wa:;
really at Edinburgh ; had they contained a letter dated at Glal-
gow Saturday morning, though hlie did not arrive there till the
evening; is it poflible that (he herrelf, who knew her own nio-
tions, or the able and zealous advocates who appoeared for her in
that age, fliould not hacve publliecd and ex)dofcd this contraditfion,

.nd, by so doing, have blarted, at once, the credit of such an imw-
poRfure ? In difquilitions which are naturally abltrufe and intri-
cate, the ingenuity of the later author may difcovel many things,
which have cfcaped the attention, or baffled the sagacity of those
who have formerly confidered the fame subjet. But when a
matter of faa lay so obvious to view, this circumltance of its
being unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any of her adhe-
rents, is almost a demonstration that there is some miflake or fal-
lacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any either of our
historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in queflion the
common account concerning the time of the Queen's fctting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the least
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this
point. But farther,

2. Those papers in the public records, on which our author

refts the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions,
are not the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or
translations of copies of those originals. It is not neccffary, nor
would it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unac-
quainted with the forms of law in Scotland ; but every Scotfrima
conversant in business will underfRand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin
copy or note of a precept, which was fealed with the Privy Sea!,
on a warrant from the signet office, proceeding on a signature
which bore date at Edinburgh the 24th of January ; and that the
deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with
the Privy Seal, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh January 24. From all this we may argue with lbrnc
degree of reason, that a proof founded on papers, which ale ib
many removes diflant from the originals, cannot be but very lame
and uncertain.

3. At that time all public papers were issued in the name both

of the King and Q(een ; by law, the King's subscription was no
less rcquifite to any paper than the Qieen's ; and therefore ulefs
the original figniturcs be produced in order to alccrtain the par-
ticular clay when each of them signed, or to prove that it was
signcd only by one of them, the legal proof arising from tlicl
papers would be, that both the King and Qieecn signed them at
Edinburgh, on the 24th of J:anuary.

4. ''llc dates of the warrants or precepts ified by the love-

reign, in that age, feCIi to have beenl in a great mealire ;irbitr:lay;
and allixed at the pnlctafre of the writer * and of confejquencc,

'tlhefe dates were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found
*to be so pernicious, that an act of parliament, A. D. 1592, de-
clared the affixing a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. There fill remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the necessity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any parti-
cular date to be false, yet surprising inltances of this kind llall
be produced. Nothing is more certain from hiflory than that
the King was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and yet the re-
cord of signatures from x565 to 1582, Fol. i6th,, contains tlhe
copy of a signature to Archibald Edmonfion said to have been
subscribed by our Sovereigns, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edin-
burgh, January 24th 1567 ; so that if we were to trust implicitly
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our author's argu-
ment to be good, it would prove that not only the Queen, but the
King too, was at Edinburgh on the 24th of January.

It appears from an original letter of the Bifllop of Ross that on

the 25th of Ocober 1566, Mary lay at the point of death;
Keith, App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the public
records, which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day.
Privy Seal. Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchier/ony.

According to papers in the fame book, fol. 113, the Queen

must have been at Edinburgh December 21, I566. According
to other papers, fol. 99, Ioo. ile mufl have been at Stirling
December 23 ; and if we depend upon other papers, fol. 112,
file mufl have returned to Edinburgh on December 22d. These
various motions are altogether repugnant to hillory. The Q!een
(luring all that time remained at Stirling, on account of the
Prince's baptifmn and we particularly know that flie was there
December 22d, by a letter of Du Croc the French ambafllidor,
xwho mentions an interview he had with her at Stirling on that
day. KIeith, Pref. VII.

TJotllhell Ifizcd the Qeen as she returned firon Stirling, April

2th I y567, and (according to her own account) carried her to
Dunbar with all diligence, And. i. 95. But our author relying
on the dates of tome paplcrs which lie found in the records, sup-
post:s that Boulhwell allowed her to iop at E(dinlburgh, and to
trrallallt bufincfs there. Notliilng can; bce mlore improbable than
this supposition. \Ve may therefore r:ilk tlei date of the deed to
xtSivbc t Privy Scal, Lib. 3r',. fol, 43. aid1 which is mentioned by

orr a'uthor, Vol. I. 124. among the inflances of the false dates'
of papers which were issued in the ordinary course of business in
that age. Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper
to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April i4th, not April 24th.

If there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hiflory, it is, that

she remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her
thither, till Ihe returned to Edinburgh along with him in the be-
ginning of May. Our author himself allows that flhe resided
twelve days there, Vol. I. 367. Now though there are deeds
in the records which bear that they were signed by the Queen at
Dunbar during that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh ; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh,
April 27th, Privy Seal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said
to be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524,
526. Ib. lib. 32. No. I54, 157. There.are some signed atDun-
bar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh April 3oth, Lib. 32.
Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. I58.
These different charters suppose the Queen to have made so many
unknown, improbable, and inconfiifent journeys, that they afford
the clearest demonstration that the dates in there records ought
not to be depended on.

This becomes more evident from the date of the charter tfid

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of federunt, thenx kept by the Lords of
Seflion.

From this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far
from amounting to demonstration.

Another argument against the genuineness of these letters is

founded on the stile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produtions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in molt of
Ml.ry's letters, arnd even front her solicitude to write them il a
fair hand, that she valued hereclf on those accomnpliflllents, and
was desirous of being eflcemed nn elegant writer. But when lhe
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy ap-
pear. A remarkable intfance of this may be found in a paper
publiflied, Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Buthwell were writ-
ten in the utmost hurry ; and yet under all the difaidvantages of
a translation, they are not dctlitute either of spirit or f' energy,.
The manner in which n(h exprefecs her love to Bothwell hath.

been pronounced indecent and even fllocking. But Mary's tem-
per led her to warm exprefflons of her regard ; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce between the
fcxes, were, in that age, but little known, even among persons of
the highest rank. Among Lord Royflon's papers there is a series
of letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the
Harleian Library, P. 37. B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares
her love to that nobleman in language, which would now be
reckoned extremely indelicate.

The sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ-

ten before the murder of her husband ; some of them after that
event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are
prior to the death of her husband abound with the fondest ex-
preflions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their
familiarity had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too,
some dark expressions, which her enemies employed to prove that
fle was no franger to the schemes which were forming against
her husband's life. Of this kind are the following passages,
"Alace ! I nevir diffavit ony body; bot I remit me altogidder
to zour will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhat-
faever thing come therof, I fall obey zow. Advise too with zour-
self, gif ze cAh find out ony mair secret inventiour by medecine,
for he fuld tak medecine and the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2,
22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa mekle
praifit and eflemit, as the trew and faithfull travellis quhilk I
futlene for to' merite hir place. For obtaining of the quhilk,
aganis my natural, I bctrayis thame that may impefche me. God
forgive me." &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit laiter thair-up, then
I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw foniething out of
him, quhilk this bercr will fchaw zow, quhilk is the faireil com-
modity that can be oirerit to excuse zour affairis. Ibid. 2.- From
the letters posterior to the death of her husband, it is evident that
the scheme of Bothwell's seizing Mary by force, and carrying
her along with him, was contrived in concert with hcrfelf, and
withl her approbation *.

That le:ters of so much importance as those of 'Mary's to Bothwell

niould have been entirely loft, appears to many altogether nnacountable.
Aicer being producedl i: England blifore Elizaecth's commiiiollcrs they were
delivered hack by them to the Earl of ttulrray. Good. 2. 3.q. lie ficens :o
have kcpt them in his poffcflion during his life. Atcer Iis death, tllh'y lc 1
iro the hands of Lennox his fucceffo, who rcetorecl thecn to tje Earl of
Alim ton. Good. ;2. gr. ''hough it be not neccc.y'rii conncrc wv;lth any ol

Having thus stated the proof on both fides; having examined

at so great length the different fyttems with regard to the fads
in controversy ; it may be expcEed that I should now pronounce
sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
can be drawn from the fads which have been enumerated.

One, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the QEcen's known aversion to her hulband, and pre-
fuming on her attachment to himself, firuck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circumltanccs of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of tellifying much indig-

the questions which gave occasion to this Dissertation, it may perhaps fa-
tisfy the curioSity of some of my readers to inform them, that after a very
diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to
Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their being de-
livered to Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

Extraa of the letters of Robert Bowes, Elf; am;balfdor from OlQeen Eli-

zabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis WVallingham, Secre-
tary of slate, from the original regifier book of Mr. I.owcs's letters, froml
isth of August i5°2, to a'th September 1583, in the ponclhlion of Chriltophcr
Hunter, M. D. of Durham.

r582, Fth November, from Edinburgh.

Albeit I have been borne in hand, 'hat the coller whericin were the ori.

ginals of letters between the Scottifl Queen and the Earl of Bothwell, lhal
been delivered to sundry hands, and thereby was at prrfent wanting, :iant
unknown where it reifed, yet I have learned certainlly by thle Priior of l'l ul'
cardync's means, that both the coffer and also the wr itings are coc, an(l
now remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I perceive, will be hardly in-
treated to make eliver-y to her Mlajefly according to her- Ml:jtlly's deftic.

This time pait I have expended in licarching wherle the coiler anld wri'ins

were, wherein without the helcl of the prior I (hould h ave found ;grcat difficul-
ty; now I will el'ay Gowrie, a.d of my llhccel you filll be fllortly adverltfed.

Itll of Noveinlber I52, friom L:dilllurgl.

recalufc I had hoth learncl, tiat tile calket antil Itt e t:-:; mentioned i n m; laP,,

before these were conic to the polfcflion of the Earl of' Gowrie, atnd :a ll
found tilh;t no nimean might prevail to whi tli fame out ol his ha:nds wiithout
his own consent anld privity; in which behall I had employed fit ini iillrulnllts
that nevcrtlielefi prnfite I notl:ing, tilrelrforce I a!ltemplr to cllly liiimll11',
leIting him know tli:t llic (^id c:a.lt and letters sionld Lave hbell blrou;lht
to hler MI:, je(ly by Ilhe olltl- and gnod itncis ol'good fiiicn!is, Ip'omiling to htIv,
delivered tien ithelr'l;ajell\',befil'theycamiito io his laiuds a:-d cullod'y,and
knowingithiatll c itlbearthcrlik;e ;aiL ioniiand w ats ri ;ly to |lealillre llerll :jioltl
in all thling, an'l chiefly ili lii that alad been thuis liar teIlr d to her
MI\ tj'[ly, a;11l wvlicli therebly lluitl lle well aLcep lIl, and wi ill princIly thiat;l.
anld glratiiy be requitcd to his comllort ;ilt colhittiltl1iclt; I ilv,'ld lio Illilt
tlcl y

i i;lt i le a precli.nt to lhe ltnt to hlirl l, .ijelly froim hliin, andi lita I rillihit

caule lthe ,lt.' ( e t

convy,'vi in) lier i l:ljellI', idlilni lhiercuntom l ut wo11:1
Z.nld 3n:'":nnt: .t; ;'s mighilt bu.lh !'r utip :L hol ; cf lilcr iliy, ;l iid :ilib )'ll !l;':

'l' t

nation at the deed, or discovering any resentment againit Both-
well, who was accuscd of having committed it, continued to load
hlim with.marks of her regard, conduced his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it impoflible to difcovcr his guilt, and soon after,
in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, vo-
luntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every confidera-
tion flould have induced her to detest. By this verdi&, Mary
is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her

the purpose i at the first he was loth to agree that they were in hispofeflion,
but I let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they were
delivered to him by Sanders Jordin, whereupon he pressed to know who did
so inform me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Morton had done
it or no; I did not otherways in plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but
that he might thinkthathe hadtoldme,as the prior is ready, to avouch and well
plealed that I flall give hirp to be the author thereof; after he had said
[though] all these letters were in his keeping (which be would neither grant
lor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any person without the consents
and privities, as well of the lKing, that bad interefP therein, as also of the
reft of the noblemen entelrprifers of the aaion againit the King's mother,
and that would have tbem lkept as an evidence to warrant and make good
that action. Ar.d albeit I replied, that their acion in that part touchiig
the assignation of the crown to the King Ly his mother, had received fich
eftablifliment, confilrmation, and fircrgth, by aRts of Parliament and other
publick authority and inIrumncl is, as neithlcr flhould that cafe be stuffercd to
come in debate or qullion, nor fich lfrolls and papers ought to be fl:wede
for the strengthen ing thereof, so as thele might'well be left and be rendered
to the hands of her ',lajefty, to whom they were destined before they fell in
i;is keeping; yet he would not be removedor satisfied, concluding, after much
reasonings, that the Earl of Morton, nor any other that had the charge aid
keeping thereof, durtft at any ti'ne make delivery, and because it was the
first time that I thad movedchiintherein, and thathewould gladlyboth anl\ver
her .Jajefly's good expekation in him, and also perfurn his duty dlue io
his fovcrcign an aafociates in the acion aforesaid, therefore he would feel
out tle said calket and letters, at his return to his houlc, which ie thoiught
hfould be within a short time; and upon finding of the fame and better ad-
vice, and consideration had of thc'canufe, he would give further answer.
This refolition I have received as to the thing; and for the present I cculd
not better, leaving him to give her Ilajefly flich telimnony of his goodl ill
towards her, by his frank dealing hcein, as Ihe may have cause to cofir rm
her higihnnef's good cpilnion *-oicirved already of him, and be thelL'ey lrawl
to greater gnodInels towards him. I lh;ll lt ll

l :l botr him bothl by nlyl;If
and alib by all other means, but I grea'lly dlilr-uil the dcfired tlicccls; herin.

2.1th of No.vember l582, from lEd inlbngh.

1lo, the reco very of the k tters in tle conlor, come to the handls of (lie EaIrl
of C;owri, I halve lately movcdl hliill tarnly therein, letting himl know tih
mpjropftr of thli Scotti(h Qleen, l>.lih givint out that the letters are counter-
s'i:ed ly Iher -rebIs, and Alr si ccl, iig tIlhron to have them dtlivcrdl to her
olr def.ccd, and that the means which Iht will make in thi:; bIh:a!f I. l:ilbc

hulfband, or even of having prcvioufly given her consent to his
death ; but she is not acquitted of having discovered her appro-
bation of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the
author of it.

The other conclusion is that which Murray and his adhlerents

laboured to cflablifl, " That as James, foimetymm e Elle of Botlh-
wile, was the chicfe cxecutor of the horribill and unworthy

so great anl( cffeltual, as these writings cannot be safely kept in that realm
without dangerous ol'hnce of him that hath the custody thereof, neithlel shall
he that is once known to have them be suffered to hold them in his hands.
IIerewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that anion,
and the parties therein, and particularly to hlnilelf that is now openly
known to have the ponielion of thefewritings, and I have lettin him fee what
surety it flall bring to the said caure and all the parties therein, and to
liimfelf, that these writings- may be with fecrecy'and good order conmmittcl to
the keepingofher Iiajefty, that till have them ready:! henfnevcr any lufe tiall
be for them, and by her Highineffes ounltenance defend them and the parties
from fich wrongfull objeCtions as fiall be laid againll. them, ci.ering at
length to him, that if he be not fully fatisfted herelin, or doubt that the reft
of the associates shall inot like of the delivery of them to her majcfty in this
good manner, and for the intcreil rehearled, that I liall re:adil, upon meet-
ing and conference with them, procure their afltnt in this p-rt; (a mattel-
snore easy to nfier than to perforni) and, lastly, moving himin that (for the
fccrecy and benefit of the cause, and ltat her [aj::lly's goln oupinion towards
himself may be firmly let!led aned conirlmed liy his acciprtab!e f:rvwardnci
herein) he would, without necdlel:; fcr;i-le, frall.l; commit tlic e wvrilil-gs
to her lajefty's good custody for- ihe good ufie recicei:cd. Afteo deater

o eat

he relblved, and laid, that he nwould uni,-,inecly feiw and do to her Ml;jelly
all the pleasure thllt he might vwithlict ollence to the King his Sovereign,
and prejudice to the afbociates in the astion, anid therefo:e he would firlt
make search and view the fi;idc Ictcrs, and herei:l ta:Lk advice what lie
might do, and how far ihe might satisfy and content her Baji-fly; promif-
ing thereon to give mole re solute anisvcr; ndi he concluided flatly, that
after he had found :and Seen the writ ings, tliit he might not mal;e delive-ry
of them without the privity of' the King. Albeit I fiood long ssith hliin
againtt his refolulion in tilis point, to aicquaint thlie ing with this matter
befolre the letters ,were inl the hanids of lhel' lajeliy, llting him iFe that
his doings thlere (!;ouldl admlit great danger to thA catile; yet I collj nlot
remove him from it. It m:: be that ie meancllt tn toput over the ilatter
frion hilnl:;ilf to the King, iupon light wvticref I Ihll tr111 vel cliidt:tilly to
obtain tlle King's conient, tlat the letters m:y be comnl itei to hlir .lM\ jeIll 's
keeping, thinkinr it more .cast to tpr!eviil lh:(ilt will the Ki'l", inlithellc-
si:nt Irve. aiid ':floiion that lie ber:tlthi to hier liighntl:, tlin > wvin i: ly
thling at thl ha:iids of the af(ibci:tl s in hie itflinl,, wliheeof lbin.t piuicip:il ot
themi now come and rtemaii tt tili' ilcvolton of tle It in;'; ioi lier; iln l.is
I lliall fill tcall on (;owrie to l .arlch cut thil-coill'r, ac. i-lii' t It li; il'ro iti;',
and ast I llial finil lin iilihel to hdeo tlietri , i f:lill

[ 1 (l iln

I . 1! ; nd w1iv..:

ndetivor c'

t o c.r
tIhe c:jcle's belt conteiiltnict.

' t ij

murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile Iing Henry of gude
memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Qucenis lauchful
hulband ; fa was file of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise, per-
fwadar and commander of the said murder to be done." Good.
2. 207.

Which of there conclusions is moit agreeable to the evidence,
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

2d December i582, from Fdinburgh.

Because I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter, to the Earl

of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I
put him in mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the Duke of Lcnnox
had fought earnestly to have had those letters, and that the King did know
where they were, so as they could not be delivered to her Majesty without
the King's privity and consent, and he pretended to be till willing to plea-
sure her Majelty in the fame, so far as he may with his duty to the King
and to the reft of the associates in that aftion; but I greatly diflruft to es-
fe£ this to her Majefly's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless, I shall do my ut-
termoft endeavours.

Whether James VI. who put the Earl of Gowvrie to death, A. D. I.84.

and seized all his effects, took care to deitroy his mother's letters, for whose
honour he was at that time extremely zealous; whether they have perilh-
ed by some uinknown accident; or whether they may not still remain unob-
served among the archievs of some of our great families, it is impossible
to determine.

TI HE END.

# A CONCISE STATE OF THE Controversy respecting QUEEN MARY.

A
CONCISE STATE

OF TIIE

Controversy rj p/2Cae g QJEEN MARY.

FE w fuljefls of political co!troverfj; have more engaged the-
attention of this nation, or been attended with more formidable
and more fatal etlcds of p'Irty-ragc, than the pielient queflion.-
The barbarity, the bigotry, and entlufiafnl of the times, in which
fle lived, all conspired to harden the hearts of licr cotemporarics
agailft this unhappy princcls, and to cauli them fliut their eyes
against the clearcll evidence ill her favour; while the ambition
of those who usurped, or wifiled to usurp, her authority, prompt-
ed them to invent nunlmerlefs falflihoods to her prejudice, xwhich
were greedily swallowed as undeniable truths by the unthinl;ing
multitude; and as fuci have been tranfiitted to latter times.
On the other lhand, the general flpirit of inquiry, and liberalihty of
fentilient, which so greatly diflinguitil the prcfcnt age, have in-
tluenced Inany ler!led I men to undertak!c the defence of tils il-
liftrioua princess, v-hofec milfortuncs cannot but inspire every one
v;it cumnpallion, and make even her enemies finccrcly lament her
fate.

In nlatill the evidence on both fides, however, it muff be re-

memlieretl, thlat, in all controversies \vhalcvcr, foinc allo'anclc:
Ilufl be iliade for the pr;julici's of tile lautlors \11o write upo, llith
Iflhjecl. It is undeniable, thlat the mIotives :already IlcentiiJned
mull have oler:tcd rvery powerfully on tlhe n.iiids of tliole x\\'il
ucculedl her origin:lly ; while niniy :iutilors of later daite, b )cd
u1) in thle buli c of thols c:lumniics, h:]ve bien unvili; a to allow
theailrflves to tliink candlidly on

011 c i:Cjcit. ILit it is i qually

uIdIlci:lile thal.t a conideiration of Llie beauty, tie llil'ri's, ;iid(
magn:niiiiiity ut M iary in her :tlvcrlitly, ar ;1,l. to (.l':tl alla op-
poite illjuidi e in tlhe minds cl lher :idlvei( ,ts ; ml to) ].:ald :n
inidvcrt(ntly into 1an iinillln? .l:. t, ;irt]it th1,, l tiult. viich
jullice I1111L certainly :;lribe to ler. 'i !1;s it !te.nimcs dli!icult,
after all that has beenl written upon 1im fuhlijc&t, to know vlwhich
of the two partics to believe ; nor ilo:u; it ::petr to us poflible to
attain to a knowle(dge of the truth, w i:ll Jut a very rigid invcei i-

gation of the writings, as well as a consideration of the particun
lar situations of those who have hitherto engaged in the contro-
verfy.

The dispute originated with the celebrated hifloriail Buchannn.

I-Is great literary talents, and time appearance of.faneity deriv-
ed from his translating the Pt'alnis into Latin, gave a prejudice int
favour of what he advances. It is difficult to ftppofe that a man
who muff have been at much pains in searching for tiuth, as his
hislory feews him to have been, would wilfully have fluffed his
writings with malicious falfthoods; and it is unnatural to ima-
gine that one, who had fpcnt so much lime in perusing the Scrip-
tures, would, without a veryl jut ground have set himself to ruin
his fovcrcign. To this prejudice in favour of his literary talents
and uprightness, we muff ascribe the partiality flewn to his as-
fertions by the celebrated French writers De Thou, Bayle, and
Voltaire. Mary appeared once in much Iplendor as queen of France;
so that it was otherwise natural for the French, who have been
remarkable for extolling the great qualities of their sovereigns,
to be lavif of their praises towards such an amiable and accom-
plifled princess. To the assertions of Buchanan therefore, an
eminent writer in this controversy * ascribes the unfavourable ac-
counts of Queen Mlary, given by there authors, which have late-
ly been refuted with luccels by Miademoifelle de Keralio.

To remove this prejudice in f.a;our of our eminent hiflorian,

we have only to confider his situation at th:it time. He was pre-
ceptor to the Prince, IMary's son, who was not under her tuition.
Of consequence he was -independent of the Queen with refpecl to
his pcrlonal intcrefl, nay it would have been much againll his
intcreil at that time, to have appeared her advocate. We can-
not suppose him to have been a great favourite with the Queen,
after flic perceived his ingratitude towards her, and, we may not
unrcafonably suppose, that some fllare of icrfinal i/l will or resent-
m;cnt lurked in his breafl 5 so that, confidering all these circum-

T Ir. De Tllon, Baylc, Vo!taire, and other FIren1ch writers, fays he, fe-

dulccl by nclchanan, lhad adopted his f:ll'el0oo(ls. To remove what they h:tl
inculcactel, wvan reflirvc for

o tadl mn ilell c de Kcrallo; for the pen of .

French l]:!y, to reltore the charnl't- of a QOCeeCl of i'r-:nc, who wa s once
in highi cftcein th'lre, iand whlo onchone l anioiinS thle molf illull'rious iha-
rafOs in Ilh;t klingdom.

" Tis, Mladclnmoil'cllie c I''lI alo h:s clfrcnnail y dlone. She lIas completedl

the triiumph of (Qleeln \;ary, Ivy a: wolk wlich (loes holnou to lier sex, and

to ler counttr ." 't.'cr'
,:';.y' r;, Vcl. 1. p. :. c:.'f . edit. 1790.

fiances, we can hardly suppose that any person in a similar fltuq-
tion would now-a-days be sustained as a legal witness in any
Court. In this a priori way of arguing therefore, we have-in
Buchanan's favour, his learning, assiduity in collecting truths, his
fidelity as an hiltorian ; and his humanity, and duty as a Chris-
tian. On the other hand, we have interelt, party.zeal, and re-
fentment ag3inft the person concerning whom he writes; and
which of there two sets of motives are moil likcly to prevail,
when placed in competition in the human breast, we mull leave
to the judgment of the reader.

The antagonist of Buchanan, even in his own age, was Lcfly

biflhop of Ross. Being the 2Qeen's ambafl'ldor at the Court of
England, there is the iigheft reason to believe that lie was pof-
fefled of every evidence and authentic document that could be
procured either for or againfl the unfortunate princess, .who was
the fuibjea of dispute. No douLt his interest was in some degree
connec'ed with the honour and reputation of his millrefs; but,
had lie abandoned her, it can scarce be lfupo'cd that lie would
have been a lufer. \Ve mufl confider th!at Mary was the fulfer-
ing party. Hler antagonill Elizabcth hated her as a pretender to
her Crown. She dreaded her ;s one ca;able of influcecing the
Catholic Powers to make a dangerous fin

a!on of her kingdom;

while file viewed her with all that enVy ian jcaloufr which fills
the mind of a woman that cannot lbcar an rquia/, when flie be-
holds herself outfhined in beauty and perlonal accomplifliments.
Add to all this the party-rage, on account of religion falsely lb
called, which we fee, even in our own times, can scarcely be
kept within bounds ; and which in those d:ays, comparatively bar-
barous with refpeu' to ours, we are sure mull have been much
worse. Confidering, therefore, Eliza'btth as a posv:iful iriiiceli,
and capable of liberally rewarding tlhoCe xlio favoured her cause,
while the partisans of Mary fuft'red contemlpt, opprenion, and
indignity, ,we mull as nuturally be inclined to give our aflUnt to
the evidence in favour of the l!tter, as to doLubt cf that which
is agains.l her. Should the evidcnce Flro:t:cetd by Lefly, there-
fore, be found void of truth, we mull liill account him a:i bho.t,
inan though miltakeen; but the nain:e can bv no n:-;: i; be :apllicd
to Bucliiana if lis iafIl'tion Llibl!l I) f\,Uind ill-ilrounideC .

''lius f.r w\e n:iti ally f1ndl ai a/rCt/''"ce in f;i\our f l\I:irv, arif-

ing, if we ItIay be tallow d the . xpi' I.'Uin, fro, ull /

i .:ot, >'.::.: itsi f,

or the mene conrf.lir;tin of iti ll ' ciCL:r:l:llnc'si in vwhichl the
Sarties It'cd in her tih'-! ;nd h!w tl: : :':il vs whv:ichl optrated

upon them may be fuppocfd to have had an influence on their
conduc]. But when we conlider the evidence itself, we muit
certainly be disposcd to rcjeA it entirely, if it does not contain
the mori full and dired proof of her guilt. Whhen a pcrfon is in the
hands of those who are his enemics as well as judges, and vho
have unlimited power to produce every evidence that can be pro-
duced, the want of a single article mutl be in a manner decisive
against them; and even flould their evidcnce be tle moil ex-
plicit that can be required, we could not be altogether void of
suspicion. On the other hand, whatever is urged in favour of
the supposed culprit mufl appear with aggravated force ; for this
plain rcafon, that we know it is natural for such judges to.fup-
Iress true, and to coin false evidence.

With refped to the modern authors who have written upon

this subjed, we can by no means attribute to them any of the
motives which must evidently have influenced those who were
immediate astors in the scenes under consideration. A desire of
literary fame might make some contradic, and others agree with
a celebrated author, such as Buchanan; while fomc no doubt
were mofily influenced by a desire of investigating the truth,
and either vindicating the memory of an illultrious princels frorr
the aspersions thrown upon her in her lifetime, or fixing them
for ever as indubitable fads. At any rate, their rivalfhlip has
undoubtedly served to bring to light, and elucidate fads which
would otherwise have remained involved in obscurity, if not bu-
ried entirely in oblivion.

The whole of this controversy, important as it has been, hinges

on a single queflion, viz. Whether are certain letters and love
sonnets addressed to the Earl Bothwell, and said to be found a-
mong his papers after his flight, to be looked upon as genuine
or not ? If they are genuine, lMary's moral condua cannot
be vindicated ; but it is impofilble to jullify that of her advcr-
farics whether they are or not ; for it never was pretended that
there was any legal proof of there letters before lhe was taken
prifoncr, and forced to rcfign her kingdom.

It ha:; already been remarked, that even in the time of Q0ccn
\lary herlclf, tiis unfortunate prilnccfs was not without an able
defender in Lefly billlop of oul's. He publilci<d a

Dj'ei,: 'i

AI,,'s Il'Honour, inl which the authllenticily of' Illc paiprrs in (lUcl-
tion was very ably conteltcd ; but this wa:; ilpr:'c!lcld by (Q!tcn
Elizabeth. Many others appeared on the continent, hut none
weVcre fiflercd to come into England l ;n!nd, c:v. ill l'rancc, wlicen

we confider the little inclination fiewn by that power to save the
life of Mary, we cannot wonder that any vindication of her fame
ihould be neglected; and hence every thing publiflled in that way
was soon allowed to fall into contempt and oblivion. In the mean
time, Buchanan's performance intitled A.Detee7on of the AElioni s of
Mary, d'-c. was patronized by Elizabeth in the liigllefl degree
receiving every recommendation which authority and influence
would give; being formally presented to the Queen of England
herself, and circulated through the kingdom by her miniltors. In
Scotland it was received with the utmost avidity; as well through
refpe& to the abilities of Buchanan, as the aversion entertained
against the unhappy princess herself on account of religious mat-
ters. Thus the generality of people in this country were brought
up in the belief of Mary's guilt, and every attempt to juflify, or
even to clear up the dispute concerning her, was soon over-
whelmed and loft. Many of these, however, had undoubtedly
made their appearance; for Anderson, in his preface to his Col-
leSion of Papers upon this controversy, informs us, that he had
seen more than forty books written cxprefsly on the fubtjct, and
sixty in which it was treated of in a flighter manner.

In such a multitude of writings it is no wonder-that it should

be difficult to come at the truth; and Mr. Anderson's work in
four volumes quarto, seems to have been the first ftep towards an
elucidation of these obscure points. But it was not till the year
1754, that any professed advocate of note appeared in defence of
Mary. The first was Mr. Goodall, keeper of the Advocates' li-
brary in Edinburgh, a gentleman very much acquainted with re-
cords, and endowed with a patience, to search into these unenter-
taining repositories, not often to be met with. He traced th-
letters in quefiton from their very first appearance in the hands
of the Earl of Morton, and remarked every thing that pafl'cd
concerning them before tQeen Elizabetl, her Council, and the
CommiffToners. In his Colletion many papers in favour of Mary
are to be met with, which Anderson had omitted.

The merit of Mr. Goodall's performance was for some time

loft in the obstinacy of prcjudice, or the ignorance of inattention.
Even the celebrated historians H-ume and Robcrtfon took the
opposite fide, and, by the refpec& defcrvedly paid to their abili-
ties, seemed, for some time, entirely to counteracl the little in-
fluence which the writings of Mr. Goodall had with the public.
They were fucccfsfully opposed by Mlr. ''ytlr, who improved
the arguments of l\r. Goidnall, furnilllcd new ones of his own,

',,lum,,' I/. 1 u

and by writing in a more lively and perspicuous manner, routed
the public attention very remarkably. Dr. Robertson seemed to
confers a defeat, by making no reply; and Hume did the fame,
by replying to Mr. Tytler's performance j though he had laid it
down on all other occasions, as an invariable rule, never to an-
fwer an adversary. His reply, however, did not appear till a
long time after the publication of Mr. Tytler's book; and then
confifed of a single ill-natured note, in which the cause of Mary
was touched only in one single point. Mr. Tytler defended him-
self in a Postscript to a new edition of his work, which has ne-
ver been answered by any body. He was followed by Dr. Gil-
bert Stuart, whose elegant and sprightly manner has been much
admired; and Mr. Whitaker confesses, that it was the second e-
dition of this work which put him upon fludying the subjea with
such attention as to be enabled to write a professed Vindication
of Mary. In this he thinks he has elucidated some things con-
cerning the letters more fully than had been done by any of her
advocates. Thus it appears that the evidence one way or other
mult be complete, and a fair slate of what has been already laid
before the public by different hands, muff contain all that can be
said upon the subjet.

The Accusations againfi Mary firit appeared in the form of a

treatise by Buchanan, under the title of a " A DeteEtion of the
Aations of Mary Queen of Scots, concerning the Murder of her
Hufbland, and her Conspiracy, Adultery, and pretended Marri-
age with Earl Bothwell, &'c." The time when it was writ-
ten is somewhat uncertain; nor is it well known whether it was
originally written in Scots, and translated into Latin by the au-
thor, or firIt written in Latin and then translated into Scots.
Certain it is, however, that it appeared in Scots, English, Latin,
and French. The argument it contains may be reduced to the
following heads.

I. (Qeen Mary having, without due consideration, married

Lord Darnly, soon began to fl(ew marls of disregard for him,
without any apparent cause. An instance of this is given of his
being denied a (hare in the administration of public affairs, and
going one winter to Peebles witl such a slender retinue as was
below the dignity even of a private nobleman. Inflances of this
want of aflclclion, he fays, were notoriously known.

2. After the Queen's delivery in 1566, lie bagan to put in

executibn those plots which had been before concerted to get rid
of her liufband, and to marry iothwell . ITcr first flep was to fowr

dissention betwixt Darnly and the nobility ; taking care on every
occasion to feed the flame of discord when fle perceived it be-
ginning to languish ; and accounting it her advantage that they
should come to blows, whichever party got the better. An in-
ltance is given of her having a conversation with her hufland till
late at night, during which she persuaded him that there was a
general conspiracy of the nobility againfl his life. Immediate-
ly after the King left her, the Queen sent for the Earl of Mur-
ray, and.told him that the King was so highly displeased on ac-
count of the Earl being in great favour with her, that his life
was in danger.

3. The next article is of such a nature, that we choose to

give it in the words of Buchanan himself.-" When this attempt
failed her, she assailed the young and unexperienced gentleman
(her husband) with a new and subtile practice. She earnefily
laboured him, that, while she was great with child, he should
chufe some young gentlewoman, whereof there was great store,
whose company he might use in the mean time. She promised
him assent and furtherance, with pardon and leave to commit the
offence. She named to him the Earl of Murray's wife ; not for
that she efleemed that mofl noble lady moss apt for such a vil-
lany, but because she thought by that way to be revenged of
three enemies at once, the King, the Earl, and his wife; and
therewithal to win a colour and cause of divorce, to make empty
bed-room for Bothwell*."

4. vWhen the King paid her a visit after delivery, the Queen

and her attendants manifested their hatred to him by every pofi-ble
method; while Bothwell was caressed, and the only way to pre-
ferment was by his means. This is followed by several others
relative to the Qteen's immodest behaviour, which we omit, as
being incapable of proof.

S. The King having gone from place to place, djfconfolate

on account of his wife's unkindness, at lafi, hearing of her sick-
ness at Jedburgh, paid her a visit there, but met with the fame
indifferent reception, while the Queen, after her recovery, lived
in such an open manner with Bothwell, " as they seemed, fays
J3uchanan, to fear nothing more, than lefl their unkindness should

It is obvious to renark, that this abominable accusation contraclias the

i.frrtiorl made in the former, vir.. that Mary began to sow dissension be.
tx/cen the King and nobles, only after her delivery; for this was plainly
treore jt.

J u ij

be unknown." Yet, a little after, he tells that the people'sfif-
picion of lM.ary's unchallity with Bothwlel was exceedingly /)i-
crcafed by the King's residence at Stirling. Had her conduct
been bo flagrant as he alleges,,s izicion could not have had a place.

6. The Queen after her recovery received some letters from

her husband, which asseted her so much, that fle instantly de-
clared, if Ihe could not by some method be rid of him, she would
never have a moment's ease; and rather than live in continu:tl
sorrow, fie would put an end to her' life. Afterwards (ie pro,
posed a divorce ; but laid aside all thoughts of it on being put in
mind that such a Itep would affcc the legitimacy of her son;
though in the next sentence our author insinuates that flie had a
mind to take away the life of that very child whose illegitimacy
was such an objeEt of dread ".

7. At the baptism of the youing prince, the King was not al-

lowed to enter the presence of the ambatladors ; tie nobility
were commanded not to attend him, nor were the foreign am-
baffadors allowed to hold any communication with him. In con-
iequcnce of this unkind usage, lie left Stirling cafile, and went
to Glasgow to his father but the Queen flill pursued him with
her wonted hatred ;" as an inflance of which, flue took away ail
his filvcr plate, and gave him pev;tcr in tle place of it. J-I
had not gone a mile from Stirling,' before he felt an itching in
all parts of his body, an evident effct of poison, according to
our author. On his arrival atCGlafgov, certain black pimples
broke out with such itching and pains through his limbs that his
life was despaircd of; and daring all this time the Qucn would
not allow any physician to attend him.

8. Mary finding at last that her ihuiband was not likely to dic

of the disease, paid him a visit, not with a friendly intent, but oil
purpose to murderhim. Bothwell, according to agreement, pro-
vided an house for the kilng in the neighbourhood of Edinburglh,
in a decflate place; an excuse for which was, that tle air V;!:
more lwholefonl than in the palace at I-olyroodhouLc ; though
our author denies any fupcriority in this rerpcta. In a fliort time
the death of the King happened by gunpowder, as is generally
fippofcd, the house being blown up, as is related in the hiiloricz
of Scotland.

* This anFwcr, when fle had a w\hlil( tofflci in her mind, anil klu4nw

th-:it he laid truth, and tllt flhe chlllt i:Ut a;i; cyt (lilclole her p1url)ol to m, 'lo

wi'y her son, fl. gave over the clc ice cf divcrcc, t'c." .ilar.altan'r DC-
it."': P:, p. I..

3. After the cruel at was perpetrated, the Queen, instead of

giving herself up to lamentations, seemed to vie with the great-
eft heroines of antiquity; fending out moll of her attendants to
inquire into the matter, and not only composed herself to reft,
but slept till pext day at noon. Not satisfied with this unnatural
behaviour, hle feasted her eyes for a long time with the fight of
her husband's body, and at lafl causcd him to be buried privately,
and in a very mean manner, hard by David Rizzio. In twelve
days ihe left Edinburgh, and went to Lord Seton's house, where
Bothwell lodged at the time; and though persuaded by M. le
Croc, the French ambassador, to return to the capital, Ihe very
soon left it again to return to the fame place, where council was
held how to get Bothwcll acquitted of the charge of murdering
the King. The scandalous manner in which the trial was con-
duced, is likewise set forth in firong terms. Mlary's being carried
off by Bothwell, her fubfequcnt marriage and misfortunes, are all
ellablifhed historical fads, which need no confirmation, and there-
fore we fiall not trouble the reader with what Buchanan has said
upon them. It is obvious to remark, that all the articles above
mentioned, contained only afertlions unsupported by the fmnalleft
ihadow of proof; and, in some places, inconsistent with them-
selves. An ORATIoN is added, containing fifty.five pages in quar-
to, in which the learned author tells us it is " by necessary argu-
ments plainly proved, that flic (Queen Mary) was guilty and
privy to the said murder."' Of this Oration we (hall only fay,
that it is far beyond our powers of abridgement; for which rea-
son we shall only present our readers with one of the necefJtz), ar-
gzmenzs, in the words of the author hlimfelf. The point to be
proved is, that Mary adminiflered poison to her hulband.

"When he was preparing to depart from G/lfgow *, (ie cauf-

ed poison to be given him. You will afl; by whom ? In what
manner ? What kind of poison ? Where had (he it ? Afl; you
thcee queflions ? As though wicked princes ever wanted minis-
ters of their wicked treacheries. But hill you press me, perhaps,
and fiill you ask me, Who are their minielcrs ? Firfl, that he
was poisoned, it was certainly known: for, though the hanmc-
leeilecs of men would not flick to deny a thing so manifcft, yet
the kind of disease, strange, unknown to the people, unacquaint-
ed to the pihyficlans, especially fLch as had not been in tll/y alld
,*)a(nil; black /Jliul/cs brcaking out over all his body; grievous itch

'* rom Stirlin'r it ouglht to have been, to make the Oration confillcnt
will the Narrltivc.

in all his limbs, and intolerable Rench, disclosed it. If this cause
were to be pleaded before grave Cato the Censor, as this were
easy to prove before him that is persuaded that there is no adul-
tererix, (adulteress, we suppose) but the fame is also a poisoner.
Need we seek for a more substantial witness than Cato, every one
of whose sentences antiquity efleemed as so many oracles ? Shall
we not in one manifest thing believe him, whose credit has, in
things doubtful, so often prevailed ? Lo, here a man of lingular
uprightness, and of most notable faithfulness and credit, bears
witness against a woman burning in hatred of her husband, and
in love of an adulterer; and in both their diseases of corrupt as-
fetions unbridled, untemperabilly by her estate, raging by her
power, and indulgently following the wantonness of her wealth.
But let us omit old and disused things, and let us fever the cre-
dit of the inconstant multitude from the cafe of princes. Let us
in so great a matter admit no witness in whom either his eflate
may be fufpeted, or his manners may be blamed. What wit-
neffes then r'hall we use ? For, by this condition, we may bring
forth none under the royal degree of a king or a queen. But
such vile a&s are not wont to be committed by noble and good
men, but by lewd and wicked ministers. Howbeit, that herein
also the most precise may be satisfied, go to; let us bring forth a
royal witness. Read her own letter; her letter, I fay, written
with her own hand. What mean these words ? He zs not mruch
deformed, andyet he has received nmuch. Whereof hath he re-
ceived much ? The thing itself, the disease, the pimples, the fa-
vour, do tell you. Even that he received, that brought defor-
mity; forsooth very poison. This is sufficient for me that is
there said, that, though he received mpch, he is not much de-
formed ; or that though he be not much deformed, yet he re-
ceived much. What means this word ye.r What else but this,
that whatever it was that he received, the farpe was the cause of
his deformity; which, though it were much, yet it was not much
enough to work such deformity as was defiired. But, be it were
not poison. What then was it else ? &c."

On this piece of reasoning we need make very little commenti

as we believe every man of common fcnre will acknowledge that,
had the author taken pains to bumlefque his own cause, and make
the enemies of Mary appear ridiculous, he could not have done
it more eflfetually than by such a rhapsody as we have transcribed.
On this occasion he appeals to the letters written by the ucen
hcrfelf; which appeal, in the moll explicit manner, shows, that,

had not these letters exifled, there could have been no proof at
ail. On the authenticity of these letters therefore, as we have
said, the whole controversy turns. If therefore the most full and
undoubted proof be not produced, the controversy must be at
once decided in favour of Mary; probability declaring originally
on the fide of her innocence for the reasons given in the begin-
ning of this Treatise. The following is Buchanan's account,
and indeed the only one we have of them.

" That in the Cafile of Edinburgh there was left by the Earl

Bothwell before his flying away, and was sent for by one George
Ialgliefh his servant, who was taken by the Earl of Morton, a
small gilt coffer, not fully a foot long, being garniflied in sundry
places with the Roman letter F, under a king's crown; wherein
were certain letters and writings well known, and by oaths to be
affirmed to have been written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
to the Earl Bothwell. Besides these writings there was also ex-
tant a writing written in the Roman hand in French, to be a-
vowed to be written by the Queen of Scots herself; being a pro-
mise of marriage to the said Bothwell; which writing being with-
out a date, and though Come words therein seem to be contrary,
yet it is upon credible grounds supposed to have been made and
written by her before the death of her husband. The tenor where-
of thus begins:

" Nous Marie par la grace de Diez, &c.
" We lMary by the grace of God, L'c."

There is also another writing in Scots, avowed to be wholly

written by the Earl of Huntly, dated the sth of April, 1567,
containing a form of contract for marriage betwixt the said Queen
and the Earl Bothwell, subscribed Mary, which is avowed to be
the proper hand of the said Queen; and underneath it yames Earl
Bothwel/, which also is to be avowed to be the proper hand of
the said Earl Bothwell; at which time he was commonly defamed
of the King's faughter, and not cleansed or acquitted thereof be-
fore the i 2th of April following. It appears also from the words
of the said contract, that it was made before sentence of divorce
betwixt Bothwell and his former wife; and also, in very truth,
before any [ult of divorce begun between him and his former wife,
though tome words in the contract seem to fay otherwif."

In the lame calket were found " certain French sonnets writ.

ten by the CQeen of Scots to Bothwell before her marriage with
him; and, as it is said, while her husband lived ; but certainly
before the divorce from his wife, as the words thcnifelves ilew;

before whom fle prefers herself in defcrving to be beloved of
Bothwell *."

Having thus given a brief account of what the firfi, and whom

we might readily suppose to be the most formidable, adversary of
l.ary lhad to fay against her, we must next take some notice of
Lefly's Vindication, of which Anderson has preserved a copy
written in the year iSo7, said to be done by Morgan Phi,/fis,
Bachelor of Divinity, and printed at Liege by TWalter Morberis,
in 1571.

This gentleman does not write a formal answer to Buchanan;

the DeteLcion not having been printed till the year 1572; ne-
verthelefs it probably contains as full an answer as could have
been given by any studicd refutation. He reduces the whole of
the charges again!t the Queen to three points. i. That her mind
was alienated from her husband. 2. The letters already mention-
ed. 3. Her pretended marriage. Having thus stated the accu-
fations, lie next complains, that her accusers had produced no-
thing by any lawful means ; and declares, that, had this been
the cafe, neither he nor any who intereited themselves in her be-

* As some of our readers may perhaps have a curiosity to know how such

an acomplifhed princess expressed her love, we shall preleft them with the
following specimen, tranllated by the celebrated Buchanan.

O Gods have of me compaflion !
"And show what certain proof

I may give, which shall not seem to him vain,
"Of my loce and fervent affctoion.

Alas is he not already in poeffeion
Of my body, of heart that refuses no pain

" Nor dishonour in the life uncertain
C' Offence of friends, nor woorfe afflidtioun.

For him I efteeni all my fiiends lels than nothing,
And I will have good hope of my enemies.

* I have put in hazard for him both fame and confciencc,
" I will for his fake renounce the world,

I will die to set him forward.
w What remains to give proof of my constancy?"

The following lines, in which the author of this poem speaks of Lady
Elhwecll, are very unlike a :oeen.

She for her honctur owes yon obedience;
I in obeying you may recCive dilhonour,

" ot being (to nmy difpleanll'c) your wife as ihe;
" And yet in ihis point fl.e fin::l h::v. no prc-lheminence,
" She uses confianc, so: hl 1- o ,vn Iproit,
"For it ii no little iono:ur to bL miflri;f of your goods!" Wc.

half would have dole so,, but lwould " Ihave yielded and given
place to an open known truth." I-ie complainls ilkewife that her
advcfarries went upon preliumptiuns, not of the fireft or molt
probable fort. In criminal cafcs alfb lie puts the reader in mind,
that it is better to be " prone to favour than to hatred ; to L;:
readier to abfllve and relcafe, than to detain and condemnn l alnd
that it is far better, and a more lure. and more indilTcrent and
upright way, to live tire guilty, th;n to condenin and call awiay
the inliocent. I trust, adds he, and am in an alilurcd hope, th:!t
all the indifferent read:ers hereof will, without ,ll parti.:lity,
veiglh and confider the alleg-tions of the one and tle cther lidc,
and judge of tle matter as it filleth out accordingly. \Vhich is
the very thing we moll dtlire."

The bilhop next sets forth the improbability that thrce was of

MPary's guilt, and the probability of the oppofitc. The fironi^er
preflimptions, lie lays, ought to destroy thc weaker. 'The fair
sex abior cruelty and bloodihed ; and (>cen IMIary was a very
acconmpliflicd princess, vwio, till she came to Scotland, was ligh-
ly elccemed fur lher many excellcnt qnulitics. Aga-in, it is not
to be fuillpofed, that any man or woman Ihould fail into fLeli cx-
trenities of vice at once. 'The human race attain to vicc, as
well as virtue, by degrees ; and lie challenges them, in all the
furmer pait of lier life, to bring a single inflance v:lcc;ln it
ground their prefinptions. I-Ic upbraids themi witlh the t;rea;ns
her fuibijc.s had commnitted, and which lie had si ofte'n pardon-
ed. \Vas it likely, then, that fie wvould entectain a thouglt of
committing a crime of f(cli a black dye as the murder of her
huliand. But, adds our author, though " he was her head in
wedlock, yet was lie othervise but a member of her comirnon-
w(ealthl, fubLjet to her as to his fipreme govcrcti;, and to the
lws, lby the d.:c and orrdinary proccfs w'hereof he might lhave
becn cnnvicled and executed, as well for the murder of David
her secretary, in v:ho!u b:oey his dagger was found nflabbed, a

:

for the impri'bning of thc Qie cn, and for atteni!,ting to remove
lier from the civil government, ;o intrude llinllfli into it. \' l
cnii now relobniably think, tlhat, wh:are lIe, by law ;ind ju'iice,
mighlt have fully fltifiecd lclr :I1!!Lcd dIf ire, oniilt ld every lawv-
fill opportunity, in order to acomnpliith hlis dcillition in !11 ni1-
l:wvful one. '1lli:; vclhcme'nt l:rti;'l:;ltic: : cf hl r i :.c::e:n!c !:

h.i:L !

Iill pen for tha lt

fie t conl 'nt to n (cl .'c' :c l It\v c: n her

::11( tlle .Ir,,'d D:1'rnly, tlou.:lh !!: .: re : v

lr ce!d t'iecl(o b)y : i.rc1t

Jn),rb*.r .sla.r :
h ;l; 'y.'

The bishop next urges it as a great presumption of Mary's ;r.:

nocence, that she voluntarily came into England, where fne kncv
both the father and mother of Lord Darnly were. Neither could
the death of her husband be of any service to her, especially )by
such means; as it must tend greatly to embarafs the affairs of her
government. Leaving, however, these presumptive proofs of the
Queen's innooence, our-author now enters on a consideration of
the charges-brought direcly against her.

I. It is said that her affection was alienated fiom her hfband.

This is not denied; but if a husband gives his wife such provo-
cation as mufl neceffurily alienate her affeAion, he cannot reason-
ably complain; neither can they who are the fomenters of dir-
cord betwixt husband and wife reasonably blame either party, or
any body but themselves for the consequences. In the present
cafe it is to be doubted whether- greater provocations could be
given by a man to a woman than were givcn'by Lord Darnly to
Queen Mary. Every one, in the least acquainted with the fe:,
must know that the following are the four greatest provocations
that can poflibly be offered to a woman. I. To abandon her for
the fake of others. 2. To charge her openly with infidelity to
her husband. 3. To threaten to leave her; and, 4. To thwart
and contradi& her in those things which flie has a right to ma-
nage. There are but few husbands that unite all those provoc-:.
tions in their own persons; but it is impossible to deny that Darn-
ly was guilty of' every one of them; and that in a degree which
no private person can be guilty of. ,With regard to the flrfl, John
Klnox.himfclf bears witness, though in Darnlyhe does not fpeakl
of the crime with fucl abhorrence as on other occasions. I-le on-
ly tells us that he was expert in the " games of Venus." With
regard to the second, flie was charged, in a most infamous man-
ner with carrying on a criminal intercourse with 'her secretary
David Rizzio. The third was no less notorious, i.ifomuci, tha;i
even the Parliament interfered to prevent him from leaving tli-
kingdom; and as to the fourth, we may fay that ile was tllwart -
ed in the management of almost every thing ilce had a iliht to
from the moment flle came into the kingdom. It mul 1be re-
membered that tilf:,, and not her hufland, ought to have 1.ad tho
adminiflration of public alf'irs; yet this was vhat lhe perpetually
attempted to deprive her of. In the moil cruel and dctcliable
manner lhe, witll other barbarians, muricrccld )David i' izzio in hl:r
pretence, and afterwards impri(bned hecrcl:f. 'This alion mvas at-
*.c.nldde with such circumflanccs of cruclty as arc scarce to lie :;'1

vauieled. The Queen was at that time with child, when women
,naturally expec more tendernc's and compaflion than at others;
yet was this unhappy princess used in such a barbarous manner as
one 'hould think might have excused the molt violent relentment
on her part. But the fat was, that Mary never had the autho-
rity of a overeign. The savage nobility usurped her power, and
in order to attain it, or to support themlelves in it, shewed them-
selves absolutely indifferent as .to every enormity. When Mary
found her husband taking part with these nobles therefore, we
cannot wonder that this, joined to other offences, should alienate
heraffecion. Well might Jilllop Lefly exclaim, " Fie, and double
Fie upon the impudence of those mischievous traitors, now to lay
to the QEeen's' charge, and reproachfully to objecE to her the
changing of her mind towards her huiband, which role and be-
gan upon causes for the which they had long before been trussed
ulp, if they had not fortuned upon and met with lbo gracious a
lifrefs, as I know, and they, though undeferving it, do well
feel, that the world hath very few her LEke."

On this subjet .the bifiop farther obl:rves, that, before his

death, the .King and Q(een were thoroughly reconciled, as ap-
peared by her viliting him at G:ifgow, and the tcndernefs with
which she behaved towards him at Edinburgh. Notwithltanding
the many and grievous provocations therefore which f!e had re-
ceived, it appears that her affetion for her husband was not era-
dicated, but capable of being awakened( again, and auually was
so; so that the first part of the charge of neceflity falls to the
ground.

2. With regard to the letters to Bothwel, and the murder of the

King. The cnemics of Mary, who could not deny that all tp/ia-
rent reconciliation had taken place, next pretend that it was on-
ly iigned upon her part, and that it appears by her own letters,
that flie had no other intention than that of enticing him to E.-
tinburgh for his own destruction. On this the bilhop jultly ob-
serves, that it was altogether impofiible to re.iJon with Ifch pco-
ple; for, being tliemlclves grieved that a reconciliation lsnould
have taken place at any ra.e, their next rcfource was to ily thiat
it was fcigned on the part of the Queen. With regard to the
letters thlemlelves, lie sys, that the very timn at hsliich lh iv \we\e
taken betrays the faillcood of the whole . Dalglicll is laid tA
have received themn from Sir [ames IBalfour to convey then: to
his mnaler, the lEarl of 3otlhwell. I'ut Sir :,mes himrclf was B'otli-
';:ll'£s ciennv, and hlid fiormc 'y dti.:n him out of ldiuLbuJ:!g

X :.' ij

The bishop next urges it as a great prcfumption of Mary's ir.

jiocence, that flie voluntarily came into England, where flie kncv
both the father and mother of Lord Darnly were. Neither coul!d
the death of her huiband be of any service to her, especially by
such means; as it mufft tend greatly to embarafs the affairs of her
government. Leaving, however, these presumptive proofs of the
Queen's innocence, our author now enters on a consideration of
the charges brought directly againfl her.

'. It is said that her affection was alienated from her hlfband.

This is not denied; but if a hulband gives his wife such provo-
cation as mufl necefftirily alienate her affection, he cannot reason-
ably complain; neither can they who are the fomenters of dif-
cord betwixt husband and wife reasonably blame either party, or
any body but themselves for the consequences. In the present
cafe it is to be doubted whether greater provocations could be
given by a man to a woman than were given-by Lord Darnly to
Queen Mary. Every one, in the least acquainted with the sex,
mull know that the following are the four greatest provocations
that can possibly be offered to a woman. I. To abandon her for
the fake of others. 2. To charge her openly with infidelity toJ
her husband. 3. To threaten to leave her; and, 4. To thwart
and contradict her in those things which flhe has a right to ma-
nage. There are but few hulbands that unite all those provoc-:-
tions in their own persons ; but it is impoflible to deny that Darn-
ly was guilty of every one of them; and that in a degree which
no private person can be guilty of. With regard to the irft, John
Knox-himfclf bears witness, though in Darrbnlhe does not speak
of the crime with suc'h abhorrence as on other occasions. HeI on-
ly tells us that he was expert in the " games of Venus." With
regard to the second, fle was charged, in a, molt infamous man-
ner with carrying on a criminal intercourse' with 'her fccretar:'
David Rizzio. The third was no less notorious, inifomuch, that
even the Parliament interfered to prevent him from leaving tlh
kingdom; and as to the fourth, we may fay that flie was thwart-
ed in the management of almost every thing (he had a right to
from the moment she came into the kingdom. It mulf be re-
membered that Mat, , and not her huifanld, ought to have had tha
administration of public nfaiirs; yet this was wxhat he pcrpetually
attempted to deprive her of. In the noil cruel nnd dct'llablc
manner he, with other barbarians, murdercd David Rizzio in her
prcfence, and afterwards imprisoned hcrfl:lf. This anion was at-
(:ndcd. withll such circuminfanccs of cruelly as are 'fcarcc to be i'1,

alidled. The Queen was at that timc with child, when women
,naturally cxped more tenderncls and compaflion than at others;
yet was this unhappy princcfs used in such a barbarous manner as
one 'hould think might have excused the mofl violent resentment
on her part. But the fat was, that Mary never liad the autho-
rity of a sovereign. The savage nobility usurped her power, and
in order to attain it, or to support themlelves in it, fl(ewed them-
selves abt)olutely indifferent.as to every enormity. When Mary
found her hlnband taking part with these nobles therefore, we
cannot wonder that this, joined to other offences, should alienate
her affection. Well might Bilhop Lefly exclaim, " Fie, and double
Fie upon the impudence of.thofc mnifchievous traitors, now to lay
to the Queen's' charge, and reproachfully to object to her the
changing of her mind towards her hulband, wvlich roif and be-
gan upon causes for the which they had long before bLcen trussed
up, if they had not fortuncd upon and met with lo gracious a
Miftrel's, as I know, and they, though undeferving it, do well
feel, that the world hath very .few her lie."

On this subjet .the bishop farther obfcrvcs, that, before his

death, the King and (Queen were thoroughly reconciled, as ap-
peared by her visiting him at Glasgow,, and the tenderness with
which she behaved towards him at Edinburgl. Notwvithllanding
the many and grievous provocations therefore whicll I.e had re-
ceived, it appears that her affecion for her husband was not era-
dicated, but capable of being awakened again, and astually was
so; so that the first part of the charge of neceflity falls to the
ground.

2. With regard to the letters to Bothwell, and the murder of the

lKing. The enemies of Mary, who could not deny that an aipa-
rent reconciliation had taken place, next pretend that it wvas on-
ly iigned upon her part, and that it appears by her own letters,
that flie had no other intention than that of enticing him to T-
dinburgh for his own destruction. On this the biihop jultly ob-
serves, that it was altogether impoflible to reobn withl such peo-
ple; for, being tliemfclves grievcd that a reconciliation il:ould
have taken place at any ra:t, their next resource was to lay tiiht
it was feigned on the part of the Qicen. \.Vith regard to the
letters themnfelves, lie iAys, that the very tinme at wh!ich it .v weire
taken betrays the f.lfcllood of tlhe whole. Dalglicil is laid t.
have received tlhem from Sir JTames Balfour to convey then: to
his mailer, the Earl of Bothiwcll. lut Sir Taimes himfelt' ws B'tl'-
y'e.ll's clenny, and had t'llrnc:'ly , i

dii,' :
hi:: out Uo E di:'u:g'-':

X :.: ii

caitc ; so that it is incredible either that Sir James would be a,
ny confident of Bothwell's, or that he would fllew him the lealT
mark of attention.

" Ncvcrtlhlefs, fays the biflop, when you have taken your belt

advantage you can of these letters, they contain no exprcfs corn
mandment of any unlawful a& or deed to be committed and per-
petrated; not ratifying, or specifying the accomplilhmcnt of any
itch sac already past, but by unsure and uncertain gueffcs, aims,
and conjecural firppofings, are not able in any wilf to make a
lawful prefumnption, much lets alny good and fubllantial proof."

On the fuilbjcl of the letters our author further presses his atl-

vcrfarics in the following manner. In all criminal accusations, it
is ab!blutely ncceffary thalt the matter in queltion flould be fairly
proved by good and lawful witncffes, or by some other evident
proofs or prcliunptions. 'I lie letters in queltion are neither sub-
ceribed by th w;riter, nor diredctl to any person ; neither have
they a date of day or month; nor is any bearer mentioned by
Vw'hom they were font. 'he -crYLn wo -w.as said to carry them,
and who was executed for being concerned in the murder, pro-
telled before God, that lie never carried any such letters, and
lhat the Queen knew notiing of the matter. Again, were thef.
letters ever comalred itii Lte Q.,een's handi writing ? This would
have been done even in a money matter. Perhaps it may be said
tlat a proper comparison was made; but, by whom was it done ?
by those very persons who were the Queen's mortal enemies;
who could counterfeit her hand; nay, who had often done it, by
fending letters to England and cllcwhcre in her name, whichl ae
knew nothing about.

Our author next retorts tle charge upon his advcrfarics in the

following manner. " ELither you mnult bring forth good and ap-
parent witn ifes to prove it her hand, or ltme such as were privy
to the meaning of thlie ihid letters, wliich ye neither yet lihav
done, nor are likely cvw'r to (1o; or you mull grant that you were
pariry to them youi.illves witlh the Queen, or at leafl with tlle fiidl
Earl, vwhlmn ye lilimile Lo iave received there letters; or tllat ll
this i; by you inalicion!ly driven or concluded." From tlis di-
lemma it Ici :; dlilc:ilet to if:t hov; the advcrflarics of Qe'.cn 4f:!-
ly cnl (l,:i; as tl

l'; t rs thiemlvee s mention nlling l aini'';

al th(,li wit,) !cviewld l':!ch lInowvlicdl;c in thel intcrlrct ::tn ).

]:'In,uii' s

l'.ItS ti'1tC.'eICt'q', I!i'.' l iJ)i ;,il( v a i n the vCrv :n Ic '1t.'-
]':).tijtn, theil: lowi.';' o tl!' ;'l'brkiatiiun of thelln.

The 'bihlop now proceeds to a consideration of one of the char-

ges brought agailnfl the Queen by Buchanan, viz. That lie ihewed
no sorrow for the King's d-;-:h, nor kept hrfelf ill mourning for
any decent time; the acquittal of Bothwell also, and her marriage
witli him so soon after her former husband's death being allo taken
into the account. To the firff.part of the charge lie replies, that
Darnly's body was embalmed, and laid in the fame sepulchre v;itlh
King James; the funeral being attended by the Lord Jufiice
Clerk, Traquair, and leveral others of the nobility; though by
reason that molu of chC Council were Protcltants, the fewer cere-
monies were made use of. The itory of Mary's indifferent beha-
viour he utterly denies. IHe argues also that such kind of queens
as Mary were not subje-t to the rules precribed to others; Ma-
ry being a fovcrcign, but her husband only a private man, and a
subje't. Besides, in certain cafes, wcmen are by the civil law
c;cufed for omitting the cuilomary forms of mourning. He a-
vers allb, that the Council themfilvcs did vehemently persuade
the cueen to flhorten the time of her mourning, and to go to fume
more open and whlcefome air. Notwitilhfanding all which, the
very persons who advilcd her to the l';ips she took were the first
to complain of her for them, and to repreflnt her in the worit
imaginable light on that very account. 'Ihe second, and indeed
the molt important part of the charge, vas that of the acquittal
of Bothwell. To this he replies, tl:hat .othvwell v;s acquitted
by his peers according to due forms of law; and none vecre more
active in procuring his acquittal than the Lords i\lorton, Semple,
Lindsay and others, who became afterwards the Queen's most in-
veterate enemies. It appears, therefore, tlat in every inllance the
persons who had the grcateft fllare in promoting thlcf tranfac-
tions, raised the very firfl and loildcit clamours againll tlhcni.
The marriage with Bothwell, (undoubtedly the wori Itclp tha:t was
ever certainly known to be talen by !Mary) :-as promoted by the
nobility; nay, they were the firll perlbos who prc:luadcd Ler to
marry again; by alleging the dangcrous iitu::tion in which ihe
Isood, lo that tlicre was a ncccflity fir lcr to lihae a hulliand and
alilitant, whlo might be capable oft dlcctdi: g lier againil everv ad-
verflliy. If lhe would be contcni'.: to do lo, they promised o-
bedelicllcc to tlle ()ice:, a;nd Icr;-'c t ;

t!: ritcrf;n lhoin llhl chose

for a holtull.n. 1l\:l'',' of tllh-l cvcn loi:rd th!lnl lv; s by an o-
bilgation itnder tlheir li!..!s to :lil', i,.ii;t:K.;i, :A:;[ dclcnd, lim :a-
,aiil all illc tI.hat 11'i.uld intpu.: the liin igi- murder to lhi'..
T'hlis it is jl,ii i, that .c I l.'i. (Ji' ; ..l '
l > alivc'.'.riCS tlte rt t:pu -

on tliemfelvcs, and lhad they not in a lucky moment found the
box of letters, they could not have had the lcait ihadow of proof;
and the finding of it at iltch a critical'noment is certainly a very
itrong prcfumption that the whole was fabricated.

This is the fum of what the hifhop has advanced with regard

to the crimes diretly charged upon Qecn Mary; which we fee
depend entirely upon the authenticity of the letters. It is plain,
therefore, as these letters had not in his time received any satis-
ifatory proof, that they were-genuine, there could then be no
real proof of her guilt. Her greatell advcrfary in that age, J3u-
chanan, has of coniequence failed in his attcmpt; so that now we
mull have recourle to the more modern -champions, of whom Mr.
Hiume and Dr. Robertfbn are the principal.

The arguments in favour of the authenticity of the letterset-

ged by AIr. Hume, are, I. It is difficult to fippofe them forge-
ries; because, though it be ealy to counterfeit a subscription, it
is far more difficult to carry on the deception through a number
rs pages. They were compa:red with lMary's hand-writing by the
Snglilh Privy Council, and a great mnnny of the nobility, among
-whom were fevcral partizans of the CQeen. They mnight have
been cxa.ined by the Billhop of Rol, I-lerries, and others of
Iar-y's commitlioners; and as the Regent mull have expeced
them to undergo such a tell, we may be assured that he well knew
they were able to bear it. 2. Billiop Lelly declined a compa-
aifon of the hands, which he calls no legal proof. Goodall,
Vo!. II. p. 389. 2. The letters are very long, which increases
the difficulty, and makes the forgery more liable to a deception.
. They are not so gross and palpable as forgeries commonly are,
as they ilill left a pretence for Mlary's friends to assert, that their
meaning was firained to make them criminal. 4. There is a long
contraci of marriage said to be written by Huntly, and signed by
the Queen, before Bothwell's acquittal; and it is not to be sup-
poied that MIortcn, supposed to be the forger, would have thus,
without any cause, doubled the difficulties in carrying on 1his own
scheme. 5. The letters were indiscreet; but such was apparent-
ly Mary's co::dua at that time. They are inelegant; but they
have a careless natural air, like letters hafilv ly ritten between
two familiar friends. 6. They contain such a variety of particu-
lar circumllances as no bedy could have thought of inventing3
/,ecially as they must have afforded mbre readily the means of

ite.ijan. 7. e hae not the originals of the letters whicL

-vere ili Frciich; we have only a Latin and Scots tranflatiori fro'
tlhe original, and a French translation cxprcfsly done from the La-
tin. Now, it is ren;markable, that the Scots tranllation is full of
Galliciills; lwhich is a clear proof that the original was Frenclh.
8. ''herc is a convcrfttion which lhe mentions between the King
and herself one evening ; but Mlurray produced, before the Eng-
lifl Corminiioncrs, the tcflimony of one Crawford, a gentleman
of the Earl of Lennox, who swore that the King, on the Queen's
departure from him, gave him an account of the ihme convcrl:a-
tion. 9. There appears no reason why Murray and his affociatea
fhlould run the rill of filch a dangerous forgery, which must have
rendered them inf;imous if deteEted ; since their cause, from l\ary's
known conduct at the time, was funliciently good without them..
1o. Ml\rray exposed these letters to persons qualified to judge of
them ;the Scottilh Council, the Scottish Parliament, Qceen E]liza-
beth and her Council; who vwere possesscd of a great number of
VlVary's genuine letters. 1 i. lIe gave VMary herself an opportuni-
ty of refuting and exposing him, if flle had chosen to lay hold of
it. 12. The letters tally To well with all the other parts of Mary's
conduct during that tranfciion, that thele proofs throw the
ftrongefl light on each oilier. 1. T'le Duke of Norfolk, who
lad examined thcfe papers, and v, ho favoured so much the Queen
of Scots that he intended to marry her, and at iaft loft his lift
in her cause, yet believed them to be authentic, and was fully
convinced of her guilt. This appears not only from his letters
above mentioned, to Queen Elizabeth and her Miniflcrs, but by
his secret acknowledgments to Bannister, his mots trufly confi-
dent.'In the conferences between the Duke, Secretary Liding-
ton and the Bilhop of Ross, all of them zealous partizans of
Mlary, the fame thing is always taken for granted. Indeed the
Duke's full perfuafioni of Mary's guilt, without the leali doubt cc
lefitation, could not have had a place, if he had found Lidington
or the billtop of Ross of a different opinion, or if they had ever
told him that thcf: letters were forged. It is to be observed, tlat
Lidington, being one of the accomplices, knew the whole bottom
of the conspira.cy against King Henry; and was besides a man of
fuclh penetration that nothing could cfcape lim in these lmatters.
14. MVr;y refused to anflvcr to the charge concerning the ge-
nninenel' of thefl letters. 'I'lle only excule for the ilence is, that
(lie fli)eeed Qce ccn Elizabeth to be a partial judge: It w.s not
;idecc for the intcrcft of that Princess to acquit anld jullify her ri-
val and competitor ; and we accordingly find that Lidingtt n, f'rnor

the secret information of the Duke of Norfolk, informed Malry
by the bidlop of Ross, that the Qeen of England never meant to
come to any decision; but only to get into her hands the proofs
of AIary's guilt, in order to blall her charactcr. But this was a
better reason for declining the conference altogether, than for
breaking it off upon frivolous pretences, the very moment the
chief accusation was unexpeedlly opened againfli her. Though fihe
could not expeL Elizabeth's final decision in her favour, it was
of importance to give a fatisfaA.ory answer, if he had one, to the
accusation of the Scottish Commissioners. That answer could have
been difpcrfed for the satisfaction of the public, of foreign nations,
nnd of posterity. And surely, after the accufalion and proofs were
in Queen Elizabeth's hands, it could do no harm to give in the
answers. MAary's information, that Queen Elizabeth never in-
tended to come to a decision, could be no obstacle to her juflifi-
cation. i5. ''he very disappearance of these letters is a prefump-
tion of their authenticity. That event can be accounted for no way
but from the care of King James's friends, who were desirous to
destroy every proof of his mother's enemies. The disappearance
of Morton's narrative, and of Crawford's evidence, from the
Cotton Library, mull have proceeded from a like cause.

An objection is made to the authenticity of the letters, froni

the vote of the Scottiih Privy Council, which affirms the letters to
be written and subscribed by Queen Mary's cwn hand ; whereas the
copies given into t.ie parliament a few days after, were only
xwritten, not subscribed. ]But it is not coniidered that this cir-
cumftance is of no manner of force. There certainly were let-
ters, true or false, laid before the Council, and whether the let-
ters were true or fallc, the miflake proceeds equally from the in-
accuracy or blunder of the transcriber. The mitlake may be ac-
counted for, the letters were only written by her: the second con-
trr.c witlh Bothwell was only subscribed. A proper diflinc&tin was
not made; and they were all iaiid to be written and subscribed.
xr. Goodall has endeavoured to prove that the letters clalh with
chronology; and that the Qccn was not in the places mention-
el in the letters on the days there assigned: to confirm this he
;uoduces charters, and other dccds signed by the QCeen, where
l.he date and place do nct agree with the letters. But it is well
knov;n, that the date of ch:lrtlrs, and ilich like grants, is no
proof of the real day on which they. were signed by the rovcrcign.
rlpcrs of tlat kindil commnonly pial; thrcul difirU ( rcnt offices: tlhe

t'ic date is naiTxed by the firfl ofnce, and may very long precede
the day of the signature.

" The account given by Morton of the manner in which these

papers came into his hands, is very natural. When he gave it to
the Englifl Commi(Tioners, he had rcafon to think. it would be
canvafved with all the fcvcrity of able adversarics intcrcfled in the
higelt degree to refute it. It is probable that he could have con-
firmed it by many circurnilanccs and tcflimonics, since they de-
clined the coitell.

" The sonnets are inelegant; insomuch that both Brantome

and Rosard, who knew Qeen ¥Mary's style, were afflrcd when
they saw them, that they could not be of her composition. But
no perfun is equal in his produflions, cfpecially one whose flyle
is so little formed as Mary's mull be supposed. Not to mention,
that such dangerous and criminal cnterprifes leave little tranquilli-
ty of mind for elegant poetical compositions. In a word, Quceen
Mary might have easily cunducted the whole conspiracy againtf
her husband, without opening her mind to any person except
Bothwcll, and without writing a scrap of paper about it: but it
.was very difficult to have matnaged it so that her conduct should
not betray her to men of difcernmcnt. In the prefcnt cafe, her be-
haviour was so gross as to betray her to every body; and fortune
threw into her encmies hands, papers by which they could con-
vi&t her. The fame infatuation and imprudence, which happily
is the attendant of great crimes, will account for both."

These arguments of Mr. Humc, as well as those urged by Dr.

Robertson in his Dif'ertation, have been replied to at confider-
able length by Mr. Tytler in his Hi-orical and Critical Re-
view, &c. He obfcrves, what indeed mull be remarkably flrik-
ing to every one who confiders the matter, that it is amazing'
how Mary flould commit to writing such palpable evidence a-
gainfl herself; and it mufl surprise no less bow Botlhweil, to whon
the letters are addressed, should keep them in his hands. But
there presumptions, though they naturally excite [irong uilipicion:;
ngninll the authenticity of the papers in qucllion, do not a-
mount to any pofitivc proof. As it is abundantly evident, how-
ever, that no woman of common prudence or mnodefly would havre
written such letters, and as it is certain, that they pas'cd through
the hands of the Earl of Morton, who was IMlry's invcterate
enemy, it is necessary to examline minutely into the circuirnfta:!
ccs of this alleged dil':ovcry.

Vli/unt 1s. Y y

In this examination it is very remarkable, that though Morton.

was present at the trial of Dalgliefh who was executed for the
King's murder, and from whom Morton is said to have receiv-
ed the box, yet not a single queflion was asked him about a mat-
ter of such importance. It was natural to think that as Dal-
gliefh had been apprehended only fix days before, that he would
have been confronted by the persons who took him, and asked, at
least, what orders he had received from his master, Bothwell, about
it; and as this was not done, it gives considerable suspicion that
it was not then prudent to put such questions.

The letters themselves did not appear till the 4th of December

i567j when an act was subscribed by the Earls of Murray, Mor-
ton, and others of that party, declaring that their rising in arms,
taking the Queen prisoner, and confining her in Lochlevin caflle,
was on account of these letters, written and fihJfcribcd by the
QOeen. Nevertheless, only ten days after, Murray's first parlia-
ment justify the proceedings of the Lords, because the letters
were written " wholly with her own hand." This contradiction
betwixt the two accounts is so glaring, that Mr. Hume was redu-
ced to the necessity above mentioned, of ascribing it to the blun-
der of the clerk. To this Mr. Tytler replies, that thepapers said
to be written, and subscribed by the Queen's hand, are the
" privy letters written and sent to James Earl of Bothwell."
These words can by no means apply to a contract; nor is there
the finalleft reason to imagine that the framing of two such im-
portant ats would have been lefttoaclerk. It is certain that the
letters produced before the parliament had no signature; though
.Murray, Morton, and other conspirators aflerted, before the Secret
Council, that they were subscribed as well as written. Mr. Tytler
accounts for this contradiction in the following manner: " The
ardour of the forgers, to make the letters to Bothvell fully con-
clufive against the Queen, might very naturally prompt them at
fir1c to afix her iubfcription to them, and in this fllape they were
afi'erted by Murray, Morton, and others, before their own Secret
Council, to be writlen and l'fJd/cri'bed wtith her owni hand. But as-
ter thcie cunning politicians came to confider deliberately, That
' tliofi horrible letters, (to cite the opinion of the E;nglifl
Coiuminifoncrs in their own words) contained such foul nmattcr,
and aboominable to be cither thought of or written by a plince;3
upon cool rcricclion, that it might Illock the credulity of ma-
ny people to belicve, thait the Queen w\ould not only be so
,,;,cL.cd as to write fuchl letters, bl:t evci: to far deprived of

.common sense as to put 'her name to them; they might very
2naturally, in the copies they produced before the Parliament,
fink the subscription, and, in place of mentioning the letters to
be written and subscribed by tile Qecn, substitute written wholly
A'y her own hand; in which form they ever afterwards appeared."

Whether this account of the matter will be more fatisfacorv

than that of Mr. Hume, we mull leave the reader to determine.
On the latter, however, we cannot help remarking, that by Mr.
Humc's extreme readiness to solve this contradiction, in favour
of Mary's accufcrs, he must evidently have prejudged the cause,
and been willing at all events to find that unfortunate princess
guilty. No conclusion can be drawn from contradicory evi-
dence; and indeed Mr. Hume himself seems to give up the let-
ters by informing us, that Murray and his party had abundance
of evidence against the Queen, without making any use of them.

Our author next observes, that the letters were not mentioned

from December I , 567, till the month of October, 1568; and
at this time they were not produced publicly, but lhcwn at a pri-
vate conference by Buchanan, Lethington, and M'Gill, in a fe-
cret conference with the Biflop of Ross and others, on the part
of Queen Mary, in presence of the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, as Commiflioners for the CQeen of
England. At this conference they protefed that they did not
siew the letters to the Englilf noblemen as Commiflioners, but
for their inflrution; after the declaration of ficlh circumrftanccs
as led and induced to vehement prelhumption to judge the Qceen
guilty of the King's murder. Thus they had the advantage of
calumniating the Qecne, at the fame time that they refulcd o-
penly to bring forth the proofs of her guilt, though called for by
the Commifioners at that time. It was on this occasion that Ma-
ry, in the infiruP.ions to her Commiflioners, complained that there
were people in the kingdom who could forge her hand ; and that
these forgers were " principally fucll as were in company with
themfclvcs," inmaning the conlipirators.

The letters being thus ihewn privatlc/i, an abfirat of their

contents was ne\t drawn up aind lent to Elizabeth, which is lill
extant; and on this proceeding Mr. Tytlcr very justly olfervcs,
that it " has too much the air of afraffination ;" and lie olferve..
lhat Dr. Robertson pafl'es it over entirely in filencc. It is plain,
however, as our nuthor alSo very juflly obl)irves, that by Ifch
proceedings the i nglin Court (ihewed no inclination to adopt a
]lan for lliving rMary's honour, and that even at this timel til

Y y ij

Duke of Norfolk was the dupe of Murray, who soon after be.
trayed him.

The conferences betwixt the Commissioners from both king-

doms being adjourned to Vefltminfler, Marray and his party
were graciously introduced to Elizabeth, and on the 26th of No-
vember gave in their accusation againfl their Sovereign. Mary
being informed of this proceeding, demanded also to be introdu-
ced to the presence of the Qieen of England; but this was re-
fused, until she should clear herself from the accusations of her
subjects, at the fame time that Elizabeth declared that fle would
receive proof upon these accusations.

It is difficult, nay impoffibic, to read an account of such shame-

ful partiality without indignation. The Queen accused her ful.
jeas of crimes of a public nature, viz. Treason and rebellion
and these needed no proof; for the taking up arms againlt their
sovereign, imprisoning, and then driving her out of the kingdom,
were matters so notorious, that all the world knew of it. On the
other hand, Mary was accused by them of crimes in her pri-
vate capacity as a woman, and-as a wife; and however enormous
these might be, her fubjeats had not any right to try her, much
less to punish her first, and then attempt to prove her guilt, which
athey most certainly did. Elizabeth, therefore, ought to have ad-
mitted none of the parties into her presence 3 or to' have admitted
both. Nay, thougl Mary had been admitted, the Earl of MIur-
ray ought at any rate to have been refused, as being the arch-re-
bel, who bad aflumed the sovereign authority, and whose crimes
againit the Htate could not be palliated even for a moment. It is
po wonder, therefore, that the Scots Commillioners inflintly bro:e
Uip the conference. 'They remonllrated againltl tle proceedilng
as ' a prepollerous order, never used in any treaty or conference,
yea, not even in cafes of judicial procedure, to receive probation
before the party was,lhear1 to answer the allegiance, and e'pcci-
ally in so weighty a cause. They, thercfore, protcfled, that no
further be proceeded in this conference."

This piece of partiality was inltantly followed by another.

Though Elizabeth had nothing farther to do in the matter, after
this declaration of the Scots Comlinillioncrs, yet resolved not to
let her escape hllom lic io much hlated ; flhe denildeLd,e at thit
very meeting, from Mlurrniy and l'Iort:n, the proofs thcy hacld of
Mary's guilt ; in confcqluenicc of.which, the box withll ti papers
and sonnets were inimediately put into her h:nl.ds, along with tilh
cecpnofiions of Hay, Il(pburn, D:lg'ic(ll and I'owr e, four of tli

rervants of Bathwell; who, though they all concurred in accusing
their malter, yet none of them pretended to lay any thing to the
charge of the Queen; nay, it was aflerted by their fiends, and
not denied by the opposite party, that all of them concurred in
declaring her innocence.

Thus, again, it appears contrary to Mr. Hume's assertion, that

the conspirators had no evidence whatever to produce besides
the letters in question ; and it was their intercft to defend them
to the utmoil of their power ; and, in this most important point,
they were so intolerably defecive, that the single affirmation of
Morton, giving an account of the way in which they came into
his pofuleffion, is all that they have to produce.

Morton affirmed that he got them in the way already mention-

ed, from Dalglielh, Bothwell's servant; and Crawford, a depen-
dent of the Earl of Lennox, gave his tellimony in favour of
meeting with Mary, and some ether incidents. of little confe-
quence. But here, Mr. Tytler observes, that whoever did write
the letters, would take care to inform himself of every circuni-
france he could which might le'rve to eftablilll the credit of his
narrative. Hume himself takes notice that Crawford was inform-
ed by Darnly of a conversation which pas'ed between the Queeni
and him and if he, as a husband, was so filly as to inform others
of the discourses he had in private with his wife, it is no wonder
to find her enemies poffefled of the knowledge of many particu-
lars which otherwise they would not have known. Surmilcs, calum-
ny, and scandal, would furnili a great deal more; and it was easy
to fabricate a letter, in which the Queen Ihould own the truth of
what, perhaps, the letter-writer himielf was the inventor, and of
which Ile never heard.

Our author has already taken notice of the irange behaviour

of Morton in not confronting Dalgliefh with the witnesses wllo
seized the box; but this deficiency was lill more manifest in his
not calling in a witness, who was living at that time, though Dal-
glieil had been hanged loon after his confeflon of the murder of
the King by Botliwell. This was one Paris, or Nicholas I-u-
bert, a servant of Bothwcll, -mentioned in one of the letters,
and who is laid to have been the pcrlbn intrutledl to carry the
letters from the Qiccn to Bothwcll. '' This man, flys our au-
thor, had been kept il clole confinement in St. Andrew's all
this time. Now, whlcn one fees the rcnl.nkalle care and at-
tention of the party in collecAing every circuliflance which they
luppoufecl could be m-u.ttcr of proof ganiiti thlle ()ecin, in l .l-

port of their accusation, their penury of proof notwithftand.
ing, and the pinching neceflity of supporting the only evidcnce
they had (that of the letters) by the bare and single affirmation
of Morton himself, the Queen's accuser and most inveterate ene-
my, it is impossible to overlook, without the firongeit suspicion,
their omitting to have produced so very material an evidence as
this Frenchman, in person, to have answered to the queflions of
Mary, or her Commiflioners, before the English Council, and to
the part assigned to him in the letters themselves.

" Mlr. Hume has been very sensible of this defect of Murray's,

in not calling upon Paris, and he endeavours to supply it in a
pretty extraordinary manner. " On giving in the letters, (fays
" he) Murray fortified this evidence by some teflimonies of cor-

responding facts; and he added, some time after, the confession

"of Hubert, or French Paris, a fcrvant of Eothwell, xwho had
" been executed for the King's murder; and who directly char-
" ged the Qu3ecn with being accessary to that criminal enterprise."
1-te afterwards adds, " It is in vain at present to seek for im-
5' probablities in this confefion: *it was certainly a regular judi-
: cial paper, given in regularly and judicially, and ought to have
" been canvassed at the time." From this account Mr. Hume
would make one believe, that that piece of evidence, Paris's
confeflion, ihad been given in by MIurray a few days after the let-
ters, at least while the conferences fubfilled; yet nothing can
be more falfc. The conferences broke up, and the Earl of
MIurray and his party got licence from Queen Elizabeth to re-
turn home to Scotland, in January I568.9. Paris, after lying
in close confinement till August 1569, was then put to death;
at which time it is pretended lhe made these confellions againil
the QOeen."

AMr. Tytler now confiders the ftibfcquent condu&c of Mary,

and vindicates it from the censures of Dr. Robertson, by whomn
file is blamed for proceeding any farther in the matter. The
Doelor condemns her also on account of an accommodation which
Lord Herries had proposed with Murray and his party, as a tacit
a.cknowledgment of her own guilt; but, though Mr. Tytler agreces
that this proposal vwas made at a very improper time, he oblervcs
thlat it ought not to be imputed as any preilmmption againll Jnllry;
bLca;:fe both Hcrries and Ross declared tl;at it was made without
l.ir knowledge, and the accufcrs hiid not then produced any part
tof thipro. r

)roof. Ier i quent concluti, lie tlinks, was the belt
l'ce coledl pollibly miake of matters as tley i'oud. I-Ir accusers.

had taken care to produce their proofs already to Elizabeth, and
though her Commissioners had declined any further conference,
she till continued to proceed. For this reason Queen Mary wrote
a letter to her Commiilioners, dated Igth December, i568, de-
firing the inspection, and copies of the letters and papers which
had been produced againlt her. Instead of this, however, Eliza-
beth only desired an extraS, or summary of the contents of them
to be given her; and whatever this was, Mr. Tytler supposes it
was no more than a copy of her accusation. No other answer
could now be returned by Mary than that the letters were for-
ged; and she again infiftedfor an infpecion of the original letters,
and to have copies of them, in which cafe, flie would make the
forgery manifest. Even the copy, however, though from a copy
no forgery could have been deteted, was constantly denied her.
Inflead of this, Elizabeth imod/lly proposed that Mary fliould
resign the crown in favour of her fun, and remain in England as
a private person. Even this proposal was in contradiction to what
she herself had said before the box and letters were produced ;
for then fle was of opinion that it was inconsistent with Mary's
honour and innocence to have the matter ended by appointment;
and now when the proofs againfl her were produced, the perfidi-
ous English princess absolutely refused her an opportunity of vin-
dicating her innocence.

The answer made by Mary to this ignominious proposal ihew-

ed at once her high spirit and conscious innocence. She was de-
termined rather to die than lubmit to such an indignity, and the lat
words of her life flhould be as (ueen of Scotland. She was now
determined, though juflice could not be expected at the hands of
Elizabeth, to vindicate her innocence, and to prove that Murray,
Morton, and Lethington, whom flie had already publicly accused,
were the devisers and perpetrators of the murder. This, how-
ever, was totally inconfiltent with the views of Elizabeth. She
had encouraged Murray and his party publicly to accuse their
sovereign, and had got into her hands what they called a proof of
her guilt. She was assured that this proof would be sustained by
the world as genuine, until it was expoled, and its fallacy deteEt-
ed; but, as Elizabeth had no mind that this lhould be done, it
was now time to difinifs Murray and his afrociatcs, both to pre-
vent Mary from vindicating herielf, and likewile to free them
from a dangerous attack from her.

Tlhe farce, however, was Hill carried on. The traitors delir-
ed to know whether the Scots Comminflioncrs would accuse thin

personally. To this they replied, that they had already been
commanded to accuse the Earl of Murray, and his adherents, by
letters under the Queen's signet; that they had already given in
their accuiations, and would abide by them, as well as by the
defence of the Queen's innocence; and as soon as they were fur-
nifhed with copies of the letters, &c. they would enter upon
particulars. This resolute way of proceeding proved so disagree-
able to Murray and his accomplices, that the very next day they
deftred leave to depart for Scotland, which wars vcry readily ob-
tained. The day following, the Bilhop of Ross and Lord Hcrrics
were acquainted by Secretary Cecil, that Elizabeth would not refuse
the copies of the letters, provided Mary would fend a letter signed
with her own hand, promising to anfver to the charges contained
in them. The Scots Comnliloners instantly replied, that this
had already been done by two writings shown and read in pre-
fence of Elizabeth herself, in which Ihe offered to answer upon
certainconditions there exprcffed; " so being that fie might have
the writings, or at least the copies of them." Cecil made no an-
fwer; indeed it was difficult to invent an answer on such a try-
ing occasion. Mary's Commifiioners, however, took the opportu-
lity of complaining in name of their mistress, that " the Earl of
Murray and his adherents, who had been publicly accused by
the Queeu, were allowed by the Queen of England to depart for
Scotland, without abiding to hear Queen Mary's defence of her
innocence, or to answer to her charges against themselves. In
which cafe it was but reasonable to allow the Queen to depart al-
so; the injuitice being apparent of detaining the one in England,
and allowing the others to go off."

The answer given to this reasonable demand was, that Murray

had promised for himself and his company to return to England
whenever the Queen fliould call him; but in the mean time their
mistress could not be suffered to depart for many reasons.

" In this manner, fays our authar, did Murray and Morton.

with their box and letters, withdraw from the conferences in
England. WTihat became afterwards of the loiters, we know not.
They are now loft, or have been deflroyed, nobody knows how.
'hilis we are certain of, and have seen, that Qceen Mary, not-
witlftandin.g her frequent allertions that they were forged by her
acculcfrs, andl her repeated earnel flupplic:itions, both under her
hand and by the mouth of her Comminffoners, to fee the letters,
to anfvwer them, and prove the forgery upon Murray, and Mor-
ton, could not prevail in so rcafoinab!e a request. And, to hec

dying hour, tlh(ec very letters upon which only, at this day, her
enemlies pretend. to found any proof of her guilt, were moil in-
duilriouilly hid fomn lher, and; at last buried forever in the faime
pit of darkness from which they had at firfi cmcrged."

Mr. T'ytler havin thus et forth, in a firoing point of view, the

ignoniniious manner in wvl ich Quecn IIary was treated by the per-
fidious l '1zabeth, and her no les treacherous allies, Murray, Mor-
tun, &cc. proceeds to point out a contradic&ion in Humc's ac-
count of the matter. 'lihat hillorian informs us that MAary abfo-
]utley reifutfd to anf\vcr by her Commiflioners to the charges pro-
duced a gini her; for which they gave this ': extraordinary rca-
son "ll that as tllcir mittrcfs was a Sovercign Princess, lle was
not accoun;.tab' to any tribunal; and they required that fle
ihould be prcviouily admitted into Qucen Elizabetil's prcfence.
Ile tells us also, tilat Elizalbctli lad always pretcndeld'to enter
into the coiif.'renccs only as the friend of Qieen Mary, and by
her own conlsent ; without al'lmilng any jurifdicdtion over ler, in
which cale, when ihe refilfed to anfwcr, no more could be done
in the matte'.

" If this, fays M\r. 'lytler, was a ncceifary consequence of InIa-

ry's reffilling to answer, (unless in person, Mir. Hume ihould have
a;dded) it may be afkct, lowi c.niCc iElizabeth, notwithitanding,
to proceed in thl trial, in alrefnce of both IvMary and her Com-
niillioners ? \V'.is not tlhis the height of partiality in this prc-
tendled friend of Mary, to hear her cnemies by thiecl.l'es, or to
icceive any lting fro;:u their hands as fullicicnt proof againil her,
upon their word only ? And, when Ilie did so, ought lic not in
common juffice, to have communicated the flame to Mary ?"

M\lr. liumne further informs us, that besides the letters and son-

nets, 'IuIrray fortified his clharge by certain corresponding falis
and tellimonics, to which lie added, " onime time after, the dyingl
confefllion of IIubert, who hadd been executed for the King's
murder, ali.n dircstly charged the OQeen, &c." "' Would not
any one, Ilays AMr. Tytler, bclieve, from this account, that Hut
bert had been han cd l before the time here Ispoken of by 1\%r.
I1iuine, and tl:at lis confeflion w'as produced during the confer-
ences ; and yet wc have seen that I-Hubert was alive al! tihe tille
of the conferences, and no confeilion from him, nor tlli least
lmention In:lmde of ins na;lle i;or ten mIonthsl after tllhey brolce ul,."

IMr. I'lunic goes on to afti;rt, tlhat l'Iary's Colnilli;iolers lidal

eludcavoured ll ai t

I avoid this dillrl; and, beinp unable to all-
fwer I'ltilsf;tiforil, gavc noun al\er at all, but broke up tle

/Zlu.:c II. IZ .

conferences ; and he confiders this recoiling forom the inquiry,;
lie calls it, to be an undeniable proof of Mary's consciousness of
her guilt. In answer to this, Mr. Tytler quotes the record dat-
ed at Hampton-Court, December 25, 1567. This paper sets
forth, that on that day Mary's Commiflioners declared, that their
miflrefs could not fuft'cr their llanderous accusations to remain un-
anof,.ured; but wou/i anojiver them in defence of her own inno-
cence, and in accusation of them as authors, inventors, and exe-
cutioners of the King's murder. " WVhich being read before her
Iajefty and ler council, they mol: humbly desired her Majesty
to cause them have such writings as were produced againll their
mifrefs lby her adversaries."

As Mr. Hume undoubtedly perused this record, it is by no

means easy to fee how he could fall into such a fErange mistake;
but Mr. Tytler observes, that his account is directly contradi&t-
ed almost in every sentence of the records, which it appears, he
himself has perused. " At the fame time, adds our author, it is
easy to perceive the poor evasion that Mr. cHume pretends to
make for this so flrange a detail. .f, That M'Iary had infifled to
confront, personally, Murray and MIorton, her accusers, in pre-
fence of Elizabeth, the whole Englifl nobility, and foreign air.
bafladors; which lIr. Hume is pleased to fay, was such a reque;t
as could not be granted: and, 2d/y, That, this request being re-
fused, Mlary's Commiflioners had protested againfl all further pro-
cedure, on the 9th of December; the conferences, therefore, ac-
cording to Mr. Iume, were from that minute, as he has said a-
bove, finally broken off. But this is such a pitiful fiift, in which
our author has followed Anderson, who breaks off his Col-leAions,
and gives us no more of the proceedings of the Englifil Council
after the 16th of December 1567. Mr. H-ume has told us, that
Elizabeth only entered into these conferences as the friend of
Mary, and by her own consent, without af'uming any jurifdicion
over her. In confcquence of this, I'Iary demands to be personal-
ly heard, upon her defence, to confront and interrogate her ac-
cufers in presence of all the world: A demand, tlat, without re-
gard to MIr. Hume's opinion, will, I pretumc, be thought a mn't
jull and neccfl'ary one. Elizabthll rcfuifcs it: Mary's Commil-
lioncrs, on so mianifeil a partiality, prolttl againfl all further pro-
cedare in thll matter. ,\'hat follows: Do the con;ircieces filn;l-
ly Ibreak up ? No, 'tis quite othlirwifc: On the ]6th of Decem-
bcr i ;67, Elizabeth "vould not consent that :any of tlhe Scolt
C,'-:'niiiener. i!!i.uiuld depart the l;inJluin L ftce t\<he Iud of thli

cinference." She allowed Murray and his associates to proceed,
and produce the proof of their nccufation ; and, twelve days as-
ter the protell, file wrote to Mary, and advised her to make an-
fwer. This Mary had determined to do, before the date of Eli-
zabeth's letter of the 2ifl of December; and had already writ-
ten her resolution to her Commissioners, on the g9th of that
month, to have infliection of Murray's proof, and doubles of all
the writings ; " and, with God's grace, (fays flel) I lhall make
such answer to their accusation, as my innocence Ihall appear, and
their guilt." It is plain, therefore, that, as the conferences were
entirely founded on the content of parties, allowing that MlIary's
Commiflioners, or even that file herself had broke them off, yet,
as Murray and his associates, on their part, were flill going on
before the Englifli Council, it was fsill in Mary's power to rc-
fume her defence, as Elizabeth herself dcfrcd that ihe flmould do;
..nd lhich file did accordingly, in the flrongell manner, by let-
ters undcr lier hand and signet. We also fee, from the records of
(Oteen lary's register, that the proceedings at Hampton-Court
wcr both frequent and regular: On the loth of January 1568-9,
at Qeeen Elizabeth's command, Cccil, her fecrctary, declares to
Murray and his accomplices, that " There had been nothing sus-
ficient]y produced, nor Ihewn by them againit the QOcen their
ifvereign, whereby the OQuen of England floould conceive or
take any evil opinion of the Queen her good lifter, for any thing
yet seen." On the lith of January G168-9, Mlurray, Morton,
vnd their adherents, were publicly acculcd by Qtleen Mary, for
being guilty of the King's murder; notwithilanding which, the
very next day, PIiurray and his adherents got public licence to
d:part; and the conferences were continued from day to day,
until the 2d of February 1568-9."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to a more particular consideration of

the genuincnefs of the letters in quellion. From tile above liate
of the cafe, the partiality of Queen Elizabeth to the enemies of
Mary is evident. That the liad ever any intention of vindicat-
ing the honour of the Scottifi princels is abfolutcly incredible;
lncc every siep ltle took tended more and more to blacken her;
and having now, as Ilic pretended, got the proofs of her guilt in-
to her hands, they were not long in being circulated. Copies of
ihle l.ov Le'tters and Sonnelr were published to the world ; but
t.hougli there is no doubt that Mlary would in tilli; wvay procure
C:opic; as well as others, yet it. was iinpofllel to give any other
:;I'lv cr than 0by a fimplle denial, anid by f'ttllng forth in as Ilroi.:

Zz ij

terms as pbflible, the circumstances which tended to sIew tht
improbability of her being guilty ; and this undoubtedly was done
over and over, though without any good cffc&. WVhat the bi-
shop of Ross said concerning them has already been taken notice
of. He mentions allo the dying confession, but differs wvidclv
in his account of it from what is rdcorded by the enemies of
Mary-; for he tells us, that, " at his execution, he took it upon
his death, as he fllould answer before God, that he never carried
any such letter, nor that the Queen was participant, nor of coun-
cil in the caufc."

From this time, there letters were no more heard 6of, till tlh

time that Buchanan publiflecd his Deteclion, which Mvr. Tytler
dates in 1571, though Auderfon makes it a year later. The
box with the originals, having long been loft, tle French copy
xwhich is now extant, has beei -fuppoled to be taken fron the oii-
ginal, and underwent several editions as such; but IAr. Goodall
has endeavoured to sicew, from a consideration of the letteis
themselves, aid by comparing the different copies wvith ole ano-
ther, that they cannot poflibly be genuinc.

His arguments are reduced by lir. Tytler, to tle following.

i. The letters said to be written in French by the QLeen, ias
now extant, have been held by all parties as true copies of the
originals produced by Morton. Buchanan lot only had them in
his cuflody, but tranllated the three firll of them into Latin ; and
the Scots copy contained eight letters, with the love verlcs. A
French translation of Buchanan's Deteeion, was printed at Lon-
don in 1572, under the name of Thomas \Valtam ; but there ne-
ver was any printer of that name in Scotland. 2. By comparili:
those different copies'together, Mr. Goodall has fic\wn, that ill-
sicad of the Scots and Latin being translated from the French,
the latter is plainly a translation from the Latin, and the Latin
from the Scots. 3. The Iatin translation is full of errors ; and
as often as these occur, the French always follow them. . As
often as there happens to be a blunder in the Scots copy, both
the Latin and French follow it of which among several others
we lhnll mention the followving very remarkable one. The
Q een is made to f.y, that hle c'as going to leek her relf till to-
morrow ; wlia:. f;ays flc. I lhall end my.bil4/c, in place of her
hill. a word used coiniol'ly at tlint time for any kiid of writil:g.
Both thel L;ain and lF:c':c h copies have this blu:lct:r in thcnml
andi i is a;!folutcly ccr;;.in, th;t it would not have origil.r.td i:
the French ; so tliat this fingd! c.rcumlance flnio.vs, ali-nofl d:-

eifively, that the letters have been fabricated. 5. Mr. Goodill.
has proved so clearly, that the letters we have at present are1
translations from PJuclianan's Latin and the Scots copy, that even ''. '
Mr. Hume and Dr. Robertson have been obliged to own, that
the original copies are loft ; and that the French are palpable
translations from the Latin and Scots.

Our two learned historians have endeavoured to evade the

force of this argument, in the following manner: " The original
letters, fay they, are loft, and we know nothing of them.": lsr.
Tytlcr cites the following paflage from Robertson's Dissertation
in answer to Goodall. " All this author's premises may be grant-
ed, and yet his conclusions will not follow, unlcfs lIe likewise
prove, that the French letters, as we now have tlem,.are a true
copy of thole which were produced by Murray and his party in
the Scots parli:lrnent, and at York and Weftminfler; but this he
has not attempted.'\' Mr. Goodall is obliged to the learned Doc-
tor for having done it for him in his Dissertation, by fairly ac-
knowlcdging that Buchanan made his translation not from the
French, but from the Scots copy. Thc historian here ingenu-
oufly tells the truth, though, perhaps, he was not aware of tle
confcqucnccs. Had there been any other French letters than
the present, what occasion had Buchanan for the Scots; when he
himself mufi lave had pofleffion of the originals ? Buchanan was
atually one of the alfifants appointed to tle Scots Commission-
crs, and intrullcd with the conduct of the whole procels, and did,
with I.cthington, M'Gill, and Wood, a Lord of the Session, ex-
hibit the original letters, and explain their contents in private to
the English -Commiiflioners. Buchanan could not have loft or
niiflaid them, becauce is is evident from Mr. Anderson's account,
that these letters were tranllated.by Buchanan at London, during
the time of the conferences.

It now becomes very reafoinably a matter of quefnion whether

any letters bceidcs those which we now have, ever cxilld.
" Surely, fays Mr. Tytlcr, it is a fair conclusion to assert, that,
if they did not exill with Buchainan, they did not cxif at all;
and if tile Scottill Commifioners, who were liid to produce them,
never flaw them, nobody else ever did. It cannot be pretended
that Buchalan did not underfiltnd the French. He passed most
of his life in that country, and taught a school there. Indeed,
since the l)octor has been. driven to deny that the French letters
are true copies of the originals, by all the rules of proof riid cli-
ticifilh it was hi;s Ibufmfs to produce thcl: originals, But, hliv is it

poflible to fix 'men, who, after having, for two hundred years, quot-
ed and inlilled on these letters as originals, and have even con-
mended the elegancy of their composition, on finding themselves
forced to give them up, have now, recourlf to other letters, which
they acknowledge to be loft; and now pretend to fay.never were
iecn, even by Buchanan hiimCclf who was employed by the pu-
blic to produce them. iNone of the adversarics of Queen Mary
ever pretended that the present French letters were vitiated tranf-
lations. Not even Morton himself, nor Buchananr, who lived
many years after their publication, ever said so; which it was
incumbent on them to have done; neither did any body ever pre-
tend that they were vitiated, before Mr. Goodall demonilrated
them to be so. ' It is incumbent, therefore, upon those who infill
on their authenticity, to produce the originals. iMr. Hume tells
us that " it is in vain at this day, to objet to the letters they
were regularly and judicially given in, and ought to have been
canvafled at the time." Had the Queen remained silent at the
time when AIurray produced these letters, there is no doubt that
the argument would have held good; but this was by no means the
cafe. On the contrary, ihe endeavoured by repeated supplications,
to have them for the infpecion of herfelt' or her friends; in
which cafe ihe would have undertaken to prove forgery; but so
far was this from being the cafe, that the box with its contents
w-ere sent back in halft to Scotland with MIurray and Morton, and
vwhat tlhe did with them nobody can tell.

; But now. that it is Siid tlhe original papers are loft, how is

it posilbie to maze good the accusation againit the Q2ecn ? By
copies it would appear. Let it be fu; these copies have now been
examined, and dtc:caecd to be vitiatcd in such a manner, as it is
forccd to be acknow!edged, that the Qceen could not have writ-
te.n fich letteis. \\ e are now told, that although the letters ex-
ta't at preient cannot be f;id to be either the originals, or copies
fro:n the origiaals, yet they are translations fro.n tranllations,
:: the third hand. " The French translator declares that he
translated them from the Latin." He fays, indeed, that, having
no mannler of knowledge of tlhe Scots language, lie cho'e rather
to express all that he found in the Latin. That this could not
co:p:ehend all the letters is plain, because only three of them
were put into Latin by Buchanan, and the ri' v were in Scots, a
l-::'.guae lwhich, he fays, lie knew nothing of. I-How then got
he these lail ? But, in order to cxpofe the deception, here it
-111i be ncclfary to trace the hiflory of the Fiench letters ','

Tfonie time back. " We have already seen that Buchnnan publifl-
ed his libel called DeteEtio AMaria, both in the Latin and Scots
languages; to which he subjoined a Latin translation of the three
first French letters, and all the eight letters in the Scottifn lan-
guage. The very next year, about the time of the Duke of Nor-
folk's examination, and while a treaty was carrying on betwixt
Elizabeth and the King of France, it was thought proper to pub-
lifl a French translation of the Detetion, with all the letters,
which being said to be written by the Qleen in French, were
surely printed verbatim from the originals. But this French tranf-
lator has declared that " he had no knowledge of the Scots lan-
guage, and therefore chose to cxprels all he found in the Latin."
But Buchanan translated only three of the letters into that lan-
guage: from what hand therefore did this supposed Frenchman
procure the other four letters in French ? For he publifled seven
of them that were produced by Murray and Morton. Will it be
said, that after finding he could not procure copies of all the ori-
ginal French letters, he transfated the three first from Buchanan's
Latin version; and for the other four, he had recourse to some
friendly Scotsman, who translated these into Latin, from which
the Frenchman translated them again into Fr-nch, in the shape
they now stand ? How strange a process this ? How contrary to
all credibility?

" But even to make this ill-contrived talc go down, he tells

a direc lie. He fays, that a/I the French letters were translated
into Latin; from which language he chose to translate all that he
found. Fr6m all which it seems pretty evident, that the affected
disguise and lies of this impostor, were contrived to make us be-
lieve, that the book was not printed in London."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to she!w that the probable reasons of

all this deceit and lying were, that, in this year (1571), there
were negociatioiis going on for a marriage betwixt the Duke of
Anjou and Queen Llizabeth. VIary had conflantly an ambafit-
dor at that Court, soliciting her releare from the hands of her
enemy; and, at this very period, her relation, the lDuke of Guifc,
was in the height of glory and power at that Court. To defeat
there solicitations, therefore, and to afford a plausible reafbn for
keeping Mary in prison, it was neccffary to r)preclfint her in the
blackelf colours poflible to the princes on the continent; which
had already been done fuficicntly in England, by the publication
of icveral editions of Buchanan's )Detelion, and Mary's letters.

That this was the cafe, is extreinely plain from the'influRsions

given-to the Ehglifh minister at the Court of France, " It were
not amirs to have divers of Buchanan's little Latin books to pre-
sent, if need were, to the King, as from yourself, and to some of
the other noblcrhen of the Council, for they will serve to good
efe c to dil/race her."

Dr. Robertson has produced the testimony of two French writ-

ers, to prove that the book was not printed in London; but Mlr.
Tytler has Shown that one of his teflimonies makes rather againfl
him. The author indeed fays, that the Latin Dete&ion of
Buchanan was translated into French by one Camuz ; but this
nobody will pretend to dispute; though it fays nothing as. to the
place where it was printed. On the other hand, it is plain,
from his words, that it was not printed in that country, but sent
thither afterwards, and dispersed through that kingdom. Nay,
one of them, Blackwood, fays, that it was translated. and printed
at Rochelle ; but if that was the cafe, who furnished them with
the materials for this translation. But wherever they were print-
ed, there can be no doubt that the publisher must have printed
them from the originals.. If in London, there they were in eve-
ry body's hands; and if in France, one of the author's quoted by
Dr. Roberfon afferts-that Buchanan sent over the whole to his
brethren in that country.

Another argument brought by the Do&or, is, that, in the Scots

translation, there was prefixed to each letter two or three fen-
tences of the original French; which, breaking off with an &('c.
the Scottish translation of the whole followed. The French
editor, observing this, foolifhiy concluded, that the letters had
been written partly in French, and partly in Scots. In answer
to this, however, our author observes, that nothing can be in-
ferred from the words of an author whose intention was manifefi-
ly to deceive; though it will by no means be -easy to convince
us that he waseither ignorant or foolish.

The Do&or next endeavours to support his argument, by hlewing

that the first sentences, by the spirit and elegance in them, ap-
pear to he the only remaining parts of, the original French, as
written by the Qucen; and what follows them are only servile
translations from the Latin vcrfion of Buchanan. This, at belt,
mutl be a very vague argument, and depend on the fancy of
every reader. Ml\r. Tytler owns that, in some inflances, the
French has a happier turn than the Latin translation ; but this
p'oves no more than that, in a few scattercd fcntenccs, on a poor,

Iobv translation may express a thought better than aii original.
Mr.; Goodall, however, has shewn that the Scots copy is the
only original one; and this by such arguments as cannot easily be
refuted. VWe have already taken notice of the scandalous error,
,bible for bill; which has run through both the French and La-
tin. In like. manner, the Scots word irkit, i. e. weary, has
been-writtcn nakit, and though it makes the fentt:ncc.plainly non-
sense, has been translated in the Latin nudata, and in the French
Nlue.

Another argument used by Mr. Iume is, that the Scottifi let-

ters are evidently a translation from some French original which
we now have not; but the answer to this is obvious. In
the time of Queen Mary, and long after, the intercourse be-
tween the French and Scottilh nations lhad intermixed the lan-
guage of the former with that of the latter; so that even French
words were sometimes used in the language of Scotland; the re-
mains of which are not to thlis day totally eradicated. In-
stances of this are pointed out by Mr. Tytler, from many other
writings; so that the argument of Mr. Hume, drawn from this
quarter, mufl fall to the ground.

LafJl/, Mr. Tytler confiders the flyle of the Scottish copy of

those letters, and finds a number of proverbial sentences and
phrases peculiar to the language of this country, to which the
French have nothing similar in their language. Botl Mr. Hume
and Dr. Robertson own, that this Scottifli copy is the original of
the French and Latin translations ; and if there ever was any o-
ther, it is incumbent on those who take the affirmative fide of
this question to produce them, or at leal to shew that there ever
exifled another copy than the present, as well as to explain in
what manner this supposed original came .to be loft, after being
in every body's hands, both in England and Scotland, which
surely muff be accounted a matter of no little difficulty.

Our author now proceeds to answer particularly the arguments

of Dr. Robertson, of which he gives a summary; and this,
through the arguments at large, are to be found in the Differta-
tion contained in the body of this volume, we (hall here tran-
fcribc for the ease of the rcader's memory. They are as follow,

x I. Murray, and his adherents, irflirmed, upon their word of
honour; that the letters were written with the Queen's own hand.

': 2. The letters were produced in the Regent's parliament,

and are mentioned in the a i againit Mary, as the chief argument
of her guilt.

Vo/lumze II. *3 A

t 3. They were fliewin privately. to',the Dukeie p.orflk,: Eali

:of Suflex,:;and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's Conimliffioners at
-York, whobconfidered them as.genuine. . .

. ".. They were believed by Elizabeth, and her miniifcrs to
-be genuine : 'TIcy laid them.before the Englifli Council; who,
·on comparing, them wvith other letters of Mary, believed, them to

be genuire.n,>- .
: ..

" .. The Earl, of Lennox, and his lady, believed MIary guilty
of the murder."

tefides the Doctor produced the follo'wing internal evidences
for the authenticity of these letters.

I. Thiat" whenever a paper is forged with any particular design,

the forgers tale care to make it as full arid explicit..as may be,
to avoid any appearahce of uncertainty, and,all kiind of.cavil.
Forgers feldon .err in proving too little, but are apt to' fall into
the other extreme." Had the letters in questio'n, therefore, been
forged, the ,Dotor thinks it probable, that instead of obscure
hints, and dark ambiguous.expreflions; there would have been the
molt full and open proofs of her guilt. All Mary's advocates in-
iift that there is nothing in the letters which amounts to a proof
of her guilt. It was not to be supposed, therefore, that'the. for-
gers would have been at so much needlers trouble to involve them-
selves in guilt and danger when, after all, it did not answer their
purpofi.

2. Skilful forgers avoid any long details, on account of the

difficulty of keeping a proper connecion in a long chain of cir-
cumftahces without discovcring the fraud. But Mary's letters,
especially the firif, are filled with a multiplicity of circumflances,
" extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogetler so.
reign to the purpose of the Queen's enemics, an.l which it would
have been absurd to have insertcd, had they been :altogether with.
out foundation."

3. The reality of several circumstances in the letters are col-

firmed by undoubted collateral evidence; of which the flory of
Crawford, gentleman to the Earl of Lennox, already mentioned,
is brought as an inflance. " Ic declared, that, during ther
(teen's stay at Glafgowv, the King repeated to hlim, every nighlr,
what had pufled through the day betwixt her majetly and hi'.
and that the account given of these converfationls in the firit let.
ter, is merely the rame with wl'at the King communicated t',
him. According to the fame letter, there was much difcourlf.
between the King and Queen concerning Illynto, Hiegait, aidl

:Valcar..:-Tii: l was ws altogethertunkniown, till a letter,.s Vfarys.
preser-ved iil. tie Scots.College at Piris, and publiflied :iK.eith,
difcoercd it to be an affair of so. muclh.importance, ias nerited
all the attention fie paid to it at that time." The painnto, whichl .
tile Q ecn 'was Lhbjesl in her filde, is likevwife. mentioned 'in' the'
Doctor?s.opinion so natuially, that it cali fcaice. belong. to a'n, ':
thiing: but a genuine prodclaio .n. .
"

4 In hher fir.i -letter, the Queen mentions her having fat up.

late writing ; and that.,he had written out all 'her clean paper,:
so lhe.continued the writiing upon a fleet on which lle had formerly.
written notes'or memorandums.!. ' Theefc meniorandums still ap-
pear in-the ..middle 'of the letter ;' and what we have said, seems.
naturally to account for the :manner how' {hey might find their-
way-into a,.rcal letter. It'is:farce to be supposed, however, that'
any forger - wotld, think of: placing memorandums in the middle
of a le'ttcr, where, at firl' fight, they make so ablilrd and unnatu-'
ral appearapce;. But if any Rlall frill carry their refinement so
£ar as to suppose that the forgers'were so artful as to throw in this
circurnmlance in order to preserve the appearance of gcnuincnefs,:
thiey. must, at lealt, allow that the Q'ueen's enemies, who employ-
ed:thefeforgers, coull'not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of there Ihort notes and meimoranclums but we find them mif-
taking 'thc'm so6 far as to imagine, .that they were the 'credit of:
the bearer; i.. e..; points concerniing which the Qceni had given'
him verbailin'ruiciois.' ' . ;. ..

·:S ."':.Mary,:'mentioning helic conversations with theKing about
the affair: of'Mynto, I-Iiegiait; Sc.{-hys, ' To-morrow I will'fpeak
vo: him lupon: thht point ;'. anl' then adds, ' Ais to::the reft of
Willie I-liegaits; hle confessld lit ; btt. it. was the morning after-
iny coriing before lie did it.' 'Ihis additionj which couldnot
ia've been m'ade till' after. the :converfation.happencd,, fcems either
to lave bcel;inferted by the, Queen into.the body: of thele ltter,
or'perlhaips, .flil having writtcri.'it.'bn the margin, it- was 'taken.
thence:.in'to the: text. ' f we. suppose the letter, to be.n:'.rcal one,
and written at diflfe'elt times' as it plainly bears, this: circum-
fiance appears to'be very natural .but no rcaf'dn could lhave in-
duced a forger to have ventured upon such an aiiachronii'm,:. for
which there.was no nccflityi?' ,

.In answer to tlheli arguments; Mr. Tytler ol)fcrves, . ''hat.

the exhibition, and collation of tllcie letters was madc entirely by
the QLecn of lEnglind' and her Council, along with M urray,
Morton, and the re'll of tle Q.,en's ndvcrlhries; and tlhat I!jlo!

3 ij

Mary and ir Commifioners infifling for a fight of them, or for
copies, t.y were instantly sent off to Scotland; which conlider-
ation unidoubtedly cuts off every argument that can be drawn
from v words of Murray or Queen Elizabeth.

I./Though the eagerness of a forger would naturally have hurri-

edwiim on to make the letters quite explicit with regard to Ma-
ry's accefflon to the murder, the observation cannot be said to
hold universally. Had a single person been the author of these
letters, no doubt it might have been allowed to hold good ; but
it must be confidered that Murray, Morton, Lethington, and
Buchanan, are said to have been the aAors in this scene, to which
society we cannot possibly ascribe much of the rashness in quef-
tion. One instance, however, of this rashness has been given
in their first producing letters with a subscription annexed to
them ; and afterwards others without it. Confidering afterwards,
however, that to affix a signature to such fhamneful letters would
have a suspicious appearance, they afterwards suppressed this copy,
and produced others, the on.y.vmark of authenticity of which was,
their being wholly written with the Queen's hand.

The Dotor, our author observes, has shown no great imparti-

ality in drawing an argument againll the Q(een from the apolo-
gy made by her friends, that the letters were not conclusive.
He asks, v;hat could any person have done more than to infill on
being brought peifonally before Queen Elizabeth, the nobility of
England, and the foreign ambafladors, to plead her cause in per-
son. She asserted, in the flrongelt language, that the letters were
forged by Murray, and his agents, and that f(le would prove it
nor can we suppose that they would have denied the charge in
more energetic terms, than it was urged home upon them 'y her
advocate the bishop of Ross.

2. and 3. In anfrvcr to what is said, that the contents of the

letters were natural, and that they were replete with many inci-
dents known to be true, lMr. Tytler confiders the plan which the
mannufaicruers of these letters must necefscrily have followed.
One of their firfi fleps mull have been to get good information of
the Qcen's fit:lation at the time, with an account of thole who
were about her person, and what occurrences happened in her pre-
fencc. In all this there was no dilliculty. Murray, Morton,
and 'Lethington, were all in the OQccn's confidence, and none of
tleim could he ignorant of he:r having a pain in he fide ; and we
have already taken notice of the way in which Crawford procu-
red his intelligence, so that his teclimony could not in the Icall

have proved the letters to be genuine, but rather tlhe contrary. It
is remarkable that this person declared, not only that he was told
every word by the King, of what palSed between:.'ti . Qeen and
him in conversation through the day,. but that he wrote down
every word, that he might be the more. ready to give an account
of it whenever the Earl of Lcnnox should think proper to call
upon him to do so. Now, fays Mr. Tyiler, " Let me ali. why
this cxaanefs to write down what he could tell Lcnnox, who was
himself at Glafgovw, by word of mouth, thc next minute? And,
for what end did he keep these writings by him after he liad told
them to Lennox ? From inliiration or foreifight, no doubt; that,
some years after, he would be called upon to relate over again
these converlations to QCaecn 'iizabeth.and her Council, to give
faith to letters, which at the time that he set down his notes did
not cxif.."

Fron all this it appears, that there was not in this letter any

thing but what was either publicly iknown, or publicly reported
at the time; so that, unlcfs the letter-writer had discovered
fornething which could not have been known without it, there
cannot be the least rcafon to fippofe, from its contents, tlat it is
genuine ; private letters are not usually written abuut public
conversations, or common reports. One exception, indeed, is
made by the Dotor, viz. the ai;ir of Vv'illiin lfiegait, IVlynto,
and Walcar, which, he &iys, remained altogether unknown, till
a letter from the Q0een to the Archlbifholp f GhIfgow, pUblilhed
by Keith, discovered it to be an af'air of importance. Wcre this
information jult, there it no doubt but it would be acl;nowlcdged
to have great weiglht. But so far is this from being the cafe, that
from the contents of the letter, it appears that the matters fpo-
ken of in it had already been circulated all over the country.
The matter was, that this VVilliam WValcar, a ftrvant to the
Archbilhop of Gla!gow, came t, the (Qlcn at Stirling and de-
clared, that it was openly reported, that tle King defligned, with
the aflillance of the nobility, to crown his lun, and alfume the
government in his own lhands ; antl, bcing prcfie(l upon the sub-
jec, he named William IIiegait as his autior. But on their exa'
mination before the Council, both of them denied liparatecly, as
well as when confrontcd together ; only WValcar conifflcd tlhat he
heard a report ofll lelin to iniprifon the King.

Thus the argtuuints for the autlenticity of the lettcrs in clue-

tion, drawn Fron ti lcir conltet iithcirto i;'ulgecd, f;l Ito tle grouiunl.
T'le moil remalrlkablle o l'alli howevcr, y:t r cln'.ins, viz. Conlccrl iiig

the rnotes and memorandums in the middle of the first letter,
This argument is taken from a paRfiage in that letter, where th.
Q2ccn is made to fay, " 1Excufc that thing that is scribble'd; I
had no paper yeflerday, when 1 vwrote that of the memoritil.'
For lack of paper, then, fays the Docor, the was obliged to con-
tinue her letter upon a separate paper, upon which file had writ-
ten down her notes and tnemorandums, -which is a circumflance
trat no forger could possibly have thought of. " I own, fays Mr.
'i'ytler, that this oblervation is ingenious, and' flews with what
attention the acute dissertator lias Icrutinized this matter. 3But,
high as my'opinion is of this gentleman's penetration, 'I cannot
give him the preference to his friends Murray, MVforton, Lething-
ton, and Buclanan, Wvhofe talents for conducting so dark an affair,
I am of opinion, could not be exceeded by any person. To make'
out his argument, therefore, we mult believe, as tlhe dissertator
teils us, thlat the above four sage politicians,' who were possessed.
of the letters, and knew every circumstance that is mentioned in'
them, or relating to them, ain so recent as within a few months
of their supposed date, were bo entirely ignorant of their contents.
that they made a blunder in explaining their meaning to the 'Com-
inifioncrs at 'York, which blunder this ingenious gentleman, at
the; distance of two hundred years, has now difcovcred and set to
.ights. The Qucen is made to refer Bothwell to the bearero'-f:
liCe letter for full information as to several things vwhich she had
not time or intention to treat fuily of. " Upon this point, fays'
llic writer of the letter, the bearer will fhevw you many tilings..'?
A.gain, " this bearer will tell you the reft; and if I learn ainy
t.ling here, I will make'vou m1emoriial at even." The letter is:
:iade to be written at different times, in the Ipace of two days:
:!nd, at the conclusion of each nighlt's writing, there is added a
Iew notes, profefcedly a recapitulation of the preceding heads of
the letter ; and at the end of tlis letterj the Queen is made to
Thy, '" Excuse that tlhing is cfribbled, for I had not Saper yefler-
l:ay wheiIn wrote that of tile mcrnoial." 1 alk the reader now,
Is it poflible to apply this to any otlier memorial, than tlat of the
mainy finnll things concerning vliicli Ilhe referred 3otliwell to the
lbc:rcr to cxplain to him fully 'l Tlis is the pliin lense of the'
words tllcmblives, and in this fenlf only did L.ethington nand
iilch;iann Xplain them in their conference with the Englilh
c..ommiflioners at York. The memorin l hllcre mecant, " is in
tlc credit (Iay they) givcn to Paris tlle bealrr." Can any thing
L-: more n:atural tlhan this ? " lut, l'vs our autllor, tlerec gentle-

then were in a miPak'e as to this, and ulideritood nothing of tie
mnatter; for now the dissertator has discovered, that this f-ribblelJ
Dwriting, called the memorial, was no other than a part of her
very letter on which she had previously made some jottings, but
was now forced to scribble her letter upon it, for want of paper.
If we can poflibly suppose that to have been the cafe, all the fcrib-
bling upon a paper, already blotted with notes and jottings, mull
undoubtedly have appeared upon the face of the letter itself; in
which cafe it is imposSible to tifppofe that Lethington and Buchan-
an would have mistaken the fienCe of this passage in the letter.

" This letter appears to have been the subject of two nights

writing; at the end of the firll night the Queen is made to tly,
file is going to bed, ' yet I cease not to scribble all the remains
of the paper.' Then follows a short note of the heads of what lhe
had written. The night after, when llhe comes to the very close
of her letter, there are added likewiie a few jottings or remo-
randums, such as, ' Remember you of the purpose of Lady Re-
res, &c.' all which is natural." Now it, according to this dif-
covery of the dissertator, flhe was obliged to write part of the let-
ter upon her paper of notes which fle had kept for jotting down
what occurred; by what sirrange accident came it to pass that
this paper of notes came to be so luckily divided, that one half
of these notes falls so very a propos as to make an exaci summar-y
of the preceding part of the letter, and no more? After which
the letter proceeds to the end, when a few other notes are again
as naturally introduced, and with which this letter concludes.
From all which, I think it is pretty plain, that these notes were
-always meant to pass for what at prelent they appear to be, " part
of the letter itself."

The next evidence brought agninfl Qlcen Mvary, is the dying

confeflion of Nicholas Hubert, commonly called French Paris,
servant to the Earl of Bothwell, and named in the letters theim-
selves, as the bearer of them from the Qteen to Bothwell.

Four of Botlhwll's servants were apprehended in Juine, 1567,

as accef'tiries to the murder of the King, and publicly tried be-
fore the -ligh Court of Jufliciary at Edinburgh ; and all of them
were condemned and executed on lhcir own confeflions, as fgil-
tv of the murder ; but none of tliem n cucl:d the Q!cLc. (On
the contr;!ry, in the iinfirultions ivenll to tle iCorrinimilTlii- ni ,j
ilIary, it is menitioled that they decl:ared t ani !:r.,:t., the ()eccni
to be innocent. IThe evidence of this is incontitibile,; :a thliet-
wvciei prc!snt no ft',cr thaln Iliil(teen :le r! .
r cr:1 rs' th':e ':'ii'

dom, eight bishops, arid eight abbots, of whom our author gives
a catalogue.

The names of the four criminals already mentioned, are, Dal-

glieflh, Hay, Powrie, and Hepburn. As for Paris, who was sup-
posed to be the confident of the whole intrigue betwixt the Q.een
and Bothwell, he was carried to the prison in St. Andrew's, where
the Earl of Murray resided, and kept there for two years, during
the whole time of the conferences at \eftmtinfler and York.

The fulfpicious conduct of Mo;rton, with regard to Dalgliefh, in

whofc cuftldy it was f:id the box was found, has been repeatedly
taken notice of; and one more concluficn drawn by Mr. Tytler
from the silence of Morton at this time, is, that he and his afbo-
ciates had either forgot the matter cf the box altogether, or that
the letters did not at that time exiti, but that the whole flory
was trumped up after Dalgliefh had been executed. Still, how-
ever, if the evidence of Paris could have availed them any thing,
he might have been produced. Besides, making the ilrange
iluppofition, that the cxilencC of this witness could have been
forgot, the conduct of Murray himself, after this time, throws
flch a violent fulpicion upon him, as never can be removed by
any aat whatcver.

iMary having, as we have seen, been denied her request of being

furniflhed with copies of the letters, or inspecting the originals, and
having publicly accu!ed Murra; of being guilty of the murder ;
the latter, inficad of xaitinlg to exculpate himself, inflantly set
out for Scotland, and after residing there seven months, cauled
this Paris, the only pellbu who could vindicate his own inno-
cence, and prove the Qeccn's guilt, to be hanged. " Let us now
fee, fays I\lr. Tytler, the method Mlurray takes to wipe off this
foul alfpcrfion, and to avoid all suspicions of prateifing, by the
force of torture or promilfs, upon a poor, ignorant, friendless
creature, then in his hands, to mould him to his purpose.
Does he fend him to London to be examined before the En-
glifh Council, as his other witnesses, Crawford and Nellbn,
had been ? Does he even venture to produce him before his own
urivy ccunci! at Edinburgh, to be interrogated there ? Or, last-
vl, Does he b:ir'g him to a public tri:al in the ordinary form, be-
'ore the I- iil Court of Jul iciary at iEdinburgh, as was allowed
to D:lIrliLcll a:: the other fcrvants of Both ell? No! As to
lhefe latt, tllc cxpriieiCnt lad not at all fuccecded. In fplite of
tortUle, thlcy h1::a, withl thitr li,'g bracllth, Iolke out the truth,
:-id ;.tniitt'.'d thle QC eii. cn i
''llis inan; iParis, v;:s tlhe la; card

Murray had to play: a new rmethod, tlerefore, mufl be follow-
ed with refpeet to him. IIe was confined, in an obscure dungeon,
in Murray's citadel of St. Andrew's; there he was kept hid from
all the world, and at lalt condemned by the Earl of Murray him-
self, in a manner nobody knows'how. Several months after his
death a coneffion was taken, clandellinely, without mentioning
any person who was present when it was made, by Paris, ahd sent
up privately to London to Secretary Cecil, but at what period
nobody knovws accufiilg the Queen in the blackell terms, and
extolling the Earl of Murray to the lkies. Arnd to crown the
whole, this precious piece of evidence is kept a profound secret
from the QOeen and her friends, who never once saw or heard of
this confeflion.

" All that remains of this poor creature, are two confeflions,

one on the 9th, and the other on the loth of August I569. The
firfl, said to be the original, and marked on fonie leaves with the
initial letters bs his name, is still extant in the Cotton Libra-
ry. It charges Bothwell with the murder, but fays nothing of
the Queen or the letters, but the other expressly charges her
with the whole."

Mr. Tytler is of opinion, tlat there confcflions were kept fe-

cret, and never Ihown to Mary, from the following circumlan-
ces, viz. that the oily cotcmporary writers who mention the
condemnation and death of this Frenchman, are Lefly bifllop of
Ross, and the author of a manuscript History of Scotland during
the reign of Queen Mary, and the four Regents, MIurray, Len-
nox, Mar, and Morton; which' was afterwards published by
Crawford, hiltoriographer to Queen Anne. The author of the
manuscript mentions, that " the Regent (Murray) proceeded
from Stirling to St. Andrcw's ; where Paris, a Frenchman, was
hanged for the murder of the late King, though he denied the
fast." We have already taken notice of bishop Lelly's assertion,
that Paris vindicated Mary from the crimes laid to her charge
from whence it is plain, that neither the Qucen nor the Biflop
had seen or heard of the fccond confeflion, in which fie was ib
violently accused. " And the above passage from Crawford, fays
Mr. T'ytlcr, fully explains the good reason that Murray then had
for keeping this prctended confession of Paris a profound secret, to
all except his own confederates and Secretary Cecil, viz. IBccanfe
it was at this time univcrfally known, by every body in Scot-
land, that this very Paris, at his execution, had publicly given
the lie to any pretelded conel'C;on, by folcillly denying the 1'uL."

,,H
, I. 3 1B

Our author now attempts to determine betwixt the two sets of

contraditory evidence before us on the present question. He
quotes a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, in which fle gives him
a great charaaer. ' In our judgment, fays lic, ye have not any
in loyalty and faithfulness can over-match him ;" and on this oc-
cafion, Mr. 'ytler observes, what is indeed very surprising, that
Dr. Robertson fllould call Lelly " a man heated with faction, so
that no llrefs can be laid upon what he fays." From the abflra&
of his arguments already given, however, the reader will be en-
abled to judge how far the Doftor is in the right in his afler-
tions ; and it is impofiible to hcfitate a moment at giving the bi-
shop the preference to Buchanan, in point of argument, candour,
and humanity.

On the other fide of the question, we must confider, that by

the conduc of Mlary, her accusers had an opportunity of contra-
diaing the reports concerning the confeflion of Paris ; but this
they did not ; and the only anfver they made to the vindication-
publilhed by the bithop of Ro3, -was to suppress the book altoge-
ther, on pretence of its containing rome dangerous points with
regard to Mary's title to the crown of England. By reason of
this fuppreflion, it may be said, that Murray and Morton had no
*opportunity of feeing the Q0een's defence with regard to Paris;
but this we can scarcely suppose, as the book was loon diftribu-
ted, and some copies of the firit edition are even extant at this
day. As the order for fupprefling it came from Elizabeth, the-
book mufi have been in the hands of her ministers, and Murray
and Morton had always an arbaffador there, who could not fail
to fee it. Nay, the Earl of Morton himself was at London in
the year 1571 ; having gone up at that time as Commiflioner for
the Earl of Lennox, then regent of Scotland, in order to treat
with Elizabeth for the depofitlon of Mary altogether. " What
reason then, fays Mr. Tytler, can be afligned for this reserved-
ness, this determined silence of Morton and Murray, with re-
fpe& to this assertion of the bishop, as to Paris's dying tefliniony
of Queen Mary's innocence, when they could at once have cruih-
ed it, by publifling the genuine confeflion said to have been
made by Paris himself, which they had at that time in their
pocket ? Two reasons, very different indeed from each other
may be imagined: Either that this confefCion of Paris, in MIor-
ton's cftodiv, was not fit to hear the light, or that fonc finall'
reaidl for Mary's fame made them conceal it from her."

That the advcrfarics of Mary had not at this time, nor indeed

at any other, the fmalllell regard for her fame, seems very plain
from the whole tenor of their conduct already mentioned, as wel
as'from what we have yet to deliver. This fame year Buchan-
an published his Deteclion, in which nothing was omitted that
could possibly serve to blacken her character. The whole in-
trigue betwixt her and Bothwell, her amours in France as well
as in Scotland, her repeated attempts to poison the King, and
:his actual murder at the last by her.contrivance, as it was laid,
are all set forth in such a manner, as nothing but the mot raa-
corous malice could have prompted even an adversary to have
done. The letters to Bothwell are printed at full length, toge-
ther with the confessions of Bothwell's four ifrvants ; and yet
the pretended confessions of Paris are omitted. The book was
presently dispersed all over the kingdom ; " but, fays Mr. Tyt-
ler, what is molt surprising, although Paris is often mention-
ed therein, as the confident of the whole ccene betwixt the
Queen and Bothwell, with rcflpec to the King's murder ; and
that Bilhop Lefly, in his printed Apology for Queen Mary, had
affirmed in the face of the world, as a fad universally known,
that Paris, at his execution, had publicly asserted the CQeen's
innocence; although the letters give only some fuflicions and dark
hints, from which the Queen's knowledge of the murder is in-
ferred; whereas Paris's confeflion, of the xoth of August, 1569,
expressly charges her as the contriver of it, and is the only evi-
dence that does so; yet, in Buchanan's book there is not the
lealf mention made of any such confession. Buchanan lived ma-
ny years after this; his Dczelion underwent several editions;
nay, he wrote his hiltory at large, which was not publilhed for
several years after this period; and, though he there again makes
mention both of Paris and the letters, yet not one word is said of
any such confelion made by this pcrfon to the prejudice of the
Queen."

Our author also takes notice that a copy of this confeleion is

flill extant, attested by one Alexander Hay, a notary. This man
appears to have been Murray's activc inlt:lument in the tranfac-
tions of those times, and by degrees arrived to be clerc to his fe-
crctcouncil. In this capacity, he attests the confeision of Paris, but
without any witnelTes ; nay, Mr. Goodall has brought forth a very
envious letter of his to John Knox, lherein lie tells tliit reform-
cr that the evil deeds of Queen Mary liad been let forth both in
Latin and E]nglih; and " itn iapcpirance, lays lel, thefy have no-

3 13 ij

thing wtifet forth. tending to her infa;ty." Thus he tacitly gives
up the confefion of Paris altogether. " This fame Hay, fays
Mr. Tytler, had attested the copy of Paris's confellion on the
Ioth of Augufi, 1569, which was sent to London that year; and
yet in this letter, wrote to his friend John Knox, though he knew
ivell that his own copy of this confefllon was in the hands of the
very fame people who had published the above scandalous collec-
tion against the Queen; yet, so well does lie know from the very
nature'of his own manufature, that this confeflion of HIubert's
durst not be exposed to light; and so far from enumerating that
piece among the above colleA.ion, he finks it altogether, as if no
such paper had ever existed. He tells his friend that the above
c6llection contained every thing that could tend to the Q(een's
infamy, when, at the fame time, he knew well, that the blackelt
piece of all, which he himself had furnilhed them with, was omit-
ted. From all which circumstances, the violent presumptions that
arise fromntheir carrying this poor ignorant firanger fiom Edin-
burgh, the ordinary feat of jutlice, their keeping him hid from all
the world in a remote dungeon, and not producing him with their
other evidences, so as he might have been publicly queilioned ;
the positive and direct teflimony of the author of Crawford's ma-
nufcript, then living, and on the spot at the time, with the pu-
blic affirmation of the biflop of'Rofs at the time of Paris's death,
that he had vindicated the Queen with his dying breath; the be-
haviour of Murray, Morton, Buchanan, and even Hay, the at-
teflor of this pretended confession on that occasion; tlicir close
and reserved silence at the time when they mult have had this
confefllon of Paris in their pocket; anld their publifing every
other circumstance that could tend to blacken tile Q!ccn, and yet
omitting this confeflion, the only direct evidence of her Ifppofcd
guilt; all this, duly and difpafionately confidered, I think, one
may safely conclude, that it was judged not fit to expole ft soon
to light this piece of evidence againlll the Queen, which a cloud
of witncffes, living, and prelent ait Paris's execution, would freely
have given clear teflinony againfl, -,s a notorious impoflute."

Mr. Tytler next proceeds to Irate tihe evidence arifillg from this

confeflion itself. Onthishe obflrvcs that the absurdities of the piece
arc so glaring, that the remark formerly made by Dr. Robcrtfon,
about forgers over doing their work, is lhere verified in its full
extent. " Their caution, fays he, in not making the QCceen
fpcak such plain lainguage in her letters, as this perlon does, was
vilfe: here they forget tlicmrfclvcs by puluirg the grcf'cll words

in his mouth. I-Is charafter, they knew, was low enough to
bear it; and they were resolved to make him speak out, so as to
leave no doubt of the Queen's infamy as a proflitute and a mur-
derefs !"

Dr. Robertson has taken notice of the absurdities and incon-

fiflencies in this confession, but does not think that from thence
there is sufficient reason to reject it entirely. " It must be ac-
knowledged, fays he, that his depositions contain tome improba-
ble circumstances. He seems to have been a foolifi talkative
fellow; the fear of death; the violence of a torture; and the de-
fire of pleating those in whose power he was, tempted him, per-
haps, to feign some circumitances, and to exaggerate others. To
fay that some circumitances in an affidavit are improbable or false,
is very different from faying that the whole is forged. I fufpec
the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance of the
latter."

In answer to this, Mr. Tytler takes notice, that it has always

been supposed a sufficient reason for disregarding the testimony of
a witness, if he be found inconfiflent with himself in any tingle
point; and in the present cafe, when the fcveral objections arising
from the external view of the testimony arc taken into confidera-
tion, this rule of judging must operate with double force. The rea-
son assigned by the Do&or for Paris's interlarding his flory with
improbabilities does not appear at all fatisfafory; but, on the con-
trary, if it proves any thing, it proves too much. If Paris had a
mind to please them, there is no doubt, that accusing the Queen
at any rate, was the most likely way to do it; and if we believe
this to have been his design, which fiom the nature and circum-
ilances of the cafe there is no reason to doubt, we mull allb be-
lieve that the whole of his narrative is a lie. It is natural, in-
deed to fuppofc, that a poor forlorn and distresscd creature like
Paris would be tempted to fallify in this manner, in hopes of ob-
taining his life; but there is one circumltance which cannot be
reasonably derived even from this motive. One of the particu-
lars of his confeflion is, that he took the liberty to fay, one day,
to the QOccn, " lMadam, Monieur Botlwelll hath commanded
me to bring to liin the keys of your chlamber, as he wants to do
fomcetling there; that is, to make the King lly in tile air with
pomwder!" This fIceclh, in Mr. Tytler's opinion, is too holrrid 1o
be flippofed to come from thle mouth even of Paris; and indeed
it mull be owned, that if he really did fay any ilch thing, it
mull be accounted the cIi ft of infinity rather than any thing

else. The long confinement in prison, and the miseries lie sus-
tained there, may not unreasonably be supposed to have affefted
his brain.

In the farther examination of this confeflion, it appears more

and more, that it has been obtruded on the world merely as a
scheme of the conspirators to ruin the fame of Queen Mary. Mr.
Tytler observes, that the confession, as we have it at present, is
by no means judicial. It mentions no person whatever that was
present when it was taken. All the other confeflions of Dal-
gliefh, Hay, Hepburn, &c. taken before the High Court of Jus-
ticiary, mention the judges before whom the confession was made;
and at the end of the depositions is the subscription at large of
Sir John Ballenden, Lord Justice Clerk, bearing that the prin-
cipal depositions were in the records of the books of the High
Court of Justiciary; but the confession of Paris has not a single
mark of authenticity, excepting the signature of Alexander Hay,
Murray's clerk, who attests it as a notary, without any witnesses.
" All the world knows, fays our author, that a copy of any pa-
per, atteited by a notary, requires the fulemnity of two reputable
witnesses, to give faith to the notary's attestation. To this pa-
per, however, though of the grcatelt importance, there are no
-vitneffes. The whole, then, depends entirely upon the naked as-
fertion of this noted clerk of Murray alone, contradicted, as we
have seen, in the moil public manner by-all the world, and even
tacitly disavowed by himself."

The confession of the 9th of August, does not charge the

Queen with the murder; but our author takes notice, that Mr.
Goodall has likewise given very good reasons for supposing it
also to be an imposture. He takes notice of what Mr. Hume
fays upon this fubjeEt, viz. that the confession was a regular and
judicial paper, given in regularly and judicially; and ought to
have been canvafled at the time, if the persons whom it concern-
ed had been aflurcd of their innocence." Mr. Tytler obfcrvcs,
however, that it evidently was not a judicial confefilon: " The pa-
per itself does not bear any such mark ; nor does it mention that
it was taken in presence of any person, or by any person, or by
any authority whatever ; and, by comparing it with the judicial
examinations of Dalgliefi, Hay, and Hepburn, it is apparent
that it is deftitutc of every formality requisite in a judicial
evidence. In what dark corner, then, this flrange produc-
tion was generated, our author, MVr. HIume, may endcavour
to find out if he can. As to his assertion that it was regularly
and judicially given in, and therefore ought to be canvasl'd dur-

ing the conferences, we have already seen that this, likewise, is
not fat. The conferences broke up in February 1569; Niclo-
las Hubert was not hanged till August thereafter; and his dying
confession, as Mr. Hume calls it, is only dated the loth of that
month. How then can this gentleman gravely tell us, that this
confeftion was judicially given in, and ought to have been, at that
very time, canvassed by Queen Mary and her Commiflioners.
Such positive assertions, contrary to sac, are unworthy the cha-
raEter of an hiflorian, and may very justly render his decision with
regard to evidences of a higher nature very dubious. In answer,
then, to Mr. Iume: As the Queen's accusers did not chufe to
produce this material witness, Paris, whom they had alive, and in
their hands, nor any declaration from him, at the critical and
proper time for having it canvafred by the Queen, I apprehend our
author's conclufon may be fairly used againfl himself: That it is
in vain at present to support the improbabilities and absurdities in a
confession taken in a clandefline way, nobody knows how; and
produced, after Paris's death, by nobody knows whom; and
from every appearance dellitute of every formality rcquifite and
common to such fort of cviddnce. For these reasons, I am under
no fort of hesitation to give sentence againfi Nicholas Hubert's con-
session, as a gross impoiture and forgery."

These are theprincipal arguments used in favour of Queen Mary
by Mr. Tytler, who may not unjustly be said to have exhaufled
the fubjeat, and to have set forth, in a very candid and judicious
manner, every thing of importance that can be said upon the
fubjeEt. As two other writers, however, of considerable repu-
tation, viz. Dr. Stuart and Mr. Whitaker, have very warm-
ly entered into a defence of Queen Mary, we fllall lill give an
abftraa of the arguments made use of by them.

Dr. Stuart observes, that when Murray and his party had

proceeded to such extravagant lengths againfI Mary, by dcfiroy-
ing and imprisoning her, it was natural for them to think of Ibme
method of securing themselves from danger. They could have
no security that Elizabeth would not take part with the Quccn of
Scotland; and they were likewile apprehensive te'at the Court of
France might interfere. To give a colour ofjufii,'e to their pro-
ceedings, they inflituted an inquiry before the Privy Council into
their own condu t; and as they were in this cafe both judges and
parties, there could be no doubt of the decision being favourable.
The origin of the misfortunes of the Queen, they said, lay in her
own mifcondu&t, and they affirmed that flie was a party with the

Earl of Bothwell in the murder of her late husband; and, to fuii-
port this aflertion, they appealed to the letters of which we have
heard so much. Our author takes notice of the inconfifiency itn
their account of this matter; it being impossible that the disco-
very of letters, poJ,srior to the dute of their'taking arms againll
their sovereign, could in any malnner of way be the carre of that
event. Another piece of inconfifency in their conduc is, that
at the very time they were endeavouring to cltablifl the proofs of
TIary's guilt. by authenticating these letters, they gave in a ma-
lifeito to Throgmorton, tle Englili ambassador, upon the I th
of July, rcprefenting the Queen as entirely innocent of the death
of her hutband, and fctting forth that the crimes of Bothwel)
had been the occasion of their taking up arms. Dr. Stuart is
even of opinion. that it is not impoflible to ascertain the date of
the forgery of the letters in queltion. In bome dilpatches to
QOee'n Elizabeth from her ambaflador Throgmorton, dated 25th
July Ix67, he informs her that the enemies of Queen lMary de-
iigned to charge her with iocontinency, with several persons be-
iides Bothwell, and with the murder of her hulband aloi. Of
this lai, fays Throgmorton, " they fay, they have as apparent
proof againlt her as may be, as well as by the telimony of her
hand-writirg, which they have recovered, as also by sufficient
witnesses." Dr. Stuart confiders this as overturning entirely
the idea of the letters being dilcovered on the 2sth of June; as
in the end of July they were only thinking of ellablifhing their
charge. In this, however, his reasoning does not appear altoge-
ther concliuive ; for they might have been for a few weeks in
poireiTion of the letters, without making the use of them that they
intended. It is a itronger argument which he next adduces, viz.
that when Throgmorton was about to depart for England, they
did not shew him the box and letters, though they were at that
time very much disposed to blacken Mary's character. Throg-
morton departed on the 3oth of August this year; and our au-
thor fuppcoes, that the letters were fabricated betwixt the 3cth
of Auguit, and the 4th of December, xwhen they were produced
to the Earl of tlurray's secret council. In the ad )f council
publilhed at this time, " the conspirators, fays Dr. Stuart, dif-
cover the greateil anxiety for thelir pardon and ilecurity. Now, if
the letters had been genuine, this ansicty would have been molt
unnatura.l; the no'oric y ,i her guilt would have operated moit corn-
pltel-y thei- j'!.:.lcIti ;on and pario;. In thlis A-t of Council they
be:ryj tlh utunol r J:icitude to elt;blitlh the criminality of tll

Queen. Yet, if the lettels had been real, her criminality would
have been ellabli!hcd from the moment of their difcovcry. lThis
anxiety, therefore, for thremcilves, and this attempt againit
the honour of the Queen at a juneture so particular, arc more
than fulipicioiis. They appear to be obviously the fuggetlions of.
their guilty fears; and the fleps by which they thought to accom-
plillh their purpoles are a new evidence againtl them, and a frefl
intimation of their guilt. It was with a view to tle approaching
convention of the Ellates, that this ad of council had been formed
and managed. It was a preparation for the parliament, in whichl
the conspirators had fccured the fullest sway; and where they
proposed to efieduate their pardon and lfecurity, and to cftablifh
tie le tters as decisive vouchers againfi the (Qeen.

In the parlianIent whicih aflllebld on the isth of the fame

month, the letters were uillained as authentic, without either in-
ljiection or inquiry. I hey were not at this time produced to
public view, nor was the Queen brouglt from her confinement
to defend herself, or any advocate '.ffTered to speak for her. The
difference of form betwixt thol: laid before the Privy Council,
and those deicribed in Pa;ria:ncnt, does not pais. unnoticed by
our author; and he rcma:ks, that they had neitlier dates, direc-
tion, nor fial. It is i ibe ta

i maginibe that they could have

been £ent to Bothwel! xs loole papers ; ur that Nicholuas IH-bert,
a person of the lowcfll rank, aui n;tur:lly indifcrcct, would have
been the messinger. ruom the con:ents of the letters alto, it is
evident, that they cannot be the perfornimnce of the Qtecn.
"They have, lays our autlor, a vulgarity, an indelicacy, and
a coarlenefs of manner and c 'xprc:li!, :!that do nut apply to her
and v;hile they are dilUuliling ifron tLi.ir want of elegance, they
violate chronology. :-omn a conipnirilfn of them vwith national
records of undoubted faith, they a:p;ar to have been written up-
on days \ihen the Q.een was diiiTccintly employed, and in places
where llhe was not attually present. it is not in one inflance on-
ly, that they exhiibit this v iild ii conf'isenc , the examples of
it are frequent, and at:tenidd v. i'h pccu! iriies tl;t are palp;ille.
Tht- objections, tlicrciire, t, tli r

i :l titliltili(ty upon this hiead,

fem decisive; and are not to be contradictd, or cven Ip;llittld,
'.vihoutl t l violence and r cc:tici: i. t!hat ar: altog lthler dlciirutiivc
ot lhiillocal cevildenc.."

Dr. Stuart nc.\t proceds to ficw, tiiat the crinmin::lity of the
tuccn does not :'Ccii'c :ny confirnl:tion from hillory. It is siid,
;,v lhcr ndlvcrl'isr, tli;i: 1!ic ;n :. ccn' ccru ill tl;: am'udert of Drwt1.,

I !/,',., 11. lY, 3 k:

ly. in order to.accomplifh the marrainge with Bothwcll. Her mar-
riage with this nobleman was by no means voluntary. W7hile
flie vas detained at Dunbar, those who rebelled againit her pro-
sessed to be the great friends of Bothwell, and instead of attempt-
ing to rescue the sovereign from his hands, they gave him every
opportunity he could with; and even furniihed him with a bond
declaring his innocence of the murder, and recommending him to
be her husband in the moil unequivocal terms. Had the Quecn been
consenting to all this, there would have been no occasion for so
much force and scandalous behaviour on the part of the nobility.
With regard to Bothwell himself, he seems to have becn entire-
ly void of every principle of decency or humanity. Dr. Stuart
is of opinion, that fie never entertained any great affetion for
him previous to the marriage. Instead of being enamoured of him,
the Doctor is of opinion, that he used the molt abominable means
to make her fubfervicnt to his purposes. These were, as he sup-
poses: intoxicating and amaztorious potions. Mary herself, in her
inflruaions to the Bifllop of Dlumblane, her ambassador to France,
after mentioning his dcclarations of love and importunities, fays,

by there means, and many others he brought us to his intent.'

In the proclamation agaiiift Bothwell, it was said, that the
Queen was seduced by un/eifome ways, and the apology made by
the facion of the Earl of Murray to Throgmorton the English
ambassador, it is said, that ' the Queen was led captive, and by
fear, force, and other extraordinalry and more un/au~ful means,
compelled to become bed-fellow to another wife's huiband.'
Iad the Queen been engaged in a criminal amour with Both-
well before her husband'. death, what occasion would there have
been for all this fracas when lfie was of herrelf sufficiently in.
clined to yield to his inclinations ?"

The Doctor agrees with Mr. Goodall and Mr. Tytler, that

the letters were written originally in the Scots language, and
that no French originals ever cxilled. He finds fault with
Goodall, however, on account of his exceflive admiration of
IMary, and his attempting to vindicate the charader of the Ear!
of Botlhwell; and he pays high compliments to Mr. Tytler, on
account of the merit of his oi k, which he thinks is in many re-
fpcds complete, and I[ands in need of no afflilance from any
quarter. Hel obllrvcs tlhat tll inlililicitncy of the letters, is evi-
dent from the tre caution with which the conliirators pro-
duccd them to the world, cven after all the pretended fanssion
they could give them. lfter hIaving got them authenticated by

the three Eflates, on the Istli of December 1567, lie flewed the
letters privately to Elizabeth ; and obtained from her a promise
that they fllould be held good and valid proofs, before he would
prefer his accusation. For this purpofc, lie procured the box and
letters from Morton; giving, at the fame time, a receipt for
them with such formality, that Dr. Stuart is of opinion, it, of
itself, throws some suspicion on the gcnuinenefs of the letters in
quetflon *. It was dated on the i6th of September I568, and
contains the firfl mention that appears in history of the discovery
of the letters, as in the a&tual poffcflion of Dalglielh, upon the
20th of June J567. It is true, he was alive on the 4th of )ce-
cember 1567 ; but it was neither proper at that time, nor on the
isth of the fame month, when the letters were authenticated by
the Eflates, to mention his name particularly ; though, after his
execution, which took plaue in January i68, there was then
no longer any danger of his discovering any thing in contradic-
tion to what they were plcafcd to report concerning the QOeen,
and then they also thought proper to mention Dalglitllh's name.

b This rem;arkable receipt is couched in the followlng'te'ms:

Apud Edinburgh, I 6th Septcmber, Anno Dom. ;6°.

"The vwhich day, the noble and potent Prince Ja!mes, a::lrl of MurrI7,

Lord Aberlnethic, regent' to our Sovereign Lord, his realm ad

ll ;egs,

granted and confefled him to have received from James, Earl of :Mo;-;on,
Iord of Dalkeith, Chancellor of Scotland, a lilvcr box overgilt with gold,
with all miflive letters contracts, or obligations for nmalrriage; sonnets or
love-letters, and all other letters contained therein, lent and palced hetwixt
the Queen, our Sovereign Lord's mother, and James, fomceimve Lord Both-
well. \Whici box, and haill pieces within the lname, were taken and foutlid
with numquhile George Dalglielli, flrvint to the said Earl Bothwell, ulon
the 2oth day of Juic, the year of God i567 years; andl therefore the Lord
Regent for lilmfelf, andl taking the burden upon him for the remiaining
noblemen and others, pr-oferfiig the querrel and obedience of our Itlid So-
vereign I.ord, exoners, quitclailmls, and dildlh;rs the llidl Earl of Mor-
toun of the box, andl of all tie I.tilds milTive-writings, conttrals, obligations,
obnnlets, lovc-blnladls, and other letters wlaltlltoevel, l'oiundl an contallined
therein, the time of his rcccilpt an(l intromilihll thici wilth

t l tifying and

declaring, that lie h:s tnrly al:nd l' ionelly obls.rvedl and I.e)pt tiCe l:fti( bov,
and h:ill wriits and pieces Iboelilds within tile Il'ne, witlhoult :ay: altera-
tion, atiginlniation, or dtliinutiiol thiretols, iln :aly part or porlion: Alid
the said l.ord Regent, ipon llis

l Ihioor, faitlhllully promifi.!;, tlih: tlie falil

llaill letters andl wrsitiigs lll le always; iready and lotllt:iiiniti;' ;) the laid
Earl of IM ;-tonl, and rIeaiilng nlemen llhat lentered( into 1lit' !a.r r-rt/ of
reveng'ing; the KinC'ig or Smoi reiSg l.o d's fathelr's n1'il-der; whlenlvrt llicy
shall have to do lihrewiltl, lfr na:milfllhl! the uouil:d :at1l the erjuitiyu oP
thleir proceediin';, to atll vwhoim it elI.irs."

3 C ij

This, however, fays our author, is not the only fiufpicicis cir-

cumflance recorded in the receipt. In the act of Privy Council,
and in the ordination of parliament in December 1567, when the
Earl of Murray and his afiociatcs were infinitely anxious to efia-
bliaf the crimtinality of the OQeen, the only vouchers appealed to
of her guilt were the letters; and at that time, doubtlcfs, they had
prepared no other papers to which they could allude. But, in
the Earl of I'Iurray's receipt in September I 6S, there is men-
tion made of other vouchers besides the letters. He acknow-
ledges that he received from the Earl of Morton, contrats or
obligations, and sonnets, or lovc-vcrfes. These remarkable pa-
pers, though said to have been found upon the 20th day of June
x567, appeared not until September 568 ; and this difficulty is
yet to be solvcd by those who believe them to be genuine. The
general arguments which afilet the authenticity of the letters ap-
ply to them in full force ; and circumllances peculiar to them-
selves, evince, at the sarre time, their fabricaticn. IThey are
not to be accounted for or explained on the fuppolition of tlle
genuimeneefs of the ietters. But upon the hypothesis of the for-
gery of tle 'letters, their use, and the wra of their invcntion,
may be pointed out with an obvious clearness. When the Earl
of Murray had agreed to accuse the Queen of Scots, his anxiety
about his prodfs werc redoubled. His apprehensions were excef-
five and alarming. The private communication of tlie letters to
Elizabeth, in June 568, produced a vwith that he could fortify
these vouchers ; for the letters only were at this time exhibited
to the Englilh (Queen. The notion that the love of Mary to
V.othwell wns incrdinate, required to be fipported. It was a
f ndamental principle with the conflpirat(rs, and they had no f:,As
by rvwhich it could be fixed and illuilrated. Between the munths,
therefore, of June and September 1568, betLccwn the dates of
the communication of the letters to llizabeth, and of the re-
ceipt of the box from the Earl of IMorton, the contrants and ion-
nets were invented ; and that they might anfwcr the intention,
they were made to express and iJnply, in a ilrong degree, the
:.ffieSion of P.l;ry to Botllwell. T'he forgery was now fininedl;
and the papers, \vhile tliey mutually evince tile vwakncefs and
impropriety of one nnotl:;er, all concur to ciablulillh the certaint
and uniform critninalty of the cnctmie of the Qu!een.

" As to the c:tlkct or box, in lhiiclh the papcrs were depolit-

rd, it is said to have contained then flll o the 2oth day of June
567, when it i-; rgcd thlt thlly were iril. difcovcred. Y'et, es

this box, in connection with the Intters and papers, there is iid
mention of the adt of Council, or the ordination of the Parlia-
ment where the letters arc dclecribed ; nor at tile time when they
were privately commlunlicated to Q(ueen Eizabeth. The i6th dav
December 1683, is tie date of the firfi mention of the box, as con-
taining vouchers againl the l ueen. The box had helonged to Ma-
ry, who received it froinm her hulband Francis II. The initial letter
of his nanme, with a crown over it, appeared upon many places of
the box. It is rather ag.ainll the confpiratois that they should
have employed a box of the Q.een's to contain papers fie had
sent to Bothwcll. It is not very probable that she would have
given to that nobleman a box wxhich lic had received from Irlan-
cis. The box might withl greater probability have been macle to
contain letters from Bothwecll to Mary ; and if that unfortunate
and flagitious man hlad ciccn killed at the Orkney Illes by Sir
William ML¥urray and Kirkcnldy of Grange, it is very pofli'ole,
that the forgery of the conlipirators to defame the Q.ecn would
have afTulned this form. 'j he Qucen had been accultomcd to
keep her jewels in this box, but when the conspirators Ieized up-
on her jewels, it was appropriated by them; and they conceived
that it would give a propriety their forgeries to lodge then in
it.

" The next date of the difl.:lion of the box and its contents,

was upon the loth day of Ot)ober 1 68. In the true spirit of
the forgery, and, with the moti guilty anxieties, the Earl of
MVurray communicated them by his agents to the English Coni-
mil1ioners at York, in a clandefline manner, not iln their public
capacity. His fchcme was to avoid the necefiity of a judicial or
exact examination of them ; and, to give them the flamp of au-
thenticity, and of finilhed and decilive evidences againit the
Oueen of Seots, by his owvn oath, and the oaths of his ailociates.
His intrigues with Norfolk are lfill farther illufirative of the na-
ture of his sensibilitics and consciousness. The diflippointment of
Elizabeth, occasioned by his caution, guilt, and tiniidities, pro-
duced the removal of the conferences from York to '\Vellminll[r.
Her refcntmetts againll IV\I;'y, tle Ilatisflctio ll lle ;iflbrded to his
feruples, and her promises of protcelion, brought lini finally to
the points nte had ill view. l-lis public accullttion of the Q(2eel
of Scots was delivered ; and at length it was fiicceedel by his
public exhibition of the box and its contents.

" When the Englifl Coininillioners received froni the Earl of
MIurray the conencts of the clfl;ct, they rec:i tlh letters and tlhe

sonnets, and comparing them with undoubted and real dispatches
from the Queen, found the hand writing to be similar; but there
were many persons besides Maitland of Lethington, already men-
tioned, who could counterfeit the Queen's hand; particularly a
young woman named Mary Beaton, one of the maids of honour
to the Queen, whose hand-writing could with difficulty be dif-
tinguifhed from hers ; and it has been supposed that this person
had been allured to lend her a[ffiance to the Earl of Murray and
his fac'ion. The examination of the letters by the English Com-
missioners was a mere farce. No scrutiny was made, and no care
to attain the truth was exerted; as has already been fully ex-
plained.

" Murray having collated, as he pretended, the originals with

the copies, took the former into his keeping; and the latter were
detained by the CommiRioners. At their next meeting, the
Commiffioncrs perused translations of the letters and ionnets, and
examined the other writings produced by the Earl of Murray.
The Earl of Morton then unfolded the manner in which the box
with the letters, sonnets, and contraCts, was discovered. It was
then requefied by Murray, that Thomas Nelson, and Thomas
Crawford ihould be examined. 'The former had been a servant
to the King, and communicated some particulars concerning the
murder; but though lie related that event in such a way as to
ininuate a suspicion againfl the Queen, there yet appeared in his
evidence, no direct acculation againll her. From the examina-
tion of the latter it may be gathered, that some incidents founded
upon the letters were real; and as the conspirators were well
acquainted with all the tranfaclions of the OCcen, it mutl have
been strange, indced, if they could not have communicated an
air of authenticity to their forgery, by the introducion of rome
particulars which could be attefced. No information, however,
was given by him, which was of power enough to criminate the
Queen. By these depoitions, which are frivolous in a great de-
gree, and by the declaration of the discovery of the box made by
the Earl of Morton, thc moll unprincipled man of a most un-
principled age, it was thought that the authority of the letters
would receive a confirmation and fopport."

Our author likewise takes notice of the absurdity of not cdl-

ling in the evidence of iicllolas Hubert, and adheres to the opi-
nion of his exculpating the (CQ en with his dying breath. Ie
obhcrvecs, that according to MVr. Goodull, the sonnets were writ-
ten oriiinall; in the Scottilh language 5 but he takes notice oi

the'opinion of Lord Hailes, that they are a version from the
French. " The fonncts, fays he, convey the idea that Mary was
influenced with the love of Bothwell to a degree of frantic and
paflionate ardour." This idea, which receives no aid from hibto-
rical memqrials, corresponds exacly with the practices of the.
conspirators. From internal evidence, it is obvious, that the son-
nets are so fabricated as to have been written by Mary in the in-
terval between the 24th of April 1567, when (he was forcibly
conveyed to Danbar by Bothwell, and the lsth day of May fol-
lowing, when fle married him. In this period, however, it is
certain, that flie mulf have been under the agitation of so many
passions and cares, that flhe could not have found leisure or
inclination for the arufements of poetry. By a comparison, too,
of the sonnets with the inflrtlctions of Mary to the 13ihop of
Dumblane, whom fie sent ambaflador to France to apologize for
her marriage with Bothwell, it appears that the author of the
former had minutely attended to the latter. Now, the inftruc-
tions to the Bilhop of Dunmblane were not drawn up till fomc
time after the I sth day of May, when the Queen was married
and the sonnets, if real, must have been composed before the marri-
age. The forger of the sonnets having afiflted his invention by
a perusal of the inftrudtions, opened thus a source of detection
against himself and its power and meaniing are sufficiently expli-
cit. Buchanan obfeives, that the Ionnlets are not inelegant.
This commendation, feeble as it is, seems remarkable from a per-
son of his satirical disposition, and of his principles. But, as he
is more than fufpe&ed of a concern in the forgeries against the
Queen, this negative praise may be accounted for. HIe did not
wish to discredit altogether, even in point of literary ability, a
fabrication in which his pen had been too busy ; and indeed the
sonnets, though they appear to have been made and framed for
an end, are by no means so defpiciable as they arc often rcprefent-
ed to be. The author, whoevcr lhe was, had the disadvantage
of being in fetters, and under conlraint ; anti it is probable, that
he hlad to fruggle with the enbl;rr;iffliecnt s of impofling in a so-
reign tongue. But whatevcr may be the merit of the sonnets as
a compolition, they cannot wvithout gr;at violence be imputed to
the pencil of Mary. Brantome and Rontfard, who were well
acquainted with iher poetical wilinls, had no difliculty in pro-
noutlcing that they coulld lnt pollibly l]".'c proceeded from her.
Upon this topic, too, there is a; lland:rd from whlich a judgment
,nay be sorned, 'Ihe lic 'cgy writlcl y M;ry ulpon the denath

of Francis II. has come down to us ; end it fcems fully fufficren;
to jullify the sentence of Eranto:ec and lRonfi.rd. 'lhere is a
fancy, a delicacy, an eieg:ncc, a ch;lr;alecr in it, which give it
the Zreatefl charh ; and the fonncts to Bothwell are in a itrain
and manner altogether opposite.

" There were two contradcs or obligations which were for-

ged. That supposed to be written by Mary has been critically
examined,, and very able judges have compared it with the hand-
writing of the Queen and found-it tobear no accurate rcfemb-
lancce neither was her labfcription done in the usual manner.
It was a promise of marriage to Bothwell. The other iLppofed
to be written by Huntly, is also an engagement to marry Both-
well. In this obligation, she is made to press hcrfelf upon Both-
well, and to infifl humbly and reverently that he would infillt on
the divorce of his wife, the Lady Jane Gordon. This made-of
proceeding, mull have been unnatural in the Qucen, even if flte
had alcually been in love with B3othwell, and can only correspond
with that inordinate and extravagant vehemcncy of aficction im-
puted to her by the conspirators. It is observable, too, that the
conspirators thought not of calling the Earl of Huntl) before the
Commissioners to attefl the authenticity of this paper; and in
fad, as early as the I 2th day of September, when the trial of the
Queen was in agitation, this nobleman had put his name to a
public deed, whichafferted her innocence in the marriage with
Bothvell, and which affirmed the guilt of Murray and his con-
federates. He was also soon to join with the Earl of Argyle ing
a diret charge against the Earl of Murray and his faction, of a
concern in the murder of the King. The general argument a-
gainfi the authenticity of the letters holds equally against the for-
niets and contrats."

But however plain it may appear, or however evident it might

even then have been, that these writings w.ere all forged, the
conspirators behaved with the greatcll effrotery ; producing
them in the molt confident manner, as if they had been ntu:l
witnefles to the writing of them. Murray and his aflociatcs nh;d
formerly sworn in the inofil olemn manner, to ac with integrity
and uprightness; and they ali'rmcd before tile En lifh Conuni-
fioners, upon their honours and confcie.nccs, that the letters, son-
:nets, and contrals, were politivcly the h:ndl-w itinl of tlhe l2cln,
e:cepting the contract written by -iuntly, which, however, thcy
underflood, and perfcEtly knew to be iiublc:ilcdl by her. Thei'
o.ths, vwhich no manl could lawfully l.av; ttl., un!efs lie h;a.

been an eye-witness to the writing of the papers, were fufliined
as good and authentic proofs by the English Commiflion'ers.

In the mean time, Q een Elizabeth, with the perfidy and dif-

simulation which so firongly marks her characler, pretended to
the English nobility that file was thoroughly convinced of Mary's
guilt, while to Murray, Morton, and the reft of the afrociates,
file declared that they had produced nothing of any moment a-
gainft her. Dr. Stuart indeed brings forth the moil authentic proofs,
that, so far from having any intention to allow this unfortunate
Princess to exculpate herself, or ivifling to save her honour, fle,
from the beginning, intended never to allow her to depart out
of England. From what has been already delivered, it must ap-
pear evident, that the pretended proofs of Mary's guilt never ap-
pcared satisfactory to a single person, even at the time they were
produced 3 nor could any thing betides the induftripus manner in
which, the reports were propagated, and handed down from fa-
ther to son, without any proof at all, have prevented the memory of
these vile associates from being long ago fligmatizcd in the man-
ner in which it now so juflty is.

The silence of the two learned hiltorians, Mr. Hume and Dr.

Robertson, is a most convincing proof that they had nothing to
reply to the arguments used by Mlr. Tytler. The former, indeed,
did make a kind of reply, which, to gratify the rcader's curiosity
we shall here transcribe. " There is a person who has writ an
Inyquiy, HI/iorical and Critical, into the Evidence againj/ Mary
-,ueen of Scots; and has attempted to refute the foregoing narra-
tive. He quotes a single palage of the narrative, in which Ma-
ry is said limply to refuse answering ; and then a single pafTage
from Goodall, in which Ihe boass that the will answer ; and he
very civilly, and almost directly, calls the author a liar, on ac-
count of this pretended contradi&ion. That whole inquiry, from
beginning to end, is compafed of such scandalous artifices ; and
from this instance the reader may judge of the candour, fair deal-
ing, veracity, and good manners of the inquirer. There are, in-
deed, three events in our hillory, wliicli may be regarded as
touchftongs of party-men. Au English Whig, wlu) afierts the re-
ality of the Popish plot ; an Irilh Catholic, who denies the mar-
sacre in I461, and a Scots Jacobite, who maintains the innocence
of Qucen iMary, mull be confidered as men beyond the reach of
argument and realon, and mull be left to their prejudices."

On this Billinglate we may remark, tlhai there are other two
fces of men, who are clquilly impregnabll to rcafon; viz. the

3D

enthufaillic four faced bigot, who condemns to cteral punilllment
all who differ from hima and the conceitcd'philol;phical dcilt.who be-
licvcs in a God that has neither courrge norgoodr ma;::r.r."

: . Mr. Tyt-

ler,lhowever, lhas given a more serious :anf\vcr, and lhews tlhat he has
not quoted him at all unfairly, as rMIr. HIumc accuses him of har-
ing done. Onthe contrary, " he has quoted almoil the xwhole of
that lliRorian's narrative concerning . een l\Iary's refusal to an-
fver, and likcwife her requeit to be present at the tii.ll of her
cause, and that, too, in the hiilorian's.own woids. In his quota-
tion he particularly mentions the grounds upon which that author
fays Qecen Mary's Coinmrniloncrs founded their refutfll to an-
f.vcr.~

In :upport of this afertion, Mr. Tytler quotes the whole paC-

fi:e \witl which MIr. Hlume finds fault; and, having vindicated
himself from the charges brouglht againl l:imr, proceeds next to
con.ider ?ilr. Flume's proposition, from vwhich he has inf£rred,
that Q(een rIary .bfol3tey rcfufcd to answer lIMurray's accuf.:-
tion, a:d recoiled from the inquiry. -le allows that l\Iary at
first. 'cnble of CQeen Elizabet'th's s partiality, did refuse to
anifwer ; but .f:Cer:.wards the thought better upon it, and oflred
not only to anlfwer the charge ccrn:ditonally, but afli.-llly gave in
her anfwver. He coamtets. with great strength of aigum ent, lMr,
I-Humc's polltion:, t:at ilary could not be admitted into ]li~a-
bethl's predence, and brings his realoning to the followving cotn-
cl.'io'.: ' Let me i:ppofe, fays he, that Qccn lMary's rcqucet,
to he admitted to Queen Elizabeth's prerence, had appeared ni-
realonacle or improper, andi was therefore reIfucd ; vas that a
good rer-aun for refufin, her requetl to fee th'e letters ? If, after
i;lpecilgtne ev-ence aamt he, een ary had remained
:-:nrt, and made no an;wer, the confequencc is plain, the letteis
:..u:i h:ave been held as genuine, and she flood convitcd to Ili-
-:..b.-:n, and the whole world, by her own letters. On th'e other
1.end, I aprehend, that un'es a good reason can hle fiown for rcfu-
;'!:,, Z.I:r- s requel! to fce the letters, tliat refurl is equally decilive
,i_ th .-!, cGion in her favo r. I cral upon \Ir. I..une, tlhcrcore,
a;d dciC, hlim, wrih all hi; ingel;.itiy, to give i:c a filid rea",un for
Elizabt:h's l' et'fiing to

i ali.).v Ia:'y to 1eI tlhc'e letters. I will

vcini.;a to fay t!hat on:; I one eC:it,fn, cuOlitlenlt wVith conmi;ln.
sense, c:'an' be ;*ve.n. v;hich is, t!is, T1;iat Qd.tx;cn Lizt, lctl, and
th- !:e::,:;-:i;. Cc( il frt, or -:fi-.c'cl a lf',:;iey; and, by the

* ; . ii:-c', ' .i:ur.:i . .v; :'., v;.c.'; t,cr .v'c >:l :' c dieli;dl 'u
t:" Dei:'.

many fllifts which, thliough w]ole courfc of the confercnces were
dcvifed to elude a icrutiny and infpeflion of thcfe letters, it is
evident tlhey were resolvcd to guard againf' a detcation; and to
clofc the fccne, and prevent 'Qccn Mary from ever getting a
.'ght.of this forged evidcnce, they took a vcry effcltual way, by
difinifling Murray and them together from the conferences. To
this let me join the proof which hlas lately been brought by
Goodall against the letters, wlhicli 1 am warranted to fay, in the
opinion of many of the first critics of the age, does clearly demon-
firate the forgery."

Having now given a full accour. of the arguments on both

idles, used by the most celebrated writers upon this controversy,
wve hlall close our subjed with a few remarks from Mr. Whitaker
on the condut of Queen Elizabeth. That gentleman has taken
the part of Mary with great warmth, and condemned the con-
duEl of Elizabeth in the strongest teins poflible; nay, he even de-
clares himself aihamed of her as an Englifl Queen. It is obferv-
able, that though unchafli'y was one of the principal charges
brought against Mary by her adversaries, yet it is a charge which
retorts tpon Elizabeth with aggravated force. MIlary might be
unichafle ; but Elizabeth's unchastity was proclaimed to all the
world ; as appears by the following account of an aa of parlia-
ment, vhich Mr. Whitaker mentions as a difg'ace to the Englilli
nation. '" At the treaty, fays he, which was held in I57o be-
tv;een Mary and Elizabeth, it was specified, by the latter, that
the former flould succeed to the throne ' in cafe of Elizabeth's
demilf without alty if'ue.' IV-ary altered the limitation thus,

without l/aful issue ;' and Elizabeth would agree only to have
it altered tlus, ' without issue by a lauftl hjbaind.' This re-
markable fadt, which was prior to the law, llhews us, in union
with it, thi firmness and audacity with which Elizabeth pursued
her purpoles upolrthc fucceffidn. Slie tried at firlt to make way
for any infuc. She then adhcred rcfolutcly to any by a lawful
iufbandii bccaufe: lhe could cure the bastardy by a marriage.

ind (lie at lalt lipoke out with more than her original explicitness;

spo!ke out even to her parliamlent; .idd had her natural illue, by
namne, rendered cap:ble of iiccecdingl her. Indced, the cxiftence
of liclh a law:v as this, upon our ilatute-book, is a full proof of the
cffrontcry of l.lizabeth in vice, and of tlhe obeclquioullhef of the
nalion in imicannllis; and the law itself llands as a 11rongi note ou
in:;famy upono bIothl t prlci:tl."

D ij

Mr. Whitaker is of opinion, that the melancholy with which

Elizabeth was seized at the close of her life proceeded not, as
has been commonly supposed, from her love to the Earl of Effex,
whom (he had caused to be beheaded; but from a remorse of con-
icience on account of her cruel treatment of Mary. Mr. Tytle.
is of the fame opinion. " We cannot help, fays he, subscribing
to the opinion of Mr. XWhitaker in this matter, ' That Eliza-
beth had a more solid ground for melancholy and remorse arising
from the fling of her own conscience on the reflecion of her in-
human treatment of Queen Mary.' To imagine that the mafcu-
line spirit of Elizabeth would evaporate in a love-sick fit of whin-
ing for an insolent fubjca, who had braved her authority, and at-
tempted an infurre&ion in her very capital, is neither credible, nor
in the leaf confillent with the characer and fortitude of the haugh-
ty, unfeeling Elizabeth. I er whole condua with regard to the
Queen of Scots was such as indeed to afford jull cause for the
nmof bitter remorse in the lait fiage of her life, on the dreadful
refleAion of the long, deliberate, premeditated schemes, framed
and prosecuted by her for the deftruAion of that princefs.-Now in
the decline of life, in her seventieth year, her popularity beginning
to fade, and the approach of bodily infirmities, all must have a-
wakened her to retletion, and to the bitter sensation of her
crimes, and of her inhuman treatment of the Queen of Scots.
Hoow forcibly mull the awful dying words of that princess, (in a
letter sent to Elizabeth after -.ary's condemnation) have vibrat-
ed in her ear! ' Think me not presumptuous, that now, bid-
ding fatewell to this world, and preparing for a better, I put you
in mind, that you mutl also die, and mull answer to the Tribu-
nal of the molt High for your conducS.' Happy for Elizabeth,
it unfeigned contrition, and penitence in ler last moments, has
expiated her climes!"

T 1 E E N D.
crimes,~~~
