i
 i

---- -;--·i·

A·i;
SL

I
:-s

ji·

:-3-SIYEBF ·
--

r -·ac ·szrai;
,,

ii-ii:·

GT'oli:

;-_i-'-·
I sli

;;
;-:;~ss3-·ss`,ai·l_p

"t·
t st3B T

-.I

-9-
-·

wrl,,,· rr
R;·rr ·U '

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH A VIEW. OF THE
tprogew% of aocietp in QEurope,

FPOM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

BY

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSiTY OF EDINBURGH, AND

sIrSTOKIOGRAPUER TO AIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

*TENTH EDITION.
IN FO-UR VOLUMES.

VOL. I.
Embellished with four legant EngravingJ.

GLASGOW,
Jtintei be ant for ciEspman anlD Lang¢.

1809.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

PRESUME to lay before Your Majesty the Hiflory of a

Period, which, if the abilities of the Writer were equal to
the dignityof the Subjet, would not be unworthy the at-
tention of a Monarch, who is no less a Judge than a Patron
of Literary Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her prerogative to offer inftruc-

tion to KINGS, as well as to their people. What reflec-
tions the Reign of the Emperor CHARLES V. may suggest
to Your Majesty, it becomes not me to conjecture. But
your Subjecs cannot observe the various calamities, which
that Monarch's ambition to be diftinguilhed as a Conquer-
or, brought upon his dominibns, without recollecing the
fclic'ty of their own times, and looking up with gratitude to
thir Sovereign, who, during the fervour of youth. and a-
nlidt the career of vi&ory, possessed such felf-command,
and maturity of judgment, as to set bounds to his own tri-
umphs, and prefer tte blessings of peace to the splendour of
military glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate the wisdom of Your
lajefty's choice, but will enumerate the many virtues, which
render Your reign conspicuous for a sacred regard to all the
duties incumbent on the Sovereign of a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the influence of these Virtues;

and to live under the dominion of a Prince, who delights
more in promoting the Public Welfare, than in receiving
thejuil Praise of his Royal Beneficence. I am,

SIR,
YoUR MAJESTY'S

Mosl faithful Subjet,

And molt dutiful Servant,

WILLIAM ROBERTSON.
A

# THE PREFACE.

THI

P R E F.A C E.

No period in the history of one's own country can be con-
fidered as altogether uninteresting. Such tranfacions as
tend to iluiStrate the progrel of its contitution, laws, or
nanners, merit the umot& attention. Even remote and

<. _ee.
-=l tnts are oeje&s of a curiosity. which, being natu-

2.

. to the hunan mind, the gratifcation of it is' ttended
W hpahure.

Bat, with rdpe& to the hifory of foreign States, we

mnt set othr bounds to our desire of information. The
tnvcrfal progrA of science, during the two lat centuries,
the at of pinting, and other obvions cause, have. filled
Europe with such a multiplicity of hifories, and with such

eft co&ions of hiftorcal material, that the term of hu-

man life is too m{ort for the ftndy or even the perusal of
them. It is necessary, then, not only for those who are cal-
led to coot the affain of oia ns but for such as inquire
and reason concerning them, to remain latiified with a gene-
al knowledge of dillant events, and to confine their fludy of
history in detail chiefly to that' period, in which the several
-States of Europe having become intimately conneted, the
operations of one power are so felt by all, as to influence
their councils, and to regulate their incafures.

Some boundary, then, ought to be fixed in order to fepa.

rate there periods. An ara lhould be pointed out, prior
to which, each country, little conneced with those around
it, may trace its own history apart; after which, tranfa&ions
of every considerable nation in Europe become interesting
and inArtive to all. With this intention I undertook to

write the hifory of the Emperor CHARLES V. It was dur-
ing his administration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in which each took
a flation, wherein it has since remained with less variation,
than could have been expe&ed after the shocks occasioned
by so many internal revolutions, and so many foreign wars.
The great events which happened then have not hitherto
spent their force. The political principles and maxims, then
established still continue to -operate. The ideas concerning
the balance of power, then introduced or rendered general,
till influence the councils of nations.

The age of CHARLES V. may therefore be confidered as

the period at which the political state of Europe began to
alTume a new form. I have endeavoured to render my ac-
count of it, an introducion to the history of Europe fubfe-
quent to his reign. While his numerous Biographers de-
scribe his personal qualities and actions; while the historians
of different countries relate occurrences the consequences of
which were local or transient, it hath been my purpose to
record only those great tranfations in his reign, the effects
of which were universal, or continue to be permanent.

As my readers could derve little inftru&ion from such a

history of the reign of CHARLEs V. without some informa-
tion concerning the state of Europe previous to the fix.
teenth century, my desire of supplying this has produced a
preliminary volume, in which I have attempted to point
out and to explain the great causes and events, to whose o--
peration all the improvements in the political state of Eu-
rope, from the subversion of the Roman Empire to the be-
ginning of the sixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have
exhibited a view of the progress of society in Europe, not
only with refpeA to interior government, laws, and nmnners, .
but with refpe& to the command of the national force re-
quifite in foreign operations; and I have described the po.
litical constitution of the principal fates in Europe at the.
time when Charles V. began his reign.

A3

la thi part of my.work I have been led into several cri-

tical dai tions, which belong more properly to the pro.
ince of the lawyer or antiqar, than to that of the hifto-
rian. Thecf I have placed at the end of the first volume,
uder the title of Proofs and Illufrations Many of myp.
r.dca wi, probably, give little attenton to such research-
er To some they my, perhap, appear the mot curious
and intrctng- prt of the work I have carefuly pointed
out the focUm rm which I have derived iformation, and
be cited the writers on whose authority I rely with a
minute exaanefs, which might appear to border uroa often.
tation if it were pofibkto be vain of having read books,
many of which.othiagbut the duty of axamining with ac-
crcy whatcver I laid berethe Public, dd

W haee in-

deced me to open. As my inquiries condxed me often
into paths which were obfcue or little frequented, such con-
sant referenes to the authors who have been, my guides,
were not only nceffary for authenticating the fa&s which
are the foundations of my reasonings, but may be useful in
pointing out the way to such as ahall hereafter hold the fame
course, and in enabling themn to carry on their refearche-
with greater facility and fuccef.

Every intellgent reader will observe one omission in my

work, the reason of which it is neefFary to explain. 1 have
iven no account of the aooqueflf Mexico and Peru, or of
the eftabliihmet of the Spanii colmies in the continent
and ilands of America. The hiftry of thef events I ori-
gnally inteded to have related at considerable length.
But upon a nearer and more attentive consideration of this-
part of my plan, I fmaod that the ditcovery of the new
world; the late offociety among its ancient inhabitants;
their charaer, manners, and arts; the genis of the Euro.
pean fettleets in its variou princes, together with the
iaflocce of thee upon the systems of policy or commerce
io Emope, were subjes so splendid and important, tht.
a superficial viewof them could afford little fa~aio aa

on the other hand, to treat of them as extenively as they
merited, must produce an episode, disproportionate. to
the principal work. t have therefore reserved these for a
separate history; which, if the peifornance now offered to
the Public lhall receive its approbation, I purpose to n oder.
take.

Though, by omitting such considerable but detached ar-

tscles in the re;gn of Charles V. T have circumfcnrbed my
narration within more narrow limits, I am yet persuaded,
from this view of the intention and nature of the work
which I thought it necelfary to lay before my readers, that
the plan mut itill appear to them too extensive, and the
undertaking too arduous. 1 have on felt them to be so.
But my conviction of th utility of fmucAhiftory prompted
me to persevere. With what fuccefaj have executed it, t/h
Public must now judge. I wait, not without solicitude, for
it decii6on; to which I&al fhamit with a-refpetal-ce,

## SECT. I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws, and Manners.

A
VIE W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETT IN EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIREj

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECT. I.
I'. of tr Prearmf of Socey t E.urop, «t; A r,,pe to ;n-

trior Governmen, Lawv, and Manners.

Two great revolutions have happened in the political Rate,
and in the manners of the European nations. The firit
was occasioned by the progress of the Roman power; the
second by the subversion of it. When the spirit of conquest
led the armies of Rome beyond the Alps, they found all the
countries which they invaded, inhabited by people whom
they denominated barbarians, but who were nevertheless
brave and independent. Thef defended their ancient pof-
effions with-obftinat valour. It was by the superiority of
their discipline, rather than that of their courage, that the
Romans gained any advantage over them. A single battle
did not, as among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, decide
the fate of a slate. The vanquished people resumed their
arms with fresh spirit, and their undisciplined valour, animated
by the 'ove of liberty, supplied the want of condu& as well
as of union. During those long and fierce struggles for do-
jminon or independence, the countries of Europe were fuc-

ceffively laid waste, a great part of their inhabitants peried
in the field, many were carried into lavery, and a feeble rem-
nant, incapable of further resistance, submitted to the Ro-
bnan power.

The Romans having thtts desolated Europe, set themselves

to civilize it. The form of government which they efta-
blifhed in the conquered provinces, though severe, was regu-
lar, and preserved public tranquillity. As a consolation for
the loss of liberty, they comrnunicated their arts, sciences,
language, and manners, to their new fubjeca. Europe be-
gan to breathe, and to recover strength after the calamities
which it had undergonel agriculture Wm encouraged; po.
pulation increased; theruined. citiei were rebuilt- newtowns
were founded; an appearance of prosperity succeeded, and
repaired, in some degree, the havock of war.

This iate, hvwever, was far frout bii happy or taour-

able to the improvement of the huma miald. The tab-
quilhed nations were difanmed by their connuewn, and o.
verawed by soldier kept in pay to reirain them. They
were given up as a prey to rapacioo goveror, who plun.
dered them with iiunppity;. and wee driiaedof their wealth
by exorbitant taxes, levied wt o little attention to the situ-
ation of the provinces, that the iarpofko were often in-
creased in proportion to heir iabiity to fipport them.
They were deprived of their ioft terprizing cititms, who
rcforted to a distant capital in i t of ldpraef nt, or of
riches; and were accutomed in a1 tbeir ~t to look up
to a superior, and tamely to receive h olanads. Under
so many deprefling circumtaaca, it vu hardlypoffibl that
they could retai- vigour orgcoeofity of mid. The mar-
tial and independent spirit, which had distinguished their an.
celtors, became, in a great meaiure, extian among all the
people fubjeEed to the Roman yoke; they loft not only the
hlabit but even the capacity of deciding for tbemfelves, or of
aaing from the impulse of their own minds; and the domi-

niofs of the Romans, like that of all great empires, degraded
and debased the human species [A].

A society in such a Rate could not subsist long. There

were defees in the Roman government, even in its most per.
fee form, which threatened its dissolution. Time ripened
these original feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many
new disorders. A constitution, unsound, and worn out,
mufr have fallen into pieces of itself, without any external
shock. The violent irruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns,
and other barbarians, hastened this event, and precipitated
the downfal of the empire. New nations seemed to arise'
and to rui from unknown regions, in order to take ven-
geance on the Romans for the calamities which they had
in.ficted on mankind. These fierce tribes either inhabited
the various rjrovinces in Germany which had never been
subdued by the Romans, or were scattered over those valt
countries in the north of Europe, and north-west of Asia,
which are now occupied by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles,
the fubjets of the Ruffian empire, and the Tartars. Their
condition and tranfafions, previous to their invasion of the
empire, are but little known. AlmofR all our information
with rcfped to these is derived from the Romans; and as
they did not penetrate far into countries, which were at that
time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts of their ori-
ginal fate given by the Roman historians are extremely im-
perfet. The rude inhabitants themselves, destitute of fci-
ence as well as of records, and without leisure or curiosity
to inquire into remote events, retained, perhaps, some indif-
tina memory of recent occurrences, but beyond these, all
was buried in oblivion, or involved in darkness and in fable
[B].

The prodigious swarms which poured in upon the em.

pire from the beginning of the fourth century to the final
extinction of the Roman power, have given-rife to an opini-
on that the countries whence they issued were crowded with

[A] Note I. [B1 Note II.

inhabitants; and various theories have been formed to account
for such an extraordinary degree of population as hath pro-
duced these countries the appellation of The Storehouse of
Nations. But if we confider, that the countries possesed by
the people who invaded the empire were of valt extent;
thata great part of these was covered with woods and marshes;
that some of the most considerable of the barbarous nations
subsisted entirely by hunting or pasturage, in both which
itates of society large tra&s of land are required for main-
taining a few inhabitants; and that all of them were ftran.
gers to the arts and industry, without which population can-
not increase to any great degree, we must conclude, that
these countries could not be so populous in ancient times as
they are in the present, when-they fill continue to be less
peopled than any other part of Europe or of Asia.

But the fame circumitances that prevented the barbarous

nations from becoming populous, contributed'to inspire, or
to strengthen, the martial spirit by which they were diftin-
guifhed. Inured by the rigour of their climate, or the po-
verty of their foil, to hardships which rendered their bodies
firm and their minds vigorous; accustomed to a course of
life which was a continual preparation for ation; and diC-
daining every occupation but that of war or of hunting;
they undertook, and prosecuted their military. enterprizes
with an ardour and impetuosity of which men softened by
the refinements of more polilhed times can fcarcey form a-
ny idea [C].

Their firt inroads into the empire proceeded r4ther from

the love of plunder than from the desire of new settlements.
Roused to arms-by some enterprising or popular leader, they
tallied out of their forests; broke in upon the frontier pro-
vinces with irrefiftable violence; put all who opposed them
to the iword; carried off the most valuable effets of the in-
habitants; dragged along multitudes of captives in chains;
wafted all before them with fire or fwordi and: returned in

[C] Note III.

Utri ph to their wid ad faeffes Their f£ccefs, toge-
tdhe wi the acountsa ich the gave of the unknown
omwen"m c and luxuis that abounded in countrie bet.
-r cultivated, or blessed. ith a milder climate than their
own, xcied new advetu~, an4 exposed the frontier to
ae dcva iow.

When nothing as left to plunder in the adjacent provio-

4r, ravaged by frequent excurion they marched farther
.fom hoae and finding it 4iicmlt, or dangerous to return,
they ban-to fettle in tbe-countries which they had Cub-
ded.d The fuddn and fbort excutns. in quet of booty,
which hadlarmed and diquieted the empire, ceased; a more
dreadful c ty impeded. Great bodies of armed men,
with their wives and chldrn, and slaves and locks, issued
forth, like regular colaies, in quelt of new ettletnent*.
People who had no ities, and feidom any fixed habitation,
were so littletthed to their native foil, that -hey migrat-
ed witoot rdluance from one place to another. New ad.
entures folowed th The lands which they deserted
were occupied by more remote trbes of barbaria. These,
in their turn, puhd ifrward into more fertile countries, and,
like a torrent continually increasing, roled on, and swept e.
very thing before them. n left than two centuries fros
their firt eruption, barbarian of variou nata and liaeage
plundered ad took pdlio n of Thrace, Panonia Go4l,
Spain, Africa, and at lUt of Italy, and Rome ctfelf The - I
fabric of the Roman power, which it had been the work-Ql
ages to pefi&t was in that p

or t

pero etr fron
the foundation,

Many concurrig causes prepared the way for this grea

rc olton, and ensured fuccdf to the nations which invade
the cmpire. The R n oman com wealth had conquered th
wortd by the widom of it cvil maxims, and the iigourao
its m;itaryifcplin. Brt, under the emperors, the form
er we forgotten or defpied, and the latter were g~tdual
relaxed. The armies of the empire in the fourth and fiftl

centuries bore scarcely any resemblance to thof invincible le-
gions which had been vicorious wherever they matched.
Instead of freemen, who voluntarily took arms from the love
of glory, or of their country, provincials and barbarians were
bribed or forced into service. These were too feeble, or too
proud to submit to the fatigue of military duty. They e-
ven complained of the weight of their defensive armour as
intolerable, and laid it aside. Infantry, from which the ar-
mies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and liability, fell
into contempt; the effeminate and undisciplined soldiers of
later times could hardly be brought to venture into the field
but on horseback. These wretched troops, however, were
the only guardians of the empire. Thejealoufy of despotism
had deprived the people of the use of arms; and subje&s, op-
pressed and rendered incapable of defending themselves, had
neither spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders, from
whom they had little to fear, because their condition could
hardly be rendered more unhappy. At the fame time that
the martial spirit became extinc, the revenues of the empire
gradually diminilhed. The taste for the luxuries of the East
increased to such a pitch in the Imperial court, that great
tums were carried into India, from which, in the channel of
commerce, money never returns. By the large subsidies paid
to the barbarous nations, a ltin greater quantity of specie was
withdrawn from circulation. The frontier provinces, watled
by frequent incursions, became unable to pay the customary
tribute; and the wealth of the world, which had long center-
ed in the capital of the empire ceased to flow thither in the
fame abundance, or was diverted into other channels. The
limits of the empire continued to be as extensive as ever, while
the spirit requisite for its defence declined, and its f-efourcee
were exhausted. A vast body, languid and almost unanimat--
ed, became incapable of any effort to save itself, and was ea-
fily overpowered. The emperors, who had the absolute di-
refion of this disordered system, funk in the softness of Eaift
ern luxury, ihut up within the walls of a palace, ignorant of

Vol. I. B

war, unacquainted with affairs, and governed entirely by wos
men and eunuchs, or by miniftcrs equally effeminate, trem-
bled at the approach of danger, and, under circumitances
awhich called for the utmost vigour in council as well as in
ation, discovered all the impotent irresolution of fear and
of folly.

In every refpe& the condition of the barbarous nations

was the reverse of that of the Romans. Among the former,
the martial spirit was in full vigour; their leaders were har-
dy and enterprising; the arts which had enervated the Ro-
mans were unknown; and such was the nature of their mili-
tary institutions, that they brought forces into the field with-
out any trouble, and supported them at little expence. The
Tnercenary and effeminate troops fRationed on the frontier, a-
AIonifhed at their fierceness, either fled at their approach, or
were routed on the first onset. The feeble expedient to
which the emperors had recourse, of taking large bodies of
the barbarians into pay, and of employing them to repel new
invaders, instead of retarding, haRfened the deftruifion of the
empire. These mercenaries soon turned their anus against
their mailers, and with greater advantage than ever, for, by
serving in the Roman armies, they had acquired all the difei-
pline, or ikill in war, which the Romans still retained; and,
upon adding these to their native ferocity, they became al-
together irrefiftable.

But though from these, and many other causes, the pro-

grefs and conquests of the nations which over-ran the empire
became so extremely rapid, they were accompanied with
horrible devaalations, and an incredible deltruction of the
human species. Civilized nations, which take arms upon
cool reflection, from motives of policy or prudence, with a
view to guard against some dillant danger, or to prevent
some remote contingency, carry on their hostilities with so
little rancour or animosity, that war among them is disarmed
of half its terrors. Barbarians are firangers to such refine-
tacuait. They rush into war with impetuosity, and prosecute

it with violence. Their sole objet is to make their enemies
feel the weight of their vengeance; nor does their rage sub-
fide until it be satiated with inflicing on them every pofli-
bie calamity. It is with such a spirit that the savage tribes
in America carry on their petty wars. It was with the fame
spirit that the more powerful and no less fierce barbarians in
the north of Europe, and of Asia, fell upon the Roman em-
pire.

Wherever they marched, their rout was marked with

blood. They ravaged or deflroyed all around them. They.
made no dillin&iion between what was sacred and what was
profane. They refpeeted no age, or sex, or rank. What
escaped the fury of the firfl inundation, perished in those
which followed it. The molt fertile and populous provin-
ces were converted into deserts, in which were scattered the
ruins of v.llages and cities, that afforded Ihelter to a few mi-
ferable inhabitants whom chance had preserved, or the sword
of the enemy, wearied with deitroying, had spared. The
conquerors who firit fettled in the countries which they had
wafted, were expelled or exterminated by new invaders, who,
coming from regionsfarther removed from the civilized parts
of the world, were itill more fierce and rapacious. This
brought fresh calamities upon mankind, which did not cease
until the north, by pouring forth successive swarms, was
drained of people, and could no longer furnish instruments of
deftru&ion. Famine and pettilence, which always march in
the train of war, when it ravages with such inconsiderate cru-
elty, raged in every part of Europe, and completed its sus-
ferings. If a man were called to fix upon the period in the
history of the world, during which the condition of the hu-
man race was most calamitous and afflited, he would, with-
out hesitation, name that which elapsed from the death of
Theodosius the Great, to the establishment of the Lombards
in Italyt. The contemporary authors, who beheld that

t TheodofiCs died A. D. 39, the reign ofAlhoinus in Lonibar
dy began A.D. 571; bo that this period was 176 years.

B z

scene of desolation, labour and are at a loss for expressions to
describe the horror of it. Te& Scourge of God, the Destroy-
or of Nations, are the dreadful epithets by which they diftin-
guiih the moR noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on the world, to
the havock occalioned by earthquakes, conflagrations, or de-
hages, the most formidable and fatal calamities which the ima-
gination of man can conceive.

But no erprefiions can convey so perse& an idea of the

decfrative progress of the barbarians as that which must
:trike an attentive observer when he contemplates the total
change which he will discover in the Rate of Europe, after it
began to recover some degree of tranquillity, towards the
cdole of the filth century. The Saxons were by that time
mailers of the southern and more fertile provinces of Britain;
the Franks of Gaul; the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of
Spain; the Goths and Lombards of Ital7 and the adjacent
province. Very faint vefliges of the Roman policy, jurif-
prudence, arts, or literature remained. New forms of go-
vernment, new laws, new manners, new dresses, new languages,
and new names of men and countries, were every where in-
troduced. To make a great or sudden alteration with re-
fpea to any of theie, uncls where the ancient inhabitants of
a country have been almost totally exterminated, has proved
an undertaking beyond the power of the greatest conqueror*'
[D]. The great changewhich the settlement ofthebarba-
rous nations occasioned in the state of Europe, may therefore.
be confidered as a more decisive proof than even the tefimo-
ny of contemporary hiltorians, of the deftruiwe violence
with which these invaders carried on their conqeftsi andiof
the havock which they had made from one extremity of this
quarter of the globe to the other [E].

In the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this general

wreck of nations, we must fcarch for the feeds of order, and
endeavour to discover the firit rudiments of the policy and

[D] Note IV. [E] Note V.

laws now eltabliflied in Europe. To this source the hiftori-
ans of its different kingdoms have attempted, though with
less attention and industry than the importance of the enqui-
ry merits, to trace back the institutions and customs peculiar
to their countrymen. It is not my province to give a mi-
nute detail of the progress of government and manners in
each particular nation, whose tranfa&ions are the objec of
the following history. But, in order to exhibit a just view
of the fate of Europe at the opening of the sixteenth cen.
tury, it is necessary to look back, and to contemplate the
condition of the northern nations upon their first settlement
in those countries which they occupied. It is necessary to,
mark the great steps by which they advanced from barba-
rifm to refinement, and to point out those general principles
and events which, by their uniform as well as extensive ope-
ration, conducted all of them to that degree of improvement
in policy and in manners which they had attained at-the pe-
riod when Charles V. began his reign.

When nations subjec to despotic government make con-

quests, these serve only to extend the dominion and the power
of their master. Bu armies composed of freemen conquer
for themselves, not for their leaders. The people who over-
turned the Roman empire, and fettled in its various pro-
vinces, were of the latter class. Not only the different na-
tions that issued from the north of Europe, which has al-
ways been confidered as the Rate of liberty, but the Huns.
and Alans who inhabited part of those countries, which have
been marked out as the peculiar region of servitude*, enjoy.
ed freedom and independence in such a high degree as seems
to be scarcely compatible with a state of social union, or
with the subordination necefiary to maintain it. They fol-
lowed the chieftain who led them forth in quest of new set-
tlements, not by constraint but from choice; not as soldier.
whom he could order to march, but as volunteers who offer-

De 1'Esprit des Loix, liv. 7. ch. 3.

B3

ed to accompany him [F]. They confidered theitn questes
as a common property, in which all had a title to tiare, as
all bad contributed to acquire them [G]. In what manner
or by what principles, they divided among them the landss
which they seized we cannot now determine with any certain-
ty. There is no nation in Europe whose records reach back:
to this remote period; and there is little information to be'
got from the uninftrucive and meagre. chronicles, compiled.
by writers ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with
the proper objecs of history.

This new division of property, however, together with

the maxims end manners to which it gave rife, gradually in-
troduced a species of government formerly unknown. This
singular infitution is now distinguished by the name of the
Feudal Svtem: and though the barbarous nations which
framed it, fettled in their new territories at different times,
came from different countries, spoke various languages, and
were under the command of separate leaders, the feudal poli-
cv and laws were established, with little variation, in-every
kingdom of Europe. This amazing uniformity hath induc-
ed some authors* to believe that all there nations, notwith-
standing so many apparent circumstances of ditinftion, were
originally the fame people. But it may be ascribed, with.
greater probability, to the similar slate of society and of man-
ners to which they were accustomed in their native countries.
and to the fimflar situation in which they found themfelve
on takino poffeflion of their new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acquisitions to

maintain not only against such of the ancient inhabitants as
they had spared, but againR the more formidable inroads of
new invaders, felf-defence was their chief care, and seems to
have been the chief object of their sirs institutions and poli.
ey. Instead of those loose aflociations, which, though they

[F] Note VI. [G] Note VII.

' Procop. de bello Vandal. ap. Script. Byz. edit. Vcn. vol i
p. 345.

scarcely diminilhed their personal independence, had been
sufficient for their security while they remained in their ori-
ginal countries, they saw the necessity of uniting in more
close confederacy, and of relinquishing some of their private
rights in order to attain public safety. Every freeman, up-
on receiving a portion of the lands which were divided, bound
himself to appear in arms against the enemies of the commu-
nity. This military service was the condition upon which
he received and held his lands; and as they were exempted
from every other burden, that tenure, among a warlike people
was deemed both easy and honourable. The king or gene-
ral who led them to conquest, continuing till to be the bead
of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion allotted to
him. Having thus acquired the means of rewarding past
services, as well as of gaining new adherents, he parcelled
out his lands with this view, binding those on whom they were
bestowed to resort to his fiandard with a number of men in
proportion to the extent of the territory which they received,
and to bear arms in his defence. His chief officers imitated
the example of the sovereign, and, in distributing portions of
their lands among their dependents, annexed the fame condi-
tion to the grant. Thus a feudal kingdom resembled a mili-
tary establishment, rather than a civil institution. The vic-
torious army, cantoned out in the country which it had feiz-
ed, continued ranged under its proper officers, and fubordi-
nate to military-command. The names of a soldier and of
a freeman were synonymous-. Every proprietor of land,-girt
with a sword, was ready to march at the summons of his
superior, and to take the field against the common ene-
my.

But though the feudal policy seems to be so' dmirably

calculated for defence against the affanlts of any foreign
power, its provisions for the interior order and tranquillity of
society were extremely defe&ive. The principles of disorder
and corruption are discernible in that conflitution under its

t Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Mil:.

best and most perfect form. They soon unfolded themselves,
and, fprea.'ing with rapidity through every part of the fy-
ftem, produced the molt fatal effets. The bond of politi-
cal union was extremely feeble; the sources of anarchy were
innu ntrable. The monarchical and ariftocratical parts of the
conllitution, having no intermediate power to balance them,
were perpetually at variance, and juitling with each other.
The powerful vassals of the crown soon extorted a confirma-
tion for life of those grants of land, which being at firt pure-
ly gratuitous, had been bellowed only during pleasure.
Not satisfied with this, they prevailed to have them convert-
ed into hereditary possessions. One ftep more completed
their usurpations, and rendered them unalienable [H].
With an ambition no less enterprising, and mofe preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour, as well as
offices of power or trust. These personal marks of diftinc-
tion, which the public admiration bestows on illustrious me-
rit, or which the public confidence confers on extraordinary
abilties, were annexed to certain families, and transmitted
like fiefs, from father to son, by hereditary right. The
crown vafTals having thus fecared the poefelion of their lanid
and dignities, the nature of the feudal institutions, which
though founded on subordination verged to independence,
led them to new, and still more dangerous encroachments on
the prerogatives of the sovereign. They obtained the pow-
er of supreme jurifictiaon, both civil and criminal, within
their own territories; the right of coining money; together
with the privilege of carrying on war against their private
enemies, in their own name, and by their own authority.
The ideas of political fubjectionl were almost entirely loft,
and frequently scarce any appearance of feudal subordination
remained. Nobles who had acquired such enormous power,
scorned to confider themselves as fubjeas. They aspired
openly at being independent: the bonds which conneced
the principal members of the constitution with the crown,

[] Notc VIIL

were dissolved. A kingdom, considerable in name and in
extent, was broken into as many separate principalities as it
contained powerful barons. A thousand causes ofjealoufy
and discord subsisted among them, and gave rife to as many
wars. Every country in Europe, wafted or kept in conti-
nual alarm during these endless contests, was filled with castles
and places of strength ereCted for the security of the inhabi-
tants; not against foreign force, but against internal hofili.
ties. An universal anarchy, deftruetive, in a great measure,
of all the advantages which men expet to derive from focie-
ty, prevailed. The people, the moif numerous as well as
the most useful part of the community, were either reduced
to a ifate of actual servitude, or treated with the fame info-
lence and rigour as if they had been degraded into that
wretched condition [I]. The king stripped of almost eve-
ry prerogative, and without authority to enac or to execute
salutary laws, could neither proteC the innocent, nor punish
the guilty. The nobles, superior to all reitraint, harassed
each other with perpetual wars, oppressed their fellow sub-
jecs, and humbled or insulted their sovereign. To crown
all, time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable this perni-
cious system, which iolence had established.

Such was the state of Europe with refpec to the interior

administration of government from the seventh to the ele.
venth century. All the external operations of its various
flates, during this period, were, of course, extremely feeble.
A kingdom dismembered, and torn with dissension, without
any common interest to route, or any common head to con-
duct its force, was incapable of acting with vigour. AlmoR
all the wars in Europe, during the-ages which I have men-
tioned,'were trifling, indecisive, and productive of no confi-
derable event. They resembled the short incursions of pi-
rates or banditti, rather than the feady operations of a regu-
lar army. Every baron, at the head of his vassals, carried
on some petty enterprize, to which he was prompted by his

[13 Note IX.

own ambition or revenge. The Rate itself, destitute of uni-
on, either remained altogether inactive, or if it attempted to
make any effort, that served only to discover its impotence.
The superior genius of Charlemagne, it is true, united all
these di.jointed and discordant members, and forming them
again into one body, restored to government that degree of
acivity which distinguishes his reign, and renders the tranf-
acions of its objects not only of attention but of admiration
to more enlightened times. But this fate of union and vi-
gour, not being natural to the feudal government, was of
short duration. Immediately upon his deash, the spirit
which animated and fuflained the vail sysem which he had
efcablifnhd, being withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All the
calamities which flow from anarchy and discord, returning
with additional force, affliled the different kingdoms into
wh'ch his empire was split. From that time to the eleventh
century, a succession of unintereiting events; a series of wars,
the motives as well as the consequences of which were unim.
portant, fill and deform the annals of all the nations in Eu-
rope.

To these pernicious effecs of the feudal anarchy may be

added its fatal influence on the chara&er and improvement
of the human mind. If men do not enjoy the protecion of
regular government, together with the expectation of per.
fonal security, which naturally flows from it, they never at-
tempt to make progress in science, nor aim at attaining re-,
finrment in taRe or in manners. That period of turbulence,
opprefion, and rapine, which I have described, was ill suit.
ed to favour improvement in any of these. In less than a
century after the barbarous nations fettled in their new con-
quels, almost all the efects of the knowledge and civility,
which the Romans had spread through Europe, disappeared.
Not only the arts of elegance, which minifler to luxury, and
are supported by it, but many of the useful arts, without
which life can scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were ne.
gleted or lod. Literature, science, tallt, were words little

in use during the ages which we are contemplating; or, if
they occur at any time, eminence in them is ascribed to per-
sons and produdions so contemptible, that it appears their
true import was little understood. Persons of the highest
rank, and in the most eminent stations, could not read or
write. Many of the clergy did not understand the breviary
which they were obliged daily to recite; some of them could
scarcely read it [K]. The memory of past tranfadions
was, in a great degree, loft, or preserved in annals filled with
trifling events, or legendary tales. Even the codes of laws,
ublifhed by the several nations which eflablifhed themselves
in the different countries of Europe, fell into disuse, while,
in their place, cufloms, vague and capricious, were fubftitut-
ed. The human mind, negleced, uncultivated, and depref-
ed, cortinued in the most profound ignorance. Europe,
uring four centuries, produced few authors who merit to
e read, either on account of the elegance of their compofi-
ion, or the jullnefs and novelty of their sentiments. There
re few inventions, useful or ornamental to society, of which
hat long period can boast.

Even the Chriftiani*religion, though its precepts are deli-
ered, and its institutions are fixed in scripture, with a preci-
on which should have exempted them from being mifinter-
reted or corrupted, degenerated, during thpfe ages of dark-
ess, into an illiberal superstition. The barbarous nations,
hen converted to Christianity, changed the objec, not the
pirit, of their religious worihip. They endeavoured to
onciliate the favour of the true God by means not unlike
o those which they had employed in order to appease their
afe deities. Intlead of aspiring to fanfity and virtue,
hich alone can render men acceptable to the great Author
f order and of excellence, they hnagined that they satisfied
very obligation of duty by a scrupulous observance of ex-
ernal ceremonies [L]. Religion, according to their con-
eption of it, comprehended nothing else; and the rites by

[K] Note X. [L] Note XL

which they p uaddd thmfelves that they 1hould gain the
favour of heaven, were of such a nature as might have beel
expeed from the rnde ideas of the ages which devised and
introduced them. They were either so unmeaning as to be
altogether unworthy of the Being to whose honour they
were consecrated; or so absurd as to be a disgrace to reason
and humanity [M]. Charlemagne in France, and Alfred
the Great in England, endeavoured to dispel this darknefa,
-nd gave their fubjeds a short glimpse of light and know-
ledge. But the ignorance of the age was too powerful for
their efforts and institutions. The darkness returned, and
fettled over Europe, more thick and heavy than before.

As the inhabitants of Europe, during there centuries,

were strangers to the arts which embelliih a polished age,
they were destitute of the virtues which abound among peo-
ple who continue in a simple state. Force of mind,- a
sense of personal dignity, gallantry in enterprize, invincible
perseverance in execution, contempt of danger and death,
are the charaaeriftic virtues of uncivilized nations. But
these are all the offspring of equality and independence,
both which the feudal institutions had destroyed. The fpi.
rit of domination corrupted the nobles; the yoke of ser-
vitude depressed the people; the generous sentiments in.
spired by a sense of equality were extinguished, and hardly
any thing remained to be a check on ferocity and violence.
Human society is in its most corrupted Rate, at that perod
when men have loft their original independence and iimpli.
city of manners, but have not attained that degree -of re;
finement which introduces a sense of decorum and of pro-
priety in conduct, as a reRfraint on those pafions which lead
to heinous crimes. Accordingly, a greater number of those
atrocious ations, which fill the mind of man with aftoni(hb
ment and horror, occur in the history of the centuries under
review, than in that of any period of the fame extent in the
annals of Europe. If we open the history of Gregory of

[M] Note XlI.

Tours, or of any contemporary author, we meet with a series
of deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so wild and enor-
mous as almost to exceed belief.

But, according to the observation of an elegant and pro.
fund historian*, there is an ultimate point of depression, as
well as of exaltation, from which human affairs naturally re-
turn in a contrary progress, and beyond which they never
pass either in their advancement or decline. When defe&q,
either in the form or in the adminiltration of government,
ccafion such disorders in society as are exceflive and into-
erable, it becomes the common interest to discover and to
apply such remedies as will most effclually remove them.
Slight inconveniencies may be long overlooked or endured;
but when abuses grow to a certain pitch, the society must
go to ruin, or must attempt to reform them. The disorders
in the feudal system, together with the corruption of tale
nd manners consequent upon these, which had gone on in-
reafing during a long course of years, seemed to have attain.
d their utmost point of excess towards the close of the e
venth century. From that aera, we may date the return
f government and manners in a contrary dire&ion, and'can
rce a fucc'eflion of causes and events which contributed,
ome with a nearer and more conspicuous, others with a
more remote and less perceptible influence, to jbolifh con-
fusion and barbarism, and to introduce order, regularity, and
refinement.

In pointing out and explaining these causes and events,

it is not necessary to observe the order of time with a chro-
nological accuracy; it is of more importance to keep in
view their mutual conne&ion and dependence, and to flhew
how the operation of one event, or one cause, prepard the
way for another, and augmented its influence. We have
hitherto been contemplating the progress of that darkness,
which pread over Europe, from its first approach, to the
eriod ofgreateft obscuration; a more pleasant exercise be-

* Hume's Hitory of.England, vol. ii. p. 441.
Vol. I. C

gins here; to observe the first dawnings of returning light,
to mark the various acceflions by which it gradually increaf.
ed and advanced towards the full splendor of day.

I The Crusades, or'expeditions in order to rescue the

Holy Land out of the hands of infidels, seem to be the first
event that roused Europe from the lethargy in which it had
been long funk, and that tended to introduce any confidera.-
bke change in government or in manners. It is natural to
the human mind to view those places which have been di.
ftinguilhed by being the residence of any illustrious person.
age, or the scene of any great tranfation, with some degree
of delight and veneration. To this principle muit be a.
crinbed the iuperQtitious devotion with which Christians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were accustomed to visit
that country which the Almighty had felelted as the inheri.
tance of his favourite people, and in which the Son of God
had accomplifed the redemption of mankind. As this di.
tant pilgrimage could not be performed without confidera
ble expence, fatigue and danger, it appeared the more meri-
torious, and came to be confidered as an expiation for al-
molt every crime. An opinion which spread with rapidity
over Europe about the dose of the tenth and beginning of
the eleventh century, and which gained universal cfredi
wonderfully augmented the number of credulous pilgrini
and increased the ardour with which they undertook thi

felefs voyage. The thousand years, mentioned by St
John*, were fnppofed to be accomplilhed, and the end o
the world to be at hand. A general consternation seize
mankind; many relinquilhedtheir poffefiions; and abandos
ing their friends and families, hurried with precipitation t
the Holy Land, where they imagined that Christ woul
quickly appear to judge the worlds.

· Revel . 1, 3, 4.
1 Chronic. Will. Godclli ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftonrenu
Franc, to. x. p. . Vita Abbois, ibid. p. 33 . Chronicl

While Palestine continued subje&t to the Caliphs, they
ad encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Jerusalem; and
nfidered this as a beneficial species of commerce, which
rought into their dominions gold and silver, and carried
othing out of them but relics and consecrated trinkets.
ut the Turks having conquered Syria about the middle of
he eleventh century, pilgrims were exposed to outrages of
very kind from these fierce barbarians*. This change hap-
ening precisely at the jun&ure when the panic terror,
hich I have mentioned, rendered pilgrimages most frequent,
led Europe with alarm and indignation. Every person
ho returned from Palestine related the dangers which he
ad encountered, in visiting the holy city, and described
ith exaggeration the cruelty and vexations of the Turks.
When the minds of men were thus prepared, the zeal of
fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of leading all the
rces of Christendom aga;nft the infidels, and of driving
em out of the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to
ve a beginning to that wild enterprize. Peter the her-
it, for that was the name of this martial apostle, ran from
ovince to province with a crucifix in his hand, exciting
inces and people to this Holy War, and wherever he
me kindled the fame enthusiastic ardour for it with which
himself was animated. The council of Placentia, where
pwards of thirty thousand persons were assembled, pro-
ouncd the scheme to have been suggested by the immediate
fpiration of heaven. In the council of Clermont, till
ore numerous, as loon as the measure was proposed, all
ed cut with one voice, " It is the will of God." Per-
s of all ranks catched the contagion; not only the gallant
bles of that age, with their martial followers, wh6m we
aay suppose apt to be allured by the boldness of a romau-

antaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Scrip. medi evi, vol i. p. 9oq0
nnalifia Saxo, ibid. 576.
' Jo. Dan. Schoepflini de facris Gallorum in orientem expediti-
ibus p. 4. Argent. 7z6, 4to.

C

tic entrprize, hut men in the more humble and pacific fa.
tions of life; ecdefiaftics of every order, and even women
and children, engaged with emulation in an undertaking,
which was deemed sacred and meritorious. If we may be.
lieve the concurring testimony of contemporary authors, fix
millions of peifons assumed the cross*, which was the badge
that distinguished such as devoted themfeves to this holy
warfare. All Europe, fays the Princess Anna Comnena,
torn up from the foundation, seemed ready to precipitate it.
seif in one united body upon Ala t-. Nor did the fumes of
this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once; the frenzy was as
lasting as it was extravagant. During two centuries, Eu.
rope seems to have had no objeft but to recover, or keep
potcffion of, the Holy Land; and through that period vas
armies continued to march thither rN].

The first efforts of valour, animated by enthusiasm, were

irrefiflable; part of the lesser Asia, all Syria and Palestine,
were wreted from the infidels; the banner of the cross was
difplatyd on Mount Sion; Coattantinople, the capital of the
Christian empire in the East, was afterwards seized by a bo-
dy of those adventurers, who had taken arms against the
Mahometans, and an earl of Slanders, and his descendant,
kept poffefiion of the imperial throne during halfa century.
But though the first impression of the Crusaders was so uni
expeced that'they made their conquests with great ease,
they found infinite difficulty in preserving them. Establish
ments so distant from Europe, surrounded by warlike nations
animated with fanatical zeal scarcely inferior to that of the
Crusaders themfclves, were perpetually in danger of being
overturned. Before the expiration of the thirteenth cen-
tury, [1291,] the Christians were driven out of all their
Asiatic poffefiions, in acquiring of which incredible numbers

' Fukherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gefa Dei per Franco,
vol. i. 387. edit. Han. i61I.

+ A1eias, ib. x. p. By. icript o. XL .

i p, 11.
rN ' Note XIII.

V

f men had perished, and immense fums of money had been
aled. The only common enterprize in which the Euro-
ean nations ever engaged, and which they all undertook
ith equal ardour, remains a singular monument of human
fly.
But from there expeditions, extravagant as they were,
eneficial consequences followed, which had neither been
refeen nor expeaed. 1 n their progress towards the Holy.
and, the followers of the cross marched through countries
etter cultivated, .nd more civilized than their own. Their
rfl rendezvous was commonly in Italy, in which Venice,
enoa, Pisa, and other cities, had begun to apply themselves
commerce, and had made considerable advances towards
ealth as well as refinement. They. embarked there, and.
nding in Dalmatia, pursued their route by land to Con-
antinople. T'hough the military spirit had been long ex-
na in the eastern Empire, and a despotism of the worst
ecies had annihilated almost every public virtue, yet Con-
ntinople, having never felt the deftru&ive rage of the
rbarous nations, was the greatest, "s well as the molt beau-
ful city in Europe, and the only one in which there re-
aincd any image of tlde ancient elegance in manners and arts.
he naval power of theeaifern Empire wasconfiderable. Ma-
fadures of the most curious fabric was carried on in its
ominions. Constantinople was the chief mart. in Europe,
r the commodities of the East Indies. Although the
aracens and Turks had torn from the Empire many of its
chef provinces, and had reduced it within very narrow
ounds yet great wealth flowed into the capital from these.
lrious sources, which not only cheriihed such a taste for
agnificence, but kept alive such a relih for the sciences; as.
pears considerable, when compared with what was known
other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the Europeans,.
ho had assumed the cross, found the remains of the know.
dge and arts which the example and encouragement of the
aliphs had dilffufed through their empire. Although the

C 3

attention of the hiftonans of the Crusades was fixed on o.
ther obje&s than the state of society and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although most of them had
neither talte nor discernment enough to defenbe there, they
rdatc. however, such signal a&s of humanity and generosity
in the conduc of Saladin, as well as some other leaders of
the Mahometans, as give us a very high idea of their man.
ners. It was not possible for the Crusaders to travel
through so many countries, and to behold the various cuf.
tots and inflitutions, without acquiring information and
improvement. Their views enlarged; their prejudices wore
off; new ideas crowded into their minds; and they muRf
have been sensible, on many occasions, of the rusticity of
their own manners, when compared with those of a more
pol'ihed people. These impreflions were not so flight as
to be effaced lpon their return to their native countrie.
A close intereourfe fubfitted between the east and weft dur-
,ig two centuries; new armies were continually marching
from Europe to A ia, while former adventurers returned
home and imported many of the customs to which they had
been familiarized by a long residence abroad. According.
.ly, we discover, loon after the commencement of the Cru-
fades, greater fplendoar in the courts of princes, greater
pomp in public ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleafurm
and amuf~ncnts, together with a more romantic spirit ol
cnterprife spreading gradually over Europe; and to
there wild expeditions, the effect of superstition or folly, w
owe the first gleams of light which tended to dispel barbar
ism and ignorance.

But these beneficial confequencs of the Crusades tool

place slowly; their influence upon the state of property, an
consequently of power, in the different kingdoms of Europe
was more 'mediate as well as discernible. The nobles wb
alumed the cross, and bound themielves to march to the He
y1 Land, soon perceived that great fums were necessary tc
wards defraying the expences of such a distant expeditio

and enabling them to appear with suitable dignity at the head
of their valfals. But the genius of the feudal system was a-
verse to the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and fnbjeas
in that age were unaccustomed to pay them. No expedient
remained for levying the fums requiflte, but the sale of their
poffeflions. As men were inflamed with romantic expeta-
tions of the splendid conquests which they hoped to make i.
Asia, and pofeffed with such zeal for recovering the Holy
Land as swallowed up every other pafllon, they relinquilhed
heir ancient inheritances without any relucance, and for
prices far below their value, that they might sally forth as
adventurers in quest of new settlements in unknown coun-
tries. The monarchs of the great kingdoms in the weft*
none of whom had engaged in the sirs Crusade, eagerly feiz-
ed this opportunity of annexing considerable territories to
heir crowns at small expencet. Besides this, several great
barons, who perished in the Holy War, having left no heirs,
their fiefs reverted of course to their refpe&ive sovereigns;
nd by these acceflions of propertyl as well as power taken
rom the one scale and thrown into the other, the regal au-
hority .ofe in proportion as that of the aristocracy declined.
he abfcnce, too, of many potent vaftals, accufomed to con.
roul and give law to their sovereigns, afforded them an op-
ortunity of extending their prerogative, and of acquiring
adegree of weight in the constitution which they did not
formerly possess. To these circumftanoes, we may add, that
as all who aflumed the cross were taken under the immediate
prote&ion of the church, and its heaviest anathemas were
denounced against such as should disquiet or annoy those
who had devoted themselves to this service; the private quar.
rels and hostilities which banilhed tranquillity from a feudal
kingdom, were suspended or extinguished; a more general
and steady administration of justice began to be introduced,
and some advances were made towards the eftablilhment of
t Willelm. Malmibur. Guibert. Abbau ap. Bongarf. vol. L 481.

attention of the hlforians of the Crusades was fixed on o-
ther objeas than the state of society and manners among
the nations which they invaded, although most of them had
neither tarle nor discernment enough to defcnbe these, they
relate. however, such signal aAs of humanity and generosity
in the conduct of Saladin, as well as some other leaders of
the !Mahometans, as give us a very high idea of their man-
ners. It was not poflible for the Crusaders to travel
through so many countries, and to behold the various cuf-
toms and inflitutions, without acquiring information and
improvement. Their views enlarged; their prejudices wore
of; new ideas crowded into their minds; and they mulf
have been sensible, on many occasions, of the rusticity of
their own manners, when compared with those of a more
poliihed people. These impressions were not so flight as
to be effaced upon their return to their native countries.
A dose intercourse fubfilled between the east and weft dur-
.ing two centuries; new armies were continually marching
from Europe to Asia, while former adventurers returned
home and imported many of the customs to which they had
been familiarized by a long residence abroad. According.
ly, we discover, soon after the commencement of the Cru-
fades, greater splendour in the courts of princes, greater
pomp in public ceremonies, a more refined taste in pleasures
and amufcmcnts, together with a more romantic spirit of
cnterprife spreading gradually over Europe; and to
these wild expeditions, the effect of superstition or folly, we
owe the sirs gleams of light which tended to dispel barbar-
ism and ignorance.

But these beneficial consequences of the Crusades took

place slowly; their influence upon the state of property, and
confequaetly of power, in the different kingdoms of Europe,
was more mnmmediate as wellas discernible. The nobles who
a.Tumed the cross, and bound themselves to march to the Ho-
ly Land, soon perceived that great fums were necessary to-
wards defraying the expences of such a distant expedition,

and enabling them to appear with fuitablc dignity at the head
of their vaffalg. But the genius of the feudal system was a-
verse to the imposition of extraordinary taxes; and fuibje&s
in that age were unaccustomed to pay them. No expedient
remained for levying the fums requisite, but the sale of their
possessions. As men were inflamed with romantic expecia-
tions of the splendid conquests which they hoped to make in
Asia, and poffefled with such zeal for recovering the Holy
Land as swallowed up every other passion, they relinquhlied
their ancient inheritances without any reluctance, and for
prices far below their value, that they might sally forth as
adventurers in quell of new settlements in unknown coun-
tries. The monarchs of the great kingdoms in the weftl
none of whom had engaged in the first Crusade, eagerly feiz.
ed this opportunity of annexing considerable territories to
their crowns at small expencet. Besides this, several great
barons, who perished in the Holy War, having left no heirs,
their fiefs reverted of course to their refpetive sovereigns;
and by these accessions of property as well as power taken
from the one scale and thrown into the other, the regal au-
thority rose in proportionas that of the arifocracy declined.
The absence, too, of many potent vassals, accustomed to con.
troul and give law to their sovereigns, afforded them an opt
portunity of extending their prerogative, and of acquiring
a degree of weight in the constitution which they did not
formerly possess. To these circumRfances, we may add, that
as all who assumed the cross were taken under the immediate
protecion of the church, and its heaviest anathemas were
denounced against such as should disquiet or annoy those
who had devoted themselves to this service; the private quar.
rels and hostilities which banilhed tranquillity from a feudal
kingdom, were suspended or extinguiihed; a more general
and steady administration of justice began to be introduced,
and fome-advances were made towards the establishment of
t Wlllelm.Malmibur. Guibert. Abbas ap. :Bongarf. vol i. 481.

regular government in the several kingdoms of Euope 'O0;

The commercial effeds of the Crusades were not less con.

fiderable than those which I have already mentioned. The
first armies under the standard of the cross, which Peter the
hermit and Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Constantinople, suffered so much by the length
of the march. as well as by the fierceness of the barbarous
people who inhabited those countries, that it deterred others
from taking the fame route; and rather than encounter so
many dangers they chofe-to go by sea. Venice, Genoa and
Pisa furnished the tranfportson which they embaiked. The
fum which these cities received merely for freight from such
numerous armes was immenfet. This, however,., was but
a small part of what they gained by the expeditions to the
Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted with them for mili,
tary Riores and provisions; their fleets kept on the coat as
the armies advanced by land; and supplying them with what.
ever was wanting, engrossed all the profits of a branch of
commerce which, in every age, has been extremely lucrative.
The success which attended the arms of the Crusaders was
produaive of advantages still more permanent. There are
charters yet extant, containing grants to the Venetians, Pi.
fans, and Genoese of the mos extensive immunities in the
several settlements which the Chrifians made in Asia. Al
the commodities which they imported or exported are there-
by exempted from every imposition; the property of entire
suburbs in some of the maritime towns, and of large freets in
others, is vested in them; and all queit;ons, arising among
persons fettled within their precints, or who traded under
their protection,are appointed te tried by their own laws,
and by judg.Us of their own appointment . When the Cru-
faders leited Coniantinople, and placed one of their own
leaders on the imperial throne, the Italian States.were like-

Du Cange Clolar. voc. Crwrlfioatlu. Guil Abbas ap. Bon-
grf. vol. i. 460o, 4g. [0] Note XIV.

t Mratori ntiqutItalic. medii vi, vol.ii.9os. ib. 906, c.

wife gainers by that event. The Venetians, who had plan-
ned the enterprize, and took a considerable part in carrying
it into execution, did not negle& to secure to themselves the
chief advantages redounding from its success. They made
themselves masters of part of the ancient Peloponnefus in
Greece,'together with fame of the most fertile islands in the
Archipelago. Many valuable branches of the commerce}
which formerly centered in Constantinople, were transferred
to Venice, Genoa, or Pisa. Thus a succession of events, oc-
cationed by the Holy War, opened various sources, from
which wealth flowed in such abundance into there citiest,
as enabled them, in concurrence with another institution,
which {hall be immediately mentioned, to secure their own
[liberty and independence.

If. The institution to which I alluded was the forming

of cities into communities, corporations, or bodies politic,
and granting them the privilege of municipal jurifdition,
which contributed more, perhaps, than any other cause, to
introduce regular government, police, and arts, and to dif-
fuse them over Europe. The feudal government had de-
generated into a system of oppreflion. The usurpations of
the nobles were become unbounded and intoleralle: they
had reduced the great body of the people into a state of ac-
tual servitude: the condition of those dignified with the
name of freemen, was often little preferable to that of the o-
ther. Nor was such oppression the portion of those alone
who dwelt in the country, and were employed in cultivating
the estate of their master. Cities and villages found it ne-
ceffary to hold of some great lord, on whom they might de-
pend for prote&ion, and became no less fubje& to his arbi-
trary jurifdition. The inhabitants were deprived of those
rights, which, in social life, are deemed molt natural and in-
alienable. They could not dispose of the effets which their
own industry had acquired, either by a latter will, or by any

t Villehardouin Hist. de Conflant. four l'Empereurs Francois
105, &c.

deed executed during their life*. They had no right to ap.
point guardians for their children during their minority.
They were not permitted to marry without purchasing the
consent of the lord on whom they depended . If once they
had commenced a law-suit, they durfl not terminate it by an
accommodation, because that would have deprived the lord,
in whose court they pleaded, of the perquisites due to himr
on pafling sentence§. Services of various kinds, no lefe dif-
graceful than opprefive, were exacted from them without.
mercy or moderation. 'The spirit of industry was checked,
in some cities by absurd regulations, and in others by unrea.:
fonable exactions; nor would the narrow and oppressive max-.
ims of a military aristocracy have permitted it ever to rife to
any degree of height or vigour l.

But as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn their at.

tention towards commerce, and to conceive some idea of the
advantages which they might derive from it, they became:
impatient to {hake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and
to eflablih among themselves such a free and equal govern.
meat, a would render property: fcure, and industry flourish.
ig. The German emperors, epecially those of the Fran.
eoian and Sliabian lines, as the feat of their government was
far distant from Italy, possessed a feeble and imperfe& jutif-
diftion in that country. Their perpetual quarrels, either
with the popes or with their own turbulent vassals, diverted
their attention from the interior police of Italy, and gave
constant employment to their arms. These circumstances
encouraged the inhabitants of iome of the Italian cities, to,
wards the beginning of the eleventh century, td assume new
privileges, to unite together more closely, and to form them-

s Dacherii Spiceleg. tom. xi. 374, 375. edit in 4to. Ordonma
ee des Rois de France, tom. iii. 04. No. a, 6.

Ordonances de Rois de France, tom. i. p. 22, tom. iii. 203!

No. z. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. 20. tDa her. Spic. 1. voL
xi. 31-, 341. .§ Dacher. Spicel. vol ix. i8. .

I M.l'Abbe Mably obfcrvat. fur l'hilt. de France, tom. ii. p. a, 96

selves into bodies politic under the government of laws eflab-
liihed by common consent . The rights, which many cities
acquired by bold or fortunate usurpations, others purchased
.from the emperors, who deemed themselves gainers when they
received large fums for immunities which they were no long-
er able to withhold; and some cities obtained them gratui.
toufly, from the generosity or facility of the princes on whom
they depended. The great increase of wealth which the
Crusades brought into Italy occasioned a new kind of ser-
mentation atd aivity in the minds of the people, and ex-
cited such a general pafflon for liberty and independence,
hat, before the conclusion of the lafi Crusade, all the con-
fiderable cities in that country had either purchased or had
extorted large immunities from the emperors [P].

This innovation was not long known in Italy before it

made its way into France. Louis le. Gros, in order to cre-
ate some power that might counterbalance those potent vas-
fals who controuled,or gave law to the crown, firif adopted
the plan of conferring new privileges on the towns situated
within his own domain.- These privileges were called
harters of community, by which he enfranchised the inhabi-
tants, abolished all marks of servitude, and formed them into
corporations or bodies politic, to be governed by a council
and magiitrates of their own nomination. These ma-
giftrates had the right of administering justice within their
on precin&s, of levying taxes, of embodying and training
to arms the militia of the town, which took the field when
required by the sovereign, under the command of officers ap-
pointed by the community. The great barons imitated the
xample of their monarch, and granted like immunities to
he towns within their territories. They had wafted such great
rums in their expeditions to the Holy Land that they were
ager to lay hold on this new expedient for raising money, by
the sale of those charters of liberty. Though the inftitu-
ion of communities was as repugnant to their maxims of

Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iv. p. $. [P Note XV.

policy, as it was adverse to their power, theydifregarded
remote consequences, in order to obtain present relief.
less than two centuries, servitude was abolfhed in most of
the towns in France, and they became free corporation,
instead of dependant villages, without jurifdi&ion or privi.
leges [Q0] Much about the fame period, the great cities
in Germany began to acquire like immunities, and laid the
foundation of their present liberty and independence [RI
The prafice spread quickly over Europe, and was adopted
in Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other feudal king.
doms [S].

The good effets of this new institution were immediately

felt, and its influence on government as well as manners was
no less extensive than salutary. A great body of the people
was released from servitude, and from all the arbitrary and
grievous impositions to which that wretched condition had
fubjeaed them. Towns upon acquiring the right of corn.
munity, became so many little republics, governed by known
and equal laws. Liberty was deemed such an eflential and cha.
raaeriftic part in their constitution, that if any save took re.
fuge in one of them, and resided there during a year without
being claimed, he was instantly declared a freeman, and ad.
mitted as a member of the community*.

As one part of the people owed their liberty to the erec.

tion of communities, another was indebted to them for thei
security. Such had been the fate of Europe during several
centuries, that fclf-prefervation obliged every man to court
the patronage of some powerful baron, and in times of dan
ger his catle was the place to which all retorted for safety
But towns fnrrounded with walls, whose inhabitants were re
gularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, as well as b]
the moRl solemn engagements, reciprocally to defend each c

IQOI Note XVI. J[R Note XVII.
[9 Note XVIII.

Statt. Humberti Bellojoci Dacher. Spice. vol. ix. ig8, I1
Charta Comit. Forenf. ibid. r93.

ther, afforded a more commodious and secure retreat. The
nobles began to be confidered as of less importance when they
cealed to be the sole guardians to whom the people could
look up for protecRion against v;olence.

If the nobility suffered some diminution of their credit and

power by the privileges granted to the cities, the crown ac-
quired an increase of both. As there were no regular troops
kept on foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the monarch
could bring no army into the field, but what was composed
of soldiers furnished by the crown vassals, always jealous of
the regal authority; nor had he any funds for carrying
on the public service but such as they granted him with a
very sparing tland. But when the members of communities
were permitted to bear arms, and were trained to the use of
them, this in some degree supplied the first defect, and gave
the crown the command of a body of men, independent of
its great vassals. The attachment of the cities to their fove-
reigns, whom they refpeaed as the first authors of their li-
berties, and whom they were obliged to court as the pro-
tetors of their immunities against the domineering spirit of
the nobles, contributed somewhat towards removing the fe-
cond evil, as, on many occasions, it procured the crown sup-
plies of money, which added new force to governmentt.

The acquisition of liberty made such a happy change in

the condition of all the members of communities, as rouoed
them from that ination into which they had been funk by
the wretchedness of their former itate. The spirit of indus-
try revived. Commerce became an objec of attention, and
began to flouriflh. Population increased. Independence
was eftablilhed; and wealth flowed into cities which had
long been the feat of poverty and oppreflion. Wealth was
accompanied by its usual attendants, ostentation and luxury;
and though the former was formal and cumbersome, and the
latter inelegant, they led gradually to greater refinement in

+ Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. 60z, 785; tom.. i. 318,
Vol. I. D

manners, and in the habits of life. Together with this ir.
provcment in manners, a more regular species of government
and poiice was introduced. As cities grew to be more poa
pulous, and the occalions of intercourse among men increaf,
ed, statutes and regulations multiplied of course, and all be.
came sensible that their common afety depended oa obferv.
ing them with exadnefl, and on punishing such as violate4
them, with promptitude and rigour. Laws and fubordina.
tibn, as well as polished manners, taking their rife in cities,
diffused themselves infenribly through the reil of the focie.
ty.

III. The inhabitants of cities, having obtained personal

freedom and'municipaljurifdi&ion, soon acquired civil iber.
ty and political power. It was a fundamental principle in
the feudal fytem of policy, that no freeman could be rub.
je.led to new laws or taxes unless by his own content. In
consequence of this, the vassals of every baron were called
to his court, in which they etablified, by mutual consent,
nfch regulations as they deemed moR beneficial to their small
society, and granted their superiors such supplies of money,
as were proportioned to their abilities, or to his wants. The
barons themselves, conformably to the fame maxim, wee
admitted into the supreme aflembly of the nation, and con.
cnrred with the sovereign io enacting laws, or in imposing
taxes. As the superior lord, according to the original plai
of feudal policy, retained the dire& property of those lands
which he granted, in temporary pofefeion, to his vassals; the
liw, even after fiefs became hereditary, fill supposcd this o,
tiginal pracice to fubfif. The great council of each na.
tion, whether diltinguilhed by the name of a Parliament, i
Diet, the Cortes, or the States-general, was composed en.
tirely of such barons, and dignified eccldeiaftics, as held im
mediately of the crown. Towns, whether situated withii
the royal domain or on the lands of a fubje&, depended ori
giaal for protetion on the lord of whom they held. The

had no legal name, no political exifience, which could entitle
them to be admitted into the legilattive assembly, or could
give them any authority there. But as soon as they were
i enfranchised, and formed into bodies corporate, they became
legal and independent members of the conflitution, and ac-
quired all the rights essential to freemen. Amongst these,
I the most valuable was, the privilege of a decisive voice in en-
aAing public laws, and granting national subsidies. It was
natural for cities, accuftorned to a form of municipal govern-
ment, according to which no regulation could be eflablifhed
within the community, and no money could be raised but by
their own consent, to claim this privilege. The wealth, the
power, and consideration, which they acquired on recover-
ing their liberty, added weight to their claim; and favour-
able events happened, or-fortunate conjuntures occured, in
the different kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated their ob-
taninng possession of this important right. In England, one
of the first countries in which the representatives of boroughs
were admitted into the great-council of the nation, the ba-
rons who took arms againlt Henry III. [A.D. 1265]
summontd them to attend parliament, in order to add great-
er popularity to their party, and to flrengthen the barrier
against the encroachments of regal power. In France, Phi-
lip the Fair, a monarch no less sagacious than enterprising,
confidered them as instruments which might be employed
with equal advantage to extend the royal prerogative, to
counterbalance the exorbitant power of the nobles, and to fa-
cilitate the imposition of new taxes. With these views, he
introduced the deputies of such towns as were formed into
communities, into the States-general of the nation*. Ir
the empire, the wealth and immunities of the imperial cities
placed them on a level with the moit considerable members
'f the Germanic body. Conscious of their own power and
lignity, they pretended to the privilege of forming a fepa*

Pafquier Recherches de la France, p. 81. edit. Par. i633,

D 2

rate bench in the diet [A. D. 1293]; and made good their
pretension t.

But in what way soever the representatives of cities first

gained a place in the legislature, that event had great influ.
ence on the form and genius of government. It tempered
the rigour of aiitocratical oppreflion with a proper mixture
of popular liberty: it secured to the great body of the peo-
ple, who had formerly no representatives, a&ive and power.
ful guardians of their rights and privileges: it established an
intermediate power between the king and the nobles, to
which each h!d recourse alternately, and which at some times
opposed the usurpations of the former, on other occasions
checked the -encioachments of the latter. As soon as the
representatives of communities gained any degree of credit
and influence in the legislature, the spirit of laws became
different from what it had formerly been; it flowed from
new principles; it wa; direted towards new objects; equa-
lity, order, the public good, and the redrefa of grievances,
were phrases and ideas brought into use, and which grew to
be familiar in the statutes and jurisprudence of the Euro.
pean nations. Almost all the efforts in favour of liberty in ec
very country of Europe, have been made by this new pow.
er in the legifiature. In proportion as it rose to confidera-
t:on and influence, the severity of the ariftocratical spirit de.
*reafed; and the privileges of the people became gradually
more extensive, as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdicion of
the nobl s was abridged [T3.

IV. The inhabitants of towns having been declared free

by the charters of communities, that part of the people
w. hich residcd in the country, and was employed in agricul-
ture, began to recover liberty by enfranchisement. During
the rigour of feudal government, as hath been already oh.
served, the great body of the lower people was reduced to

PfefTel Abrege de l'hiftoire & drcit d'Allemagne, p. 408S, 4i
lTj 2Note XiX.

servitude. They were slaves fixed to the foiif which they
cultivated, and together with it were transferred from one
proprietor to another, by sale, or by conveyance. The fpi-
Tit of feudal policy did not favour the enfranchisement of
that order of men. It was an established maxim, that no
jaffal could legally diminiih the value of a fief, to the detri-
ment of the lord from whom he had received it. In confe-
quence of this, manutrifllon by the authority of the imme-
diate matier was not valid; and unless it was confirmed by
the superior lord of 'whom he held, slaves belonging to the
fief did not acquire a complete right to their liberty. Thus
it became neceffaryto ascend through all the gradations of
feudal holding to the king, the lord paramount*. A formr
of procedure so tedious and troublesome, discouraged the
praftice of manumiffiort. Domestic or personal slaves often-
obtained liberty from the humanity or beneficence of thei'
rnafters, to whom they belonged in absolute property. The
condition of slaves fixed to the foil, was much more unalter-
able.

But the freedom and independence which one part of the'

people had obtained by the irftitution of communities, in-
spired the other with the most ardent desire of acquiring the
fame privileges; and their fnperiors, sensible of the various
advantages which they had derived from their former con-
cessions to their dependents, were less unwilling to gratify
them by the grant of new immunities. The enfranchise-
tnent of slaves became more frequent; and the monarchs of
France, prompted by necessity no less than by their inclina-
tion to reduce the power of the nobles, endeavoured to ren.
ier it general [A. D. 13'5 and I318]. Louis X. and
Philip the Long iffired ordinances, declaring, ', That as'all
nen were by nature freeborn, and as their kingdom was cal.
ed the kingdom of Franks, they determined that it should
)efo in reality as well as in name; therefore they appointed
'Etabli;femeus de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. tom. i.
82, not. (a).

D3

that enfranchisements Ihould be granted throughout the
whole kingdom, upon just and reasonable conditions*."
These edics were carried into immediate execution within
the royal domain. The example of their fowereigns, toge-
ther with the cxpecation of considerable fums which they
might raise by this expedient, led many of the nobles to set
their dependants at liberty; and servitude was gradually a.
bo'ifhed in almoR every province of the kingdom [U]. Is
Italy, the etablimunent of republican government in their
great cities, the genius and maxims of which were extremely
different from those of the feudal policy, together with the
ideas of equality, which the progress of commerce had ren.
gered familiar, gradually introduced the pra&ice of enfran-
ehifiug the ancient pred;al flayes. In fame provinces of
Germany, the persons who had been subjet to this species
of bondage were released; in others, the rigour of their fiate
was mitigated. In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal servitude, without
any formal interposition of the legillature to prohibit it, wai
totaly bani ied.

The effects of such a remarkabIe change in the condition of

so great a part of the people, could not fail of being conli.
ierable and extensive. The hulbandman, master of his own
indnfiry, and fecare of reaping for himself the fruits of his
abour, became the farmer of the fame fields where he had
formerly been compelled to toil for the benefit of another.
The odious names of master and of slave, the mofl mortify.
ing and depreffng of all ditintiions to human nature, were
abollihed. New profpeft opened, and new incitements to
igenuity and enterprize prefeuted themselves to those who
were emancipated. The expecation of bettering their for.
tune, as well as that of raising themselves to a more honour.
able condition, concurred in calling forth their activity and
genius; and a numerous class of men,who formerly had no po.
litical exitence. and were employed merely as instruments o

* Ordsn. tom i. p. 583, 653. (T7 lNote XX

abour, became ufcful citizens, and contributed towards aug.
mentingthe force or riches of the society which adopted thenm
amembers.
V. The various expedients which were employed in order
o introduce a more regular, equal, and vigorous adminifira.
ion ofjuftice, contributed greatly towards the improvement
of society. What were the particular modes of dispensing
uffice, in their several countries, among the various barba-
rous nations, which over-ran the Roman Empire, and took
possession of its different provinces, cannot now be deter.
ined with certainty. We may conclude, from the form of
overnment established among them, as well as from their
ideas concerning the nature of society, that the authority of
the magistrate was extremely limited, and the independence
of individuals proportionally great. History and records,
as far as these reach back, justify this conclulion, and repre.
tent the ideas and exercise ofjuitice in all the countries of
Europe, as little different from those which must take place
in the most simple fate of civil life. To maintain the order
and tranquillity of society by the regular execution of
known laws; to inflic vengeance on crimes deftrutive of
the peace and safety of individuals, by a prosecution carrit
ed on in the name and by the authority of the community;
to c )nfider the punishment of criminals as a public example
to deter others from violating the laws; were objecs of go-
vernment little underltood in theory, and less regarded in
praatice. The magistrate could hardly be said to hold the
sword of justice; it was left in the hands of private persons.
Resentment was almolt the sole motive for prosecuting
crime,; and to gratify that passion, was confidered as the
chief end in punishing them. He who suffered the wring,
was the only person who had a right to pursue the aggreflor,
and to exact or remit the punilhment. From a system of
judicial procedure, so crude and defective, that it seems to
be scarcely compatible with the fubfiitence of civil society,
disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition coucurred with

this ignorance concerning the nature of go~ernment, iti b
ftruaing the adminiffration ofjuftice, or in rendering it ca;
pricious and unequal. To provide remedies for these evilhs
so as to give a more regular course to justice, was, during
several centuries, one great objeEt of political wifdodi. T
regulations for this purpole may be reduced to three gene.
ral beads: To explain these, and to point ont the rmnfane
in which they operated, is an important article in the hist.
ry of focety among the nations of Etrope.

r. The first coaiderable fep towards eftablifing an eqtri

adminiftraton of justice, was the abolishment of the right
which individuals claimed of waging war with each othert
in their own name, and by their own authority. To repel
injries, and to revenge wrongs, is no less natural to man,
than to cultivate friendship; and while society remains in itt
molt simple flatc, the former is confidered as a personal right
no less alienable than the latter. Nor do men in this fitua.
tion deem that they have a title to redress their own ,drong
alone; they are touched with the injuries done to those with
whom they are conneted, or in whose honour they ate int
terested, and are no lefI prompt to avenge them. The faL
vage, how imperfeAty oever he may comprehend the prin
c'pls of political union, feels warmly the sentiments of f,
cial affc;on, and the obigations arising from the tieit f
blood. On the appearance of aa injury or affront offered tdi
him family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pursues the aai1
thors of it with the keenest resentment. He confiders it
as cowardly to expe redress from any arm but his owtt,
and as infamous to give up to another the right of determin'
ing what reparation he imold aceept, or with what vei
geance he should reft satisfied.

The maxims and practice of all uncivilized nationt, w-it

refpe& to the prosecution and punilhment of offenders, par.
ticularly those of the ancient Germans, and other barbari'
as who invaded the Roman Empire, are perfeftly conform.

ble to these ideas*. While they retained their'native
implicity of manners, and continued to be divided into
mall tribes or societies, the defects in this imperfec system
f criminal jurisprudence (if it merits that name) were less
nfibly felt.- .-W hen they came to fettle in the extensive
rovinces which they had conquered, and to form them-
ves into great monarchies; when new objeas of ambition
resenting themfelve', increased both the number and the
olence of their dissensions; they ought to have adopted
ew maxims concerning the redress of injuries, and to have
gulated, by general and equal laws, that which they for-
erly left to be directed by the caprice of private pailion.
ut fierce and haughty chieftains, accustomed to avenge
ecmfelves on such as had injured them, did not think of re-
nquifhing a right which they confidered as a privilege of
Cir order, and a mark of their independence. Laws en-
rced by the authority of princes and magifirates, who pof-
ed little power, commanded no great degree of reverence.
he administration of justice among rude illiterate people,
as not so accurate, or decisive, or uniform, as to induce
en to submit implicitly to its determinations. Every of-
nnded baron buckled on his armour, and fought redress at
e head of hit vassals. His adversary met him in like hof-
e array. Neither of them appealed to impotent laws,
hich could afford them no protetion. Neither of them
ould submit points, in which their honour and their pas-
ons were warmly interested, to the flow determination of a
idicial inquiry. Both trusted to their swords for the de-
ion of the contest. The kindred and dependants of the
greffor, as well as of the defender, were involved in the
uarrcl They had not even the liberty of remaining neutral.
uch as refuted to adt in concert with the party to which
ey belonged, were not only exposed to infamy, but sub!
cted to legal penalties.
The different kingdoms of Europe were torn and affli&.
* Ticit. de Mor. German. cap. 21. Veil. Paterc. lib ii,. i. 1

vate tranquillity. As the right of private war left many of
the quarrels among individuals to be decided, like those be.
tween nations, by arms; the form of trial by judicial corn.
bat, which was efablifhed in every country of Europe, ba.
nalhed equity from courts of justice, and rendered chance or
force the arbiter of their determinations In civilized na-
tions, all tranfations of any importance are concluded in
writing. The exhibition of the deed or infirument is full
evidence of the fa&, and ascertains with precision what each
party has Rtipulated to perform. But among a rude people,
when the arts of reading and writing were such uncommon
attainments, that to be mafier of either entitles a perion to
the appellation of a clerk or learned man, scarcely any thing
was committed to writing but treaties between princes, their
grants and charters to their fubjefts, or Such tranxa.io %
between private parties as were of extraordinary confe.
quence, or had an extensive effec. The greater part of as.
fairs in common life and hufinefs were carried on by verbal
contraAs or promises. This in many civil questions, not
only made it difficult to bring proof sufficient to establish
any claim, but encouraged falsehood and fraud, by rendering
them extremely easy. Even in criminal cafes, where a par.
ticular fa& must be ascertained, or an accusation mufft be dii-
proved, the nature and effe& of legal evidence were little un-
derfood by barbarous nations. To define with accuracy
that species of evidence which a court had reason to expet;
to determine when it ought to insist on positive proof, and
when it should be satisfied with a proof from circunftancee;
to compare the testimony of discordant witnesses, and to fix
the degree of credit due to each; were discussions too intri,
cate and subtile for the jurisprudence of ignorant ages. In
order to avoid encumbering themselves with these, a more
simple form of procedure was introduced into courts as well
civil as criminal In all cafes where the notoriety of the
fa& did not flrni{h the clearef and most direEt evidence, the
person accused, or he against whom an aCtion was brought

was called legally, or offered voluntarily, to purge himelf by
oath; and upon his declaring his innocence, he was instant.
ly acquittedt. This absurd practice effe&ually screened
guilt and fraud from detection and punifiment, by rendering
the temptation to perjury so powerful, that it was not easy
to resist it. The pernicious effets of it were sensibly felt;
and in order to guard againit them, the laws ordained, that
oathsihould be adminitered with great solemnity, and accom-
panied with every circumstance which could inspire religi-
ous reverence, or superstitious terror*. This, however,
proved a feeble remedy: these ceremonious rites became fa-
miliar, and their impreflion on the imagination gradually di-
rnnilhed; men who could venture to disregard truth, were
not apt to startle at the folemnities of an oath. Their ob-
servation of this, put legislators upon devising a new expedi-
ent for rendering the purgation by oath more certain and
fatisfadory. They required the person accused to appear
with a certain number of freemen, his neighbours or rela-
tions, who corroborated the oath which he took, by swear-
ing that they believed ay that he uttered to be true. These
were called Compurgators, and their number varied according
to the importance of the subjed in dispute, or the nature of
the crime with which a person was chargedS. In some cafes,
the concurrence of no less than three hundred of these auxili-
ary witnesses was requisite to acquit the person accused~.
But even this device was found to be ineffctual. It was a
point of honour with every man in Europe, during several
ages, not to desert the chief on whomn he depended, and to
stand by those with whom the ties of blood conne&ed him.
W'hoever then was bold enough to viol:.- the laws, was'fure
of devoted adherents, willing to abet, and eager to serve him

t Leg. Burgund. tit. 8, & 45, Leg. Aleman. tit. 89. Let Bal-

wair tit. 8. § s, 2, &c.

* Du Cange Glolfar. vno. 7rrnnitum, vol. iii. p. x607. Edit.
BelnediA. t Iid. v. iii. p. i.)99.

Spelrnan Gloffar. voc. Bill

. (;itgr. 'i urcn. Hill. lib. vii.c.9.
Vol. I. E

in whatever mnnncr he required. The formality 'of calling
compurgators proved an apparent, not a real security, against
falsehood and perjury; and the sentences of courts, while
they continued to refer every point in question to the oath
of the defendant, became so flagrantly iniquitous, as excited
universal indignation against this method of procedure-.

Sensible of thcfe defects, but strangers to the manner of

corre&ing them, or of introducing a more proper form, our
ancestors, as an infallible method of discovering truth, and
of guarding against deception, appealed to Heaven, and re.
ferred every point in dispute to be determined, as they ima~
gined, by the decisions of unerring wisdom and impartial jus.
tice. The person accused, in order to prove his innocence,
submitted to trial, in certain cafes, either by plunging his
arm in boiling water; or by lifting a red-hot iron with his
naked hand; or by walking bare-foot over burning plough.
ihares; or by other experiments equally perilous and formi-
dable. On other occasions, he challenged his accuser to
fight him in fingk combat. All these various forms of trial
were conducted with many devout ceremonies; the ministers
of religion were employed, the Almighty was called upon to
interpose for the manifetation of guilt, and for the protec.
tion of innocence; and whoever escaped unhurt, or came off
victorious, was pronounced to be acquitted by the Yudgmetd
of Godt.

Among all the whimsical and absurd institutions which

owe their existence to the weakness of humam reason, this,
which fubm.tted questions that asseted the property, the
reputation, and the lives of men, to the determination of
chance, or of bodily strength and address, appears to be the
noft extravagant and preposterous. There were circum.
stances, however, which led the nations of Europe to con-
lider this equivocal mode of deciding any point in contest,

-t Leg. Langobard. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 34-
4 Murat. differtatio dejudiciis Dei A.ktiquit.Ital. vol. iii.p. 61z.

as a direc appeal to Heaven, and a certain method of dif-
covering its will. As men are unable to comprehend the
manner in which the Almighty carries on the government
of the universe, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they are
apt to imagine, that in every cafe which their passions or in-
terest render important in their own eyes, the Supreme Rul-
er of all ought visibly to display his power in vindicating in-
nocence and punishing guilt. It requires no inconsiderable
degree offcience and philosophy to corret this popular er-
ror. But the sentiments prevalent in Europe during the
dark ages, instead of correting, strengthened it. Religion,
for several centuries, confited chiefly in believing the legen-
dary history of those faints whose names crowd and disgrace
the Romish calendar. The fabulous tales concerning their
miracles, had been declared authentic by the bulls of popes,
and the decrees of councils: they made the great subjet of
the inftru&ions which the clergy offered to the people, and
were received by them with implicit credulity and admira-
tion. By attending to these, men were accustomed to be-
lieve that the eftablilhed laws of nature might be violated
on the most frivolous occasions, and were taught to look
rather for particular and extraordinary a&s of power under
the divine adminiitration, than to contemplate the regular
progress and execution of a general plan. One superstition
prepared the way for another; and whoever believed that
the Supreme Being had interposed miraculotfly on those
trivial occasions mentioned in legends, could not but ex-
pect his intervention in matters of greater importance, when
solemnly referred to his decision.

With this fuperRitious opinion, the martial spirit of Eu-

rope, during the middle ages, concurred in eftablifhling the
mode of trial by judicial combat. To beready to maintain
with his sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first
maxim of honour with every gentleman. To assert their
own rights by force of arms, to inflict vengeance on thole
viio had injured or affronted them, were the diltinltion and

E 2

pride of high-fpirited nobles. The form of trial by com-
bat conciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified these
paflions. Every man was the guardian of his own honour,
and of his own life; the jutiice of his cause, as well as his
future reputation, depended on his own courage and prow-
eis. This mode of decision was confidered, accordingly,
as one of the happier efforts of wife policy; and as soon as
it was introduced, all the fonns of trial by fire or water, and
other fupenritious experiments, fell into disuse, or were em.
ployed only in controversies between persons of inferior
rank. As it was the privilege of a gentleman to claim the
trial by combat, it was quickly authorised over all Europe,
ad received in every country with equal fatisfaaion. Not
only queltions concerning uncertain or contcfted fads, but
general and abftra& points in law, were determined by the
issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a method of
discovering truth more liberal, as well as more fatiafaaory,
than that by investigation and argument. Not only might
parties, whose minds were cxafperated by the eagernefsand
the hofility of opposition, defy their antagonists, and re-
quire him to make good his charge, or to prove his inno-
cence, with his sword; but witnesses who had no interest in
the iifue of the question, though called to declare the truth
by laws which ought to have afforded them protection,
were equally exposed to the danger of a challenge, and equal-
ly bound to aiTert the veracity of their evidence by dint of
arms. To complete the absurdities of this military jurif-
prudence, even the characer of a judge was not sacred from
its violence. Any one of the parties might interrupt a
judge when about to deliver his opinion; might accuse him
of iniquity and corruption in the most reproachful terms,
and throwing down the gauntlet, might challenge him to
defend his integrity in the field; nor could he, without in.
fanmy, refuse to accept the defiance, or decline to enter the
lifls against such an adverfan.

T'uus the form of trial by combat, like other abuse,

spread gradually, and extended to all persons, and almost to
all cafes. Eccleliaftics, women, minors, superannuated and
infirm persons, who could not with decency or justice be
compelled to take arms, or to maintain their own cause,
were obliged to produce champions, who offered from as-
section, or were engaged by rewards, to fight their battles.
The folemnities of a judicial combat were such as were na-
tural in an ation, which was confidered both as a formal
appeal to God, and as the final decision of questions of the
highest moment. Every circumstance relating to them was
regulated by the edits of princes, and explained in the
comments of lawyers, with a minute and even superstitious
accuracy. Skill in these laws and rights was frequently
the only science of which warlike nobles boafted,-or which
they were ambitious to attaint.

By this barbarous custom, the natural course of proceed-

ing, both in civil and criminal questions, was entirely per-
verted. Force usurped the place of equity in courts of
judicature, and justice was banished from her proper mansion.
Discernment, learning, integrity, were qualities less necef-
fary to a judge, than bodily strength and dexterity in the
ule of arms. Daring courage, and superior vigour or ad-
dress, were of more moment towards securing the favour-
able issue of a suit, than the-equity of a cause, or the clear-
nefa of the evidence. Men, of course, applied themselves to
cultivate the talents which they found to be of great utili-
ty. As strength of body and address in arms were no less
requisite in those lifts which they were obliged to enter in de-
fence of their private rights, than in the field of battle,
where they met the enemies of their country, it becamre the
great object of their education, as well as the chief employ.
ment of life, to acquire these martial accomplilhments. The
adminiltration of justice, instead of accufloming men to lift-

t See a curious difcoirfe concerning the laws ofjudicial combat,
ly Thomas of Woodstock, duke of Gloucester, uncle to RichadGi
I1. in Spelman's Gloflar. voc. Caop,,.

E 3

en to the voice of equity, or to reverence the decisions of
law, added to the ferocity of their manners, and taught them
to confider force as the great arbiter of right and wrong.

These pernicious effecs of the trial by combat were so

obvious, that they did not altogether escape the view of the
unobferving age in which it was introduced. The clergy,
from the beginning, remonstrated against it as repugnant to
the spirit of Chrillianity, and subversive ofjuftice and orderS..
But the maxims and paifions which favoured it, had taken
such hold of the minds of men, thatthey disregarded admo-
nitions and censures, which, on other occasions, would have
Rruck them with terror. The evil was too great and inve-
teate to yield to that remedy, and continuing to increase,
the civil power at length found it necessary to interpose.
Conscious, however, of their own limited authrity, monarchl
proceeded with caution, and their first attempts to reitrain,
or to set any bounds to this pratice, were extremely feeble.
One of the earlief reftriAions of this pratice which.occurs
in the history of Europe, is that of Henry I. of England.
It extended no farther than to prohibit the trial by combat
in questions concerning property of small vlue*. Louis
VII. of France iinitated his example, and iltued an edi& to
the fame effect. St. -Louis, whose ideas as a legislator
were far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to intro-
duce a more perlie jurisprudence, and to fubtitute the trial
by evidence, in place of that by combat. But his regula.
tions, with refpet to this, were confined to his own domains;
for the great vassals of the crown possessed such independent
authority, and were so fondly attached to the ancient prac
tice, that he bad not power to extend it to the whole king
dom. Some barons voluntarily adopted his regulations
The spirit of courts of justice became averse to the mode o
decision by combat, and discouraged it on every occasion
The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honourable to depene

t Du Canoe Gloflar. voc. D.ellus, vol. ii. p. I67N.
* Bruiel Usage des Fiefs, voLii. p. 962. t Ordon. tom. I. p. Id

for the security of their lives and fortunes on their own cou-
rage alone, and contended with so much vehemence for the
preservation of this favourite privilege of their order, that
the successors of St. Louis, unable to oppose, and afraid of
offending such powerful subje&s, were obliged not only to
tolerate, but to authorize the pratice which he had attempt-
ed to abolifht. ' In other countries of Europe, efforts equal-
ly 7ealous were employed to maintain the eftablilhed custom;
and similar concessions were extorted from their refpe&ive
sovereigns. It continued, however, to be an object of poli-
cy with every monarch of abilities or vigour to explode the
trial by combat; and various edi&s were issued for this pur.
pole. But the observation which was made concerning the
right of private war, is equally applicable to the mode of
trial under review. No custom, how absurd soever it may
be, if it has subsisted long, or derives its force from the man-
ners and prejudices of the age in which it prevails, was ever
abolished by the bare promulgation of laws and statutes.
The sentiments of the people must change, or some new
power, sufficient to counteract the prevalent custom, must be
introduced. Such a change accordingly took place in Eu-
rope, as science gradually increased, and society advanced to-
wards more perfect order. In proportion as the preroga.
tive of princes extended, and came to acquire new force, a
power, interested in suppressing every pratice favourable to
the independence of the nobles, was introduced. The trug-
gle, nevertheless, fubfifled for several centuries; sometimes
the new regulations and ideas seemed to gain ground; some-
times ancient habits recurred: and though, upon the whole,
the trial by combat went more and more into difuferyet in-
itances of it occur, as late as the sixteenth century, in the hi-
flory both of France and of England. In proportion as it
declined, the regular administration of justice was restored,
the proceedings of courts were dire&ted by known laws, the
tudy of these became an objea of attention to judges, and

t Ordon. tom. i. p. 3X8, 390, 435.

the people of Europe advanced fast towards civility, when
this great cause of the ferocity of their manner was remov
ed [Y].

3. By authorizing the-right of appeal from the courts

of the barons to those of the king, and fubjeting the de.'
cifions of the former to the review of the latter, a new ftep,
not less considerable than those which I have already men.
tioned, was taken towards establishing the regular, confii.
ent, and vigorous administration of justice. Among all
the encroachments of the feudal nobles on the prerogative of
their monarchs, their usurping the administration ofjuftice
with supreme authority, both in civil and criminal causes,
within the precincts of their own estates, was the most fn-
gular. In other nations, fubjeas have contended with their
sovereigns, and have endeavoured to extend their own pow.
er and privileges; but in the history of their struggles and
prctenfions, we discover nothing similar to this right which
the feudal barons claimed, and obtained. It must have been
something peculiar in their genius and manners that fug-
gestcd this idea, and prompted them to insist on such a claim.
Among the rude people who conquered the various pro.
vinces of the Roman Empire, and established new kingdoms
there, the passion of resentment, too impetuous to bear con.
trol, was permitted to remain almost unrettrained by the
authority of laws. The person offended, as has been obferv.
ed, retained not only the right of prosecuting, but of punish.
ing his adversary. To him it belonged to inflict such ven.
geance as satiated his rage, or to accept of such fatisfatior
as appeared it. But while fierce barbarians continued to be
the sole judges in their own cause, their enmities were im
placable and immortal; they set no bounds either to the de
gree of their vengeance, or to the duration of their resent
ment. The excesses which this occasioned, proved so de
firucive of peace and order in society, as to render it necef
Lary to devise some remedy. At first, recourse was bad toarbi

lY] Note XXII.

trators, who by persuasion or intreaty prevailed ontheparty of.
fended to accept of a fine or composition from the aggressor,
andtodrop allfarther prosecution. Butas fubmifflontoperfons
who had no legalor magisterial authority was altogethervolun-
tary, it became necessary to establish judges, with power sus-
ficien't to enforce their own decisions. The leader whom
they were accutfomed to follow and to obey, whose courage
they refpedted, and in whose integrity they placed confidence,
was the person to whom a martial people naturally commit-
ted this important prerogative. Every chieftain was
the commander of his tribe in war, and their judge in peace.
Every baron led his vaffls to the field, and administered jus-
tice to them in his hall. Their high-fpirited dependants
would not have recognized any other authority, or have sub-
mitted to any other jurifdidion. But in times of turbulence
and violence, the exercise of this new fundion was attended
not only with trouble, but with danger. No person could
assume the character of a judge, if he did not possess power
sufficient to protect the one party from the violence of pri-
vate revenge, and to compel the other to accept of such re-
paration as he enjoined In consideration of the extraordi-
nary efforts which this office required, judges, besides the
fine which they appointed to be paid as a compensation to
the person or family who had been injured, levied an addi-
tional Tum as a recompence for their own labour; and in all
the feudal kingdoms the latter was not only as precisely
ascertained, but as regularly exated, as the former.

Thus, by the natural operation of circumstances peculiar

to the manners or political fate of the feudal nations, fepa-
rate and territorial jurifdi&ions came not only to be eftab.
lilhed in every kingdom, but were established in such a way,
that the interest of the barons concurred with their ambi-
tion in maintaining and extending them. It was not mere-
ly a point of honour with the feudal nobles to dispense jus-
tice to their vassals; but from the exercise of that power a-
rose one capital branch of their revenue; and the emoluments

of their courts were frequently the main support of their dig-
nity. It was with infinite zeal that they asserted and de-
fended this high privilege of their order. By this institution,
however, every kingdom in Europe was split into as many
separate principalities as it contained powerful barons. Their
vassal, whether in peace or in war, were hardly sensible of
any authority, but that of their immediate superior lord.
They set themselves subjet to no other command. They
were amenable to no other jurisdiction. The ties which
linked together these frnaller confederacies became dose and
firm; the bonds of public union relaxed, or were diflolved.
The nobles strained their invention in devising regulations
which tended to ascertain and perpetuate this diftintion.
In order to guard against any appearance of subordination
in their courts to those of the crown, they frequently eon-
strained their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from
entering their territories, or from claiming any jurifdiaion
there; and if, either through miRfake, or from the spirit of
encroachment, any royal judge ventured to extend his au-
thority to the vassals of a baron, they might plead their right
of exemption, and the lord of whom they held could not on.
ly rescue them out of his hands, but was entitled to legal re-
paration for the injury and affront offered to him. The ju.
rifdition of the royal judges scarcely reached beyond the
narrow limits of the king's demesnes. Initead of a regular
gradation of courts, all acknowledging the authority of the
fame general laws, and looking up to these as the guides of
their decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom a num-
ber ofindependent tribunals, the proceedings of which were
dire&ed by local customs and contraditory forms. The col.
lifon of jurifdi&ion among these different courts often re-
tarded the execution ofjuftice. The variety and caprice of
their modes of procedure must have for ever kept the admi-
niftration of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or
perfection.

All the monarchs of Europe perceived there encroachments

on theirjurifdiAlion, and bore them with impatience. But
the usurpations of the nobles were so firmly eitablilhed, and
the danger of endeavouring to overturn them by open force
was so manifet, that kings were obliged to remain satisfied
vith attempts to undermine them. Various expedients were
employed for this purpose; each of which merits attention,
as they mark the progress of law and equity in the several
kingdoms of Europe. At firit, princes endeavoured to cir-
ctumfcribe thejurifdi&ion of the barons, by contending that
they ought to take cognizance only of smaller offences, referv-
ing those of greater moment, under the appellation of Pleas
vs the Crown, and Royal Causer, to be tried in the king's
courts. This, however, affected only the barons of inferior
note; the more powerful nobles scorned such a diRfintion,
and not only claimed unlimited jurifdiaion, but obliged their
tovereigns to grant them charters, conveying or recognizing
this privilege in the most ample form. The attempt, never-
tl:e!efs, was productive offome good consequences, and paved
tLc way for more. It turned the attention of men towards
a jurifdioion dittinct fPm that of the baron whole vassals
they were; it accustomed them to the pretensions of fuperi.
oity which the crown claimed.over territorial judges; and
taught them, when oppressed by their own superior lord, to
look 6p to their sovereign as their protector. This facili-
tated the introduction of appeals, by which princes brought
the decisions of the barons' courts under the review of the roy-
l judges. While trial by combat subsisted in full vigour, no
point decided according to that mode could be brought un-
der the review of another court. It had been referred to the
i idgment of God; the issue of battle had declared his will;
id it would have been impious to have called in question
the equity of the divine decision. But asfoon as the barbar-
ols custom began to fall into disuse, princes encouraged the
I:ilals of the barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the
i'val courts. The progress of this practice, however, was
iow and gradual. The first instances of appealc were on ac-

of their courts were frequently the main support of their dig.
nty. It was with infinite zeal that they aflerted and de-
fended this high privilege of their order. By this inflitution,
however, every kingdom in Europe was split into as many
separate principalities as it contained powerful barons. Their
vaflas, whether in peace or in war, were hardly sensible of
any authority, but that of their immediate superior lord.
They felt themselves subjet to no other command. They
were amenable to no other jurifdi&ion. The ties which
linked together these fialler confederacies became close and
firm; the bonds of public union relaxed, or were dissolved.
The nobles strained their invention in devising regulations
which tended to ascertain and perpetuate this diftinAion.
In order to guard againf any appearance of subordination
in their courts to those of the crown, they frequently con.
trained their monarchs to prohibit the royal judges from
entering their territories, or from claiming any juriidiaion
there; and if, either through mistake, or from the spirit of
encroachment, any royal judge ventured to extend his au-
thority to the vassals of a baron, they might plead their right
of exemption, and the lord of whom they held could not on.
ly rescue them out of his hands, but was entitled to legal re-
paration for the injury and affront offered to him. The ju.
rifdition of the royal judges scarcely reached beyond the
narrow limits of the king's demesnes. Instead of a regular
gradation of courts, all acknowledging the authority of the
fame general laws, and looking up to there as the guides of
their decisions, there were in every feudal kingdom a num-
ber of independent tribunals, the proceedings of which were
dire&ed by local customs and contradiaory forms. The cot.
Lifon of jurzidicfion among these different courts often re-
tarded the execution ofjuftice. The variety and caprice of
their modes of procedure must have for ever kept the admi-
nitration of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or
perfection.

All the monarchs of Europe perceived these encroachments

on their jurifdiicon, and bore them with impatience. But
the usurpations of the nobles were so firmly efiabliihed, and
the danger of endeavouring to overturn them by open force
was so manifest, that kings were obliged to remain satisfied
with attempts to undermine them. Various expedients were
employed for this purpose; each of which merits attention,
as they mark the progress of law and equity in the several
kingdoms of Europe. At firit, princes endeavoured to cir-
cumfcribe thejurifdi&ion of the barons, by contending that
they ought to take cognizance only of smaller offences, referv-
ing those of greater moment, under the appellation of Plcas
vs the Crown, and Royal Caufls, to be tried in the king's
courts. This, however, affeced only the barons of inferior
note; the more powerful nobles scorned such a diRfindion,
and not only claimed unlimited jurifdidion, but obliged their
sovereigns to grant them charters, conveying or recognizing
th.'s privilege in the molt ample form. The attempt, never-
tlle!efs, was productive offome good consequences, and paved
tlc way for more. It turned the attention of men towards
ajurifdition diitin& from that of the baron whose vassals
th;cy were; it accultomed them to the pretensions of fuperi.
ority which the crown claimed over territorial judges; and
taught them, when oppressed by their own superior lord, to
look tip to their sovereign as their protector. This facili-
tated the introduction of appeals, by which princes brought
the decisions of the barons' courts under the review of the roy-
l judges. While trial by combat subsisted in full vigour, no
po;flt decided according to that mode could be brought un-
der the review of another court. It had been referred to the
ijtgment of God; the issue of battle had declared his'vwill;
id it would have been impious to have called in question
the equity of the divine decision. But as soon as the barbar-
o')3 custom began to fall into disuse, princes encouraged the
Xlifals of the barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the
'r,,al courts. The progress of this pracice, however, was
ilow and gradual. The first instances of appeals were on ac-

count of tAE delay or refusal of juiice in the barons' court;
and as these were countenanced by the ideas of subordination
in the feudal constitution, the nobles allowed them to be in.
troduced without much opposition. But when these were
followed by appeals on account of the injufice or iniuity of
the sentence, the nobles then began to be sensible, that if this
innovation became general, the /hadow of power alone would
remain in their hands, and all real authority and jurifdi&ion
would center in those courts which possesed the right of re-
view. They instantly took the alarm, remonstrated againt
the encroachment, and contended boldly for their ancient
privileges.. But the monarchs in the different kingdoms of
Europe pursued their plan with Readiness and prudence.
Though forced to suspend their operations on some occafi.
ons, and seemingly to yield when any formidable confederacy
of their vassals united against them, they resumed their mea-
fures as soon as they observed the nobles tobe remits or fee-
ble, and pulhed them with vigour. They appointed the
royal courts, which originally were ambulatory, and irregu-
lar with refpe& to their times of meeting, to be held in a
fixed place, and at flated seasons. They were solicitous to
name judges of more diftinguilhed abilities than such as ufu-
ally presided in the courts of the barons. They added dig-
rnity to their characer, and splendour to their assemblies.
They laboured to render their forms regular, and their de-
crees confitent. Such judicatories became, of course, the
objecs of public confidence as well as veneration. The
people, rdinquifhing the partial tribunals of their lords, were
eager to bring every subjet of contest under the more equal
and discerning eye of those whom their sovereign had cho.
fen to give judgment in his name. Thus kings became
once more the heads of the community, and the dispenser
ofjuftice to their fubjeds. The barons, in some kingdom!
ceased to exercise their right of jurifdiAion, because it funi
into contempt; in others, it was circumscribed by such re
gulations as rendered it innocent, or it was entirely abolilhet

by express fatutes. Thus the administration ofjullice tak-
iig its rife from one source, and following one direction,
held its course in every itate with more uniformity, and
with greater force [Z].

VI. The forms and maxims of the canon law, which

were become universally refpedable from their authority in
the spiritual courts, contributed not a little towards those
improvements in jurisprudence which I have enumerated.
If we confider the canon law politically, and view it either
as a system framed on purpose to assist the clergy in usurp-
ing powers and jurifdi;tion no left repugnant to the nature
of their fun&ion, than inconsistent with the order of go-
vernment; or as the chief instrument in etlablilhing the do-
minion of the popes, which shook the throne, and endan-
gered the liberties of every kingdom in Europe, we must pro-
nounce it one of the most formidable engines ever formed a-
gainit the happiness of civil society. But if we contemplate
it merely as a code of laws refpeEting the rights and proper-
ty of individuals, and attend only to the civil effects of its
decisions concerning lhefe, it will appear in a different, and
a much more favourable light In ages of ignorance and
credulity, the ministers of religion are the objecs of super-
ltitious veneration. When the barbarians who over-ran the
Roman Empire first embraced the Christian faith, they
found the clergy in pofleffion of considerable power; and
they naturally transferred to tlofe new guides the profound
fubmiflion and reverence which they were accustomed to
yield to the priests of that religion which they had forfakcn.
They deemed their persons to be equa'ly sacred with their
funcion; and would have confidered it as impious to
fubjeEt them to the profane jurifdi&ion of the laity. The
clergy were not blind to tllcf advantages wlhich the weak-
ness of mankind afforded them. They eflablifhed courts
in which erery question relating to their own chlra&er,
their fun&ion, or their property, was tried. They pleaded

[Z] Note XXIII.
Vol. 1. F

and obtained an almost total exemption from the authority
of civil judges. Upon different pretexts, and by a multi-
plicity of artifices, they communicated this privilege to so
many persons, and extended their jurifdi&ion to such a va.
riety of cafes, that the greater part of those affairs which
give rife to contetl and litigation, was drawn under the cog-
nizance of the spiritual courts.

But in order to dispose the laity to susser these ufurpa-

tions without murmur or opposition, it was necessary to
convince them, that the administration of justice would be
rendered more perfect by the establishment of this new ju-
rifdiftion. This was not a difficult undertaking at that
period, when ecclefialics carried on their encroachments
with the greatest success. That scanty portion of science
which served to guide men in the ages of darkness, was al-
most entirely engrossid by the clergy. They alone were
zccuftomed to read, to inquire, and to reason. Whatever
knowledge of ancient jurisprudence had been preserved,
either by tradition, or in such books as had escaped the de-
frutire rage of barbarians, was pofeffed by them. Upon
the maxims of that excellent fyltem, they founded a code of
laws consonant to the great principles of equity. Being
dirted by fixed and known rules, the forms of their courts
w-ere ascertained, and their decisions became uniform and
confiifent. Nor did they want authority sufficient to en-
force their sentences. Excommunication and other eccle-
fiailical censures, were punishments more formidable than
any that civil judges could infiac in support of their decrees.

It is not surprising, then, that ecclesiastical jurisprudence

liould become such an objea of admiration and refpe&,
that exemption from civil juriidition was courted as a pri.
vilege, and conferred as a rcward. It is not surprising,
that, even to rude people, the maxims of the canon law
ihould appear more equal and just than those of the ill-di-
gestrd jurisprudence which dircted all proceedings in civil
courts. According to the latter, the differences between

contending barons were terminated, as in a state of nature, by
the sword; according to the former, every matter was sub-
jeSed to the decision of laws. The one, by permitting
judicial combats,. left chance and force to be arbiters of
right or wrong, of truth or falsehood; the other passed
judgment with refpcEt to these, by the maxims of equity,
and the tefiimomy ofwitneffes. Any error or iniquity in a
sentence pronounced by a baron to whom feudal jurifdic-
tion belonged, was irremediable, because, originally it
was fubje& to the retiew of no superior tribunal; the ec-
clefiaftical law eftablilhed a regular gradation of courts,
through all which a cause might be carried by appeal, until
it was determined by that authority which was held to be
supreme in the church. Thus the genius and principles of
the canon law prepared men for approving those three great
alterations in the feudal jurisprudence which I have men-
tioned. But it was not with refpe&t to these points alone
that the canon law suggested improvements beneficial to so-
ciety. Many of the regulations, now deemed the barriers
of personal fecurity,-or the safeguards of private property,
are contrary to the spirit and repugnant to the maxims of
the civil jurifprudenao known in Europe during feve-
ral centuries, and were borrowed fiom the rules and prac-
tice of the ecclesiastical courts. By observing the wisdom
and equity of the decisions in there courts, men began to
perceive the necelfity either of deserting the martial tribu-
nals of the barons, or of attempting to reform them [AA.]

VII. The revival of the knowlege and fludy of the Ro-

man law co-operated with the canfrs which I have mention-
ed, in introducing more julf and liberal ideas concerning the
nature of government, and the adminiltration of jufice. A-
mong the calamities which the devastations of the barbari-
ans, who broke in upon the empire, brought upon mankind,
one of the greateit was their overturning the system of Ro-
man jurisprudence, the noblest monument of the wisdom

[AA] Note XXIV.

F 2

of that great people, formed to subdue and to govern
the world. The laws and regulations of a civilized commu.
nity were altogether repugnant to the manners and ideas of
these fierce invaders. They had refpe&t to objecs of which a
rude people had no conception; and were adapted to a state
of society with which they were entirely unacquainted.
For this reason, wherever they fettled, the Roman jurifpru.
dence soon funk into oblivion, and lay buried for some cen-
turies under the load of those infitutions which the inha.
bitants of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But
towards the middle of the twelfth century, a copy of JufRi
nan's Pandects was accidentally discovered in Italy. By
that time, the state of feciety was so far advanced, and the
ideas of men So much enlarged and improved by the occur.
rences of several centuries, during which they had continued
in political union, that they were struck with admiration of
a fyaiem which their ancestors could not comprehend. Tho'
they had not hitherto attained such a degree of refinement,
as to acquire from the ancients a relish for true philosophy
or speculative science; though they were still insensible, in
a great degree, to the beauty and elegance of classical corn
position; they were fufiiciently qualified to judge with re-
fpea to the merit of their system of laws, in which the ma-
ny points most interesting to mankind were fettled with dif-
cernment, precision. and equity. All men of letters studied
this new science with eagerness; and within a few years as-
ter the discovery of the Pandets, profcffors of civil law
e-re appointed, who taught it publicly in moll countries of
Lurope.

The effeds of having such an excellent model to study

and to imitate were immediately perceived. Men, as soon
as they were acquainted with fixed and general laws, per-
ceived the advantage of them, and became impatient to as.
certain the principles and forms by which judges Ihould re
gulate their decisions. Such was the ardour with which
they carried on an undertaking of so great importance tc

iociety, that, before the close of the twelfth century, the
feudal law was reduced into a regular fyitem; the code of
canon law was enlarged and methodized; and the loose un-
certain customs of different provinces or kingdoms were
collected and arranged with an order and accuracy acquired
from the knowledge of Roman jurisprudence. In some
countries of Europe the Roman law was adopted as fubfidi-
ary to their own municipal law; and all cafes to which the
latter did not extend, were decided according to the princi-
ples of the former. In others, the maxims as well as forms
of Roman junfprudence mingled imperceptibly with the
laws of the country, and had a powerful, though lefi fen-
fible, influence, in improving and perfecting them [BB.]

These various improvements in the system of jurifpru-
dence, and administration of junice, occasioned a change in
manners, of great importance, and of extensive effe&. They
gave rife to a diftintion of profeffons; they obliged men
to cultivate different talents, and to aim at different accom-
plifhments, in order to qualify themselves for the various de-
partments and funtions which became necessary in society*.
Among uncivilized nations, there is but one profeflion ho-
nourable, that of arms. AH the ingenuity and vigour of
the human mind are exerted in acquiring military lkill or
address. The funtions of peace are few and funple; and
require no particular course of education or of study, as a
preparation for ditcharging them. This was the fate of
Europe during several centuries. Every gentleman, born a
soldier, scorned any other occupation; he was taught no
feience but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes
were feats of martial prowess. Nor did the judicial cha-
rdter, which persons of noble birth were alone entitled to
aiTume, demand any degree of knowledge beyond that
which such untutored soldiers possessed. To recollet a

[BB] Note XXV.
Dr. Fergufon's-Efay on the History of Civil Society, part iv.

F3

few traditionary customs which time had confirmed, and
rendered refpecable; to mark out the lifts of battle with
due formality; to cbferve the iffbe of the combat; and to
pronounce whether it had been condu&ed according to the
laws of arms; included every thing that a baron, who a&.
ed as a judge, found it necessary to understand.

But when the forms of legal proceedings were fixed, when

the rules of decision were committed to writing, and col-
le&ed into a body, law became a science, the knowledge of
which required a regular course offtudy, together with long
attention to the pracice of courts. Martial and illiterate
nobles had neither leisure nor inclination to undertake a talk
so laborious, as well as so foreign from all the occupations
which they deemed entertaining, or suitable to their rank.
They gradually relinquithed their places in courts ofjuftice,
:where their ignorance exposed them to contempt. They
became weary of attending to the discussion of cafes; which
grew too intricate for them to comprehend. Not only the
j adicial determination of points whichwere the fubje& of con.
troverfy, but the condut of all legalbufnefs and tranfa&tions,
was committed to persons trained by previous fludy and ap-
plication to the knowledge of law. An order of men, to
whom their fellow citizens had daily recourse for advice
and to whom they looked up for decision in their most im
portant concerns, naturally acquired consideration and in
fluence in society. They were advanced to honours whid
Lad been confidered hitherto as the peculiar rewards of mi
litary virtue. They were entrusted with offices of the high
eft dignity and most extensive power. Thus, another prc
fllion than that of arms came to be introduced among th
laity, and was reputed honourable. The funtions of civ
life were attended to. The talents requisite for difcharq
ing them were cultivated. A new road was opened 1
wealth and eminence. The arts and virtues of peace wer
placed in their proper rank, and received their due recon
pence [CC.]

ICC) Note XXVI.

VIII. While improvements, so important with refpet

to the itate of society and the administration of justice,
gradually made progress in Europe, sentiments more liberal
and generous had begun to animate the nobles. These
were infpiredby the spirit of chivalry, which, though confi-
dered, commonly, as a wild intfitution, the effet of caprice,
and the source of extravagance, arose naturally from the
fate of society at that period, and had a very serious influ-
ence in refining the manners of the European nations. The
feudal state was a state of almost perpetual war, rapine, and
anarchy; during which the weak and unarmed were expos-
ed to insults or injuries. The power of the sovereign was
too limited to prevent these wrongs; and the administration
of justice too feeble to redress them. The most effectual
protection against violence and oppression was often found to
be that which the valour and generosity of private persons
afforded. The fame spirit of enterprise which had prompt-
ed so many gentlemen to take arms in defence of the oppref-
fed pilgrims in Palestine, incited others to declare themselves
the patrons and avengers of injured innocence at home.
When the finaLredu&ion of the Holy Land under the do.
minion of infidels put an end to these foreign expeditions,
the latter was the only employment left for the activity and
courage of adventurers. To check theinfolence of over-grown
oppressors; to rescue the helpless from captivity; to protet,
or to avenge women, orphans, and ecclesiastics, who could not
bear arms in their own defence; to redress wrongs and re-
move grievances; were deemed acs of the highest prowess
and merit. Valour, humanity, courtesy, justice, honour,
were the charaaeriftic qualities of chivalry. To these were
added religion, which mingled itself with every pafiion and
inlltitution during the middle ages, and by infusing a large
proportion of enthusiastic zeal, gave them such force, as car-
ried them to romantic excess. Men were trained to knight-
hood by a long previous discipline; they were admitted into
the order by folemnities no less devout than pompous; eve.

ry person of noble birth courted that honour; it was deem.
ed a diflincion superior to royalty; and monarchs were
proui to receive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

This singular inftstution, in which valour, gallantry, and

religion, were so strangely blended, was wonderfully adapted
to the tafle and genius of martial nobles; and its effecs
were soon visible in their manners. War was carried on
with lcfs ferocity, when humanity came to be deemed the
ornament of knighthood no less than courage. More
gentle and polished manners were introduced, when courte.
fy was recommended as the most amiable of knightly virtues.
Violence and oppression decreased, when it was reckoned
meritorious to check and to punish them. A fcnlpulous
adherence to truth, with the most religious attention to ful.
fil every engagement, became the distinguishing characer-
iftic of a gentleman, because chivalry was regarded as the
school of honour, and inculcated the most delicate sensibility
with respect to those points. The admiration of these qua.
lities, together with the high difinaions and prerogatives
conferred on knighthood in every part of Europe, inipired
persons of noble birth on some occasions with a species of
military fanaticism, and led them to extravagant enterprises.
But they deeply imprinted on their minds the principles of
generosity and honour. These were strengthened by every
thing that can assert the senses or touch the heart. The
wild exploits of those romantic knights who sallied forth in
quest of adventures, are well known, and have been treated
with proper ridicule. The political and permanent es-
fe&s of the spirit of chivalry have been less observed. Per-
haps, the humanity which accompanies all the operations of
war, the refinements of gallantry. and the point of honour,
the three chief circumfiances which distinguish modern from
ancient manners, may be ascribed in a great measure to this
institution, which has appeared whimsical to superficial ob-
servers, bat by its effects has proved of great benefit to man-
kind. The ientiments which chivalry inspired had a won-

derful influence on manners and conduc during the twelfth,
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. They were
so deeply rooted, that they continued to operate after the
vigour and reputation of the institution itself began to de-
cline. Some considerable tranfa&ions, recorded in the fol-
lowing history, resemble the adventurous exploits of chival-
ry, rather than the well.regulated operations of found poli-
cy. Some of the mdft eminent personages, whose charac-
ters will be delineated, were firongly tinctured with this
romantic spirit. Francis I. was ambitious to distinguish
himself by all the qualities of an accomplifsed knight, and
endeavoured to imitate the enterprising genius of chivalry
in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy during peace. The
fame which the Freach monarch acquired by these splendid
aflions, so far dazzled his more temperate rival, that he de-
parted on some occasions from his usual prudence and mode.
ration, and emulated Francis in deeds of prowess or of gal-
lantry [DD.]

IX. The progress of science, and the cultivation of lite-

rature, had a considerable effea in changing the manners
of the European nations, and introducing that civility
and refinement by which they are now distinguished. At
the time when their Empire was overturned, the Romans,
though they had loft that corret tarte which has rendered
the producions of their ancestors atandards of excellence,
and models of imitation for succeeding ages, fill preserved
their love of letters, and cultivated the arts with great ardour.
But rude barbarians were so far from being tfruck with any
admiration of these unknown accomplishments, that they
despised them. They were not arrived at that Rate of so-
ciety, when those faculties of the human mind, which have
beauty and elegance for their objects, begin to unfold them-
fclves. 'hey were itrangers to moit of those wants and de-
fires which are the parents of ingenious invention; 'anr
they did not comprehend either the merit or utility

O[DD. Note XXVII.

Roman arts, they destroyed the monuments of them, with
an industry not inferior to that with which their posterity
have fnce studied to preserve or to recover them. The con.
vullions occasioned by the settlement of so many unpolifhed
tribes in the Empire; the frequent as well as violent revolu.
tions in every kingdom which they eftablithed; together
with the interior defets in the form of government which
they introduced, banilhed security and leisure; prevented
the growth of taste, or the culture of science; and kept Eu.
rope, during several centuries, in that state of ignorance
which has been already described. But the events and in.
fitutions which I have enumerated, produced great altera.
tions in society. As soon as their operation, in restoring li
berty and independence to one part of the community, be.
gan to be felt; as soon as they began to communicate to all
the members of society, some taste of the advantages arising
from commerce, from public order, and from personal fecu-
rity, the human mind became conscious of powers which it
did not formerly perceive, and fond of occupations or pur.
suits of which it was formerly incapable. Towards the be.
ginning of the twelfth century, we discern the first fymptonn
of its awakening from that lethargy in which it had ben
long funk, and observe it turning with curiosity and atten.
tion towards new objeas.

The firi literary efforts, however, of the European nations

in the middle ages, were extremely ill direced. Among
nations, as well as individuals, the powers of imagination at-
tain some degree of vigour before the intelledual faculties
are much exercised in speculative or abftra& disquisition.
Men are poets before they are philosophers. They fee
with sensibility, and decfribe with force, when they have
made but little progress in investigation or rea£oning. The
age of Homer and of Hesiod long preceded that of Thale!

'f Socrates. But, unhappily for literature, our ancertorl,

ing from this course which nature points out, plunged

into the depths ofabftrufe and metaphysical inquiry

They had been converted to the Christian faith, soon after
they fettled in their new conquests. But they did not re-
ceive it pure. The presumption of men had added to the
simple and inftrutive do6rines of Chriflianity the theories
of a vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate into my-
fteries, and to decide questions which the limited faculties of
the huinan mind are unable to comprehend or to resolve.
h'lefe over-curious speculations were incorporated with the
yllein of religion, and came to be confidered as the moR es-
fential part of it. As soon, then, as curiosity prompted men
to inquire and to reason, there were the subjeCts which first
presented themselves, and engaged their attention. The fcho-

tllic theology, with its infinite train of bold disquisitions and
subtile diflintions concerning points which are not the object
of human reason, was the firit production of the spirit of inqui-
rv after it began to resume some degree of activity and vigour
in Europe. It was not, however, this circumstance alone that
gave fach a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they be-
gan again to exercise talents which they had so long neglet-
ed. Most of the persons who attempted to revive literature
in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, had received initruc-
tion, or derived their principles of science, from the Greeks
in the eastern Empire, or from the Arabians in Spain and
Africa. Both these people, acute and inquisitive to excess,
ad corrupted those sciences which they cultivated. The
ormer rendered theology a system of speculative refinement,
rof endless controversy. The latter communicated to phi-
ofophy a pirit of metaphysical and frivolous subtlety. Mif-
ed by these guides, the persons who first -applied to science
ere involved in a maze of intricate inquiries. Infead ofal-
wing their fancy- to take its natural range, and to produce,
ach works of invention as might have improved their tafle,
ad refined their sentiments; instead of cultivating those arts

rhich embellish human life, and render it comfortable; they
'ere fettered by authority, they were led alh ay by example,

and wafted the whole force of their genius in speculations
as unavailing as they were difficult.

But fruitless and ill-direEted as these speculations were,

their novelty roused, and their boldness interested the hu.
man mind. The ardour with which men pursued those un.
inviting tudies, was astonishing. Genuine philosophy was
never cultivated, in any enlightened age, with more zeal.
Schools, upon the model of those intfituted by Charlemagne,
were opened in every cathedral, and almost in every mona.
fiery of note. Colleges and universities were ereced and
formed into communities or corporations, governed by their
own laws, and invested with separate and extensive jurifdic.
tion over their own members. A regular course of fiudies
was planned. Privileges of great value were conferred on
matfers and scholars. Academical titles and honours of va-
rious kinds were invented as a recompence for both. Nor
was it in the schools alone that superiority in science led to
reputation and authority; it became an objeEt of refpea in
life, and advanced such as required it to a rank of no inconfi-
cerable eminence. Allured by all these advantages, an in.
cred;ble number of students resorted to those new feats of
E:arning, and crowded with eagerness into that new path
,xhich was opened to fame and diftincion.

But how considerable soever these first efforts may appear,

there was one circumfRance which prevented the effecs of
them from being as extensive as they naturally ought to have
Leen. All the languages in Europe, during the period un.
der review, were barbarous. They were destitute of ele.
gance, of force, and even of perspicuity. No attempt had
been hitherto made to improve or to polish them. The La.
tin tongue was consecrated by the church to feligion. Cuf
tom, with authority scarcely less sacred, had appropriated it
to literature. All the sciences cultivated in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries were taught in Latin. All books with
refpest to them were written in that language. It would
have been d:tmed a degradation of any important subjed,

to have treated of it in a modern language. This confined
science within a very narrow circle. The learned alone were
admitted into the .temple of knowledge; the gate was Ihut
against all others, who were suffered to remain involved in
their former darkness and ignorance.

But though science was thus prevented, during several

ages, from diffusing itself through society, and its influence
was much circumscribed; the progress which it made may
be mentioned, nevertheless, among the great causes which
contributed to introduce a change of manners into Europe.
The ardent, though ill-judged spirit of inquiry which I
have described, occasioned a fermentation of mind that put
ingenuity and invention in motion, and gave them vigour.
It led men to a new employment of their-faculties, which
they found to be agreeable as well as intereting. It ac-
cuifomed them to exercises and occupations which tended
to soften their manners, and to give them some relith for
the gentle virtues, peculiar to people among whom science
has been cultivated with success [EE].

X. The progress of commerce had considerable influence

in polishing the manners of the European nations, and in
establishing among them order, equal laws, and humanity.
The wants of men, in the original and moRt simple state of
society, are so few, and their desires so limited, that they
reft contented with the natural productions of their climate
and foil, or with what they can add to there by their own
rude industry. They have no superfluities to dispose of,
and few necessities that demand a supply. Every little
community subsisting on its own domestic flock, and fatiified
with it, is either little acquainted with the states around it,
or at variance with them. Society and manners muff be
considerably improved, and many provisions must be made
for public order and personal security, before a liberal inter-
course can take place between different nations. We find,
accordingly, that the first effe& of the settlement of the bar-

[EE] Note XXVIII.
Vol. 1. G

barians in the Empire, was to divide those nations which
the Roman power had united. Europe was broken into
many separate communities. The intercourse between these
divided states, ceased almost entirely during several cen.
turies. Navigation was dangerous in seas infelled by pi.
rates; nor could ftragers trust to a friendly reception in
the ports of uncivilized nations. Even between distant parts
of the fame kingdom, the communication was rare and diffi-
cult. The lawless rapine of banditti, together with the a-
vowed exations of the nobles, (carcely less formidable than
oppressive, rendered a journey of any length a perilous enter-
prize. Fixed to the spot in which they resided, the greater
part of the inhabitants of Europe loft, in a great measure,
the knowledge of remote regions, and were unaoquainted
with their names, their situations, their climates, and their
commodities [FS].

Various causes, however, contributed to revive the spirit

of commerce, and to renew, in some degree, the intercourse
between different nations. The Italians, by their connec-
tion with Confiantinople, and other cities of the Greek em-
pire, had preserved in their own country considerable reli
for the precious commodities and curious manufactures of
the East. They communicated some knowledge of these
to the countries contiguous to Italy. But this commerce
being extremely limited, the intercourse which it occasioned
between different nations was not considerable. The Cru-
fades, by leading multitudes from every comer of Europe
into Asia, opened a more extensive communication between
the East and Weft, which subsisted for two centuries; and
though the obje&ct f there expeditions was conquest and not
commerce; though the issue of them proved as unfortunate,
as the motives for undertaking them were wild and enthu-
fiaic; their commercial effets, as hath been shewn, were
both beneficial and permanent. During the continuance of
the Crusades, the great cities in Italy, and in other countries

[FFJ Note XXIX.

of Europe, acquired liberty, and together with it such pri-
vileges as rendered them refpetable and independent com-
munities. Thus, in every Rtate, there was formed a new or-
der of citizens, to whom commerce presented itself as their
proper obj-e, and opened to them a certain path to wealth.
and consideration. Soon after the dose of the Holy War,
the mariner's compass was invented, which, by rendering na-
vigation more lecure, encouraged it to become more adven-
turous, facilitated the communication between remote na-
tions, and brought them nearer to each other.

The Italian States, during the fame period, established a.

regular commerce with the East in the ports of Egypt, and
drew from thence all the rich products of the Indies. They
introduced into their own territories manufacures of vari-
ous kinds, and carried them on with great ingenuity and vi-
gour. They attempted new arts; and transplanted from
warmer climates, to which they had been hitherto deemed
peculiar, several natural producions which now furnilh the
materials of a lucrative and extended commerce. All these
commodities, whether imported from Asia, or produced by
their own skill, they disposed of to great advantage among
the other people of Europe, who began to acquire some
talte for an elegance in living unknown to their ancestors, or
despised by them. During the twelfth and thirteenth cen-
turies the commerce of Europe was almost entirely in the
hands of the Italians, more commonly known in those ages
by the name of Lombards. Companies or societies of Lom--
bard merchants fettled- in every different kingdom. They
were taken under the immediate protection of the several go-
vernments. They enjoyed exteufive privileges and-immuni-
titc. The operation of the ancient barbarous laws concern-
ing ltrangers, was suspended with refpet to them. They
became the carriers, the manufacturers, and. the bankers of
all Europe.

While the Italians, in the South of Europe, were cultivat.
iug trade with. such indufry and success, the commercial fpi-

G

rit awakened in the North towards the middle of the thir.
teenth century. As the nations around the Baltic were, at
that time, extremely barbarous, and infefed that sea with
their piracies, the cities of Lubec and Hamburgh, soon after
they began to open some trade with these people, found it
neceflary to enter into a league of mutual defence. They
derived such advantages from this union, that other towns
acceded to their confederacy, and in a flort time, eighty of
the moil considerable cities scattered through those extensive
countries which stretch from the bottom of the Baltic to
Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the famous Hanseatic league,
which became so formidable, that its alliance was courted,
and its enmity was dreaded by the greatest monarchs. The
members of this powerful association formed the first fyftema-
tic plan of commerce known in the middle ages, and con.
duted it by common laws enacted in their general assemblies.
They supplied the reft of Europe with naval itores, and
pitched on different towns, the most eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they established staples in which
their commerce was regularly carried on. Thither the
Lomrbards brought the producions of India, together with
the manufactures of Ital-, and exchanged them for the more
bulky, but not less ufcful commodities of the North. The
Hanseatic merchants disposed of the cargoes which they re-
ceived from the Lombards, in the ports of the Baltic, or
carried them up the great rivers into the interior parts of
Germany.

This regular intercourse opened between the nations in

the north and south of Europe, made them sensible of their
mutual wants, and created such new and increasing demands
for commodities of every kind, that it excited among the
inhabitants of the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in car-
rying on the two great manufacures of wool and flax, which
seem to have been considerable in that country as early as
the age of Charle.dgne. As Bruges became the centre of
communication between the Lombard and Hanseatic mer-

chants, the Flemings traded with both in that city to fuchi
extent as well as advantage, as spread among them a general;
habit of indulfry, which long rendered Slanders and the ad-
jacent provinces the most opulent, the most populous, and
tbet cultivated countries in Europe.

Struck with the flourishing state of these provinces, of
vhich lie discerned the true cause, Edward III. of England'
tndeavoured to excite a spirit of industry among his own.
Fubjeds, who, blind to the advantages of their situation, and-
ignorant of the source from which opulence was destined to,
Slow into their country, were so little attentive to their com--
mercial interests, as hardly to attempt those manufa&ures,
the materials of which they furnished to foreigners.- By al--
luring Flemish artisans to fettle in his dominions, as well as-
by many wife laws for the encouragement and regulation of,
trade, Edward gave a beginning to the woollen manufaaures-
of England, and first turned the a&tive and enterprising ge--'
nius of his people towards those arts which have raised the
English to the highest rank among commercial nations.

This increase of commerce, and of' intercourse between'
nations, how inconsiderable soever it may appear in refpet'
es thel rapid'and extensive progress during the last and pre-
sent age, seems wonderfully great, when we compare it with
the state of'both in Europelprevious to the twelfth century.-
Ir did not fail of producing great effe&s. Commerce tends;
to wear off those prejudices which maintain diftin&ion- and'
animosity between nations. It softens and polishes the. man--
ners of men. It unites them by one of the strongest of all'
ties, the desire offupplying theirmutual wants, It disposes,
them to peace, by establishing in every ftate.an order of.ci--
tizens bound'by their interest' to be the guardians of public-
tranquillity. As soon as the commercial spirit acquires vi-
gour, and begins to gain an afceudant in any society,. we.:
discover a new genius in its policy, its alliances, its wars,,
and its negotiations. Conspicuous proofs of- this occur int
the history of the Italian ltates, of the Hanseatic leagnue,.

G 3

## SECT. II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the Command of the National Force requisite in Foreign Operations.

and the cities of the Netherlands during the period under
review. In proportion as commerce made its way into the
different countries of Europe, they successively turned their
attention to those objets, and adopted those manners, which
occupy and diftinguiih polished nations [GG].

SECT. II.
Ve of the Progrefi of Society in Europe, with refpeB to the

Command of the National Force requrite in Foreign 0-
peraticn.

SUCH are the events and institutions which, by their pow-
erful operation, contributed gradually to introduce regular
government and pclifhed manners into the various nations of
Europe. When we survey the fate of society, or the cha-
racter of individuals, at the opening of the fifteenth century,
and then turn back to view the condition of both .at the
time when the barbarous tribes, which overturned the Ro-
man power, completed their settlement in their new con-
queits, the progress which mankind had made towards or.
der aud refinement w:l appear immense.

Government, however, was JiI far from having attained

that date, in which extensive monarchies aft with the unit-
ed vigour of the whole community, or carry on great un-
dertakings with perseverance and success. Small tribes or
communities, yen in their rudest fate, may operate in con-
cert, and exert their utmot force. They are excited to as
not by the diflant objets or the refined speculations which
interefl or assec men in polished societies, but by their pre.
feit feelings. The insults of an enemy kindle resentment;

[GG] Note XXX.

the success of a rival tribe awakens emulation; thefepaffions
communicate from breast to breast, and all the members of
the community, with united ardour, rulh into the field in
order to gratify their revenge, or to acquire diftintion.
But in widely extended states, such as the great kingdoms
of Europe at the beginning of the fifteenth century, where
there is little intercourse between the distant members of the
community, and where every great enterprize requires pre-
vious concert and long preparation, nothing can route and
call forth their united strength, but the absolute command
of a despot, or the powerful influence of regular policy. Of
the former, the vafi empires in the East are an example;
the irrefiltable mandate of the sovereign reaches the most re-
mote provinces of his dominions, and compels whatever num-
ber of his fubjets he is pleased to summon, to follow his
Randard. The kingdoms of Europe, in the present age,
are an inflance of the latter; the prince, by the less violent,
but no less effetual operation of laws and a well-regulated
government, is enabled to avail himfelfof the whole force of
his fate, and to employ it in enterprizes which require itre-
nuous and persevering efforts.

But, at the opening of the fifteenth century, the political

conflitution in all the kingdoms of Europe was very differ-
ent from either of these fates of government. The several
monarchs, though they had somewhat enlarged the bounda-
ries of prerogative by successful encroachments on the im-
munities and privileges of the nobility, were possessed of an
authority extremely limited. The laws and interior police
of kingdoms, though much improved by the various events
and regulations which I have enumerated, were fill feeble
and imperfe&. In every country, a numerous body of no-
bles, who continued to be formidable notwithtanding the va-
rious expedients employed to depress them, watched all the
motions of their sovereign with a jealous attention, which
set bounds to his ambition, and either prevented his forming

schemes of extensive enterprize, or obtru&ted the execution
of them.

The ordinary revenues of every prince were so extremely

small as to be inadequate to any.great undertaking. He
depended for extraordinary supplies on the good-will of his.
subje&s, who granted them often with a relu&ant, and al-
ways with a sparing hand.

As the revenues of princes were inconsiderable, the armies.

which they could bring into the field were unfit for long and
effetual service. Instead of being able to employ troops
trained to skill in arms, and to military subordination, by.
regular discipline, monarchs were obliged to depend on such!
forces as their vassals condufed to their Itandard in confe-.
quence oftheir military tenures. Thee, as they were bound:
to remain under arms only for a Ihort time, could not march:
far from their usual place of residence, and being more at-
tached to the lord of whom they held, than. to the sovereign:
whom they served, were often as much disposed to coun.:
terat as to forward his schemes. Nor were they, even if:
they had been more subjet to the command of the monarch,.
proper instruments to carry into execution any great andi
arduous enterprize. The strength of an army, formed ei-
ther for conquefl or defence, lies in infantry. To the fla-
bility and discipline of their legions, consisting chiefly of in.
fantry, the Romans, during the times of the republic, were-
indebted for their vicories; and when their descendants,
forgetting the institutions which had led them to universal-
dominion, so far altered their military system as to place:
their principal confidence in a numerous cavalry, the undif.
ciplined impetuosity of the barbarous nations,' who fought:
moflly on foot, was sufficient, as I have already observed,.
to overcome them. These nations, soon after they fettled
in their new conquests, uninftru&ed by the fatal error of the:
Romans, relinquifled the customs of their ancestors, and'
converted the chief force of their armies into cavalry. A.
mong the Romans this change was occasioned by the efemri-

nacy of their troops, who could not endure the fatigues of
service, which their more virtuous and hardy ancestors had
sustained with cafe. Among the people who eftablilhed the
new monarchies into which Europe was divided, this inno-
vation in military discipline seems to have flowed from the
pride of the nobles, who, scorning to mingle with persons of
inferior rank, aimed at being distinguished from them in the
field, as well as during peace. The institution of chivalry,
and the frequency of tournaments, in which knights, in com-
plete armour, entered the lifts on horseback with extraordi-
nary splendour, displaying amazing address, force, and va-
lour, brought cavalry into still greater esteem. The fond.
ness for that service increased to such a degree, that during
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the armies of Eu-
rope were composed almost entirely of cavalry. No gentle-
man would appear in the field but on horseback. To serve
in any other manner, he would have deemed derogatory to
his rank. The cavalry, by way of diftinaion, was-called
TCe battle, and on it alone depended the fate of every aation.
The infantry, colleted from the dregs and refuse of the peo-
ple, ill armed and worse disciplined, was almost of no account.

As there circumstances rendered the operations of particu-

lar kingdoms less considerable and less vigorous, so they long
kept the princes of Europe from giving such attention to
the schemes and tranfadions of their neighbours, as might
lead them to form any regular system of public security.
They were, of consequence, prevented from uniting in con-
federacy, or from adsing with concert, in order to establish
such a distribution and balance of power, as lhould hinder
any state from rising to a superiority, which might endanger
the general liberty and independence. During several cen-
turies, the nations of Europe appear to have confidered them-
selves as separate Societies, scarcely conneded together by
any common interest, and little concerned in each other's'
affairs or operations. An extensive commerce did not afford
them an opportunity of observing and penetrating into the

schemes of every different state. They had not ambaffadon
residing confiantly in every court to watch and give early in.
telligence of all its motions. The expetation of remote ad.
vantages, or the profpe& of distant and contingent evils, were
not sufficient to excite nations to take arms. Such only as
were within the sphere of immediate danger, and unavoidably
exposed to injury or insult, thought themselves intereted in
any contest, or bound to take precautions for their own
safety.

Whoever records the tranfa&ions of any of the more con.

fiderable European Rfates during the two last centuries, must
write the history of Europe. Its various kingdoms, through.
out that period, have been formed into one great system, so:
clofcly united, that each holding a determinate Ration, the
operations of one are so felt by all, as to influence their coun-
els and regulate their meafurea. But previous to the si.
teenth century, unless when vicinity of territory rendered the
occasions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or when na-
tional emulation fomented or embittered the spirit of hoftili-
ty, the affairs of different countries are seldom interwoven
with each other. In each kingdom of Europe great events
and revolutions happened, which the other powers beheld
with almost the fame indifference as if they had been uninte-
retled fpe&ators, to whom the effect of thcfe tranfacion&
could never extend.

During the violent struggles between France and Eng-

land, and notwithstanding the alarming progress which was
made towards rendering one prince the marer of both there
kingdoms, hardly one mcafure, which can be confidered as
the result of a sagacious and prudent policy, was formed in
order to guard ag3inft an event so fatal to Europe. The
dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, whom their situation
would not permit to remain neutral, engaged, it is true, in
the contest; but in taking their part, they seem rather to
have followed the impulse of their paffons, than to have
been guided by any just difcernmcnt of the danger which

threatened themselves and the tranquillity of-Europe. The
other princes, seemingly unaffeaed by the alternate successes
of the contending parties, left them to decide the quarrel by
themselves, or interposed only by feeble and ineffe&ual nego-
tiations.

Notwithifanding the perpetual hostilities in which the va-

rious kingdoms of Spain were engaged during several centu-
ries, and the successive occurrences which visibly tended to
unite that part of the continent into one great monarchy,
the princes of Europe hardly took any itep from which we
may conclude that they gave a proper attention to that im-
portant event. They permitted a power to arise impercep-
tibly, and to acquire itrength there, which soon became for-
midable to all its neighbours.

Amidst the violent convulsions with which the spirit of

domination in the fee of Rome, and the turbulent ambition
of the German nobles, agitated the Empire, neither the au.
thority of the popes, seconded by all their artifices and in-
trigues, nor the solicitations of the emperors, could induce
any of the powerful monarchs of Europe to engage in their
quarrel, or to avail themselves of many favourable opportu-
nities of interposing with effe& and advantage.

This amazing inactivity, during tranfa&ions so interest-

ing, is not to be imputed to any incapacity of discerning
their political consequences. The power of judging with
sagacity, and of a6ting with vigour, is the portion of men
in every age. The monarchs who reigned in the different
kingdoms of Europe during several centuries, were not
blind to their particular interest, negligent of the public
safety, or trangers to the method of securing both. If
they did not adopt that salutary system, which teaches mo-
dern politicians to take the alarm at the profpe& of distant
dangers, which prompts them to check the firit encroach-
ments of any formidable power, and which renders each state'
the guardian, in some degree, of the rights and independence
of all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to such imper-

fetions and disorders in the civil government of each coun.
try, as made it impolfibe for sovereigns to a& suitably to
those ideas which the pofiure of affairs, and their own obh
servation, mutl have suggested.

But during the course of the fifteenth century, various

events happened, which, by giving princes more entire con.
mand of the force in their refpe&ive dominions, rendered
their operations more vigorous and extensive. In confe.
quence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms becoming i
more frequently as well as more intimately conneced, they
were gradually accustomed to a& in concert and confedera.
cy, and were insensibly prepared for forming a system of
policy, in order to e&ablilh or to preserve such a balance
of power as was moil consistent with the general security.
It was during the reign of Charles the Fifth, that the ideas,
on which this system is founded, first came to be fully under.
flood. It was then, that the maxims by which it has been
uniformly maintained since that era, were universally adopt.
ed. On this account, a view of the causes and events which
contributed to establish a plan of policy, more salutary and
extensive than any that has taken place in the condut of
human affairs, is not only a neceflary introducion to the
following work, but is a capital object in the history of
Europe.

The firt event that occasioned any confiAerable alteration

in the arrangement of affairs in Europe, was the annexation
of the extensive territories, which England possessed on the
continent, to the crown of France. 'Whie the Eingli
were mailers of several of the most fertile and opulent pro
vinces in France, and a great part of its most nartial
inhabitants was bound to follow their standard, an Englith
monarch confidered himself rather as the rival, than as the
vasal of the sovereign of whom he held. The kings of
France circumcribed and thwarted in their schemes and o
perations by an adversary no less jealous than formidable,
durst not enter upon any enterprize of importance or of

difficulty. The English were always at hand, ready to op-
pose them. They disputed even their right to their crown,
and being able to penetrate, with ease, into the heart of
the kingdom, could arm againfl them those very hands which
ought to have been employed in their defence. Timid
«ounfels and feeble efforts were natural to monarchs in such
a situation. France, dismembered and overawed, could not
I attain its proper station in the system of Europe. But the

death of Henry V. of England, happily for France, and not
unfortunately for his own country, delivered the French
from the calamity of having a foreign master feated on their
throne. The weakness of a long minority, the diffenlions
in the Englifll court, together with the unfleady andlanguid
condu& which these occasioned, afforded the French a fa-
vourable opportunity of recovering the territories which
they had loft. The native valour of the French nobility
heightened to an enthusiastic confidence by a fupp6fed inter-
position of Heaven in their behalf; condu&ed in the field by
skilful leaders; and direted in the cabinet by a prudent
monarch; was exerted with such vigour and success, during
this favourable juncture, as not only wrested from the En-
glifh their new conquests, but fiript them of their ancient
poffeflions in France, and reduced them within the narrow
precinsts of Calais, and its tetty territory,

As soon as so many considerable provinces were reunited

to their dominions, the kings of France, conscious of this
acquisition of strength, began to form bolder schemes of inte-
rior policy, as well as of foreign operations. They immedi-
ately became formidable to their neighbours, who began to
fix their attention on their measures and motions, the im-o
portance of which they fully perceived. From this xera,
France, possessed of the advantages which it derives from the
situation and contiguity of its territories, as well as from the
number and valour of its people, rose to new influence in
Europe, and was the firit power in a condition to give alarnr
to thejealoufy or fears of the itates around it.

Vol. I. H

Norwas France indebted forthis increase of importance

merely to the reunion of the provinces which had been torn
from it. A circumstance attended the recovery of these,
which, though less considerable, and kls observed, contri.
buted not a little to give additional vigour and decision to all
the efforts of that monarchy. During the obstinate strum
gles between France and England, all the defects of the mi-
litary system under the feudal government were sensibly felt.
A war of long continuance languished, when carried on by
troops bound and accustomed to keep the field for a short
time. Armies, composed chiefly of heavy-armed cavalry,
were unfit either for the defence or the attack of the many
towns and catles, which it became necessary to guard or to
reduce. In order to obtain such permanent and effective
force, as became reqnifite during these lengthened contests,
the kings of Fraace took into their pay considerable bands
of mercenary soldiers, levied Sometimes among their own
fubjefs, and Sometimes in foreign countries. But as the
feudal policy provided no sufficient fund for such extraordi-
nary service, these adventurers were dismissed at the close of
every campaign, or upon any profpe& of accommodation;
and having been little accustomed to the restraints of difcip-
line, they frequently turned their arms againfi the country
which they had been hired to defend, and desolated it with
cruelty not inferior to that of its foreign enemies.

A body of troops kept cenfantly on foot, and regularly

trained to military subordination, would have supplied what
was wanting in the feudal contfitution, and have furnished
princes with the means of executing enterprizes, to which
they were then unequal. Such an eftablilhment, however,
was so repugnant to the genius of feudal policy, and so in-
compatible with the privileges and pretensions of the nobi-
lity, that during several centuries no monarch was either so
bold, or so powerful, as to venture on any ftep towards in-
troducing it. At last, Charles VII. availing himself of the
reputation which he had acquired by his successes against

the English, and taking advantage of the impressions of ter-
ror which such a formidable enemy had left upon the minds
of his fubjeAs, executed that which his predecessors durst
not attempt. Under pretence of having always ready a
force sufficient to defend the kingdom against any sudden in-
vafion of the English, he, at the time when he dilbanded his
other troops [A. D. 1445], retained under arms a body of
nine thousand cavalry, and of sixteen thousand infantry. He
appropriated funds for the regular payment of these; he fta-
tioned them in different places of the kingdom, according to
his pleasure; and appointed the officers who commanded
and disciplined them. The prime nobility courted this ser-
vice, in which they were taught to depend on their fove-
reign, to execute his orders, and to look up to him as the
judge and rewarder of their merit. The feudal militia,
composed of.the vassals whom the nobles could call out to
follow their standard, as it was in no degree comparable to
a body of foIdiers regularly trained to war, funk gradually
in reputation. The strength of an army was no longer e-
ftimated solely by the number of cavalry which served in it.
From the time that gun.powder was-invented, and the use of
cannon in the field became general, horsemen cased in com-
plete armour loft all the advantages which gave them the
pre-eminence over other oldiers. The helmet, the shield,
and the breast-plate, which refiited the arrow or the spear,
no longer afforded them security against these new inftru-
ments of deftrution. The service of infantry rose again
into esteem, and victories were gained, and conquests made,
chiefly by their efforts. The nobles and their military te-
nants, though Sometimes summoned to the field, according
to ancient form, were confidered as an incumbrance upon
the troops with which they acted; and were viewed with
contempt by soldiers accustomed to the vigorous and steady
operations of regular service.

Thus the regulations of Charles the VII. by eftablifling
the firit tanding army known in Europe, occasioned ai

H z

important revolution in its affairs and 'policy. By taking
from the nobles the sole direction of the national military
force, which had railed them to such high authority and im.
portar.e, a deep wound was given to the feudal arillocracy,
in that pait where its power seemed to be molt complete.

France, by forming this body of regular troops at a time

when there was hardly a squadron or company kept in con.
tiant pay in any other part of Europe, acquired such ad.
vantages over its neighbours, either in attack or defence,
that felf-prefervation made it necessary for them to imi.
tate its example. Mercenary troops were introduced into
all the confiderabie kingdoms on the continent. They. gra.
dually become the only military force that was employed or
trustcd. It has long been the chief objec of policy to in.
creae and to support them. It has long been the great aim
of princes and ministers to discredit .ad to annihilate all o.
thee means of national a&ivity or defence.

As the kings of France got the start ofother power.i,

ellabliihing a military force in their dominions, which en.
abled them to carry on foreign operations with more vigour,
and to greater extent, so they were the first who effeually
broke the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the great vaflts
of the crown, who by their exorbitant power had long cir-
cumfcribed the royal prerogative within very narrow limits,
and had rendered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe
inconsiderable. Many things concurred to undermine, gra-
dually, the power of the feudal aristocracy in France. The
wea'th and property of the nobility were greatly impaired
d.;ri:;g the long wars which the kingdom was obliged to
mainrtain with the English. The extraordinary zeal with
whl;i- t:ey exerted themselves in defence of their country
g-in:i its ancient enemies, exhauRed entirely the fortunes
of i'me great families. As almost every province in the
kingdom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands of o-
thers were exposed to the depredations of the enemy, were
avaged by the mercenary troops which their sovereigns hir.

ed occasionally, but could not pay, or were desolated with
tage still more deftrutive, by the peasants, in different in-
furredions. At the fame time, the necefilties of govern-
ment having forced their kings upon the desperate expedi-
ent of making great and sudden alterations in the current
coin of the kingdom, the fines, quit-rents, and other pay-
mnents fixed by ancient custom, funk much in value, and the
revenues of a fief were reduced far below the fum which it
had once yielded. During their contelts with the Englilh, in
which a generous nobility courted every station where dan-
ger appeared, or honour could be gained, many families of
note became extint, and their fiefs were reunited to the
crown. Other fiefs, ifi a long course of years, fell to fe-
mlale heirs» and were divided among them; were diminished
hy profuse donations to the church, or were broken and
split by the fucceflion of remote collateral heirs*.

Encouraged by these manifest symptoms of decline in

that body which he wished to depress, Charles VII. during
the firt interval of peace with England, made several efforts
towards establishing the regal prerogative on the ruins of
the aristocracy. But his obligations to the nobles were so
many, as well as recent, and their services in recovering the
kingdom so splendid, as rendered it necessary for him to pro.
ceed with moderation aed caution. Such, however, was
the authority which the crown had acquired by the progress
of its arms against the Englifl, and so much was the power
of the nobility diminilhed, that, without any opposition, he
soon made innovations of great consequence in the confitu.
tion. He not only established that formidable body of re-
gular troops, which has been mentioned, but he was the
iirft monarch of France who, by his royal edid [A. D.
1440], without the concurrence- of the States-general of the
kingdom, levied an extraordinary subsidy on his people.
He prevailed likewise with his fubjets, to render several

* Boulainvilliers Hifloire de Gouvernement de France, Lettre
xii.

H3

taxes perpetual, which had formerly been imposed occasion.
ally, and exacted during a short time. By means of all these
innovations, he accquir.d such an increase of power, and ex.
tended his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits, that,
from being the most dependent prince who had ever" fat up.
on the throne of France, he came to poflefs, during the lat.
ter years of his reign, a degree of authority which none of
his predecessors had enjoyed for several ages.

The plan of humbling the nobility which Charles began

to execute, his son Louis XI. carried on with a bolder spirit,
and with greater success. Louis was formed by nature to
be a tyrant; and at whatever period he had been called to
ascend the throne, his reign must have abounded with
schemes to oppress his people, and to render his own power
abfolutc. Subtile, unfeeling, crud; a stranger to every
principle of integrity, and regardless of decency, he scorned
at the restraint3 which a sense of honour, or the desire of
fame, impose even upon ambitious men. Sagacious, at the
fame time, to discern what he deemed his true interest, and
influenced by that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with
a perferving industry, and of adhering to it with a fylfema-
tic spirit, from which noobjec could divert, and no danger
could deter him.

The maxims of his administration were as profound as

they were fatal to the privileges of the nobility. He filled
all the departments of government with new men, and often
with persons whom he called from the lowest as well as most
despised functions of life, and railed at pleasure to stations of
great power or trust. These t-ere his only confidents, whom
he consulted in forming his plans, and to whom he commit-
ted the execution of them: while the nobles, accustomed to
be the companions, the favourites, and the miniiters of their
foereigns, were treated with such Rfudied and mortifying

* Hifcire de France par Valley & Villaret, tom. xv. 33I, &c.

389. tom. xvi. 324. Var.atioxn de la Monarchie Francoise, tom.
ii. l6a.

negle&, that if they would not submit to follow a court in
which they appeared without any shadow of their ancient
power, they were obliged to retire to their castles, where
they remained unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied
with having rendered the nobles of less consideration, by
taking out of their hands the sole dire&ion of affairs, Louis
added insult to negle&; and by violating their most valuable
privileges, endeavoured to degrade the order, and to reduce
the members of it to the fame level with other subje&s.
Persons of the highest rank among them, if so bold as to op-
pose his schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken the jealou.
fy of his capricious temper, were persecuted with rigour,
from which all who belonged to the order of nobility had
hitherto been exempted; they were tried by judges who
had no right to take cognizance of their actions; and were
fubje& to torture, or condemned to an ignominious death,
without regard to their birth or condition. The people ac-
customed to fee the blood of the most illustrious personages
fled by the hands of the common executioner, to behold
them ihut up 'in dungeons, and carried about in cages of
iron, began to view the nobility with less reverence than for-
merly, and looked up with terror to the royal authority,
which seemed to have humbled or annihilated every other
power in the kingdom. *

At the fame time, Louis, being afraid that oppression

might rouse the nobles, whom the rigour of his government
had intimidated, or that felf-prefervation might at last teach
them to unite, dexterously scattered among them the feeds
of discord; and industriously fomented those ancient animo-
fities between the great families, which the spirit ofjealou-
fy and emulation, natural to the feudal government, had ori-
ginally kindled and still kept alive. To accomplish this, all
the arts of intrigue, all the mysteries and refinements of his
fraudulent policy were employed, and with such fuccef4 that
at a juncure which required, the most fRrenuous efforts, as
well as the moif perfelt union, the nobles never aaed, ex.

taxes perpetual, which had formerly been imposed occasion.
ally, and exadted during a {hort time. By means of all these
innovations, he accqurrtd such an increase of power, and ex.
tended his prerogative so far beyond its ancient limits, that,
from being the most dependent prince who had ever fat up.
on the throne of France, he came to possess, during the lat-
ter years of his reign, a degree of authority which none of
his predecessors had enjoyed for several ages*.

The plan of humbling the nobility which Charles began

to execute, his son Louis XI. carried on with a bolder spirit,
and with greater success. Louis w as formed by nature to
be a tyrant; and at whatever period he had been called to
afccnd the throne, his reign must have abounded with
icilemes to oppress his people, and to render his own power
absolute. Subtile, unfeeling, cruel; a itranger to every
principle of integrity, and reganrlefs of decency, he scorned
al the refsraints which a sense of honour, or the desire of
fame, impose even upon ambitious men. Sagacious, at the
fame time, to discern what he deemed his true interest, and
influenced by that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with
a perferving industry, and of adhering to it with a fyllema-
tic spirit, from which noobje& could divert, and no danger
could deter him.

The maxims of his administration were as profound as

they were fatal to the privileges of the nobility. He filled
all the departments of government with new men, and often
with persons whom he called from the lowes as well as most
derpifed funtions of life, and raised at pleasure to fations of
great power or trust. These were his only confidents, whom
Le consulted in forming his plans, and to whom he commit-
ted the execution of them: while the nobles, accustomed to
be the companions, the favourites, and the ministers of theit
sovereigns, were treated with such studied and mortifying

' Hifcirc de France par Valley & Villaret, tom. xv. 331, &c,

389. tom. x. x.324. Vatlation de 13 Monarchie Francoise, torn
iii. 161.

neglet, that if they would not submit to follow a court in
which they appeared without any ihadow of their ancient
power, they were obliged to retire to their cafles, where
they remained unemployed and forgotten. Not satisfied
with having rendered the nobles of less consideration, by
taking out of their hands the sole direcion of affairs, Louis
added insult to negle&; and by violating their most valuable
privileges, endeavoured to degrade the order, and to reduce
the members of it to the fame level with other fubjeas.
Persons of the highest rank among them, if so bold as to op-
pose his schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken the jealou-
fy of his capricious temper, were persecuted with rigour,
from which all who belonged to the order of nobility had
hitherto been exempted; they were tried by judges who
had no right to take cognizance of their ations; and were
subjea to torture, or condemned to an ignominious death,
without regard to their birth or condition. The people ac-
customed to fee the blood of the most illustrious personages
fled by the hands of the common executioner, to behold
them Shut up 'in dungeons, and carried about in cages of
iron, began to view the nobility with less reverence than for-
merly, and looked up with terror to the royal authority,
which seemed to have humbled or annihilated every other
power in the kingdom. *

At the fame time, Louis, being afraid that oppression

might rouse the nobles, whom the rigour of his government
had intimidated, or that felf-prefervation might at last teach
them to unite, dexterously scattered among them the feeds
of discord; and industriously fomented those ancient animo-
fities between the great families, which the spirit ofjealou-
fy and emulation, natural to the feudal government, had ori-
ginally kindled and till kept alive. To accomplish this, all
the arts of intrigue, all the mysteries and refinements of his
fraudulent policy were employed, and with such success, that
at a junaure which required the most firnuous efforts, as
vell as the mofi perseEt union, the nobles never ated, ex-

cept during one flort sally of resentment at the beginning of
his reign, either with vigour or in concert.

As he flripped the nobility of their privileges, he added

to the power and prerogative of the crown. In order to
have at command such a body of soldiers as might be fuffici.
ent to crush any force that his difaffeced fubjecs could draw
together, he not only kept on foot the regular troops which
his father had raised, but, besides augmenting their number
confiderablv, he took into his pay fix -thousand Swiss, at
that time the best disciplined and most formidable infantry
in Europe*. From the jealousy natural to tyrants, he con.
fided in theie foreign mercenaries, as the most devoted in-
firuments of oppression, and the mol faithful guardians of
the power which he had usurped. That they might be
ready -to aft on the 1horted warning, he, during the latter
years of his reign, kept a considerable body of them en-
camped in one placet.

Great funds were requisite, not only to defray the ex-

pence of this additional eftablifinent, but to supply the
fums employed in the various enterprizes which the reliefs
activitv of his genius prompted him to undertake; But the
prerogative that his father had assumed of levying taxes
without the concurrence of the States-general, which he
was careful not only to retain but to extend, enabled him
to provide in some measure for the encrealing charges of
government.

What his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could not fur-

nuh, his address procured. He was the first monarch in
Europe who discovered the method of managing those
great aflemblies, in which the feudal policy had veiled
the power of granting subsidies and of imposing taxes.
He firfl taught other princes the fatal art of begin-
ning their attack on public liberty, by corrupting the

Mem. de Comines, tom. i. 367. Dan. Hiit. de la Milice Fran-
coife, tom. i. 182.

Merm. de Corn. tom. i. 381.

source from which it should flow. By exerting all his power
and address in influencing the ele&ion of representatives, by
bribing or overawing the members, and by various changes
which he artfully made in the form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired such entire direcion of these assemblies, that,
from being the vigilant guardians of the privileges and pro-
perty of the people, he rendered them tamely subservient
towards promoting the most odious measures of his reign*,
As no power remained to set bounds to his exations,
he not only continued all the taxes imposed by his father,
but made great additions to them, which amounted to a
fum that appeared astonishing to his contemporariest. §

Nor was it the power alone or wealth of the crown that

Louis increased; he extended its territories by acquisitions
of various kinds. He got poffefion of Roufillon by pur-
chafe; Provence was conveyed to him by the will of Charles
d' Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold, he feiz-
ed with a strong hand Burgundy and Artois, which had
belonged to that prince. Thus, during the course of a
single reign, France was formed into one compa& kingdom,
and the steady unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only
subdued the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but eftab-
lifhed a species of government, fearcely less absolute, or less
terrible than eafern despotism.

But fatal as his administration was to the liberties of his

fubjets, the authority which he acquired, the resources of
which he became matter, and his freedom from restraint in
concerting his plans as well as in executing them, rendered his
reign a&ive and enterprizing. Louis negotiated in all the
courts of Europe; he observed the motions of all his neigh-

Mem. de Comin. tom. L 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid. tom. ii.

p. 71.

tMem. de Corn. tom. i. 334.
§ Charles VII. levied taxes to the amount of x,8oo,ooo francs;
Louis XI. raised 4,700,000oo. The former had in pay 9000ooo caval-
ry and 16,000 infantry. The latter augmented the cavalry to
is,ooo, and the infantry to s5,ooo. Mem. de Comines, i, .34.

hours; he engaged, either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in
every great tranfadion; his resolutions were prompt, his o.
perations vigorous; and upon every emergence he could call
forth into aation the whole force of his kingdom. From
the era of his reign, the kings of France, no longer fetter.
ed and circurfcribed at home by a jealous nobility, have ex.
erted themselves more abroad, have formed more extensive
schemes of foreign conquests, and have carried on war with
a spirit and vigour long unknown in Europe.

The example which Louis set was too inviting not to be

imitated by other princes. Henry VII. as soon as he
was feated on the throne of England, formed the plan of
enlarging his own prerogative, by breaking the power of the
nobility. The circumstances under which he undertook to
execute it, were less favourable than those which induced
Charles VII. to make the fame attempt; and the spirit
with which he conduted it, was very different from that of
Louis XI. Charles, by the success of his arms against the
English, by the merit of having expelled them out of' so
many provinces, had established himself so firmly in the con-
fidence of his people, as encouraged him to make bold en-
croachments on the ancient constitution. The daring ge.
nius of Louis broke through every barrier, and endeavour-
ed to surmount or to remove every obftac-e that stood in his
way. But Henry held the sceptre by a disputed title; a
popular fadtion was ready every moment to take arms a-
gainfl him; and after long civil wars, during which the no-
bility had often displayed their power in creating and de-
poring kings, he felt that the regal authority had been so
much relaxed, and that he entered into poflfelion of a prero-
gative so much abridged, as rendered it necessary to carry on
his neafures deliberately, and without any violent exertion.
lHe endeavoured to undermine that formidable lfru&ure,
which he durit not attack by open force His schemes,
though cautious and flow in their operation, were well con-

certed, and productive in the end of great effects. By his
laws permitting the barons to break the entails of their e-
flates, and expose them to sale; by his regulations to pre.
vent the nobility fiom keeping in their service those nume-
rous bands of retainers, which rendered them formidable and
turbulent; by favouring the rising power of the commons;
by encouraging population, agriculture, and commerce; by
fecur;ng to his fubjeets, during a long reign, the enjoyment
of the blessings which flow from the arts of peace; by ac-
customing them to an administration of government, under
wliich the laws were executed with steadiness and vigour;
he made imperceptibly confiderahle alterations in the En-
glifh constitution, and transmitted to his successor authority
so extensive, as rendered him one of the molt absolute mo-
narchs in Europe, and capable of the greatest and molt vigo.
rous efforts.

In Spain, the union of all its crowns by the marriage of

Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory that they acquired by the
conquest of Granada, which brought the odious dominion
of the Moors to a period; the command of the great armies
which it had been necessary to keep long on foot, in or.
der to accomplish this; the wisdom and steadiness of their
adrminiftration; and the address with which they availed
themselves of every incident that occurred to humble the
nobility, and to extend their own prerogative, conspired in
raising these monarchs to such eminence and authority, as
none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed. Though feve-
ral causes, which shall be explained in another place, pre-
vented their attaining the fame powers with the kings of
France and England, and preserved the feudal constitution
longer entire in Spain, their great abilities supplied the de-
sets of their prerogative, and improved with such dexterity
all the advantages which they pofreffed, that Ferdinand car-
ried on his foreign operations, which were very extensive,
with extraordinary vigour and cffet.

While these princes were thus enlarging the boundaries

of prerogative, and taking such steps towards rendering
their kingdoms capable of acding with union and force, events
occurred, which called them forth to exert the new powers
which they had acquired. These engaged them in such a
series ofenterprizes and negotiations, that the affairs of all
the considerable nations in Europe came to be insensibly in.
terwoven with each other; and a great political system was
gradually formed, which grew to be an obje&t of universal
attention.

The first event which merits notice, on account of its in-

fluence. in producing this change in the state of Europe, was
the marriage of the daughter of Charles the Bold, the sole
heiress of the house of Burgundy. For some years before
her father's death, she had been confidered as the apparent
successor to his territories, and Charles had made proposals of
mnarryix.g her to several different princes, with a view of al.
luring them, by that offer, to favour the schemes which his
refilefs ambition was continually forming.

This rendered the alliance with her an obje&t of general

attention; and all the advantages of acquiring possession of
her territories, the most opulent at that time, and the beRl
cultivated of any on this fide of the Alps, were perfeAly un-
deritood. As soon, then, as the untimely death of Charles
opened the succession [A. D. 1477, Jan. 5,] the eyes of
all the princes in Europe were turned towards Mary, and
they felt themselves deeply interested in the choice which
ihe was about to make of the person on whom Ihe would
bestow that rich inheritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the provinces

which she possessed had been difmelnbered, and whose domi-
nions stretched along the frontiers of her territories, had e
very inducement to court her alliance. He had, likewifi
a good title to expe& the favourable reception of any reason
able proposition he shouid make, with refpeA to the difpo
fal of a princess, who was the vassal of his crown, and de
scended from the royal blood of France. There were only

two propofitidns, however, which he could make with pro.
priety. The one was the marriage of the dauphin, the o-
ther that of the count of Angouleme,.a prince of the blood,
with the heiress of Burgundy. By the former, he would
have annexed all her territories to his crown, and have ren-
dered France at once the most refpe&able monarchy in Eu-
rope. But the great disparity of ages between the two par-
ties, Mary being twenty and the dauphin only eight years
old; the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not to choose
a mailer possessed of such power as might enable him to form
schemes dangerous to their liberties; together with their
dread of falling under the odious and oppreifive government
of Louis, were obstacles in the way of executing this plan
which it was vain to think of surmounting. By the latter,
the accomplishment of which might have been attained with
ease, Mary having discovered some inclination to a match with
the count of Angouleme*. Louis would have prevented the
dominions of the house of Burgundy from being conveyed to
a rival power, and in return for such a splendid establishment
for the count of Angouleme, he muff have obtained, or
w ould have extorted from him, concessions highly beneficial
to the crown of France. But Louis had been accultomed
so long to the intricacies of a crooked and insidious policy,
that he could not be fatiofiedvith what was obvious and fim-
ple; and was so fond of artifice and refinement, that he came
to confider these rather as an ultimate obje&, than merely
as the means of conduting affairs. From this principle,
no less than from his unwillingness to aggrandize any of his
own fubjeds, or from his desire of oppressing the house of
Burgundy, which he hated, he negleced the course which
a prince less able and artful would have taken, and followed
one more suited to his own genius.

He proposed to render himself, by force of arms, mafier

of those provinces which Mary held of the crown of France,
and even to push his conqueRs into her other territories,

* Mem. de Comines, i. 358.
Vol 1. - .

while he amused her with insisting continually on the im-
practicable match with the dauphin. In prosecuting this
plan, he displayed wonderful talents and industry, and exhi-
bited such scenes of treachery, falfhood, and cruelty, as are
amazing even in the history of Louis XI. Immediately up-
on the death of Charles, he put his troops in motion, and
advanced towards the Netherlands. He corrupted the lead-
ing men in the provinces of Burgundy and Artoi., and fe-
duced them to desert their sovereign. He got admifflion in-
to some of the frontier towns by bribing the governors; the
gates of others were opened to him in consequence of his in-
trigues with the inhabitants. He negotiated with Mary;
and, in order to render her odious to her subje&s, he betray.
ed to them her most important secrets. He carried on a
private correspondence with the two ministers whom ihe
chiefly trusted, and then communicated the letters which he
had received from them to the flates of Slanders, who, en-
raged at their perfidy, brought them immediately to trial,
tortured them with extreme cruelty, and, unmoved by the
tears and entreaties of their sovereign, who knew and ap-
proved of all that the ministers had done, they beheaded them
in her presence*.

While Louis, by this condut, unworthy of a great mo-

narch, was securing the possession of Burgundy, Artois, and
the towns on the Somme, the flates of Slanders carried on
a negotiation with the emperor Frederic III. and concluded
a treaty of marriage between their sovereign and his son
Maximilian, archduke of Auitria [A.D. 1477]. The il-
luftrious birth of that prince, as well as the high dignity of
which he had the profpe&t, rendered the alliance honourabk
for Mary, while, from the difRance of his hereditary territo.
ries, and the scantiness of his revenues, his power was so in.
considerable, as did not excite the jealousy or fear of the
Flemings.

Thus Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and the excefi

Mem. de Comines, liv. v. chap. 15. p. 309, &c.

of his refinements, put the house of Auflria. in pofeflion of
this noble inheritance. By this acquisition, the foundation
of the future grandeur of Charles V. was laid; and he be-
came master of those territories, which enabled him to carry
on his most formidable and decisive operations against France.
Thus, too, the fame monarch who first united the interior
force of France, and established it on such a footing, as to
render it formidable to the reft of Europe, contributed, far
contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival power, which,
during two centuries, has thwarted the measures, opposed
the arms, and checked the progrcfs of his fucciTfors.

The next event of confcquence in the fifteenth century,

was the expedition of Charles VIII. into Italy [A.D.
1494]. This occasioncd revolutions no less memorable;
produced alterations, both in the military and political f)-
Item, which were more immediately perceived; routed the
fates of Europe to bolder efforts; and blended 'their affairs
and interests more closely together. The mild adminitlra-
tion of Charles, a weak but generous prince, seems to have
revived the spirit and genius of the French nation, which
the rigid despotism of Louis XI. his father, had depressld,
and almost extinguirfed. The ardour for military service,
natural to the French nobility, returned, and their young
monarch was impatient to diftinguifl his reign by some
splendid enterprize. While he was uncertain towards what
quarter he (hould turn his arms, the solicitations and intrigues
of an Italian politician, no less infamous on account of his
crimes, than eminent for his abilities, determined his choice.
Ludovico Sforza, having formed the design of deposing
his nephew the duke of Milan, and of placing himself on
the ducal throne, was so much afraid of a combination of
the Italian powers to oppose this measure, and to support
the injured prince, with whom most of them were conne&ed
by blood or alliance, that he saw the neceflity of securing
the aid of some able protetor. The king of France was
the person to whom he applied; and without disclosing his

I z.

own intentions, he laboured to prevail with him to march
into Italy, at the head of a powerful army, in order to seize
the crown of Naples, to which Charles had pretensions as
heir of the house of Anjou. The right to that kingdom,
claimed by the Angevin family, had been conveyed to Louis
XI. by Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and Provence.
But that sagacious monarch, though he took immediate
pofleflion of those territories of which Charles was really
master, totally disregarded his ideal title to a kingdom, over
which another prince reigned in tranquillity; and uniformly
declined involving himself in the labyrinth of Italian politics.
His son, more adventurous, or more inconsiderate, embarked
eagerly in this enterprize; and contemning all the remon.
ftrances of his molt experienced counsellors, prepared to car.
ry it on with the utmost vigour.

The power which Charles possessed was so great, that he

reckoned himself equal to this arduous undertaking. His
father had transmitted to him such an ample prerogative, as
gave him the entire command of his kingdom. He himself
had added considerably to the extent of his dominions, by
his prudent marriage with the heiress of Bretagne, which
rendered him master of that province, the las of the great
fiefs that remained to be annexed to the crown. He soon
assembled forces which he thought ftufficient; and so impa-
tient was he to enter on his career as a conqueror, that fa-
crificing what was real, for what was chimerical, he reftor.
ed Rouiillon to Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's
acquisitions in Artois to Maximilian, with a view of induc-
ing these princes not to molelt France, while he was carry-
ing on his operations in Italy.

But so different were the efforts of the states of Europe

in the fifteenth century, from those which we shall behold
in the course of this history, that the army with which
Charles undtr-ook this great enterprize, did not exceed
twenty thousand men. The train of artillery, however, the
ammunition, and warlike stores of every kind provided for

its use, were so considerable, as to bear some resemblance to
the immense apparatus of modern war*.

When the French entered Italy, they met with nothing

able to refill them. The Italian powers having remained,
during a long period, undiiturbed by the invasion of any so-
reign enemy, had formed a fyitem with refpe&f to their as-
fairs, both in peace and war, peculiar to themselves. In or-
der to adjust the interests, and balance the power of the dif-
ferent flates into which Italy was divided, they were engag-
ed in perpetual and endless negotiations with each other,
which they conducted with all the subtlety of a refining and
deceitful policy. Their conteffs in the field, when they had
recourse to arms, were decided in mock battles, by innocent
and bloodless victories. Upon the firit appearance of the
danger which now impended, they had recourse to the arts
which they had itudied, and employed their utmost skill in
intrigue in order to avert it. But this proving ineffectual,
their bands of effeminate mercenaries, the only military force
that remained in the country, being fit only for the parade-
of service, were terrified at the aspet of real war, and shrunk
at its approach. The impetuosity of the French valour ap-
peared to them irrefiftable. Florence, Pisa, and Rome o-
pened their gates as the French army advanced. The pro.
speCt of this dreadful invasion itruck one king of Naples
with such panic terror, that he died (if we may believe his.
torians) of the fright. Another abdicated hi, throne from
the fame pusillanimous spirit. A third fled out of his do-
minions, a. soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapolitan,
frontiers. Charles, after marching thither from the bottom
of the Alps, with as much rapidity, and almoRl as little op.
polition, as if he had been on a progrets through his owna-
dominions, took quiet possession of the throne of Naples,.
and intimidated or gave law to every power in Italy.

Such was the conclusion of an expedition, that mufl be
confidered as the firit great exertion of those new powers

Mezeray Hist. tom. ii. 777,

I 3

which the princes of Europe had acquired, and now began
to exercise. Its effefts were no less confiderabletthan its
success had been astonishing. The Italians, unable to resist
the imprefiion of the enemy who broke in upon them, per-
mitted him to hold on his course undisturbed. They quick.
ly perceived that no single power, which they could rouse to
action, was an equal match for a monarch who ruled over
such extensive- territories, and was at the head offuch a mar.
tial people; but that a confederacy might accomplish what
the separate members of it durst not attempt. To this ex-
pedient, the only one that remained to deliver or to preserve
them from the yoke, they had recourse. While Charles in-
considerately wafted his time at Naples in festivals and tri-
umphs on account of his past fuccefies, or was fondly dream-
iMg of future conquests in the East, to the empire of which
he now aspired, they formed against him a powerful combi-
nation of almot all the Italian Rates, supported by the em-
peror Maximilian, and Ferdinand king of Aragon. The
unio'n ui so many powers, who suspended or forgot all their
particular animcfitits, that they might a& in concert against
an enemy who had become formidable to them all, awaken-
ed Charles from his thoughtlels security. He saw now no
profpedc of safety but in returning to France. An army of
thirty thousand men, afrembled by the allies, was ready to
obftrua his march; and though the French,.with a daring
courage, which more than countervailed their inferiority in
number, broke through that great body and gained a vito-
ry, which opened to their monarch a safe passage into his
own territories, he was stripped of all his conquests in Italy
in as (hort a time as it had taken to acquire them; and the
political system in that country tefumed the fame appearance
as before his invasion.

The sudden and decisive effe& of thi- confederacy, seems

to have infiruated the princes and statesmen of Italy as much
as the irruption of the French had disconcerted and alarmed
them. They had extended, on this occasion, to the affairs

of Europe, the maxims of that political science which had
hitherto been applied only to regulate the operations of the
petty states in their own country. They had discovered the
method of preventing any monarch from rising to such a
degree of power, as was inconsistent with the general liber-
ty; and had manifested the importance of attending to that
great secret in modern policy. the preservation of a proper
diltribution of power among all the members of the fyllem
into which the states of Europe are formed. During all the
iars of which Italy from that time was the theatre, and a-
midst the hostile operations which the imprudence of Louis
XII. and the ambition of Ferdinand of Aragon, carried on
in that country, with little interruption, from the close of
the fifteenth century, to that period at which the subsequent
history commences, the maintaining a proper balance of pow-
er between the contending parties, became the great object
of attention to the statesmen of Italy. Nor was the idea
confined to them. Self-prefervation taught other powers to
adopt it. It grew to be fashionable and universal. From
this era we can trace the progress of that intercourse between
nations, which has linked the powers of Europe so closely
together; and can discern the operations of that provident
policy, which, during peace, guards against remote and con.
tingent dangers; and, in war, has prevented rapid and de-
fru&ive conquests.

This was not the only effet of the operations which the

great powers of Europe carried on in Italy. They contri-
buted to render general such a change, as the French had
begun to make in the state of their troops; and obliged all
the princes who appeared on this new theatre of action, to
put the military force of their kingdoms on an eftablifliment
similar to that France When the feat of war came to be
remote from the countries which maintained the contest, the
service of the feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and the
necessity of employing soldiers regularly trained to arms, and
kept in constant pay, came at once to be evident. When

Charles VIII. marched into Italy, his cavalry was entirely
cornpofed of those companies of gendarmes, embodied by
Charles VII. and continued by Louis XI.; his infantry con.
silted partly of Swiss, hired of the Cantons, and partly of
Gafcans, armed and disciplined after the Swiss model. To
these Louis XII. added a body of Germans, well known in
the wirs of Italy by the name of the Black Bands. But
neither of these monarchs made any account of the feudal
militia, or ever had recourse to that military force which they
might have commanded, in virtue of the ancient institutions
in their kingdom. Maximilian and Ferdinand, as soon as
they began to aft in Italy, employed similar instruments, and
trusted the execution of their plans entirely to mercenary
troops.

This innovation in the military system was quickly follow.

ed by another, which the custom of employing Swiss in the
Italian wars was the occasion of introducing. The arms and
discipline of the Swiss were different from those of other Eu-
ropean nations. During their long and violent struggles in
defence of their liberties againif the house of Austria, whose
armies, like those of other considerable princes, confited
chiefly of heavy-armed cavalry, the Swiss found that their
poverty, and the small number of gentlemen residing in their
country, at that time barren and ill cultivated, put it out of
their power to bring into the field any body ofhorfe capable
of facing the enemy. Neceflity compelled them to place all
their confidence in infantry; and in order to render it capa-
ble of withflanding the Ihock of cavalry, they gave the fol-
diers brea!t-plates and helmets as defensive armour; together
with long spears, halberts, and heavy swords, as weapons of
offence. They formed them into large battalions ranged in
deep and close array, so that they could present on every fide
a formidable front to the enemy*. The men at arms could
make no impression on the solid strength of such a body. It
repulsed the Austrians in all their attempts to conquer Swif-

* Machiavel's Art of War, b. ii. chap. ii. p. 45 1.

feriand. It broke the Burgundian gendarmerie, which was
scarcely inferior to that of France, either in number or re-
putation; and when first called to a& in Italy, it bore down,
by its irrefiftable, force, every enemy that attempted to op-
pose it. These repeated proofs of the decisive effed of in-
fantry, exhibited on such conspicuous occasions, restored
that service to reputation, and gradually re-eftablilhed the
opinion which had been long exploded, of its superior im-
portance in the operations of war. But the glory which the
Swiss had acquired, having inspired them with such high
ideas of their own prowess and consequence as frequently
rendered them mutinous and insolent, the princes who em-
ployed them became weary of depending on the caprice of
foreign mercenaries, and began to turn their attention to-
wards the improvement of their national infantry.

The German powers having the command of men, whom

nature has endowed with that fleady courage and perfever-
ing strength which forms them' to be soldiers, loon modelled
their troops in such a manner, that they vied with the Swiss
both in discipline and valour.

The French monarchs, though more slowly, and with

greater difficulty, accustomed the impetuous spirit of their
people to Subordination and discipline; and were at such
pains to render their national infantry refpetable, that as
early as the reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
rank had so far abandoned their ancient ideas, as to conde-
scend to enter into that fervicet.

The Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult to em-

ploy any other than their national troops in the southern
parts of Italy, which was the chief scene of their operations
in that country, not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but
improved upon it, by mingling a proper number of soldiers,
armed with heavy muskets, in their battalions; and thus
formed that famous body of infantry, which during a cen-
tury and a half, was the admiration and terror of all Europe.

t Brantome, tom. x. p. I1. Mem. de Fleuranges, 143.

The Italian flates gradually diminiihed the number of their
cavalry, and, in imitation of their morepowerful neighbours,
brought the itrength of their armies to consist in foot fol.
diers. From this period the nations of Europe have carried
on war with forces more adapted to every species of service,
more capable of acing in every country, and better fitted
both for making conquests, and for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe to there

improvements in the art of war, they gave them likewise the
firit idea of the expence with which it is accompanied when
extensive or of long continuance, and accustomed every na-
tion to the burden of such impositions as are necessary for
supporting it. While the feudal policy subsisted in full vi.
gour, while armies were composed of military vafials called
forth to attack some neighbouring power, and to perform, in
a short campaign, the services which they owed to their so.
vereign, the expence of war was extremely moderate. A
small subsidy enabled a prince to begin and to finish his great.
elI military operations. But when Italy became the theatre
on which the powers of Europe contended for superiority,
the preparations requisite for such a distant expedition, the
pay of armies kept constantly on foot, their fubfitence in a
foreign country, the sieges to be undertaken, and the towns
to be defended, swelled the charges of war immensely, and,
by creating demands unknown in less ac;ive times, multiplied
taxes in every kingdom. The progress of ambition, how-
ever, was so rapid, and princes extended' their operations so
fall, that it was impofible at first to eftablilh funds propor-
tional to the increase of expence which these occasioned.
When Charles VII. invaded Naples, the fums requisite for
carrying on that enterprize so far exceeded those which
France had been accustomed to contribute for the support of
government, that before he reached the frontiers of Italy,
his treasury was exhausted, and the domestic resources, of
which his extensive prerogative gave him the command,
were at an end. As he durst not venture to lay any new

imposition on his people, oppressed already with the weight
es unusual burdens; the only expedient that remained was,
to borrow of the Genoese as much money as might enable
him to continue his march. But he could not obtain a sus-
ficient fum, without consenting to pay annually the exorbi-
tant interest of forty-two livres for every hundred that he re-
ceivedt. We may observe the fame disproportion between
the efforts and revenues of other princes, his coitemporaries.
From this period, taxes went on increasing; and during the
reign of Charles V. such fumrs were levied in every state, as
would have appeared enormous at the close of the fifteenth
century, and gradually prepared the way for the till more
exorbitant exactions of modern times.

The last tranfa&ion, previous to the reign of Charles V.

that merits attention on account of its influence upon the
slate of Europe, is the league of Cambray. To humble the
republic of Venice, and to divide its territories, was the ob-
jet of all the powers who united in this confederacy. The
civil constitution of Venice, established on a firm basis, had
suffered no considerable alteration for several centuries; dur-
ing which, the senate conducted its affairs by maxims of po-
licy no less prudent than vigorous, and adhered to these with
an uniform confiilent spirit, which gave that commonwealth
great advantage over other states, whose views and measures
changed as often as the form of their government, or the'
persons who administered it. By these unintermitted exer-
tions of wisdom and valour, the Venetians enlarged the do-
minions of their commonwealth, until it became the molt con-
Giderable power in Italy; while their extensive commerce, the
useful and curious manufactures which they carried on, to-
gether with the large flare which they had acquired of the
lucrative commerce with the East, rendered Venice the molt
opulent fate in Europe.

The power of the Venetians was the object of terror to
their Italian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed with

t Mem. de Cpmines, lib: vii. c. 5. p. 440.

envy by the greatest monarchs, who could not vie with ma-
ny of their private citizens in the magnificence of their build-
ings, in the richness of their dress and furniture, or in fplen.
dour and elegance of living §. Julius II. whose ambition was
superior, and his abilities equal, to those of any pontiff who
ever fat on the papal throne, conceived the idea of this league
againA the Venetians, and endeavoured, by applying to those
passions which I have mentioned, to persuade other princes
to join in it. By working upon the fears of the Italian pow-
ers, and upon the avarice of several monarchs beyond the
Alps, he induced them, in concurrence with other causes,
which it is not my province to explain, to form one of the
most powerful confederacies that Europe had ever beheld, a-
gainft those haughty republicans.

The emperor, the king of France, the king of Aragon,

the pope, were principals in the league of Cambray, to which
almost all the princes of Italy acceded, the leaf considerable
of them hoping for some hare in the spoils of a fate, which
they deemed to be now devoted to deftrucion. The Ve-
netians might have diverted this storm, or have broken its
force; but with a presumptuous rashness, to which there is
nothing funilar in the course of their history, they waited its
approach. The impetuous valour of the French rendered
ineffetual all their precautions for the safety of the republic;
and the fatal battle of Ghiarraddada entirely ruined the ar-
my, on which they relied for defence. Julius seized all the
towns which they held in the eccleiaftical territories. Ser-
dinand re-annexed the towns of which they had got posses-
lion on the coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominion.
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army, advanced to-
wards Venice on the one fide. The French puihed their
conquefs on the other. The Venetians, surrounded by so
many enemies, and left without one ally, funk from the
height of presumption to the depths of despair; abandoned
all their territories on the continent; and {hut themselves u;

§ Heliani oratio apud Goldaaum in polit. Imperial. p. 980.

in their capital, as their last refuge, and the only place which
they hoped to preserve.

This rapid success, however, proved fatal to the confede-

racy. The members of it, whose union continued while
they were engaged in seizing their prey, began to feel their
ancient jealousies and animofities revive, as soon as they had
a profped of dividing it. When the Venetians observed
there fy mptoms of distrust and alienation, a ray of hope broke
in upon them; the spirit natural to their councils returned;
they resumed such wisdom and firmness, as made some atone-
ment for their former imprudence and dejection; they reco-
vered part of the territory which they had lotl; they ap-
peased the pope and Ferdinand by well-timed concessions in
their favour; and at length dissolved the confederacy, which
had brought their commonwealth to the brink of ruin.

Julius, elated with beholding the effects of a league which

he himself had planned, and imagining that nothing was too
arduous for him to undertake, conceived the idea of expel-
ling every foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
of his mind towards executing a scheme so well suited to his
enterprizing genius. He directed his first attack against the
French, who, on many accounts, were more odious to the
Italians, than any of the foreigners who had acquired domi-
nion in their country. By his activity and address, he pre-
vailed on most of the powers, who had joined in the league
of Cambray, to turn their arms againfi the king of France,
their former ally; and engaged Henry VIII. who had late-
ly ascended the throne of England, to favour their opera-
tions by invading France. Louis XII. resifted all the es-
forts of this formidable and unexpected confederacy with un-
daunted fortitude. Hostilities were carried on, during fe-
veral campaigns, in Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in
Picardy, with alternate success. Exhaufled, at length, by
the variety as well as extent of his operations; unable to
withstand a confederacy which brought against him superior
force, conduced with wisdom and acing with perseverance;

Vol. I. K

Louis found it necessary to conclude separate treaties of
peace with his enemies; and the war terminated with the
loss of every thing which the French had acquired in Italy,
except the castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable towns in
that dutchy.

The various negotiations carried on during this busy pe-

rnod, and the different comb;nations formed among powers
hitherto little conne&ed with each other, greatly increased
that intercourse among the nations of Europe, which I have
mentioned as one effc& of the events in the fifteenth century;
while the greatness of the objed at which different nations
aimed, the distant expeditions which they undertook, as well
as the length and obstinacy of the contest in which they en-
gaged, obliged them to exert themselves with a vigour and
perseverance unknown in the preceding ages.

Those a&tive scenes which the following history will exhi-

bit, as well as the variety and importance of those tranfac-
tions which distinguish the period to which it extends, are
not to be ascribed folcly to the ambition, to the abilities, or
to the rivalihip of Charles V. and of Francis I. The king-
doms of Europe had arrived at such a degree of improve-
ment in the internal administration of government, and prin-
ces had acquired such commana of the national force which
was to be exerted in foreign wars, that they were in a condi-
tion to enlarge the sphere of their operations, to multiply
their claims and pretensions, and to increase the vigour of
their efforts. Accordingly the sixteenth century opened
with the certain profpe& of its abounding in great and in-
tereming events.

«L"S

## SECT. III. View of the Political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the commencement of the sixteenth Century.

SECT. III.
View of the Political Confitution of theprincipal States in Eu-

rope, at the commencement of the ixteenth Century.

HAVING thus enumerated the principal caures and events;
the influence of which was felt in every part of Europe, and
contributed either to improve internal order and police in its
various ilates, or to enlarge the sphere of their afivity, by
giving them more entire command of the force with which
foreign operations are carried on; nothing farther seems re-
quifite for preparing my readers to enter, with full informa,.
tion, upon perusing the History of Charles V. but to give a
view of the political constitution and form of civil governs
ment in each of the nations which- alted any considerable
part during that period. For as the institutions and events
which I have endeavoured to illuufrate, formed the people of
Europe to resemble each other, and conducted them from
barbarism to refinement, in the fame path, and by nearly e-
qual steps; there were other circumstances which occasioned
a difference in their political eflabliflments, and gave rife tow
those peculiar modes of government, xvhich have produced:
such variety in the characer and genius of nations.

It is no less neceffaryto become acquainted with the lat.

ter, than to have contemplated the former. \Without a di.
ftiuE knowledge of the peculiar form and genius of civil go;
vernment in each state, a great part of its tranfaaions must
appear altogether mysterious and inexplicable. The hillo-
rians of particular countries, as they seldom extend their
views farther than to the amusement or intrudtion of their
fellow-citizens, by whom they might presume that all their
domestic customs and inflitutions were perfetly underflood,
have often neglected to descend into such details with refpe&
to these, as are sufficient to convey to foreigners full light
and information concerning the occurrences which they re-
late. But a history, which comprehends the tranfa&tiona

K

of so many different countries, would be extremely imper.
fe,, without a previous survey of the conifitution and poli-
tical state of each. It is from his knowledge of these, that
the reader mu.t draw those principles, which will enable him
tojudge with dii'fecment, and to decide with certainty con.
cerning the condd:c of nations.

A minute detail, however, of the peculiar forms and re-

gulations in every country, would lead to deductions of im-
measurable length. To sketch out the great lines which
difinguilh and charaterife each government, is all that the
rature of my present work will admit of, and all that is ne-
ce.Tarv to illufirate the events which it records.

At the opening of the sixteenth century, the political

aspect of Italy was extremely different from that of any o-
ther part of Europe. Instead ofthofe extensive monarchies,
which occupied the reft of the continent, that delightful
country was parcelled out among many small states, each of
which possessed sovereign and independent jurifdiaion.
The olily monarchy in Italy was that of Naples. The do.
minion of the popes was of a peculiar species, to which
there is nothing similar either in ancient or modern times.
In Venice, Florence, and Genoa, a republican form of go-
vernment was established. Milan was subjea to sovereigns,
\bho had Assumed no higher title than that of dukes.

The pope was the firt of these powers in dignity, and

pot the leaf considerable by the extent of his territories. In
the primitive church, the jurifdicdion of biflops was equal
and co-ord'nate. They derived, perhaps, some degree of
coniideration from the dignity of the fee in which they pre-
lided. They poiTeffed, however, no real authority or pre-
eminence, but what they acquired by superior abilities, or
superior fantity. As Rome had so long been the feat of
empire, and the capital of the world, its bishops were on that
account entitled to refpec; they received it; but during
several ages they received, and even claimed, nothing more.
From these humble beginnings, they advanced with such

adventurous and well-direded ambition, that they establish-
ed a spiritual dominion over the minds and sentiments of
mren, to which all Europe submitted with implicit obedience.
Their claim of universal jurifdiEtion, as heads of the church;
and their pretensions to infallibility in their decisions, as fuc-
celTors of St. Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repug-
nant to the genius of the Chriltian religion. But on these
foundations, the superstition and credulity of mankind en-
abled them to eret an amazing fuperfructure. In all ec.
clefiaflicatcbntroverfies, their decisions were received as the
infallible oracles of truth. Nor was the plenitude of their
power confined solely to what was spiritual; they dethron-
ed monarchs; disposed of crowns; absolved subje&s from
the obedience due to tltir sovereigns; and laid kingdoms.
under interdics. There was not a state in Europe which
had not been disquieted by their ambition. There was not
a throne which they had not shaken; nor a prince who did
not tremble at their power.

Nothing was wanting to render this empire absolute, and;

to cilablitl it on the ruins of all civil authority, but that the
popes flou!d have possessed such a degree of temporal power,
as was sufficient to second and enforce their spiritual decrees.
Happily for mankind, at the time when their spiritual jurif-
didcion was molt exten&ve, and most revered, their secular
dominion was extremely limited. They were powerful pon-
tiffs, formidable at a distance; but they were petty princes,
without any coufiderable domestic force. They had early
endeavoured, indeed, to acquire territory by arts similar to
those which they had employed in extending their fpirituat
junfdi&tion. Under pretence of a donation from Conftan.
tine, and of another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin,..
they attempted to take possession of some towns adjacent to
Rome But these donations were fietitious, and availed
them little. The benefations, for which they were indebt.
ed to the credulity of the Norman adventurers,.who conquer.

K 3

ed Napies, and to the superstition of the coimtefs Matilda,
were real, and added ample domains to the Holy See.

But the power of the popes did not increase in propor.

tion to the extent of territory which they had acquired.
In the dominions annexed to the Holy See, as well as in
tihofe subjef to other princes in Italy, the sovereign of a
date was far from having the command of the force which
it contained. During the turbulence and confusion of the
middle ages, the powerful nobility, or leaders of popular
factions in Italy, had seized the government of different
towns; and after strengthening their fortifications, and tak.
ing a body of mercenaries into pay, they aspired at indepen-
dence. The territory which the church had gained was fil-
led with petty lords of this kind, who left the pope hardly
the fbadow of domestic authority.

As these ufurpat'ons a'moft annihilated the papal pow'

er in the greater part of the towns subjeA to the church,
the Rom-an barons frequently disputed the authority of
the popes, even in Rome itfclf. In the twelfth centu-
rv, an opinion began to be propagated, " That as the func-
tion of ecclfiaiics was purely spiritual, they ought to
poCtes no propertv, and to claim no temporal jurifdi&ion;
but, accordi!lg to the laudable example of their predecessors
in the primitive church, fhonld subsist wholly upon their
tithes, or upon the vo!untary oblations of the people *."
This dotrine being addressed to men, who had beheld the
scandalous manner in which the avarice and ambition of the
clergy had prompted them to contend for wealth, and to ex-
ercife power, they litlened to it with fond attention. The
Roman barons, who had felt most fer.fibly the rigour of ec-
clefiaRfical oppression, adopted these sentiments with such
ardour, that they set themselves instantly to shake off the
yoke. They endeavoured to restore some image of theil
ancient liberty, by reviving the institution of the Roman
senate [A. D. 1 143], in which they vested supreme authow

* Otto Frifigenfis de Gcftis Frider. Imp. lib. ii. cap. Io.

rity; committing the executive power sometimes to one
chief senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to a magi-
ftr t- dignified with the name of The Patrician. The
popes exerted themselves with vigour, in order to check
this dangerous encroachment on their jurifdiaion. One of
them, finding all his endeavours ineffe'tual, was so much
mortified, that extreme grief cut short his days. Another,
having ventured to attack the senators at the head of some
aimed men, was mortally wounded in the fray*. During
a considerable period, the power of the popes, before which
the greatest monarchs in Europe trembled, was circumfcrib-
ed within such narrow limits in their own capital, that they
durif hardly exert any aft of authority, without the per-
mission and concurrence of the senate.

Encroachments were made upon the papal sovereignty,

not only by the usurpations of the Roman nobility, but by
the mutinous spirit of the pepole. During seventy years of
the fourteenth century, the popes fixed their residence in
Avignon. The inhabitants of Rome, accustomed to con-
rider themselves as the descendants of the people who had
conquered the world, and had given laws to it, were too high-
spirited to submit with patience to the delegated authority
of those persons to whom the popes committed the govern-
ment of the city. On many occasions, they opposed the
execution of the papal mandates, and on the slightest ap-
pearance of innovation or oppression, they were ready to
take arms in defence of their own immunities. Towards
the middle of the fourteenth century, being instigated by
Nicholas Rienzo, a man of low birth and a seditious spirit,
but of popular eloquence, and an enterprising ambition, they
drove all the nobility out of the city, established a democra-
tical form of government, eleced Rienzo tribune of the
people, and invested him with extensive authority. But
though the frantic proceedings of the tribune soon over-

* Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 27.3. Id. de Gest. Frid.
lIb. i. c. 27. Muratori Annali d'ltalia, voL ix. 398, 404.

turned this new system; though the government of Rome
was reinflated in its ancient form; yet every freth attack
contributed to weaken the papal jurifdiEtion: and the tur.
bulence of the people concurred with the spirit of indepen.
dence among the nobility, in circumscribing it more and
more*. Gregory VII. and other domineering pontiffs,
accomplished those great things which rendered them so for-
midable to the emperors with whom they contended, not by
the force of their arms, or by the extent of their power, but
by the dread of their spiritual ceufures, and by the effet of
their intrigues, which excited rivals, and called forth ene-
mies against every prince whom they wiffied to depress or
to dectroy.

Ma:ny attempts were made by the popes, not only to

humble those usurpers, who lorded it over the cities in the
ecclcliailical fRate, but to break the turbulent spirit of the
Roman people. These were long unsuccessful. But at last
Alexander VI. with a policy no less artful than flagitiou%
subdued and extirpated most of the great Roman barons, and
rendered the popes mailers of their own dominions. The
c::-;rprufing anmbition ofJulius II. added conquells of no in-
con:iderable value to the patrimony of St. Peter. Thus the
popes, by degrees, became powerful temporal princes.
Their territories, in the age ofCharles-V. were of greater
extent than atprefent; their country seems to have been better
cultivated as well as more populous; and as they drew large
contributions from every part of Europe, their revenues far
exceeded thole of the neighbouring powers, and rendered
them capable of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

'Ilhe genius of the papal government, however, was bet-

ter adapted to the exercise of spiritual dominion, than of
temporal power. With refpe&t to the former, all its maxims

* Hifloire Florentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 89. 104. ap.

Mural. Script. Reclu.! Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Rienzo, ap.
Alurat. An:q. ltai. vol. iii.p. 399, &c. Hilt. de Nic. ienzy, par
MI de Boifpreaux, p. 91. &-c.

were steady and invariable. Every new pontiff adopted the
plan of his predecessor. By education and habit, ecclefiafics
were so formed, that the charater of the individual was funk
in that of the profession; and the passions of the man were
iacrificed to the interest and honour of the order. The
hands which held the reins of administration might change;
but the spirit which conduced them was always the fame.
While the measures of other governments fliu&uated, and
the objects at which they aimed varied, the church kept one
end in view; and to this unrelaxing constancy of pursuit, it
was indebted for its success in the boldest attempts ever
inade by human ambition.

But in their civil administration, the popes followed no

such uniform or consistent plan. There, as in other govern-
ments, the characer, the palfions, and the interest of the
person who had the supreme direcion of affairs, occasioned
a variation both in objects and measures. As few prelates
reached the summit of ecclesiastical dignity until they
were far advanced in life, a change of matiers were more
frequent in the papal dominions than in other states, and the
political system was, of course, less liable and permanent.
Every pope was eager to make the most of the short period,
during which he had the profpec of enjoying power, in or-
der to aggrandize his own family, and to attain his private
ends; and it was often the first buflnefs of his successor to
undo all that he had done, and to overturn what he had e-
stablished.

As ecclesiastics were trained to pacific arts, and early in-

itiated in the mytleries of that policy by which the court of
Rome extended or supported its spiritual dominion, the
popes in the conduc of their temporal affairs were apt
to follow the fame maxims, and in all their measures were
more ready to employ the refinements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It was in the papal court that address and
rubtlety in negotiation became a science; and during the

f.xteenth century, Rome was confidered as the school in
which it might be beit acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclefiar.ical character prevented

the popes from placing tlhcmfelves at the head of their armies,
or fiom taking the command in person of the military force
in their dominions, they were afraid to arm their subje&s;
and in all their operations, whether offensive or defensive,
they trusted entirely to mercenary troops.

As their power and dominions could not descend to their

poicerity, the popes were less felicitous than other prince
to form or to encourage schemes of public utility and im.
provement. Their tenure was only for a short life; pre-
sent advantage was what they chiefly studied; to squeeze
and to amass, rather than to meliorate, was their objea.
They erected perhaps, some work of ostentation, to remain
as a monument of their pontificate; they found it necessary
at some times, to establish uftful inflitutions, in order to
soothe and silence the turbulent populace of Rome; but
plans of general benefit to their subjects, framed with a view
to futurity, were rarely objecs of attention in the papal po-
licy. The patrimony of St. Peter was worse governed than
any part of Europe; and though a generous pontiffmight
suspend for a little, or countera& the effccs of those vices
which are peculiar to the administration of ecclesiastics; the
disease not only remained without remedy, but has gone os
increasing from age to age; and the decline of the state has
kept pace with its progrcfs.

One circumnlance, farther, concerning the papal govern.

meat, is so singular, as to merit attention. As the spiritual
fipremacy and temporal power were united in one person,
and uniformly aided each other in their operations, they be-
came so blended together, that it was difficult to separate
them, even in imagination. The potentates, who found it
necefary to oppose the measures which the popes purfuea
as temporal princes, could not easily divest themselves of the
reverence which they imagined to be due to them as heads

of the church, and vicars of Jesus Christ. It was with re-
lu:jan¢e that they could be brought to a rupture with the
head of the church; they were unwilhlng to pulh their opera-
tions against himto extremity; they listened eagerly to the firit
overtures of accommodation, and were anxious to procure
it almoit upon any terms. Their consciousness of this en-
couraged the enterpriling pontiffs who filled the papal throne
about the beginning of the sixteenth century, to engage in
schemes seemingly the most extravagant. They trusted,
that if their temporal power was not sufficient to carry them
through with success, the refpe& paid to their spiritual dig-
Rity would enable them to extricate themselves with facility
and with honour*. But when popes came to take part
more frequently in the contests among princes, and to en-
gage as principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
Europe, this veneration for their sacred character began to
abate; and striking instances will occur in the following
hiflory of its being almost totally extint.

Of all the Italian powers, the republic of Venice, next to

the papal fee, was most connected with the reft of Europe.

* The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook and

carried on war against Julius II. remarkably illustrates this ob-
lervation. Louis solemnly consulted the clergy of France, whe-
ther it was lawful to take arils againit a pope who had wantonly
kindled war in Europe, and whom neither the faith of treatiess
nor gratitude for favours received, nor the decorum of his charac-
ter, could restrain from the most violent actions to which the lust
of power prompts ambitious princes. Though his clergy autho-
rized the war, yet Anne of Bretagne, his queen, entertained fcru-
yes with regard to the lawfulners of it. The king himself, from

fbme superstition of the fame kind, carried it on faintly; and, up-

on every fresh advantage, renewed his propositions of peace.
Mezeray, Hilt. de France, fol. edit. 1685. tom. i. 852. hall
produce another proof of this reverence for the papal character
Jtill more striking. Guicciardini, the most sagacious, perhaps, of
all modern historians, and the boldest in painting the vices and
ambition of the popes, represents the death of Migliau, a Spanish
officer, who was killed during the siege of Naples, as a punishment
infliced on him by heaven, on account of his having oppofed'the
setting of Clement VII. at liberty. Guic. Hiiteria d'ltalia. Ge-
lev. 1645. vol. ii. lib. 18. p. 467.

The rife of that commonwealth, during the inroads of the
Huns in the fifth century; the singular situation of its ca.
pital in the small illes of the Adriatic gulf; and the more
singular form of its civil constitution, are generally known.
If we view the Venetian government as calculated for the
order of nobles alone, its inffitutions may be pronounced ex.
cellent; the deliberative, legislative, and executive powers,
are so admirably distributed and adjuRed, that it mutt be re.
garded as a perfec model of political wisdom. But if we
confider it as formed for a numerous body of people fubje&
to its jirifdition, it will appear a rigid and partial arifto.
cracy, which lodges all power in the hands of a few mem.
bers of the community, while it degrades and oppresses the
refl

The spirit of government, in a commonwealth of this

species, was, of course, timid and jealous. The Venetian
nobles distrusted their own fubjeds, and were afraid of allow.
ing them the use of arms. They encouraged among them the
arts of industry and commerce; they employed them in ma.
nufatures and in navigation, but never admitted them into
the troops which the state kept in its pay. The military
force of the republic consisted entirely of foreign mercena-
ries. The command of these was never trusted to noble
Venetians, left they Ihould acquire such influence over the
army, as might endanger the public liberty; or become ac-
cultomed to the exercise of such power, as would make them
unwilling to return to the condition of private citizens. A
soldier of fortune was placed at the head of the armies of the
commonwealth; and to obtain that honour, was the great
obje& of the Italian Condottieri, or leaders of bands, who,
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, made a trade of war,
and raised and hired out soldiers to different flates. But the
fame fufpicics policy, which induced the Venetians to emr
ploy these adventurers, prevented their placing entire confl
dence in them. Two noblemen, appointed by the senate,
accompanied their army, when it took the field, with the ap

pellation of Prove&litori, and, like the field-deputies of the
Dutch republic in latter times, observed all the motions of
the general, and checked and controuled him in all his ope-
rations.

A commonwealth with such civil and military institutions,

was not formed to make conquests. While its fubjets were
disarmed, and its nobles excluded from military command, it
carried on its warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage.
This ought to have taught the Venetians to reft satisfied
with making felf-prefervation, and the enjoyment of domes-
tic security, the obje&s of their policy. But republics are
apt to be seduced by the spirit of ambition, as well as kings.
When the Venetians so far forgot the interior defecs in
their government as to aim at extensive conquests, the fatal
blow, which they received in the war excited by the league
of Cambray, convinced them of the imprudence and danger
of making violent efforts, in opposition to the genius and
tendency of their constitution.

It is not, however, by its military, but by its naval and

commercial power, that the importance of the Venetian com-
monwealth muff be estimated. The latter conifituted the
real force and nerves of the state. The jealousy of govern-
ment did not extend to this department. Nothing was ap-
prehended from this quarter, that could prove formidable to
liberty. The senate encouraged the nobles to trade, and to
serve on board the fleet. They became merchants and ad-
mirals. They increased the wealth of their country by their
industry. They added to its dominions, by the valour with
which they conducted its naval armaments.

Commerce was an inexhaustible source of opulence to the
Vecntians. All the nations in Europe depended upon them,
not only for the commodities of the Eafl, but for various
manufautures fabricated by them alone, or finiffed with a
dexterity and elegance unknown in other countries. From
this extensive commerce, the state derived such immense fiip-
plies, as concealed those vices in its couftitution wLich I

Vol. I. L

have mentioned; and enabled it to keep on foot such armies,
as were not only an over-match for the force which any of
its neighbours could bring into the field, but were sufficient
to contend, for some time, with the powerful monarchs be-
y-end the Alps. During its struggles with the princes unit.
ed against it by the league of Caiurbray, the republic levied
fums which, even in the present age, would be deemed con-
fiderable; and while the king of France paid the exorbitant
interefl which I have mentioned for the money advanced to
him, and the er-nperor, eager to borrow, but destitute of cre-
dit, was known by the name of Alaximilian the Money-less,
the Venetians raised whatever sinns they pleased, at the mo-
derate premium of five in the hundred*.

The constitution of Florence was perfectly the reverse of

the Venetian. It partook as much of democratical turbu-
lence and licent;oufnefs, as the other of ariftocratical rigour.
Florence, however, was a commercial, not a military demo-
cr:acy. The nature of its institutions was favourable to
commerce, and the genius of the people was turned towards
it. The vat wealth which the family of Medici had acquir.
ed by trade, together with the magnificence, the generosity,
and the virtue of the firit Cosmo, gave him such an afcen-
dant over tle affections as well as the councils of his ccun-
trvmen, that though the forms of popular government were
prefer-ed, thungh the various departments of administration
were filled by magistrates diilinguihed by the ancient names
and elected in the usual manner, he was in reality the head
of the commonwealth; and in the station of a private citi.
zen, he pof'ftfcd supreme authority. Cosmo transmitted a
confiderabie decree of this power to his descendants; and
duri::g the greater part of the fifteenth century, the politi-
cal fate of Florence was extremely singular. The appear-
a.nce of republican government subsisted, the people were
paFclnately attached to it, and on some occasions contend-

* His. de !a Ligue fait a Cambray, par M. 1'Abbe du Bos, lib.
v. Sandi Storia Civil Vencziana, lib. viii. c. x6. p. 89i, &c.

ed warmly for their privileges, and yet they permitted a
single family to assume the diretion of their affairs, almost
. ,absolutely as if it had been formally invested with sovereign
ovwer. The jealousy of the Medici concurred with the
cuminercial spirit of the Florentines, in putting the military
force of the republic upon the fame footing with that of the
other Italian flates. The troops, which the Florentines,
employed in their wars, confilted almost entirely of merce-
wi;.ry soldiers, furnished by the Condoltieri, or leaders of bands,
v.hom they took into their pay.

In the kingdom of Naples, to which the sovereignty of

the island of Sicily was annexed, the feudal government was
ellabliflied in the fame form, and with the fame defe&s, as in
the other nations of Europe. The frequent and violent re-
volutions which happened in that monarchy had considerably
increased these defeats, and rendered them more intolerable.
The fucceflion to the crown of Naples had been so often in-
terrupted or altered, and so many princes of foreign blood
had, at different periods, obtained possession of the throne,
that the Neapolitan nobility had loft, in a great measure,
that attachment to the family of their sovereigns, as well as
that reverence for their persons, xn hich, in other feudal king.
doms, contributed to set some bounds to the encroachments
of the barons upon the royal prerogative and power. At
the fame time, the different pretenders to the crown, being
obliged to court the barons who adhered to them, and on
whose support they depended for the success of their claims,
they augmented their privileges by liberal concessions, and
connived at their boldest usurpations. Even when feated on
the throne, it was dangerous for a prince, who held his
sceptre by a disputed title, to venture on any ftep towards
extending his own power, or circumscribing that of the no-
bles.

From all these causes, the kingdom of Naples was the

moll turbulent of any in Europe, and the authority of its
monarchs the leat extensive. Though Ferdinand I. who.

L

began his reign in the rear 1468, attempted to break the
power of the ariRocracy; though his son Alphonfo, that he
might crush it at once by cutting off the leaders of greatest
reputation and influence among the Neapolitan barons, ven.
tured to corrmit one of the most perfidious and cruel aaions
recorded in hiflory [A. D. 1487]; the order of nobles was
nevertheless more exasperated than humbled by their mea.
fures*. T'he refcntr.ent wvh.ch these outrages excited ws
so violent, and the power of the malcontent nobles was still
io furmidable, that to theft may be ascribed, in a great de-
gree. the ease and rapidity with which Charles VIII. con.
quered the kingdom of Naplest.

The event that gave rife to the violent contests concern.

ing the fucceflion to the crown of Naples and Sicily, which
brought so many calamities upon there kingdoms, happened
in the thirteenth century [A.D. 1254]. Upon the death
of the emperor Frederick I . Manfred, his natural son, afpir.
ing to the Neapolitan throne, murdered his brother the em-
peror Conrad (if we may believe contemporary hitforians),
and by that crime obtained poffefion of it . The popes,
from their implacable enmity to the house of Swabia,
not only refused to recognize Manfred's title, but en-
deavoured to excite against him some rival capable of wreRf
ing the sceptre out of his hand. Charles, count of An.
jou, the brother of St. Louis king of France, undertook
this; and he received from the popes the inveltiture of the
kingdom of Naples and Sicily as a fief held of the holy fee.
The count of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success;
Manfred fell in battle; and he took poffeflion of the vacant
throne. But loon after, Charles sullied the glory which he
Lad acquired, by the injustice and cruelty with which he put
to death, by the hands of the executioner, Conradin, the last

Giannone, book xxviii. chap. 2. vol. ii. p. 410, &c.

f Giannone, ib. ,. 414.
t Struv. Co.

CO ilt. Germ. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii.
thap. 5.

pnnce of the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the
Neapolitan crown. That gallant young prince alferted his
tite, to the lait, with a courage worthy of a better fate.
On the scaffold, he declared Peter, at that time prince, and
soon after king of Aragon, who had married Manfred's only
daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove among the peo.
ile, he entreated that it night be carried to Peter, as the
fmbbol by which he conveyed all his rights to himt. The
dcliie of avenging the insult offered to royalty, by the death
of Conradin, concurred with his own ambition, in prompting
Peter to take arms in support of the title which he had ac-
(iqired. From that period, during almost two centuries,
the houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the crown
of Naples. Amidst a succession of revolutions more rapid,
as well as of crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the
iliitory of almost any other kingdom, monarchs, Sometimes
of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes of the Angevin, were
feated on the throne. At length the princes of the house
of Ardgon [AD. 1434] obtained such firm poffeflion of
!his long disputed inheritance, that they transmitted it
rtinctly to a bastard branch of their family _.

'iic race of the Angevin kings, however, was not extincd
3r hal they relinquished their title to the Neapolitan crown.
Tiie count of Maine and Provence, the heir of this family,
ca::veyed all his ri lhts aod pretensions to Louis XI. and to
i.;s iicceffurs [A.1). 1494]. Charles VIII. as I have al-
r-.dy related, crofted the Alps at the head of a powerful ar-
Il.y, in order to prosecute his claim with a degree of vigour,
!'ir ltperior to that which the princes from whom he derived
it had been capable of exerting. The rapid progress of his
arnn n Ita!y, as well as the short time during which he en-
joyed th:- fruits of his success, have already been mentioned,
;rnd are well kno n. Frederick, the heir oi the illegitimate
Lranah of the Aragonefe family, loon recovered the throne

t Giannone, book xix. chap . 4 z.

4 Giannone, book xxvi. ch. z.

L 3

cf which Charles had difpoffeffed him. Louis XII. and
Ferdinand of Aragon united against this prince, whom both,
though for different reasons, confidered as an usurper, and
agreed to divide his dominions between them [A.D. xl50o.
Frederick, unable to resist the combined monarchs, each of
whom was far his superior in power, resigned his sceptre.
Louis and Ferdinand, though they had concurred in mak.
ing the concuefi, differed about the division of it; and from
allies became enemies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly
by the exertion of such military talents as gave him a just
title to the appellation of the Great Captain, which the Spa.
r.iih historians have bellowed upon him; and partly by such
fharnelefs and frequent violations of the most solemn engage.
ments, as leave an indelible slain on his memory; firipped
the French of all that they possessed in the Neapolitan do.
minions, and secured the peaceable pefleffion of them to his
master. These, together with his other kingdoms, Ferdi.
rand transmitted to his grandson Charles V. whose right to
possess them, if not altogether uncontrovertible, seems, at
least, to be as well founded, as that which the kings of
France set up in opposition to itt.

There ic nothing in the political conflitution, or interior

governrrent of the dutchy of Milan, so remarkable, as to re
ci'i;- a particular explanation. But as the right of fuccef-
sion to that fertile province was the cause or the pretext of
znmoi all the wars carried on in Italy during the reign of
Charles V. it is necessary to trace these disputes to their
source, and to inquire into the pretensions of the various
competitors.

During the long and fierce contefls excited in Italy by the

vo:ncce of the Guelf and Ghibelline factions, the family of
Vifccnti role to great eminence among their fellow-citizens
cf Milan. As the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the
Ghi:.elline or Irperial interest, they, by way of recompence,

t Dricts des Rois de France an Royaume de Sicile. Mein. de
Comin. Edit. de Frefnoy, tom. iv. part iv. p. 5.

received, from one emperor, the dignity of perpetual vicars
,f the empire in Italyt [A.D. 1354]: they were created,
by another, dukes of Milan [A.D. I3951; and, together
with that title, the pofleffion of the city and its territories
was bestowed upon them as an hereditary fiefs. John, king
of France, among other expedients for raising money, which
the calamities of his reign obliged him to employ, conde-
scended to give one of his daughters in marriage to John
Galeazzo Visconti, the first duke of Milan, from whom he
had received considerable fums. Valentine Visconti, one of
the children of this marriage, married her cousin, Louis,
duke of Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their
narriage-contrat, which the pope confirmed, it was ftipu-
lated that, upon failure of heirs male in the family of Vis-
conti, the dutchy of Milan should descend to the posterity
of Valentine and the duke of Orleans. That event took
place. In the year 1447, Philip Maria, the last prince of
the ducal family of Visconti, died. Various competitors
claimed the succession. Charles, duke of Orleans, pleaded
his right to it, founded on the marriage-contraA of his mo-
lter Valentine. Visconti. Alfonso king of Naples claimed
it in consequence of a will made by Philip Maria in his fa-
vour. The emperor contended that, upon the extinction
of male issue in the family of Visconti, the fief returned to
the superior lord, and odght to be re-annexed to the empire.
The people of Milan, imitten with the love of liberty which
in that age prevailed among the Italian states, declared a-
gainRt the dominion of any matter, and eftablilhed a republi.
can form of government.

But during the struggle among so many competitors, the

prize for which they contended was seized by one from
whom none of them apprehended any danger. Francis
Sforza, the natural son of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his
courage and abilities had elevated from the rank of a pca-

t Petrarch. epift. ap. Struv. Corp. i. 625.
i Lcbnit. Cod. Jur. Gent. Diplom. vol. i. 257.

sant to be one of the molt eminent and powerful of the Ita.
lian ConJtr.iir;, having succeeded his-father in the command
of the adventurers who followed his standard, had married a
natural daughter of the last duke of Milan. Upon this fha.
dow es a title Francis founded his pretensions to the dutchy,
which he supported with such talents and valour, as placed
him at lait on the ducal throne. The virtues, as well as a.
bilities, with which he governed, inducing his fubjeas to
forget the defecs in his title, he tranfmitttd his dominions
qui tlv to his son; from whom they dcfcended to his grand.
son. He was murdered by his grand uncle Ludovico, fur-
named the Moor, who took poffefflon of the dutchy; and
his right to it was confirmed by the investiture of the empe.
ror Maximilian in the year 1494t.

Luuis XI. who took pleasure in deprefling the princes of

the bloDod, and who admired the political abilitics of Francis
Sfor-a, would not permit the duke of Orleans to take any
ftep in prosecution of his right to the dutchy of Milan.
Ll :ovico .:le Moor kept up such a close connetion with
C...;.Ls V\l 1l. that, during the greater part of his reign, the
c!:::n of the family of Orleans continued to lie dormant.
I,.: when the crown of France devolved on Louis XII.
Cu.:ec us G.lcans, he inilantly asserted the rights of his fami-
ly v.-:i the as dour which it was natural to expcct, and march-
ed at the head of a powerful army to support them. Lu-
dovico Sfuiza, incapable of contending with such a rival,
wa~ i:b-pi ou1 all his dominions in the space of a few days.
Tr., k:i:, c.d il the ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph;
ai.d ioll afier, Ludovico, having been betrayed by the Swiss
in i i. pay, was f nt a prisoner into France, and Ihut up in
tr.n ia.'ic oi Lohlcs, w-here he lay unpitied during the re-
rr. ..dcr of lis days. In consequence of one of tne singular
rc.utlutiun which occur so frcq:ently in the liiilory of the

i.hi.,.cilc, his fIn Mlaxilnli-a Siorza was placed on the du-
t+ ..;.li . !'t MAltiol. lib. vi. 654. ap. S.ruv. Corp. i. 930.
Du 3Mlcni Corps Diploi. tom. iii. p. ii. 533. ib.

calthrone, of which he kept possession during the reign of
Louis XII. [A.D. 1512.] But his successor Francis I.
was too high-fpirited and enterprising tamely to relinquish
his title. As soon as he was feated upon the throne, he
prepared to invade the Milanese; and his right of fucceflion
to it appears, from this detail, to have been more natural and
more just than that of any other competitor.

It is unneceleary to enter into any detail with refpeat to

the form of government in Genoa, Parma, Modena, and the
other inferior states of Italy. Their names, indeed, will oft-
en occur in the following history. But the power of these
fates themselves was so inconsiderable, that their fate de-
pended little upon their own efforts; and the frequent revo-
lutions which they underwent, were brought about rather by
the operations of the princes who atttacked or defended
them, than by any thing peculiar in their internal conftitu-
tion.

Of the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps, Spain is

one of the most considerable; and as it was the hereditary
domain of Charles V. as well as the chief source of his pow-
er and wealth, a diftin& knowledge of its political conftitu-
tion is of capital importance towards understanding the tranf-
aftions of his reign.

The Vandals and Goths, who overturned the Roman

power in Spain, establishtd a form of government in that
country, and introduced customs and laws, perfeEtly similar
to those which were established in the reft of Europe, by the
other victorious tribes which acquired settlements there.
For some time, society advanced, among the new inhabitants
of Spain, by the fame steps, and seemed to hold the fame
course, as in other European nations. To this progress a
fudci fltop was put by the invasion of the Saracens or
Mloors from.Africa [A.D. 712]. The Goths could not

itllftand the efforts of their enthusiastic valour, which sub-
dued the greatest part of Spain, with the fame impetuous
rapidity that dillinguilhes all the operations of their arms.

The ccroeserors introduced into the country in which they
fettled, the M;ahometan religon. the Arabic language, the
n-anners .f t':-e Ea":, together with that tate for the arts,
and that love cf cirgance a'.d splendour, which the caliphs
had lbgun ti, cultivate amlorg their fulije'ts.

Such Gothic nobles as disdaincd to ftbmit to the Moor.

ifli yoke, i-d fur refuge to the inacceflible mountains of A.
ilurias. There thcy conmforted thcflfelves with enjoying
the exerifc of the Chril:.ian relgion, and with maintaini.g
the a.tho-ity of :ilrir av.clnt laws. Being joined by many
of the boldef and moil warlike among their countrymen,
they sallied out upon the adjacent settlements of the Moors
in small parties; but venturing only upon short excursions
at firil, they were fati-fied with plunder and revenge, with-
out thirLkng of conquest. By degrees, their strength in.
creased, their views enlarged, a regular government was e.
ftabli'fed among them, and they began to aim at extending
their territories. While they puihed on their attacks with
the unremitting ardour, excited by zeal for religion, by the
desire of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their coun-
try from oppression; while they conduced their operations
with the courage natural to men who had no other occupa-
tion but war, and who were strangers to all the arts which
corrupt or enfeeble the mind; the Moors gradually loll ma.
ny of the advantages to which they had been indebted for
their first success. They threw off all dependence on the
caliphst; they negleced to preserve a close connection with
their countrymen in Africa; their empire in Spain was split
into many fiall kingdoms; the arts which they cultivated,
together with the luxury to which these gave rife, relaxed,
in some measure, the force of their military intfitutions, and
abated the vigour of their warlike spirit. The Moors, how.
ever, continued still to be a gallant people, and possessed
great resources. According to the magnificent ityle of the
Spanifih hiiorians, eight centuries of almofit uninterrupted

t Jos. Sim. Affemanri Hiftor. Ital. Scriptores, vol. iii.p. I35-

war O!apfed, and three thousand seven hundred battles were
fo0uirlt, before the lait of the Moorilh kingdoms in Spain
fubrS:it.cd to the Christian arms [1492.]

As thte Crli!tians mlde their conquests upon the Maho-

mtt;;;' at various periods, and under different leaders, each
[,lrincd the territory whicl he had cwrefted from the common
tirsin', into an independent slate. Spain was divided into
alnioft as many separate kingdoms as it contained provinces;
in each city of note, a petty monarch established his throne,
and alfimed all the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years,
however, by the usual events of intermarriages, or succession,
or conquelt, all these inferior principalities were annexed to
the more powerful kingdoms of Castile and of Aragon.
At length, by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella, the former the hereditary monarch of Aragon, and
the latter railed to the throne of Caltile by the afferion of
her fubjef&s, [1481], all the Spanish crowns were united,
and defceided in the fame line.

From this period, the political constitution of Spain be-

gan to aflume a regular and uniform appearance; the geni-
us of its government may be delineated, and the progress of
its las, and manners may be traced with certainty. Not-
witlhtanding the singular revolution which the invasion of
t!ie lMo;rs occasioned inSpain, and the peculiarity of its
ftie, ilr )being so long subjeCt to the Mahometan yoke, the
cuiloms introduced by the Vandals and Goths had taken
such dqi root, and were so thoroughly incorporated with
the frame of its government, that in every province which the
Chriltians recovered from the Moors, we find the condition
ns individuals, as well as the political constitution, nearly the
fame as in other nations of Europe. Lands were held by
the fame tenure; jullice was dispensed in the fame form; the
fine privileges were claimed by the nobility; and the fame
P)VWCr xercifed by the Cortes, or general assembly of the
kingdom. Several circumstances contributed to secure this
pcrllanclce of the feudal intitutions in Spain, notwitllltand-

ing the conquei of the Moors, which seemed to have over.
turned them. Such of the Spaniards, as preserved their in.
dependence, adhered to their ancient customs, not only from
attachment to them, but out of antipathy to the Moors, to
xhofe ideas concerning property and government these cu.
ftoms were totally repugnant. Even among the Christians,
who submitted to the Moorish conquerors, and consented to
become their fubjet¢s, ancient customs were not entirely a.
bolified. They were permitted to retain their religion,
their laws concerning private property, their forms of ad.
ministering juitice, and their mode of levying taxes. The
followers of Mahomet are the only enthusiasts who have un.
ited the spirit of toleration with zeal for making proselytes,
and who, at the fame time that they took arms to propa.
gate the doftrine of their Prophet, permitted such as would
not embrace it, to adhere to their own tenets, and to prac.
tife their own rites. To this peculiarity in the genius of
the Mahometan religion, as well as to the desire which the
Moors had of reconciling the ChrifRians to their yoke, it
was owing that the ancient manners and laws in Spain, fur.
vived the violent shock of a conqueR, and were permitted to
fubfilt, notwithstanding the introduaion of a new religion
and a new form of government into that country. It is ob-
vious, from all these particulars, that the Christians must
have found it extremely easy to re-ellablish manners and go.
vernment on their ancient foundations, in those of Spain
uhich they wrested successively from the Moors. A con.
fiderable part of the people retained filch a fondness for the
customs, and such a reverence for the laws of their ancestors,
that, wishing to fee them completely restored, they were not
only willing but eager to resume the former, and to recog-
nize the authority of the latter.

But though the feudal form of government, with all the

intfitutions which characterize it, was thus preserved entire
in Castile and Aragon, as well as in all the kingdoms which
depended on these crowns, there were certain peculiarities ii

their political conllitutions, which dilfingni(h them from
those of any other country in Europe. The royal pre-
rogative, extremely limited in every feudal kingdom, was
circumlcribed, in Spain, within such narrow bounds, as re-
duced thL power of the sovereign almost to nothing. The
pr;;i'e]cs of the nobility were great in proportion, and ex-
tended so far, as to border on absolute independence. The
immunities of the cities were likewise greater than in other
feudal kingdoms, they poflifed considerable influence in the
Ccrtes, and they aspired at obtaining more. Such a Rfate
of society, in which the political machine was so ill adjufied,
and the several members of the legislature so improperly ba-
lanced, produced internal disorders in the kingdoms of Spain,
which rose beyund the pitch of turbulence and anarchy usual
under the feudal government. The whole tenor of the
Spanish history confirms the truth of this observation; and
when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius of their po-
licy gave birth and vigour, was no longer refrained and
overawed by the immediate dread of the Moorish arms, it
broke out into more frequent infurretions againf the go-
vern-rent of their princes, as well as more outrageous insults
on their dignity, than occur in the annals of any other coun-
try. These were accompanied at some times with more libe-
ral sentiments concerning the rights of the people, at other
times with more elevated notions concerning the privileges
of the nobles, than were common in other nations.

In the principality of Catalonia, which-was annexed to
the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience of the people to ob-
tain the redress of their grievances having prompted them
to take arms against their sovereign John ILIA. D. 1462],
they, by a solemn deed, recalled the oath of allegiance which
they had sworn to him, declared him and his posterity to be
unworthy of the thronet, and endeavoured to eftablifl a
republican form of goverr.ment, in order to fecure-the-perpe-

- Zurita Annales de Arag. tom. iv. rI3, I Id, &C.
Vol. I. M

tual eijoyment of that liberty, after which they aspired*.
Nearly about the fame period, the indignation of the Cafti-
lian nobility against the weak and flagitious adminiflration
of Henry IV. having led them to combine againlt him,
they arrogated, as one of the privileges.belonging to their
order, the right of trying and of pafling sentence on their
fovcreign. That the exercise of this power might be as pn.
blic and solemn, as the pretension to it was bold, they fum.
moned all the nobility of their party to meet at Avila
[A. D. 1465]; a spacious theatre was ereted in a plain,
without the walls of the town; an image, representing the
king, was feated on a throne, clad in royal- robes, with a
crown on its head, a sceptre in its hand, and the sword of
justice by its fide. The accusation against the king was
read, and the sentence of deposition was pronounced, in pre-
fence of a numerous assembly. At the close of the first ar-
ticle of the charge, the archbishop of Toledo advanced, and
tore the crown from the head of the image; at the close of
the second, the Conde de Placentia snatched the sword of
justice from its fide; at the close of the third, the Conde de
Benevente wreited the sceptre from its hand; at the close of
the last, Don Diego Lopes de Stuniga tumbled it headlong
from the throne. At the fame instant, Don Alfonso, Hen-
ry's brother, was proclaimed king of Castile and Leon in
his fteadt.

The moti daring leaders of faaion would not have ven-

tured on these measures, nor have condu&ed them with such
public ceremony, if the sentiments of the people concerning
the royal dignity had not been so formed by the laws and
policy to which they were accustomed both in Castile and
Catalonia, as prepared them to approve of such extraordina-
ry proceedings, or to acquiesce in them.

* Fereras HiiL d'Efpagne, tom. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans Re-

sol. d'Efpagne, tom. iii. p iS5. L. Marinaus Siculus de Reb.
Hifpan. apud Schotti Script. Hifpan. fol. 429.

+ Marian. Hit. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

In Aragon, the form of government was monarchical, but

the genius and maxims of it were purely republican. The
kings who were long elective, retained only the ihadow -of
power; the real exercise of it was in the Cortes or parlia-
ment of the kingdom. This supreme assembly was com-
porfd of four different arms or members. The nobility of
the first rank. The equestrian order, or nobility of the fe-
cond class. The reprcfentatives of the cities and towns
whose right to a place in the Cortes, if we may give creditto
the historians of Aragon, was coevai with the constitution.
The ecclesiastical order, composed of the dignitaries of the
church, together with the representatives of the inferior
clergy*. No law could pass in this assembly without the
aftent of every single member who had a right to votet.
Without the permission of the Cortes, no tax could be im-
posed; no war could be declared; no peace could be con-
cluded; no money could be coined; nor could any altera-
tion be made in the current fpeciee:. The power of review-
ing the proceedings of all inferior courts, the privilege of in-
fpefting every department of adminifiration, and the right of
redressing all grievances, belonged to the Cortes. Nor did
those who conceived themselves to be aggrieved, address the
Cortes in the humble tone of fuppliaits, and petition for
redress; they demanded it as the birthright of freemen, and
required the guardians of their liberty to decide with refpcct
tothe points which theylaid before tlem§. This fove-
reign court was held during several centuries, every year;
but, in consequence of a regulation introduced about the be-
ginning of the fourteenth century, it was convoked from
that period only once in two years. After it was assembled,
the king had no right to prorogue or dissolve it without its
own content; and the feflion continued forty days ¶.

T Forma de Celebrar. Cortes en Aragon. por Geron. Martel.
t Martel. ibid. p. 2.
$ Hier. Blanca Comment. Rer. Aragon. ap. Schot. Script. Hi-

span. vol i. p.in .
7 § Martel. Fornade Celebr. p. a.

liicr. Blanca Comment. 76I.

M 2

Not satisficd with having erected such formidable barriers

against the encroachments of the royal prerogative, nor wil.
ing to commit the sole guardianship of their liberties entirely
to the vigilance and authority of an assembly, similar to the
diets, ftates-ge::eral, and parliaments, in which the other
feudal nations have placed so much confidence, theAragonefe
bad recourse to an infritution peculiar to themselves, and e-
leted a 7uflizu or fupremejudge. This magifirate, whose
office bore some resemblance to that of the Ephori in an.
cient Sparta, a&ed as the prote&or of the people, and the
comptrolier es the prince. The person of the juftiza was
sacred, his power and jurifdi&ion almost unbounded. He
was the supreme interpreter ofthe laws. Not only inferior
judges, but the kings themselves, were bound to consult
him in every doubtful cafe, and to receive his responses
with implicit deferencet. An appeal lay to him from the
royal judges, as well as from those appointed by the barons
within their refpetive territories. Even when no appeal
was made to him, he could interpose by his own authority,
prohibit the ordinary judge to proceed, take immediate cog-
nizance of the cause himself, and remove the party accused
to the Manmfrf/ution, or prison of the slate, to which no per-
son had access but by his permission. His power was ex-
erted with no less vigour and effet& in superintending the
administration of government, than in regulating the coufie
ofjuftice. It was the prerogative of the juftiza to infpet
he cendut of the king. He had a title to review all the
royal proclamations and patents, and to declare whether or
not they were agreeable to law, and ought to be carried in-
to executicn. He, by his sole authority, could exclude any
of the king's mirni;ilrs from the condnti of affairs, and call
them to answ-er for their mal-adminiltration. He himnelf
xras accountable to the Cortes only, for the manner in

+ Bianca has preserved two responses of the juftiza to James II.

u ho reigned towards the close of the thirteenth century. Blanca
'4^.

which he discharged the duties of this high office; and
performed funtions of the greatest importance that could
be committed to a subjed [HH] *.

It is evident, from a bare eiaumeration of the privileges

of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of the rights belonging
to the julliza, that a very frnall portion of power remained
in the hands of the king. The Aragonefe seem to have
been solicitous that their monarchs ihould know and fee}
this itate of impotence, to m hich they were reduced. Even
in swearing allegiance to their sovereign, an act which ought
laturally to be accompanied with profeflions of fiubmiffion
and rcfpedt, they devised an oath, in such a form, as to re-
Mlind him of his dependence on his fubjedts. " We," said-
thejufliza, to the king in name of his high-fpirited barons,
" wlho are each of us as good, and who are all together
more powerful than you, promise obedience to your govern-
ment, if you maintain our rights and liberties; but if not,
not." Conformably to this oath, they eftablilhed it as a
fundamental article in their constitution, that if the king
ihould violate their rights and privileges, it was lawful for
the people to disclaim him as their sovereign, and to elect
anothier, even though a heathen, in his place-+. The at-
tachment of the Aragonefe to this singular constitution of
government was extreme, and their refpeEt for it approach-
ed to ftlperltitious veneration [II]. In the preamble to
one of their laws, they declare, that such was the barrenness
of their country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that,.
if it were not on account of the liberties by which they were
diitinguifhed from other nations,the people would abandonit,
and goinqueft of a settlement to fomemore fruitful region. .

In Caiiile there were not such peculiarities in the form of

government, as to eltablifl any remarkable diftindion be-
tween it and that of the other European nations. The ex-

[IIH] Note XXXI. * Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-S55.
t Hlier. Blanca Comment. 7z0. [11 Note XXXIL
' Hicr. Blanca Corn. p. 75 R.

M 3

ecutive part of government was committed to the king, bti
with a prerogative extremely limited. The legislative an.
thority resided in the Cortes, which was composed of the
nobility, the dignified ecclesiastics, and the representatives
of the cities. The afflmbly of the Cortes in Catile was ve.
ry ancient, and seems to have been almoR coeval with the
constitution. The members of the three different orders,
who had a right of suffrage, met in one place, and delibe.
rated as one colledcive body; the decisions of which were
regulated by the sentiments of the majority. The right of
imposing taxes, of enating laws, and of redressing griev.
ances, belonged to this assembly; and in order to secure
the agent of the king to fitch statutes and regulations as were
deemed salutary or beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual
in the Cortes to take no ftep towards granting money, un-
til all business relative to the public welfare was concluded.
The representatives of cities seem to have obtained a feat
verv early in the Cortes of Castile, and soon acquired such
infliuence and credit, as were very uncommon, at a period
when the splendour and pre-eminence of the nobility had
ecl;pfed or depressed al other orders of men. The number
of members from cities bore such a proportion to that of the
whole collective body, as rendered them extremely rtfpefa-
ble in their Cortes [KK]. The degree of consideration,
which they possessed in the state, may be efimated by one
event. Upon the death of John I. [A. D. 1390] a coun-
cil of regency was appointed to govern the kingdom during
the minority of his son. It was composed of an equal num.
ber of noblemen, and of deputies chosen by the cities; the
!atter were admitted to the fame rank, and invested with the
fa-me powers as prelates and grandees of the first order*. But
though the members of communities in Castile were elevat-
ed above the condition wherein they were placed in other
kjigdoms of Europe; though they had attained to such po-
litical importance, that even the proud and jealous spirit of

i[K' Note XXXIIL * Mariar. Hil. lib. xviii. c. 15.

the feudal aristocracy could not exclude them from a confi.
derable ihare in government; yet the nobles, notwithitand-
ing these acquisitions of the commons, continued to assert
the privileges of their order, in opposition to the crown, in
a tone extremely high. There was not any body of nobility
in Europe more diftinguiihed for independence of spirit,
haughtiness of deportment, ;rnd bold pretensions, than that
of Caltile. The history of that monarchy affords the most
striking examples of the vigilance with which they observed,
and of the vigour with which they opposed, every measure
of their kings, that tended to encroach on their jurifdiAion,
to diminish their dignity, or to abridge their power. Even
in their ordinary intercourse with their monarchs, they pre-
served such a consciousness of their rank, that the nobles
of the first order claimed it as a privilege to be covered in
the roval presence, and approached their sovereigns rather
as equals than as fubjeas.

The conltitutions of the subordinate monarchies, which

depended on the crowns of Castile and Aragon, nearly refem-
bled those of the kingdoms to which they were annexed.
In all of them, the dignity and independence of the nobles
were great; the immunities and power of the cities were
considerable.

An attentive observation of the singular situation of

Spain, as well as the various events which occurred there,
from the invasion of the Moors to the union of its king-
doms under Ferdinand and Isabella, will discover the causes
to which all the peculiarities in its political constitution I
have pointed out, ought to be ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from the Maho-

metans gradually and with difficulty, the nobles who follow-
ed the standard of any eminent leader in these wars, conquer-
ed not for him alone, but for themselves. They claimed a
ihare in the lands which their valour had won from the ene-
ny, and their prosperity and power increased, in proportion
as the territory of the prince extended.

During their perpetual wars with the Moors, the mo.

narchs of the several kingdoms in Spain depended so much
on their nobles, that it became necessary to conciliate their
good-will by successive grants of new honours and privi.
leges. By the time that any prince could establish his do.
minion in a conquered province, the greater part of the
territory was parcelled out by him among his barons, with
such jurisdiction and immunities as raised them almost to
sovereign power.

At the fame time, the kingdoms ere&ed in so many dif.

ferent corners of Spain, were of inconsiderable extent.
The petty monarch was but little elevated above his noble&
They, feeling themselves to be almost his equals, a&ed as
such; and could not look up to the kings of such limited
domains with the fame reverence that the sovereigns of the
great monarchies in Europe were viewed by their subje&s
ELL].

While these circumstances concurred in exalting the no-

bility, and in depressing the royal authority, there were o-
ther causes which raised the cities in Spain to consideration
and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the Moors,

was perpetually exposed to the incursions of the enemy, with
whom no peace or truce was so permanent as to prove any
lalting security, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all ranks
to fix their residence in places of strength. The castles of
the barons, which, in other countries, afforded a commodi-
ous retreat from the depredations of banditti, or from the
transient violence of any interior commotion, were unable to
resist an enemy whose operations were coaduted with regu-
lar and preserving vigour. Cities, in which great numbers
united for their mutual defence, were the only places in
which people could reside with any profpea of safety. To
this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in Spain of
which the Christians recovered pofflffion. All who fled

[LL] Note XXXIV.

from the Moorish yoke resorted to them, as to an asylum;
and in them. the greater part of those who took the field
against the Mahometans eltablifhed their families.

Several of those cities, during a longer or shorter course

of Years, were the capitals of little states, and enjoyed all
the advantages which accelerate the increase of inhabitants
in every place that is the feat of government.

From those concurring causes, the number of cities in

Spain, at the beginning of the fifteenth century, had become
considerable, and they were peopled far beyond 'the propor-
tion which was common in other parts of Europe, except in
Italy and the Low-Countries. The Moors had introduced
manufactures into those cities, while under their dominion.
The Christians, who, by intermixture with them, had learn-
ed their arts, continued to cultivate these. Trade in several
of the Spanish towns appears to have been carried on with
vigour; and the spirit of commerce continued to preserve
the number of their inhabitants, as the sense of danger had
firit induced them to crowd together.

As the Spanish cities were populous, many of the inhabi-

tants were of a rank superior to those who resided in towns
in other countries of Europe. That cause, which contri-
buted chiefly to their population, affeEted equally persons of
every condition, who flocked thitherpromifcuoufly, in order to
find shelter thereor in hopes of making aftand againftthe ene-
my, with greater advantage than in any other station. The
persons elected as their representatives in the Cortes by the
cities, or promoted to offices of trust and dignity in the go.
vernment of the community, were often, as will appear from
tranfadtions which I ihall hereafter relate, offuch confidera-
ble rank in the kingdom, as refleted lustre on their conllitu-
ents, and on the stations wherein they were placed.

As it was impossible to carry on a continual war against

the Moors, without some other military force than that
wiich the barons were obliged to bring into the field, in
-cofilquence of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to

have some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry, ia
conilant pay. It was one of the privileges of the nobles,
that their lands were exempt from the burden of taxes
The charge of supporting the troops requilite for the pub.
lic safety, fell wholly upon the cities; and their kings, be.
ing obliged frequently to apply to them for aid, found it ne.
cclTary to gain their favour by concessions, which not only
extend&d their immunities, but added to their wealth and
power.

When the influence of all these circumstances, peculiar to

Spain, is added to the general and common causes, which
contrbuted to aggrandize cities in other countries of Eu.
rope, this wil fully account for the extensive privileges
which they acquired, as well as for the extraordinary con.
fideration to which they attained, in all the Spanifi kingdoms

By there exorbitant privileges of the nobility, and this

unusual power of the cities in Spain, the royal prerogative
was hemmed in on every fide, and reduced within very nar.
row bounds. Sensible of this, and impatient of such re-
itraint, several monarchs endeavoured at various junaures
and by different means, to enlarge their own jurifdi&ion.
Their power, however, or their abilities, were so unequal
to the undertaking, that their efforts were attended with lit-
tle success. But when Ferdinand and Isabella found them.
selves at the head of the united kingdoms of Spain, and de.
i;'ercd from the danger and interruption of domestic wars,
thcy were not only in a condition to refuine, but were not
able to prosecute with advantage, the schemes of extenling
the prerogative, - hich their ancestors had attempted in vain.
Ferdinand's profound sagacity in concerting his meafurcs,
his pe:"rrving induttry in conducting them, and his uncom-
mron address in carrying them into execution, fitted him ad-
mirably for an undertaking nI hich required all these talents.

As the overgrown power and high pretensions of the no.

I[MM] Note XXXV.

bility were what the monarchs of Spain felt most sensibly,
and bore with the greatest impatience, the great objeE of
Ferdinand's policy was to rednce these within more mode-
rate bounds. Under various pretexts, some times by vio-
lence, more frequently in consequence of decrees obtained in
the courts of law, he wrested from the barons a great part of
the lands which had been granted to them by the inconfi-
derate bounty of former monarchs, particularly during the
fecble and profilfe reign of his predecessor Henry IV. He
did not give the entire conduct of affairs to persons of noble
birth, who were accustomed to occupy every department of
importance in peace or in war, as if it had been a privilege
peculiar to their order, to be employed as the sole counsel-
lors and ministers of the crown He often tranfa&ed bufi-
ness of great consequence without their intervention, and be-
fiowed many offices of power and trust on new men, devot-
ed to his interel*t. He introduced a degree of Rate and
dignity into his court, which being little known in Spain,
while it remained split into many small kingdoms, taught
the nobles to approach their sovereign with more ceremony,
and gradually rendered him the object of greater deference
and -espet.

The annexing the masterships of the three military orders

es St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara, to the crown, was
another expedient, by which Ferdinand greatly augmented
the revenue and power of the kings of Spain. These or-
ders were instituted in imitation of those of the Knights
Templars and of St. John of Jerusalem, on purpose to wage
perpetual war with the Mahometans, and to protec the pil-
grims who visited Compoftella, or other places of eminent
san&ity in Spain. The zeal and superstition of the ages in
which they were founded, prompted persons of every rank
to btRtow such liberal donations on those holy warriors, that,
in a short time, they engrossed a considerable share in the pro-
perty and wealth of the kingdom. The masterships of there

* Zurita Annales de Arag. tom. vi p. 21.

orders came to be stations of the greatest power. and epu.
lence to which a Spanish nobleman could be advanced.
These high dignities were in the disposal of the knights of
the order, and placed the persons on whom they conferred
them almost on a level with their sovereign [NN]. Ferdi.
nand, unwilling that the nobility, whom he confidered as al.
ready too formidable, ihould derive such additional credit
and influence from possesing the government of these weal.
thy fraternities, was solicitous to wreit it out of their hands,
and to vet it in the crown. His measures for accompliih.
ing this were wifely planned, and executed with vigourl
[A. D. 1476 and 1493]. By addresses, by promises, and
by threats, he prevailed on the knights of each order to
place Isabella and him at the head of it. Innocent VIII.
and Alexander VI. gave this eletion the fancdion of papal
authority-t; and subsequent pontiffs rendered the annexation
of these masterships to the crown perpetual.

While Ferdinand, by this measure, diminifled the power

and influence of the nobility, and added new lustre or autho.
rity to the crown, he was taking other important steps with
a view to the fame obje&. The sovereign jurifdition, which
the feudal barons exercised within their own territories, was
the pride and diftin&ion of their order. To have invaded
openly a privilege which they prized so highly, and in de-
fence of which they would have run so eagerly to arms, was
a measure too daring for a prince of Ferdinand's cautios
temper. He took advantage, however, of an opportunity
which the hate of his kingdoms and the spirit of his people
presented him, in order to undermine what he durst not as.
fault. The incessant depredations of the Moors, the want
of discipline among the troops which were employed to op-
pose them, the frequent civil wars between the crown and

N Note XXXVI. t Marian. Hi. lib. xxv. c. 5.
t ZuritaAnnales, tom. v. p. 22.- -lii Anton. Nebritlenfisre

rmn a Ferdinand & Eliabe geflarum decades ii. apud Sclot. script.
Hispan. i. 86o.

the nobility, as well as the undifcerning rage with which the
barons carried on their private wars with each other, filled
all the provinces of Spain with disorder. Rapine, outrage,
and murder became so common, as not only to interrupt com-
merce, but in a great measure to suspend all intercourse be-
tween one place and another. That security and protection,
which men expe& from entering into civil society, ceased in
a great degree. Internal order and police, while the feudal
institutions remained in vigour, were so little obje&s of at-
tention, and the administration ofjuftice was so extremely
feeble, that it would have been vain to have expeted relief
from the eftablilled laws or the ordinary judges. But the
evil became so intolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who
were the chief sufferers, grew so impatient of this anarchy,
that felf-prefervation forced them to have recourse to an ex-
traordinary remedy. About the middle of the thirteenth
century, the cities in the kingdom of Aragon, and after
their example, those in Castile, formed themselves into an
association, distinguished by the name of the Holy Brother.
hood. They exated a certain contribution from each of the
associated towns; they levied a considerable body of troops,
in order to prote& travellers, and to pursue criminals; they
appointed judges, who opened their courts in various parts
of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery,
or of any a& that violates the public peace, and was seized
by the troops of the Brotherhood, was carried before judges
of their nomination, who, without paying any regard to the
exclusive and sovereig.n jurisdiction, which the lord of the
place might claim, tried and condemned the criminals. By
the establishment of this fraternity, the prompt and impartial
administration of jufitce was reflored; and, together with it,
internal tranquillity and order began to return. The.nobles
alene murmured at this salutary institution. They complain-
ed of it as an encroachment on one of their most valuable
privileges. They remonftated against it in an high tone;
ard, on some occasions, refused to grant any aid to the

Vol. 1. N

crown, unless it were abolished. Ferdinand, however, was
sensible not only of the good effecs of the Holy Brother.
hood with rcfpeCt to the police of his kingdoms, but per.
ceived its tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate,
the territorial jurifdidion of the nobility. He countenan.
ced it on-every occaiion. He supported it with the whole
force of royal authority; and besides the expedients employ.
ed by him in common with the other monarchs of Europe,
he availed himself of this inRfitution, which was peculiar to
his kingdom, in order to limit and abolish that independent
jurifdicion of the nobility, which was no less inconsistent
with the authority of the prince, than with the order of so-
ciety [00].

But though Ferdinand by these measures considerably en-

larged the boundaries of prerogative, and acquired a degree
of influence and power far beyond what any of his predecef-
fors had enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal authority,
as well as the barriers against its encroachments, continued
to be many and strong. The spirit of liberty was vigorous
among the people of Spain; the spirit of independence was
high among the nobility; and though the love of glory, pe-
culiar to the Spaniards in every period of their history,
prompted them to support Ferdinand with zeal in his so-
reign operations, and to afford him such aid as enabled him
not only to undertake but to execute great enterprizes; he
reigned over his fubjets with a jurisdiction less extensive
than that of any of the great monarchs in Europe. It will
appear from many passages in the following history, that
during a considerable part of the reign of his successor Charles
V. the prerogative of the Spaniih crown was equally cir-
cumfcribed.

The ancient government and laws in France so nearly re-

fembled those of the other feudal kingdoms, that such a de.
tail with refpcet to them as was necessary, in order to con-
vcy sone idea of the nature and effects of the peculiar inftitu-

[001 Note XXXVII

tionR which took place in Spain, would be superfluous. nl
the viewv which I have exhibited of the means by which the
French monarchs acquired such a full command of the na-
tioual force of their kingdom, as enabled them to engage in
rxteilfve fchtmes of foreign operation, I have already point-
rd out the great steps by which they advanced towards a
.lore ample poffcffion of political power, and a more uncon-
trouldc exercise of their royal prerogative. All that now re-
mains is to take notice of such particulars in the constitution
of 'Fance, as serve either to distinguish it from that of other
countries, or tend to throw any light on the tranfa&ions of
that period, to which the following history extends.

Under the French monarchs of the first race, the royal

prereogative was very inconfidcrable. The general afiemblies
of the nation, which met annually at stated seasons, extended
their authority to every department of government. The
Gower of eleciing kings, of enacting laws, of redressing griev-
ances, of conferring donations on the prince, of pafling
judlment in the last resort, with reflpe to every person and
to every cause, relided in this great convention of the nation.
Under the second race of kings, notwithstanding the power
and fplkndour which the couquefts of Charlemagne added to
the crown, the general assemblies of the nation continued to
possess extensive authority. The right of determining which.
ofthe royal family flioult be placed on the throne, was velt-
ed in them. The princes, elevated to that dignity by their
filffrage, were accustomed regularly to call and to consult
themr with refped to every affair of importance to the state,
andi without their consent no law was passed, and no new tax-
was levied.

But, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father of the third

race of kings, took possession of the throne of France, such
changes had happened in the political state of the kingdom,
as conliderably affected the power and jurifdition of the ge-
ueral airembly of the nation. The royal authority, if the
lhads of the degenerate posterity of Charlcmagne, hald

N z

dwindled into insignificance and contempt. Every confider.
able proprietor of land had formed his territory into a ba.
rony, anlmoR independent of the sovereign. The dukes or
governors of provinces, the counts or governors of towns and
small difirics, and the great officers of the crown, had ren-
dered these dignities, which originally were granted only
during pleasure or for life, hereditary in their families. Each
of thefr had usurped all the rights which hitherto had been
deemed the diftindions of royalty, particularly the privi.
leges of dispensing justice within their own domains, of coin.
ing money, and of waging war. Every diftri& was govern-
ed by local customs, acknowledged a diftint lord, and pur.
sucd a separate interest. The formality of doing homage to
their favereign, was almost the only at of fubje&ion which
those haughty barons would perform, and that bound them
no farther than they were willing to acknowledge its obliga.
tion [PP].

In a kingdom broken into so many independent baronies,

hardly any common principle of union remained; and the ge.
neral assembly, in its deliberations, could scarcely confider
the nation as forming one body, or establish common regu.
iations to be of equal force in every part. Within the im-
mediate domains of the crown, the king might publish laws,
and they were obeyed, because there-he was acknowledged
as the only lord. But if he had aimed at rendering there
laws general, that would have alarmed the barons as an en-
croachment upon the independence oftheirjurifdition. The
barons, when met in the great national convention, avoided,
with no less care, the enaAing of general laws to be observed
in every part of the kingdom, because the execution of them
mull have been vefled in the king, and would have enlarged
that paramount power, which was the objet of their jealou-
fy. Thus, under the descendents of Hugh Capet, the
States General (for that was the name by which the fu-
preme afembly of the French nation came then to be diftin-

[PP1 Note XXXVIII.

guilitd) loft their legiClative authority, or at leadt entirely
rcli'lc'u!i]ed the exercise of it. From that period, the jurif-
i;E;,),n of the States General extended no farther than to
ti. impolition of new taxes, the determination of questions
wi;h rcfpet to the right of succession to the crown, the set-
tling of the regency when the preceding monarch had nut
fxed it by his will, and the presenting remionitrances-enume--
ratin,, tihe grievances of which the nation wished to obtain-
rediess.

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of Europe fel-

di;ni demanded extraordinary subsidies oftheir fubjeas, and,
the other events, which required the interposition of the
st:ites, rarely occurred, their meetings in France were not.
f.e-qucnt. They were summoned occafioually by their kings,.
s lien compelled by their wants or their fears to have recourse
to the great convention of their people; but they did not,
like the Diet in Germany, the Cortes in Spain, or the Par-
lit;nent in England, form am essential member of the confti-
tution, the regular exertion of whose powers was requisite
to give vigour and order to government.

When the states of France ceased to exercise legislative

autl:ority, the kings began to afflme it. They ventured at
lirit on ads of legiilation with great reserve, and after tak-
ing every precaution that could prevent their fubjeds from
b)ing, alarmed at the extrcife of a new power. They did
not at once ifiue their ordinances in a tone of authority and
command. They treated with their fubjeEts they pointed
out what was best; and allured them to comply with it. By
degrees, however, as the prerogative of the crown extended,
aad as the supreme jurifdidion of the royal courts came to
be etlabliihed, the kings of France assumed more openly the
fille and authority of lawvgivers; and, before the beginning
of the fiftenuth century, the complete legislative power was
'c Iilin the crown [Q. ].
liavi.lg secured thi;' imp--ltant acquisition, the /teps wllichb

[QQ] Note XXXiX.

N3

led to the right of imposing taxes were rendered few and
easy. The people, accustomed to fee their sovereigns issue
ordinances, by their sole authority, which regulated points
of the greatest consequence with respect to the property of
their fubjets, were not alarmed when they were required,
by the royal edids, to contribute certain fums towards sup.
plying the exigencies of government, and carrying for.
ward the measures of the nation. When Charles VII.
and Louis XI. first ventured to exercise this new power, in
the manner which I have already described, the gradual in.
crease of the royal authority had so imperceptibly prepared
the minds of the people of France for this innovation, that
it excited no commotion in the kingdom, and seems scarcely
to have given rife to any murmur or complaint.

When the kings of France had thus engrossed every pow.

er which can be exerted in government; when the right of
making laws, of levying money, of keeping an army of mer.
cenaries in constant pay, of declaring war, and of conclud.
ing peace, centered in the crown, the constitution of the
kingdom, which, under the first race of kings, was nearly
dsmocratical; which, under the second race, became an arif.
tocracv; terminated, under the third race, in a pure monar-
chy. Every thing that tended to preserve the appearance
or revive the memory, of the ancient mixed government,
seems from that period to have been industriously avoided.
During the long and afive reign of Francis I. the variety
as wcll as extent of whole operations obliged him to lay
many heavy imp-fitions on his subje&s, the States General
of France were not once assembled, nor were the people once
allowed to exert the power of taxing themselves, which, ac.
cording to the original ideas of feudal government, was a right
eifential to every freeman.

T..o things, however, remained, which moderated the

exc:iss; of the regal prerogative, and refrained it with-
in f.ch bounds as preferred the conisitution of France from
e~.r-nerat'ng into mere despotism. The rights and privi-
kges claimed by the nobility, must be confidered as ote

barrier against the absolute dominion of the crown. Tho'
the nobles of France had loft that political power which was
vetted in their order as a body, they fRill retained the per-
fonal rights and pre-eminence which they derived from their
rank. They preserved a consciousness of elevation above o-
ther classes of citizens; an exemption from burdens to which
persons of inferior condition were fnbje&; a contempt of the
occupations in wvhich they were engaged; the privilege of
assuming ensigns what indicated their own dignity; a right
to be treated with a certain degree of deference during
peace; and a claim to various dillinctions when in the tield.
Many of these pretensions were not founded on the words
of fatutes, or derived from positive laws; they were defined
and ascertained by the maxims of honour, a title more deli-
cate, but no less sacred. These rights, eftablified and pro-
teded by a principle equally vigilant in guarding, and in-
trepid in defending them, are to the sovereign himfelfobjets
of refpea and veneration. Wherever they itand in its way,
the royal prerogative is bounded. The violence of a def-
pot may exterminate such an order of men ;. but as long as
it subsists, and its ideas of personal diftintion remain entire,
the power of the prince has limits*.

As in France the body of nobility was very numerous, and

the individuals of which it was composed retained an high
sense of their own preeminence, to this we may ascribe, in
a great measure, the mode of exercising the royal prerogative
which peculiarly diftinguilhes the government of that king-
dom. An intermediate order was placed between the mo-
narch and his other fubjeas; in every a& of authority it be-
came necessary to attend to its privileges, and not only to
guard againit any real violation of them, but to avoid any sus-
picion offuppofing it to be possible that they might be violat-
ed. Thus a species of government was eftablilhed in France
unknown in the ancient world, that of a monarchy, in

'De I'Efprit des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4. Dr. Ferguson's Efay on the
Hil of Civil Society, part i. set. io.

which the power of the sovereign, though unconfined by
aiy legal or constitutional reatraint, has certain bounds set
to it Lv the ideas which one class of his fubjets entertain
ccnccrning their own dignity.

The jurisdiction of the parliaments in France, particularly

that of Pari:- was the other barrier which served to confine
the exercise of the royal prerogative within certain limits.
T:e parliancnt of Paris was originally the court of the
kings of France, to which they committed the supreme ad.
r-iniilra.ion ofjutlice within their own domains, as well as
the power of deciding with refpet to all cafes brought be-
fore it by appeals from the courts of the barons. When in
consequence of events and regulations which have been men-
tioned formerly, the time and place of its meeting were fix.
ed, when not only the form of its procedure, but the prin-
ciples on which it decided, were rendered regular and confilt-
eat, when every cause of importance was finally determined
there, and when the people became accuflomed to resort thi-
ther as to the supreme temple of uftice, the parliament of Pa-
ris rose to high eltimation in the kingdom, its members acquir-
ed dignity, and its decrees were submitted to with deference.
Nor was this the only source of the power and influence
which the parliament obtained. The kings of France,
when they firtt began to assume the legislative power, in or-
der to reconcile the minds of their people to this new exer-
tion of prerogative, produced their edits and ordinances in
the parliament of Paris, that they might be approved of and
regiflered there, before they were published and declared to
be of authority in the kingdom. During the intervals be-
tween the meetings of the States General of the kingdom,
or during those reigns in-which the States General were not
affembld, the monarchs of France were accustomed to con-
fult the parliament cf Paris with refpeEt to the molt ardu-
ous affairs of government, and frequently regulated their
conduct by its advice, in declaring war, in concluding peace,
and in other tranfaclions of public concern. Thus there

was ere&ed in the kingdom a tribunal which became the
great depository of the laws, and by the uniform tenor of its
decrees efiablifhed principles ofjuftice and forms of proceed-
ing which were confidered as so sacred, that even the fove-
reign power of the monarch durif not venture to disregard
or to violate them. The members of this illustrious body,
thougi: they neither possess legislative authority, nor can be
confidered as the representatives of the people, have availed
themselves of the reputation and influence which they had
acquired among their countrymen, in order to make a itand
to the utmost of their ability, against every unprecedented
and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative. In every peri-
od of the French history, they have merited the praise of be-
ing the virtuous but feeble guardians of the rights and pri-
vileges of the nation [ RR]

After taking this view of the political slate of France,

I proceed to confider that of the German empire, from
which Charles V. derived his title of highest dignity. In
explaining the constitution of this great and complex body at
the beginning of the sixteenth century, I lhall avoid enter-
ing into such a detail as would involve my readers in that iri-
extricable labyrinth, which is formed by the multiplicity of
its tribunals, the number of its members, their interfering
rights, and by the endless discussions or refinements of the
public lawyers of Gernany, with refpet to all these.

The empire of Charlemagne was a ftru&ure ereced in so
short a time, that it could not be permanent. Under his
immediate successor it began to totter; and soon after fell to
pieces. The crown of Germany was separated from that of
France, and the descendents of Charlemagne established two
great monarchies so situated as to give rife to a perpetual ri-
vallhip and enmity between them. But the princes of the
race of Charlemagne who were placed on the Imperial
throne, were not altogether so degenerate, as those of the
fame family who reigned in France. In the hands of the

[RR] Note XL.

former the royal authority retained some vigour, and the no.
bls of Germany, though possessed of extensive privileges as
vell as ample territories, did not so early attain indepen-
dence. The great offices of the crown continued to be at
tle d;ipofal of the foxcreign, and during a long period, fiefs
remained in their original ilate, without becoming heredita.
ry and perpetual in the families of the persons to whom they
had been granted.

At lci.gth the German branch of the family of Charle-

magne became extinct. and his feeble descendents who reign-
ed in France had funk into such contempt, that the Ger-
mans, without looking towards them, exercised the right in-
herent in a free people; andin a general assembly of the na-
tion elecCed Conrad count of Franconia emperor [A.D.
911]. After him Henry of Saxony, and his descendents
the three Othos, were placed, in succession, on the Imperial
throne, by the fiffrages of their countrymen. The exten-
five territories of the Saxon emperors, their eminent abilities
and enterpriting genius, not only added r.ew vigour to the
Imperial dignity, but raised it to higher power and pre-emi-
nence. Otho the Great marched at the head of a numerous
army into Ilily [A.D. 952], and after the example of
Charlemagne, gave law to that country. Every power there
recognized his authority. He created popes, and deposed
them, by his sovereign mandate. He annexed the kingdom
of Italy to the German empire. Elated with his success,
he af2umed the title ofCaefar Aguftus. -t A prince, born irn
the heart of Germany, pretended to be the successor of the
emnrors of ancient Rome, and claimed a right to the fame
puwt:r axid prerogative.

But while the emperors, by means of these new titles and

new. douinlions, gradually acquired additional authority and
fi.-:,.dour, the nobility of Germany had gone on at the.fame
timne extending their privileges and jurildicion. The situ-
ation of affaIrs was favourable to their attempts. The vi-

t .AiinPlipa Saxo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

gour which Charlemagne had given to government quickly
relaxed. The incapacity of fume of his successors was fuclh,
as would have encouraged vassals less enterprising than the
nobles of that age, to have claimed new rights, and to have
afutmed new powers. The civil wars in which other empe-
rors were engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court to
their subjects, on whose support they depended, and not on-
ly to connive at their usurpations, but to permit, and even
to authorize them. Fiefs gradually became hereditary.
They were tranfinitted not only in the dire&, but also in
the collateral line. The invefliture of them was demanded
not only by male but by female heirs. Every baron began
to exercise foveleign jurifdi&ion within his own domains;
and the dukes and counts of Germany took wide steps to-
wards rendering their territories diftiuft and independent
ftatest. The Saxon emperors observed their progress, and
vwere aware of its tendency. But as they could not hope to
hunible vassals already grown too potent, unless they had
turned their whole force as well as attention to that enter-
prize, and as they were extremely intent on their expedi-
tions into Italy, which they could not undertake without the
concurrence of their nobles, they were solicitous not to a-
larm them by any dired attack on their privileges and jurif.
dictions. They aimed, however, at undermining their pow-
er. Witl this view, they inconsiderately betlowed addi-
tional territories, and accumulated new honours on the cler-
gy, in hopes that this order might serve as a counterpoise
to that of the nobility in any future struggle*.

The unhappy effecs of this fatal error in policy were
quickly felt. Under the emperors of the Franconian and
Bwabian lines, whom the Germans, by their voluntary elec-
tion, placed on the imperial throne, a new face of things ap-
peared, and a scene was exhibited in Germany, which afto-
niilhed all Chriflendom at that time CA.D. 1024], and in

1 Pfeffl. Abrege, p. Izo. isz. Lib. Feudor. tit. i.
* Pfefiel. Abrege, p. 134.

the present age appears almost incredible. The popes, hi.
therto dependent on the emperors, and indebted for power
as well as dignity to their beneficence and protefion, began
to claim a superior jurifdi&ion; and, in virtue of authority
which they pretended to derive from heaven, tried, condemn.
ed, excommunicated, and deposed their former masters.
Nor i this to be confidered merely as a frantic sally of pas.
sion in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas concerning the
extent of priestly domination, and the plenitude of papal au.
thority. Gregory VII. was able as well as daring. His
prefmption and violence were accompanied with political
discernment and fagaciry. He had observed that the princes
and nobles of Germany had acquired such considerable ter-
ritories and such extensive jurisdiction, as rendered them not
on'y formidable to the emperors, but disposed them to fa-
vour any attempt to circumscribe their power. He foresaw
that the eccdiaftics of Germany, raised almost to a level
with its princes, were ready to fupporf any person who would
ifand forth as the prote&or of their privileges and indepen-
dence. With both of these Gregory negotiated, and had
secured many devoted adherents among them, before he ven-
tured to enter the lifts against the head of the empire.

He began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a pretext

that was popular and plausible. He complained of the ve-
nality and corruption with which the emperor had granted
the investiture of benefices to ecclesiastics. He contended
that this right belonged to him as head of the church; he
required Henry to confine himself within the bounds of his
civil jurifdi&ion, and to abstain for the future from such fa-
crilegious encroachments on the spiritual dominion. All
the censures of the church were denounced against Henry,
because he refused to relinquilh those powers which his pre.
deceffors had uniformly exercised. The most confiderablc
of the German princes and ecclesiastics were excited to tak(
arms against him. His mother, his wife, his sons wer
wrought upon to disregard all the ties of blood as well as o

duty, and to join the party of his enemies . Such were the
successful arts with which the court of Rome inflamed the
fuperititious zeal, and conduced the fa&ious spirit of tl:e
Germans and Italians, that an emperor, diflinguifhed not on-
ly for many virtues, but polffleed of considerable talents, was
at length obliged to appear as a fiuppliant at the gate of the
castle in which the pope resided, and to stand therel three
days, bare-footed, in the depth of winter, imploring a pardon,
which at length he obtained with difficulty [SS].

This a& of humiliation degraded the Imperial dignity.

Nor was the depression momentary only. The contest be-
tween Gregory and Henry gave rife to the two great sac-
tions of the Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which
fiipporting the pretensions of the popes, and the latter de-
fending the rights of the emperor, kept Germany and Italy
in perpetual agitation during three centuries. A regular
system for humbling the emperors and circumscribing their
power was formed, and adhered to uniformly throughout
that period. The popes, the free states in Italy, the nobili-
ty, and ecclesiastics of Germany, were all interested in its fuc-
cess; and notwithRfanding the return of some short intervals
of vigour, under the administration of a few able emperors,
the Imperial authority continued to decline. During the
anarchy of the long interregnum subsequent to the death of
William of Holland [A. D. 256], it dwindled down almost
to nothing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder of the
House of Austria, and who firRf opened the way to its fu-
ture grandeur, was at length ele&ed emperor [A. D. 1273],
not that he might re-establish and extend the Imperial au-
thority, but because his territories and influence were so in-
'considerable as to excite no jealousy in the German princes,
who were willing to preserve the forms of a constitution, the
power and vigour of which they had destroyed. Several of
his successors were placed on the Imperial throne from the
fame motive; and almost every remaining prerogative was

t Annal. German. ap Struv. i. p. 325. [SS] Note XLI.
Vol. I. 0

rescued out of the hands of feeble princes unable to exercise
or to defend them.

During this period of turbulence and confusion, the con.

.ttution of the Germanic body underwent a total change.
The ancient names of courts and magistrates, together with
the original forms and appearance of policy, were preserved;
but such new privileges and jurlfdi;ion were assumed, and so
many various rights effab'lhed, that the fame species of go-
vernment no longer subsisted. The princes, the great no.

ility, the dignified eeclefiaftics, the free cities had taken ad.
vantage of the interregnum, which I have mentioned, to
eftabliih or to extend their usurpations. They claimed and
exercised the right of governing their refpe&ive territories
with full fovereigaty. They acknowledged no superior with
iefpet to any point, relative to the interior administration
and police of their domains. They enacted laws, imposed
taxes, coined money, declared war, concluded peace, and ex.
-erted every prerogative peculiar to independent fates. The
ideas of order and political union, which had originally form.
ed the various provinces of Germany into one body, were
almoif entirely loft; and the society mutl have diffilved, if
the forms of feudal subordination bad not preserved such an
appearance of connection or dependence among the various
members of the community, as preservcd it from falling to
pieces.

This bond of union, however, was extremely feeble; and

hardly any principle remained in the German constitution,
of sufficient force to maintain public order, or even to afcer.
tain personal security. From the accelion of Rodulph of
Hapfburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the immediate pre.
deceffor of Charles V. the empire felt every calamity which
a Rate mutl endure, when the authority of government is so
much relaxed as to have loft its proper degree of vigour.
The causes of dissension among that vast number of members,
which composed the Germanic body, were infinite and un-
avoidable. These gave rife to perpetual private wars, which

were carried on with all the violence that usually accompa-
nies resentment, when unrestrained by superior authority.
Rapine, outrage, exacions, became universal. Commerce
was interrupted; industry suspended; and everypart of Ger-
ma!yl resembled a country which an enemy had plundered
and left desolate*. The variety of expedients employed
with a view to restore order and tranquillity,.prove that the
grievances occasioned by this fate of anarchy had grown in-
tolerable. Arbiters were appointed to terminate the differ-
ences among the several states. The cities united in a league,.
the objet of which was to check the rapine and extortions
of the nobility. The nobility formed confederacies, on pur-
pose to maintain tranquillity among their own order. Ger-
many was divided into several circles, in each of which a pro-
vincial and partial jurifdition was eftablilhed, to supply the
place of a public and common tribunal-;

But all these remedies were so ineffetual, that they ferv.

ed only to demonstrate the violence of that anarchy which
prevailed, and the insufficiency of the means employed to
correft it. At length Maximilian re-eftablilhed public or-
der in the empire, by instituting the Imperial chamber [A.D.
1495], a tribunal composed of judges named partly by the
emperor, partly by the several states, and veiled with autho.
,ity to decide finally concerning all differences among the
members of the Germanic body. A few years after [A. D.
1512], by giving a new form to the Aulic council, which
takes cognizance of all feudal causes, and such as belong to-
the emperor's immediate jurifdi&ion, he restored some de-
gree of vigour to the Imperial authority.

Butnotwithftanding the falutaryeffeds of these regulations

and improvements, the political constitution of the German
empire, at the commencement of the period of which I pro-
pose to write the history, was of a species so peculiar, as not

* See above, page 46, and Note xxi. Datt. de pace publica
Imper. p. 25, no. 53. P. 28, no. 25, p. 35, no. "x.
tDatt. paffn. Struv. Corp. Hil i. 51o, &c.

02.

to resemble perfe&tly any form of government known ct.her
in the ancient or modem world. It was a complex body,
formed by the association of several states, each of which
poleffred forereign and independent jurifdiLion within its
own territories. Of all the members which composed this
united body, the emperor was the head. In his name, all
decrees and regulations, with r:peft to points of common
concern, were issued; and to him the power of carrying
them iato execution was committed. But this appearance
of monarchical power in the emperor was more than coun.
terbalanced by the influence of the princes and fates of the
empire in every at of adminifiration. No law extending to
the whole body could pass, no refclution that asseted the
general interest could be taken, without the approbation of
the diet of the empire. In this assembly, every sovereign
prince and state of the Germanic body had a right to be
present, to deliberate, and to vote. Th$ decrees or RecIei
of the diet were the laws of the empire, which the emperor
was bound to ratify and enforce.

Under this afpe&, the conflitution of the empire appears

a regular confederacy, similar to the Achaean league in an.
cient Greece, or to that of the United Provinces and of the
Swiss Cantons in modern times. But if viewed in another
light, ariking peculiarites in its political fate present them.
selves. The Germanic body was not formed by the union
of members altogether diftinE and independent. All the
princes and flates, joined in this association, were originally
subjet to the emperors, and acknowledged them as fove-
reigns. Besides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiEfs, and in consequence of this tenure owed the
emperors all those services which feudal vassals are bound to
perform to their liege lord. But though this political sub-
iection was entirely at an end, and the influence of the feu-
dal relation much diminished, the ancient forms and inftitu-
tions, introduced while the emperors governed Germany
with authority not inferior to that which the other mop-

archs of Europe possessed, Rill remained. Ttus alnoppo-
fition was eftablilhed between the genius of the government,
and the forms of adlnninitration in- the German empire. The
former confidered the emperor only as the head of a confe-
deracy, the members of which, by their voluntary choice,
have raised him to that dignity; the latter seemed to imply,
that he is really invested with sovereign power. By this
circumitance, such principles of hoffility. and' discord were
interwoven into the frame of the Germanic body,. as asset-
ed each of its members, rendering their interior union in-
complete, and their external efforts feeble and irregular..
The pernicious influence of this defe& inherent in the con-
litution of the empire is so considerable, that, without at-
tending to it, we cannot fully comprehend many tranfac.
tions in the reign of Charles V. or form just ideas concern-
hig the genius of the German government.

The emperors of Germany, at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century, were distinguished by the most pompous
titles, and by such ensigns of dignity, as intimated their au-
thority to be superior to that of all other monarchs. The
greatctr princes of the empire attended, and served them, on;
3ine occasions as the officers of their household. They ex-
rTifed prerogatives which no other sovereign ever claimed.
They. retained pretensions to all the extensive powers which
their predecessors had enjoyed in any former age. But, at
the fame time, instead of pofeffing that ample domain which
had belonged to the ancient emperors of Germany, and;
which stretched from Basil to Cologne, along both banks of
the Rhine*, they were stripped of'all territorial property,
and had not a single city, a single cafile, a single foot of land,-
that belonged' to them, as heads of the empire. As their
domain was alienated, their ftated&revenues were reduced-
almost to nothing; and the extraordinary aids,.which. on a,
ft- occasions they obtained, were granted sparingly and.
paid with relu&tance. The princes and states of the empire,,

Pfeffel. Abrege, &c. p. a41.

03

though they seemed to recognize the Imperial authority,
.were fubjeds only in name, each of them possessing a com.
plete municipal jurifdi&ion within the precincts of his own
territories.

From this ill-compaaed frame of government, effe&s that

were unavoidable resulted. The emperors, dazzled with
the splendour of their titles, and the external signs of vast
:authority, were apt to imagine themselves to be the real so.
-ereigns of Germany, and were led to aim continually at re-
covering the exercise of those powers which the forms of
the conflitutiom seemed to veif in them, and which-their
predecessors, Charlemagne and the Othos, had actually en-
joyed. The princes and states, aware of the nature as well
as extent of these pretensions, were perpetually on their
guard, in order to watch all the motions of the Imperial
court, and to circumscribe its power within limits till more
narrow. The emperors, in support of their claims, appeal-
ed to ancient forms and institutions, which the states held
to be obsolete. The flates founded their rights on recent
practice and modern privileges, which the emperors confider.
ed as usurpations.

This jealousy of the Imperial authority, together with

the opposition betw-een it and the rights of the iates, in.
created considerably from the time that the emperors were
elected, not by the colle&tive body of German nobles, but
by a few princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanic body had a right to as-
iemble, and to make choice of the person whom they ap-
pointed to be their head. But amidi the violence and anar-
chy wh'ch prevailed for several centuries in the empire,
fcv-nk prines who pofffled the most extensive territories, and
who had obtained a hereditary title to the great offices of
the -late, acquired the exclusive privilege of nominating the
emperor. This right was confirmed to them by the Gold-
en Bull: the mod- of exercising it was ascertained, and they
were dignified \ith the appellation of Eleaors. The nobi-

lity and free cities being thus stripped of a privilege which
they had once enjoyed, were less conneced with a prince,
towards whose elevation they had not contributed by their
suffrages, and came to be more apprehensive of his authori-
ty. The electors, by their extensive power, and the diftin-
guifhing privileges which they pofleffed, became formida-
ble to the emperors, with whom they were placed almost on
a level in several a&s of jurisdiCtion. Thus the introduntion
of the eledoral college into the empire, and the authority
which it acquired, instead of diminishing, contributed to
firengthen, the principles of hotility and discord in the
Germanic constitution;

These were further augmented by the various and repug-

nant forms of civil policy in the several states which compos-
ed the Germanic body. It is no easy matter to render the
union of independent Rtates perfect and entire, even when
the genius and forms of their refpe&ive governments hap-
pen to be altogether similar. But in the Germanic empire,
which was a confederacy of princes, of ecclesiastics, and of
free cities, it was impossible that they could incorporate
thoroughly. The free cities were small republics, in which
the maxims and spirit peculiar to that species of government
prevailed. The princes and nobles, to whom supreme jurif-
diEtion belonged, possessed a fort of monarchical power with.
in their own territories, add the forms of their interior ad-
ministration nearly resembled those of the great feudal king-
doms. The interests, the ideas, the obje¢ts of iates so dif-
ferently confituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could their
common deliberations be carried on with the fame spirit,
while the love of liberty, and attention to commerce, were
the reigning principles in the cities; while the desire of
lpower, and ardour for military glory,were the governing pas-
sions of the princes and nobility.

The secular and ecclesiastical members of the empire were

as little fitted for union as the free cities and the nobility.
Considerable territories had been granted to several of the

bishoprics and abbeys, and some of the highest offices in the
empire having been annexed to them inalienably, were held
by the ecclfiaftics raised to these dignities. The younger
sons of noblemen of the second order, who hal devoted
themselves to the church, were commonly promoted to these
stations of eminence and powers and it was no small mor-
tification to the princes and great nobility, to fee persons
raised from an inferior rank to the fame level with themselves,
or even exalted to superior dignity. The education of these
churchmen, the genius of their profeflion, and their connec-
tion with the court of Rome, rendered their charater as
well as their interest different from those of the other mem-
bers of the Germanic body, with whom they werw called to
ad in concert. Thus another source ofjealoufy and vari-
ance was opened, which ought not to be overlooked when
we are searching into the nature of the German confiitu.
tion.

To all these causes of dissension may be added one more,

arising from the unequal distribution of power and wealth
among the states of the empire. The eleEtors, and other
nobles of the highest rank, not only poffelfed sovereign ju-
rifdicion, but governed such extensive, populous, and rich
countries, as rendered them great princes. Many of the o-
ther members, though they enjoyed all the rights of fove-
reignty, ruled over such petty domains, that their real pow-
er bore no proportion to this high prerogative. A well
compa&ed and vigorous confederacy could not be formed
of such dissimilar itates. The weaker were jealous, timid,
and unable either to assert or to defend their just privileges.
The more powerful were apt to assume and to become op.
preffive. The ele&ors, and emperors, by turns, endeavoured
to extend their own authority, by encroaching on those fee-
ble members of the Germanic body, who sometimes defend-
ed their rights with much spirit, but more frequently, being
overawed or corrupted, they tamely surrendered their pri-

vileges, or meanly favoured the designs formed against them
[TT].

After contemplating all these principles of disunion and

opposition in the constitution of the German empire, it will
be easy to account for the want of concord and uniformity,
conspicuous in its councils and proceedings. That low, di-
latory, distrustful, and irresolute spirit, which chara&erizes
all its deliberations, will appear natural in a body, the junc-
tion of whose members was so incomplete, the different parts
of which were held together by such feeble ties, and set at
variance by such powerful motives. But the empire of Ger-
many, nevertheless, comprehended countries of such great
extent, and was inhabited by such a martial and hardy race
of men, that when the abilities of an emperor, or zeal for
any common cause, could rouse this unwieldy body to put
forth its strength, it a&ed with almost irresistible force. In
the following history we lhall find, that as the measures
on which Charles V. was most intent, were often thwarted
or rendered abortive by the spirit ofjealoufy and division
peculiar to the Germanic constitution; so it was by the in-
fluence which he acquired over the princes of the empire,
and by engaging them to co-operate with him, that he was
enabled to make some of the greatest efforts which diftin.
guilh his reign.

The Turkish history isofo blended, during the reign of

Charles V. with that of the great nations in Europe, and
the Ottoman Porte interposed so often, and with such deci-
five influence, in the wars and negotiations of the Christian
princes, that some previous account of the state of govern.
ment in that great empire, is no less necessary for the infor.
mation of my readers, than those views of the constitution
of other kingdoms which I have already exhibited to them.

It has been the fate of the southern and more fertile parts

of Asia, at different periods, to be conquered by that warlike
and hardy race of men, who inhabit the vati country known

[TTJ Note XLII.

to the ancients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of these people,
called Turks or Turcomans, extended its conquests, under
various leaders, and during several centuries, from the Caf.
pian Sea to the straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the
middle of the fifteenth century, these formidable conquerors
took Constantinople by torm, and eftablilhed the feat of
their government in that imperial city. Greece, Moldavia,
Walachia, and the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms
of Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of Hungary,
were fubjeted to their power.

But though the feat of the Turkish government was fix.

ed in Europe, and the sultans obtained possession of such ex.
tensive dominions in that quarter of the globe, the genius
of their policy continued to be purely Asiatic; and may be
properly termed a despotism, in contradiftinaion to those
monarchical and republican forms of government which we
have been hitherto contemplating. The supreme power
was vested in sultans of the Ottoman race, that blood being
deemed so sacred, that no other was thought worthy of the
throne. From this elevation, these sovereigns could look
down and behold all their subje&s reduced to the fame level
before them. The maxims of Turkish policy do not au-
thorife any of those inflitutions, which in other countries,
limit the exercise, or moderate the rigour of monarchical
power; they admit neither of any great court with confi-
tutional and permanent jurifdi&tion to interpose, both in en-
afting laws, and in superintending the execution of them;
nor of a body of hereditary nobies, whose sense of their own
pre-eminence, whose consciousness of what is due to their
rank and character, whose jealousy of their privileges cir-
cumfcribe the authority of the prince, and serve not only
as a barrier againf the excesses of his caprice, but stand as
an intermediate order between him and the people. Under
the Turkish government, the political condition of every
subjec is equal. To be employed in the fcrvice of the ful-

tan, is the only circumstance that confers diftinlion. Even
this diftinftion is rather official than personal, and so closely
annexed to the fation in which any individual serves, that it
is scarcely communicated to the persons of those who are
placed in them. The ighellt dignity in the empire does
not give any rank or pre-eminence to the family of him who
enjoys it. As every man, before he is raised to any station
of authority, must go through the preparatory discipline of a
long and servile obedience*, the moment he is deprived of
power, he and his posterity return to the fame condition
with other fubjeas, and fink back into obscurity. It is the
distinguishing and odious charaferiftic of Eastern despotism
that it annihilates all other ranks of-men, in order to exalt
the monarch; that it leaves nothing to the former, while it
gives every thing to the latter; that it endeavours to fix in the
minds of those who are fibjec to it, the idea of no relation
between men, but that of a mailer and of a slave, the for-
mer defined to command and to punish, the latter formed
to tremble and to obey [UU].

But as there are circurftances which frequently obflrut

or defeat the salutary effeas of the befl regulated govern-
ments, there are others which contribute to mitigate the
evils of the most defective forms of policy. There can, in-
deed, be no contitutional restraints upon the will of a
prince in a despotic government; but there may be such
as are accidental. Absolute as the Turkish sultans are,
they feel themselves circumscribed both by religion, the
principle on which their authority is foundedt, and by the
army, the instrument which they mutl employ in order to
maintain it. Wherever religion interposes, the will of the
sovereign muff submit to its decrees. When the Koran
hath prescribed any religious rite, hath enjoined any moral
duty, or hath confirmed by its fantion any political maxim,

*State of the Turkifli Empire by Rycaut, p. 25.
[UU] Note XLIII.
t Rycaut, p. 8.

the command of the sultan cannqt overturn that which an
higher authority hath established. The chief refiri&ion,
however, on the will of the sultans, is imposed by the mili.
tary power. An armed force mut surround the throne of
every despot, to maintain his authority, and to execute his
commands. -As the Turks extended their empire over na.
tions which they did not exterminate, but reduce to sub.
jection, they found it necessary to render their military e.
fabliihment numerous and formidable. Amurath, their
third sultan, in order to form a body of troops devoted to
his wil, that might serve as the immediate guards of his
person and dignity,'commanded his officers to seize annually
as the Imperial property, the fifth part of the youth taken
in war [A. D. 1362]. These after being intru&ed in the
Mahometan religion, inured to obedience by revere difcip.
line, and trained -o warlike exercises, were formed into a
body distinguished by the name of ,anizaries,. or new fol.
diers. Every sentiment which enthusiasm can inspire, every
mark of diRinftion that the favour of the prince could con-
ser, were employed in order to animate this body with mar-.
tial ardour, and with a consciousness of its own pre-emi1
nencet. The Janizaries soon became the chief strength
and pride of the Ottoman armies; and, by their number as
well as reputation, were distinguished above all the troops
whose duty it was to attend on the person of the sultans

Thus as the supreme power in every society is pofflffed

by those who have arms in their hands, this formidable bo-
dy of soldiers destined to be the instruments of enlarging the
- sultan's authority, acquired at the fame time, the means of

c3ntrouling it. The Janizaries in Constantinople, like the
Pretorian bands in ancient Rome, quickly perceived all the
advantages which they derived from being stationed in -the
capital; from their union under one fiandard; and from be

t Prince Cntenir's Hitory of the Othman Empire, p. 87.
[XX] Note XLIV.
- !,

.ig mafters-of the person of the-prince. The sultans be-
came nolefs sensible of their influence and importance. The
Capiculy, or soldiery of the Porte, was the only power ill
the empire that a sultan or his vilier had reason to dread.
To prIferve the fidelity and attachment of the Janizaries,
was the great art of government, and the principal object of
attention in the policy of the Ottoman court. Under a mo-
ilarch, whose abilities and vigour of mind fit him for com-
mand, they are obsequious inftrmetits; execute whatever he
enjoins; and render his power irrefiiible. Under feeble
princes, or such as are unfortunate, they become turbulent
and mutinous; afftme the tone of masters; degrade and ex-
alt sultans at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on whose
nod, at other times, life and death depend.

From Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, to Solyman
the Magnificent, who began his reign a few months after
'Charles V. was placed on the Imperial throne of Germany,
a succession of illustrious princes ruled over the Turkibh em-
pire. By their great abilities, they kept their fubjets of
every order, military as well as civil, submissive to govern-
ment; and had the absolute command of whatever force their
vast empire was able to exert. Solyman, in particular, who
is known to the Christians chiefly as a conqueror, but is ce-
lebrated in the Turkifi annals, as the great lawgiver who
established order and police in their empire, governed, dur-
ing his long reign, with no less authority than wisdom. He
divided his dominions into several diftrias;. -he appointed the.
number offoldiers which each fliould furnish; he appropri-
ated a certain proportion of the land in every province f6r
their maintenance; hie regulated, with a minute accuracy,
every thing relative to their difcipline,'-heir arms, and the'-
nature of their service. He put the'finances of the empire
into an orderlytrain of administration; and, though the tax4
es in the THrkifh dominions, as well as in the other de4potic
monarchies of the EAst, are far fref bbeing co1fiderable, .'
ftpplied that defPe by an attentive and severe economy.
Vol. I. p - - -

Nor was it only under such sultans as Solyman, whose ta.

lents were no less adapted to preserve internal order than to
conduc the operations of war, that the Turkish empire en.
gaged with advantage in its contests with the Chrifian ifates.
The long succession of able princes, which I have mentioned,
had given such vigour and firmness to the Ottoman govern.
nent, that it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth cen.
tury, the highefl degree of perfe&ion of which its conftitu.
t'on was capable. Whereas the great monarchies in Christ-
endom were till far from that state, which could enable them
to at with a full exertion of their force. Besides this, the
Turki]a troops in that age pofli'eed every advantage which
arises from superiority in military discipline. At the time
'when Solyman began his reign, the Janizaries had been em.
bodied near a century and a half; and, during that long pe-
riod, the severity of their military discipline had in no de-
gree relaxed. The other soldiers, drawn from the provin.
ces of the empire, had been kept almost continually under
arms, in the -various wars which the sultans had carried on,
with hardly any interval of peace. Against troops thus train.
ed and accustomed to service, the forces of the Christian
powers took the field with great disadvantage. The most
intelligent as well as impartial authors of the sixteenth cen.
tury acknowledge and lament the superior attainments of the
Turks in the military art [YY]. The success which almod
uniformly attended their arms, in all their wars, demongtrates
the juftneis of this ohfervation. The Christian armies did
not acquire that superiority over the Turks, which they now
possess, until the long establishment of standing forces had
improved military discipline among the former; and until
various canses and events, which it is not my province to
explain, had corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike in-
Ilitutiona among the latter.

[YY] Note XLV.

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. Sea . L p. o. [Al.

THE consternation of the Britons, when invaded by the-Picts
and Caledonians after the Roman legions were called out of the
inand, may give some idea of the degree of debasement to which
the human mind was reduced by long servitude under the Ro-
mnans. In their supplicatory etter to Aetius, which they call the
Groanr of Britain, "'We know not (fay they) which way to turn-
tus. The barbarians drive us to the sea, and the sea forces us back
on the barbarians; between which we have only the choice of
two deaths, either to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be slain
by the sword." Hiftor. Gilda, ap. Gale, His. Britain. Script. p.
6.-One can hardly believe this dastardly race to be the delcend-
ents of that gallant people, who repulsed Cefar, and defended
their liberty so long against the Roman arms.

NOTE II. SeA. 1. p io. [B].

The barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but regarded
literature with contempt. They found the inhabitants of all the
provinces of the empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to war.
Such a character was the object of scorn to an high spirited and gal-
lant race of men. When we would brand an enemy,lays Liutprand-
us, " with the molt disgraceful and contumelious appellation, we
call him a Roman; hoc solo, id elt Romani noinine, quicquid ig-
nobilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avaritie-, quicquid lux-
uriae, quictqid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum eft compre-
bendentes.' Liutprandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic.
vol. ii. pars a. p. 481. Tlis degeneracy of manners, illiterate
barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even after they
fettled in the countries which they had conquered, they would
not permit their children to be infiruled in any science; " for
(laid they) inftrudion in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate
and deprefl the mind; and he who has been accustomed to trem-
ble un er the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a sword or
spear with an undaunted eye.' Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Vennet. vol. k A considerable number
of years elapsed, before nations so rude, and so unwilling to learn,
could produce historians capable of recording their tranfadcions,
or of describing their manners and inltitutions. By that time, the
mimnnry of their ancient condition was in a great measure loft,
and few monuments remained tos guide their first writers to any
certain knowlege of it. If one expects to receive any fatisfadtory
account of the manners and laws ot the Goths, Lombards, or
Iranks, during their residence in those countries where they were

P 2

Nor was it only under such sultans as Solyman, whose ta-

klets were no less adapted to preserve internal order than to
cordu& the operations of war, that the Turkiih empire en.
gaged with advantage in its contests with the Chrisian gates.
The long succession of able princes, which I have mentioned,
'had given such vigour and firmness to the Ottoman govern-
ner.t, that it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth cen-
tury, the highest degree of perfeAion of which its conflitu.
tlon was capable. Whereas the great monarchies in Chris.-
endom were till far from that state, which could enable them
to at with a full exertion of their force. Besides this, the
Turkish troops in that age pofeflfed every advantage which
arises from superiority in military discipline. At the time
'when Solyman began his reign, the Janizaries had been em.
bodied near a century and a half; and, during that long pe.
riod, the severity of their military discipline had in no de-
gree relaxed. The other soldiers, drawn from the provin-
ces of the empire, had been kept almost continually under
arms, in the various wars which the sultans had carried on,
with hardly any interval of peace. Againit troops thus train-
d d ad accultomted to service, the forces of the Christian
powers took the field with great disadvantage. The moot
intelligent as well as impartial authors of the sixteenth cen.
tury acknowledge and lament the superior attainments of'the
Turks in the military art [YY]. The success which almost
uniformly attended their arms, in all their wars, demonstrates
the justness of this observation. The Christian armies did
not acquire that superiority over the Turks, which they now
possess, until the long establishment of sanding forces had
improved military discipline among the former; and until
Tarious causes and events, which it is not my province to
explain, had corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike in-
flitutions among the latter.

[YY] Note XLV.
cO ,

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. Se&. 1. p. xo. [AT.

TH F consternation of the Britons, when invaded by the Pidhs
and Caledonians after the Roman legions were called out of the
island, may give some idea of the degree of debasement to which.
the human mind was reduced by long servitude under the Ro-
mans. In their supplicatory letter to Aetius, which they call the
Groans of Britain, "'We know not (fay they) which way to turn

Ts. The barbarians drive us to the sea, and the sea forces us back

en the barbarians; between which we have only the choice of
two deaths, either to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be slain
by the sword." Hiftor. G;lde, ap. Gale, Hist. Britain. Script. p.
6.-One can hardly believe this dastardly race to be the delcend-
ents of that gallant people, who repulsed Caesar, and defended.
their liberty so long againfi the Roman arms.

NOTE I. Sea. I. p Io. [B].

The barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but regarded

literature with contempt. They found the inhabitants of all the
provinces of the empire funk in effeminacy, and averse to war.
Such a character was the objed of scorn to an high spirited and gal-
lant race of men. When we would brand an enemy,lays Liutprand-
us, " with the moit disgraceful and contumelious appellation, we
call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft Romani no.nine, quicquid ig-
nobilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avaritie, quic(luid lux-
Lrie, quicquxid mendacii, immo quicquid vitiorum eft compre-
hendentes. Liutprandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic.
vol. ii. pars I. p. 481. This degeneracy of manners, illiterate
barbarians imputed to their love of learning. Even after they
fettled in the countries which they had conquered, they would
not permit their children to be inftrusted in any science; " for
(said they) inflrution in the sciences rends to corrupt, enervate
and depress the mind; and he who has been accustomed to trem-
ble under the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a sword or
spear with an undaunted eye.' Procop. de bello Gothor. lib. i.
p. 4. ap. Scrip. Byz. edit. Vennct. vol. is A considerable number
of years elapsed, before nations so rude, and so unwilling to learn,
could produce historians capable of recording their transactions,
or of describing their manners and inltitutions. By that time, the
rnimory of their ancient condition was in a great measure loft,
and few monuments remained to guide their firit writers to any
certain knowlege of it. If one expcds to receive any fatisfadcory
account of the manners and laws of the Goths, Lombards, or
F'ranks, during their residence in thole countries where they were

p z

originally feated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gre.
gory of Tours, the earlicft and most authtntic historians of there
people, he w-ill be miserably disappointed. Whatever imper.
frdt knowledge has been conveyed to us of their ancient slate, we
owe not to their own writers, but to the Greek and Roman hifto-
rians.

NOTE III. Sect. I. p. xI. TC]

A circumflance, rrlated by Prifcus in his lhifory of the embassy

to Atnila, king of the lluns, gives a fi'tking view of the enthufi.
si'c paiffon fcr war which prevailed among the barbarous na-
t:.'.ns »-hen the entertainment, to which that fierce conqueror
:'.rn:ted the RomK n ambassadors, was ended, two Scythians ad-
vanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in which they cele.
tl-ated his vicdories and military virtues. All the Huns fixed
t:tir eyes with attention on the bards. Some seemed to be de.
lighted with the verses; others, remembering their own battles
and exploits, exulted with joy; while such as were become feeble
through age, burfl into tears, lewailing the decay of their vigour,
and the fla:e of inactivitv in which they were nuw obliged to re-
main. Excerpta ex hifloria Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant. Hiftor.
Script. vol. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. Sect. I. p. i6. [D]

A remarkable confirmation of both parts of this reasoning oc-

curs in the hi.ory of England. The Saxons carried on the con,
quest of that country, with the fame deftrutive spirit which dif-
t;nguifhed the other barbarous nations- The ancient inhabitants of
Br-tain w-ere either exterminated, or forced to take ihelter among
the mountains of Wales, or reduced to servitude. The Saxon go-
vcrrnment, laws, manners and language were of consequence in-
troduced into Briailn; .nd were so perfecly established, that all
nemory o the institutions previous to their conquest of the coun-
try, was in a great measure loft. The very reverse of thishap.
-.-;,ed in a subsequent revolution. A lingle vidlory placed Wil-
.anm the Norman on the throne of England. The Saxon inhabi-
t'r.t,, t.ough oppressed, were not exterminated. William em-
i-loyed the utmolt efforts of his power and policy to make his
r.ew f;- Ilhj-cs conform in every thing to the Norman standard,
li:t without success. The Saxons, though vanquithed, were far
nore numerous than their conquerors; when the two races began
to incorporate, the Saxon laws and manners gradually gained
:round. Tlce Norman ;nflitutions became unpopular and odi-
o.as; manv of them fell into difuft, and in the English conftitu-
i;rn and language, at this day, many essential parts are manifefily
of Saxon, not of Norman extraction.

Note V. Seat. I. p. 16. [El.

Procopius, the historian, declines, trom a principle of benevo-
lence, to give any particular detail of the cruelties of the Goths:

-
Left," lays he, i" I ihould traninit a monuinmnt and example

of inhumanitv to succeeding ages." Proc. de bello Goth. lib. iii.
cap. ie. ap. Iyz. Script. vol. i. 126. But as the change, which I
have pointed out as a consequence of the settlement of the barba.
rous nations in the countries formerly fuhjed to the Roman em-
pire, could not have taken place, if the greater part of the ancient
inhabitants had not been extirpated, an event of such importance
and influence merits a more particular illustration. This will
justify me for exhibiting some part of that melancholy fpeftacle,
over which humanity prompted Procopius to draw a veil. I ihall
not, however, disgust my readers by a minute narration-; but reft
satisfied with collecting Come inflances of the devastations made
hby two of the many nations which fettled in the empire. The
Vandals were the firfi of the babarians who invaded Spain. It
was one of the richest and molt populous of the Roman provinces;
the inhabitants had been distinguished for courage, and had de-
fended their liberty against the arms of Rome, with great obfti
nacy, and during a longer course of years, than any nation n Eu-
rope. But so entirely were they enervated by their fubje&ion to
the Romans, that the Vandals, who entered the kingdom, A. D.
409, completed the conquell of it with such rapidity, that in the
year 411, the'e barbarians divided it among them by catling lots.
T'he desolation occasioned by their irnvafion, is thus described by
Idatius an eve witness: " The barbarians walled every thing with
holtile cruelty. The pestilence was no less deftrutdivc. A dread-
ful famine raged, to such a degree, that the living were con-
llrained to feed on the dead bodies of their fellow-citizens; and-
all those terrible plagues desolated at once the unhappy kingdoms."
Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum, vol. vii. p. 1233. edit Ludg.
1677. The Goths having attacked the Vandals in their new let-
tleinents. a fierce war enfuied; the country was plundered by
both parties; the cities which had escaped fri, s i deltru6tion in the
first invasion of the Vandals, were now laid in ashes, and the in-
habitants .exposed to susser every thing that the' wanton cruelt
ty of barbarians could inflin. Idatius describes thele scenes
of inhumanity, ibid. p. 1235. b. 1X36. c. f. Afimilar account of
their devaitation is given by fidorus l-iitpalenfis, and other con-
temporary writers. Ifid. Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 731. From
Spain the Vandals palled over into Africa, A. D. 428. Africa
was, next to Egypt, the most fertile of the Roman provinces.
It was one of the granaries of the empire, and is called by an an-
cient writer the foul of the commonwealth. Though the army
with which the Vandals invaded it did not exceed 3o,ooo fight-
ing men, they became ablolute maiters of the province in less than
two years. A contemporary author gives a dreadful account of
the havock which they made: " They found a province well cul-
tivated, and enjoying plent, the beauty of the whole earth. They
tarried their deitrud&ive arms into every corner of it; they dii;
peopled it by their devaflations; exterminating every thing with
fire and Ivord. l'hey did not even Ipare the vines and fruit
trees, that rhole, to whom caves and inaccessible mountains had
afforded a retreat, might find no nourishment of any kind. Their

P3

;ofiile rage could not be satiated, and there was no place exempt.
ed from the effects of it. They tortured their prisoners with the
molt exquisite cruelty, that they might force from them a disco-
very of their hidden treasures. The more they discovered the
i-ore :hey extpeted, and the more implacable they became.
.Nither the infinnities of age nor of sex; neither the dignity of
I:obility, nor the fanCity of the facerdoral office, could mitigate
;L.cir fur ; bur the more illustrious their prisoners were, the more
barbanruily they intulted them. The public buildings which re-
fifird the violence of the flames, they levelled with the ground.
'I hey left many cities without an inhabitant. MWhen they ap-
I roached any fortified place, which their undicfiplined army
ciLild not redite, they gathered together a multitude of prisoners,
and lutting them to the sword, left their hbdies unburied, that
t Ie fiencb of the carcafles might oblige the garrison to abandon
i " Viacor Vitenfis de perfecutione Arricana, ap Bibl. Iatrum,
vo!. viii. p. 666. St. Alugufiin, an African. who survived the
c,.r.qutft of his country by the Vandals iome years, gives a fimi-
lar dftcription ot their cruehies, Opera, vol. x. p. 372. edit.
j616.-About an hundred years after the settlement of the Van-
dcals in Africa, Bellilarius attacked and difpofleffed them. Pro-
coius, a coT.tempcrary hiltorian deitribes the devastation which
thzt war occafi nd. " Africa," fays he, " was so entirely dif-
ptop!-cd that one n.ight travel several days in it without meeting
o.e m-n; and it is ro exaggeration to fay, that in the course of
the ;ar five milliors ofperfons perilhed!" Proc hist. Arcana,
cap. In . .p. Bvz Srript. vol. i. 315.-1 have dwelt longer upon
ti.c calamities or tlus province, because they are described not only
by contcnlorary authors, but by eye-witntffes The pretent
itate of Airica confirms their teftimonv. Many of the moll flou-
rT.Li.g and popu' s cities with which it was filled, m ere lo en-
t.rciy ruined, thait ro vefligcs remain to point out where th.ey
W-ere fituatd. That fertile territory which fufiaintd the Ronran
r:.pire, fiill lies in a great measure uncultivated; and that pro-
.v:l.e, which Vi&or, in his barbarous Latin, called SpecioJitai totiut
r.t rt frc , ;i now the retreat of pirates and banditti.

Wiile the Vanda!s laid wvafle a great part of the empire, the

iI.l;s i. :oated the remainder. Of all the barbarous tribes they
w-re tl: fiercest and noft formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus,

:o, ritemporary a;ut hor, and ene of the best of the later hiflorians,

^:;cs an account of their policy and manners; which nearly re-
. r;.lne bhofe of the Scythians described by the ancients, and of
li.e Ta':ars knrown ;o the moderns. Some parts of their charac-
ter, and !evrral of ht'.r Luftoms are not unlike those of the Sava-
Frs in Nrih A.mtrica. Their pafinni for war was extreme.
· As in p.ichr.cd so, icties (lays Amrmnus) cafe and tranquillity
srt -.ura;d, thcy (ltlight in war and dangers. He who falls in
i Itt.c is re. kneId happy They u ho die of old age or of disease
,re demcrncd infamrous. They beast, with the utmofl exultation,
of the num.t r of enmics whom they have slain, and, as the molt
gloi;c. es ail ornaments, they faltn the scalp, of those who have

fallen by their hands to the trappings of their horses." Ammian.
Marc. lib xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd. I693.-Their in-
curiions into the empire began in the fourth century; and the
Romans, though no Itrangers, by that time, to the effets of bar-
barous rage, were astonished at the cruelty of their devastations.
'lhrace, Pannonia, and Illyricum, were the countries which they
firt laid desolate. As they had at first no intention of fettling in
Europe, they made only inroads of short continuance into the
empire, but there were frequent, and Procopius computes that in
each of these, at a medium, two hundred thousand perlons pe-
ri;hed, or were carried off as slaves. Procop. Hist. Arcan. ap.
]3vz. Script vol. i. 316. Thrace, the bell cultivated province in
that quarter of the empire, was converted into a desert, and,
when Prifcus accompanied the ambalTadors sent to Attila, there
were no inhabitants in some of the cities but a few miserable peo-
ple who had taken shelter among the ruins of the churches; and
the fields were covered with the bones of thole who had fallen
bv the sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attila became
king of the Huns, A. D. 434. He is one of the greatest and most
enterprising conquerors mentioned in history. He extended his
empire over all the vast countries comprehended under the gene-
ral names of Scythia and Germany in the ancient division of the
world. While he was carrying on his wars against the barha-
rous nations, he kept the Roman empire under perpetual appre-
henfions, and extorted enormous subsidies from the timid and es-
feminate monarchs who governed it. In the year 451, he enter-
ed Gaul, at the head of an army composed of all the various na-
tions which he had subdued. It was more numerous than any
with which the barbarians had hitherto invaded the empire.
The devaRations which he committed were horrible; not only
the open country, but the most flourishing cities, were dtfolated.
The extent and cruelty of his devastations are described by
Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei, edit. Baluz. Par. 1669. p. 39, &c.
and by Idatius, ubi supra, p. 1z35. Aetius put a flop to his pro-
grefs in that country by the famous battle of Chalons, in which
(if we may believe the hiflorians of that age) three hundred thcu-
land persons perished. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de Rebus Getlcis
ap. Grot, Hilt. Gothor. p. 67I. Amft. x665. But the next year
he rbfolved to attack the centre of the empire, and marching into
Italy, wafted it with rage, inflamed by the sense of his late dif-
grace. What Italy fufered by the Huns, exceeded all the cala.
mities which the preceding of the barbarians had brought upon
it. Conringius, has colleted several passages from the ancient
historians, which prove that the devastations committed by
the Vandals and Huns in the countries situated on the banks of
the Rhine, were no lels cruel and fatal to the human race. Ex-
ercitatio de urbibus Germanie, Opera, vol. i. 488. It is endlels,
it is hocking, to follow these destroyers of mankind thrpugh so
many scenes of horror, and to contemplate the havock which they
made of the human species
But the late in which Italy appears to have been, during fevte

ral ages after the barbarous nations fettled in it, is the most de.
cifive proof of the cruelty as well as extent of their devaflations.
MWhenever any country is thinly inhabited, trees and firubs
spring up in the uncultivated fields, and spreading by degrees,
form large forests; by the overflowing of rivers, and the flagnat.
ing of waters, other parts of it are converted into lakes-and marsh-
es. Ancient Italy, which the Romans rendered the feat of ele-
gance and luxury, was cultivated to the highest pitch. But so es-
feclually did the devastations of the barbarians destroy all the es-
se&c of Roman industry and cultivation, that in the eighth century
a confidtrable part of Italy appears to have been covered with so-
rcft and m.arshes of great extent. Muratori enters into a mi-
nute detail concerning the situation and limits of several of there;
and proves by the most authentic evidence, that great tracds of
territory, in all the different provinces of Italy, were either over-
run with wood, or laid under water. Nor did there occupy parts
of the country natura'ly barren or of little value, but were spread
over diftricls which ancient writers represent as extremely fertile,
and which at prelent are highly cultivated. Muratori Antiqui-
tates Italica medii evi, dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, I53, &c. A
strong proof of this occurs in a description of the city of Modena,
by an author of the tenth century. Murat. Script. Rerum Italic.
vol. ii. pars ii. p. 691. The state of desolation in other countries
of Europe teems to have been the fame. In many of the most
eaTlv charters now extant, the lands granted to monasteries, or to
private persons, are distinguished into such as are cultivated or
inhabited, and such as were ermui, desolate. In many instances,
lands are granted to persons because they had taken them from
the desert, 4 ercmo, and had cultivated and planted them with
inhabitants. This appears from a charter of Charlemagne,
publifed by Eckhart de Rebus Francie Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 864,
and from many charters of his successors quoted by Du Cange,
voc. eremus.-Wherever a right of property in land can be thus
acquired, it is evident that the country must be extremely desolate
and thinly peopled. The first settlers in America obtained pof
feCon of land by such a title. Whoever was able to clear and t(
cultivate a field, was recognized as the proprietor. His induftr
merited flch a recompence. The grants in the charters which
have mentioned flow from a similar principle, and there mull hav
Leen some referblance in the fate of the countries.

Muratori adds, that during the eighth and ninth centuries, Ita

ly was greatly infefled with wolves and other wild bealts; ano
ther mark ot its being destitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq
vol. ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the ancient world for it
fertility and cultivation, was reduced to the Rate of a countr
newly peopled and lately rendered habitable.

I am sensible, not only that some of these decrliptions of the de

variations, which I have quoted, may be exaggerated, but that th
barbarous tribes, in making their fetlements, did not proceed ii
variably in the fame manner. Some of them seemed to be ben
en exterminating the ancient inhabitants; others were more di.

posed to incorporate with them. It is not my province either to
inquire into the causes which occasioned this variety in the con-
dli6t of the conquerors, or to describe the slate of those countries
whi.re the ancient inhabitants were treated moil mildly. The
fals which I have produced are sufficient to justify the account
which I have given in the text, and to prove, that the deftrudcion
of the human species. occasioned by the hostile invasions of the
northern nations and their subsequent settlements, was much great-
er than many authors seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SeC. I. p. s8. [F].

I have observed, Note II that our only certain information
concerning the ancient state of tie barbarous nations must be de-
rived from the Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account
of the inflitutions and customs of one people, to which those of all
the reft seem to have been in a great measure similar, has been
transmitted to us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps that
ever wrote, of observing them with profound discernment, and of
delcribing them with propriety and force. The reader mull per-
ceive that Cuefar and Tacitus are the authors whom I have in
view. The former gives a short account of the ancient Germans
in a few chapters of the sixth book of his Commentaries; the lat-
ter wrote a treatise expressly on that subjed. Thele are the most
precious and infirudtive monuments of antiquity to the present
inhabitants of Europe. From them we learn,

i. That the state of society among the ancient Germans was

of the rudest and most simple form. They lubfifled entirely by
hunting or by pasturage. Caf. lib. vi. c. 21. They negleced
agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and flefih Ibid. c.
22. Tacitus agrees with him in moit of thele points. De morib.
Germ. c. 14, 1 , 23. The Goths were equally negligent of agri-
culture. Prifc. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script. v. i. p. 3. B. Society
was in the fame itate among the Huns, who dildained to cultivate
the earth, or to touch a plough. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475.
The fame manners took place among the Alans; ibid. p. 477.
While lbciety remains in this finple itate, men by uniting toge-
ther scarcely relinquish any portion of their natural independence.
Accordingly we are informed, z. That the authority of civil
government was extremely limited among the Germans. Dur-
ing times of peace they had no common or fixed magistrate, but
the chief men of every diftria difpenled justice and accommodated
diffcrences, Cef. ibid. c. 23. Their kings had not abbolute or
unbounded power; their authority confifed rather in the privi-
lege of advising, than in the power of commanding. Matters of
fniall consequence were determined by the chief men; affairs of
importance by the whole community. Tacit. c. 7. 11. The
luns, in like manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the society; and were not subject to the
rigour of regal authority. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474.
S. Every individual among the ancient Gcrmlans was left at li-
berty to choose whither he would take part in any military ca-

terprife which was proposed; there seems to have been no obhl.
gation to engage in it imposed on him by public authority.
" When iny of the chief men proposes an expedition, such as ap-
prove of the cause and of the leader rife up, and declare their inten-
tion of following him; after coming under this engagement,
those who do not fulfil it, are confidered as deserters and traitors,
and are looked upon as infamous." Cef. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus
plainly points at the fame cuflom, though in terms more obscure.
Tacit. c. 1i. 4. As every individual was so independent, and
mailer in so great a degree of his own actions, it became of con-
sequence, the great objec of every person among the Germans,
who aimed at being a leader, to gain adherents and attach them
to his person and interest. These adherents Cefar calls Anbaai
and Cliete,, i. e. retainers or clients; Tacitus, Comiite, or com.
panions. The chief diftinaion and power of the leaders confited
in being attended by a numerous band of chosen youth. This
was their pride as well as ornament during peace and their de-
fence in war. The leaders gained or preserved the favour of
these retainers by presents of armour and of horses; or by the
profuse though inelegant hospitality with which they entertained
them. Tacit. c. 14, J1. $ . Another consequence of the personal
liberty and independence which the Genr.ans retained, even aftet
they united in society, was their circumscribing the criminal jurist
diAion of the magitirate within very narrow limits, and their not
only claiming but exercising almPft all the rights of private re-
fentment and revenge. Their magistrates had not the power
either of imprisoning or of infiiting any corporal puniihment of
a free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was obliged to avenge
the wrongs which his parents or friends had fullained. Their
enemies were hereditary, hut not irreconcilable. Even murder
was compensated by paying a certain number of cattle. Ta-
cit. c. 21. A part of the fine went to the king, or state a part
to the person who bad been injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c.
Ia.

Those particulars concerning the institutions and manners of

the Germans, though well known to every person conversant
in ancient literature, I have thought proper to arrange in this or-
der, and to lay before such of my readers as may be less acquaint-
ed with these faes, both because they confirm the account which I
have given of the slate of the barbarous nations, and because they
tend to illustrate all the olervations 1 thall have occasion to make
concerning the various changes in their government and cultoms.
Tre laws and cuflems introduced b\ the barbarous nations intQ
th-ir new ftttlements, are the best commentary on the writings
of Cefar and Tacitus; and their observations are the best key to
a perfect knowledge of there laws and custom.s

One circumstance, with respect to the teltimonies of Cefarand

Tacitus, concerning the Ge-rnians, merits attention. Cafar
wrote his brief account of Their rmanners more than an hundred
y.ars before Tacitus composed his trt:tife De Moribus Germanr
urmni. An hundred years make a considerable period in the pro-

grefs of national manners, especially if, during that time, those
people who are rude and unpolifhed have had much communica-
tion with more civilized states. This was the cafe with the Ger-
mans. Their intercourse with the Romans began when Caesar
crofied the Rhine, and increased greatly during the interval be-
tween that event and the time when Tacitus flourilhed. We may
accordingly observe, that the manners of the Germans, in his
timr, which Caelar describes, were less improved than those of the
fame people as delineated by Tacitus. Besides this, it is remark-
able that there was a considerable difference in the state of society
among the different tribes of Germans. The Suiones were so
much improved, that they began to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44.
The Fenni were so barbarous, that it is wonderful how they were
able to fubfifl. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever undertakes to describe
the manners of the Germans, or to found any political theory up-
on the state of society among them, ought carefully to attend to
both these circumlRances.

Before I quit this fubje&, it may not be improper to observe,
that, though successive alterations in their institutions, together
with the gradual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people who conquered the
Roman empire, there is fill one race of men nearly in the fame
political ftuation with theirs, when thev first fettled in their new
onquelts; I mean the various tribes and nations of Savages in
North America. It cannot then be confidered either as a digref-
sinn, or as an improper indulgence of curiosity, to enquire whether
this similarity in their political state has occasioned any resemblance
between their character and manners. If the likeness turns out
to be flriking, it is a stronger proof that a just account has been
given of the ancient inhabitants of Europe, than the tetimony
even of Cefar or Tacitus.

i. The Americans Iubfift chiefly by hunting and fishing. Some

tribes neglec agriculture entirely. Among those who cultivate
some fmat spot near their huts, that, together with all works of
labour, is performed by the women. P. Charlevoix Journal Hil-
torique d'un Voyage de l'Amerique, 4to. Par. i744. p. .34. In
such a Rate of society, the common wants of men being few, and
their mutual dependence upon each other small, their union is ex-
tremely imperfe& and feeble, and they continue to enjoy their
natural liberty almost unimpaired. It is the first idea of an Ame-
rican, that every man is born free and independent, and that no
power on earth hath any right to diminish or circumscribe his na-
tural liberty. There is hardly any appearance of subordination
either in civil or domestic government. Every one does what he
pleases. Afather and mother live with their children, like persons
whom chance has brought together, and whom no common bond
unites. Their manner of educating their children is suitable to
this principle. They never chastise or punish them, even during
their infancy. As they advance in years, they continue to be en-
tirelv mailers of their own a6tions, and seem not to be conliiou3
of being responsible for any part of thefr conduc. Id. p. 272,

,77 --- 2. The power of their civil magistrates is extremely limit.

ed. Among most of their tribes, the Sachem or chief is elective.
A council of cld men is chosen to assist him, without whose advice
he determines no affair of importance. The Sachems neither
possess nor claim any great degree of authority. They propose
and intreat, rather than command. The obedience of their peo-
ple is altogether voluntary. Id. p. a66, z68-3. The savages
of America engage in their military enterprises, not from con-
fraint, but choice. When war is resolved, a chief arises, and of-
sers himself to he the leader. Such as are willing (for they com-
pel no pcrlbn) fiand up one after another, and sing their war song.
But if, after this, any of these ihould refute to follow the leader to
whom they have engaged, his life would be in danger, and he
would be confidered as the most infamous of men. Id. p. 217,
218.--4. Such as engage to follow any leader, expedt to be
treated by him with great attention and refped; and he is oblig-
ed to make them presents of considerable value. Id. p. 2 18.-
j. Among the Americans, the magifirate has scarcely any crimi-
nal jurifdiscion. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the per
son or family offended may infiidt hat puniihment they pleae on
the person who was the author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resent.
nent and desire ofvengeance are excessive and implacable. Time
can neither extinguih nor abate it. It is the chief inheritance pa-
rents leave to their children; it is transmitted from generation to
generation, until an occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p. 309.
Sometimes, however, the offended party is appealed. A compen-
fation is paid for a murder that has been committed. The rela.
tions of the deceased receive it; and it consists most commonly of
a captive taken in war, who, being substituted in place of the per.
son who was murdered, assumes his name, and is adopted into his
family. Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in many other par.
ticulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have pointed out the
fmilarity of those great features which distinguish and chara&er-
ize both people. Bochart, and other philologists of the last centu-
ry, who, with more erudition than science, endeavoured to trace
the migrations of various nations, and who were apt, upon the
flighteit appearance of resemblance, to find an affinity between na-
tions far removed from each other, and ti conclude that they were
descended from the fame ancestors, would hardly have failed, on
viewing such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with confidence
" That the Germans and Americans muff be the fame people."
But a philosopher will satisfy himself with observing, " That the
chara&ers of nations depend on the state of society in which they
live, and on the political inititutions eftabliihed among them; and
that the human mind, whenever it is placed in the fame situation
will, in ages the mofi dillant, and in countries the most remote,
afliume the fame form, and be diftinguilhed by the fame man
tiers."

I have pushed the comparison between the Germans and Ame

ricans no farther than was necessary for the illustration of my fiub
jea. I do not pretend that the state of focicty in the two coun

tries was perfecdly similar in every refpedt. Many of the German
tribes were more civilized than the Americans. Some of them
were not unacquainted with agriculture; almoif all of them had
fiocks of tame cattle, and depended upon them for the chief part
of their subsistence. Most of the American tribes subsist by hunt-
ing, and are in a ruder and more simple fiate than the ancient
Germans. The resemblance, however, between their condition,
is greater, perhaps, than any that hillory affords an opportunity of
observing between any two races of uncivilized people, and this
has produced a furpriing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SEcr. I..

I x. [G].

The booty gained by an army belonged to the army. The
king himrelf had no part of it but what he acquired by lot. A
remarkable instance of this occurs in the hiltory of the Franks.
The army of Clovis, the founder of the French monarchy, having
plundered a church, carried off, among other lacred utensils, a
vale of extraordinary size and beauty. The bishop sent deputies
to Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it might be a-
gain employed in the sacred lervices to which it had been confe-
crated. Clovis desired the deputies to follow him to Soissons, as
the booty was to be divided in that place, and promised, that if
the lot should give him the disposal of the vase, he would grant
what the bihop desired. When he came to Soissons, and all the
booty was placed in one great heap in the middle of the army,
Clovis entreated, that before making the division, they would give
him that vase over and above his Ihare. All appeared willing to
gratify the king, and to comply with his request, when a fierce and
haughty soldier lifted up his battle-axe, and firiking the vase with
the utmolt violence, cried out with a loud voice, " You ihall re-
ceive nothing here but that to which the lot gives you a right."
Gregor. Turon. Hilor. Francorum, lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. Ix6o.

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. o2. [H].

The hiflory of the eftablifihnent and progress of the feudal fy-
flem is an interefllig objeit to all the nations ofEurope. In fmne
countries, their jurilprudence and laws are still in a great measure
feudal. In others, many forms and practices eftablifihed by cuf-
tom, or founded on flatutes, took their rile from the feudal law,
and cannot be understood without attending to the ideas peculiar
to it. Several authors of the highest reputation for geniLs and
erudition, have endeavoured to illuflrate this subjeCt, but fill ma-
ny parts of it are obscure. I filall endeavour to trace, with pre-
ciion, the progress and variation of ideas concerning property in
land among the barbarous nations; and fiall attempt to point out
thie caules which introduced thele changes, as well as the effedts
which followed upon them. Property in land seems to have gone
through four successive changes among the people who fettled in
the various provinces of the Roman empire.

I. While the barbarous nations remained in their original coun-
tries, their property in land was only temporary, and they had no

Vol. I. Q

certain limits to their pofieffions. After feeding their flocks in one
great diftrid, they removed with them, and with their wives and
families, to another; and abandoned that likewise in a ihort time.
They were not, in confeqnence of this imperfecl species of proper.
ty, brought under any positive or formal obligation to serve the
community; all their services were purely voluntary. Every in.
dividnal was at liberty to choose how far he would contribute to.
wards carrying on any military enterprize. If he followed a leader
in any expedition, it was from attachment, not from a sense of o-
bligation. The clearest proof of this has been produced in Note
V1. While property continued in this fate, we can discover no-
thing that bears any resemblance to a feudal tenure, or to the sub.
ordination and military service which the feudal system introduced.

II. Upon fettling in the countries which they had subdued, the

vietorious troops divided the conquered lands. Whatever por-
tion of them fell to a soldier, he seized as the recompence due to
his valour, as a settlement acquired by his own sword. He took
poffeffion-of it as a freeman in full property. He enjoyed it dur-
ing his own life, and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it
as an inheritance to his children. Thus property in land became
fixed. It was at the fame time allodial, i. e. the poffefTor had the
entire right of property and dominion, he held of no Sovereign or
fuperiorlord, to whom he was bound to do homage and perform
service. But as these new proprietors were in some danger
(as has been observed in the text) of being disturbed by the re-
mainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in till greater danger of
being attacked by successive colonies of barbarians as fierce and
rapacious as themselves, they saw the neceflity of coming un-
der obligations to defend the community, more explicit than
those to which they had been subjea in their original habita-
tions. On this account, immediately upon their fixing in their
new settlements, every freeman became bound to takearms in de.
fence of the community, and, if he refused or negleaed so to do,
.was liable to a confiderabie penalty. I do not mean that any con-
tradl of this kind was formally concluded, or mutually ratified
by anv legal fclemnity. It was eftablithed by tacit consent, like
the other compass which hold society together. Their mutual
fecuriry and prefcrvation made it the interest of all to recognize
its authority, and to enforce the observation of it. We can trace
back this new obligation on the proprietors of land to a very
early period in the hiliory of the Franks. Chilperic, who began
his reign A. D. 562, exaated a fine, bannos jJ.t exigi, from certain
persons who had refuted to accompany him in an expedition.
Gregor. Turon. lib. v. c. 26. p. anI. Childebert, who began
his reign A. D 576, proceeded in the fame manner against o-
thers who had been guilty of a like crime. Id. lb. vii. c. 41. p.
342- Such a fine could not have been exadted while property
tontinued in its first Hate, and military service was entirely vo-
luntary. Charlemagne ordained, that every freeman who posses.
led five manfi, i. . sixty acres of land, in property, fIould march il
perln against the enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807. Louis e Debona

naire, A. D. 8ri, granted lands to certain Spaniards who fled
from the Saracens, and allowed them to fettle in his territories,
on condition that they should serve in the army lie other freemen.
Capitul. vol. i. p. 500. By land pofleffed in property, which is
mrltioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are to underfand, ac-
cording to the flyle of that age, allodial land; alodes andproprietua,
alo lam and proprium being words perfecly fynonimous. Du Cange
voce Alodis. The clearest proof of the diftindion between allo-
dial and beneficiary poffeilion, is contained in two charters pu-
blissed by Muratort, by which it appears, that a person might
pofi fs one part of his estate as allodial, which he could difpofc
of at pleafuire, the other as a beneficiu,, of which he had only the
ufufruru, the property returning to the superior lord on his demile.
,ntiq. Ital. medii. evi, vol. i. p. 559, s6s. The fame diflinc-
tion is pointed out in a Capitulare of Charlemagne. A. D. 8iz,
edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 491. Count Everard, who married a
daiughter of Louis le Debonnaire, in the curious teflament, by
which he disposes of his vast estate among his children, diftin-
gufibes between what he pofieffed proprietate, and what he held

r-nfcrio; and it appears that the greater part was allodial, A. D.
837. Aub. Mirrei Opera Diplomatica, Lovan. 723. vol. i p. 19.

In the fame manner Liber Lomid is commonly opposed to Vaffus
or Vaftuis; the former denotes an allodial propietor, the latter
one who held of a superior. Thef free men were under an obli-
gation to serve the slate; and this duty was confidered as so fa-
cred, that free men were prohibited from entering into holy or-
ders unless they had obtained the consent of the sovereign. The
reason given for this in the statute is remarkable, " For we.are in-
formed that some do so, not so much out of devotion, as in order
to avoid that militaryfervice which they are boundto perform. Ca-
pitul. lib. i. § 14. If, upon being summoned into the field, any
free man refused to obey, a full Herebannur, i. e. a tine of sixty
crowns, was to be exadled from him according to the law of the
Franks." Capit. Car. Magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. § i3.
p 539. This expreflion, according to the law of the Franks,
feemn to imply, that both the obligation to serve, and the penal-
ty on those who disregarded it, were coeval with the laws made
by the Franks at their first settlement in Gaul. This fine was le-
vied with such rigour, " That if any person convided of this crime
was insolvent, be was reduced to servitude, and continued in that
tate until such time as his labour ihould amount to the value of
the bereaerannur. Ibid. The emperor Lotharius rendered the pen-
alty till more severe; and if any person poflffing such an extent
of property as made it incumbent on him to take the field in per-
son, refused to obey the summons, all his goods were declared to
be forfeited, and be himself might be puniihed with banilhment.
Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars ii. p. 153.

111. Property in land having thus become fixed, and subjec to
military service, another change was introduced, though slowly,
and itep by flep. We learn from Tacitus, that the chief men a-
mong the Germans endeavoured to attach to their perfons.agd

Q2Z

interests certain adherents whom he calls Comires. These fought
under their flandard, and followed them in all their enterprizes.
The fame cultom continued among them in their new fettle.
ri-n;ts, and those attached or devoted followers were calledfideles,

,..r'.n:s, L mi.-es i. truJ Doi.itea. IUI. Tacitus informs us,

that t;.e rank of a Comes was deemed honourable; De Morib.
Germ. c. -. The corr.pcfition, whlich is the standard bywhich
we r...;ll ,'5- of the rank and conditi.n of persons in the mid-
-( a,_-S ij ;. ';! T;" murder of one in trile DIminica, was triple to
:ii :.i. *.'- ti.e rrur,'cr of a freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44. § z

& 2 '. -dIe the cr;r-'-s remained in their own country, they
cu:t-ed the favo-'r oi t: -i Crr.ites, by presents of arms and hors.
es, ndd by hofp'aliit. S-e Nrte Vi. Aslong as they had no
fixe;: p:o cert in 'and, the'.e w.re the only gifts that they cotld
bes- vr. -nd ;lie oi. y reward which their followers desired. But
unon th:er fet;I;!z' in the countries which they conquered, and
. hrn the value of property came to be understood among them,
instead ofthofe flight presents, the kings and chieftains bestowed
a more fubfian:ial recompence in land on their adherents. These
,rants were called be,.ef; , tecaute they were gratuitous donations;
and ts-r,, because they were regarded as marks oF diitintlion.
What were the services originally exacted in return for these $en-r
Jfi.; cannot be detenr.ined with absolute precision; because there
are no records so ancient. When allodial poftefions were first
renered sendal, they were not, at once, fubje&ed to all the feu.
dal lervices. The transition here, as in all other changes of iim
r.- ..--.-, .-d:a!. As the great cbjeC of a feudal vassal was
:o obtain proteclion, when allodial proprietors first consented to'
treccme vaffTls of any powerful leader, they continued to retain
is much of their anci-nt independence as was confifient with that
;lew relation. The homage which they did to the superior of
wahcr they chose to iicld, was called bomagiu p!anun, and bound
ti.em to nnthir.g more than fidelity, but without any obligation
c':l.cr of r.ili;ar '

!ervice, or attendance in the courts of their fupe.

-;-r. Of this f';i,,m flinrm some traces, though obscure, may
l:ili be d;fcovercd. BruiTl, tom. L p. 97. Among the ancient
, rits pub!ifhed by D. D. De Vie and Vaifette hilf. de Langued.
.-e a great manv which they call tomagi.. They seem to he an
i:nmdiate flep between the nmagrium planum mentioned by Bruf-
f.;, and the engagement to perforn complete feudal service. The
c nc party promises protection, and grants certain castles or lands;
tie o:her eng ges to defend the p-ribn of the granter, and to afflif
iql likcwie n defending his property as often as he shall be ium-
r.,' ned tc do so. BHtt these engagements are accompanied with
,none of the ftrud! formalities, and no mention is made of any of
thie other sendal services. They appear rather to be a mutual
contracS bettwe.n equals, than the engagement of a vaflal to per-
Iorin lervircs to a superior lord. 1lrcuves de l'hifi. de lang. torn
i _. 173. & prlAin. As soon s nm-n wereaccftonmed to theii, the
,.it-r fCudat lI-rvices were gra!ual;y introduced. M. de Mon
tduquieu conlietrs tefl: bó.je.ia as sics, w!ich originally fubjeSlte

those who held them to military service. L'Efpr't des Loix, 1-
xxx. c. 3 & 16. M. 1'Abbe de Mably contends that such as held
these were at first subjected to no other service than what was in-
cumbent on every freeman. Ohfervations fur l'hiftoire de France,
i. 356. But, upon comparing their proofs and reasonings and con-
jectures, it seems to be evident, that as every freeman, in confi-
quence of his allodial property, was bound to serve the community
under a severe penalty, no good reason can be assigned for con.
ftrring these beneficia, if they did not iubjecl such as received them
to some new obligation. Why lhould a king have firipped him.
ftlf of his domain, if he had not expeaed that, by parcelling it
out, he might acquire a right to services, to which he had former-
ly no title? We may then warrantably conclude, " That as allo-
dial property fubjeced those who poffelfed it to serve the commu-
nity, so beintcida fiibjetled such as held them to personal service and
fidelity to him from whom they received there lands." These óe-
r/rcid were granted originally only during pleasure. No circum-
liance relating to the customs of the middle ages is better afcer-
;aincd than this; and innumerable proofs of it Ilight he added to
t;of e produced in L'Elprit des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 16. and by Du
Ca]]ge, voc. Be,,qiqdum iq eridu/:.

IV. But the possession of bentfices did not continue long in this
Rate. A precarious tenure during pleasure was not sufficient to la-
ifv such aa held lands, and by various means they gradually ob-
tailed a confirmation of their benefices during life. Feudor. lib.
iit. i. Du Cange produces leveral quotations from ancient char-
iers and chronicles in proof of this; Glof. voc. Benerlcium. After
.iis it was easy to obtain or extort charters rendering beneficia heredi-
tarv, firlf in the direct line, then in the collateral, and at lafi in the
fenalc line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. HYncfc.um.

It is no easy matter to fix the precise time when each ot these

cda'nges took place. M. l'Ah. Mably conjeaures, with some pro-
bability, that Charles Martel first introduced the practice of grant-
;ig henosc;ia for life; Obfervat. tom. i. p. I03, I6o; and that Louis
le Debonnaire was among the firt who rendered them hereditary,.
i; evident from the authorities to which he refers; Id. 429.- Ma-
ililln however has publiihed a placitum of Louis le Debonnaire,
A. D. 860, by which it appears that he itill continued to grant some
6inc.cia only during life. De Re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353. In
the year 889, Odo king of France granted lands to Ricabodo, si-
(lrli lhio,jure beneficiario & fru&uario, during. his own life; anti
if he ihould die, and a son were born to him, that right was to,
rnlitinue during the life of his son. Mabillon ut supra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs merely during life,.
nd fiefs hereditary to perpetuity. While be,,fii continued under
thiir first form, and were held only during pleasure, he who grant-
ed thm r not only exercised the dominium or prerogative of superior
lord, but he retained the property, giving his valTal only the ,fu-
Ji.g'.-Bult under the latter form, when they became hereditary, alt
thl;.gh feudallawyers continued to define a £cnfici..m agreeablyto its
origilnal nature, the property was in eftf:t taken out of the hands o£

Q'3

the superior lords, and lodged in those of the vafIal. As soon as
the rev iprocal advantages of the feudal mode of tenure came to be
underfiocd bv superiors as well as vassals, that species of holding
became so agreeable to both, that not only lands, but casual rents,
fich as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at ferries, &c. the fala.
ries or perquisites of offices, and even pensions themselves, were
granted and he'd as fiefs; and military service was promised and
exacted on account ofthefe. Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves
a I'l:if. de Bretagne, trn. ii.78, 690. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 41. How
alifurd soever it may seem to grant or to hold such precarious and
calfial property as a fief, there are inflances of feudal tenures fill
more singular. The profits arising from the masses said at an al-
tar were pro perly an ecclraflical revenue, belonging to the cler.
<yv of the church or monaflery which performed that duty; but
tlefc were l:onetimes seized by the powerful barons. In order to
icfcrt-in their right to them, they held them as fiefs of the church,
and p.arceli-; them out in the fame manner as other property to
their futb--:ai7's. Buquet, receuil des hift.vol. x. 238, 480. The
fime pirit of encroacl:ment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led
tel nobles to extort from their sovereigns hereditary grants of of-
f .-s. Manv of the great offices of the crown became hereditary
::o nefl of the kingdoms in Europe; and so conscious were mo-
:archs of this spirit of usurpation among the nobility, and so soli-
c;ro-s to guard against it, that, on some occasions, they obliged
the perfol:s 'whom they promoted to any office of dignity, to grant
an o'l;cation, that neither they nor their heirs should claim it as
e'.n rinl to them by hereditary right. A remarkable instance of
t:l:s i- pr-'.uced, Memr. de 1'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xxx. p. 595.
.ilotl .r occurs in the Theiaur. anecdot. published by Martene &
Di:r.::, ol. i. p. 8S;,.-This revolution in property occasioned a
tr-I: .c rorrcfpon'ir.g to it in political government; the great vas-
sis cr the cro:wn, as they acquired such extensive possessions, usurp-
ed a prcrortiona! dlegree of power, depressed the jurifdi&ion of
l;c : o; n. ar.d tr.n,piced on the privileges of the people. It is on
c'o-:r.n cf thi .onnetion, that it becomes an object of import-
-. 'e hi: nK cr- t- trace the progress of feudal property; for, upon
c:.;:o c- r:c in what slate property was at any particular period,

.e

1.;:; - ''e rnmine with preciltin what was the degree of power
p^cs ;-;d Cv :'!- king or by :he nobilitv at that juncture.

Cr.e ri, cmftance more, with refpeca to the changes which pro-

p'r:' cL;.er\*ent, delerves attention. I have Ihewn, that when
,' .t; ( -:,s tribes of barbariars divided their conquests in the fifth

1- :. ::. Cra! Ia-i of Eurcpe, property had become almost entire
v -: i. l'' ry the reginning of the tenth century. The formel
fev:.' ( f rro-ert- ftem- to be so much better and more defirabk
ti l,. *'c lalter, that iuch a change appears surprising, especially

; s:n '.'.' are ir.;or:ned that al!.dial property was frequently con

rv:res ;rs c ft-;a ;' - *a

-- luntarv deed of the poffcffor. The mo

,':.-: -'.' :.h dctermin-d ;h m to a choice so repugnant to the ideas
ci t' c. rn: timut cincernig p-operty, have beca investigated and

explained by M. de Montesquieu, with his usual discernment and
accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most considerable is that of which
we have an hint in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce A!odi. In those times of anarchy and disorder
which became general in Europe after the death of Charlemagne,
when there was fearcely any union among the different members
of the community, and individuals were exposed, single and un-
defended by government, to rapine and oppression, it became ne-
reflary for every man to have a powerful protector, under whose
banner he might range himself, and obtain security against ene-
mies whom singly he could not oppose. For this reason he relin-
quithed his allodial independence, and subjected himself to the feu-
dal services, that he might find lafety under the patronage of some
rrfpecqable superior. In some parts of Europe, this change frorn
allodial to feudal property became so general, that he who posses-
fed land had no longer any liberty of choice left. He was obliged
to recognize some liege lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beauma-
noir informs us, that in the counties of Clermont and Beauvois, if
the lord or count discovered any lands within his jurifdition, for
which no service was performed, and which paid to him no taxes
or customs, he might inflantly seize it as his own; for, fays he,
no man can hold allodial propeity. Couf. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon
the fame principle is founded a maxim, which has at length be-
come general in the law of France, Nutle terre fans Seigneur. In o-
ther provinces of France, allodial property seems to have remain-
ed longer unalienated, and to have been more highly valued. A
great number of charters, containing grants, or sales, or exchanges
of allodial lands in the province of Languedoc, are published. Hilt.
gener. de Langued. par D. D. De Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. Dur-
ing the ninth, tenth, and great part of the eleventh century, the
property in that province teems to have been entirely allodial; and
Irarcelv any mention of feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that
country. The state of property, during these centuries, seems to
have been perfectly similar in Catalonia and the country of Roufil-
lon, as appears fr,,m the original charters published in the Appen-
dix to Petr. de la Marca's treatise de marca five limite Hiilpanico.
Allodial property seems to have continued in the Low Countries to
a period still later. During the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
centuries, this species of property seems to have been of colifider-
able extent. Mirasi opera diplom. vol. i. 34, 74, 75, 83, 29(, 817,
842, 847,578. Some vestiges of allodial property appear there as
late as the fourteenth century. Ibid. 218. Several fadts which
prove that allodial property fubfilted in different parts of Europe
ong after the introdulcion of feudal tenures, and which tend to il.
luitrate the distinction between these two different species of posses-
sion, are produced by M. Houard, Anciennes L'oix dies Frangois,
coiifervees o( ns les Coutumes Alngloifes, vol. i. p. 192, &c. The
notions of men with refped to property vary according to the di-
verfity of their undcrftandings, and the caprice of their pallions.
At the fame time that some persons were fond of reiinqluihiiag al-
lodial property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure, others fceiu to'

have been solicitous to convert their fiefs into allodial property.
An inflance of this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, pub-
lified by Eckhard, Commentarii de rebus Franciae Orientalis, vol.
ii. p. 885. Another occurs in the year z299, Reliquie MSS.om-
nis avi. by L.:d3wig, vol. i. p. 2o9; and even one as late as the year
.,3 7, ihid. vol. vii. p. 40. The fame thing took place in the Low
Countries. Mirse oper.i. 5 .

In tracing theie various revolutions of property, I have hitherto

chitfly confined myself to what happened in France, because the
ancitnt monuments of that nation have either been more carefully
pre:t rv.d, or have been more clearly illustrated than those of any
people in Europe.

In Itail, the fame revolutions happened in property, and fuc-

ceedtd each other in the fame order. There is some ground,
however, for conjecturing that allodial property continued long.
er in estimation among the Italians, than among the French. It
appears, that many of the charters granted by the emperors in
the ninth century, conveyed an allodial right to land. Murat.
Antiq. med. revi. v. i. p 575, &c. But in the eleventh century
we find son-e examples of persons who resigned their allodial
property, and returned it back as a feudal tenure. Id. p. 6ro, &c.

IMuratori obierves, that the word feudum, which came to he filb-
flitut;d in place of b-nefju;m, does not occur in any authentic
charter previous to the eleventh century. d. 594. A charter of
king Robert of France, A. D. 1oo8, is the earliest deed in which
I have met with the word feudum. Bouquet receuil des hiftoriens
de Gaule &i de la France, tom. x. p. 593. h. This word occurs
indeed in an edid, A. D. -go, publilhcd by Bruffe!, vol. i. p. 77.
But the atuthenticity of that deed has been called in question, and
perlhps the frcqlleit use of the word feudum in it is an additional
reaion for doing so. The account which I have given of the na-
ture both of allodial and feudal possessions receive some informa-
tion from the etymology of the words themfelyes. Alode or alto-
diu.- is compounded of the German particle a. and ht, i. e. land
obtained by lot. Wachteri Gloffar. Germanicun, voc. Alicdium
p. 5c. It appears from the authorities produced by him and by
Du Cange, voc. Sorn, that the northern nations divided the lands
which they had conquered in this manner. Feodum is com-
pounded of od poffEfion or eflate, and so wages, pay; intimating
that it was liperndary, and granted as a recompence for service.
Uachterus, ibid. voc. rodanm, p. 441.

The progress of the feudal system among the Germans was

perieclly fimlilar to that which we have traced in France. But as
the emperors of Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
ipafic' roti the dependents of Charlemagne to the house of Sax-
onv. were far fuptrior to the contemporary monarchs of France
in abilities, the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to indepen-
denc. nor did they so soon obtain the privilege of possessing their
bel. . Ees by hereditary right. According to the compilers of the
Libi. Yeucorum, Conrad 11. or the Salic, was the firfi emperor
who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i tit. i. Conrad began his

reign A. D. 1024. Ludovicus Pius, under whose reign grants
of hereditary fiefs were frequent in France, succeeded his father
A. D. 814. Not only was this innovation so much later in be-
ing introduced among the vassals of the German emperors, but e-
ven after Conrad had eitabliihed it, the law continued favourable
to the ancient practice; and unless the charter of the vassal bore
txprefsly that the fief descended to his heirs, it was presumed to
be granted only during life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the al-
teration made by Conrad, it was not uncommon in Germany to
grant fiefs only for life; a charter of this kind occurs as late as
the year 1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 36r.
The tranfriffion of fiefs to collateral and female heirs, took place
very slowly among the Germans. There is extant a clirter, A.
D. IzoI, conveying the right of fuccefiion to females, but it is
granted as an extraordinary mark of favour, and in reward of un-
common services. Boehmer ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well
as in France and Italy, a confiderabie part of the lands continued
to be allodial long after the feudal mode of tenure was introduced.
It appears from the Codex Diplomaticus Monafterii Buch, that
a great part of the lands in the marquisate of Mifnia was still al-
lodial as late as the thirteenth century. No. I3, 36, 37, 46, &c.
ap. Scriptores hil. German. cura Schoetgenii & Kreyfigii. Al.
tenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial property seems to have
been common in another difirid of the fame province, during the
lame period. Reliquiae Diplomaticae Santimonial. Beutiz, Nc
17» 36, 58, ibid. 374, &c.

NOTE IX. Sed. I. p. ia. [.

As I ihall have occasion, in another Note, to represent the con-
dition of that part of the people who dwelt in cities, I will con-
fine myself in this to confider the state of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating the ground dur-
ing the ages under review may be divided into three clafes; I.
Srvi or slaves. This seems to have been the most numerous
class, and conlifted either of captives taken in war, or of persons
the property in whom was acquired in some one of the various
methods enumerated by Du Cange, voc. Servus, v. 6. p. 447.
The wretched condition of this numerous race of men will appear
from several circumstances. i. Their mailers had absolute dominion
overtheir persons. They had the power ofpuniihing their slaves ca-
pitally, without the intervention of any judge. This dangerous
right they poffffed not only in the more early periods, when
their manners were fierce, but it continued as late as the twelfth
century. Joach. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorun. Lemgov. I 37.
4to. lib. ii. cap. i. § 4. lo, 1a, 24. Even after this jurifdition of
nafters, came to be restrained, the life of a slave was deem-
ed to be of so little value, that a very flight compenlation
atoned for taking it away. Idem, lih. iii. c. 6. It maiters
Ihad power over the lives of their slaves, it is evident that
almoif no hounds would be set to the rigour of the punishments
which they might inflit upon them. The codes of ancient laws

prescribed punishments for the crimes of slaves different from
those which were infli&ed on free men. The latter paid only a
fine or compensation; the former were fubjeaed to corporal pu.
nifhments. The cruelty of there was in many inrlances excessive.
Slaves might be put to the rack 'on very flight occaions The
laws with refpe to there points are to be found in Potgief.
ferus, lib. iii. cap. 7, a. and are ihocking to humanity. If the do-
minion of mailers over the lives and persons of their slaves was
thus extensive, it was no less so over their actions and property.
They were not originally permitted to marry. Male and female
Caves were allowed and even encouraged to cohabit together.
But this union was nct confidered as a marri-ge, it was called
csrjarn'w--, not nupt:! or mtrimonium. Potgiefi. lib. ii. c. a. § 1.
This notion was so much eflablifhed, that, during several centuries
after the barbarous nations embraced the Christian religion,
iaves, who lived as huoband and wife, were not joined together
by any religious ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial iene-
didtion from a priest. Ibid. . ro, Ix. When this conjunAcion be.
tween slaves came to be confidered as a lawful marriage, they
were not permitted to marry without the consent of theirmafter;
and such as ventured to do so, without obtaining that, were pu-
nilhed with great severity, and sometimes were put to death. Pot.
giefl ibid. 5 za, &c. Gregor. Turon. hist. lib. v. c.. . hen
the manners of the European nations became more gentle, and
their ideas more liberal, saves who married without their maf-
ter's consent were fubjeded only to a fine. Porgieff. ibid. § so.
Du Cange Glolf. voc. Fcrifmaritagim. j. All the children of
laves were in the fame condition with their parents, and became
the property of the master. Du Cange Gfoff v. voc. Serv, vol.
vi. 450. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so entire-
lv the property of their masters, that they could fell them at plea-
sure. While domestic slavery continued, property in a slave was
fold in the fame manner with that which a peribn had in any o-
ther i oveable. Afterwards slaves became adfiriptiglSa, and were
conveyed by sale, together with the farm or eltate to which they
belonged. Potgielerus has collrced the laws and charters which
illuRrate this well-known circumflance in the condition of slaves.
Lib. ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves had a title to nothing but subsistence and
clothes from their master; all the profits of their labour ac-
crued to him. If a master, from indulgence, gave his slaves any
pau./iu, or fixed allowance for their subsistence, they had no right
of property in what they saved out of that. All that they accu-
mulated belonged to their master. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. Io. Murat.
Antiq. lial. vol. i. 768. Du Cange, voc. Servus, vol. vi. p. 45I.
Conformably to the fame principle, all the effecs of slaves be-
longed to their master at their death, and they could not dispose
of them by teflamernt. Po!gieff. lib. ii. c. i . 6. Slaves were
distinguished from free men hy a peculiar dress. Among all the
barbarous nations, long hair was a mark of dignity and of
freedom; slaves were for that reason obliged to ihave their
heads; and by this diftintion, how indifferent soever it may be

in its own nature, they were reminded every moment of the in-
feriority of their condition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4. For the
fame rcafon it was enaaed in the laws of almost all the nations of
Europe, that no slave should be admitted to give evidence against
a free man in a court of jufiice. Du Cange, voc. Servun, vol. vi.
p. 451. Potgieff li.

l i. . c. 3.

i. l'iil.,'i. They were likewise adJfripti gtebs or viltl, from

which they derived their name, and were transferable along with
it. Du Cange, voc. Villanus. But in this they differed from
slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their master for the land
which they cultivated, and, after paying that, all the fruits of their
labour and indulRry belonged to themselves in property. This di-
flinlion is marked by Pierre de Fontain's Conleil. Vie de St.
Louis par Joinville, p. I19. edit. de Du Cange. Several cafes de-
cided agreeably to this principle are mentioned by Murat. ib. p. 77 .

3. The laftc dass of persons employed in agriculture were free

men. These are distinguished by various names among the writ-
ers of the middle ages, Arim.inni, conditionales, originarii, tritutales, c.
These seem to have been persons who poflfled some small allodi-
al property of their own, and besides that, cultivated some farm be-
longing to their more wealthy neighbours, for which they paid a
fixed rent; and bound themselves likewiie to perform several
finall services in prato wvel in mwcte, in aratura 'vel in vinea, such as
ploughing a certain quantity of their landlord's ground, affifling
him in harvest and vintage work, icc. The clearest proof of this
inav be found in Muratori, v. i. p. 712. and in Du Cange under
the relipedtive words above mentioned. I have not been able to
discover whether these arimanni, &c. were removeable at pleasure,
or held their farms by lease for a certain number of years. The
former, if we may judge from the genius and maxims of the age,
fiems to be moil probable. These persons, however, were conli-
dered as free men in the most honourable sense of the word; they
enjoyed all the privileges of that condition, and were even called
tt serve in war; an honour to which no slave was admitted. Mu-
rat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the
condition of these three different classes of persons, will enable the
reader to apprehend the full force of an argument which I shall
produce in confirmation of what I have said in the text concern.
ing the wretched state of the people during the middle ages.
Notwithitanding the immense difference between the first of there
rIafes and the third, such was the spirit of tyranny which prevail-
ed among the great proprietors of lands, and so various their op-
portunities of oppressing those who were fettled on their estates,
and ofrendering their condition intolerable, that many free men,
in despair renounced their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered
thenfelves as slaves to their powerful masters. This they did, in
order that their masters might become more immediately interest-
ed to afford them protetlion, together with the means offubfifting
themselves and their families. The forms of such a surrender, or
d.,oxiatio, as it was then called, are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii.
c. a8; and by the anonymous author published by M. Bignon, to-

prescribed punilhments for the crimes of slaves different from
those which were infliced on free men. The latter paid only a
fine or compensation; the former were subjected to corporal pu
nifarnents. 'I he cruelty of there was in many inflances exceflive.
Slaves might he put to the rack on very flight occasions The
laws with refped to these points are to be found in Potgief.
ferus, lb. iii. cap. 7, a. and are ihocking to humanity. If the do.
minion of mailers over the lives and persons of their saves was
thus extensive. it was no less so overtheir actions and property.
They were not originally permitted to marry. Male and female
Caves were allowed and even encouraged to cohabit together.
But this union was net confidered as a marriage, it was called
or:/iurit,', not r.upts, or matrimoniuw. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. z. § 1.
This notion was so much eftablified, that, during several centuries
after the barbarous nations embraced the Christian religion,
slaves, who lived as husband and wife, were not joined together
by any religious ceremony, and did not receive the nuptial benc
diftion from a pricft. Ibid. § zo, x . When this conjuncaion be.
tween slaves came to be confidered as a lawful marriage, they
were not permitted to marry without the consent of their master;
and such as ventured to do so, without obtaining that, were pu-
niihed with great feveritv, and sometimes were put to death. Pot.
giefl ibid. § 1z, &c. Gregor. Turon. hist. lib. v. c. 3. When
the manners of the European nations became more gentle, and
their ideas more liberal, slaves who married without their maf.
ter's content were fubjedled only to a fine. Potgieff. ibid. § so.
Du Cange Gloss. voc. Fcrfrif tgim. j. All the children of
saves were in the fame condition with their parents, and became
the property of the master. Du Cange Gloss. voc. Servus, vol.
vi. 450. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. 766. 4. Slaves were so entire-
lv the property of their masters, that they could fell them at plea-
sure. W'hile domestic flaverv continued, property in a slave was
fold in the fame manner with that which a perlon had in any o-
ther moveable. Afterwards slaves became adfiripti gl.sa, and were
conveyed by sale, together with the farm or estate to which they
belonged. Potgiefferus has colleted the laws and charters which
illustrate this well-known circumstance in the condition of slaves.
Lib. ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves had a title to nothing but subsistence and
clothes from their master; all the profits of their labour ac-
crued to him. Ifa master, from indulgence, gave his fHaes any
p.-,:i~, or fixed allowance for their subsistence, they had no right
of property in what they saved out of that. All that they accu-
mulated belonged to their master. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. Io. Murat.
Antiq. hal. vol. i. 768. Du Cange, voc. Servms, vol. vi. p. 451.
Conformably to the fame principle, all the effects of saves be-
longed to their master at their death, and they could not difpolf
of them by teflament. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. Il. 6. Slaves were
diflinguifhed from free men by a peculiar dress. Among all the
barbarous nations, long hair was a mark of dignity and of
freedom; flajes were for that reason obliged to slave their
heads; and by this diftinclion, how indifferent soever it may be

in its own nature, they were reminded every moment of the in.
feriority of their condition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4. For the
fame reason it was enacted in the laws of almofi all the nations of
Europe, that no lave should be admitted to give evidence against
a free man in a court of juitice. Du Cange, voc. Servui, vol. vi.
p. 45 . Potgieff. lih. iii. c. 3.

2. 'i.lmni. They were likewise adfcripti gleba or vilir, from

which thev derived their name, and were transferable along with
it. Du Cange, voc. ViIla.nu. But in this they differed from
ilaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their master for the land
which they cultivated, and, after paying that, all the fruits of their
labour and industry belonged to themselves in property. This di-
fiinlion is marked by Pierre de Fontain's Conleil. Vie ie St.
Louis par Joinville, p. 119. edit. de Du Cange. Several cafes de-
cid(ed agreeably to this principle are mentioned by Murat. ib. p. 773.

. The last class of persons employed in agriculture were free

men. These are diftinguilhed by various names among the writ-
ers of the middle ages, Arimntnni, conditionaler, originarii, tributalde, 'e.
Thclc seem to have been persons who poffcefed some small allodi-
al property of their own, and besides that, cultivated some farm be-
longing to their more wealthy neighbours, for which they paid a
fixed rent; and bound themselves likewise to perform several
finall fcrvices in prato vel in mese, in a mtura vet ion vinea, such as
ploughing a certain quantity ot their landlord's ground, assisting
him in harvest and vintage work, &c. The clearest proof of this
inav be found in Muratori, v. i. p. 71 . and in Du Cange under
the refpeAive words above mentioned. I have not been able to
discover whether these arimanni, &c. were removeable at pleasure,
orheld their farms by lease for a certain number of years. The
former, if we may judge from the genius and maxims of the age,
f&ems to be most probable. These persons, however, were confi-
dered as free men in the most honourable sense of the word; they
tnjoyed all the privileges of that condition, and were even called
tt serve in war; an honour to which no slave was admitted. Mu-
rat. Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account of the
condition of these three different classes of persons, will enable the
reader to apprehend the full force of an argument which I shall
produce in confirmation of what I have said in the text concern.
ing the wretched itate of the people during the middle ages.
lKotwithitanding the immense difference between the first of these
rlaTes and the third, such was the spirit of tyranny which prevail-
ed among the great proprietors of lands, and so various their op-
portunities of oppressing those who were fettled on their eflates
and of rendering their condition intolerable, that many free men,
ill despair renounced their liberty, and voluntarily surrendered
tihenfelves as slaves to their powerful masters. This they did, in
order that their mailers might become more immediately interest-
ed to afford them protection, together with the means of subsisting
thernflves and their families. The forms of such a surrender, or
t;oxiatio, as it was then called, are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii.
c. 48; and by the anonymous author publiihed by M. Bignon, to.

gether with the collection of/formul compiled by Marculfus, c,
16. In both, the reason given for the sbn,.xiatio, is the wretched
and indigent condition of the person who gives up his liberty. It
wAs still more common for free men to surrender their liberty to
bilhops or abbots, that they might partake of the security which
the aiTals and slaves of churches and monaflteries enjoyed, in con-
f-qeatnce of the fuperflitious veneration paid to the laint under
Abofe immediate prottreion they were supposed to be taken. Du
Cange, voc. Gilart,, vol. iv. p. I286. That condition must have
been mifcrable indeed, which could induce a free man voluntarily
to renounce his liberty, and to give up hirnlelf as a slave to the
disposal of another. The number of slaves in every nation of Eu.
rope was immense. The greater part of the interior class ofpeo.
plc in France were reduced to this fate at the commencement of
the third race of kings. L'Efpr. des Loix, liv. xxx. c. xa. The
fame was the cafe in England. Brady Prci. to Gen. Hifl. Ma-
ny curious fasts, with respeCt to the ancient fate of vi/lain,, or
slaves in England, are published in Observations on the Statutes,
chitfly the more ancient, third edit. p. 269, &c.

NOTE X. SE r.I. . 3. [K].

Innumerable proofs of this might beproduced. Many charters,

granted by pernons of the highest rank, are preserved, from which
it auppars that they could not subscribe their name. It was ufu.
al ;or persons, who could not write, to make the sign of the cross,
in cofirnmauon of a charter. Several of there remain, where
kings and persons of great eminence affixf igru cruci manu proprin
pro irncrt:!cut titeraru,. Du Cange, voc. Crux, vol. iii. p. 1191.
From tllis is derived the phrase of signing inflead of subscribing a
paper. In the ninth century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though fu.
preme jidge of the empire by virtue of his office, could not sub.
sic.be his name. Noveau Traite de Diplomatique par deux le-
nediclins 4to. tom. ii. p. 422. As late as the fourteenth century
Du Guefclin, confiable of France, the greatest man in the fate,
and one of the greater men of his age, could neither read nor
write. St. Palax e Memoires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, tit. ii. p.
8a. Nor was this ignorance confined to laymen; the greater
part of the clergy was not many degrees superior to them in fci-
ence. Many dignified ecclesiastics could not subscribe the canons
of those councils, in which they fat as members. Nouv. Traiti
de Diplcm. tow. ii. p. 424.. One of the questions appointed by
the canons to be put to persons who were candidates for orders
w-as this, ' Whether they could read the gospels and epiftles,.and
explain the itnfe of them, at least literally?' Regino-PrumienFS
ap. Bruck. Hist. Philof. v. iii. p. 63 . Alfred the Great complain.
ed, that from the Humber to the Thames there was not a priest
who underflood the liturgy in iiis mother-tongue, or who could
translate the easiest piece of Latin; and that from the Thames to
the sea, the ecclesiastics were still more- ignorant. Afferius de re-
bus geftis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni Anglica, &c. p. 25. The igno-
rance of the clergy is quaintly described by an author of the dak

,ges: " Potius dediti gulae quam glofrae; potius colligunt libras
quam leguntlibros; libentius intuentur Martham quam Marcum;
nialunt legere in Salmone quam in Solomone." Alanus de Art.
Predicat. ap. Lebeuf Difiert. tom. ii. p. 2a. To the obvious cauf-
e3 of such universal ignorance, arising from the slate of govern-
ment and manners, from the seventh to the eleventh century, we
may add the scarcity of books during that period, and the difficul-
ty of rendering them more common. The Romans wrote their
books either on parchment or on paper made of the Egyptian pa-
pyrus. SThe latter being the cheapest, was ofcourfe the most com-
monly used. But after the Saracens conquered Egypt in the fe-
venth century, the communication between that country and the
people fettled in Italy, or in other parts of Europe, was almoR en-
tirely broken off, and the papyrus was no longer in use among
them. They were obliged, on that account, to write all their
books upon parchment, and, as the price of that was high, books
became extremely rare and of great value. We may judge of the
frarcitv of the materials for writing them from one circumstance.
There 'ill remain several manuscripts of the eighth, ninth, and
following centuries, written on parchment, from which some for-
necr writing had been erased, in order to fubf'itute a new compo-
ition in its place. In this manner it is probable that several works
of the ancients perished. A book of Livy or of Tacitus might
be crazed, to make room for the legendary tale of a faint, or the
fuperflitious prayers of a missal. Murat. Antiq. Ital. v. iii. p. 833.
P. de Montfaucon affirms, that the greater part of the manuscripts
on parchment which he has seen, those of an ancient date except-
ed, are written on parchment from which some former treatise
had been crazed. Mem. de l'Acad. des Infcript. tom. ix. p. 315.
As the want of materials for writing is one reason why so many
of the works of the ancients have perilhed, it accounts likewise for
the small number of manuscripts of any kind, previous to the ele-
venth century, when they began to multiply from a cause which
Ihall bementioned. Hiftor. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Ma-
ny circumstances prove the scarcity of books during these ages.
Private persons seldom pofleffed any books whatever. Even mo-
nafteries ofconfiderable note had only one missal. Murat. Antiq.
v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in a letter to the pope,
A. D. 855, beseeches him to lend him a copy of Cicero de Ora-
tore and Quintilian's Jnftitutions, " for," fays he, "although we
have parts of those books, there is no complete copy of them in all
France." Murat. Ant. v. iii. p. 835. The price of books became
so high, that persons of a moderate fortune could not afford to
purchase them. The countess of Anjou paid for a copy of the
Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Alberftadt, two hundred sheep, five
quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye and millet. His-
toire Literaire de France par des Religieux Benediclins, tom. vii.
p. 3. Even so late as the year 1471, when Louis XI. borrowed
the works of Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the faculty of
medicine in Paris, he not only deposited in pledge a considerable
quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure a nobleman to join

Vol. 1. R

with him as surety in a deed, binding himfelfunder a great forfei.
tare to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a l'Hiftoire de Louys XI.
par Comines, edit. de Frefnov, tomn. iv. p. 181. Many curious
circumstances, with rcfped to the extravagant price of books in
the middle ages, are collecled by that indlufrious compiler, to
whom I refer such of my readers as deem this inall branch of li-
terary liftory an objc& of curiosity. When any person made a
present of a book to a church or a monastery, in which were the
only libraries during several ages, it was deemed a donative of
such value, that he offered it on the altar pro rced;o aianeJ.,,, in
order to obtain the forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836.
Hlift. Lit. de France, tom. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait. du Diplomat.
par deux Benedicins, 4to. tom. i. p. 481. In the eleventh centu-
ry, the art of making paper, in the manner now become universal,
was invented; by means of that, not only the number of manu-
scripts increased, but the fludy of the sciences was wonderfully fa-
cilitated. Murat. ib. p. 871. The invention of the art of mak-
ing paper, and the inventionof the art of printing, are two confi-
derable events in literary history. It is remarkable that the former
preceded the firfi dawning of letters and improvement in know.
ledge towards the close of the eleventh century; the latter ulhered
in the light which spread over Europe at the ara of the Refor-
mantion.

NOTE XI. Se. I. p. 23. [L].

All the religious maxims and practices of the dark ages are a

proof of this. I ihall produce one remarkable t-.imony in con-
firmarion of it, from an author canonized by the church of Rome,
St. Elov, or Egidius, bilhop of Noyon, in the seventh century.
s He is a good Chriflian who comes frequently to church; who
presents the oblation which is offered to God upon the altar; who
doth not taste of the fruits of his own indultry until he has confe-
crated a part of them to God, who, when the holy fetfivals ap-
proach, lives chastely even with his own wife during leveral days,
that with a safe conscience he may draw near the altar of God;.
and who, in the last place, can repeat the Creed and the Lord's
Prayer. Redeem then your fouls from deftruaion, while you
have the means in your power; offer presents and tythes to church-
men ccme more frequently to church; humbly implore the pa-
trcnage of the fLints; for, if you observe these things, you may
come with lscurity in the day of retribution to the tribunal of the
eternal Judge, and fay, " Give to us, O Lord, for we have given
unto thee." Dzcerii Spicelegium Vet. Script. v. ii. p. 94. The
learned and judicious translator of Dr. Mofheim's Ecclefiaflical
History, to one of wlofe additional notes I am indebted for my
knowledge of this pafiage, subjoins a very proper reflection;
a We fee here a large and ample description of a good Chriltian,
in which there is not the lealt mention of the love of God, refigna-
tion to his will, obedience to his laws, or of justice, benevolences
and charity towards men." Mobh. EccIef. Hiiv. v. i. p. 34.

NOTE XII. Sect. I. . 24. [M].

That infallibility in all its determinations, to which the chureh,
of Rome pretends, has been attended with one unhappy confe-
quenlce. As it is impoflible to relinquish any opinion, or to alter
any practice which has been eflablifhed by authority that cannot
err, all its institutions and ceremonies must be immutable and ever-
laiting, and the church must continue to observe, in enlightened
times, those rites which were introduced during the ages of dark-
ness and credulity. What delighted and edified the latter, muf
dilguft and Thock the former. Many of the rites observed in the
Romish church appear manifestly to have been introduced by a
fupeiftition of the lowetl and most illiberal species. Many of
them were borrowed, with little variation, from the religious ce-
remonies eflablifhed among the ancient Heathens.- Some were fa
ridiculous, that if every age did not furniih instances of the fafci-
nating influence of superstition as well as of the whimsical forms
which it assumes, it must appear incredible that they should have
been ever received or tolerated. In several churches of France,
they celebrated a feitival in commemoration of the Virgin Mary's
flight into Egypt. It was called the feast of the Ass. A young
girl richly dressed, with a child in her arms, was set upon an als
iuperbly caparisoned. The ass was led to the altar in solemn pro-
cellion. High mass was said with great pomp. The ass was
tactht to kneel at proper praces; a hymn no legs ehidifh than
impious was sung in his praile; and when the ceremony was end-
ed, the priest, instead of the usual words with which he difiiffed
the people, brayed three times like an ass, and the people, initead
of the usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three times in
the fame manner. Du Cange, voc. Fct,,,, v. iii. p. 424. This
ridiculous ceremony was not, like the feitival of fools, and some
orher pageants of those ages, a mere farcical entertainment exhi-
bited in a church, and mingled, as was then the cuflom, with an
imitation of rome religious rites; it was an aCt of devotion, per-
formed by the ministers of religion, and by the authority of the
church. However, as this pradtice did not prevail universally in
the Catholic church, its absurdity contributed at lat to abolilh
it.

NOTE XIIT. Sec. I. p. 28. [NI.

As there is no event in the history of mankind more singular
than that of the Crusades, every circumstance that tends to explain
or to give any rational account of this extraordinary frenzy of
the human mind is interesting. I have asserted in the text, that
the minds of men were prepared gradually for the amazing effort
which they made in consequence of the exhortations of Peter the
hermit, by several occurrences previous to his time. A more par.
ti:ular detail of this curious and obscure part of hiflory, may per-
haps appear to some of my readers to be of importance. That
the tnd of the world was expected about the close of the tenth
and beginning of the eleventh century; and that this occasioned
a general alarm, is evident from the authors to whom I have r-

R

ferred in the text. This belief was so universal and so strong
that it mingled itself with civil tranfaclions. blany charters, in
the latter part of the tenth century, begin in this manner: " Ap.
propinquante mundi termino," &c. As the end of the world i
now at hand, and by various calamities and judgments the figri
of its apFroach are now manifcft. Hilt. de Langued. par D.D,
de Vie & Vaifette. tom. ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, o9, 17, 158, &e,
One cffcA of this opinion was, that a great number of pilgrims
resorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution to die there, or to wait
the coming of the Lord; kings, earls, marquifies, bishops, and e-
ven a great number of vorren, besides persons of inferior rank,
flocked to t' e Ioly Land. GCa!er. Roduiph. I :fh chez Bouquet
Recl-ic , toom. x. p. 5c, 52. Another hiflorian mentions a vast ca.
valade of pilgrims who accompanied the count of Angouleme to
Jeufa'eni in the Year IC2a. Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. 162. Up.
on ;leir rtt:rn, there pilgrims fiiied Europe with lamrentable ac-
roun;s of the liate of Chrni'ans in tlte Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr.
H-ifl. ap. Gv:ft. Dri per France, vol. i:. p. 63j-. Guihert. Abbat.
Hist. bd. vol. i. p. 476. Betfices rlis, it was uiual for many of
t.t Chritian irhahitants of ],Ju:alcm, as well as of other cities
in tl e EaR, to travl a menrndira.nt through Europe; and ly de.
ferihing the v rctched rondition of the profeTors of the Christian
fj;nb under the cominion of Infidels, to extort charity, and to ex-
cite zealous perions io nmae .oine ariefmpi '.'- *"

. l-.'

from opprefrion. Baldrici Archiepifcopi Hiflor. ap. Gefta Dei,
&c. vol.i. p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbert, archbishop of Raven.
na, afterwmars Pope Si'vefter II. addrefled a letter to all Christians
in the naire of the church of Jerusalem. It is eloquent and pa.
thetic, and contains a formal exhortation to take arms againfl the
Pa2an oplTrecfiirs. in order to rescue the holy city from their yoke.
Gtrberbi Epiftoile ap. Boutquet Receuil, tom. x. p. 426. In confe.
q:er.ce of this spirited call, some fubjesct of the republic of Pisa e
qu].FF-d a f.let, and invaded the territories of the Mahometans in
S' ria. a .urat Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii. p. 4co. The alarm was
taken in the East, and an opinion prevailed, A. D. 1olo, that all
tIe rcr; es of Chrifiendom were to unite, in order to drive the Ma.
!rinm:tans out of Palefline. Chron. Adtmari ap. Bouquet, tom.
>. p. i 2. It is evident from all there particulars, that the ideas
v hich led the Crusaders to undertake their wild enterprize did
r.;t ar'f, --ccrding to the description of many authors, fronr a
fi:dden fit of frantic enthusiasm, but were gradually formed; so
tFr: the uiLiverfal concourse to the flandard of the cross, whenc-
rceed ;- Urban II. will appear less surprising.

If the vari,,.s circumstances which I have enumerated in this

note, as well a- ill the hiflory,'are sufficient to account for the
ardour with which such vast numbers engaged in such a danger.
ous undcrra'.hi, the extensive privileges and immunities grant.
td to the perfens who assumed the cross, serve to account for the
lcr.c conutinuance of this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempt.
ed from Frofecutions on account of debt, during the time of their
being engaged in this holy service. Du Cange voc. Crsiirqrivii'gw

v. ii. p. tr94.-z. They were exempted from paying interest for
the monev which they had borrowed, in order to fit them for this
sacred warfare. Ibid.-3. They were exempted either entirely,
or at least during a certain time, from the payment of taxes. Ibid.
Ordonnances des Rois de France, tom. ip. p. 33-4. They might
alienate their lands without the consent of the superior lord of
whom they held. Ibid.-5. Their persons and effe6ts were taken
under the protetion of St. Peter, and anathemas of the church
were denounced against all who ihould molest therij or carry on
any quarrel or hostility against them, during their absence, on ac-
count of the holy war. Du Cange, Ibid. Guihertus Ahbas ap.
Bonparf. i. p. 480. 483.-6. They enjoyed all the privileges of
eccliefaflics and were not bound to plead in any civil court but were
d cared subject to the spiritual jurifdidion alone. Du Cange, lb.
Ordon. des Rois. tom. i.p. 34, 74.-7. Thev obtained a plenary
rerr ifTion of all their fins, and the gates of heaven were let open.
to t;lem, without requiring any other proof of their penitence, but
their ensaging in this expedition; and thus, by gratifying their
fa.virite passion, the love of war, they secured to themselves ci-
vil rights of great value, and religious immunities, which were-
not usually obtained, hut by paying large funs of money, or by
undergoing painful penances. Guiob-rt. Abbas, p. 480. Whent
we h.hold the civil and ecclefialtical powers vying with each o-
ther, and ftr:ining their invention in order to devise expedienta
for rcnouraLing and adding ftrentlth to the spirit oftluperftition,
can w e e furp-ifed that it should become so general as to render'
it infamous, and a mark of cowardice, to tecline engaging in
the holy war? Willierm Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf. vol. ii. . 641.-
The hiltories of the Crusades, written by modern authors, who'
are apt to fubhtitute the ideas and maxims of their own age in the
pla.e ofthofe which inflnenced the persons whole actoins they at-
tempt to relate, convey a very impe!fe& notion of the spirit at
that time predominant in Europe. The original historians, wlho
were animated themselves with the fame paiflons which pof-
fetlirl their cohnemporaries, exhibit to us a more fteiking piAutre-
of the times and manners which they decfribe.- The enthusiastic
rapture with which they account for the effects of the pope's dif-
co;irfe in the council of Clermont; the exultation with which they
mention the n mbers who devoted themselves ta this holy war-
fare; the confidence with which they express their reliance on
the divine proterion; the extaly of joy with whi.h they d--
fcrihe their taking poffefion of the holy city, will enable us to -
ron, eive, in some degree, the extravagance of that zeal which a-
gitatc, ;ile minds of men with such violence, and will suggest as
nmary lingular refletions to a philosopher, as any occurence in
the Ihiftorv of mankind. It is unneceflary to ilea the particular
paiTages in the several historians, which confirm this oblervation. -
Blt left those authors m-y he fufpeiced of adorning their narra.
tive with any exaggerated description, I frhall appeal to one of the
leaders wlio conducted the enterprize. There is extant a letter
from Stephen, the earl of Charires and Blois, to Adela his wife,.

R 3

in which he gives her an account of the progress of the Cruradenm
He dcfcribes the Cnsfaders as the chosen army of Christ, as the
servants and soldiers of God, as men who marched under the im.
mediate protecAion of the Almighty, being condudled by his hand
to vi&ory and conqucft. He speaks of the Turks as accursed, fa.
crilegious, and devoted by Heaven-to defirudion: and when he
mentions the soldiers in the Christian army, who had died, or
were killed, he is confident that their fouls were admitted direA.
ly into the joys of Paradise. Dacherii Spicelegium, vol iv. p,
25 .

The expence of conducting numerous bodies of men from

Europe to Asia, must have been exceflive, and the difficulty of
railing the neceflary fums must have been proportionally great,
during ages when the public revenues in every nation of Europe
were extreme! v finall. Some account is preserved of the expedi.
ents emplo?'ed by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in order to
levy the money requisite towards equipping him for the Crusade,
A. D. . 46. These I ihall mention, as they tend to ihew the
rcrfider-ble influence which the Crusades had, both on the slate
of Froperty, and of civil government. I. He expoled to sale part
of his domains; and as the price was destined for such a sacred
service, he obtained the consent of the French king. of whom
therfe lands were held, ratifying the alienation. Hifl de Dau-
phine, tom. i. p. 332, 335.-2. He issued a proclamation, in
which he promised to grant new privileges to the nobles, as
well as new immunities to the cities and towns, in his territories,
in consideration of certain rums which they were instantly to pay
on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. si2. Many of the chartersof
community, which I ihall mention in another Note, were obtained
in this manner.-3 He exacted a contribution towards defraying
the charges of the expedition from all his fiubjets, whether eceie.
fiafics or laymen, who did not accompany him in person to the
East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335. 4. He appropriated a confiderabk
part of his usual revenues for the support of the troops to be em-
ployed in this service. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 5i8.-- . He exa&ed'con-
liderab e fums not only of the Jews fettled in his dominions, but
aLb of the Lombards and other bankers who had fixed their re.
fiderce there. Ibid. torn. i. p. .3 8. tom. ii. 528. Notwithftand-
ing the variety of their resources, the dauphin was involved in
such exynnce by this expedition, that on his return he was obliged
to r:a;;e rew demands on his subje&s, and to pillage the Jews by
frrfn exactions. Ibid. torn. i. p. 344, 347. When the count de
Foix tr.~i'ged in the first Crusade, he railed the money necefslry
tfoi ccra\in the expences of that expedition, by alienating part
of his trri-itories. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic &Vi-
letze, torn. ii. p. 287. In like manner Baldwin, count of Hainaut,
mortgig' d or fold a considerable portion of his dominions to the
b:-hop of Leige, A. ). Ioi6. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique
ton. i. p. 59. At a later period, Baldwin, count of Namur, fold
Fart of his c;:a:e to a monastery, when he intended to afume the
crol, A. D. 1239. liraei lper. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. Sed. I. p. 32. [0].

The urual method of forming an opinion concerning the com-
parative state of manners in two different nations, is by attending
to the facts which historians relate concerning each of them.
Various passages might be seleCted from the Byzantin historians,
delclribing the splendour and magnificence of the Greek empire.
P. de Montfaucon has produced from the writings of St. Chry-
fotom a very full account of the elegance and luxury of the
Greeks in his age. That father in his sermons enters into such
minute details concerning the manners and customs of his con-
temporaries, as appear flrange in discourses from the pulpit. P.
de Montfaucon has collected these descriptions, and ranged them
under different heads. The court of the more early Greek em-
perors seems to have resembled those of Eastern monarchs, both
in magnificence and in corruption of manners. The emperors in
the eleventh century, though inferior in power, did not yield to
them in ostentation and Splendour. Memoires de l'Acad. des In-
scrip. tom. xx. p. 197.- But we may decide concerning the
comparative slate of manners in the eastern empire, and among
the nations in the weft of Europe by another method, which, if not
more certain, is at leaf more flriking. As Constantinople was
the place of rendezvous for all the armies of the Crusaders this
brought together the people of the East and Vest as to one great
interview. There are extant several contemporary authors both
among the Greeks and Latins, who were witnefies of this singular
congress of people, formerly firangers, in a great measure, to
each other. They describe with simplicity and candour, the im-
pression which that new fpeftacle made upon their own minds.
This may be confidered as a mo't lively and just picture of the
real chara&er and manners of each people. When the Greeks
speak of the Pranks, they describe them as barbarians, fierce illi-
terate, impetuous and savage. They alFume a tone of superiority,
as a more polished people, acquainted with the arts both of govern-
ment and of elegance, of which the other was ignorant. It is
thus Anna Comnena describes the manners of the Latins, Alexias,
p. 224, 231, 237. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always views
them with contempt as a rude people, the very mention of whose
names was sufficient to contaminate the beauty and elegance of
lhitory, p. 2z9. Nicetas Choniatus inveighs against them with
fill more violence, and gives an account of their ferocity and de-
vaflations, in terms not unlike thole which preceding hiftorarns
had employed in describing the incursions of the Goths and Van-
dals. Nicet. Chon. ap. Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 301, &c. But on
the other hand, the Latin historians were struck with aftonilhment
at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which they discovered
in the eastern empire. " 0 what a vast city is Conflantinople
(exclaims Fulcherius Carnotenfis, when he first beheld it), and
how beautiful How many monasteries are there in it, and how
many palaces built with wonderful art! How many manuiacatures
are there in the city amazing to beholdl It would be alit~mhng

to relate how it abounds with all good things, with gold, Efive
and fluffs of various kinds; for every hour ih;ps arrive in its port
laden with all things necessary for the use of man." Fulcher.ap.
Bongarf. vo'. i. p. 386. Willermus archbishop of Tyre, the molt
inte'ligent hi;torian of the Crusades, seems to be fond on every oc.
cafion of describing the elegance and splendour of the court of
Conftant.!iop!e, and adds, that what he and his countrymen ob.
served there exceeded any i4ea which they could have formed ofit,
noftrartm er.im rerum modum & dignitatem excedunt. Wilerm.
Tvr. ap. BFng. vol. ii. p. 6R7, 664. Benjamin the Jew, of Ti.
dcla in Navarre, who began his travels A. D. 1173, appears to
have been equally aflonifhed at the magnificence of that city, and
gpvcs a dc-iription of its f)!endour, in terms of high admiration.
B-ni. Ttdel. cFez les Voyages faits cn 12, 13, &c. Siecles, par
Bergeron, p. Io, &c. Gnntherus, a French monk, who wrote a
hitory of the conquest of Constantinople by the Crusaders in the
thirteenth century, speaks of the magnificence of that city in the
fame tone of admiration: "' Structuram autem aedificiorum in
corpore civitatis, in ecc!cfi;s videlicet, & turribus, & in domibus
magnatorum, vix ulllt vcl defcribere poteft, vel credere deferiben.
ti, nifi qui ea oculara fide cognoverit." Hist. Conftantinop. ap.
Canifii Leationes Antiquas, fol. Antw. 1;25. vol. iv. p 14.
Geoffrey de Villchardonin, a nobleman of high rank, and accuf-
tomed to all the magnifice!tce then known in the Weft, describes
in similar ttrms, the aflonifhment and admiration of such of his
fe!low-foldicrs as behrld Constantinople for the first time: " Fhey
could not have believed, fays he, that there was a city so beautiful
and ro rich in the whole world. When they viewed its high
w-alis, its lofty towers, its rich palaces, its superb churches, all
appeared so great, that they cculd have formed no conception of
this sovereign city. uiele's they had seen it with their own eyes."
Hi-ioi-e de la Conqucte de Conftat. p. 49. From these tndif.
gp:ifedl rprefentaticlns of their own feelings, it is evident that to
the Greeks, the Crusaders appeared to be a race of rude, unpolith-
ed barbarians; hereas the latter, how much soever they might
conren-.n the unw.ri!je character of the former, could not help
regarding them as far superir to themlelves in elegance and arts.
-That the late of government and manners were much more im-
proved in Italy than in the other countries of Europe, is evident
not onlh from the fads recorded in history, but it appears that the
nerre i:;telligept lrI'ners ofthe Crusaders were Itruck with the dif.
ference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French historian of the holy war,
makes an elaborate panegyric on the character and manners of
the Italians. He views them as a more polished people, aud par-
tct:;arly celehrates them for their love of liberty, and (ivil wisdom;
"in confiliis cirumfprcti, in r- fua puhiica procuranda diligentes &
ftu,:ofi; fibi in potlerum providentes; alis fiibjici renuentes;
ante omnid librtattm fib; defenidefes; fib uno quem eligunt ca-
pitiner, co:imun. aii itia jura & inltituta diaanres & iimiliter
obiervan-es." liilor. Hierofol ap. tc.cta Dei per Francos, vol.
ii. p. 1o85.

Note XV. Se&. I. p. 35. [P].

The different steps taken by the cities of Italy in order to ex-
tend their power and dominions are remarkable. As soon as
their liberties were eftablifled, and they began to feel their own
importance, they endeavoured to render themselves marters of the
territory round their walls. Under the Romans, when cities en-
joved municipal privileges and jurifdiclion, the circumjacent lands
belonged to each town, and were the property of the community.
But as it was not the genius of the feudal policy to encourage ci-
ties, or to shew aly regard for their poffeflions and immunities,
these lands had been seized, and ihared among the conquerors.
The barons to whom they were granted, ere&ed their castles, al-
mofl at the gates of the city, and exercised theirjurifdidlion there.
Under pretence of recovering their ancient property, many of the
cities in Italy attacked these troublerome neighbours, and difpof-
tffing them, annexed their territories to the communities, and
made thereby a considerable addition to their power. Several
instances of this occur in the eleventh, and beginning of the
twelfth centuries. Murat. Antiq. ital. vol.iv. p. I59, &c. Their
ambition increasing together with their power, the cities after-
wards attacked feoeral barons situated at a greater diflance from
their walls, and obliged them to engage that they would become
members of their community; that they would take the oath of
L2i.: to their ma:iftrates; that they would fubje& their lands
to ail burdens and taxes imposed by common content; that they
would defend the community against all its enemies; and inha
they would reside within the city during a certain specified time
in each year. Murat. ibid. 163. This fubjetion of the nobility
to the municipal government established in cities, became almoit
universal, and was often extremely grievous to persons accustom-
ed to confider themselves as independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus
delcribes the fate of Italy under Frederick I. "The cities so
much assec liberty, and are so solicitous to avoid the insolence of
power, that almost all of them have thrown offevery other autho-
rity, and are governed by their own magistrates. Inforuch that
all that country is now filled with free cities, most of which have
compelled their biffops to reside within their walls, and there is
scarcely any nobleman, how great soever his power may be, who
is not lubjec to the laws and government of tome city." De Ge-
flis Frider. i. Imp. lib. ii.c. 13.p. 453. In another place he ob-
serves of the Marquis of Montserrat, that he was almost the only
Italian baron who had preserved his independence, and had not
become fubjeCd to the laws of any city. See also Muratori Anti-
chita Erenii, vol. i.p. 4I1, 411. That Rate into which some of
the nobles were compelled to enter, others embraced from choice.
They ohferved the high degree of security as well as of credit
and estimation, which the growing wealth and dominion of the
great communities procured to all the members of them. They
were desirous to partake of these, and to put themlelves under
such powerful protection. With this view they voluntarily be.
came citizens of the towns to which their lands were molt con.-

ticuous; and abandoning their ancient castles, took up their r.
fidence in the cities at least during part of the year. Several
deeds are still extant, by which some of the most illustrious fami:
lies in Italy are afloeiated as citizens of different cities. Murat
ib. p. I65, &c. A charter, by which Atto de Macerata is admit.
ted as a citizen of Ofmo, A. D. Ig98, in the Marcha di Ancona,
is Rill extant. In this he stipulates, that he will acknowledge
himfcif to be a burgers of that community; that he will to the
utnnoft of his power promote its honour and welfare; that he
will obey its maaiftrates; that he will enter into no leagues with
its enemies; that he will reside in the town during two months
in every year, or for a longer time, if required by the magistrates.
The community, on the other hand, take him, his family, and
friends, under their protecion, and engage to defend him a
gair.q every enemy. Pr. Ant. Zacharias Anecdota medii Evi.
Aug. Taur. I755. fol. p. 66. This privilege was deemed so im.
portant, that not only laymen, but ecclefiafics of the highest rank,
condescended to be adopted as members of the great communitis,
in hopes of enjoying the safety and dignity which that condition
conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the inrfitution of communi.
ties, per;ons of noble birth had no other residence but their caRtles
They kept their petty courts there; and the cities were deserted,
having hardly any inhabitants but Raves, or persons of low con-
dition. But in confequse .e of the praUtce which I have mt-.
tinned, cities not only became more populous, but were filled with
inhabitants of better rank, and a custom which fill subsists in Ita-
lv was then introduced, that all families of diftin6ion reside more
constantly in the great towns, than is usual in other parts of Eu.
rope. As cities acquired new consideration and dignity by the
accession of such citizens, they became more solicitous to preserve
their liberty and independence. The emperors, as sovereigns, had
anciently a palace in almost every great city of Italy; when they
visited that country they were accustomed to reside in these pa.
laces, and the troops which accompanied them were quartered
in the houses of the citizens. rhis the citizens deemed both igno-
minious and dangerous. They could not help confidering it a
receiving a master and an enemy within their walls. They la-
boured therefore to get tree of this fubjeclion. Some cities pre-
railed on the emperors to engage that they would never enter
their gates, but take up their reiidence without the walls: Chart.
Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 14. Others obtained the Imperial li-
cen:ce to puli down the palace situated within their liberties, on
condition that they build another in the suburbs for the occafiont
al reception of the emperor. Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. IS.
These varions encroachments of the Italian cities alarmed the em-
perors, and put them on Ichemes for re-eflablilhing the Imperial
juriflicdion ove. them on its ancient footing. Frederick Barba-
roffa engaged in this enterprize with greatardour. The freec-
tie. of italy joined together in a general league, and flood on
their dclence: and after a long contest, carried on with alternate
fucceis, a loierm treaty of peace was concluded at ConItances

A. D. 1183, by which all the privileges and immunities granted
by former emperors to the principal cities in Italy were confirm-
edand ratified. Murat. Dissert. XLVIII. This treaty of Con-
stance was confidered as such an important article in the jurif-
prudence of the middle ages, that it is usually published together
sith the Libri Feudorum at the end of the Corpus Juris Civilis.
The treaty lecured privileges of great importance to the confede-
rate cities, and though it reserved a considerable degree of autho-
rity and jurisdiction to the empire, yet the cities persevered with
such vigour in their efforts in order to extend their immunities,
and the conjunedures in which they made them were so favour-
able, that, before the conclusion of the thirteenth century, moit
of the great cities in Italy had ihaken off all marks of fubje6tion to
the empire, and were become independent sovereign republics. It
is not requisite that I should trace the various fleps by which they
advanced to this high degree of power so fatal to the empire, and.
so beneficial to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori, with his u-
fual industry, has colkcted many original papers which illufirate
this curious and little known part of history. Murat. Antiq. Ital.
Diflert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanovae Hist. Laudis Pompeii five
Lodi, in Graev. Thcf. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii p. 888.

Note XVI. Sect. I. p. 36. rQ.]

Long before the institution of communities in France, charters
ofilnmunity or franchise were granted to some towns and villages
by the lords on whom they depended. But these are very diffe-
rent from such as became common in the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. They did not erec these towns into corporations;
they did not eftabliflh a municipal government; they did not
grant them the privilege of bearing arms. They contained no--
thing more than a manumission of the inhabitants fron the yoke
offervitude; an exemption from certain services which were op-
prefiet and ignominious; and the establishment of a fixed tax or
rent which the citizei s were to pay to their lord in place of im-
positions hich he could formerly lay upon them at pleasure. Two
charters of this kind to two villages in the county of Roufillon,
one in A. D. 974, the other in A. D. oz25, are fill extant. Petr.
de Marca, .Ilurc, five Limes Hifpanicus, App. p. 909, 1038.
Such conccfflons, it is probable, were not unknown in other parts
of Europe, and may be confidered as a ltep towards the more ex-
tensive privileges conferred by Louis le Gros, on the towns with-.
in his domains. The communities in France never aspired to the.
fame independence with those in Italy. They acquired new pri-
vileges andt immunities, but the right of sovereignty remained en-
tire to the king or baron within whose territories the refpecive
cities were situated, and from whom they receive the charter of
their freedom. A great number of thele charters, granted both by
the kings of France, and by their great vassals, are published by M.
1)Achery in his Spicelegium, and many are found in the collec-
tiont of the Ordonnances des Rois de France. Thelfe convey a ve-
ry striking representation of the wretched condition of cities pre-

vious to the infiitution of communities, when they were fubjdf t
the judges appointed by the superior lords of whom they held,
and who had scarcely any other law but their will. Each con.
cession in there charters muff he confidered as a grant of some new
privilege which the people did not formerly enjoy, and each re.
rlation as a method of redressing some grievance under which the
inhabitants of cformerof

cities formerly laboured. The charter of .

nities contain likewise the first expedients employed for the intro.
duction of equal laws and regular government. On both there
ccounts they merit particular attention, and therefore, instead of
referring my readers to the many bulky volumes in which they
are Scattered, I flailgive them a view offoimof the most important
articles in there charters, ranged under two general heads. I. Such
asrefpedtperfonal safety. II.Such asrerpect thefecurity ofproperty,

I. During that fiate of turbulence and disorder which the cor.

ruption of the feudal government introduced into Europe, person-
al safety was the first and great object of every individual; and
as the great military barons alone were able to give sufficient pro-
tection to their vassals, this was one great source of their power
and authority. But, by the institution of communities, effectual
provision was made for the safety of individuals, independent of
the nobles. For, z. The fundamental article in every charter
was, that all the members of the community, bound themfelve
by an oath to assist, defend, and stand by each other againfi all
aggressors, and that they should not susser any person to injure,
difirefi, or molest any of their fellow citizens. D'Acher. Spicel.
x. 641. xi. 741. &c.-z. Whover resided in any towni which
was made free, was obliged, under a severe penalty, to accede to
the community, and to take part in the mutual defence of its
members. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.--.1 The communities had
the privilege of carrying arms; of making war on their private
enemies; and of executing by military force any sentence which
their magifirates pronounced. D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. Xi
343-4. The practice of making fatisfadcion by a pecuniary
compensation for murder, afiault, or other acts of violence, mot
inconfifetnt with the order of society, and the safety of individuals,
was abolilhed; and such as committed these crimes were puniih
ed capitally, or with rigour adequate to their guilt. D'Ach. xi.
361. Mir'i Opera Diplomatica, i. 29z.-s. No member of a
community was bound to justify or defend himself by battle or
combat; but, if he was charged with any crime, he could be con-
victed only by the evidence of witnesses, and the regular course of
legal proceedings. Miraus,ibid. D'Ach. xi.3 75, 349. Ordon. tom.
iii. 265-6. If any man fufpeded himself to be in danger from
the malice or enmity of another, upon his making oath to that
effect before a magistrate, the person suspected was bound under
a fewere penalty to give surety for his peaceable behaviour,
D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame species of security which if
still know in Scotland under the name of Lovburrtwvs. In France,
it was firt introduced among the inhabitants of communities, and
having been found to contribute considerably towards pcrfonia

safety, it was extended to all the other members of focietv. Efta.
bliffcrnens de St Louis. liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du Cange Vie de St.
Louils, p. 15.

II. The provisions in the charters of communities concerning
the tecurity of property, are not less considerable than those re-
fpesling personal safety. By the ancient law of France, no per-
son could be arreited or confined in prison on account of any pri-
vate deb. Ordon. des Rois de France, tom i. p. 7z- 80. If any
person was arrested upon any pretext, but his having been guilty
of a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue him out of the hands of
the officers who had seized him. Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom
from arrest on account of debt seems likewise to have been en-
joyed in other countries. Gudenus Sylloge Diplom. 47.1. In so-
ciety, while it remained in its rudest and most simple form, debt
seems to have been confidered as an obligation merely personal.
Men had made some progress towards refinement, before credi-
tors acquired a right of leizing the property of their debtors it
order to recover payment. The expedients for this purpose were
all introduced originally in communities, and we can trace the
gradual progress of them. x. The simplest and most obvious fpe-
cies of lecurity was, that the person who fold any commodity
should receive a pledge from him who bought it, which he re-
stored upon receiving payment. Of this custom there are velti-
ges infeveral charters of community. D'Ach. ix. I85. xi. 377-
2. When no pledge was given, and the debtor became refradto-
ry or insolvent, the creditor was allowed to seize his effects with a
strong hand, and by his private authority; the citizens of Paris
are warranted by the royal mandate; " ut ubicumque, et quo-
cumque modo poterunt, tantum capiant, unde pecuniam fibi de-
bitam integre & plenarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem adjutores
exiftant." Ordon. &c. tom. i p. 6. This rude practice, suitable
only to the violence of that which has been called a slate of na-
ture, was tolerated longer than one can conceive to be possible in
any society where laws and order were at a!i known. The or-
donnance authorising it was issued, A. D. t.:34: and that which
correts the law, and prohibits creditors fr.m seizing the effects
of their debtors, unless by a warrant from a magistrate, and under
his inspection, was not published until the year 13Sx. Ordon.
tom. ii. p. 438. It is probable, however, that men were taught,
by observing the disorders which the former mode of proceeding
occasioned, to corredt it in practice long before a remedy was pro-
vided by a law to that effetd. Every discerning reader will apply
this observation to many other cufioms and practices which I have
mentioned. New cufloms are not always to be ascribed to the
laws which authorize them. Thoft statutes only give a legal
sanCtion. to such things as the experience of mankind has previ-
oufly found to be proper and beneficial.-3. As soon as the in-
terpofition of the magistrate became requisite, regular provision
was made for attaching or distraining the moveable effects of a
de)tor; and if his moveable were not sufficient to discharge the
debt, his immoveable property, or estate in land, was liable to

Vol. I. S

be fame rdifrefs, and was fold for the benefit of his creiitt.
D'Ach. ix. p. 184, i85. xi. p. 348-38o. As this regulation as
forded the most complete security to the creditor, it was confider.
ed as so Ifyere, that humanity pointed out several limitations in
the execution of it. Creditors were prohibited from seizing the
wrearing apparel of their debtors, their beds, the door of their
lhoufe, their inlruments of hulEandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi
.377. Upon the fame principles, when the power of distraining
effects became more general, the horse and arms of a gentleman
could not be seized. D'Ach. ix. I85. As hunti',g was thefa.
vourite amusement of martial nobles, the emperol Lodovicus Pi.
vs prohibited the seizing of a hawk, on account of any compo.
stion or debt. Capitul. lib. iv. § 21. But if the debtor had no
other moveables, even these privileged articles might be seized.-
A. In order to render the security of property complete within a
community, every person who was admitted a member of it,
was obliged to buy or build a house, or to purchase lands within
its precinss, or at leafi to bring into the town a considerable por-
tion of.his moveables, ser quejufliciari pojFt,ji quidj ,rte in rum guc

it ae~nerit. D'Ach xi. 316. Ordon. i 367. Libertates S.

Ceorgii de Efperanchia. Hitl. de Dauphinc, torn i. p. 26.-5,
That fecuritv might be as perfet as possible in some towns, the
members of the community seem to have been bound for each o.
ther. D'Ach. x. 644.-6. All questions with refpet to proper.
ty were tried within the community, by magifirates aud judges
'-hom the citizens elected or appointed. l'heir decisions were
more equal and fixed than the fentencts which depended on the
capricicu, and arbitrary will ofa baron, who thought himlelf fupe-
rior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644 646 xi. 44 & passim. Ordon. iii
204-?. No member of a comni.unity could be burdened by any ar-
titrary tax; for the fiplerior lord, who granted the charter of cor-
munity, accepted of a fixed ct:eius or duty in lieu of all demandl
Ordon. tom. iii. 2c4. Libertatea de Calma Hifl. de Daurhine, to.m
i. p. I9. Libert. St. Georgii de Elperanchia, ibid. p. z6. Nor
could the members of a community be diltreffed by an unequal
imposition cf the him to be levied on the community. Regula-
tiens are in erted in the charters of some communities, concerning
the method of determining the quota of any tax to be levied on
each inhabitant, D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis published aR
ordennzance corcerning this matter which extended to all the
cormmunrities. Ordon. tom. i. x86. These regulations are ex-
tremely favourable to liberty, as they vest the power of propor-
tionir.g the taxes in a certain .number of citizens chosen outof
cach pariLh, who were bound by solemn oath to decide according
tojuftice.-That the more perfect security of property was one
great obiect of those who instituted communites, we learn, not on-
Iv from the nature of the thing, but from the express words of
feverai charters, of which I ihall only mention that granted bs
Alienor Queen of England andDutchels of Guienne, to the corn
rnunitiy of Po;:iers," ut Cua propria melius defendere poflint, &
magii integre cuftodire." Du Cange, voc. Cowwania, v. ii. p.863.
-Such are omne of the capital regulations ctalilhed in commnu

sities during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. There may be,
conidered as the first expedients for the re-eftabliihment of lai
and order. and contributed greatly to introduce regular govern;
ment among all the members of society. As soon as communi-
ties were inltituted, high sentiments of liberty began to manifeff
thenfifeves. When Humbert lord of Beaujeu, upon grantingachar-
ttr ,t community to the town of Belleville, exacted of the inhabi-
tants an oath of fidelity to himself and fuccelfors, they stipulated onm
their part, that he fiould swear to maintain their franchises and li-
berties; and, for their greater security, they obliged him to bring.
twenty gentlemen to take the fame oath, and to be bound toge-
ther with him. D'Ach. ix. 183. In the fame manner the lord?
es Moriens in Dauphin& produced a certain number of persons as-
his sureties for the observation of the articles contained in the char-
ter of community to that town. These were bound to surrender
themselves prisoners to the inhabitants of Moriens, if their liege'
lord should violate any of their franchises, and they promised to
remain .n cuflody until he should grant the members-of the com-
iunitv redress. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 17. If the mayor
or chief magistrate of a town did any injury to a citizen, he was
obliged to give security for his appearance in judgment in the
fame manner as a private perlbn; and if cast, was liable to the
fame penalty. IDArh. ix. ig3. Thele are ideas of equality un-
common in the feudal times. Communities were so favourabte
to freedom, that they were dillinguifhed by the name of LiirfJtie.-
Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863. They were at first extremely odious to,
the nobles, who foresaw what a check they must prove to their'
power and domination. Guibert Abbot of Nogent calls them
execrable inventions, by which, contrary to law and justice, flavcs
withdrew themselves from that obedience which they owed to-
their mailers. Du Cange, ib. 862. The zeal with which tome
of the nobles and powerful ecclesiastics oppoled the eflablifhmeint
of communities, and endeavoured to circumscribe their pri-
vileges, was extraordinarv. A firiking instance of this, occurs in,
the contests between the archbishop of Reims, and the inhabitants
of that community. It was the-chief business of every archbi-
Ihop, during a considerable time, to abridge the rights and jurild-
dit'ion of the community; and the great obje& of the citizens, .
ipecially when the lee was vacant, to maintain, to recover,
and to extend their own jurifdiaiion. Hiftoire civile & politique'
de la Ville de Reims, par M. Anquetil, tom. i. p. 287, &c.

The cbfervations which I have made concerning the low slate'
ofcities, and the condition of their inhabitalnts, are confirmed by-
innumerable passages in the hillorians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that obme cities of the
firit order were in a better state, and enjoyed a Iuperior degree of.
libtety. Under the Roman government, the municipal govern-
mlcit eflabliihed in cities was extremely- avourable to liberty.
Tlhe ;ur lsdiAion of the senate in each corporation, and the privi-
ieges ot the citizens, were both extensive. There is reason to be-
ieve, that some of the greater cities which escapcd the deftrut-i.ve

S z.

rage of the barbarcus nations, Rill retained their ancient form of
government, at leaf in a great measure. They were governed
by a council of citizens, and by magistrates whom they themfelvcs
tieced. Very strong presumptions in favour of this opinion are
produced by M. 1'Abbe De Bos, Hilt. Crit. de la Mon. Franc.
tourn i. p. 18, &c. tom. ii . p5. 4 edit. 1743. It appears from
some of the charters of community to cities, granted in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that these only confirm thepri.
\ ilees pcftffed by the inhabitants previous to the eftablilhment
or the community. D'Acher. Spiceleg. vol. xi. p. 34. Other
cities c!airred their privileges, as having poffcffed them without
interruption from the times of the Romans. Ilift. Crit. de la
Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 33 . But the number of cities which en.
joyed such immunities was so small, as hardly in any degree to di.
minifi the force of my conclusions in the text.

Note XVII. Sed. 1. p. 36. [R.]

Having given a full account of the establishment as well as es.

fccts of communities in Italy and France, it will be nececfary to in-
quire with fonme attention into the progress of cities and munici.
pal government in Germany. The ancient Germans had no ci-
ties. Even in their hamlets or villages they did not build their
Louses contizuous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.cap. 6.
They coniGdered it as a badge of servitude to be obliged to dwell
in a cr-y furrouuded with walls. When one of their tribes had
shaken of the Roman yoke, their countrymen required of them,
as an evidence of their having recovered liberty, to demolish the
walls of a town which the Romans had built in their country.
Even the fierceti animals, said they, lose their spirit and courage
when they are confined. Tac. Hiftor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Ro-
mans built several cities of ncte on the banks of the Rhine. But
in all the valt countries from that river to the coafta of the Baltic,
there was hardly one city previous to the ninth century of the
Christian aera. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus Germanix,
(Jpcr. vol. i. § 25, 2;, 31, &c. Heinccius differs from Conringius
v ith refped to this, But even, after allowing to his arguments
and authorities their utmost force, they prove only, that there
were a few places in those extensive regions on which some hi.
llorians have beltowed the name of towns. Elem. Jur. German.
lib. i. § 102. Under Charlemagne, and the emperors of his fami-
ly, as the political Rate of Germany began to improve, several
ities were founded, and men became accustomed to afrociate and
to live together in one place. Charlemagne founded two arch-
bishoprics and nine bilhoprics in the most considerable towns of
Germany. Aub. Miraei Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. i6. Hit
!ucceffors increased the number of these; and as bilhops fixed
their residence in the chief town of their diocese, and performed
religious functions there, that induced many people to lettle in
them. Ccuring. ibid. § 48 But Henry firnamed the Fowler,
who began his reign, A D. 92o, must be confidered as the great
founder of cities in Germany. The empire was at that time in-
li.iLd by the incu;rions of the Hungarians and other barbarous

people. In order to oppose them, Henry encouraged his subjed ls
to Ietle in cities which he surrounded with walls strengthened
by towers. He enjoined or persuaded a certain proportion of the
nlhility to fix their residence in the towns, and thus rendered the
cendlition of citizens more honourable than it had been for-
nmrlv. Wittikindus Annal. lib i.ap. Conring. § 8z. From this
period the number of cities continued to increase, and they
became more populous and more wealthy Bet cities in'
Germany were fill deflitute of municipal liberty or jurifdidtion.-
Suc'h of them as were situated in the Imperial demesnes were subjeA
to the emperors. Their Comites, Mi/Zli and otherjudges presided in
them and difpenrcd jultice. Towns lituated on the efate of a baron,
,were part of his fief, and he or his officers exercised a similar jurif-
diclion in them. Conring. ibid. § 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur. Germ.-
lib. i.§ 104. The Germans borrowed the institution of communities
from the Italians. Knipfchildius Tractitus Politico. Hiltor. Jurid.
de Civitatum ImperialiumJuribus, vol i.lib.i.cap.s.No. 23. Fre-
derick Barbarossa was the firfi emperor who, from the fame poli-
tical consideration that influenced Lotis le Gros, multipliedcom-
m:nltlics in order to abridge the power of the nobles Pfeffel
Abrege de l'Hiftoire & du Droit Pblique d'Allemagne, 4t0. p.
297. From the reign of Henry the Fowler, to the'time when the
German cities acquired full possession of their immunities, various'
circumstances contributed to their increaie. The eftabliflmeint
of lfiloprics (already mentioned) and the building of cathedrals
naturally induced many people to fettle near the chief place of
wolthip. It became the custom to hold councils and courts of
judicature of every kind, ecclesiastical as well as civil, in cities.
In the eleventh century, many slaves were enfranchised, -the
greater part of whom fettled in cities. Several mines were dif-
covrced and wrought in different provinces, which drew toge-
ther siich a concourse of people as gave rife to several cities, and in-
crralcd the number of inhabitants in others. Conring. § sos.
T'ie cities began in the thirteenth century to form leagues for
tixcir mutual defence, and for repressing the disorders occa-
linced by tile priv.ate wars among the barons, as well as by their
cxations. This rendered the condition of the inhabitants ofci-
tics more secure than that of any other order-of men, and allured
mallv to become members of their communities. Conring. § 94.
The, c were inhabitants of three different ranks in the towns of
Gtrininy: the nobles, or familiae; the citizens or liberi; and the
artalns, lwhoo were slaves, or homines proprii. iKnipfthild. lib. ii.
calp. 29. No. ij. Henry V. who began his reigii A. D. Ixo6, en-
fl.liciilc tle flnaves who ,were artilhans or inhabitants in several
towns, and gave them the rank of citizens or liberi. Pfeffel, p.-
2;4. Knipih. lib. ii.c. 29. No. II3, 19. Though the cities
in Gecrmiany did not acquire liberty so early as thole in Prance,
thecy extcnded their privileges much farther. All the imperial
alni free cities, the number of which is considerable, acquired the
full right of being immediate; by which term, in the German jurif-
pludcince, we are to underhand, that they are subjel to the eli--

S 3

pire alone, and poflefs within their own precincs all the rights of
complete and independent sovereignty. The various privilgts,
of the Imperial cities, the great guardians of the Germanic liber.
ties, are enumerated by Knipfchild. lib. ii. The most important
articles are generally known, and it would be improper to enter
into any dilquifition concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. Seft. I. p. 36. [S].

The Spanilh historians are almost entirely silent concerning the

origin and progress of communities in that kingdom; so that I
cannot fix, with any degree of certainty, the time and manner of
their firfl introduction there. It appears, however, from Mari-
ana, vol. ii. p. 221. fol. Hagsa, 1736, that in the year I359, eigh-
teen cities had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile. From the
a. count, which will be given of their conflitution and pretensions,
Sect. II. ofthis volume, it appears that their privileges and form
cf government were the fame with those of the other feudal
corporations; and this, as well as the perfect similarity of political
institutions and tranfadlions in all the feudal kingdoms, may lead
us to conclude that communities were there introduced in the
fame manner, and probably about the fame time, as in the other
i.atrens of Europe. In Aragon, as I ihall have occasion to observe
in a subsequent note, cities seem early to have acquired extenfire
immunities, together with a (hare in the legislature. In the year
1118, the citizens of Saragofla had not only attained political li-
Lerty, but they were declared to be of equal rank with the nobles
cf the second class; and many other immunities, unknown to per.
sons in their rank of life in other parts of Europe, were conferred
upcn them. Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. i. p. 44. In Eng-
land, the efiabliflhment of commrnities or corporations was
pofttrior to the cenqueft. The practice was borrowed from
'rance. ar.d !T:e privileges granted by the crown were perfedily
fimlar to rhofe which I have enumerated, but as this part ofhif-
tcry is sw!l known to mofi of my readers, 1 ihall, without enter-
ingS ir;o any critical or minute difcuflion, refer them to authors
-- ho ha v fully illustrated this interefling point in the Englilh hi-
:ovr. Bradv's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox Firma Burgi, cap.
i. if'. ix. Htume's History of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii.
It is rot irprdcable that some of the towns in England were for-
ined Int.o crporations under the Saxon kings, and that the char-
ters zranted by the kings of the Norman race were not charters
of enfrjnh;hiemtent from a state of slavery, but a confirmation of
priv;:eges whii h they already enjoyed. See Lord Lyttelton's
ILI;cr'c of Htrrv 11 vol. ii p. 317. The Englilh cities, however,
were very incr.niderable in the twelfth century. A dear proof
of this occurs in the hifiory to which I last referred Fitzftephen,
a ccnterr.purary author, gives a description of the city of London

.n the rtiFr: of Henry 11. and the terms in which he speaks of its
trade, isi. M ealth, and the splendour of its inhabitants, would fug.
grft r.o inadequate idea of its state at present, when it is the great-
et and r.of opulent city of Europe. But all ideas of grandeur
ad magnificence are merely comparative; and every description

of them in general terms is very apt to deceive. It appears from
Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London, who flourished in the fame
rIign, and who had good opportunity of being well informed,
that this city of which Fitsftephen gives such a pompous account,
contained no more than forty thousand inhabitants. Ibid. 315.
1i6. The other cities were [mall in proportion, and were not in
a condition to extort any extensive privileges. That the confti-
tltion of the boroughs in Scotland, in many circumstances, relem-
t!ed that of the towns in France and England, is manifest from the
Leges Burgorum, annexed to the Regiam Majeflatum.

NOTE XIX. SeR. . p. 40. [T].

Soon after the introduction of the third estate into the national
council, the spirit of liberty which that excited in France began to
produce conspicuous effecs. In leveral provinces of France the no-
bility and communities formed associations, whereby they bound
thenirelves to defend their rights and privileges againfl the formi-
d!able and arbitrary proceedings of the king. The Count de Bou-
lainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of these associations, dated
in the year x.314, twelve years after the admission of the deputies
front towns into the States General. Hifloire de l'ancien Gou-
vernement de la France, tom. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which
the people aflerted and prepared to maintain their rights, obliged
their sovereigns to reCpeC them. Six years after this afiociation
Philip the Long issued a writ of summons to the community of
Narbonne, in the following terms: " Philip, by the grace, &c.
to our well-beloved, &c. " As we desire with all our heart, and
above all other things, to govern our kingdom and people in
peace and tranquillity, by the help of God; and to reform our
laid kingdom in so far as it ltands in need thereof, for the public
good, and for the benefit of our fuibje&ts, who in times past have
been aggrieved and oppressed in divers manners by the malice of
sundry perlbns, as we have learned by common report, as well
as by the information of good men worthy of credit, and we hav-
ing determined in-our counsel which we have called to meet in
our good city, &c. to give redress to the utmost of our power,
by all ways and means possible, according to reason and justice,
ntd willing that this should be done with solemnity and delibera-
tion by the advice of the prelates, barons, and good towns of our
rream, and particularly of you, and that it flould be tranfad&ed
agreeably to the will of God, and for the good of our people,
therefore we command," &c. Mably, Obfervat. ii. App. p. 386.
1 shall allow these to be only the formal words of a public and legal
fiyle; but the ideas are singular, and much more liberal and en-
arged than one could expect in that age. A popular monarch of
Great Britain could hardly address himfelfto parliament, in terms
more favourable to public liberty. There occurs in the hiflory of
France a striking instance of the progress which the principles of
liberty had made in that kingdom, and of the influence which
the deputies of towns had acquired in the States General. Dur-
ing the calamities in which the war with England, and the cap-
tivity of King John, had involved France, the States General

made a bold effort to extend their own privileges andjurifdltion.
The regulations eftablifned by the States, held A. D. 1355, con.
cerning the mode of levying taxes, the administration of which
they vested not in the crown, but in commissioners appointed by
the States; concerning the coining of money; concerning the re.
dress of the grievance of purveyance; concerning the regular ad.
ministration of juflice; are much more suitable to the genius of
a republican government than that of a feudal monarchy. lhi
curious statute is published, Ordon. t. iii. p. 19. Such as have
not an opportunity to consult that large collekion, will find an
abridgen rnt of it in Hist. de France par Villaret, tom. ix. p. 130.
or in Hifloire de Boulainv. tom. ii. 2r3. The French historians
represent the bishop of Laon, and Marcel provost of the met.
chants of Paris, who had the chief direction of this assembly, as fe
ditious tribunes, violent, intercfled, ambitious, and aiming at in.
novatiens subversive of the constitution and government of their
country. That may have been the cafe, but these men poffiffed
the confidence of the people; and the measures which they pro.
posed as the most popular and acceptable, as well as molt likely
to increase their own influence, plainly prove that the spirit of li-
berty had spread wonderfuUly, and that the ideas which then pre-
vailed in France concerning government were extremely liberal,
The States General held at Paris, A. D. 1355, consisted of about
-eight hundred members, and above one half of these were depu-
ties from towns. ML Secoufe Pross. a Ordon. tom. iii. p. 48.
It appears that in all the different assemblies of the States, held
during the reign of John, the representatives of towns had great
influence, and in every refpe& the third State was confidered as
co-ordinate and equal to either bs the other two. Ibid. pallim.
These spirited efforts were made in France long before the house
of Coirmons in England acquired any considerable influence in
the legislature. As the feudal system was carried to its utmoll
height in France sooner than in England, so it began to decline
sooner in the former than in the latter kingdom. In England, al
most all attempts to establish or to extend the liberty of the people
have been successful; in France they have proved unfortunate.
What were the accidental events, or political causes, which occa.
Cioned tis diference, it is not my prelint business to enquire.

NOTE XX. Set. I. p. 41. [U].

In a former Note, No. VIII. I have enquired into the condi.

tion of that part of the people which was employed in agriculture,
and have reprcfented the various hardflups and calamities of their
situation. When charters of liberty or manumission were granted
to such persons, they contained four conctffions corresponding
to the four capital grievances to which men in a fate of servitude
are subjet. x. The right of disposing of their persons by sale or
grant was relinquilhed. a. Power was given to them of convey-
ing their property and effects by will or any other legal deed. Or
if they happened to die inteflate, it was provided that their proper-
ty Ihould go to their lawful heirs in the fame manner as the plr

perty of other persons. 3. The services and taxes which they ow-
td to their superior or liege lord which were formerly arbitrary
and iinpofed at pleasure, are precisely ascertained. 4. They are
allowed the privilege of marrying according to their own inclina-
tion; formerly they c( .ld contrac no marriage without their
lord's permission, and with no person but one of his slaves. All
thcl'e particulars are found united in the charter granted Habita-
torbus Montis Britonis, A. D. 1376. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
p. 81. Many circumltances concurred with those which I have
mentioned in the text procuring them deliverance from that
wretched state. The gentle spirit of the Chriflian religion; the
doarines which it teaches, concerning the original equality of
mankind; its tenets with refpet to the divine government, and
the impartial eye with which the Almighty regards men of every
condition, and admits them to a participation of his benefits, are
all inconsistent with servitude. But in this, as in many other inftan-
ces, considerations of interest, and the maxims of false policy, led
men to a condudt inconsistent with their principles. They were
so fenfble, however, of this inconsistency, that to set their fellow
Chriltians at liberty from servitude was deemed an at of piety
l]ighly meritorious and acceptable to lieaven. The humane spirit
of the Clriftian religion struggled long with the maxims and
manners of the world, and contributed more than any other cir-
cumltance to introduce the pra6tice ofmanumifion. When pope
Gregory the Great, who flourished toward the end of the sixth
century, granted liberty to some of his slaves, he gives this reason
for it, " Cur Redemptor noiter, totius conditor naturz, ad hoc
propitiatus humanam carnem voluerit affumere, ut divinitatia fuas
gratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi) vinculo, prifiine nos
reftitueret libertati; falubriter agitur, si homines, quos ab initio
liberos natura protulit, & jus gentium jugo fubftituit fervitutis, in
ea, qua nati fuerant, manumittentis beneficio, libertati reddantur."
Gregor. Magn. ap. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. i. § 3. Several laws or
charters founded on realbns similar to this, are produced by the
fame author. Accordingly, a great part of the charters of manu-
mifIion, previous to the reign of Louis X. are granted pro amore
Dei, pro remedlio anima, & pro merccde animae. Murat. Antiq.
Ital. vol. i. p. 849, 8o. Du Cange, voc. MAanumiio. The for-
mality of manumission was executed in a church, as a religious
solemnity. The person to be set free was led round the great al-
tar with a torch in his hand, he took hold of the horns of the al-
tar, and there the solemn words conferring liberty were pronoun-
ced. Du Cange, ib vol iv p. 467.

1 ihall tranlcribe a part of a charter of manumiflion granted,
A.D. 1056; both as it contains a full account of the ceremonies
used in this form of manumission, and as a specimen of the imper-
sect knowledge of the Latin tongue in that barbarous age. It is
granted by W illa the widow of Hugo the Duke and Marquis, in
tavour of :lariza one of her slaves. ' Et ideo nos Domino \Wille
indite conmetifie-libera et ablolvo te Cleriza filia Ubcrto-pro
timore oinnipotentis Dei, & re.i.edio luminarie anime bone me-
niurie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo glriofflifimo, ut quan-

do illum Dominus de hac vita migrare, juflerit, pars iniqua noa
abeat poteftatem ullarn, fed anguelus Domini noftri Jesu Chrifi
colocare dignitur illum inter fan&os dileclos suos; & beatut
Petrus princips apofolorum, qui hahed poteftatem omnium a.
nimarum ligandi et abfolvendi, ut ipfi 'abfolvat animae ejus de
peecatis fni, & aperiad ilium janua paradifi; pro eadem vero ra.
tioni, in mano mite te Benzo prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia
fan&i Bartholomei apoftoli; traad de tribus vicibus circaaltare
ipfius ecclrfiz cum careo apprehenfum in manibus- ruis & mani.
bus fuis; deinde exite ambulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie
fe deviduntur. Statimq; pro remedio luminarie anime bone me.
morie quondam supra fcripto Domini Ugo et ipfi prefbiter Benzo
fecit omnia, et dixit, ecce quatuor vie, ite et ambulate in quacunq;
partem tibi placuerit, tam fie supra fcripta Cleriza, qua nofque
tui heredes, qui ab ac hora in antea nati, vel procreati fuerit u.
triufq; fexus, &c. Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other charter
msight have been feledSd, which, in point of grammar or ftvle,
are in noways superior tothis. Manumiffionwas frequendygrant.
ed on death-bed or by latter-will. As the minds of men are
at that time awakened to fenriments of humanity and piety, these
deeds proceeded from religiousmotives, and weregrantedprordanp
tie anima , in order to obtain acceptance with God. Du Cange u.
bi supra, p. 470. & voc. Servo, -vol. vi. p. 45 I. Another method
f obtaining liberty was by entering into holy orders, or taking
the vow in a monafterv. This was permitted for some rime, but
so many Rlaves escaped, by this means, out of the hands of their
masters, that the praAice was afterwards restrained, and at lat
prohibited by the laws of almost all the nations of Europe. -Mu-
rat. ib. p. 842. Conformably to the fame principles, princes, on
the birth of a son, or upon any other agreeable event, appointed a
certain number of slaves to be enfranchised, as a testimony of
their gratitude to God for that benefit. Marculfi Form. lib. i. cap.
9y. There are several forms of manumiflion published by Mar.
culfus, and all of them are founded on religious considerations-
in order to procure the favour of God, or to obtain the forgive-
aefs of their fins. Lib. ii. c. 13, 33, 34. edit. Bauz. The fame
observation holds with refped to the other collections of Formula.
annexed to Marculfus. As ientiments of religion induced some
to grant liberty to their fellow Christians who groaned under the
yoke of iervitude'; so mistaken ideas concerning devotion led o-
thers to relinquish their liberty. When a person conceived an
extraordinary rcfpe&t for the faint who was the patron of any
church or monafierr in which he was accustomed to attend reli-
gious worship, it was not unusual among men poffiffed with an
excess of luperftitous reverence, to give up thelnielves and their
poflerity to be the slaves of the faint. Mabillon de Re Diplomat.
tib. vi. 631. The obili or voiuntarv flacs-of churches or mon-
aflerics -ere very numerous, and ma} be divided into three dif-
ferent classis. The first were furh as put th mltlves and effess
under the proteftion of a particular church or monastery, bind-
ing thcufelves to defend its privileges and property againfl every

RggrefTor. These were prompted to do so not merely by devotion,
but in order to obtain that security which arose from the protection
of thechurch. They were rather vasals than slaves, and sometimes
perons of noble hirthfoundit prudent tofecure theprotection ofthe
church in this manner. Perfonsof the second clars bound themselves
to pay an annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates to a church or
mnonaftery. Besides this, theyfometimes engaged to perform certain
services. They were called cenfuales. The last class consisted of
such as adiually renounced their liberty, and became slaves in the
ftridt and proper sense of the word. These were called mi.ij/eria-
I,,, and enslaved their bodies, as some of their charters bear, that
they might procure the liberty of their fouls. Potgielcerus de fla-
tu iervorum, lib. i. cap. i. § 6, 7. How zealous the clergy were
to encourage the opinions which led to this practice, will appear
from a clause in a charter by which one gives up himclf as a save
to a monastery. " Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate generofius
extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium, scilicet quod terrena nobi-
litas multos plerumq; vitiorum servos facit, fervitus vero Chrifti
nobiles virtutibus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus vitia
comparaverit, claret pro certo eum efie generofiorem, qui fe Dei
Servitio przebuerit proniorem. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelligens,
&c." Another charter is expressed in the following words: "E-
ligens magis effe fervus Dei quam libertus fCeculi, firmiter cre-
dens & fciens, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft, fummaque ingenui-
tas fit in qua fervitus comparahatur Chrifti, &c. Du Cange, voc,
Oliat.s, vol. iv. p. z186, ig87. Great, however, as the power of
religion was, it does not appear, that the enfranchisement of
llaves was a frequent practice while the feudal system preserved
its vigour. On the contrary, there were laws which set bounds
to it as detrimental to society. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. a. § 6. The
inferior order of men owed the recovery of their liberty to the
decline of that ariftocratical policy, which lodged the most exten-
five power in the hands of a few members of the society, and de-
pressed all the reft. When Louis X. iflued his ordonnance, several
/laves had been so long accustomed to servitude, and their minds
were so much debased by that unhappy situation, that they re-
fused to accept of the liberty which was offered them. D'Ach.
Spicel. vol. xi. p. 387. Long after the reign of Louis X. several
of the French nobility continued to aflert their ancient dominion
over their saves. It appears from an ordonnance of the famous
Bertrand de Guefchlin Constable of France, that the cuflom of
enfranchising them was confidered as a pernicious innovation.
Morice Mem. pour fervir des preuves a l'Hit. de Bret. tom. ii. p.
ico. In some instances, when the predial slaves were declared
to be freemen, they were till bound to perform certain services
to their ancient masters; and were kept in a Rate different from
other subjects, being reftridled either from purchasing land, or be-
coming members of a community within the precints of the ma-
nor to which they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand. Tbe-
faur. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, however, seems not to have
been common.-There is no general law for the manumifliou of

aves in the Statute-book of England, similar to that which hat
been quoted from the Ordonnances of the kings of France. Tho'
the genius of the English constitution seems earls to have favour-
ed personal liberty, personal servitude, nevertheless, continued
long in England in some particular places. In the year 1514, we
find a charter of Henry VIII. enfranchising two slaves belonging
to one of his manors. Rym. Feeder. vol. xiii. p 470. As late as
the year 15 74, there is a commission from Queen Elizabeth with
rTpeft to the mannmiffion of certain bondmen belonging to her.
Rymer, in Obfervat. on the Statutes, &c. p. aS1.

NOTE XXI. Sed I. p. 47. [X].

There is no custom in the middle ages more singular than that

of private war. It is a right of To great importance, and prevail.
ed so universally, that the regulations concerning it occupy a con-
fiderable place in the fvflem of laws during the middle ages. M.
de Montesquieu, who has unravelled so many intricate points in
feudal jurisprudence, and thrown light on so many customs for-
merly obscure and unintelligible, was not led by his fubje& to con-
fider this. I hall therefore give a more minute account of the cuf.
toms and regulations which direled a practice so contrary to the
present ideas of civilized nations concerning government and or-
der. 1. Among the ancient Germans, as well as other nations in
a similar slate of ociety, the right of avenging injuries was a pri.
rate and personal right cxercifed by force of arms, without any re-
ference to an umpire, or any appeal to a magistrate for decision.
The clearft proofs of this were produced, Note VI.--. This
pracice fubfifled among the barbarous nations after their fettle-
ment in the provinces of the empire which they conquered; and
as the cauSes of diffen6ion among them multiplied, their family
feuds and private wars became more frequent. Proofs of this oe-
cur in their early historians. Greg. Turon. Hill. lb. vii. c. 2. lib.
viii. c. i8. lib. x. c. 27. and likewise in the codes of their laws. It
was not only allowable for the relationsto avenge the injuries of
their family, but it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque hereditas terre perve-
nerit, ad illum veflis bellica id eft lorica & ultio proximi, et folatio
leudis, debet pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Saliq. tit.
63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. § lo.-3. None but gentlemen,
or persons of noble birth, had the right of private war. All dif-
putes between slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and free
men of inferior condition, were decided in the courts of justice.
All disputes between gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were
terminated in the fame manner. The right of private war fuppof-
ed nobility of birth, and equality of rank in both the contending
parties. Beaumanoir Costumes de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon.
des Rois de France, tom. ii. 395. § xvii. o08 § xv. &c. The dij
nified ecclefiafti-s likewise claimed and exercised the right of pri-
vate war; but as it was not altogether decent for them to prose-
cute quarrels in person, ad.scai or vidames were chosen by the fe
veral monatrries and bilhopric. These were commonly menof

high rank and reputation, who became the protectors of the ch urch-
es and convents by which they were elected; espoused their quar-
rels, and fbught their battles; armis omnia quae erant ecclesia vi-
riliter defendebant, et vigilanter protegebant. Brullel Usage des
Fiefs, tonm . .

p. 144. Du Cange, voc. AJdvoatus. On many oc-

cafions, the martial ideas to which ecclesiastics of noble birth were
accustomed, made them forget the pacific spirit of their profeflion,
and led them into the field in perlon at the head of their vassals,
4 flamma, ferro, cede, possessiones ecclefiarum pralati defende-
bant." Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange, ib. p. I79.-4. It was not
every injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make war
upon his adversary. Atrocious adts of violence, insults and as-
fronts publicly committed, were legal and permitted motives for
taking arms against the authors of them. Such crimes as are now
puniled capitally in civilized nations, at that time jutifled private
hostilities. Beauman. ch. lix. Du Cange Dissert. xxix. fur Join-
ville, p. 331. But though the avenging of injuries was the only
motive that could legally authorise a private war, yet disputes
concerning civil property often gave rife to hostilities, and were
terminated by the sword. Du Cange Diflert. p. 332.-5. All per-
sons present when any quarrel arose, or any adt of violence was
committed, were included in the war which it occasioned; for it
was luppofed to be impofible for any man in such a situation to
remain neuter, without taking fide with one or other of the con-
tending parties. Beauman. p. 3oo.-6. All the kindred of tha
two principals in the war were included in it, and obliged to e-
Spoule the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were connect-
ed. Du Cange, ib. 331. This was founded on the maxim of the
ancient Germans, fulcipere tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propin-
qui, quam amicitias, neceffe eft;" a maxim natural to all rude na-
tions, among which the form of society, and political union,
firengthen flich a entiment. This obligation was enforced by le-
gal authority. If a person refused to take part in the quarrel of
is kinsman, and to aid him against his adversary, he was deemed
to have renounced all the rights and privileges of kindredihip, and
became incapable of succeeding to any of his relations, or of de-
riving any benefit from any civil right or property belonging to
them. Du Cange Dissert. p. 333. The method of ascertaining
the degree of affinity which obliged a person to take part in the
quarrel of a kinsman, was curious. While the church prohibited
the marriage of persons within the seventh degree of affinity, the
vengeance of private war extended as far as this absurd prohibi-
tion, and all who had such a remote connection with any of the
principals, were involved in the calamities of war. But when the
church relaxed somewhat of its rigour, and did not extend its pro-
hibition of marrying beyond the fourth degree of affinity, the fame
reftricion took place in the condu& of private war. Beauman.
303. Du Cange Dissert. 333.-. A private war could not be car-
ried on between two full brothers, because both have the fame
common kindred, and consequently neither had any persons hound
to Itand by him agains the other in the contest; but two brothers
Vol. I. T

saves in the Statute-book of England, similar to that which hal
been quoted from the Ordonnances of the kings of France. Tho'
the genius of the English constitution seems early to have favour-
td personal liberty, personal servitude, nevertheless, continued
long in England in some particular places. In the year 1514, we
find a charter of Henry VIII. enfranchising two slaves belonging
to one of his manors. Rym. Feeder, vol. xiii. p 470. As late as
the year 1574, there is a commission from Queen Elizabeth with
refpet to the manumission of certain bondmen belonging to her.
Rymer, in Obfervat. on the Statutes, &c. p. 151.

NOTE XXI. Set. I. p. 47. [X].

There is no cuflom in the middle ages more singular than that

of private war. It is a right of To great importance, and prevail-
ed so universally, that the regulations concerning it occupy a con-
fiderable place in the fyfiem of laws during the middle ages. M.
de Montesquieu, who has unravelled so many intricate points in
feudal jurisprudence, and thrown light on so many customs for-
merly obscure and unintelligible, was not led by his iubjec to con-
fider this. I shall therefore give a more minute account of the cuf-
toms and regulations which direced a praetice so contrary to the
present ideas of civilized nations concerning government and or-
der. I. Among the ancient Germans, as well as other nations in
a similar fate of ociety, the right of avenging injuries was a pri-
rate and personal right exercised by force of arms, without any re-
ference to an umpire, or any appeal to a magistrate for decision.
The clearest proofs of this were produced, Note VI.--. This
pracice fubfilted among the barbarous nations after their fettle-
ment in the provinces of the empire which they conquered; and
as the caules of dissension among them multiplied, their family
feuds and private wars became more frequent. Proofs of this oc-
cur in their early historians. Greg. Turon. Hist. lib. vii. c. a. lib.
,iii. c. 18. lib. Y. c. 17. and likewise in the codes of their laws. It
was not only allowable for the relations to avenge the injuries of
their family, but it was incumbent on them. Thus by the laws
of the Angli and Werini, ad quemcunque hereditas terra perve-
nerit, ad illum veilis bellica id eft lorica & ultio proximi, et folatio
leudis, debet pertinere, tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Saliq. tit.
63. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14. § lo.-3. None but gentlemen,
or persons of noble birth, had the right of private war. All dif-
putes between slaves, villani, the inhabitants of towns, and free
men of inferior condition, were decided in the courts of justice.
All disputes between gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were
terminated in the fame manner. The right of private war luppof-
ed nobility of birth, and equality of rank in both the contending
parties. Beaumanoir Costumes de Beauv. ch. lix. p. 3oo. Ordon.
des Rois de France, tom. ii. 395. § xvii. 508- § xv. &c. The dig-
nified ecclesiastics likewise claimed and exercised the right of pri-
vate war; but as it was not altogether decent for them to prose-
cute quarrels in person, advocati or vidame# were clofen by the fe-
veral monafttries and bilhoprics. These were commonly men of

high rank and reputation, who became the protectors of the church-
es and convents by which they were elected; espoused their quar-
rels, and fought their battles; armis omnia que erant ecclefie vi-
riliter defendebant, et vigilanter protegebant. Bruffel Usage des
Fiefs, ton. i. p. 144. Du Cange, voc. AJvoratus. On many oc-
cafions, the martial ideas to which ecclesiastics of noble birth were
accustomed, made them forget the pacific spirit of their profeflion,
and led them into the field in perlon at the head of their vafrals,
"iflamma, ferro, crde, poffefiones ecclefiarum praelati defende-
bant." Guido Abbas ap. Du Cange, ib. p. I79.-4. It was not
every injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make war
upon his adversary. Atrocious acds of violence, insults and as-
fronts publicly committed, were legal and permitted motives for
taking arms against the authors of them. Such crimes as are now
puniflled capitally in civilized nations, at that time juliflied private
hostilities. Beauman. ch. lix. Du Cange Dissert. xxix. fur Join-
ville, p. 331. But though the avenging of injuries was the only
motive that could legally authorise a private war, yet disputes
concerning civil property often gave rife to hostilities, and were
terminated by the sword. Du Cange Dissert. p. 332.-5. All per-
sons present when any quarrel arose, or any a& of violence was
committed, were included in the war which it occasioned; for it
was luppofed to be impossible for any man in such a situation to
remain neuter, without taking fide with one or other of the con-
tending parties. Beauman. p. 30o.-6. All the kindred of the
two principals in the war were included in it, and obliged to e-
fpoule the quarrel of the chieftain with whom they were connect-
ed. Du Cange, ib. 332. This was founded on the maxim of the
ancient Germans, fulcipere tam inimicitias feu patris, feu propin-
qui, quam amicitias, neceffe eft;" a maxim natural to all rude na-
tions, among which the form of society, and political union,
flrengthen fich a sentiment. This obligation was enforced by le-
gal authority. If a person refused to take part in the quarrel of
his kinsman, and to aid him against his adverlary, he was deemed
to have renounced all the rights and privileges of kindredfhip, and
became incapable of succeeding to any of his relations, or of de-
riving any benefit from any civil right or property belonging to
them. Du Cange Dissert. p. 333. The method of afeertaining
the degree of affinity which obliged a person to take part in the
quarrel of a kinfnian, was curious. While the church prohibited
the marriage of persons within the seventh degree of affinity, the
vengeance of private war extended as far as this absurd prohibi-
tion, and all who had such a remote conne6lion with any of the
principals, were involved in the calamities of war. But when the
church relaxed Ibmewhat of its rigour, and did not extend its pro-
hibition of marrying beyond the fourth degree of affinity, the fame
restriCtion took place in the condudt of private war. Beauman.
303. Du Cange Dissert. 333.-7. A private war could not be car-
ried on between two full brothers, because both have the fame
common kindred, and consequently neither had any persons hound
to fland by him against the other in the contest; but two brothers

Vol. I. T

of the half blood might wage war, because each of them has a di-
Iin&t kindred. Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vassals of each princi.
pa in any private war were involved in the contelt, because by
the feudal .maxims they were bound to take arms in defence of
the chieftain of whom they held, and to assist him in every quar-
rel. As loon, therefore, as feudal tenures were introduced, and
thIs artifiial connection was eftabliled between vaiTals and the
baron of whom they held, vaiTals cane to be confidered as in the
fame slate wi:h relations. Beaunian. 303.-9. Private wars were
very frequent for several centuries. Nothing contributed more to
i:creafe those disorders in government, or to encourage such fero-
city of manners as reduced the nations of Europe to that wretch.
ed slate which diftincuifhed the period of hiflory which I am re.
viewing. Nothing was such an obitacle to the introduction of a
regular adminifration of juflice. Nothing could more effectually
discourage induftr-, or retard the progress and cultivation of the
arts of peace. Priv _te wars were carried on with all the deftruc-
tire rage which is to be dreaded from violent resentment when

rared with force, and authorised by law. It appears from the

fiatutes prohibiting er ref:raining the exercise of private hostilities,
that the invasion of the mos bat barous enemy could not be more
lfe!iting to a country, or more fatal to its inhabitants, than those
intertine wars. Ordotl tom. i. .

to.

i .

. to. p. 39, 408, 507,

&c. The contemporarv historians describe the excesses comnlit-
ted in prosecution of t.cfe quarrels in fach terms as excite aftoni'h-
ment and horror. I {hall mention only one passage from the hi-
fiory of the Holy War, by Guibert Abbot of Nogent: '" Erat eo
tempore maximis ad invicem hoftilitatibus, totius Francorum reg-
.ni fata turbatio; crebra ubiq; latrocinia, viarum obleffio; audi-
ebantur passim, immo fiehant incendia infinita; nullis prcter so-
la & indomita cupiditate exiftentihus caufis extruebantur praelia;
& ut brevi totum cludam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum fubjace-
bat, nufquam attendendo cujus effet, predae patebat." Gela Dei
per Fraacos, vol. i. p. 48z.

Having thus coliired the chief regulations which custom had

eftablithed concerning the right and exercise of private war, I ihall
enumerate in chronological order, the various expedients employ-
ed to aboliih or restrain this fatal custom. i. The sirss expedient
employed by the civil magistrate, in order to set' some hounds to
the violence of private revenge, was the fixing by law the fine or
composition to be paid for each different crime. The injured per
son was originally the sole judge concerning the nature of the
wrong which he had fufiered, the degree of vengeance which he
Ihould exad, as well as the species of atonement or reparation with
which he might reft fatisfid. Resentment became of course as
implacable as it was fierce. It was often a point of honour not to
forgive, r.or to be reconciled. This made it neceifary to fix those
compositions which make so great a figure in the laws of barba-
rotls nations. The nature of crimes and offences was estimated
by the magistrate, and the fum due to the person offended was as
certaiotd with a minute and often a whimsical accuracy. Rotha

ris, the legislator of the Lombards, who reigned about the middle
of the fevelth century, discovers his intention both in ascertaining
the composition to he paid by the offender, and in increasing its
value; it is, fays he, that the enmity may be extinguished, the
prosecution may cease, and peace may be restored. Leg. Longob.
lib. i tit. 7. § o0.-2. About the beginning of the ninth century,
Charlemagne struck at the root of the evil, and enacted, " That
when any person had been guilty of a crime, or had committed an
outrage, e should immediately submit to the penance which the
church imposed, and offer to pay the composition which the law
treferibed, and if the injured person or his kindred should refuse
to accept of this, and presume to avenge themfclves by force of
arms, their lands and properties should be forfeited." Capitul.
A. D. 802, edit. Baluz. vol. i. 371.-3. But in this, as well as in
thler regulations, the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the
spirit of his age. The ideas of his contemporaries concerning re-
gular government were too imperfect, and their manners too fierce
to fiubmit to this law. Private wars, with all the calamities which
they occasioned, became more frequent than ever after the death
of that great monarch. His fuccefTors were unable to reftra;n
them. 'he church found it necessary to interpose. The molt
early of there interpositions now extant, is towards the end of the
tenth century. In the year 990, several bilhops in the south of
France assembled, and published various regulations, in order to
set some bounds to the violence and frequency of private wars; if
any perrfn within their dioceses ihould venture to transgress, they
ordained that he ihould be excluded from all Christian privileges
during his life, and be denied Chrillian burial after his death. Du
MIont Corps Diplomatique, tom i. p. 41. These, however, were
only partial remedies; and therefore a council was held at Limo-
ges, A. D. 994. The bodies of the faints, according to the custom
of those ages, were carried thither; and by thele fatred relics menr
were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extinguish their animo-
fities, and to swear that they would not for the future violate the
public peace by their private hostilitics. Bouquet Recucil des IIi-
ftor. vol. x. p. 49, 147. Several other councils issued decrees to
the fame effe&t. Du Cange Diflert. 343.-4. But the authority
of councils, how venerable foevep in those ages, was not fuflicicnt
to aholish a custom which flattered the pride of the nobles, and
gratified their favourite patliois. The evil grew lo intolerable,
that it became nectfary to employ fiperniatural means for fitp-
prefing it. A bishop of Aquitaine, A. D. Io32, pretended that
an angel had appeared to him, and brought him a writing front
heaven, enjoining men to ceate from their hostilities, and to be re-
co'ncled to each other. It was during a fealbn of public calllnity
that he published this revelation. The minds of men were dif-
poled to receive pious imprellions, and willing to perform all.
thing in order to avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace
and cessation from hoftliities took place, and continued for f-vctn
years; and a reloiution was formed, that no man should in ti;nme
to colme attack or molest his adverfarich during the ieabon let a-

T 2

part for celebrating the great festivals of the church, or from the
evening of Thursday in each week, to the morning of Monday in
the week ensuing, the intervening days being conlidered as parti.
cularlv holy, our Lord's Passion having happened on one of theft
days, and his Refurrecion on another. A change in the difpofo.
tions of men Ib sudden, and which produced a relblution f) unex.
peced, was confidered as miraculous; and the respite from hofti.
lities which followed upon it, was called Trhe Tru of God. Gla.
her. Rodolphus Hiftor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet, vol. x. p. 59. Thi,
from being a regulation or concert in one kingdom, became a ge-
nera! law in Chriifendom, was confirmed by the authority of feve.
ral popes, and the violators were fubjeated to the penalty of ex-
co.immunicaticn. Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal. lib. i. tit. 34. c.
Du Cange GlcflTar. voc. Trerga. An adt of the council of Toulu-
jes in Roufillon, A. D. 1041, containing all the flipulations reuir.
ed by the truce of God, is publifled by Dom de Vic and Dom
Vaiferte, Hilt de Languedoc, tom ii. Preuves, p. 206. A ceflition
from hoftil.tics during three complete days in every week, allow-
ed luc a considerable space for the passions of the antagonists to
ccol, ard for the people to enjoy a respite from the calamities of
war, as well as to take measures for their own security, that, if
this truce of God had been exatly observed, it must have gone far
towards putting an end to private wars. This, however, seems
not to Lave been the cafe; the nobles, disregarding the truce, pro-
fecuted their quarrels without interruption as formerly. Qa ni-
.nirurn tempeitate, univerfae provincim adeo devaftationis continua
importunitate inquietantur, ut ne ipfa, pro obfervatione divine
pacis, protefta facramentaculodiantur. Abbas Ufpergenfis, apud
Datt de pace imperi. publica, p. 13, No. 35. The violent spirit
of the nohility could not be restrained by any engagements. The
complaints of this were frequent; and bishops, in order to compel
tlem to renew their vows and promises of ceasing from their pri.
vate wars, were obliged to enjoin their clergy to suspend the per-
fornmarce of divine iervice and the rxercife of any religious' funco
tion within the parises of such as were refra&ory and obtflnate.
Hi.l. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves,
p. r 8.-5. The people, eager to obtain relief from their sufferings,
talicd in a second time revelation to their aid. Towards the end
of the twelfth century, a carpenter in Guienne gave out, that Je.
so- Chriit, together with the blessed Virgin, had appeared to him,
atnd having conmmanded him to exhort mankind to peace, had
given iim, as a proof of his mission, an image of the Virgin hold-
ing her son in her arms, with this inscription, Lams of God who taA
eft av tie ,insl /'t ie zror/id give us feace. This low fanatic addref-
fed bh'felf to an ignorant age, prone to credit what was marvel-
lous. He was received as an inspired meffcnger of God. Many
prc:!t-e and barons assembled at Puy, and took an oath, not only
to r:.ake peace u ih all their enemies, but to attack such as refuled
to lay down their arms, and to be reconciled to their enemies
They formed an afrlciation for this purpole, and assumed the ho.
nourable name of di oeiberkla / C od. Robetnu de Monte Mi

clacele, ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Ordon p. 29. But the in'
flhence of this fliperftitious terror or devotion was not of long con-
tinilance.-6. The civil magistrate was obliged to exert his autho-
rity in order to check a custom which threatened the dissolution
of government. Philip Augustus, as some imagine, or St. Louis,
as is more probable, published an ordonnance, A. D. 1245, prohi-
biting any person to commence hostilities against the friends and
vaitil, of his adversary, until forty days after the commission of
iie crime or offence which gave rife to the quarrel; declaring,
that if any man prefilmed to transgress this statute, that he should
lb confidered as guilty of a breach of the public peace, and he
tried and puniIhed by the judge ordinary as a traitor. Ordon.
ton. i. p .6. This was called tle Royul 'Truer, and afforded time
for the violence of resentment to subside, as well as leisure for the
good offices of such as were willing to compore the difference.
The happy effets of this regulation seem to have been confider-
able, if we may judge from the lolicitude of furceeding monarchs
to enforce it.-7. In order to refirain the exercise of private war
11 farther, Philip the Fair, towards the close of the fame century,
A. D. 1x96, publilhed an ordonnance commanding all private ho-
fiilities to cease, while he was engaged in war againfi the enemies
of the state. Ordon. tom i. p. 328, 390. This regulation, which
seems to he almost essential to the existence and preservation of
society, was often renewed by his successors, and being enforced
by the regal authority, proved a considerable check to the deftruc-
tie contests of the nobles. Both these regulations, introduced
first in France, were adopted hy the other nations of Europe.-
8. The evil, however, was so inveterate, that it did not yield to
all these remedies. No sooner was public peace eftablifbed in any
kingdom, than the barons renewed their private hostilities. They
not only struggled to maintain this pernicious right, but to secure
the exercile of it without any restraint. Upon the death of Phi-
lip the Fair, the nobles of different provinces in France formed as-
lociations, and presented remonstrances to his fuccefior, demand-
ing the repeal of several laws, by which he had abridged the pri-
vileges of their order. Among these, the right of private war is
always mentioned as one of the most valuable; and they claim
that the restraint imposed by the truce of God, the royal truce, as
well as that arising from the ordonnance of the year 1296, should
be taken off. In some inflances, the two sons of Philip who
mounted the throne successively, eluded their demands; in others, -
they were obliged to make concessions. Ordon. tom. i. p. 551,

7,i 56i, 573. The ordonnances to which I here refer are of such

length that I cannot insert them, but they are extremely curious
and may be peculiarly inftru&ive to an Lnglifll reader, as they
tlrow considerable light on that period of English hiitory, in
which the attempts to circumscribe the regal prerogative were
carried on, not by the people struggling for liberty, but by the
nobles contending for power. It is not nccfCary t') produce any
evidence of the continuance and frequency of prii ate wars under
the successors of Philip the Fair.-9. A pratcice obmewhat irmi-

T 3

tar to the royil truce was introduced, in order to strengthen and
e,teld it. Bonds of aflurance, or mutual security, were demand.
ed from the parties at variance, by which they obliged themselves
to abstain from all hoflilities, either during a time mentioned in
the bond, or for ever; and became subjec to heavy penalties, if
they violated this obligation. These bonds were sometimes grant.
ed voluntarily, but more frequently exacted by the authority of
the civil magistrate. Upon a petition from the party who felt
himself weakelt, the magift-ate summoned his adversary to appear
in court, and obliged him to give a bond of afiurance. If, after
that, he committed any farther hostilities, he became subjec to
all the penalties of treason. This restraint on private war was
known in the age of St. Louis. Eftabliffemens, liv. i. c. x8. It
was frequent in Bretagne; and what is very remarkable, such
bonds of assurance were given mutually between vassals and the
lord of whom they held. Oliver de Cliffon grants one to the
Duke of BretaFne, his sovereign. Morice Mem. pour fervir de
preuves a l'Hift. de Bret. tom. i. p. 846. ii. p. 371. Many ex-
amples of bonds of aflurance in other provinces of France are col-
lesed by Bruftel, tom. ii. p. 856. The nobles of Burgundy re-
monflrated againit this pracice, and obtained exemption from it
as an encroachment on the privileges of their order. Ordon.
tom. i. p. 558. This mode of security was first introduced in ci-
ties, and the good effects of it having been felt there, was extend-
ed to the nobles. See Note XVI.--o. The calamities occasioned
by private wars became at some times so intolerable, that the no-
bles entered into voluntary associations, binding themselves to re-
ser all matters in dispute, whether concerning civil property, or
points of honour, to the determination of the majority of-the as-
rociates. Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a l'Hit. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. 7 8.-- x. But all there expedients proving ineffeTual,
Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an ordonnance expressly prohibit-
ing private wars on any pretext whatsoever, with power.to the
judge ordinary to compel all persons to comply with this injunc-
tion, and to punish such as liould prove refratory or difo-
bedient, by imprisoning their persons, seizing their goods, and
appointing the officers of juftlce, Mageur:n t Gafteur:, to live at
fre quarters on their eflate. If those who were disobedient to
this edid could not be personally arrefied, he appointed their
fri nds and vafials to be seized, and detained until they gave sure.
ty' or keeping the peace; and he abolished all laws, customs, or
pri, ileges which might be pleaded in opposition to this ordonnance
Or( on. tom. x. p. X38. How flow is the progrels of reafbn and
of cvil order! Regulations which to us appear so equitable, obvi.
cus, and simple, required the efforts of civil and ecclesiastical au
thority, during several centuries, to introduce and establish them
Evenr poflerior to this period, Louis XI. was obliged to abolifi
priva-e wars in Dauphline, by a particular edit, A. D. 1451
L) Cange Dissert. p. 348.

Tl 's note would swell to a disproportionate bulk, if I Ihoul
atlempt to inquire with the fame minute attention into the pro

refs of this pernicious custom in the other countries of Europe.
In England, the ideas of the Saxons concerning personal revenge,
the right of private wars, and the composition due to the party of-
fended, seem to have been much the fame with those which pre-
vailed on the Continent; The law of Ina de iindicantibui, in the
eighth century, Lamb p. 3. those of Edmund in the tenth cen-
tury, de homicidio Lamb. p. 72, & de inimicitiii, p. 76. and those of
Edward the Confessor, in the eleventh century, de temporibusr
dihus pair, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. Iz6. are perfedcly similar
to the ordonnances of the French kings their contemporaries. The
laws of Edward, de pace rei,, are still more explicit than those of
the French monarchs, and, by several provisions in them, discover
that a more perfect police was eftablilhed in England at that pe-
riod. Lambard, p. zzS. fol. verf. Even after the conquest, pri-
vate wars, and the regulations for preventing them, were not al-
together unknown, as appears from Madox Formulare Anglica-
num, No. CXLV. and from the extracts from Domesday Book,
published by Gale Scriptores Hist. Britan. p. 759, 777. The well
known claure in the form of an Englilh indictment, which, as an
aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions his having aflaulted
a person, who was in the peace of God and of the King, seems to
be borrowed from the Treuga or Pax Dei, and the Pax Regis,
which I have explained. But after the conquest, the mention of
private wars among the nobility occurs more rarely in the Eng-
lith history, than in that of any other European nation, and no
laws concerning them are to be found in the body of their fta-
tutes. Such a change in their own manners, and such a varia-
tion from those of their neighbours, is remarkable. Is it to be a-
fcribed to the extraordinary power that William the Norman ac-
quired by right of conquest, and transmitted to his successors,
which rendered the execution of justice more vigorous and deci-
five, and the jurifdiflion of the king's court more extensive than
under the monarchs on the Continent? Or, was it owing to the
settlement of the Normans in England, who having never adopt-
ed the practice of private war in their own country, abolilhed it
in the kingdom which they conquered? It is asserted in an ordon-
nance of John king of France, that in all times past, persons of
every tank in Normandy have been prohibited to wage private
war, and the practice has been deemed unlawful. ' Ordon. tom.
ii. p. 407. If this fact were certain, it would go far towards ex-
plaining the peculiarity which I have mentioned. But as there
are some English Acts of Parliament, which, according to the re-
mark of the learned author of the ObfervationJ on bhe Statutes, cbiefly
tie more ancient, recite falsehoods, it may be added, that this is not
peculiar to the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the pofi-
tive assertion contained in this public law of France, there is good
reason for confidering it as a statute which recites a falsehood.
This, however, is not the place for discussing that point. It is
an inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of an Englilh antiquary.

In CaRile, the pernicious practice of private war prevailed, and
was authorized by the culloms and law of the kingdom. Leges

Tauri, tit. 76. cum commentario Anton. Gomezii, p. Sr. As
the Caflilian nobles were no less turbulent than powerful, their
quarrels and hostilities involved their country in many calamities.
Innumerable proofs of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the
right of private revenge was likewise authorised by law; exercif-
ed in its full extent, and accompanied with the fame unhappy
confequencts. Hieron. Blanca Comment. de Rebus Arag. apA
Schotii Hifpan. iluftrat. vol. iii. p. 733. Lex Jacobi f. A. D. x47.
Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon. lib. ix. p. I8z. Se-
veral confederacies between the kings of Aragon and their nobles,
for the refioring of peace, foWuded on the truce of God, are fill
extant. Petr. de Marca, MaMa five Limes Hispanic. App. i3oj,
1388, 14z8. As early as the year i165, we find a combination
of the king and court of Aragon, in order to abolish the right of
private war, and to punish those who presumed to claim that pri.
vilege. Anales de Aragon por. Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the
evil was so inveterate, that as late as A. D. 1519, Charles V. was
obliged to publish a law enforcing all former regulations tending
to suppress this pra&ice. Fueros et Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183.

The Lombards, and other northern nations who fettled in Italy,

introduced the fame maxims concerning the right of revenge in-
to that country, and there were followed by the fame effedts.
As the progress of the evil was perfectly similar to what happened
in France, the expedients employed to check its career, or to ex-
tirpare it finally, refclmbled those which I have enumerated. Mu-
rat. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306, &c.

In Germany, the disorders and calamities occasioned by the

right of private war were greater and more intolerable than in a-
ny other country of Europe. The Imperial authority was so
much fiaken and erfeetbled by the violence of the civil wars ex-
cited by the contests between the popes and the emperors of the
Franconian and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but the
cities acquired almost independent power, and scorned all fubor-
dination and obedience to the laws. The frequency of thefefaidz,
or private wars, is often mentioned in tle German Annals, and
the fatal effects of them are most pathetically described, Datt de
Pace Imper. pub. lib. i. cap. v. No. 30, & passim. The Germans
early adopted the qTreuga Dei, which was first eflablilhed in
France. This, however, proved but a temporary and intffe&u-
al remedy. The dilolucir multiplied so fail, and grew to be so
enormous, that they threatened the dissolution of society, and
compelled the Germans to have recourse to the only remedy of
the evil, viz. an ahfolute prohibition of private wars. The em-
peror William publilhed his edil to this purpose, A. D. 1255,
an hundred and sixty years previous to the ordonnance of
Charles VI. in France. Datt, lib. i. cap. 4. No. 20. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to lecure the observance of it.
This gave rife to a practice in Germany, which conveys to us a
striking idea bo:h of the intolerable calamities occasioned by pri-
vate wars, and of the feeblenels of government during the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries. The cities and nobkls entercd into

alliances and aiabciations, by which they bound themselves
to maintain the public peace, and to make war on such as
should violate it. This was the origin of the league of the Rhines
of Suabia, and of many smaller confederacies diltinguifhed by va-
rious names. The rife, progress, and beneficial effects of thece
aflbciations are traced by Datt, with great accuracy. Whatever
degree of public peace or of regular administration was preserved
in the empire from the beginning of the twelfth century to the
close of the fifteenth, Germany owes to these leagues. During
that period, political order, refped for the laws, together with the
equal adminiltration of justice, made considerable progress in Ger-
many. But the final and perpetual abolition of the right of pri-
vate war was not accomplished until A. D. 1495. The Imperial
authority was by that time more firmly established, the ideas of
men with respect to government and subordination were become
more just. That barbarous and pernicious privilege of waging
war, which the nobles had so long possessed, was declared to be
incompatible with the happiness and exiitence of society. In or-
der to terminate any differences which might arise among the
various members of the Germanic body, the imperial chamber
was instituted with supreme jurifdidion, to judge without appeal
in every question brought before it. That court has subsisted
since that period, forming a very refpedable tribunal, of eflential
importance in the Germanic constitution. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v.
Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hitoire, du Droit, &c. p. 556.

Note XXII. Set. I. ps6. [Y.]

It would be tedious and of little use to enumerate the various
modes of appealing to the justice of God, which superstition in-
troduced during the ages of ignorance. I ihallmention only ones
because we have an account of it in a placitum or trial in the pre-
fence of Charlemagne, from which we may learn the imperfedc
manner in which justice was administered even during his reign.
In the year 775, a contest arose between the bilhop ot Paris and
the abbot of St. Denys, concerning the property of a small abbey.
Each of them exhibited deeds and records, in order to prove the
right to be in them. Instead of trying the authenticity, or confider-
ing the import of thele, the point was referred to the judiciun i suci.
Each produced a person, who during the celebration of masa,
flood before the cross with his arms expanded; and he, whose
reprelentative first became weary, and altered his posture, loll the
caule. The pcrlon employed by the bishop on this occasion had
less strength or less spirit than his adverlary, and the queltion was
decided in the favour of the abbot. Mabillon de Re Diplomat.
lili. vi. p. 498. If a prince so enlightened as Charlemagne coun-
tenanced such an abiurd mode ot decision, it is no wonder that
other monarchs should tolerate it so long. M. de Montesquieu
has treated of the trial by judicial combat at considerable length.
The two talents which diltinguifhed that illufrnous author, in.
dutil y in tracing all the circuxuitances of ancient and obicure in-
itutions, and sagacity in penetrating into the causes and princi-

lt i

which contributed to establish them, are equally confpicuoui

in his ohb!rvations on this fubjct. To these I refer the reader,
as they contain mrofl of the principles by which I have endeavour.
ed to txplain this praAice. De 1'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxviii. It
seems to be lrciah!e from the remarks of M. de Montesquieu, as
well as from the farts produced by Muratori, tom. iii. Dissert.
xxxviii. that appeals to the justice of God by the experiments
with fire and water, &e. were frequent among the people who
fettled in the different provinces of the Roman empire, before
they bad recourse to the judicial combat; and yet the judicial
combat seems to have been the molt ancient mode of terminating
any controverfv among the barbarous nations in their original
settlements. This is evident from Velleius Paterculus, lib. ii. c.
18. who informs us, that all qucftions which were decided a-
mcr.g the Romans b legal trial, were terminated among the
Germans tv arms. The fame thing appears in the ancient laws
and cufloms of the Swedes, quoted by o. 0. Stiernhook de Jure
Sueonum & Guthorum vetulto, 4to, Holmiae 1682, lib. i. c.7.
It is probable that when the various tribes which invaded the em-
pire were converted to Christianity, their ancient cuflom of allow-
ing judicial combats appeared so gJaringly repugnant to the prec
ecpts of religion, that, for some time, it was abolilhed, and by de.
grees, several circumfiances which I have mentioned led them to
rtfume it.

It seems likewise to be probable from a law quoted by Stiern.

hook in the treatise which I have mentioned, that the judicial com-
bat was originally permitted, in order to determine points re-
specing the personal chara&er or reputation of individuals, and
was afterwards extended not only to criminal cafes, but to que.
stions concerning property. The words of the law are, " if any
man lhall fay to another these reproachful words, " you are not

a man equal to other men," or, you have not the heart of a

U man," and the other lhall reply, I am a man as good as you,"
let them meet on the highway. If he who first gave offence ap-
pear, and the perien offended absent himself, let the latter he
deemed a torfe man even than he was called; let him not be ad-
mitted to give etilcnce in judgment either for man or woman,
and let him not have the privilege of making a teflament. If he
who gave the ofTnr e be absent, and only the person offended ap-
pear, let him call uponi the other thrice with a loud voice, and
make a mark upon the earth, and then let him who ahfented him.
felfbe deemed in:armo;s, becau!e he uttered words which he durst
not support. If both lhall appear properly armed, and the perlbn
offended r.all fall in the combat, let a haif compensation be paid
for his death. But if the person who gave the offence /hall fall,
let it be imputed to his own rashness. The petulance of hit
tongtue hath bcn tamil to him. Let him lie in the field without
ary. c(ompcniation being demanded for his death." Lex Upian-
dica, an . .ir. p. 76. Martial people were extrcmely dericate

itizh rctepcc to cv^.- tiing that aficted their reprut.tion as Ibl-
diers. By tlc laws oi the Saiians, if any man called another a

tare, or accused him of having left his ihield in the field of battle,
Ihe was ordained to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4, 6.
By the law of the Lombards, if any one called another arga, i. e.
a good for nothing fellow, he might immediately challenge him
to combat. Leg. Longoh. lib. i. tit v. § I. By the law of the
Salians, if one called another cenitus, a term of reproach equivalent
to arga, he was bound to p.a a very high fine. Tit. xxxii. § z.
Paulus Diaconus relates the violent impression which this reproach-
ful expression made upon one of his countrymen, and the fatal es-
secs with which it was attended. De Geftis Longobard. lib. vi.
c. 24. Thus the ideas concerning the point of honour, which we
Prc apt to confider as a modern refinencnt, as well as the p:ac-
tice of duelling, to which it gave rilt, are derived fiom the notions
of our ancelitrs, while in a itate of society very little improved.

As M. de Monte[quitu's view of this fulmea did not lead him

to conlider every circumitance relative to judicial combats; I shall
mention some particular fads necessary for the illuitration of
what I have laid with refpea to them. A remarkable instance
occurs of the decision of an ahftra& point of law by com-
bht. A quftlion arose in the tenth century, concerning the
rigHt of reprtfrenation, which was not then fixed, though now
universally established in every part of Europe. " It was a
matter of doubt and difptte (faith the historian), whether the sons
of a son ought to be reckoned among the children of the family,
and fuccced equally with their uncles, if their father happened to
dic while their grandfather was alive. An aflmnbly was called to
deliberate on this point, and it was the general opinion 'that it
ought to bereanitted to the examination and decision of judges.
But the emperor following a better course, and desirous of dealing
lionourably with his people and nobles, appointed the matter to
be decided by battle between two champions. He who appear-
td in behalf of the right of children to represent their dcceafcd
father was vi&corious; and it was eltablifhed, by a perpetual de-
tree, that they Ihould hereafter ihare in the inheritance together
with their uncles." Wittikindus Corbienfis, lib. Annal. ap. 1M.
de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxiii. If we can suppose the
caprice of folly to lead men to any action more extravagant than
this of fettling a point in law by combat, it must he of that refer-
ring the truth or falsehood of a religious opinion to he decided
in the fame manner To the disgrace of human reason, it has
b!een capable even of this extravagance. A question was agitated
in Spain in the eleventh century, whether the Mufarabic liturgy
and ritual which had been used in the'churches of Spain, or that
approved of by the fee of Rome, which differed in many particu-
lars fiom the other, contained the form of worihip molt accept-
able to the Deity. The Spaniards contended zealonfly for the ri-
tual of their ancestors. The popes urged them to receive that to
which they had given their infallible fandion. A violent contest
arole. The nobles propoled to decide the controversy by the sword.
The king approved of this method of decision. Two knights in
complete armour entered the lifts. John Ruys de Matanca, the

champion of the Mufarabic liturgy, was vicorious. But the queen
and archbilhop of Toledo, who favoured the other form, infifled
on having the matter Submitted to another trial, and had interest
enough to prevail in a reqneft, inconfiitent with the laws of com.
bat, which being confidered as an appeal to God, the decision
ought to have been acquiesced in as final. A great fire was kind.
led. A copy of each liturgy was cast into the flames. It was a-
greed that the book which food this proof, and remained untouch-
ed, should be received in all the churches of Spain. The Mufara.
bic liturgy triumphed likewise in this trial, and if we may believe
Roderigo de Toledo, remained unhurt by the fire, when the other
was reduced to alhes. The queen and archbishop had power or
art fufEcient to elude this decision also, and the use of the Mufara.
bic form of devotion was permitted only in certain churches. A
determination no less extraordinary than the whole tranfadcion.
Roger de Toledo, quoted by P. Orleans, Hifi. de Revol. d'Ef.
pagne, tom. i. p. 417. Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378.-A
remarkable proof of the general use of trial by combat, and of
the predileeion for that mode of decision, occurs in the laws of
the Lombards. It was a cuflom in the middle ages, that any
pcrfon might signify publicly the law to which he chore to be
fubjeeed; and by the prescriptions of that law he was obliged to
regulate his tranfa&ions, without being bound to comply with
any pracAice authorized by other codes of law. Persons who had
fubjecded themselves to the Roman law, and adhered to the an-
cient jurisprudence, as far as any knowledge of it was retained
in those ages of ignorance, were exempted from paying any re-
card to the forms of proceedings eflablilhed by the laws of the
Burgundians, Lombards, and other barbarous people. But the
emperor Otho, in dired contradiction to this received maxim,
ordained, " That all perons, under whatever law they lived, even
although it were the Roman law, should be bound to conform to
the edicAs concerning the trial by combat." Leg. Longob. lib. ii.
tit. r5. § 38. While the trial by judicial combat fubifiled, proof
by charters, contracts, or other deeds, became ineffectual; and
even this species of written evidence, calculated to render the pro-
ceedings of courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When a
charter or other instrument was produced by one of the parties,
his opponent might challenge it, affirm that it was false and for-
ged, and offer to prove this by combat. Leg. Longob. ib. § 34.
It is true, that among the reasons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on
account of whichjudges might refuse to permit a trial by combat,
one is, " If the point in contest can be clearly proved or ascertain-
ed by other evidence." Coult. de Beauv. ch. 63. p. 123. But
that regulation removed the evil only a single ftep. For the party
who fufpe&ed that a witness was about to depose in a manner un-
favourable to his cause, might accuse him of being suborned, give
him the lie, and challenge him to combat; if the witness was van-
qnilhed in battle, no other evidence could be admitted, and the
party by whom he was summoned to appear loft his cause. Leg.
Baivar. tit. I6.§ . Leg. Burgund.tit. 45. Beauman.ch. 6. p.

315. The reason given for obliging a witneCs to accept of a defi-
ance, and to defend himself by combat, is remarkable, and con-
tains the fame idea which is fill the foundation of what is called
the point of honouri " for it is just, that if any one affirms that
he perfedily knows the truth of any thing, and offers to give oath
upon it, that he /hould not hesitate to maintain the veracity of his
affirmation in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

That the trial by judicial combat was established in every coun-
try of Europe, is a faCdt ell known, and requires no proof. That
this mode of decision was frequent, appears not only from the
codes of ancient laws which established it, but from the carlieft
writers concerning the praCdice of law in the different nations of
Europe. They treat of this cullom at great length; they enume-
rate the regulations concerning it with minute accuracy; and ex-
plain them with much solicitude. It made a capital and extensive
article in jurisprudence. There is not any one fubjeft in their fy-
ftem of law, which Beaumanoir, Defontaines, or the compilers of
the Affifes de Jerusalem, seem to have confidered as of greater im-
portance; and none upon which they have bestowed so much at-
tention. The fame observation will hold with reiped to the ear-
ly authors of other nations. It appears from Madox, that trials
of this kind were so frequent in England, that fines, paid on there
occasions, made no inconsiderable branch of the king's revenue.
Hist. of the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349 A very curious account of a
judicial combat between Mefire Robert de Beaumanoir, and Me-
fire Pierre Tournemine, in presence of the Duke of Brctagne, A.
D. 1385, is published by Morice, Mem. pour fervir de preuves a
l'Hift. de Breragne, tom. ii. p. 498. All the formalities ohferved
in such extraordinary proceedings are there described more minute-
ly than in any ancient monument which I have had an opportuni-
ty of confidering. Tournemine was accused by Beaumanoir of
having murdered his brother. The former was vanquiihed, but
was laved from being hanged upon the spot, by the generous in-
terreffion of his antagonist. A good account of the origin of the
laws concerning judicial combat is published in the history of Pa-
via, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8. in Graev. Thef. Antiquit. Ital.
vol. iiI. 743.

This mode of trial was so acceptable, that ecclesiastics, notwith-

standing the prohibitions of the church, were conitraincd not only
to connive at the pratice, but to authorize it. A remarkable in-
stance of this is produced by Pafquier Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. p.
350. The abbot Wittikindus, whose words I have produced in
this note, confidered the determination of a point in law by com-
bat as the belt and most honourable mode of decision. In the year
98, a judicial combat was fought in the presence of the emperor.
*'he archbishop Aldebert advised him to terminate a contest which
adi arisen between two noblemen of his court, by this mode of
decision. The vanquished combatant, though a person of high
rank, was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epifc. Merib.
(.te Bouquet Recueil des Hill. tom. x. p. i zi. Queflions concern-
ing the property of churches and monasteries were decided by

Vol. 1. U

conmbt. In the year 961, a controversy concerning the churcl
of St. Medard, whether it belonged to the abbey of Beaulieu 01
not, was terminated by judicial combat. Bouquet Recueil de

iift. tom. ix. p. 7:9. Ibid. p. 612, &c. The emperor Henry 1

dcc:ares, that this lai-, authorizing the pracice of judicial combats
was enacted with consent and applaule of many faithful bilhops
Ibid. p. 23 . So remarkably did the martial ideas of those ages
prevail over the genius and maxims of the canon law, which ir
other instances was in the highest credit and authority with eccle.
fiafics. A judicial combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles
V. A. D. Iz22. The combatants fought in the emperor's pre.
fence, and the battle was conducted with all the rites prelcribed by
the ancient laws of chivalry. The whole tranfadion is described
at great length by Pontus Heuterus Rer. Auflriac. lib. viii. c. 17.
p. 2CS.

The lift intanee which occurs in the history of France, of a ju'

dicial combat authorised by the magistrate, was the famous one
bht-ween M. Jarnac and M. de ia Chaiftaignerie, A. D. 1547. A
trial by combat was appointed in England, A.D. 157 t, under the
infpe&ion of the judges in the court of Common Pleas; and tho'
it was not carried to the fame extremity with the former, queen
Elizabeth having interposed her authority, and enjoined the parties
to compound the matter, vet, in order to preserve their honour,
the liLts were maried out, and all the forms previous to the com.
bat were observed with much ceremony. Spelm. Gloss. voc. Cam,

psr, p. IC'. In the year 163r, a judicial combat was appointed

between Donald Lord Rea, and David Ramsay, Efq. by the au-
thoritv of the lord high constable, and earl marthal of England;
but that quarrel likewise terminated without bloodshed, being ac-
commodated by Charles L. Another inflance occurs leven yean
later. Rufiworth in Observations on the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

'OTE XXIII. Se&. I. p. 6i. [Z]

The text contains the great outlines which mark the course of

private and public jurifdiition in the several nations of Europe. I
thall here follow more minutely the various fReps of this progress,
as the matter is curious and important enough to merit this atten-
tion. The payment of a fine by way of fatisfacion to the person
or family injured, was the first device of a rude people, in order to
ch-eck the career of private resentment, and to extinguish thofefai-
dr, or deadly feuds, which were prosecuted among them with the
uimoft violence. This cufiom may be traced back to the ancient
Germans. Tacit. de Mrorib. Germ. c. z2. and prevailed among
other unc;vilized nations. Many examples of this are colleted by
the ingenious and learned author of Historical Law TraAs, vol. i.
p. 41. These fines were alcertained and levied in three different
manners. At first they were fettled by voluntary agreement be-
tween the parties at variance. When their rage began to fubfidet
and they felt the bad efe&ts of their continuing in enmity, they
came to terms of concord, and the fatisfacdion made was called a
eswpV;tiit, implying that it was fixed by mutual coufent. De l'E-

sprit des I,oix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from some of the
more ancient codes of laws, that at the time when these were
comrpiled, matters still remained in that simple state. In certain
chfs, the person who had committed an offence was left exposed
to the resentment of those whom he had injured, until he ihould
recover their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. Ix.
g i. The next mode of levying these fines was by the sentence
of a-biters. An arbiter is called in the Regiam Majeftatem ami-
cabilis compositor, lib. xi. c. 4. § lo. He cou d eltimate the de-
gree of offence with more impartiality than the parties interested,
and determine with greater equity what fatisfation ought to be
deranded. It is difficult to bring an authentic pr.of of a cuflom
previous to the records preserved in any nation of Europe. But
one of the Formula Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth century,
fietms to allude to a tranfation carried on, not by the authority
of a judge, but by the mediation of arbiters chosen by mutual
consent. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor tdfn. iv. p. 566. But as aa
arbiter wanted authority to enforce his decisions, judges were ap-
pointed with compulsive power to oblige both parties to acquicfee
in their decisions. Previous to this last ftep, the expedient ol pay-
ing compofitinns w'as an imperfect remedy againit the. pernicious
efflet. of private resentment. As soon as this important 'hange
was introduced, the magiflrate, putting himself in place of the per-
son injured, ascertained the composition with which he ought to
reft satisfied. Every possible injury that could occur in the inter-
course of civil society was confidered and estimated, and the com-
positions due to the person aggrieved were fixed with lifch minute
attention, as discovers, in most cafes, amazing discernment and
delicacy; in some instances, unaccountable caprice. Betides the
composition payable to the private party, a certain film called a
frtaNms, was paid to the king or fate, as racitus expresses it, or to
the fifcus, in the language of the barbarous laws. Some authors
blending the refined ideas of modern policy wi h their reasonings
concerning ancient tranfacions, have imagined that the Jfedu
was a compensation due to the community, on account of the vio-
lation of the public peace. But it is manifestly nothing more than
the price paid to the magifirate for the protection which he afford-
ed against the violence of resentment. The enacding of this was
a conliderable ftep towards improvement in criminal jurifpru-
dence. In some of the more ancient codes of laws, thej/rea are
ailogether omitted, or Ib seldom mentioned, that it is evident they
were but little known. In the later codes, the cJedum is as precise-
I: specified as the composition. In common cafes it was equal to
the third part of the composition. Capitul. vol. i. p. z. In Ibme
extraordinary cafes, where it was more difficult to protect the
person who had committed violence, the J-ed,, was augmented.
Capitul. vol. i. p. 5I5. These frda made a confidcrabie branch
in the revenues of the barons, and in whatever diftriai territo-
rial jurifdic'ion was granted, the royal judges were prohibited from
le'ying anyyrda. In expiaining the nature of thejredum, I have
followed in a great nlealure the lpinion of l. de MIontefquiieu,

L.','

though I know that several learned antiquaries have taken the
word in a different sense. De l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxx. c. go,
&c. The great object of judges was to compel the one party to
give, and tLe other to accept, the fatisfacdion prescribed. They
mnltiplied regulations to this purpose, and enforced them by
grievous penalties. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 34. Ib. tit. 37.
c i, a. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371. § zz. The person who received
a composition was obliged to cease from all farther hostility, and
to confirm his reconciliation with the adverse party by an oath.
Leg Lon gob. lib. i. tit. 9 § 8. As an additional and more ennrm.

er.nt evidence of reconciliation, he was required to grant a bond
of fecuritv to the person from whom he received a composition,
absolving him from all farther prosecution. Marculfus, and the o
ther colctors of ancient writs, have preserved several different
forms of fich bonds. Marc. lib. xi. § i. Append. § 3.. Form.
Sirmondica, § 39. The Letters of Slanes, known in the law of
Scotland, are pcrfectlv similar to these bonds of security. By the
Letters of Slanes, the heirs and relations of a person who had been
murdered, bound therfelves, in consideration of an ayltsent or
compoGtion paid to them, to forgive, " pass over, and for ever
forget, and in oblivion inter, all rancour, malice, revenge, preju-
dice, grudge, and Tefentment, that they have or may conceive a-
gains[ the aggressor or his posterity, for the crime which he had
committed, and discharge him of all action, civil or criminal, a-
gainfl him or his eflate, for now and ever." System of Stiles by
Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 86-. In the ancient form of Letters of
Sianes, the private party not only forgives and forgets, but par-
dons and grants remission of the crime. This practice, Dallas,
rea!c.ning according to the principles of his own age, confiders as
an er.crcachmrnt or, the rights of sovereignty, as none, fays he,
could pardcn a criminal but the king. Ibid. But, in early and
rude times, the prosecution, the puniflment, and the pardon of
rrim:.a's, were all deeds of the private person who was injured.
iadox has pubhli£ed two writs, one in the reign of Edward I.
the o:thr in the reign of Edward 111. by which private persons
grz:.r a rcleafe or pardon of all trespasses, felonies, robberies, and
i! -rders committed. Formul. Anglican. No. 702, 705. In the

Cl. cf thei'- imtTruments, some regard seems to be paid to the rights

tcf the i '-errign, for the pardon is granted en gva.t qut en a nu IR.
Even as er the authority of the magistrate was interposed in pu-
niir:g crimes, the punilhment of criminals is long confidered
chief. as a gratification to the resentment of the persons who have
been injured. In Persia a murderer is flill delivered to the rela-
tions of the person whom he has slain, who put him to death with
their own hands. If they refuse to accept of a fum of money as a
compensation, the sovereign, absolute as he is, cannot pardon the
rnurdtrer. Voyages de Chardin, iii. p. 41 , edit. 735, 4to. Voy-
ages de Tavernier, liv. v. c. , Io. Among the Arabians, though
one of the first polished people in the Eaf, the fame cuftorm till
subsists. Description de l'Arabie par M. Niebuhr, p. 28. By a
law in the kingdom of Aragon, as late as the year 1564, the pu-

nihment of one condemned to death cannot he mitigated but 1')
conifcnt of the parties who have been injured. Fueros & Obfer-
vancias dcl Reyno de Aragon, p. o04. 6.

If alter all the engagements to cease from enmity which I have

mentioned, any person renewed hostilities, and was guilty of any
violence, either towards the person from whom he had received a
composition, or towards his relations and heirs, this was deemed a
noft heinous crime, and punished with extraordinary rigour. It
was an aft of dirct rebellion against the authority of the magi.
itrate, and was repressed by the interposition of all his power.
Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8. 34. Capit. vol. i.p. 3i. §. 22.
Thus the avenging of injuries was taken out of private hands, a
legal composition was eflablifhed, and peace and amity were re-
tiored, under the infpetion, and by the authority of a judge. It
is evident that at the time when the barbarians fettled in the pro-
vinces of the Roman empire, they had fixed judges established a-
nong them with compulsive authority. Pertons veiled with this
claracter are mentioned by the earliest historians. Du Cange, voc.

;dite. The right of territorial jurifliction was not altogether
a": usurpation of the feudal barons, or an invasion of the preroga-
ntve of the sovereign. There is good reason to believe, that the
powerful leaders, who seized different diftrias of the countries
which they conquered, and ktpt possession of them as alloiial pro-
pcrtv, assumed from the beginning the right of jurifdition, and
exercised it within their own territories. This jurifdi&ion was
uipreme, and extended to all causes. The clearest proofs of this
are produced by M. Bouquet. Le Droit publique de France e-
clairci, &c. tom. i. p. 2o6, &c. The privilege of judging his own
valials, appears to have been originally a right inherent in every
baron who held a fief. As far back as the archieves of nations can
conduct us with any certain' , we find the jurifdition and fief
united. One of the earliest charters to a layman which I have
met with, is that of Ludovicus Pius, A. D. 814. And it contains
the right of territorial jurildiction, in the most express and exter,-
Jive terms. Capi:ul. vol..ii. p. 1405. There are many charters
to churches and monaiteries of a more early date, containing
grants of a similar jurifdiaion, and prohibiting any royal judge
to enter the territories of those churches or monasteries, or to per-
form any adt of judicial authority there. Bouquet Recueil des
Hist. tom. iv. p. 628, 63s, 633, tonl. v. p. 703, 71o, 751, 762.
Muratori has published many very ancient charters containing
the fame immunities. Antiq. Ital. Difrert. lxx. In molt of thele
deeds, the royal judge is prohibited from exacting thefrdda due to
the poffelfor of territorial jurifdicion, which ihews that they con-
flituted a valuable part of the revenue of each fiuperior lord at
that juncture. The expenre of obtaining a lentence in a court of
justice during the middle ages was so conliderable, that this cir-
crmftance alone was sufficient to render men unwilling to decide
ayv contest in judicial form. It appears from a charter in the
thirteenth century, that the baron who had the right of justice,
received the fifth part of the value of every fubjecdt the property

U3

of which was tried and determined in his court. If, after the
commencement of a law-suit, the parties terminated the conteit
in an amicable manner, or by arbitration, they were nevertheless
hound to pay the fifth part of the subject contefied, to the court
before which the suit had been brought. Hist. de Dauphine, Ge.
neve, 1721, tom. i. p. a2. Similar to this is a regulation in the
charter of liberty granted to the town of Friburg, A. D. Izo.
If two of the citizens lhall quarrel, and if one of them shall com.
plain to the superior lord or to his judge, and after commencing
the suit, shall be privately reconciled to his adversary, the judge,
if he does not approve of this reconciliation, may compel him to
go on with his law suit; and all who were present at the reconci.
liation ihall forfeit the favour of the fupenor lord. Hiftoria Za.
ringo Badenfis. Auitor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolfr. 1765,
4to. vol. v. p. 55.

What was the extent of that jurifdidion which those who held

fiefs poflefled originally, we cannot now determine with certainty.
It is evident that, during the disorders which prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, the great vaffils took advantage of the feeble-
necf of their monarchs, and enlarged their jurifdidtions to the ut.
niofL As early as the tenth century, the more powerful barons
had usurped the right of deciding all causes, whether civil or cri.
minal. They had acquired the Highb J7ufic as well as the Low.
Eflahl. de St. Louis, lib. i. . 14, 25. Their sentences were final,
and there lay no appeal from them to any superior court. Seve-
ral striking instances of this are colleced by Bruffel. Traits des
V'efs, li.ri. c' . 11, 11, 13. Not fatisfie with this, the more po-
tent bar ns got their territories erected into Regalitie,, with al-
moRt every royal prerogative and jurifdidion. Instances ofthefe
were frequent in Vrance. Bruil. ib. In Scotland, where the
power of the feudal nobles became exorbitant, they were very
numerous. HiRorical Law Tradts, vol. i. tract vi. Even in
England, though the authority of the Norman kings circumfcrib-
ed the jurisdiction of the barons within more narrow limits than
in any other feudal kingdom, several counties palatine were e-
refed, into which the king's judges could not enter, and no writ
could come in the king's name, until it received the feal of the
county palatine. Spelman. Gloss. voc. Comites Palatiii; Black-
flone's Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. iii. p. 78.
These lords of Regalities had a right to claim or rescue their vas-
fals from the king s judges, if they assumed any jurifdidtion over
them. Bruffel, ubi supra. In the law of Scotland this privilege
was termed the right of reMedgking; and the frequency of it not on-
ly interrupted the course ofjuftice, but gave rile to great disorders
in t!:e exercise of it. Hist. Law Trats, ib. The jurifdidlion of
the counties palatine seems to have been productive of like incon-
veni-nciei in Ergland.

Thh rrmediecs provided by princes against the bad effects of

they' uui-pations of the nobles, or inconsiderate grants of the
crow-n, .ere various, and gradually applied. Under Charle-
magne and his immediate dcicendtnts, the regal prerogative till

retained great vigour, and the Duces, Comites, and MAfi Domiuci,
the former of whom were ordinary and fixed judges, the latter
extraordinary and itinerant judges, in the different provinces of
their extensive dominions, exercised a jurifdition co-ordinate with
the barons in some cafes, and fupenor to them in others. Du
Cange, voc. Dux, Comites, & M>Ji. Murat. Antiq. Difert. viii. &
ix. But under the feeble race of monarchs who succeeded them,
the authority of the royal judges declined, and the barons acquir-
ed that unlimited jurildi&ion which has been described. Louis
VI. of France attempted to revive the fun&ion of the MiJ Domi-
wici under the title of 'uge. dos Exempts, but the barons were be-
come too powerful to bear such an encroachment on their jurif-
dition, and he was obliged to desist from employing them. He-
naut Abrege Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His successor (as has been
oblcrved) had recourse to expedients less alarming. The appeal
de iefaute de droit, or on account of the refusal of justice, was the
first which was attended with'any considerable effec. According
to the maxims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many vaflals
as enabled him to try by their peers the parties who offered to
plead in his court, or if he delayed or refused to proceed in the
trial, the cause might be carried, by appeal, to the court of the
luperior lord of whom the baron held, and tried there. De 1'E-
sprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange, voc. Dofeaus Jujfiti.r.
The number of peers or assessors in the courts of barons was fre-
quently very considerable. It appears from a criminal trial in
the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. x299, that upwards
of two hundred persons were present, and assisted in the trial,
and voted in pafling judgment. Hilt de Langued. par D. D. de
Vic & Vaifette, tom. iv. Preuves, p. 114. But as the right of
jurifdi&tion had been usurped by many inconsiderable barons,
they were often unable to hold courts. This gave frequent occa-
lion to such appeals, and rendered the pradtice familiar. By de-
grees such appeals began to be made from the courts of the more
powerful barons, and it is evident, from a decilion recorded by
Bruffel, that the royal judges were willing to give countenance to
any pretext for them. Traite des Fiefs, tonm. i. p. 35, a6i. This
tpecies of appeal had lets effeet in abridging the jurifdidion of
the nobles, than the appeal on account of the injustice of the fen-
tence. When the feudal monarchs were powerful, and their
judges possessed extensive authority, such appeals seem to have
been frequent. Capitul. vol. i. p 175, 180; and they were made
in a manner suitable to the rudeness of a simple age. The persons
aggrieved retorted to the palace of their sovereign, and with out-
cries and loud noise called to him for redress. Capitul. lib. iii. c.
59. Chronic. Laterberginenle ap. Mencken. Script. German. vol.
ii. p. 284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the appeals to the JhflIza
or tuprene jude wer-e taken in such a form as luppofed the appel-
lant to be in immediate danger oi death, or of tome violent out-
rge ; he ruthed into the pretence of the judge, crying with a
loud voice, .ivi,v Avi, Fth eza, Fuerza, thus imploring (as it were)
tlh inifant interposition of that supreme judge in order to lave

him. Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. His.
panic. Piflorii, vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the trial by com-
bat facilitated the revival of appeals of this kind. The effects of
the subordination which appeals eftablihfed, in introducing atten.
tion, equity, and consistency of decision into courts ofjudicature,
were soon conspicuous; and almost all causes of importance were
carried tobe finally determined in the king's courts. Bruffel,tomn.
i. 252. Various circumstances which contributed towards the
introduction and frequency of such appeals are enumerated De
l'Efprit dcs Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of
such effe& as the attention which monarchs gave to the conftitu-
tion and dignity of their courts of juflice. It was the ancient
cuftorn for the feudal monarchs to preside themselves in their
courts, and to adminifterjuftice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.

lMurat. Difiert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he was dressing, used
to call parties into his presence, and having heard and confidered
the fubjedt of litigation, gave judgment concerning it. Eginhar-
t-s, Vita Caroli Magni, cited by Madox, Hist. of Exchequer, vol.
i. p. 91. TIhis trial and decision of causes by the sovereigns them-
feves could not fail of rendering their courts respectable. St.
Louis, who encouraged to the utmost the practice of appeals, re-
vived this ancient custom, and adminifteredjuftice in person with
a'. the ancient fmplicity. " I have often seen the faint," fays
Joirivillc, " fit under the /hade of an oak in the wood of Vincen-
nes, when all who had any complaint freely approached him.
At other times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and
feating himself upon it, heard the caules that were brought before
him." Hil. de St Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior
rank, who pcfiefied the right ofjuftice, Ibmetimes dilpenfed it in
person, and presided in their tribunals. Two instances of this oc-
cur , ith refpecl to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hlt. de Dauphine,
tom. i. p. 8. tom. ii. p. 257. But as kings and princes could not
decide every cause in person, nor bring them all to be determined
in the fame court; they appointed Baillis, with a right ofjurif.
dicion, in different diftrits of their kingdom. These pofeffed
powers somewhat similar to those of the ancient Comites. It was
towards the end of the twelfth century and beginning of the
thirteenth, that this office was firit instituted in France. Bruffel,
liv. ii. c. 35. When the king had a court eflablifhed in different
quarters of lis dominions, this invited his fubjeAs to have recourse
to it. It was the private interest of the Bailis, as well as an object
of public policy, to extend their jurifdicion They took advan-
tage of every defec in the rights of the barons, and of every error
in their proceedings, to remove causes out of their courts, and to
bring them under their own cognizance. There was a diftindtion
in the feudal law, and an extremely ancient one, between the high
jufticeand the low. Capitul. j. A. D. 82. § 4. A D. 8.5. §.3.
Eflabl. de St. Louis, liv. i c. 40. Many barons possessed the lat-
terjuriidiAfion who had no title to the former. The former in-
cluded the right of trying crimes of every kind, even the highef;
the attet was confined to petty ttrepafes.

This furnished endless pretexts for obtrudting, restraining, and re-
viewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 457 § S5.
458. § 29.-A regulation of greater importance succeeded the
institution of BailliJ. The king's supreme court or parliament
was rendered fixed as to the place, and coRafant as to the time of
its meetings In France, as well as in the other feudal kingdomst
the king's court of justice was originally ambulatory, followed the
person of the monarch, and was held only during some of the
great festivals. Philip Augustus, A.D. 30o5, rendered it station-
ary at Paris, and continued its terms during the greater part of
the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii. c. a & 3, &c. Ordon. tom.
i p. 366. § 6X. He and his successors vested extensive powers in,
that court; they granted the members of it several privileges and
diflindions which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib.
Velly Hist. de France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons eminent for integri-
ty and ikill in law were appointed judges there. Ib. By degrees
the final decision of all causes of importance was brought into the.
parliament of Paris, and the other parliaments, which administered
justice in the king's name, in different provinces of the kingdom.
Thisjurifdi&ion, however, the parliament of Paris acquired very
slowly, and the great vassals of the crown made violent efforts in
order to obftrua the attempts of this parliament to extend its
authority. Towards the close of the thirteenth century, Philip
the Fair was obliged to prohibit his parliament from taking cog-
nizance of certain appeals brought into it from the courts of the
count of Bretagne, and to recognize and refpea his. right of fu-
preme and final jurifdiólion. Memoires pour fervir de Preuves.
a l'Hftoire de Bretagne par Morice, tom. i. p. 1037, 0o74.
Charles VI. at the end of the following century was obliged to
confirm the rights of the dukes of Bretagne in still more ample
form. Ibid. tom.. ii. 8. o, 581. So violent was the oppofitloa
of the barons to this right of appeal, which they confidered as fa-
tal to their privileges and power, that the authors of the Encyclo-
pedie have mentioned several inflances in which barons put to
death, or mutilated, such persons as ventured to appeal from the
Sentences pronounced in their courts, to the parliament of Paris,
tom. xii. art. Parlement, p. 25.

The progress of jurisdiction in the other feudal kingdoms was
in a great measure similar to that which we have traced in France.
In England the territorial jurifdiclion of the barons was both an-
cient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons No. 5 and 9. After the
Norman conquest it became more ftridilv feudal; and it is evi-
dent from faSts recorded in the Englif si iftory, as well as from
the institution of Counties Palatine, which I have already men-
tioned, that the usurpations of the nobles in England were not left
bold or extensive than those of their contemporaries on the conti-
nent. The fame expedients were employed to circumscribe or
abolish those dangerous jurifditions. William the Conqueror
eftahiifhed a contlant court in the hall of his palace; from which
the four courts now entrusted with the administration of justice
in England took their rife. Henry II. divided his kingdom into

him. Hier. Blanc Comment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hit
panic. Piftorii, vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the trial by com-
bat facilitated the revival of appeals of this kind. The efleas of
the tubordination which appeals eftablihed, in introducing atten-
tion, equity, and consistency of decision into courts of judicature,
were soon conspicuous; and almost all causes of importance were
carried to be finally determined in the king's courts. Bruflel, tom.
i. 252. Various circumstances which contributed towards the
introduftion and frequency of such appeals are enumerated De
l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however, was of
such effect as the attention which monarchs gave to the conftitu-
tion and dignity of their courts of justice. It was the ancient
cuflom for the feudal monarchs to preside themselves in their
courts, and to administer justice in person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25.
Murat. Difert. xxxi. Charlemagne, whilst he was dressing, used
to call parties into his presence, and having heard and confidered
the subje&t of litigation, gave judgment concerning it.' Eginhar.
tus, Vita Caroli Magni, cited-by Madox, Hist. of Exchequer, vol.
i. p. 91. This trial and decision of causes by the sovereigns them-
selves could not fail of rendering their courts refpeatable. St.
Louis, who encouraged to the utmost the practice of appeals, re
vived this ancient custom, and administered jutice in perfoa with
all the ancient implicity. 1 have often seen the faints' fay
Joinville, " fit under the Thade of an oak in the wood of Vincen-
nes, when all who had any complaint- freely approached him.
At other times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden, and
feating himfelfupon it, heard the caules that were brought before
him." Hifl. deSt Louis, p. 13. edit. 1761. Princes of inferior
rank, who possesed the right of justice, sometimes dispensed it in
person, and presided in their tribunals. Two instances of this oc-
cur with respect to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hilt. de Dauphine,
tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 157. But as kings and princes conldnot
decide every cause in person, nor bring them all to be determined
in the fame court; they appointed Bai/ilu, with a right ofjurif-
dieXion, in different diftrits of their kingdom. These possessed
powers somewhat similar to those of the ancient Conits. It was
towards the end of the twelfth century and beginning of the
thirteenth, that this office was first iitituted in France. BrufTel,
iv. ii. c. 35. When the king had a court established in different
quarters of his dominions, this invited his fubjeEts to have recourse
to it. It was the private interest of the Bailli, as well as an obje&
of public policy, to extend their jurifdiion They took advan-
tage of every defeet in the rights of the barons, and of every error
in their proceedings, to remove causes out of their courts, and to
bring them under their own cognizance. There was a diftindtion
in the feudallaw, and an extremely ancient one, between the high
justice and the low. Capitul. J. A. D.8iz. § 4. A D. 815. §.3.
Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i c. 40. Many barons pofeffed the lat-
terjurifdiftion who had no title to the former. The former in-
cluded the right of trying crimes of every kind, even the higbel ;
the latter was confined to petty trcfpaffcs.

This furnithed endless pretexts for obftruting, restraining, and re-
viewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii. 45 7 § a5.
458. § a9.-A regulation of greater importance succeeded the
intitution of Bailli,. The king's supreme court or parliament
was rendered fixed as to the place, and coftiant a: to the time of
its meetings In France, as well as in the other feudal kingdoms,
the king's court of justice was originally ambulatory, followed the.
person of the monarch, and was held only during some of the
great festivals. Philip Augustus, A.D. s30o5,rendered it flation-
ry at Paris, and continued its terms during the greater part of
the year. Pafquicr Reeherches, liv. ii. c. z & 3, &c. Ordon. tom.
i.p. 366. § 6s. He and his successors vested extenfve powers in,
that court; they granted the rmembers of it several privileges and
diftintions which it would be tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib.
Velly Hist. de France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons eminent for integri-
ty and iill in law were appointed judges there. Ib. By degrees
the final decision of all causes of importance was brought into the.
parliament of Paris, andthe other parliaments, which administered
juflice in the king's name, in different provinces of the kingdom.
Thisjurifdidtion, however, the parliament of Paris acquired very
slowly, and the great vasals of the croan made violent efforts in
order to obftru& the attempts of this parliament to extend its
authority. Tpwards the close of the thirteenth century, Philip
the Fair was obliged to prohibit his parliament from taking cog-
nizance of certain appeals brought into it from the courts of the
count of Bretagne, and to recognize and refpea hiss right of fu-
prme and final jurildidion. Memoires pour fervir de Preuve.
a 'Hiftoire de Bretagne par Morice, tom. . . p. 1037, 1074.
Charles VI. at the end of the following century was obliged to
confirm the rights of the dukes of Bretagne in fill more ample
form. Ibid. tom. i p. 580, 581. So violent was the opposition
of the barons to this right of appeal, which they confidered as fa.
tal to their privileges and power, that the authors of the Egcyclo-
pedie have mentioned several inflances in which barons put to
death, or mutilated, such perlbns as ventured to appeal from the
Sentences pronounced in their courts, to the parliament of Paris,
tom. xii. art. Parlement, p. s5.

The progress ofjurifdidlion in the other feudal kingdoms was
in a great measure similar to that which we have traced in France.
In England the territorial jurifdidion of the barons was both an-
cient and extensive. Leg. Edw. Cons No. 5 and 9. After the
Norman conquelt it became more ftridtly feudal; and it is evi-
dent from fadts recorded in the Englili history, as well as from
the institution of Counties Palatine, which I have already men-
tioned, that the usurpations of the nobles in England were not lefa
bold or extensive than those of their contemporaries on the conti.
nent. The fame expedients were employed to circumscribe or
abolish those dangerous jurifdidcions. William the Conqueror
eftablilhed a conitant court in the hall of his palace; from which
the four courts now entrusted with the administration ofjuftice
in England took their rife. Henry II. divided his kingdom into

fix circuits, and sent itinerant judges to hold their courts in them
at .stated seasons. Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of
England, vol. iii. 7. Justices of the peace were appointed in
every county by fuhfequent monarchs; to whoe jurifdietion the
people gradually had recbirrfe in many civil caures. The privi-
leges of the Counties Palatine were gradually limited; with re-
fpedc to Come points they were abolished; and the administration
of jufice was brought into the king's courts, or before judges of
his appointment. The several steps taken for this purpose are
enumerated in Dalrymple's History of Feudal Property chap. vii.

In Scotland the usurpations of the nobility were more exorbi-

tant than in any other feudal kingdom. The progress of their
encroachments, and the methods taken by the crown to limit or
aboliSh their territorial and independent jurifdidiions, both which
I had oceaflon to confider and plain in a former work, differed
very little from thole of which I have now given the detail Hit.
tory of Scotland, vol. p. 45.

I Should perplex myself and my readers in the labyrinth of

German juriprndenee, if were to attempt to delineate the pro.
greó of jurifdiifion in the empire, with a minute accuracy. It
n sufficient to observe, that the authority which the Aolic coun.
cil and Imperial chamber now pocfi, took its rife from the fame
desire of- redreffig the abuses of territorial jurifdidion, and was
acquired in the fame manner that the royal courts attained inlu.
ence in other countries of Europe. All the important fact with
refpea to both there particulars may be found in Phil. Datt, de
pace publica Imperii, lib. iv. The capital articles are pointed
out in Pfcffel AbreFe de l'Hiftoire & Droit publique d'Allemagne,
p. ss6, 8S. and n Traite do Droit publique de l'Empire par
M. Ie Coq. de Vileray. The two last treatises are of great au.
thority, having been compored under the eye of M. Schoepflin of
S:rafburg, one of the ablest public lawyers in Germany.

NOTE XXIV. SeA. p. p63. [AA].

It is not easy to fix with precision the period at which ecclefil

afics sirs began to claim exemption from the civil jurifdidion.
It is certain, that during the early and puref ages of the church,
they pretended to no such immunity. The authority of the ci-
vil n.agiftrate extended to all persons, and to all causes. This
fad has not only been clearly efltablilhed by Protestant authors,
but is adrr;tted by many Roman Catholics of eminence, and par-
ticu!zrly by the writers in defence of the liberties of the Gallican
church. There are fveral original papers publilhed by Muratori,
-which Ihew that, in the ninth and tenth centuries, causes of the
greatelt importance relating to ecclesiastics were fiill determined
by civil judges. Antiq. Ital. vol. v. diflert. Ixx. Proofs of this
are produced likewise by M. Houard, Anciennes Loix des Fran-
cois, &c. vol. i. p. 2o9. Ecclesiastics did not hake off all at once
their fubieAion to civil courts. This privilege, like their other
usurpations, was acquired slowly, and ftep by Rtep. This ex-
emption seems at first to have been merely an at of complai-

iance, flowing from veneration for their charater. Thus from
a charter of Charlemagne in favour of the church of Mans, A. D.
796, to which M. I'Abbe de Soy refers in his Notice de Di-
plomes, tom. i. p. 201. that monarch directs his judges, if any
difference should arise between the admiuiftrators of the revenues
of that church and any person whatever, not to summon the ad-
ininitrators to appear in mallo publico; but first of all to meet
with them, and to endeavour to accommodate the difference in an
amicable manner. This indulgence was in process of time im-
proved into a-legal exemption; which was founded on the fame
fuperflitious respeCt of the laity for the clerical character and
function. A remarkable infiance of this occurs in a charter of
Frederic Barbarossa, A. D. 1172, to the monastery of Altenburg.
lie grants them judicium non tantum fanguinolentis plage, fed
vitae & mortis; he prohibits any of the royal judges from disturb-
ing their jurifdiaion; and the reason which he gives for this am-
ple conceflion is, nam quorum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini mini-
fierii onus leve eft, &jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus illos op-
prcfliotis contumelia, vel manu Laica, fatigari. Mencken. Script.
rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. 1067.

It is not neceflary for illustrating what is contained in the text,
that I lhould describe the manner in which the code of the canon
law was compiled, or shew that the doctrines in it most favour-
able to the power of the clergy, are founded on ignorance, or sup-
ported by fraud or forgery. The reader will find a full account
ofthee in Gerard. Van Mafiricht. Hiftoria Juris Ecclefiaftici, &
in Science de Gouvernement par M. Real, tom. vii. c. I & 3. § 2,
3. &c. The history of the progress and extent of ecclesiastical
jurifdiAion, with an account of the arts which the clergy employ-
ed in order to draw causes of every kind into the spiritual courts,
is no less curious, and.would throw great light upon many of the
customs and institutions of the dark ages; but it is likewise so-
reign from the present fubje&. Du Cange in his Glollary, voc.
Curia Chrifiaslatiti, has colleEted most of the causes with refpet to
Mwhich the clergy arrogated an exclusive jurifdidior, and refers to
the authors, or original papers, which confirm his observations.
Giannone in his Civil History of Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ar-
ranged these under proper heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions
of the church with his usual boldness and discernment. M. Fleu-
rv uhferves, that the clergy multiplied the pretexts for extending
the authority of the spiritual courts with so much boldness, that
it was fooli in their power to withdraw almoR every person and
every cause from the jurifdiscion of the civil magistrate. Ilit.
Eccles. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But how ill-founded soever
the jurisdiction of the clergy may have been, or whatever might
be the abuses to which their manner of exercising it gave rife,
the principles and forms of their jurisprudence were far more
perfed than that which was known in the civil courts. It seems
to be certain that ecclesiastics never submitted, during any period
in the middle ages, to the laws contained in the codes of the bar-
barous nations, but were governed entirely by the Roman law.

They regulated all their tranfacions by such of its maximin
were preserved by tradition, or were contained in the Theodosian
code, and other books extant among them. This we learn from
a custom which prevailed universally in those ages. Every per.
son was permitted to choose among the various codes of laws
then in force, that to which he was willing to.conform. In any
tranfa*ion of importance, it was usual for the persons contramting
to mention the law to which they submitted, that it might be
known how any controversy that ihould arise between them was
to be decided. Innumerable proofs of this occur in the charten
of the middle ages. But the clergy confidered it as such a valu.
able privilege of their order to be governed by the Roman lav,
that when any person entered into holy orders, it was usual for
him to renounce the code of laws to which he had been formerly
subjed, and to declare that he now submitted to the Roman law.
Confiat me Johannem clericum, filium quondam Verandi, qui pro-
feifus fum, ex natione mea, lege vivere Langobardorum, fed ta.
men, pro honore ecclefiaftico, lege nunc videor vivere Romana.
Charta, A. D. 1072. Farulfus presbyter qui profefus fum, more
facerdotii mci, lege vivere Romana. Charta, A.D. 1075. Mu-
ratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol. i. p. 78. See likewise Houard An-
ciennes Lois des FranSois, &c. vol. i. p. 203.

The code of the canon law began to be compiled early in the

ninth century. Memr de 1'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346,
&c. It was above two centuries after that before any colectlion
was made of those customs, which were the rule of judgments in
the courts of the barons. Spiritual judges decided of course, ac-
cording to written and known laws: Lay judges, left withoutany
fixed guide, were directed by loose traditionary customs. But be.
Ides this general advantage of the canon law, its forms and prin-
ciples were more consonant to reason, and more favourable to the
equitable decision of every point in controversy, than those which
prevailed in lay courts. It appears from Notes XXI. and XXIt.
concerning private wars, and the triaLby combat, that the whole
spirit of ecclesiastical jurisprudence was adverse to those fanguina
ry customs which were defirudive of jutice; and the whole force
of ecclefiaflical authority was exerted to abolilh them, and to sub-
!titute trials by law and evidence in their room. Almost all the
forms in lay courts, which contribute to eftablilh, and continueio
preserve order in judicial proceedings, are borrowed from the ca-
non law. Fleury Infsit. du droit canon. part ii. c. 6. p. 51. -St.
Louis, in his Eftabliffemens, confirms many of his new regulations
concerning property, and -the adminiflration of justice, by the au-
thority of the canon law, from which he borrowed them. T'hu,
for instance, the first hint of attaching moveables for the recovery
of a debt, was taken from the canon law. Eftab. liv. ii. c. 1 and
40. And likewise the uje, owrua, by a person who was infolvenlt
Ibid. In the fame manner, he established new regulations with re-
fpef to the effets of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89. Thd
and many other salutary regulations the canonists borrowed from
the Roman law. Many other examples might be produced-of

more perfet jurisprudence in the canon law than was known in
lay courts. For that reason it was deemed an high privilege to be
subjet to ecclefiaflical jurisdiction.. Among the many immuni-
ties, by which men were allured to engage in the dangerous ex-
peditions for the recovery of the Holy Land, one of the moit con-
desirable was the declaring such as took the Cross to be subjet
only to the spiritual courts, and to the rules of decision observed
in them. See Note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. Cructi Privilgia.

NOTE XXV. SeE. I. p. 65. [BB].

The rapidity with which the knowledge and study of the Ro-
man law spread over Europe is amazing. The copy of the Pan-
decs was found at Amalphi, A. D. 1137. Irnerius opened a
college of civil law at Bologna a few years after. Giann. Hist.
book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught as a part of academical
learning in different parts of France before the middle of the cen-
tury. Vaccarius gave lectures on the civil law at Oxford, as ear-
ly as the year 1147. A regular system of feudal law, formed
plainly in imitation of the Roman code, was composed by two
Milanese lawyers about the year zI0o. Grarian published the
code of canon law, with large additions and emendations, about
the fame time. The earliest collection of those customs, which
served as the rules of decision in the courts ofjuftice, is the A.fffct
de Jerusalem. They were compiled, as. the preamble informs us,
in the year Io99, and are called Jus Confuetudinarium quo rege-
batur regnum orientale. Willerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. . But e-
culiar circumflances gave occasion to this early compilation. The
vitorious Crusaders fettled as a colony in a foreign country, and
adventurers from all the different nations of Europe composed
this new society. It was neceflary on that account to ascertain
the laws and customs which were to regulate the tranfadtions of
business, and the administration of jultice among them, But in
no country of Europe was there, at that time, any collecdion of
customs, nor had any attempt been made to render law fixed.
The sirs undertaking of that kind was by Glanville, Lord Chief
Jultice of England, in his Tra6tatns de Legibus & Confuetudini-
bus Anglie, composed about the year xi8g. The Regiam Ma-
jeftatem in Scotland, ascribed to David I. seems to be an imitation,
and a servile one, of Glanville. Several Scottilh antiquaries, un-
der the influence of that pious credulity, which disposes men to
afient, without hesitation, to whatever they deem for the honour
of their native country, contend zealoutly, that the Regiam Ma-
jellatem is a production prior to the treatise of Glanville; and
have brought themselves to believe, that a nation, in a superior
fate of improvement, borrowed its laws and institutions from
one considerably less advanced in its political progress. The in-
ternal evidence (were it my province to examine it) by which this
theory might be refuted, is, in my opinion, decilive. The exter-
nal circumstances which have seduced Scottih authors into this
niftake, have been explained with so much precision and candour
by Sir David Dilrymple, in lis examination of some of the argu-
Vol. I. X

nments for the high antiquity of Regiam Majeftatem, Edin. z769,
4to. that it is to be hoped the controversy will not be again re-
vived. Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us, that he was the sirs
who had attempted such a work in France, composed his Ce/ir,
which contains an account of the customs of the country of Ver.
mandois, in the reign of St. Louis, which began, A. D. x216.
Beawmamr, the author of the Couftumes de Beauovois, liwed about the
fame time. The Eftabliffemens of St. Louis, containing a large
eollection of the customs which prevailed within the royal do.
mains, were published by the authority of that monarch. As
soon as men became acquainted with the advantages of having
written cuStoms and laws, to which they could have recourse oa
every occasion, the practice of collecting them became common.
Charles VII. of France, by an ordonnance, A. D. I45 3 appointed
the customary laws in every province of France to be collected
and arranged. Velley and Villaret, Hiftoire, tom. xvi. p. II3.
His fuccefor, Louis XI. renewed the injunction. But this faluta-
ty Imdertaking hath never been fully executed, and the iurifpr-
dence of the French nation remains more obscure and uncertain
than it would have been if there prudent regulations of their mo-
marchs had taken effec. A mode of judicial determination was
ftablilhed in the middle ages, which affords the clearef proof
that judges, while they had no other rule to dire&c their decrees
but unwritten and traditionary customs, were often at a lofB how
to find out the fads and principles, according to which they were
bound to decide. They were obliged, in dubious cafes, to call a
certain number of old men, and to lay the cafe before them, that
they might inform them what was the pradice or custom with
regard to the point. This was called Enqsuefe par tourbe. Da
Cange, voc. Turba. The effecs ns the revival of the Roman ju.
rifprudence have been explained by M. de Montesquieu, liv. xxviii.
c. 41. and by Mr. Hume, HIift of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I
Lave adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend to review
any subjec which such writers have confidered, without receiving
from them light and information: At-the fame time I am con-
winced, that the knowledge of the Roman law was not so entirely
loft in Europe during the middle ages, as is commonly believed.
My subjea does not require me to examine this point. Many
striking fa&s with regard to it are colleted by Donato Antonmi
d'Afti Dal' Ufo c autorita della regione civilt ncle provincie del'
lrmperio Occidcnta!e. Nap. 1751, a vol. 8vo.

That The civil law is intimately conneted with the municipal
uinfpnruenue in several countries of Europe, is a fat so well
known, that it needs no iilultration. Even in England, where
the common law is supposed to form a sysem perteely diftin
from the Roman code, and although such as apply in that country
to the study of the common law, boast of this diftin&ion with
some degree of affecation, it is evident that many of the idea
and maxims of the civil law are incorporated into the Englilh jt
riprudence. This is well illustrated by the ingenious and lcran

ed author of Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more at-
tient, 3d edit. p. 76, &c.

NOTE XXVI. Sea. I p. 66. [CCT.

The whole hifiory of the middle ages makes it evident, teas
war was the sole profession of gentlemen, and alinoft the only
ebj*t attended to in their education.. Even after some change
in manners began to take place, and the civil arts of life had ac-
quired some reputation, the ancient ideas with refpe& to. the ac-
eomplifhments neceflary for a person of noble birth, continued
long in force. In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c we
have an account of the youthful exercises and occupations oF
Francis I. and they were altogether martial and athletic. Tkat
father of letters owed his relish for them, not to education, but
to his own good sense and good taste. The manners of the fu-
perior order of ecdefiaftics during the middle ages furnilh the
strongest proof that, in some instances, the diftin&ion of profef-
sions was not completely ascertained in Europe. The func&ions
and chara&ter of the clergy are obviously very different from those
of laymen; and among the inferior orders of churchmen, this:
constituted a distinct character separate from that of'other citi-
zens. But the dignified ecclefiaitics, who were frequently of no-
ble birth, were above such a diftindlion; they retained the ideaz
of what belonged to them as gentlemen, and in spite of the de-
crees of popes, or the canons of councils, they bore arms, left
their vafials to the field, and fought at their head in battle. A-
mong them the priesthood was scarcely a separate prafeflion; the
military accomplishments which they thought eflential to them.
as gentlemen, were cultivated, the theological science, and paci-
sic virtues suitable to their spiritual funAion, were negle&edean&
despised.

As soon as the science of law became a laborious fludy, andI

the practice of it a separate profeflion, such persons as rose to emi--
nence in it obtained honours which had formerly been appropriat-
ed to soldiers. KFnighthood was the most illustrious mark of di--
finction during several ages, and conferred privileges to which
rank or birth alone were not entitled. To this high dignity per-
sons eminent for their knowledge of law were advanced, and
,ere thereby placed on a level with those whom their military
talents had rendered conspicuous. Miles Juflitit, gMihe Lileratui,.
became common titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as-
carly as A.D. x15i. If a judge attained a certain rank in the-
courts of iuftice, that alone gave him a right to the honour of
knighthood. Pafquier Recherches, liv. xi. c. 6. p. x3o. Dif-
fertations hiftoriqnes fur la Chevalerie, par Honore de Sainte
Marie, p. 164, &c. A profefion that led to offices, which enno-
bled the persons who held them, grew into credit, and the peo--
ple of Europe became accustomed to fee men rife to eminence by
civil as well.as military talents.

Xa

NOTE XXVII. Sea. I. p. 69. [DD].

The chief intention of these notes was to bring at once under

the view of my readers, such fads andfcircumfiances as tend to
illufirate or confirm what is contained in that part of the history
to which they refer. When these lay scattered in many different
authors, and were taken from books not generally known, or
which many of my readers might find it disagreeable to consult, I
thcugl!: it would be of advantage to colled them together. But
v!hen every thing neceflary for the proof or illustration of my nar-
rativ,. or reasoning may be found in any book which is generally
known, or deserves to be so, I mfall jatsfy myself with referring
to it. This is the cafe with refpeft to Chivalry. Almcft every
fa.-- which I have mentioned in the text, together with many o,
tber curious and inftrucive particulars concerning this fingulr in.
ftl':ti-n, may be found in Mcmorores fir 1'ancienne Chevalerie con.
fideree comnme une Elabuliflement politique & militaire, par M. de
la Curne de St. Palaye.

Note XXVHI. Sec. I. p. 73. tEE).

The subjec of my 'enquiries does not call me to write a hiftor

of the prcgrefs of icience. The faas and observations which I
have produced, are sufficient to illustrate the effects of its progreft
upon manners and the state of society. While science was alto.
gether extin& in the western pans of Europe, it was cultivated in
Confiantinople and other parts of the Grecian Empire. But the
fhuti!e genius of the Greeks turned almost entirely to theological
dilputation. The Latins borrowed that spirit from them, and
many of the controversies which fiill occupy and divide theologi
ans, took their rife among the Greeks, from whom the other Eu-
ropeans derived a considerable part of their knowledge. See the
testimony of JEneas Sylvius ap. Conringium de antiq. academiik,
p. 43. Hiftoire literaire de France, tom. vii. p. 13, &c. tom. ix.
p. Ix5, &c. Soon after the empire of the Caliphs was eflablified
an the Eaif, some illustrious princes arose among them, who en-
ccur:ged science. But when the Arabians turned their attention
to the literature cultivated by the ancient Greeks and Romans, the
chai'e and correc taste of their works of genius appeared frgid
and unanimated to a people of a more warm imagination. Tno'
they could not admire the poets and historians of Greece or of

.c' me, they were Cenfile ofthe merit of their philosophers. The

operations of the intelle& are more fixed and uniform than those
of dite fancy or taire. Truth makes an imprefflon nearly the fame
in every place; the ideas of what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime,
varv in different climates. The Arabians, though they negledted
Horner, translated the most eminent of the Greek philosophers in.
to their own language; and, guided by their precepts and disc-o
veries, applied themnfelres with great ardour to the fludy of geo-
mctrv, afironomy, medicine, dialedics, and metaphysics. In the
three former, thev made considerable and useful improvementU
which have contributed not a little to advance those sciences to
that high degree of perfection which they have attained. In the

two latter, they chore Aristotle for their guide, and refining rn,
the subtle and diftinguifiing spirit which charatlerifes his philofo-
phy, they rendered it in a great degree frivolous or unintelligible.
he schools eftablilhed in the East for teaching and cultivating:
these sciences were in high reputation. They communicated their-
love of science to their countrymen, who conquered Africa and.
Spain; and the schools ihftituted there were little inferior in fame-
to those in the East. Many of the persons who diflinguilhed themn--
filves by their proficiency in science during the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, were educated among the Arabians. Bruckerus;
collects many instances of this, Hiftor. PhiloL v. iii. -p. 68s, &c..
Almoit all the men eminent for science, during several. centuries,.
if they did not resort in person. to the schools of Africa and Spain,,
were inftru&ed in the philosophy of the Arabians. The first
knowledge of the Ariltotelian philosophy in the middle ages was -
acquired by translations of Arittotle's works out of the Arabic..
The Arabian commentators were deemed the most kilful and au--
thentic guides in the study of his system. Conring. Antiq.. Acad..
Dill. iii p. 95,&c. Supplem. p. 241, &c. Murat Antiq. ltal. vol..
iii. p. 932, &c. From them the lihoolmen derived the genius and.
principles of their philosophy, which contributed to muchto re-
tard the progress of true science.-

The eltablifhnient of colleges or universities is a remarkable ara-
in literary history.. The schools in cathedrals and monasteries
confined themlelves chiefly to the teaching of grammar. There
were only one or two maflers employed in that office. But in
colleges, professors were appointed to teach all the different parts
oi science. The course or o der of education was fixed. The
time that ought to be allotted to the study of each science was as-
certained. A regular form of trying the proficiency of itudent:s
was prescribed; and academical titles and honours were conferred
on luch as acquitted themselves with approbation. A good ac-
count of the origin and nature of these is given by Seb.-Bacmei-
Iterus Antiquitates Roftochienlis, five, Hiltoria Urbis & Acadernia
Roftoch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per E..J..de:Wet. -
phalen, vol. iii.p. 781. Lips. 1743. The first obscure mention:
of the&e academical degrees in the university of Paris (from which
the other universities in Europe have borrowed molt of-their cuf-
toms and inititutions) occurs, A. D.'izSt. Crevier. Hit. de t'U-
niv. de Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were completely elablifh- -
ed,A.D. Ii3I. Ib. 248. It is unnecefrary to enumerate the fe- --
veral privileges to which bachelors, masters, and dodors were e--
titled. One circumstance is sufficient to demonstrate the high de--
gree of eltimation in which they were held. Doc~ors in the dif -
tcrent faculties contended with knights for precedence, and the
di'pute was terminated in many instances by advancing the former-
to the dignity of knighthood, the high prerogatives of which I
have mentioned. It was even aflerted, that a'doaor had a right
to that title without creation. Bartolus taught-doctorem aiftu--
alitrr regentem in jure civili per decennium effici militem ipso sac--
to. Iluilore de St. Marie Dissert. p. x6j. This was called.CheT-

X$3

wlerie de Letures, and the persons advanced to that dignity, IM
lites Clerici. These new establishments for education, together
with the extraordinary honours conferred on learned men, great-
ly increased the number of scholars. In the year x162, there were
ten thousand students in the university of Bologna; and it appears
from the hiflory of that university, that law was the only science
taught in it at that time. n the year 1340, there were thirty thou-
sand in the university of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's
Chronol. Deducion of Commerce, vol. i. p. 17. In the fame
century, ten thousand persons voted in a question agitated in the
university of Paris; and as graduates alone were admitted to that
privilege, the number of students must have been very great. Vel-
ly Hist. de France, tom. xi. p. 147. There were indeed few uni-
verfities in Europe at that time; but such a number of fludents
may nevertheless be produced as a proof of the extraordinary ar.
dour with which men applied to the ltudy of science in those ages;
it ihows likewise that they already began to confider other pro.
feflions beside that of a soldier as honourable and useful.

Note XXIX. SeC.I. p. 4.. [FS].

The great variety of subje&s which I have endeavoured to il

lustrate, and the extent of this upon which I now enter, will justify
my adopting the words of M. de Montesquieu, when he begins
to treat of commerce. " The fubjedl which follows would re.

quiire to be difcufTed more at large; but the nature of this work
' decs not permit it. I wilh to glide on a tranquil stream; butl
1s am hunied along by a torrent.'

M.nv proofs occur in history of the little intercourse between

nations during the middle ages. Towards the close of the tenth
centu-ry Count Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des Fosses near Paris, applied to an Abbot of Clugny in
Burgundy famous for his sanctity, intreating him to conducA the
monks thither. The language in which he addressed that holy
man is singular: he tells him that he had undertaken the labourof
such agreatjourney; thathe wasfatiguedwiththelength ofit,there-
fore hoped to obtain his request, and that his journey into such a
dif ant country should not be in vain. The answer of the abbot
is Rill more extraordinary- he refused to comply with his desire,
as it would be extremely fatiguing to go along with him into a
f-ange and unknown region. Vita Burchardi venerabilis comi-
ti2ap Bouquet Rec. des Hist vol. x.p. 351. Even so late asthe
hi ginning of the twelfth century, the monks of Ferrieres in the
diocese of Sens did not know that there was such a city as Tour.
asV in Slanders; and the monks of St. Martin of Tournay were
equally unacquainted with the situation of Ferrieres. A tranfac-
tion in which they were both concerned made it neceffarv for them
to have fme intcrccurfe. The mrutual interest of bothf monafle.
ries prompted each to find out the situation of the other. After
a long learch, which is particularly described, the discovery wa
n;ade by accident. Herimannus Abbas de Reftauratione St. Mar.
tii Tieniacnfis ap. Dacher. Spicel. vol. xii. p. 400. The igno.

rance of the middle ages with respect to the situation and. geogra-
phy of remote countries was still more remarkable. The most
ancient geographical chart which now remains as a monument
of the fate of that science in Europe during the middle ages, is
found in a manuscript of the Chronique de St. Denys. There
the three parts of the earth then known are so represented, that
Jerusalem is placed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem. de l'Acad. des Bel-
les Lettres, tom xvi.p. 185. There seems to have been no inns
or houses of entertainment for the reception of travellers during
the middle ages Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 58, &c. This
is a proof of the little intercourse which took place between dif-
ferent nations. Among people whose manners are simple, and
who are seldom visited by firangers, hospitality is a virtue of the
first rank. This duty of hospitality was so necessary in that state
of society which took place during the middle ages, that it was not
confidered as one of those virtues which men may pra&tife or not,
according to the temper of their minds and the generosity of their
hearts. Hospitality was enforced by Rfatutes, and such as negledt-
ed this duty were liable to punmhment. Quicunque hofpiti
venienti ledum, out focum negaverit, trium folidorum inlatione
mulAetur. Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § I. Si quis homini aliquo
pergenti initinere mansionem vetaverit fexaginta folidos componat
in publico. Capitul. lib. vi. § 8z. This increase of the penalty,
at a period so long after that in which the laws of the Burgundians
were publilhed, and when the fIate of society was much improved,
is very remarkable. Other laws of the fame purport are colledt-
ed by Jo. Fred. Polac. Syftema Jurifprud. Germanicae, Lips.
1 733, p. 75. The laws of the Slavi were more rigorous than any
that he mentions; they ordained, " that the moveables of an in-
hospitable person should be confiscated. and his house burnt.
They were even so solicitous for the entertainment of frangers
that they permitted the landlord to steal for the support of his
guest." Qod nodu furatus fueris, eras appone, hofpitibus.
Rerum Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 17 1, p.
0o. In consequence of these laws, or of the state of society which
made it proper to enact them, hospitality abounded while the in-
tercourle among men was incoutiderable, and secured the itran-
ger a kind reception under every roof where he chose to take
lhelter. This, too, proves clearly, that the intercourse among
men was rare, for as soon as this became frequent, what was a
pleasure became a burden, and the entertaining of travellers was
converted into a branch of commerce.

But the laws of the middle ages afford a proof fill more con-
vincing of the small intercourse between different nations. The
genius of the feudal fyitem, as well as the spirit ofjealouly which
always accompanies ignorance, concurred in discouraging firan-
gers from fettling in any new country. If a person removed from
one province in a kingdom to another, he was bound.within a
year and day to acknowledge himself the vassal of the baron in
whose estate he fettled, if he neglected to do so, he became liable

to a penaltr; and, if at his death he neglected to leave a certai~
legacy to the baron within whose territory he had resided, ail his
goods were confiscated. The hardihips imposed on foreigners
tettling in a country, were still more intolerable. In more early
times, the superior lord of any territory in which a foreigner
fettled, might seize his person, and reduce him to servitude. Ve.
ry /ftrking inflances of this occur in the history of the middle
ages. The cruel depredations of the Normans in the ninth cen.
turv, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime provinces of
France to fly into the interior parts of the kingdom. But inflead
of being received with that humanity to which their wretched
condition entitled them, they were reduced to a state offervitude.
Both the civil and ecclefiaflical powers found it neceffarv to inter.
pose in order to put a flop to this barbarous practice. Potgiefer.
de Statu Servor. lib. i. c. I. § 16. In other countries, the laws
permitted the inhabitants of the maritime provinces to reduce such
as were Shipwrecked on their coast to servitude. Ibid. § 17 .This
barbarous cuflom prevailed in many countries of Europe. The
practice offeizing the goods of persons who had been shipwrecked,
and ofconfifeating them as the property of the lord on whose ma.
nor they were thrown, seems to have been universal. De Weft.
phalen Monum. inedita Rer. Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du
Cange, voc. Lar,,m, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 2 . Among
the ancient Welsh, three forts of persons, a madman, a stranger,
and a leper, might be killed with impunity. Leges Hoel Dda,
quoted in Obfervat. on the Statutes chiefly the more ancient, p.
22. M. de Lauriere produces several ancient deeds, which prove,
that in different provinces of France, firangers became the avres
of the lord on whole lands they fettled. Gloffaire du Droit Fran-
cois, art. Ab.aite, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, " that there are feve-
rn places in France, in which, if a stranger fixes his residence for
a year and day, he becomes the slave of the lord of the manor."
Coull. de Beav. ch. 45. p. 154. As a pratice so contrary to hu
nanity could not fubfit long, the superior lords found it necessary
to reft satisfied, inflead of enslaving aliens, with levying certain
annual taxes upon them, or impofng upon them some extraor
dinary duties or services. But when any flranger died, he could
not convey his effcts by will; and-all his real, as well as person-
al eflate, fell to the king, or to the lord of the barony, to the ex-
clufion of his natural heirs. This is termed in France Droit
1D'3 ^.sie. Pref. de Laurier. Ordon. tom. i. p. I5. Bruffel. tom.
ii. p.944. Du Cange,voc. AI/lai. Pafquier Recherches, p. 367.
This practice of confiscating the effects of firangers upon their
death was very ancient. It is mentioned, though very obscurely,
in a law of Charlemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul. Baluz. p. 507. §
5. Not only persons who were born in a foreign country were
hubject to the Droit D'Aubaine, but in some countries such as
removed from one diocese to another, or from the lands of one
baron to another. Brufiel. vol. ii. p. 947, 949. It is hardly pof-
fible to conceive any law more unfavourable to the intercourse be-
tween nations. Something Gmilar to it, however, may be found

in the ancient laws of every kingdom in Europe. With refpcdt
to Italy, fee Murat. Ant. vol. ii. p. 14. As nations advanced in
improvement, this praaice was gradually abolished. It is no
mnall disgrace to the French jurisprudence, that this barbarous in-
holpitable custom Ihould have so long remained among a people
so highly civilized.

Tile confusion and outrage which abounded under a feeble
form of government, incapable of framing or executing salutary
laws, rendered the communication between the different provinces
of the fame kingdom extremely dangerous. It appears from a
letter of Lupus, abbot of Ferrieres, in the ninth century, that the
highways were so much infested by banditti, that it was necessary
for travellers to form themselves into companies or caravans, that
they might be safe from the aflaults of robbers. Bouquet Re-
cuell des Hilt. vol. vii. p. JI5. The numerous regulations pu-
bliflbed by Charles the Bald in the fame century, discovered the
frequency of these disorders; and such ads of violence were be-
come so common, that by many they were hardly confidered at
criminal. For this reason the inferior judges, called centenarii,
were required to take an oath, that they would neither commit
any robbery themselves nor prote& such as were guilty of that
crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz.-vol. ii. p. 63, 68. The historians of
the ninth and tenth centuries gave pathetic descriptions of these
disorders. Some remarkable paflages to this purpose are colledt-
ed by Mat. Jo. Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They be-
came so frequent and audacious, that the authority of the civil
magistrate was unable to repress them. The ecclesiastical jurif.
diclion was called in to aid it. Councils were held with great
folemnnty, the bodies of the faints were brought thither, and, in
preence of their sacred reliques, 'anathemas were denounced a-
gainft robbers, and other violators of the public peace. Bouquet
Recuell des Hist. tom. x. p. 360, 431, 536. One of these forms
of excommunication, ifued A. D. 988, is still preserved, and is so
singular, and composed with eloquence of such a peculiar kind,
that it will not perhaps be deemed unworthy of a place here.
After the usual introduction, and mentioning the outrage which
gave occasion to the anathema, it runs thus: " Obtenebrefcant
oculi veltri, qui concupiverunt; arefcant manus, qua rapuerunt,
debilitentur omnia membra, que adjuverunt. Semper laboretis,
nec requiem inveniatis, fruatuque veltri laboris privemini. Form.
idetis, et paveatis, a facie perlequentis, et non periequentis hoftis,
ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum Juda traditore
Domini, in terra mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda veftra ad satis-
laaioicm plenard convertantur.-Ne ceffant a vobis hae maledic-
tiones, fcelerum veftrorum perfecutrices, quamdiu permanebitis
in peccato pervafionis. Amen, Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet ib. p. 517.

Note XXX. Sedt.I.p. 89. [GG.]

Vith refpedt to the progress of commerce which I have de-

fcribed, p. 73, &c it may be observed, that the Italian states car-
ned on some commerce with the cities of the Greek empire, as

early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported into their own
country the rich commodities of the east. Murat. Antiq. Itat

ol. ii. p. 882. In the tenth century, the Venetians had opened
a trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The inhabitant of
Amalph; and Pisa had lilewife extended their trade to the fame
ports. Murat. ib. p 884, 885. The effets of the Crusades ia
Increaing the wealth and commerce of the Italian lRates, and
particularly that which they carried on with the EaRs, I have ex-
plained, page 3id of this volume. They not only imported the
Indian commodities from the East, but eftablilhed manufactures
of curious fabric in their own country. Several of these are e-
numerated by Muratori in his Difiertations concerning the arts
and the wrevwiag of the middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349,
399. They made great progress, particularly in the manufaCure
of silk, which had long been peculiar to the eastern provinces of
Asia. Silk stuffs were of fnch high price in ancient Rome, that only
a few persons of the rft rank were able to purchase them. Under
Aurelian, A. D. 270, a pound of silk was equal in value to a
pound of gold. Abfit utauro fila penfentur. Libra enim ari
tune libra feriei suit. Vopifus in Aureliano Justinian, in the

txth century, introduced the art of rearing silk worms into

Greece, which rendered the commodity somewhat more plenti.
fil, though fill it was offuch great value as to remain an article
of luxury or magnificence, reserved only for persons of the sirs
order, or for public folemnities. Roger I. king of SiEily, about
the year 1130, carried off a number of artificers in the silk trade
from Athens, and fettling them in Palermo, introduced the cul.
ture of silk into his kingdom, from which it was communicated
to other parts of Italy. Oianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi c. 7.
This seems to have rendered silk so common, that, about the
middle of the fourteenth century, a thbufand citizens of Genoa
appeared in one procession clad in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a
produ&ion of the East. Some plants of the sugar cane wre
brought from Asia; and the first attempt to cultivate them in
Sicily was made about the middle of the twelfth century. Prom
thence they were transplanted into the bouthern province of
Spain. From Spain they were carried to the Canary and Ma.
deira ifies, and at length into the new world. Ludovico Guico
ciardini, in enumeratig the goods imported into Antwerp about
the year oo500 mentions the sugar which they received from
Spain and Portugal as a considerable article. He describes that
figar as the produa of the Madeira and Canary islands. Defcrit.d
Paefi Bassi, p. ro8, iS8. The sugar cane was introduced into
the Wefl Indies before that time, but the cultivation of it.was not
so improved or extensive as to furnilh an article of much confe
quence in commerce. In the middle ages, though sugar was not
raised in such quantities, or employed for so many purpoles, as
to become one of the common neceCfaries of life, it appears tc
have been a considerable article in the commerce of the Italian
Sates.

These varios commodities with which the Italians fwurnii

he 'other nations of Europe, procured them a favourable recep-
tion in every kingdom. They were established in France in the
thirteenth century with most extensive immunities. They not
only obtained every indulgence favourable to their commerce,
but personal rights and privileges were granted to them, which
the natives of the kingdom did not enjoy. Ordon. tom. iv. p.
668. By a special proviso, they were exempted from the Droit
D'Aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards (a name frequently
given to all Italian merchants in many parts of Europe) engrolfed
the trade of every kingdom in which they fettled, they became maf-
ters of its cath. Money of course was in their hands not only a sign
of the value of other commodities, but became an obje& of com-
merce itself. They dealt largely as bankers. In an ordonnance,
A. D. r295, we find them tiled wmrcatores and camnporel. They
carried on this as well as other branches of their commerce with
somewhat of that rapacious spirit which is natural to monopoliz-
ers who are not refrained by the competition of rival traders.
An absurd opinion, which prevailed in the middle ages, was,
however in some measure, the cause of their exorbitant demands,
and may be pleaded in apology for them. Trade cannot be car-
ried on with advantage, unless the persons who lend a fum of
money are allowed a certain premium for the use of it, as a comn
penfation for the rifl which they run in permitting another to
traffic with their flock. This premium is fixed by law in all
commercial countries, and is called the legal interest of money.
But the Fathers of the church had preposterously applied the
prohibitions of usury in ifripture to the payment of legal interest,
and condemned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, miffled by Aristotle,
whose Sentiments they followed implicitly, and without examina-
tion, adopted the fame error, and enforced it. Blackilone's
Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455. Thus
the Lombards found themselves engaged in a traffic which was
tvery where deemed criminal and odious. They were liable to
punishment if detected. They were not satisfied, therefore, with
that moderate premium, which they might have claimed if their
trade had been open and authoriled by law. They exacted a
fum proportional to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Ac-
cordingly, we find that it was usual for them to demand twenty
per cent, for the use of money in the thirteenth century. Murat.
Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About the beginning of that century,
the countess of Slanders was obliged to borrow money in order
to pay her huxband's ranfor. She procured the fum requisite,
either from Italian merchants or from Jews. The lowest interest
which the paid to them was above twenty per cent. and some of
them exacted near thirty. Martene and Durand. Thefaur. An-
ecdotorum, vol. i. p. 886. In the fourteenth century, A. D.
13 1, Philip IV. fixed tle interef which might be legally exa&-
td in the fairs Champagne at twenty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i.
P. 484. The interest of money in Aragon was somewhat lower.
James I. A. D. 1242, fixed it by law at eighteen per cent. Petr.
4t Marca. .Murfa five Limes Hilpan. app. 1433. As late as the

year 1490, it appears that the interest of money in Placentia was
at the rate of forty per cent. This is the more extraordinary, be.
cause at that time the commerce of the Italian states was become
considerable. Memoire Storiche de Piacenza, tom. viii. p. 1o4.
Piac. 1760. It appears from Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V.
had fixed the rate of interest in his dominions in the Low Coun.
tries at twelve per cent. and at the time when he wrote, about the
year i56o, it was not uncommon to exact more than that funs.
le complains of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad effess
both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di Paefi Bassi, p. 17.
The high interest of money is alone a proof that the profits on
commerce were exorbitant; and that it was not carried on to great
extent.-The Lombards were likewise eftablilhed in England in
the thirteenth century, and a considerable street in the city of
London flill bears their name. They enjoyed great privileges,
and carried on an extensive commerce, particularly as bankers
See Anderson's Chronol. Deduction, vol. i.p. 137 , 6o 104, 231.
where the flatutes or other authorities which confirm this are quo.
ted. But the chief mart for Italian commodities was at Bruges.
Navigation was then so imperfea that to fail from any port in the
Baltic, and to return again, was a voyage too great to be performed
in one summer. For that reason, a magazine or storehouse half-way
between the commercial cities in the North, and those in Italy, be.
came neceflary. Bruges was pitched upon as the most convenient
station. That choice introduced vast wealth into the Low Coun.
tries. Bruges was at once the staple for English wool; for the wool.
len and linen manufactures of the Netherlands; for the naval flore
and other bulky commodities of the North; and for the Indian
commodities, as well as domestic prodLJlions imported by the
Italian States. The extent of its commerce in Indian goods with
Venice alone, appears from one faA. In the year 1318, five Ve-
netian galeaffes laden with Indian commodities arrived at Bruges,
in order to dispose of their cargoes at the fair. These galeafes
were vessels of very coniderable burden. L. Guic. Defcritt.di
Paefi Bafi, p. 174. Bruges was the greatest emporium in all
Europe. Many proofs of this occur in the historians and records
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. But, inflead of mul.
tiplying quotations, I {hall refer my readers to Anderson, vol. i.
p. 11, 37, 113, 146, &c. The nature of this work prevents me
from entering into any more minute detail, but there are some de.
tached fads, which give an high idea of the wealth both of the
Flemish and Italian commercial Rates. The Duke of Brabant
contrated his daughter to the Black Prince, son of Edward Ill
of England, A. D. 1339, and gave her a portion which we'ma3
reckon to be of equal value with three hundred thousand poundi
of our present money. Rymer's Ficdera, vol. v. p. x13. Johs
Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a treaty of marriage
between his daughter and Lionel Duke of Clarence, Edward'l
third son, A. D. 1367, and granted her a portion equal to twi
hundred thousand pounds of our present money. Rymer's Feeder
vol vi. p. 547. Thdc exorbitant fums so far exceeding what w

then granted by the moit powerful monarchs, and which appear
extraordinary even in the present age when the wealth of Europe
is Ib much increased, mull have arilcn from the riches which flow-
ed into those countries from their extensive and lucrative com-
merce. The firlt source of wealth to the towns situated on the
Baltic lea seems to have been the herring fishery; the Ihoals of her-
rings frequenting at that time the coasts of Sweden and Denmark,
in the fame manner as they now resort to the Britilh coasts. The
effels of this fifiery are thus described by an author of the thir-
teenth century. The Danes, fays he, who were formerly clad in
the poor garb of sailors, are now clothed'in scarlet, purple, and
fine linen. For they abound with wealth flowing from their an-
nual fishery on the coalt of Schonen; so that all nations resort to
them, bringing their gold, silver, and precious commodities, that
they may purchale herrings, which the divine bounty bestows up-
on them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap. Conring. de Urbib. German.

§s87. The Hanseatic league is the most powerful commercial confede-
racy known in history. Its origin towards the close of the twelfth
century, and the objedls of its union, are described by Knipfchildt
Tractaus Hiftorico Politico Juridicus de Juribus Civitat. Imper.
lib. i. cap. 4. Anderson has mentioned the chief facts with refpet
to their commercialprogrefs, the extent of the privileges which
they obtained in different countries, their successful wars with fe-
veral monarchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with which they con-
tended for those liberties and rights without which it is impolfible
to carry on commerce to advantage. The vigorous efforts of a
society of merchants attentive only to commercial objeCds, could
not fail of diffusing new and more liberal ideas concerning justice
and order in every country of Europe where they fettled.

In England, the progress of commerce was extremely flow; and
the causes of this are obvious. During the Saxon heptarchy, Eng-
land, i-plit into many petty kingdoms, which were perpetually at
variance with each other; exposed to the fierce incurlioin of the
Danes, and other northern pirates, and funk in barbarity and ig-
norance, was in no condition to cultivate commerce, or to pursue
any system of useful and salutary policy. When a better profpet
began to open by the union of the kingdom under one monarch,
the Norman conquest took place. This occasioned such a violent
fIock, as well as such a sudden and total revolution of propertv,
that the nation did not recover from it during several reigns. 1;y
the time that the conflitution began to acquire some Itability, and
the Englilh had so incorporated with their conquerors as to be-
come one people, the nation engaged with no less ardour than
imprudence in support of the pretenlions of their sovereigns to the
crown of France, and long wafted its vigour and genius in its
wiid efforts to conquer that kingdom. When by its ill fulccefs,
and ..eatcd disappointments, a period was at raft put to this fa-
tai pl. nzy, and the nation beginning to enjoy Ibme rcpole, had
leifurc to breathe and to gather new strength, the destructive wars
between the houses of York and Lancaster broke out, and involv-
Vol. I. Y

td the kir.gdom in the worfit of all calamities. Thus, besides the
common obftruaions of commerce occasioned by the nature of
the feudal government, and the state of manners during the mid.
dle ages, its progress in England was retarded by peculiar causes
Such a fuccefflon of events adverse to the commercial spirit wau
sufficient to have checked its growth, although every other circum.
fiance had favoured it. The Engliih were accordingly one of the
afi nations in Europe who availed themselves of those commercial
advantages which were natural or peculiar to their country. Be-
fore the reign of Edward III. all the wool of England, except a
small quantity wrought into coarse cloths for home consumption,
was fold to the Flemings or Lombards, and manufatured by them.
Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some of the Plemif
weavers to fettle in England, it was long before the English were
capable of fabricating cloth for foreign markets, and the export
es unwrought ool itill continued to be the chief article of their
commerce. Anderson passim. All foreign commodities were
brought into England by the Lombards or Hanseatic merchants.
The Engli&h ports were frequented by Ihips both from the north
and south of Europe, and they tamely allowed foreigners to reap
all the profits irising from the supply of their wants. The firt
commercial treaty of England on record, is that with Haquin king
of Norway, A.D. 1217. Anders. vol i.p. xoS. But the Englilh
did not venture to trade in their own Ihips to the Baltic until the
beginning of the fourteenth century lb. Ib. . It was after the
middle of the fifteenth, before they lent any (hip into the Mediter-
ranean. Ib. p. 1 77. Nor was it long before this period that their
vessels began to visit the ports of Spain or Portugal. But though
I have pointed out-the flow progress of the Englifi commerce as
a faA little attended to, and yet meriting consideration, the con-
course of foreigners to the ports of England, together with the
communication among all the different countries in Europe, which
went on.increafing from the beginning of the twelfth century, i
fufficieia to justify all the observations and reasonings in the text
concerning the influence of commerce-on the fate of manners and
of society.

NOTE XXXI. Se& Il. p.i 37. [HH].

I have not been able to discover the precise manner in whild

the jufliza was appointed. Among the claims of the junta or ai,
formed against James I. A. D. 1264, this was one; that the kina
should not nominate any person to be juftiza, without the confenl
or approbation of the ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Analesdm
Aragon, vol. i. p. I8o. But the king in his answer to their re
monstrance asserts, " that it was efiablifed by immemorial pra
tice, and was conformable to the laws of the kingdom, that tb
king, in virtue of his royal prerogative, ihould name the jufiza.'
Zurita, ibid. iS. Blanca, 636. From another paffige in Zui
ta, it appears, that while the Aragonefe enjoyed the privilege C
tbe aicn, i e. the power of confederating against their fovereigna
often as they conceived that he had violated any of their rngh

and immunities, thejuftiza was not only nominated by the king,
hut held his office during the king's pleasure. Nor was this prac-
tice attended with any bad effects, as the privilege of the union was
a sufficient and effectual check to any abuse of the royal preroga-
tive. But when the privilege of the union was abolished as dan-
gerous to the order and peace of society, it was agreed that the
jufliza ihould continue in office during life. Several kings, how-
ever, attempted to remove juftizas who were obnoxious to them,
and they Sometimes succeeded in the attempt. In order to guard
against this encroachment, which would have destroyed the inten-
tion of the infitution, and have rendered the juftiza the dependent
and tool of the crown, instead of the guardian of the people, a law
was ena&ed in the Cortes, A. D. 1442, ordaining that the jufliza
thould continue in office during life, and should not be removed
from it unless by the authority of the Cortes. F ros & Obfervan-
cias del Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p. 22. By formelaws the person
of the juftiza had been declared sacred, and he was responsible on-
lyto the Cortes. Ibid. p. rS, b. Zurita and Blanca, who bbth
published their histories while the jufliza of Aragon retained tha-
full exercise of his privileges and jurisdiction, have neglected to,
explain several circumstances with regard to the office of that re-
fpe&able magistrate, because they addressed their works to their
countrymen, who were well acquainted with every particular con-
cerning the funcions of a judge, to whom they looked up as to
the guardian of their liberties. It is vain to consult the later hifto-
rians of Spain, about any point with refped to which the excellent
hiltorians whom I have named are silent. The ancient conflitu-
tion of their country was overturned, and despotism established on
the ruin of its liberties, when the writers of this and the preceding
century composed their histories, and on that account they had lit-
tle curofity to know the nature of those institutions to which their
ancetfors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or they were afraid to
describe them with much accuracy. The spirit with which Mari-
ana, his continuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write their histories, is
very different from that of the two historians of Aragon,from whomn
I have taken my account of the constitution of that kingdom.

Two circumstances concerning the juftiza, besides those which
I have mentioned in the text, are worthy of observation: I. None
of the ricos-hombres, or noblemen of the first order, could be ap-
pointed juftiza. He was taken out of the second class of cavalle-
ros, who seem to have been nearly of the fame condition or rank
with gentlemen or commoners in Great Britain. Fueros & Ob-
fervanc. del Reyno, &r. lib. i. p. 2i, b. The reason was, By the-
laws of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were not subjea to capital pu-
nilhment; but as it was necefrary for the security of liberty, that
thi juftiza fholuld be accountable for the manner in which he ex-
ecuted the high trust reposcd in him, it was a powerful restraint
ulpon him to know that he was liable to be punished capitally.
Bidana, p. 657, 756. Zurita, tom. ii. 229. Fueros & Oblervanc..
lib ix.p. p82,h. 183. It appears too, from many passages in Zu-
tita, that the juftiza was appointed to check the ckmineering and

Y 2

opprcffive spirit of the nobkts, as well as to set bounds to the pow-
er of the mncarch, and therefore he was chosen from an order of
citi-ens equaly intere!fed in opposing both.

2. A rma.ifirate po.T fld of such extensive powers as the jufli.

za, might have exercised them in a manner pernicious to the hate,
if he himself had been subjed to no controul. A constitutional re-
medy was on that account provided against this danger. Seven.
teen perifns were thefen by lot in ea:h meeting of the Cortes.
Thcfe fonned a tribunal called the court of inquisition into the of.
fice ofjiifuiza. This court met at three stated terris in each year.
Eve-v-- pcron had liberty of compiainiig to it of any iniquity or
ncgl.h- c- duty in the juifiza, or in the inferior judges, who ated
in his .:._nt. Tlhejufllza and his deptuzies were called to answer
for tl:heir conduat. ' he members of the court l'.rfed sentence by
b:il.;t. 'I leVy miglt puni;fn by degra-'ic.n, roi ef!cation of goods,
tr tven W 'ithi dCeath. The law which ereSled this court, and regu.
lired ti.c forTi of its procedure, was enacted, A. D. 146I. Zuri.
ta A.naies, iv. toz. B!anca Commrtnt. Rer. Aragon, 770. Previ-
ous to this period, inquiry was made into the condu& of the jufti.
za, though not with the fame formality. He was, from the first
inrfitution ot the office, fubjeca to the review of the Cortes. The
cor.nflnt dread of such an impartial and severe inquiry into his be.
haviour, was a powerful motive to the vigilant and faithful dif.
charge of his duty. A remarkable infance of the authority of
the ijuiiza when opposed to that of the king occurs in the year
i 4G6. By the conftiution of Aragon, the eldest son or heir appa.
rcr.. or the crown poflcffed considerable power and jurifdidion in
the '. inudom. Fueros & Obfervan. del Reyno de Arag. lib. i. p.
i6 I'ee r iV. infligated by a second wife, attempted td deprive
his son o thfis, and eio.intd his fubjeAs to vield him no obedience.
'Th' -'.irce ilz.mreiatclv applied to the juftiza; 1' the safeguard
ar.d < c':cnc, ia s Zurita, aaainit all violence and oppresion."
'Thejuiiza grannted him the jsa; , dcrecho, the effeE of which was,
t'rat upon his gi- ing surety to appear in judgment, he could not
be d.ri-cd oi any limrunity or privilege which he possessed, but
in ccni 'rc!eice ot a legal trial before the juftiza, and of a fenttece
pronoun.td by him. This was pu!.l:fhcd throughout the king'
tcrn, anil notwithstanding the proclamation in contradiction to
this wh.:'h had b<en iflued by the king, the prince continued in
the cxercife of ali his rights, and his authority was univerfallyrec
co.n;z 1 2"uria Analcs de Aragon, tom.ii. 385.

NOTE XXXII. Sea. II.. 13 7. [11.j

I have been induced, by the concurring testimony of manyre

fpc-;atie aithcrs, to mention this as the constitutional form 0
the oath of allkgiance, which the Arrsonefe took to their fove
reign . I muff acknow!edge, however,, that 1 have not fouun
this fEngu!ar oath in any Spanilh author whom I have had an op
por:.i'.tv of cenfu'ling. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, no
B!anr-a, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, ho were all hiltoriographer
appoui;t.d by t - Cortes of Aragon to record the tranIabionls o

the kingdom. All these writers possess a merit which is very
rare among historians. They are extremely accurate in tracing-
the progress of the laws and constitution of their country. Their
silence with respect to this; creates some fuflicion concerning the
genuineness of the oath. But as it is mentioned by so many au-
thors, who produce the ancient Spanilh words, in which it is ex-
pressed, it is probable that they have taken it from some writer of
credit, whose works have not fallen into my hands. The spirit
of the oath is perfectly agreeable to the genius of the Aragonefe
constitution. Since the publication of the first edition, the learn-
ed M. Totze, profefoir of history at Batzow in the Dutchy of
Mecklenburgh, has been so good as to point out to me a Spanish
author of great authority, who has published the words of this
oath. It is Antonio Perez, a native ofAragon, secretary to Phi-
lip II. The words of the oath are, " Nos, quevalemos tanto co-
mo vos, os hazemos nueftro Rey y Segnor, cital que nos guar-
deys nueftros fueros, y libertades, y si No, No." Las Obras y
Rclaciones de Ant. Perez. 8vo. par Juan de la Planche 1631. p.
143.

The privilege of union, which I have mentioned in the preced-
ing note, and alluded to it in the text, is indeed one of the most
singular which could take place in a regular government, and the
oath that I have quoted expresses nothing more than this conftitu-
tional privilege entitled the Aragonefe to perform If the king or
his ministers violated any of the laws or immunities of the Ara-
gonele, and did not grant immediate redress in consequence of
their representations and remonstrances, the nobles of the first
rank, or Rica.-hombrcs de natura, Y de mernada, the equestrian order, or
the nobility of the feconi class, called Hidal$os & Ifaciones, toge-
ther with the magifirates of cities, might, either in the Cortes, or
in a voluntary assembly, join in union, and binding themselves:
by mutual oaths and the exchange of hostages to be faithful to
each other, they might require the king, in. the name and by the
authority of this body corporate, to grant them redress. If the
king refused to comply with their request, or tookarms in order to.
oppose them, they might, in virtue of the privilege of union, in.
ftantly withdraw their allegiance from the king, retuse to acknow-
ledge him as-their sovereign, and proceed to eleda.another mon-
arch, nor did they incur any guilt, or become liable to- any pro-
feution on that account. Blanca Cornm Rer. Arag. 661, 669.
This union did not resemble the confederacies in other feudal
lingdoms. It was a conifitutional association, in which legal.
privileges were vested, which issued its mandates under a com-
mon feal, and proceeded in all its operations by regular and afcer-
tained forms. This dangerous right was not only claimed but
txercifed. In the year 118.7, the Aragonefe formed an union in-
oppoition to Alfonlb Ill. and obliged that king not only to com-
ply with their demands, but to ratify a privilege so fatal to the
power of the crown. Zurita Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the
)car 1347, an union was formed against Peter 1V. with equat
llucc-s, and a new ratification of the privilege was extorted. Zi>-

Y3

rira, tom. ii. p 202. But soon after, the king having defeated
the leaders of the union in battle, the privilege of union was si-
nally abrogated in the Cortes, and all the laws or records which
contained any confirmation of it were cancelled or deflroyed.
The king, in presence ot the Cortes, called for the a&t whereb
he had ratified the union, and having wounded his hand with
his poniard, he held it above the record, "that privilege, fays

he, which has been so fatal to the kingdom, and so injurious

·' to royalty, should be effaced with the blood of a king." ZuW
rita, tom. ii. p. 229. The law abolishing the union is publith.
ed. Furos .& Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. I78. From that period the
jftiza became the constitutional guardian of public liberty, and
his power and jurifdidion occasioned none of those violent con-
vulfions which the tumultuary privilege of the union was apt to
produce. The constitution of Aragon, however, flill remained
extremely free. 'ne source of this liberty arose from the early
admission of the representatives of the cities into the Cortes. It
jeems probable from Zurita, that burgesses were conflituent
nerr.bers of the Cortes from its first institution. He mentions a
meeting of Cortes, A. D. 1X33, in which the proturadoret de la
,iL Jer ? ;lljs were present. Tom. i. p. 51. This is the confti-
tutionaI language in which their pretence is declared in the Cortes,
after the journals of that court were regularly kept. It is proba-
E!e, that a historian so accurate as Zurita would not have used
there words, if he had not taken them from some authentic re-
cord. It was more than a century after this period before the re-
prefcntatives of cities formed a conflituent part in the supreme as.
femblies of the other European nations. The free spirit of the
Araronefe government is conspicuous in many particulars. The
Ccrtis not only opposed the attempts of their kings to increase
thai: revtnue, or to extend their prerogative, but they claimed
rights ard cxercifed powers which will appear extraordinary even
in a country accrftomed to the enjoyment of liberty. In theyear
1 a26, the Cortes claimed the prifiege of naming the members of
the k:ng's council and the officers of his household, and they seem
to have cbtained it for some time. Zurita, tom. i. p. 303, 307.
It was the privilege of the Cortes to name the officers who
commanded the troops raised by their authority. This seems to
be evident from a passage in Zurita. When the Cortes, in the
Near ;503, raised a body of troops to be employed in Italy, it pas-
fed an ad empowering the king to name the officers who should
command them. Zurita, tom. v. p. 274; which plainly implies
that. .-ithout this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue of
hi Dprerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de A-
ragon, two general declarations of the rights and privileges of
the Ar:gontfe are publilbed; the one, in the reign of Pedro I.
A. D. 1*i3; the other, in that of James 11. A.D. 1315. They
are of such a length, that I cannot insert them; but it is evident
from thcfe, that not only the privileges of the nobility, but the
rights of the people, personal as well as political, were, at that pe-
riod, nmore cxtelfivc and better underiiood than in any kingdom

in, Europe. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The oath by which the king bound
himfclf to observe thore rights and liberties of the people, was very
solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p. xS. The Cortes of Aragon discover-
ed not only the jealousy and vigilance which are peculiar to free
fiates, in guarding the essential parts of the constitution, but they
were Icrupuloufly attentive to observe the most minute forms and
cc. emonies to which they were accufomed. According to the
eflablifhed laws and customs of Aragon, no foreigner had liberty
to enter the hall in which the Cortesaffembled. Ferdinand, in the
year 1481, appointed his queen, Isabella, regent of the kingdom,
while he was absent during the course of the campaign. The
law required that a regent should take the oath of fidelity in pre-
ftnce of the Cortes; but as Isabella was a foreigner, before she
could be admitted, the Cortes thought it necessary to pass an aet
authorizing the ferjeant-porter to open the door of the hall, and
to allow her to enter; 1' so attentive were they (fays Zurita) to
" observe their laws and forms, even such as may seem most mi-
," nute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

The Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure the personal

rights of individuals, than to maintain the freedom of the conftitu-
tion; and the spirit of their statutes with respect to both was e-
qually liberal. Two fadcs relative to this matter merit obferva-
tion. By an express statute in the year 1335, it was declared to
be unlawful to put any native Aragonefe to the torture. If he
could not be convicted by the testimony of witnesses, he was in-
fiantly absolved. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the re-
gulation with the fatiEfaftion natural to an historian, when he con-
templates the humanity of his countrymen. He compares the
laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both exempted citizens and
freemen from such ignominious and cruel treatment, and had re-
course to it only in the trial of slaves. Zurita had reason to be-
flow such an encomium on the laws of his country. Torture was
at that time permitted by the laws of every other nation in Eu-
rope. Even in England, from which the mild spirit of legislation
has long baniihed it, torture was not, at that time, unknown. Ob-
fcrvations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, &c. p. 66.

The other fad shows, that the fame spirit which influenced the

legislature prevailed among the people. In the year 1483, the re-
ligious zeal of Ferdinand and Isabella prompted them to intro-
duce the inquisition into Aragon. 'I'hough the Aragonefe were
no less fuperltitioufly attached than the other Spaniards to the Ro-
man Catholic faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds of
error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors had scattered, yet
they took arms against the inquisitors, murdered the chief inqui-
fitor, and long opposed the establishment of that tribunal. The
realon which they gave for their conduct was, That the mode of
trial in the inquisition was inconfittent with liberty. The crimi-
nal was not confronted with the witnesses, he was not acquaint-
ed with what they deposed againt him, he was fubjetded to torture,
and the goods of persons condemned were confiscated. Zurita
Analcs, torn. iv. p. 341.

The form of government in the kingdom of Valencia, an&

principality of Catalonia, which were annexed to the crown of
Aragon, was likewise extremely favourable to liberty. The Va.
lencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the fame manner with
the Aragonefe. But they had no magistrate resembling thejufti.
za. The Catalonians were no less jealous of their liberties than
the two other nations, and no less bold in aflerting them. But it
is not necessary for illufirating the following hiflory to enter into
any farther detail concerning the peculiarities in the conflitutioa
of thefr kingdoms.

NOTE XXXIII. SeHr. Il. p. 138. [KIq.

I have searched in vain among the historians of Castile for such

information as might enable me to trace the progress of laws and
government in Caflile, or to explain the nature of the conflitu.
tion with the fame degree of accuracy wherewith I have defcrib-
ed the political slate of Aragon. It is manifest not only from the
hifiorians of Caflile, but from its ancient laws, particularly the
Fuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally eletive. Ley,
A, $, 8. They were chosen by the bishops, the nobility, and the
people, ibid. It appears from the fame venerable code of laws,
that the prerogative of the Castilian monarchs was extremely
limited. Villaldiego, in his commentary on the Feuro Juzgo,
produces many sacs and authorities in confirmation of both these
articulars. Dr. Geddes, who was well acquainted with Spanilh
literature, complains that he could find no author who gave a di-
flincA account of the Cortes or supreme assembly of the nation, or
who delcibed the manner in which it was held, or mentioned
the precise number of members who had a right to fit in it. He
produces, however, from Gil Gonzales d'Avila, who published a
history of Henry 1I. the writ of summons to the town of Abula,
requiring it to chufe representatives to appear in the Cortes which
he called to meet, A. D. I390. From this we learn, that pre-
lates, dukes, marquifles, the mailers of the three military orders,
condes and ricos-hombres were required- to attend. These cornm-
posed the bodies of ecclefiaflics and nobles, which formed two
members of the legislature. The cities which sent members to
that meeting of the Cortes were forty-eight. The number of re-
presentatives (for the cities had right to chufe more or fewer ac-
cording to their refpetdive dignity) amounted to an hundred
and twenty-five. Geddes' Miccellaneous Tracts. vol. i. 331.
Zurita having occasion to mention the Cortes which Ferdinand
held at Toro, A. D. 50o5, in order to secure for himself the go-
vernment of Castile after the death of Isabella, records, with his
usual accuracy, the names of the members present, and of the
cities which they represented. From that lift it appears, that on-
ly eighteen cities had deputies in this affcmbly. Anales de Ara-
gon, tom. vi p. 3. What was the occasion of this great differ-
ence in the number of cities represented in tbcfe two meetings
of the Cortes, I am unable to explain.

NOTE XXXIV. Set. III. p. 140. [LL.

A great part of the territory in Spain was engrossed by the

nobility. L. Marinaeus Siculus, who composed his treatise De
Rebus Hifpanie during the reign of Charles V. gives a catalogue
of the Spanish nobility, together with the yearly rent of their
eltates. According to his account, which he affirms was as ac-
curate as the nature of the subject would admit, the fum total of
the anuual revenue of their lands amounted to one million four
hundred and eighty-two thousand ducats. If we make allowance
for the great difference in the value of money in the fifteenth cen-
tury from that which it now bears, and confider that the cata-
logue of Marinaus includes only the 'itulados, or nobility whose
famlilies were diiiinguifhed by some honorary title, their wealth
nill appear very great. L. Marineus ap. Schotti Scriptores
llifpan. vol. i. p. 323. The commons of Castile, in their con-
tells with the crown, which I shall hereafter relate, complain of
the extensive property of the nobility as extremely pernicious to
the kingdom. In one of their manifestoes they alfert, that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Gallicia, which was an hundred leagues,
the crown did not possess more than three villages. All the reft
belonged to the nobility, and could be fubjeAed to no public
burden. Sandov. Vida del Emperor Carl. V. vol. i. p. 422. It
appears from the testimony of authors quoted by Bovadilla, that
thele extensive poiTeffions were bestowed upon the ricoJ-koures
hbuta'go, and cuauvioe.o, by the kings of Cafile, in reward for the
affiltance which they had received from them in expelling the
Moors. They likewise obtained by the fame means a confidera-
ble influence in the cities, many of which anciently depended
upon the nobility. Politica para Corregidores. Amb. 7o0. fol.
vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXV. Set. IIIp. p. 4. [MM].

I have been able to discover nothing certain, as I obServed

Note XVIII. with refpem& to the origin of communities or free
cities in Spain. It is probable that as soon as the considerable
towns were recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed
their rcfidence in them, being persons ofdiftinction and credit,
had all the privileges of municipal government and juridiclion
conferred upon them. Many firiking proofs occur of the fplen-
dour, wealth, and power of the Spanish cities. Hieronymus Paul-
us wrote a description of Barcelona in the'year 1491, and com-
pares the dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and the ele-
gance of it buildings, the variety of its manufactures, and the ex-
tent ot its commerce, to Florence. Hieron. Paulus ap. Schottum
Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marinaeus describes Toledo as a large and
populous city. A great number of its inhabitants were persons
of quality and of illutlrious rank. Its commerce was great. It
carried on with great acaivity and success the manufactures of silk
and u ool; and the number of inhabitants employed il these two
branches ot traie, amounted nearly to ten thousand, Marin. ubi
supr. p. 3oj. I know no city, lays he, that I would prefer to

'aUladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p. 312. We may
form some eflimate of its populousness from the following cir.
cumstances. The citizens having taken arms in the year 1516,
in order to oppose a measure concerted by cardinal Ximenes,
they mustered in the city, and in the territory which belonged to
it, thirty thousand fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl.
V. tom. i. p. 81. The manufactures carried on in the towns of
Spain were not intended merely for home consumption, they
were exported to foreign countries, and their commerce was a
considerable iource of wealth to the inhabitants. The maritime
laws of Barcelona are the foundation of mercantile jurisprudence
in modern times, as the Leges Rhodia were among the ancients.
All the commercial states in Italy adopted these laws, and regu.
lated their trade according to them. Sandi Storia Civile Vene.
ziani, vol. ii. 865. It appears from several ordonnances of the
kings of France, that the merchants of Aragon and Castile were
received on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame privileges
with those of Italy. Ordonnances des Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135.
iii. r66, c04, 635. Cities in such a flourishing slate became a re-
fpctabie part of the Ibciety, and were entitled to a considerable
1hare in the legislature. The magistrates of Barcelona aspired to
the highest honour a Spanilh subjcd can enjoy, that of being co.
vered m the presence of their sovereign, and of being treated as
grndees of the kingdom. Origin de la dignidad de Grande de
Caflilla por Don Alonfo Carillo. Madr. 165 7. p. 18.

NOTE XXXVI. Sea . p. 144. [NN].

The military order of St. Jago, the most honourable and opu-

lent of the three Spanish orders, was instituted about the year
1170. The bull of confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A.D.
1176. At that time a considerable part of Spain fiill remained
under fubjetion to the Moors, and the whole country was much
exposed to depredations not only of the enemy, but of banditti
It is no wonder then, that an institution, the objec of which was
to oppose the enemies of the Christian hith, and to restrain and
punirh those who disturbed the public peace, should be extremely
popular, and meet with general encouragement. The wealth
and power of the order became so great, that according to one
historian the grand rmarer of St. Jago was the person in Spain of
greatest power and dignity next to the king. .l1. Anton. Ne-
.rirfcnfis, ap. Schott. Scrip. Hifp. i. 8r2. Another historian ob-
serves, that the order pofcfled every thing in Caltile that a king
would most desire to obtain. 'Lurita Anaics, v. 22. The knights
took the vows of obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chastity.
By the former they were bound implicitly to obey the commands
of their grand master. The order could bring into the field a
thousand men at arms. ,E1. Ant. Nebref. p. 813. If, as we
hare reason to believe, there men at arms were accompanied, as
was usual in that age, this was a formidable body -of cavalry.
There belonged to this order eighty-four comnmanderies, and two
hundred priories and other benefices. Dissertations fur la Cheva-

lrie par Hon. de St. Marie, p. z62. It is obvious how formida-
ble to his sovereign the command of these troops, the adminifira-
tion of such revenues, and the disposal of so many offices, must
have rendered a subjed. The other tJo orders, though inferior
to that of St. Jago in power and wealth, were nevertheless very
considerable fraternities. When the conquest of Granada de-
prived the knights of St. Jago of those enemies againit whom
their zeal was originally directed, fuperflition found out a new
object, in defence of which they engaged to employ their cou.
rage. To their usual oath, they added the following clause:
" We do swear to believe, to maintain, and to contend in public
and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the Mother of God, our
Lady, was conceived without the stain of original fin. "-This ad-
dition was made about the middle of the seventeenth century.
lIonore de St. Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 263.-Nor is such a
fingilar engagement peculiar to the order of St. Jago. The mem-
bers of the second military order in Spain, that of Calatrava, e-
qually zealous to employ their prowess in defence of the honours
of the Blessed Virgin, have likewise professed themselves her true
knights. Their vow, conceived in terms more theologically ac-
curate than that of St. Jago, may afford some amusement to an
Englilh reader. i' I vow to God, to the Grand Mailer, and to
you who here represent his person, that now, and for ever, I will
maintain and contend, that the Virgin Mary, Mother of God,
our Lady, was conceived withput original fin, and never incurred
the pollution of it; but that in the moment of her happy concep-
tion, and of the union of her foul with her body, the Divine Grace
prevented and preserved her from original guilt, by the merits
of the passion and death of Christ our Redeemer, her future son,
foreseen in the Divine Council, by which ihe was truly redeemed,
and by a more noble kind of redemption than any of the children
of Adam. In the belief of this truth, and in maintaining the ho-
nour of the most Holy Virgin, through the strength of Almighty
God, I will live and will die." Definiciones de la Orden de Ca-
latrava, conforme al Capitulo General en 1652, fol. Madr. 1748.
p. 153. Though the church of Rome hath prudently avoided to
give its farkion to the dodirine of the immaculate conception,
and the two great monastic orders of St. Dominick and St. Fran.
cis have espoused opposite opinions concerning it, the Spaniards
are such ardent champions for the honour of the Virgin, that
when the present king of Spain inflituted a new military order in
the year 1771, in commemoration of the birth of his grandson,
he put it under the immediate proteCtion of the most Holy Mary
in the mystery of her immaculate conception. Conflitutiones de
la Real y diftinguida Orden. Efpanola de Carlos III. p. 7. To
undertake the defence of the Virgin Mary's honour, had such a
resemblance to that (pecies of refined gallantry, which was the
original object of chivalry, that the zeal with which the military
orders bound themselves, by a solemn vow, to defend it, was
worthy of a true knight in those ages, when the spirit of the in-
ititution subsisted in full vigour. But in the present age, it must

excite some surprise to fee the inflitution of an illustrious order
connected with a doctrine so extravagant and destitute of any
foundation in scripture.

NOTE XXXVII. Sea. III. p. 146. [00].

T have frequently had occasion to take notice of the defects in

police during the middle ages, occasioned by the feebleness of go.
ernnment, and the want of proper subordination among the dif.
ferent ranks of men. I have observed in a former Note, that
this greatly interrupted the intercourse between nations, and even
between different places in the fame kingdom. The description
which the Spanish hiflorians give of the frequency of rapine, mur.
Cer, and every aA of violence, in all the provinces of Spain, are
amazing, and present to us the idea of a society but little removed
from the disorder and turbulence of that which has been called a
tate of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. i75. .El. Ant. Ne.
brifenfis rer. a Ferdin. gellar. Hist. ap. Schottum, ii. 849. Tho'
the excess of thele dilbrders rendered the inititution of the 8anta
Herrw~dad necefiary, great care was taken at first to avoid giving
any offence or alarm to the nobility. The jurifdition of the
judges of the Hermandad was expressly confined to crimes which
violated the public peace. All other offences were left to the
cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a person was guilty of the
mnofi notorious perjury, in any trial before a judge of the Her.
mandad, he could not punilh him, but was obliged to remit the
cafe to the ordinary judge of the place. Commentaria in Regias
Hifpan. Conflitut. per Alph. de Azevedo, pars v. p. 220, &c.
fol. Duaci, 16 2. Notwithstanding these reftridlions, the barons
were early sensible how much the eftablilhment of the Hermandad
would encroach on their jurifdidion. In Castile Come opposition
was made to the institution; but Ferdinand had the address to obh
tain the content of the Constable to the introduction of the Her-
mandad into that part of the kingdom where his estate lay; and
by that means, as well as the popularity of the institution, he fur.
mounted every obstacle that flood in its way. E1I. Ant. Nebrif-
fen. 85 . In Aragon, the nobles combined againf it with greater
pirit; and Ferdinand, though he supported it with vigour, was
obliged to make some conccffions, in order to reconcile them.
Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The power and revenue of the
Hermandad in Castile seems to have been very great. Ferdinand:
when preparing for the war against the Moors in Granada, re
quired of the Hermandad to furnish him sixteen thousand beast
of burden, together with eight thousand men to condu& them
and he obtained what he demanded. SEI. Ant. Nebriff. 88l
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much use in preferv.
ing peace, and rcftraining or detecting crimes, that it is itill con
tinued in Spain; but as it is no longer necessary either for mode
rating the power of the nobility, or extending that of the crown
the vigour and authority of the institution diminilhes gradually.

NOTE XXXVIIL Se&. III.p. 48. [PP].

Nothing is more common among antiquaries, and there is not
a more copious oIurce of error, than to decide concerning the in-
flitutions and manners of past ages, by the forms and ideas which
prevail in their own times. The French lawyers in the seven-
teentll and eighteenth centuries, having found their sovereigns in
polreffion of ahfolute power, seem to think it a duty incumbent
on thenl to maintain that such unbounded authority belonged to
the crown in every period of their monarchy. c' The govern-
ment of France," fays M. de Real very gravely, " is purely mo-
narchical at this day, as it was from the beginning. Our kings
were absolute originally as they are at present." Science du Go-
veruement, tom, i. p. 3 1. It is impossible, however, to conceive
two flates of civil society more unlike to each other, than that of
the French nation under Clovis, and that under Lewis XV. It
is evident from the codes of laws of the various tribes which set-
tled in Gaul and the countries adjacent to it, as well as from the
history of Gregory of Tours, and othei early annalists, that a-
mong all these people the form of government was extremely
rude and simple, and that they had scarcely begun to acquire the
first rudiments of that order and police which are necelfary in ex-
tensive societies. The king or leader had the command of fol-
diers or companions, who followed his standard from choice, not
by constraint. I have produced the clearest evidence of this,
Note VI. An event related by Gregory of Tours, lib iv. c. 14.
affords the most striking proof of the dependence of the early
French kings on the sentiment and inclination of their people.
Clotaire I. having marched at the head of his army, in the year
55 , against the Saxons, that people, intimidated at his approach,
sued for peace, ahd offered to pay a large fum to the offended
monarch. Clotaire was willing to close with what they propos-
ed. But his army insisted to be led forth to battle. The king
employed all his eloquence to persuade them to accept of what
the Saxons were ready to pay. The Saxons, in order to soothe
them, increased their original offer. The king renewed his soli-
citations: but the army, enraged, ruffed upon the king, tore his
tent in pieces, dragged him out of it,- and would have slain him
on the spot, if he had not consented to lead them instantly against
the enemy.

If the early monarchs of France possessed such limited authori-

ty, even while at the head of their army, their prerogative during
peace will be found to be till more confined. They ascended the '
throne not by any hereditary right, but in consequence of the e-
lesion of their fubjets. In order to avoid an unnecessary num-
ber of quotations, I refer my readers to Hottomanni Francogallia,
cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will find the fullest proof
of this from Gregory of Tours, Amoinus, and the most authen-
tic historians of the Merovingian kings. The effet of this elec-
tion was not to invest them with absolute power. Whatever re -
lated to the general welfare of the nation, was submitted to pu.
blic deliberation, and determined by the suffrage of the peoples

Vol. L.

in the annual affcmblies called Les Champs de Mars and Les
Champs de Mai. These alremblies were called Cbamwp, because,
according to the custom of all the barbarous nations, they were
leld in thc open air, in some plain capable of containing the vast
.numer of persons who had a right to be present. Jo. Jac. Sor.
berus de Comitiis veterum Germanorum, vol. i. § 19, &c. 'They
?were denominated Champs de Mars and de Mai, from the months
m which they were held. Every freeman seems to have had a
right to be prefrnt in these afhemblies. Sorberus, ibid. § 133,
&c. The ancient annals of the Franks deferibe the persons who
were present in the afcmbly held A. D. 788, in these words: In
placito Ingelheimenfi conveniunt pontifices, majores, minores
facerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, prafedti, civis, oppidani, Apud
Sorber. 5 304. There every thing that concerned the happiness
of their countrv, fays an ancient hiflorian, every thing that could
be-of benefit to the Franks, was confidered and enjoined. Fre-
degarius ap. Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Campus Martii. Chlothari.
us II. defribes the business, and acknowledges the authority of
there alemblies. They are called, fays he, that whatever relates
to the common fafcty may be confidered and resolved by com-
mon deliberation; and whatever they determine, to that I will
conform, Amoinus de Geit Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Re-
cueil, iii. 1x6. The flatutory clauses, or words of legislative aup
thority in the decrees issued in there affemhlies, run not in the
name of the king alone. " We have treated, fays Childebert, in
a decree, A. D. 5j3, in the assembly of ~March, together with
our nobles, concerning some affairs, and we now publilh the con-
clufion, that it may come to the knowledge of all." Childeb.
Decrtt. ap. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 3. We have
agreed together with our vaffa!s, Ibid. 5§'. It is agreed in the
aiEmbly in which we were aU united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws,
the most venerable monument of French jurisprudence, were e-
nated in the fame manner. Di&averunt Salicam legem proceres
ipfius gentis, qui tune temporis apud earn erant Reaores. Sunt
autem elefti de pluribus vii quatuor--qui per tres Mallos con-
venientes, omnes caufarum origines solicit difcurrendo, tradantes
de fingulisjudicium decreverunt hoc modo. Prsef. Leg. Salic.
ap. Bouquet. Ibid. p. ira. Hoc decretum eit apud regem &
principes ejus, & apud cundlum populum Chriftianum, qui infra
reguum Merwingorum confiflunt. Ibid . p. 24. Nay, even in
their charters, the kings of the firfI race are careful to specify
that they were granted with the content of their vassals. Ego
Childebertus Rex una cum confcnfu & voluntate Francorum, &c.
A.D. 558. Bouquet, ibid. 6z22. Chlotharius III. una cum pa-
tribus noftris epifcopis, optimatibus, ceterifque palatii noftri mini-
Iris, A.D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenlu fidelium nofirorum.
Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 239. The historians likewise describe
the functions of the king in the national assemblies in such terms
as imply that his authority there was extremely finall, and that
every thing depended on the court itlelf. Ipfe Rex (fays the au-
thor of the Annales Francorum, speaking of the Field of March)

fedebat' in fela regia, circumftante exercitu, pracipiebatque is, die
illo, quicquid a Francis decretum erat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii.

p, 647. That the general assemblies exercised supreme jnrifdision over
all persons, and with' refped to all causes, is so evident as to stand
in need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut, A.D. 6x3, how
unjult soever the sentence against her may bei as related by Fre-
drgarius, Chron. cap. 42. Bouquet, ib. 430, is in itself sufficient
proof of this. The notorious violence and iniquity of the sentence

rye to demonRfrate the extent of jurifdidtion which this aiFembly
poffefled, as a prince so sanguinary as Clothaire II. 'ought the
fantion of its authority would be sufficient to juflify his rigorous
treatment of the mother ant grandmother of so many kings.

With respeCt to conferring donatives on the prince, we may

obfcrve, that among nations whole manners and political inftitu-
tions are simple, the public as well as individuals, having few
wants, they are little acquainted with taxes, and free uncivilised
tribes disdain to submit to any fated imposition. This was rev
markahly the cafe of the Germans, and of all the various people
that iTlued from that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes not
to he of German origin, because they submitted to pay taxet.
De Morib. Germ. c. 43. And speaking of another tribe accord-
ing to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he fays, «" they were not
degraded by the imposition of taxes. lb. c. 29. Upon the set-
tlement of the Franks in Gaul, we may conclude, that while elat-
ed with the consciousness of vitory, they would not renounce the
high-fpirited ideas of their ancestors, or voluntarily fuhmit toa
burden which they regarded as a badge of servitude. The evi-
dence of the earliest records and hilt6rians justify this conclusion.
M. de Montesquieu, in the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the
thirteenth book ofl 'Esprit des Loix, and M. de Mably Obfervat.
fur l'Hift. de France, tom. i. p. 247, have investigated this fast
with great attention, and have proved clearly that the propertY
of freemen among the Franks was not subjed to any stated tax.
That the fRate required nothing from persons of this rank, but
military service at their own expence, and that they (hould enter-
tain the king in their houses when he was upon any progress thro'
his dominions, or his officers when sent on any public employ-
m.nt, furnishing them with carriages and horses. Monarchs sub-
sifted alnoft entirely upon the revenues of their own domains,
and upon the perquisites arising from the administration of juflice,
together with a few finall fines and forfeitures exacded from filch ''
as had been guilty of certain trefpalFes. It is foreignl from my
fuljeAt to enumerate there. The reader may find them in Ob-
I;:rvat. de M.de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

\hen any extraordinary aid was granted by freemen to their

fovicrign, it was purely voluntary. In the annual allmblvy of
?tkrch or Mbay, it was the custom to make the king a present of
noncy, of horses or arms, or of forne other thing of value. This
V;as an ancient custom, and derived from their ancetulor the Ger-
siiS. Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri princlipibus

7 _

vel armentorum vel frugum, quod pro honore acceptum, etiam
necdfiatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 15. These
gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning them from the ge.
neral terrs in which they are mentioned by the ancient hiflorians,
were con£derable, and made no small part of the royal revenue.
Many pafiages to this purpdfe are produced by M. du Cange,
Dissert. iv. fur Joinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people
fpecifiid the gift which they bound themselves to pay annually,
and it was exated as a debt if they failed. Annales Metenfcs, ap.
Du Cange, ibid. p. x55. Itis probable, that the firfl flep to-
wards taxation was to ascertain the value of there gifts which were
originally gratuitous, and to compel the people to pay the fum at
whFch they were rated. Still, however, some memory of theiro-
riginal was pr.cerved, and the aids granted to monarchs in all the
kingdems of Europe were termed letr,vrlrie or fregifbi.

The kings of the second race in France were raised to the

throne by the ele&tion of the people. 'Pepinus Rex pius, fays an
author who wrote a few years after the tranfaaion which he re.
cords, per authoritatem Papae, & uncdionem fan&i chrifmatis &
clt&ionem omnium Francoram in regni folio fublimatus eft.
Claufula de Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des Hifior.
tom. v. p-g9. At, the fame time, as the chief men of the nation
had transferred the crown from one family to another, an oath
wW5 exacted of them, that they should maintain on the throne the
family which they had now promoted; ut nunquam de alterius
lnmbis regem in Zvo prafumant eligere. Ibid. p. Io. This oath
the nation faithfully observed during a considerable space of time.
The posterity of Pepin kept polefflon of the throne; but with
rtrpe& to the manner of dividing their dominions among their
clildren, princes were obliged to consult the general aflembly of
the nation. Thus Pcpin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his two
sons, Charles and Charlomannus, to reign as joint sovereigns; but
he did this, una cum confenfu Francorum et procerum fuorum
feu & epifcoporum, before whom he laid the matter in their gene-
ral assembly. Conventus apud fandluf Dionyfium, Capitular.
vel. i.p. 187. This deflination the French confirmed in a fubfe
quent afiembly. which was called upon the death of Pepin: for,
as Eginhart relates, they not only appointed them kings, but by
their authority they regulated the limits of their refpe ive tern
tornes. Vita Car Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. go. In
the fame manner, it was by the authority of'the supreme alfemt
blies that any difpnte which arose among the descendents of the
rovyl family was determined. Charlemagne recognizes this im
Fprtant part of their jurifdiclion, and confirms it in his charter
concern;ng the partition of his dominions; for he appoints, that,
in cafe of any uncertainty with refped to the right of the fevera
competitors, he wLom the people fiall chufe, hall succeed to the
crown. Capitular. vl. i. 442.

Under the second race of kings the assembly of the nation, di

fliEguiffied by the name of Conventus, Malli, Placita, were regu
lariy aG-imbled once a year at leail, and frequently twice in te

year. One of the most valuable monuments of the history of
irance is the treatise of Hincmarus, archbishop of Rheims, de or-
dine Palaiii. He died, A. D. 88a, only fixty-eight years after
Charlemagne, and he relates in that Short discourse the fads which
wcre comnunicated to him by Adalhaldus, a minilter and confi-
dtnt of Charlemagne. From him we learn, that this great mon-
arch never failed to hold the general assembly of his fubjeats eve-
ry year. In quo placito generalitas univerlorum majorun tam
clcricorum quam laicorum conveniebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sir-
mondi, vol. ii. c. 29. an . In these allemblies, matters which re-
ltred to the general safety and fate of tie kingdom were always
if(cufled, before they entered upon any private or less important
buGfines. Ibid. c. 33.p . i13. His immediate successors imitated&
Lls example, and tranfated no affair of importance without the
advice of their great council.

Under the second race of kings, the genius of the French go.

vernment continued to be in a good measure democratical. The
nobles, the dignified ecclesiastics, and the great officers of the
crown, were not the only members of the national council; the
people, or the whole body of free men, either in pertbn-or by their
rcprefentatives, had a rght to be present in it. Hincmarus, ir
describing the manner of holding the general- assemblies, fays,
that if the weather was favourable, they met in the open air; but
if otherwise, they had different apartments allotted to them: so
that the dignified clergy were separated from the laity, and the
comitcs vel hujufmodi principes fibimet honorificabiliter a catera,
multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. c. 35. p. 114. Agobardus,
archbishop of Lyons, thus describes a national council in the year
833,whereinhe was present. Qui uhique conventus extitit exreve-
rendiffimis epifcopis, et magnificentiffimis viris illufiribus, collegio
quoque abbatum et comitum, promifcuaque setatis et dignitatis
populo. The .atera miutitudo of Hincmarus is the fame with the
pp.lU, of Agobardus, and both describe the inferior order. of free-
men, the fame who were afterwards known in- France by the
name of the third estate, and in England, by the name of coi
mons. The people, as well as the members of higher dignity,
were admitted to a ihare of the legislative power. Thus, by a
law, A. D. 803, it is ordained, " that the question hall be put to
the people with refpea to every new law, and if they flall agree
to it, they flall confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol. i. 394-
T here are two capitularia which convey tous a full idea of the part

hlitll the peopletook in the administration of government. Whera
they felt the weight of any grievance, they had-a right to petition
the sovereign for redress. One of these petitions, in which theydi-
fire that ecclesiastics might be exempted from bearing arms, and fron,
Icrving in person against the enemy, is fill extant. It is addresed& to
Charltemagne,A.I). 830, and expressed in such terms as could have:
been uled only by men conscious of liberty, and of the extenlive pri.
vilegcs which they pofisled. They conclude withrequiring himtat
grant their demand, if he wihed that they (hould any longer continue
althuiullubjec's to him. That great monarch, infteadof being of

z 3

fended or surprised at theboldners of their petition, received it in a
mnoft gracious manner, and signified his willingness to comply
with it. But sensible that he himself did not possess legislative au-
thority, be promises to lay the matter before the next general
ffiemblv, that such things as were of common concern to all
might be-there confidered and eftablifled by common consent. Ca,
pitul. tom. i. p. 405-409. As the people by their petitions
brought matters to be proposed in the general assembly, we learn
from another capitulare the form in which they were approved
there, and enafed as laws. The propositions were read aloud,
and then the people were required to declare whether they as-
sented to them or not. They signified their assent by crying three
times, " We are satisfied," and then the capitulare was confirm.
ed by the subscription of the monarch, the clergy, and the chief
men of the laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 812. It seems
propable from a capitulare of Carolus Calvus, A. D. 85 , that the
sovereign could not refuse his afgent to what was proposed and e-
itabl liied by his fubjeds in- the general assembly. Tit. ix. § 6.
Capitui. vol. ii p. 47. It is unnecessary to multiply quotations
concerning the iegiflative power of the national afembly of
France under the second race, or concerning its right to deter.
mine with regard to peace and war. The uniform fyle of the Ci.
pitularia is an abundant confirmation of the former. The reader
a-Lo dcfires snv farther information with refped to the latter,
Trxa cniu\t Les Origines ou l'Ancien Gouvernement de la
France, &c. tom. iii. p. 87. &c. What has been said with refpeA
to the adniffion of the people or their representatives into the fu-
prtrne f.rhembly merits attention, not only in tracing the progrefi
of the French government but on account of the light which it
throws upon a similar question agitated in England. concerning
the time when the commons became part of the legislative body
in that kingdom.

NOTE XXXIX. Sect. m.p. 149. [QQ.

That important change which the constitution of France un-

derwent, when the legislative power was transferred from the
great council of the nation to the king, has been explained by the
French antiquaries with less care than they bestow in illuitrating
other events in their history. For that reason I have endeavour-
ed with grea'er attention to trace the feps which led to this me-
morable revolution. I shall here add some particulars which tend
to throw additional light upon it. The Leges Salicae, the Leges
Burgundion;il,, and other codes publihed by the several tribes
v-hich ietted in Gaul, were general laws extending to every per-
son, to every province and diltria where the authority of those
tribWes wa ack.nowl dged. But they seem to have become obfo-
kte; and the reason of their falling into disuse is very obvious.
Almost the whole property of the nation was allodial when these
la-xs were framed. But when the feudal institutions became gene-
rl, and gave rife to an infinite variety of questions peculiar to that
fpc;ie= oi tenure, the ancient codes were of no use in deciding

with regard to there, because they could not contain regulations
applicable to cafes which did not exist at the time when they were
comipiled. This considerable change in the nature of property
made it necessary to publilh the new regulations contained in the
Capilularia. Many of these, as is evident from the perusal of them
were public laws extending to the whole French nation, in the ge-
neral aflhmbly of which they were enacted. The. weakness of
the greater part of the monarchs of the second race, and the difg
order into which the nation was thrown by the depredations of
the Normans, encouraged the barons to usurp an independent
power formerly unknown in France. The nature and extent of
that jurifditdion which they assumed I have formerly conlidered.
The political union of the kingdom was at an end, its ancient
conflitution was dissolved, and only a feudal relation fubffited be-
tween the king and his vaflals. The regal jurifdicdion extended
no further than the domains of the crown. Under the last kings
of the second race, these were reduced almost to nothing. Under
the first kings of the third race, they comprehended little more
than the patrimonial estate of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to
the crown. Even with this accession, they continued to be of
finall extent. 'Valley, Hist. de France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of
the most considerable provincesin France did not at first acknow-
ledge Hugh Capet as a lawful monarch. There are till extant
leveral charters, granted during the first years of his reign, with
this remarkable clause in the form of dating the charter; " Deo
rcgnante, rege expedfante," regnante domino nofitro Jesu Chrifto,
Francis autem contra jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bou-
quet Recueil, tom. x. p. 544. A monarch whose title was thus
openly disputed, was not in a condition to assert the royal jurif-
diurion, or to limit that of the barons.

All thele circumfiances rendered it easy for the barons to u-
furp the rights of royalty within their own territories. The Ca-
pitularia became no less obsolete than the ancient laws; and
customs were every where introduced, and became the sole rule
by which all civil tranfadtions were condu6ted, and all caules
were tried. The wonderful ignorance, which became general
in France during the ninth and tenth centuries contributed to the
introdution of customary law. Few persons, except ecclelia-
Itics, could read; and as it was not in the power of such illiterate
persons to have recourse to written laws, either as their guide
in business, or their rule in administering justice, the customary .
law, the knowledge of which was preserved by tradition, univer-
fall) prevailed.

During this period, the general afrembly of the nation seems
not to have been called, nor to have once exerted its legislative
authority. Local customs regulated and decided every thing.
A flriking proof'of this occurs in tracing the progress of the
French jurisprudence. The last of the Capitularia collected by
M. Baluze, was issued in the year 921, by Charles the Simple.
Au hundred and thirty years elapsed from that period to the pu-
blication of the firtt ordonnance of the kings of the third race,

contained in the great collecAion of M. Lauriere, and the first
ordonnance which appears to be an at of legislation extending
to the whole kingdom, is that of Philip Auguflus, A. D. r190.
Ordon. tom. i. p. i. I8. During that long period of two hun.
dred and fixty-nine years, all tranfations were directed by local
customs, and no addition was made to the statutory law ofFrance.
The ordonnances, previous to the reign of Philip Auguflus con-
tain regulations, the authority of which did not extend beyond
the king's domains.

Various inflances occur of the caution with which the kings

of France ventured at first to exercise legislative authority. M.
I'Ah. de Mahly produces an ordonoance of Philip Augufltus, A.
D. o206, concerning the Jews, who, in that age, were in some
measure the property of the lord in whose territories they resided.
But it is rather a treaty of the king with the countess of Cham-
pagne, and the compte de Dampierre, than an ac of royal pow-
er; and the regulations in it seem to be established not so much
by his authority, as by their consent. Obfervat. fur I'Hift de
France, ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an ordonnance of Louis
ViI!. concerning the Jews, A. D. 12z3, is a contrad between
the king and his nobles, with refpecd to their manner of treating
that unhappy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47. The Eftab~
licfmens of St. Louis, though well adapted to serve as general
laws to the whole kingdom, were not publiled as such, but only
as a complete code of cuflomary law, to be of authority within
the king s domains. The wifdom,the equity, and the order con-
fpicuoius in that code of St. Louis, procured it a favourable re-
ception throughout the kingdom. The veneration due to the
virtues and good intentions of its author, contributed not a little
to reconcile the nation to that legislative authority which the
king began to assume. Soon after the reign of St. Louis, the idea
of the king's possessing supreme legislative power became com-
mon. If, fays Beaumanoir, the king makes any establishment
especially for his own domain, the barons may nevertheless ad-
here to their ancient eufloms; but if the establishment be gene-
ral, it Ihall be current throughout the whole kingdom, and we
ought to believe that such eflablifhments are made with mature
deliberation, and for the general good. Count de Beauvoifis, c.
48. p. 265. Though the kings ofthe third race did not call tihe
general aflembly of the nation, during the long period from
Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair, yet they seem to have consulted
the bishops and barons who happened to be present in their court,
with refptct to any new law which they published. Examples of
this occur, Ocdon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5. This practice seems to have
continued as late as the reign of St. Louis, when the legislative
authority of the crown was well eflablifhed. Ordon. tom. ;. p.
58. A. D. 1246. This attention paid to the barons faciliated the
kings acquiring such full poffleion of the legislative power, as
enabled them afterwards to exercise it without observing that for-
rmality.

The aflemblies diflinguihed by the name of the States Gencra

vere firfl called, A. D. 1302, and were held occasionally from
that period to the year 1614, since which time they have not
been summoned. These were very different from the ancient
afilcmblies of the French nation under the kings of the first and
second race. There is no point with refpedt to which the French
antiquaries are more generally agreed, than in maintaining that
the States General had no suffrage in the passing of laws, and
poflrffed no proper legislative jurisdiction. The whole tenor of
the French hiflory confirms this opinion. The form of proceed-
ing in the States General was this:-The king addressed himself,
at opening the meeting, to the whole body assembled in one
place, and laid before them the affairs on account of which he
had summoned them. Then the deputies of each of the three
orders, of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate, met apart,
and prepared their cabier or memorial, containing their answer to
the propositions which had been made to them, together with
the representations which they thought proper to lay before the
king. These answers and representations were confidered by the
king in his council, and generally gave rife to an ordonnance.
'I hele ordonnances were not addressed to the three estates in
common. Sometimes the king addressed an ordonnance to each
of the estates in particular. Sometimes he mentioned the assem-
bly of the three estates. Sometimes he mentioned the assem-
bly of that estate to which the ordonnance is addrefled. Some-
times no-mention at all is made of the assembly of estates, which
suggested the propriety of enadling the law. Preface au tom. ii.
des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the States General had only the privi-
lege of advising and remonfirating; the legislative authority ro.
tided in the king alone.

NOTE XL. Seca. M.p. i53. [RR].

If the parliament of Paris be confidered only as the supreme
court ofjuftice, every thing relative to its origin and jurifdition
is clear and obvious. It is the ancient court of the king's palace,
new-modelled, rendered stationary, and invested with an exten-
five and alcertained jurifdiftion. The power of this court, while
employed in this part of its functions, is not the obje&t of pre-
sent consideration. The pretensions of the parliament to control
the exercise of the legislative authority, and its claim of a right
to interpose with refpedt to public affairs and the political admi-
niftration of the kingdom, lead to inquiries attended with great
I;fficulvy. As the officers and members of the parliament of ,,
Paris were anciently nominated by the king, were paid by him,
and on several otcafions were removed by him at pleasure
(Chronic. Scandaleufe de Louis XI. chez les Mem. de Comines,
ton'. ii. p. 51. Edit. de M. Lenglet de Frcfnoy), they cannot be

ionildered as reprel;-nlatives of the people, nor could they claim

anly hare in the legislative power as acting in their name. We
Iiuit theretore fcarch for ibme other source of this high privilege.
'Ilie parliament was originally composed of the mofi eminent
ycrlons in the kingdom. The peers of France, ecclesiastics of the
llhlcil order, and noblemen of illuflrious birth, were members of

it, to whom were added some clerks and counsellors learned in
the laws. Pafquier Recherches, p. 44, &c. Encyclopedie, tom.
xii. Art. PJrlIteet, p. 3, 5. A court thus constituted was proper-
ly a committee of the States General of the kingdom, and was
composed of those barons and /Htr-, whom the kings of France
were accustomed to consult with regard to every at of jurifdietion
or legislative authority. It was natural, therefore, during the in-
tervals between the meetings of the States General, or during
those periods when that assembly was not called, to consult the
parliament, to lay matters of public concern before it, and to ob-
tain its approbation and concurrence, before any ordonnance was
publilhed, to which the people were required to conform. s.
Under the second race of kings, every new law was reduced in-
to proper form by the chancellor of the kingdom, was proposed
by him to the people, and when enacted, was committed to him
to be kept among the public records, that he might give authentic
copies of it to all who should demand them. Hincm. de Ord. Pa.
lat.c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv. tit. xiv. § Ir. tit. xxxiii. The
chancellor presided in the parliament of Paris at its first inftitu-
ion. Encyclopedie, tom. in. art. Clhaxrlier, p. 88. It was there-
fore natural for the king to continue to employ him in his ancient
fiucions of framing, taking into his custody, and publishing the
ordpnninces which were iFTued. To an ancient copy of the Ca-
pitolaria of Charlemagne, the following words are subjoined: An-
no terio clementiffimi domini noflri Caroli Augufli, sub ipso anno,
h=c faca Capitula funt, & confignata Stephano comiti, ut hgec
manifefla faceret Parifiis mallo publico, & illa legere faceret co-
ram Scabineis, quod ita & fecit, & omnes in uno confenferunt,
quod ifi voluiffent obfervare ufque in poflerum, etiam omnes
Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria fubter fig.
naverunt. Bouquet Recueil, tom. v. p. 663. Malllw signifies not
only the public aflembly of the nation but the court ofjufiice held
by the Comes, or missus dominicus. Sea6ini were the judges, or
the alrffiors of the judges in that court. Here then seems to be a
very early instance, not only of laws being published in a court of
julice, but of their being verified or confirmed by the subscription
of the judges. If this was the common practice, it naturally in-
troduced the verifying of edicts in the parliament of Paris. But
this conj-lture I propose with that diffidence, which I have felt in
all my reasonings concerning the laws and inflitutions of foreign
nations. 3. This fupireme court ofjuftice in France was dignified
with the appellation of parliament, the name by which the gene-
ral assembly of the nation was diftinguifed towards the close of
the second race of kings; and men, both i: reasoning and in con-
dut, are wonderfully influenced by the finilarity of names. 'he
prcferving the ancient names of the magifirates eftablilhed while
the republican government fuhfilled in Rome, enabled Augulus
and his fucccffci s to aflume new powers with less observation and
greater cafe. The bcltowing the fame name in France upon two
courts, which were extremely different, contributed not a little to
confound their -uri:diclion and funocions.

All these circumstances concurred in leading the kings of France
to avail themfelvcs of the parliament of Paris, as the infirument
of reconciling the people to the exercise of legislative authority by
the crown. 'The French, accustomed to fee all new laws examin-
ed and authorised before they were pubiilhed, did not sufficiently
diflinguifh between the effec of performing this in the national
assembly, or in a court appointed by the king. But as that court
was composed of refpetable members, and who were well Ikilled
in the laws of their country, when any new edidt received its fanc-
tion, that was sufficient to dilpofe the people to submit to it.

When the pracdice of vcrifying and reg/'-ring the royal ediets in

the parliament of Paris became common, the parliament contend-
ed that this was necessary in order to give them legal authority.
It was eflablifhed as a fundamental maxim in French'jurifprudence,
that no law could be puhlifhed in any other manner; that with-
out this formality no edict or ordonnance could have any effet;
that the people were not bound to obey it, and ought not to con-
fider it as an edid or ordonnance until it was verified in the fu-
preme court, after free deliberation. Roche-flavin des Parlemens
de France, 4to. Gen. 1621. p. 92I. The parliament, at different
times, hath, with great fortitude and integrity, opposed the will
of their sovereigns; and, notwithflanding repeated and perempto-
ry requisitions and commands of the crown, hath refused to veri-
fr and publifl such edids as it conceived to be opprflfive to the
people, or subversive of the conflitution of the kingdom. Roche-
fiavin reckons, that between the year 156z and the year 1589, the
parliament refused to verify more than a hundred ediits of the
kings. Ibid. 925. Many instances of the spirit and conilancy
with which the parliaments of France opposed pernicious laws,
and asserted their own privileges, are enumerated by Limnaeus in
his Notitim Regni Francie, lib. i. c, 9. p. 224.

But the power of the parliament to maintain and defend this
privilege, bore no proportion to its importance, or to the courage
with which the members afierted it. When any monarch was de-
termined that an edi&t Should be carried into execution, and found
the parliament inflexibly resolved not to verify or publish it, he
could easily fnpply this defet by the plenitude of his regal power.
ie repaired to the parliament in person, he took poifeiion of his
frat of jusice, and commanded the edict to be read, verified, re-
gifered, and publihed in his presence. Then, according to an-
other maxim of French law, the king himself being present, nei-
ther the parliament, nor any magistrate whatever, can exercise
any authority, or perform any function. Adveniente Principe,
cfhat magiflratus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Encyclopt-
die, ton. ix. Art. Lit. de -uiscr, p. 58i. Roche.flavin mentions
fcveral initances of kings who actually exerted this prerogative, so
fatal to the residue of the rights and liberties tranfrnittcd to the
Irench by their ancestors. Pafquier produces tome instances of
tle fame kind. Rech. p. 6l. Limneus enumerates many other
iiltances, but the length to which this note has swelled prevents
'it from inserting them at length, though they tend greatly to i!-

lustrate this important article in the French history, p. 445.' Thus
by an exertion of prerogative, which, though violent;feems to be
constitutional, and is justified by innumerable precedents, all the
effrts of the parliament to limit and control the king's legislative
authority are rendered ineffectual.

I have not attempted to explain the conflitution orjurifdicion of

any parliament in France but that of Paris. All of them are form-
ed upon the model of that most ancient and refpecable tribunal,
and all my observations concerning it will apply with full force to
them.

NOTE XLI. Sect. p. . S7. [SS].

The humiliating posture in which a great emperor implored ah.

solution is an event so singular, that the words in which Gregory
himself describes it merit a place here, and convey a firiking pic-
ture of the arrogance of that pontiff. Per triduum, ante portar
caftri, depofito omni regio cultu, miferabiliter, utpote difcalceatts,
& laneis indutus, perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu apoftolial
miferationis auxilium, & consolationem implorari deflitit, quam
omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam
pietatem, & compaffionis miferecordiam movit, ut pro eb multis
precibus & lacrymis intercedentes, omnes quidem infolitam noftr
mentis duritiem-mirarentur; nonnulli vero in nobis non apoftoli-
ce fedis gravitatern, fed quasi tyrannicae feritatis crudelitatem efe
clamhrunt. Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Contefla Matilda
da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca, 1756, vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLI. Se&. III. p. i65. [TT].

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace the various steps

in the progrefa of the constitution of the empire, and to explain
the peculiarities in its policy very fully, it is not necessary to add
much by way of illustration. What appears to be of any import-
ance, I ihall range under diftin& heads.

I. 'With refpec to the power, jurifdition, and revenue of the

emperors. A very just idea of these may be formed by attending
to the view which Pfeffel gives of the rights of the emperors at two
different periods. The first atthe close of theSaxon race,A.D. 10o4.
These, according to his enumeration, were the right of conferring
all the ecclesiastical benefices in Germany; of receiving the reve-
nues of them during a vacancy; of mortmain, or of succeeding
to the effets of ecclefiatics who died intetate. The right of con-
firming or of annulling the elections of the popes. The right of
assembling councils, and of appointing them to decide concerning
the affairs of the church. The right of conferring the title o
king upon their vassals. The right of granting vacant fiefs. The
right of receiving the revenues of the empire, whether arising
from the Imperial domains, from imposts and tolls, from gold or
silver mines, from the taxes paid by the Jews, or from forfeitures.
The right of governing Italy as its proper sovereigns. The right
of ereAing free cities and of establishing fairs in them. The right
of assembling the diets of the empire, and of siing the tiet of

their duration. The right of coining money, and of conferring
that privilege on the flates of the empire. The right of admini-
flering both high and low justice within the territories of the dif-
ferent fates. Abreg6, p. I6c. The other periodis at the extinc-
tion of the emperors of the families of Luxemburg and Bavaria,
A. D. 1437. According to the fame author, the Imperial prero-
gatives at that time were the right of conferring all dignities and
titles, except the privilege of being a slate of the empire. The
right of Preeet primarie, or of appointing once during their reign
a dignitary in each chapteror religious house. The right of grant-
ing dispensations with refpe& to the age of majority. The right
of erecting cities, andof conferring the privilege of coining mo-
ney. The right of calling the meetings of the diet, and of pre-
fiding in them. Abrege, &c. p. 507. It were easy to {hew that
Mr. Pfeffel is well founded in all there assertions, and to confirm
them by the testimony of the most refpedable authors In the
one period, the emperors appear as mighty sovereigns with exten-
five prerogatives; in the other, as the heads of a confederacy with
very limited powers.

The revenues of the emperors decreased fill more than their
authority. The early emperors, and particularly those of the Sax-
online, besides their great patrimonial or hereditary territories,
poflefed an extensive domain both in Italy and Germany, which
belonged to them as emperors. Italy belonged to the emperors as
their proper kingdom, and the revenues which they drew from it
were very considerable. The first alienations of the Imperial re-
venue were made in that country. The Italian cities having ac-
quired wealth, and aspiring at independence, purchased their li-
berty from different emperors, as I have observed, Note XV. The
fums which they paid, and the emperors with whom they con-
cluded these bargains, are mentioned by'Cafp.Klockius de JEra-
rio Norimb. 1671, p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his son Wencef-
laus, dissipated all that remained of the Italian branch of the do-
main. The German domain lay chiefly upon the banks of the
Rhine, and was under the government of the counts palatine. It
is not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to estimate the value
of this ancient domain, which has been so long incorporated with
the territories of different princes. Sonme hints with refpea to it
may be found in the Glodfary of Speidelius, which he has intitled,'
SpeculumJuridicoPhilologico:politico Hiftoricum Obfervationum,
&c. Norimb. 1673, vol. i- 679, 1045, a more full account of it is'
given by Klockius de .Erario, p. 84. Besides this the emperors
polfeffed considerable diftrids of land lying intermixed with the
eflates of the dukes and barons. They were accustomed to visit
these frequently, and drew from their vafIah in each what was'
sufficient to support their court during the time of their refi.
dence among them. Annalise;. ap. Struv. torn i. 6Ir. A great
part of these detached poflefIions were seized by the nobles
during the-long intcrregnum, or during; the wars occasioned
'yv the contefis between the emperors and the court of Rome.
At the fame time that ifuch encroachments were made on the-
Vol. I. A a

bed almost entirely of their casual revenues. The princes and
barons appropriating to themselves taxes and duties of every
kind, which had usually been paid to them. Pfeffel AbregC, p,
374. The profuse and inconsiderate ambition of Charles IV.
squandered whatever remained of the Imperial revenues after sO
many defalcations. He, in the year 1376, in order to prevail
with the eletors to chufe his son Wenceslaus king of the Romans,
promised each of them a hundred thousand crowns. But being
unable to pay so large a fum, and eager to secure the election to
his son, hI alienated to the three ecclesiastical elecors, and to the
count palatine, such countries as fill belonged to the Imperial do.
main on the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over to them
all the taxes and tolls then levied by the emperors in that diftria.
Trithemius, and the author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh, enu-
nerate the territories and taxes which were thus alienated, and
repr~fnt this as the lafl and fatal blow to the Imperial authority.
Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 437. rom that period the hreds of the
ancient revenues polfeffed by the emperors have been so inconfi

,erable, that, intheopinionof Speidelins,allthat they yield would be

So far from defraying the expence of supporting their household,
that they would not pay the charge of maintaining the posts efa-

buhed in the empire. Speidelii Speculum, &e vol. 1. p. 6o8a
Thefc funds, inconsiderable as they were, continued to decreate.
Granvelle, the minister of Charles V. aflerted in the year 1546,
in preence of several of the German princes, that his master drew
no money at all from the empire. Sleid. History of the Reforma-
tion, Lond. 1689, p. 37 . The fame isthe cafe at present. Train
de droite publique de l'Empire, par M. le Coq. de Villeray, p.
SS. From the reign of Charles IV. whom Maximilian called
the pest of the empire, the emperors have depended entirely on
their herditary dominions, as the chief, and almost the only
source of their power, and even of their subsistence.

t. The ancient mode of elecing the emperors, and the various

changes which it underwent, require some illufltation. The Im-
perl crown was originally attained by elelion, as well as those
of most monarchies in Europe. An opinion long prevailed a-
mong the antiquaries and public lawyers of Germany, that the
tight of chufing the emperors was veiled in the archbiihops of
Memz, Cologne, and Treves, the king of Bohemia, the duke of
Saxony, the marquis of Brandenburgh, and the count palatine of
the Rhine, by an edift of Otho III. confirmed by Gregory V. a.
·out the year p96. But the whole tenor of history contradicts
this opinion. It appea, that from the earliest period in the his-
torv of Germany, the person who was to reign over all, was elead
ed by the fufrage of all. Thus Conrad I1 was elected by all the
people of the Franks, fay some annalifti by all the princes and
chief me, ay others; n, fay

others

by all their

words, Struv, Corp. a t. Conringius de German. Imper. Repub.
Aeroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654, p. 103. In the year 1014, pofte
tior to the fuppoed regulatns of Otho II.Coarad lIwu cleAt

ed by all the chief men, and his elecRion was approved and con-
firmed by the people, Struv. Corp. 284. At the eletion osLo-
tharius II. A. D. 1Iz5, sixty thousand persons of all ranks were
present. He was named by the chief men, and their nomination
was approved by the people. Struv. ibid. p. 357. The first au-
thor who mentions the seven eledors is Martinus Polonus, who
flourished in the reign of Frederick II. which ended A. D. Ixao.

We find that in all the ancient elections to which I have refer-

red, the princes of the greatest power and authority were allowed
by their countrymen to name the person whom they wilhed to
appoint emperor, and the people approved or disapproved of their
nomination. This privilege of voting first is called by the Ger-
man lawyers the right of PrWatxation. Pfeffel AbregC, p. 316.
This was the first origin of the exclusive right which the elecdors
acquired. The electors possessed the moit extensive territories of
any princes in the empire; all the great offices of the fate were
in their hands by hereditary right; as soon as they obtained or en-
groflfd so much influence in the election as to be allowed the
right of prataxation, it was vain to oppose their will, and it even
became unneceflary for the inferior ecclesiastics and barons to at-
tend, when they had no other fundcion but that of confirming the
deedof thefemore powerful princesby their aflent. During times of
turbulence, the subordinate members of the Germanic body couldi
not resort to the place of election without a retinue of armed
vassals, the expence of which they were obliged to defray out of
their own revenues; and finding their attendance to be unneceflary,
they were unwilling to waste them to no purpose. The rights of
the seven eleclors were supported by all the descendents and allies
of their powerful families, who shared in the splendour and influ-
ence which they enjoyed by this diftinguilhing privilege. Pfeffel
Abrege, p. 376, The seven electors were confidered as the re-
presentatives of all the orders which composed the highest claa
of German nobility. There were three archbilhops, chancellors
of the three great diftricAs into which the empire was anciently di-
vided; one king, one duke, one marquis, and one count. All
there circumstances contributed to render the introduction of this
considerable innovation into the constitution of the Germanic bo-
dy extremely easy. Every thing of importance, relating to this
branch of tke political slate of the empire, is well illustrated by
Onuphrius Panvinius, an Augustinian monk of Verona, who lived
in the reign of Charles V. His treatise, if we make some allow-
ance for that partiallity which he expresses in favour of the pow-
ers which the popes claimed in the empire, has the merit of being
one of the first works in which a controverted point in history is
examined with critical precision, and with a proper attention to
that evidence which is derived from records, or the testimony of
contemporary hiitorians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Po-
litica Imperialia, p. a.

As the electors have engrofled the sole right of chufing the

emperors, they have assumed likewise that of deposing them. This
high power the electors have not only presumed to claim, but

Aaz

have ventured, in more than one instance, to exercise. In the
year 1298, a part of the tie&tors deposed Adolphus of Naitau, and
fubflituted Albert of Autria in his place. The reafohs on which
they found their fenteuce, (hewed that this deed flowed from sac-
tious, not from public spirited motives. Struv. Corp. vol. i. 540.
In the first year of the fifteenth century, the eleators deposed
\enceflaus, and placed the Imperial crown on the head to Ru,
pert eleoer palatine. The aA of deposition is fRill eant. Gol-
daili Couflit. vol. i. 379. It is pronounced in the name and by
the authority of the eledors, and confirmed by several prelates and
barons of the empire, who were present. These exertions of the
t!c&-oral power demonstrate that the Imperial authority was-funk
very low.

The other privileges of the elecors, and the rights of:theelee-

toral college, are explained by the writers on the public law is
Germany.

3. With refpedl to the diets or general assemblies of the empire

it would he necrflary, if my object were to write a particular h'i
florv of Germany, to enter into a minute detail, concerning the
forms of assembling it, the persons who have right .to be present
their divifion-into leveral colleges or benches, the objedts of their
deliberation, the mode in which they carry on their dehbltes
give their suffrages, and the authority of their decrees or receffit
But as my only cbjeA is to give the outlines of the -consitution
of the German empire, it will be sufficient to observe, thaj origi-
nally, the diets of the empire were exaaly¥ the fame with thetas.
femblies of March and of May, held by. the kings of Frapnce. They
met, at leafi, once a-vear. Every freeman had a right to be prb
ient. They were aflemblies, in which a amonarch dHieuted
with his fubjedcs, concerning their common interest. Arumue
de Comitiis Rom. German. lmperii, 4to. Jenae, 166o Cap, 7, No.
so, &c. But when the princes, dignified eccleiaftics, andihro,
acquired territorial and independent jurisdiction, the diet became
an assembly of the separate fates, which formed the confederacy
of w hich the emperor was head. While the coniitution f the
empire remained in its primitive form, attendance on the diets was
a duty, like the other services due from feudal fubjeas to their so-
vercign, which the members were bound to perform in person;
and it any member who had a right to be present in the diet, neg-
leced to attend in person, he not only loft his vote, but was liable
to an heavy penalty. Arumeus de Comit. c. 5 No .

o Where-

as, from the time that the members of the diet became indepen-
dent flates, the right of suffrage was annexed to the territory or
dignity, not to the person. The members, if they could not, or
would not attend in person, might fend their deputies, as princes
fend ambassadors, and they were entitled to exercise all the rights
belonging to their conflituents. Ibid. No. 42, 46, 49. By de-
grees, and upon the fame principle of confidering the diet as an
assembly of independent states, in which each confederate had the
right of luffrage, if any member possessed more than one of those
tates or characters which entitle to a feat in the diet, he was al-

lowed aproportional number of suffrages. Pfeffel Ahrege, 66z.
From the fame cause the Imperial cities, as soon as they became
free, and acquired supreme and independent jurisdiction within
their own territories, were received as members of the diet. The
powers of the diet extend to every thing relative to the common
concern of the Germanic body, or that can interest or affedt it as
a confederacy. The diet take no cognizance of the interior ad-
ministration in the different fates, unless that happens to difturbk
the public, peace, or to threaten the general safety.

4. With refpe& to the Imperial chamber, the jurifdicion of

which has been the great source of order and tranquillity in Ger-
many, it is necessary to observe, that this court was instituted in
order to put an end to the calamities occasioned by private wars
in Germany. I have already traced the rife and progress of this
praatice, and pointed out its pernicious effects as fully as their ex-
tensive influence during the middle ages required. In Germany,
private wars seem to have been more frequent and productive of
worse consequences than in the other countries of Europe. There
are obvious reasons for this. The nobility of Germany were ex-
tremely numerous, and the causes of their dissension multiplied in
proportion. The territorial jurifdidtion which the German no-
bles acquired, was more complete than that possessed by their or-
der in other nations. They became, in reality, independent pow-
ers, and they claimed all the privileges of that charader. The
long interregnum from A. D. 1a56. to A. D. 17?3, accustomed
them to an uncontrolled license, and led them to forget that sub-
ordination which is neceifary in order to maintain public tranquil-
lity.. At the time when the other monarchs of Europe began to
acquire such an increase of power and revenues as added new vi-
gour to their government, the authority and revenues of the em-
perors continued gradually to decline. The diets of the empire,
which alone had authority to judge between such mighty barons,
and power to enforce its decisions, met very seldom. Conring.
Acroamata, p. 334. The diets, when they did affemble,,were of-
ten composed of several thousand members, Chronic.. Confiat. ap.
Srruv. Corp. i. . 546. and were tumultuary assemblies, ill quali-
sied to decide concerning any queflion of right. The session of
the diets continued only two or three days; Pfeffel Abrege, p.
'44: so that they had no time to hear or discuss any cause that
was in the fmaUllef degree intricate. Thus Germany was left, in
some measure, without any court of judicature capable of deciding-
the contests between its more powerful members, or of repressing:
the evils occasioned by their private wars.

All the expedients which were employed in other countries of

Europe, in order to restrain this pralice, and which I have de-
fcribed Note XXI. were tried in Germany with little effedt. The
confederacies of the nobles and of the cities, and the division of
Germany into various circles, which I mentioned in that Notes
were found likewise insufficient. As a last remedy, the Germans
lhad recourse to arbiters whom they called Aurega. The barons
and flares in different parts of Germany joined in conveniozns

Aa 3

by which they bound themselves to refer all controversies that
might arise between them to the determination of AujIrega,- and
to fiubmit to their sentences as final. These arbiters are named
fjmetimes in the treaty of convention, an instance of which occurs
in Ludewig Reliquae Manufcr. omnis aevi, vol. i. 212; sometimes
they were chosen by mutual consent upon occasion of any contest
that arose; sometimes they were appointed by neutral persons;
and fornetimes the choice was left to be decided by lot. Datt. de
Pace publica Imperi, lib. i. cap. 27. No. 60, &c. Speidelius Spe-
culum, &c. voc. Auj4rag. p. 95. Upon the introdudion of this
praaice, the public tribunals of justice became in a great measure
ufe'efs, and were almost entitely deserted.

In order to re-eftablilh the authority of government, Maximi-
ian 1. instituted the Imperial chamber at the period which I have
mentioned. This tribunal consisted originally of a president,
who was always a nobleman of the first order, and of sixteen
judges. The president was appointed by the emperor, and the
judges, partly by him, and partly by the flates, according to
forms which is unnecessary to describe. A fum was imposed, with
their own content, on the fates of the empire, for paying the
salarics of the judges and officers in this court. The Imperial
chamber was eflabliibed at first at Francfort on the Maine. Du-
ring the reign of Charles V. it was removed to Spires, and con-
tinued in that city above a century and a half. It is now fixed
at WVetzlar. This court takes cognizance of all questions con-
cerning civil right between the states of the empire, and palses
judgment in the last retort, and without appeal. To it belongs
likewi.e the privilege of judging in criminal causes, which may
be confidered as conne&ed with the preservation of the public
peace. Pfeffel Abrege, 36o.

All causes relating to points of feudal right or jurifdi&ion, to-

gether with such as refpeC the territories which hold of the em-
pire in Italy, belong properly to the jurisdiction of the Aulic
council. This tribunal was formed upon the model of the an-
cient court of the palace inflituted by-the emperors of Germany.
It depended not upon the states of the empire, but upon the em-
peror, he having the right of appointing at pleasure all the judg-
es of whom it is composed Maximilian, in order to procure
some compensation for the diminution of his authority, by the
powers vested in the Imperial chamber, prevailed on the diet,
A. D. 15IZ. to give its content to the eftablilhment of the Aulic
council. S'nce that time it has been a great object of policy in
the rcurt of Vienna to extend the jurifdidion. and support the au-
t;.or;ty of the Aulic council, and to circumscribe and weaken those
of the imperial chamber. The tedious forms and dilatory pro-
ceedings of the Imperial chamber have furnifihed the emperors with
Fprtexts for doing so. Lites Spirae, according to the witticism of
a German lawyvr, spirant, fed nunquam expirant. Such delays
are unavoidable in a court composed of members named by ma-
ny different flates, jealcus of each other. W\hcreas the judges o:
the Aulic council, depending upon one mailer, and being refpon-

fible to him alone, are more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf,
de Statu Imper. German. cap. v. § zo. Pfeffl Abregi, p. 58i.

NOTE XLIII. Sea. III. p. I67. [UU].

The description which I have given of the Turkish govern-

ment is conformable to the accounts of the most intelligent tra-
vellers who have visited that empire. The count de Marfigli, in
his treatise concerning the military state of the Turkilh empire,
ch. vi. and the author of Observations on the religion, laws, go-
vernment, and manners of the Turks, published at London 1768,
vol. i. p. 81. differ from other writers who have deferibed the
political constitution of that powerful monarchy. As they had
opportunity, during their long residence in Turkey, to observe
the order and justice conspicuous in several departments of admi-
nifiration, they seem unwilling to admit that it should be deno-
minated a despotism. But when the form of government in any
country is represented to be despotic, this does not suppose that
the power of the monarch is continually exerted in aas of vio-
lence, injustice, and cruelty. Under political constitutions of
every species, unless when some frantic tyrant happens to hold
the sceptre, the ordinary administration of government mufl be
conformable to the principles of justice, and if not active in pro-
moting the welfare of the people, cannot certainly have their de-
ftruition for its object. A state, in which the sovereign poflffes
the absolute command of a vait military force, together with the
disposal of an extensive revenue, in which the people have no
privileges, and no part either immediate or remote in legislation f
m which there is no body of hereditary nobility, jealous of their
own rights and diftintions, to fland as an intermediate order be-
tween the prince and the people, cannot be distinguished by any
name but that of a despotism. The refiraints, however, which I
have mentioned, arising from the Capiculy, and from religion, are
powerful. But they are not such as change the nature or deno-
mination of the government. When a despotic prince employs
an armed force to support his authority, he commits the supreme
power to their hands. The Praetorian bands in Rome dethroned,
murdered, and exalted their princes, in the fame wanton manner
with the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople. But notwith-
flanding this, the Roman emperors have been confidered by all
political writers as possessing despotic power.

The author of Observations on the religion, laws, government,

and manners of the Turks, in a preface to the second edition of
his work, hath made some remarks on what is contained
in this Note, and in that part of the text to which it rcfei-. It
is with diffidence I set my opinion in opposition to that of a per-
son, who has observed the government of the Turks with atten-
tion, and has described it with abilities. But after a careful re-
view of the subjet, to me the Turkish government still appears of
filch a species as can be ranged in no class but that to which poli-
tical writers have given the name of dcfsotifm. There is noz in
Turkey any conflitutional restraint upon the will of the love-

reign, or any barrier to rircumfcribe the exercise of his power
but the two which I have mentioned; one afforded by re.igion,
the principle upon which the authority of the sultan is founded;
the other by the army, the instrument which he must employ to
maintain his power. The author represents the Uiema, or body
of the law, as an intermediate order between the monarch and
the people. Pref. p. 30 But whatever restraint the authority of
the UiCma may impose upon the sovereign, is derived from reli-
gion. The MA~-tsa, out of whom the mufti and other chief
officers of the law mull be chosen, are ecclesiastics. It is as
interpreters of the Koran or Divine Will that they are obh
jeds of veneration. The check, then, which they give to the
exercise of arbitrary power is not different from one of those of
which I took notice. Indeed, this restraint cannot be very conufi
derable. The mufti, who is the head of the order, as wel as
every inferior officer of law, is named by the sultan, and is re-
movable at his pleasure. The strange means employed by the
Uiwe in 1746, to obtain the dismission of a minifttr whom they
hated, is a manifest proof that they poisess but little constitutional
authority which can serve as a restraint upon the will of the so-
vereign. Obfervat. p. 92 of ad edit. If the author's idea bejuft,
it is afonithing that the 6L of /the loe hould have no method of
remonstrating against the errors of adminiiration, but by setting
fire to the capital.

The author seems to confider the CapiCaly or soldiery of the

Porte, neither as formidable instruments of the sultan's power,
nor as any restraint upon the exercise of it. His reasons for this
opinion are, that the number of the Capiculy is small in propor-
tion to the other troops which compose the Turkish armies, and
that in time of peace they are undisciplined. Pref. ad edit. p. 13,-
&c. But the troops flationed in a capital, though their number
be not great, are always masters of the sovereign's person and
power. The Praetorian bands bore no proportion to the legion-
ary troops in the frontier provinces. The soldiery of the Pote
are more numerous, and must possess power of the fame kind,
and be equally formidable, fomeuimes to the sovereign, and oft-
ener to the people. However much the d.fcipline of the Jani-
zaries may be negleded at present, it certainly was not so in that
age to which alone my deicription of the Turkih government
applies. The author observes, Pref. p. 19, that the Janizaries
never deposed any sultan of themselves, but that some form of law
true or false, has been observed, and that either the mufti, or some
other minitier of rehgion, has announced to the unhappy prince
the law which renders him unworthy of the throne. Obferv. p.
102. This will always happen. In every revolution, though
brought about by military power, the deeds of the soldiery mull
be confirmed and carried into execution with the civil and religi-
ous formalities peculiar to the constitution.

This addition to the Note may-ferve as a further illuflratien

of my own sentiments, but is not made with an intention of en-
tering into any controversy with the author of (I/,i vatio") &c.

to whom I am indebted for the obliging terms in which he has
expressed his remarks upon what I had advanced. Happy were
it for such as venture to communicate their opinions to the world,
if every animadversion upon them were conveyed with the fame
candid and liberal spirit. In one particular, however, he seems
to have misapprehended what I meant. Pref. p. 17. I certainly
did not mention his or count Marfigli's long residence in Turkey,
as a circumstance which should detrad from the weight of their
authority. I took notice of it, in justice to my readers, that they
might receive my opinion with diflruft, as it differed from that
of persons whose means of information were so far superior to
mine.

NOTE XLIV. Set. III. p. 168. [XX].

Theinfitution, the discipline, and privileges of the Janizaries

are described by all the authors who give any account of the I'urk-
ilh government. The manner in which enthusiasm was em-
ployed in order to inspire them with courage, is thus related by
princeCantemir: " When Amurath I. had formed them into a
body, he sent them to Haji Bcktalb, a Turkifli liint, famous for
his miracles and prophecies, desiring him to bestow on them a
banner, to pray to God for their success, and to give them a
name. The faint, when they appeared in his presence, put the
fieeve of his gown upon one of their heads, and said, Let them be
called rrgicb;eri. Let their countenance be ever bright, their
hands victorious, their sword keen; let their spear always hang
over the heads of their enemies, and wherever they go, may they
return with a ihining face." History of the Ottoman Empire,
p. 38. The number of Janizaries at the -first institution of the
body, was not considerable. Under Solyman, in the year 3i2l,
they amounted to twelve thousand. Since that time their num-
ber has greatly increased, Marfigl, Etat. &c. ch. 16. p. 68.
Though Solymnan poffefled such abilities and authority as to re-
firain this formidable body within the bounds of obedience, yet
its tendency to limit the power of the sultans was, even in that
age, foreseen by sagacious observers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who
accompanied M. D'Aramon, ambassador from Henry II. of
France to Solyman, published an account of his travels, in which
he describes and celebrates the discipline of the Janizaries, but at
the fame time predicts, that they would, one day, become formi-
dable to their mailers, and act the fame part at Confiantinople,
as the Praetorian bands had done at Rome. Colletion of Voyages
from the Earl of Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLV. Sect. III. p. 170. [YY].

Solyman the Magnificent, to whom the Turkilh historians have

given the lirname of Canuni, or inflituter of rules, firA brought
the finances and military establishment of the Turkish empire in-
to a regular form. He divided the military force into the Cuapirly
or soldiery of the Porte, which was properly the sanding army,
and Serratatu/y or soldiers appointed to guard the frontiers. ' 11'

chief flrength of the latter confifled of those who held Turimalo
and Ziams. These were portions of lad granted to certain per-
rons for life, in much the fame manner as the military fiefsamopg
the nations *f Europe, in return for which military. fervic was
performed. Solyman, in his Cau NArai, or book of regulations,
ixed vwith great accuracy the extent of these lands in each pro-
vince of his empire, appointed the precise number of soldiers each
person who held a Timariot or a Ziam Ihould bring into the
ield, and eftabliihed the pay which they lhould receive while en.
gaged in service. Count Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have given
exzracs from this book of regulations, and it appears, that the
ordinary eftablilhment of the Turkilh army exceeded an hundred
and fifty thousand men. When theie were added to the soldiery
of the Porte, they formed a military power greatly superior to what
any Chritian fate could command in the sixteenth century. Mar-
figli, Etat Militaire, 8c. p. x16. Rycaut's State of the Ottoman
Empire, book iii. ch. a. As Solyman, during his adive reign, was
engaged so conflantly in war, that his troops were always in the
field, the Serratacwlj became almot equal to the Janzaies them.

elves in dircipline and valour.
It is not surprising then, that the.authors of the sixteenth cen-

tury hould repreient the Turks as far superior to the Cbriftians
both in the knowledge and in the praflice of the art of war.
Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians learned the art of for.
tifying towns from the Turks. Hiflor. lib. I. p. z66. Bulbe.
quius, who was ambafiador from the emperor Ferdinand to Soly-
man, and who had opportunity to observe the state both of the
Christian and Turkifll armies, published a discourse concerning
the best manner of carrying on war against the Turks, in which
he points out at great length the immense advantages which the
Infidels possessed with refpcA to discipline, and military improve-
ments of every kind. Bulbequii opera, edit. Elzevir, p. 393, &c.
The teflimony of other authors might be added, if the matter
were in any degree doubtful.

Before 1 conclude there Proofs and Illustrations, I ought to ex-

plain the reason of two omissions in them; one of which it is ne-
ceflary to mention on myown account, the 6ther to obviate an
objection to thi; part of the work.

In all my inquiries a dr disquisitions concerning the progress of

government, nanners, literature, and commerce, during the mid-
dle ages, as well as in my deiineations of the political constitution
of the different flates of Europe at the opening of the sixteenth
century, I have not once mentioned M. de Voltaire, who, in his
.EiaY f* r 'btirire geerale, has reviewed the fame period, and has
treated of all these fubjeds. This does not proceed from inatten-
tion to the works of that extraordinary man, whole genius, no
less enterprising than universal, has attempted almost every diffe,
rent species of literary composition. In many of thele he excels.
In all, if he had left religion untouched, he is inftrudive and a-
greeable. But ab he seldom imitates the example of modern hifto
rians in citing the authors from whom they derived their infor-

mation, t cotld not, with propriety, appeal to his authority in
confirmation of any doubtful or unknown fad. I have often,
however, followed him as my guide in these researches; and he
has not only pointed out the fac'ts with refpeft to which it was of
importance to enquire, but the conclusions which it was proper to
draw from them. If he had, at the fame time, mentioned the
books which relate these particulars, a great part of my labour
would have been unnecessary, and many of his readers, who now
confider-him oniv as an entertaining and lively writer, would find
that he is a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omiflion, every intelligent reader mufl have ob-

served, that I have not entered, either in the historical part of this
volume, or in the Proofs and Illustrations, into the fame detail
with refpe& to the ancient laws and cutloms of the British kin-g
doms, as concerning those of the other European nations. As the
capital fadts with regard to the progress of government and man-
ners in their own country are known to most of my readers, such
a detail appeared to me to be less eftential. Such fads and obfer-
vations, however, as were neceflary towards completing my de-
sign in this part of the work, I have mentioned under the different
articles which are the fubjcets of my disquisitions. The itate of
government, in all the nations of Europe, having been nearly the
fame during several ages, nothing can tend more to illuflrate the
progress of the Engliih contlitution, than a careful inquiry into
thelaws and customs of the kingdoms on the continent. This
source of information has been too much negleded by the Englihf
antiquaries and lawyers. Filled with admiration of that happy
tonftitution now eftablihied in Great Britain, they have been more
attentive to its forms and principles than to the condition and is
deas of remote times, which in almost every particular differ from
the present. While engaged in perusing the laws, charters, and
early historians of the continental kingdoms, I have often been
led to think that an attempt to illustrate the progress of English
jurisprudence and policy, by a comparison with those of other king-
-doms in a similar fitua ion, would be of great utility, and might
throw much light on some points which are now obscure, and de-
cide others which have been long controverted.

7.

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

INDEX

TO THE
RIRST VOLUME.

A
AFRICA, the Ihocking devastations made there by the Vandals,

I73

Alonu., his charadter of the clergy in his time, I93
Alfred the Great, his complaint of the ignorance of the clergy,

192

Allodial poffeflion of land, explained, 182. How such possession

became subjed to military service, id. Distinguished from be-
neficiary tenures, ib. 183. How converted into feudal tenures,
I86

Allodium, the etymology of that word, I88
Amrmiants, his character of the Huns, 174, 177
Amuralt, Sultan, the body of Janizaries formed by him, 168
Anathema, form of that denounced againfi robbers during the mid-

dle ages, 249

Arabia, the ancient Greek philosophy cultivated there, while loft

in Europe, 244, Note xxviii. The progress of philosophy from
thence to Europe, 245
Aragon, rife of the kingdom of, 131. Its union with Castile, i$.

The constitution and form of its government, I35. The pri-
vileges of its Cortes, ib. Office and jurifdiciion of the jufliza,
i,6. The regal power very confined, I37. Form of the alle-
giance sworn to the kings of, ib. The power of the nobility to
controul the regal power, 257. Their privilege of union taken
away by Peter IV. it. The eftablifment of the inquisition op-
poled there, 259
Armies, flanding, the rife of, traced, 86. By what means they

became more general in Europe, 103

Arms, the profeflion of, the most honourable in uncivilized na-

tions, 65, 66

A4, an account of the ancient Romish feast of, I95
AJ.m/lies, legislative, how formed, 38
- - - general, of France, their power under the first race of

kings, 147. Under the second and third, ib. 148. At what
period they loft their legislative authority, 149

Anila, king ot the Huns, account of his reception of the Roman

ambassadors, I72, NVote iii. Some account of his conqueits,
175
Vol. J. Bb

i*;!:, an aflenmF'! of Caflliian nobles there, solemnly tty and de-
pose lielry 1V. thei- king, X;4
Aayjria, the house of, by whom founded, 157

B

Pa;Isr, in the old French law, tlhir office explained, 236
Balance of power, the first rife of, in Europe, ro3. The progress

of, i;.
£lai;', the firfl source of wealth to the towns situated on that sea,

251
Barc!er.a, its trade, riches, and privileges at the close of the sis-

teenth century, 262

Bareos,, their independence, and mutual hostilities, under the feu-

dal fvltem, 21. How affeied by the infranchifement of cities,
-?. Acquire a participation in legislative government, 38.
Their private wars for redress of personal injuries, 44. Me-
thods employed to abolish these contentions, 46. Origin of their
lupreme and independent jurifdiaion, 56. The bad effcts re-
fulting from these privileges, 37. The steps taken by princes
to reduce their courts, 59. How obliged to relinquish their ju-
dicial prerogatives, 65. Of Italy, fubjeced to municipal laws,
'oC, Note xv. Their right of territorial jurifdition explained,
233. Their emoluments from causes decided in their courts,
234

Benfies, under the feudal fyflem, a history of, 184. When they

became hereditary, 185
BWis, an enquiry into the materials of the ancient ones, 193. The

lots of old manuscripts accounted for, ib. The great prices
they fold for in ancient times, i.
.crongbJ, representatives of, how introduced into national councils,

38

Britonx, ancient, their distress and' dejecion when deserted by

the Romans, and harrafted by the Pi&ts and Caledonians, 170,
.oate i.

BratbecrLs:d cf Gcd, an account of that aiociatton for extinguishing

private ewars, 220.

£.,<.,, how it became the chief mart for Italian commodities dur-

ing the middle ages, 152
Burudy, Mlarv, heiress of, the importance with which her choice

in a humlbma was confidered by all Europe, 96. The treacher-
ous views of Louis XI. of France towards her, 97 Is married
to the archduke Maximilian, 98. The influence of this match
on Whe Bate of Europe, 99.

C

Crifr, his account of the ancient Germans, compared with that

of Tacitus, x 7
Calalrava, military order of, in Spain, zealous to employ their

prowess in defence of the honours of the Virgin blry, a6j.
The vow used by these knights, ih

Cambray, treaty of, its objed, 107. The confederacy diolblved,

109
Crio tLaw, an inquiry into, 61. Progress of ecclesiastical ufurpa-

tions, it. The maxims of, more equitable than the civil courts
of the middle ages, 6z

Caqli/r, rife of the kingdom of, x3i. Its union with Aragon, i.

Its king Henry 1V. solemnly tried and deposed in an assembly
of the nobles, 134. The confitution and government of that
kingdom, .37. A history of the Cortes of, and its privileges,
I38. The kingdom originally elective, 260, Note xxxiii.

CalailoHiu, the spirited behaviour of the people there il defence of

their rights, against their king John II. of Aragon, 134

C'tif/alc, a 1pecies of the Oblati, or voluntary slaves, the obliga-

tions they entered into, described, 215

Centcnaii, or inferior judges in the middle ages, the extraordinary

oath required from them, 249

Clbamip de Ma,s, and doe mai, account of those assemblies of the

ancient Gauls, 266

Clarlemaga, his law to prevent private wars for redress of personal

injuries, 46, 219. State of Germany under his descendents, 153

Charles IV. emperor, dissipates the imperial domains, 277
-- V. emperor, an emulator of the heroic conduct of his ri-

val, Francis I. 69. His future grandeur founded on the mar-
riage of the archduke Maximilian with the heiress of Burgun-
dy, 98
--- VII. of France, the firfi who introduced landing armies ia

Europe, 86. His successful extension of the regal prerogative,
88

--- VIII. of France, his chara&er, 99. How induced to invade

Italy, it. His resources and preparations for this enterprize,
loo. His rapid success, ib. A combination of the Italian states
formed against him, xo1. Is forced to return back to France,
ib. The distressed tfate of his revenues by this expedition,
106.

Cha/l-,voix, his account of the North American Indians, made

use of in a comparison between them and the ancient Germans,
I79

Cilzarers of immunity or franchise, an inquiry into the nature of

those granted by the barons of France to the towns under their
jurifdiftions, 204, NVoe xvi. Of communities, granted by the
kings of France, how they tended to eflabliih regular govern-
ment, 35, 204

Cbivalry, the origin of, 67. Its beneficial effe&s on human man-

ners, 69. The enthufialin of, diftinguilhed from its salutary
consequences, ib.

Clh ioianity, corrupted when firfl brought into Europe, X7. Its in-

fluence in freeing mankind from the bondage of the feudal po-
licy, 213, Note Xx.
Ci,-le of Germany, the occasion of their being formed, I59
CGriif, the ancient states of, under the feudal policy, 34. The
freedom of, where firit eitablifhed, ib. Charters ot community,

Bb 2

why granted in France by Louis le Gros, .. Obtain the like
ail over Europe, iS. Acquire political consideration, 38.
Clr-,, the proFrcis cf their usurpations, 61. Their plan of

uinfpruidence more perfect than that of the civil courts in the
rr.id'diL ,es, 62. The great ignorance of, in the early feudal
times of Europe, 191
Ceii:a, sfave to WVilla, widow of duke Hugo, extra&t from the

charter of manumiflion granted to her, 213
Clnrr.t, council of, reolves on the holy war, 17. See Poor tLe

Rermit, aYid Cr> /,res.

C.tirut I. ir.ftance of the fmal authority he had over his army 265
C:h-.itr,, 1I. his account of the popular afembies among the an.

cient Gauls, a66

Cil, the fc.:ir.der of the French monarchy, unable to retain a

sacred va.e taken by his army, from being difiributed by lot a-
mong the reft of the plunder, x8r, Note vii.

Cfll.ei, the sirs eftabliflment, of, in Europe, 245
Coemat, judicial, the prohibition of, an improvement in the ad-

ministration ofjufice, 47. The foundation and universality of
this mode of trial, 5a. The pernicious effe&s of, 53. Various
expedients for abolilhing this practice, 54. The ancient Swe-
dih law of, for words of reproach, az6. Positive evidence, or
points of proof rendered ineffectual by it, 128. This mode
of trial authorized by the ecclesiastics, a29. The last inflances
of, in the histories of France and England, 230
C_-..ere, the spirit of crusading how far favourable to, at that

early period, 19. The first eftablifluent of free corporations,
;S. Charters of community, why granted by Louis le Gros,
A. The like pratfice obtains all over Europe, 36. The falu-
tary effects of these inflitutions, i;. The low state of, during
l'e middle ages, 74. Caufee contributing to its revival, i.
Prmonted by the Hanseatic league, 76. Is cultivated in the
Ntrhttrrands, ,b. Is introduced into England by Edward III.

. The beneficial corfequences resulting from the revival of,

h. The earlv cultivation of, in Italy, 50o
C.--.... .-:, the firt compilation of, made in England by Lord

Chif Juiti-e Gianville, 241

C7cm--i itl. See Cbharer. Citi,,, Cornerce, and Cortcrations.
C.n--^r. Anne, her chara&er of the crusaders, I99
LCst',r, mariner's, when invented, and its influence on the ex-

'enfizn ofcommerce, 75

C;i-,: ;- for perfonua injuries, the motives for eflablifhing, 218.

The custom of, deduced from the practice of the ancient Ger-
mans., 230

C..iur^atori, introduced as evidence in the jurisprudence of the

middle ages 49

Cecat- .-r', in the Italian policy, what, a2o
C"r",,i count of Franconia, how he obtaihed election to the empire

154 C£rain, the last rightful heir to the crown of Naples of the
bouse of Suabia, his unhappy fate, ix5

Con/flate, treaty of, between the emperor rF:eder-i Bar;barossa and

the free cities of Italy, 20o
Colt,,lltiiofl, its flouriliing state at the time of the cnifades, 29.

When firit taken by the Turks, 166. The cruatders how look-
ed upon there, 99. The account given' oi this city by the
Latin writers, ib.

CoiJlition.r, popular, how formed, 38
Cordo,,,, Gonlalvo de, secures the crown of Naples to Ferdinand

of Aragon, 126

Corporatinsv, and bodies politic, the eflablilhments of how far fa-

vourable to the improvement of manners, 33. The privileges
of, how first claimed, 35. Charters of community, why grant-
ed by Louis le Gros in France, ib. The institution of, obtains
all over Europe, 36 Their effeEts, ib.

Cortes of Aragon, its constitution and privileges, 135.
- of Caflile, a hiltory of, and an account of its constitution

and privileges, 138. The vigilance with which it guarded its
privileges againfi the encroachments of the regal power, 139

Cr/fades, the first motives of undertaking, a6. The enthusiastic

zeal with which they were undertaken, z7. Firftpromoted by
Peter the Hermit, ib. The success of them, 18. The conit-
quences resulting from them, 29. Their effects on manners,
30. On property, ib. How advantageous to the enlargement.
of the regal power of the European princes, 31. The corn
mercial effects of, 32, 74. The univerlal frenzy for engaging
in these expeditions accounted for, 196, Vote xiii. The privi-
leges granted to those who engaged in them, 197. Stephen
earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of them, ih. The ex-
pence of conduAing them, how raised, 198. Charaler given
of the crusaders by the Greek writers, I99

D

D:-t, the first hint of attaching moveables Sor the recovery of,

derived from the canon law, 240

Drtori,J how confidered in the rude and simple fate of society,.

205

Diets, of Germany, some account of, 280
Doaor, in the different faculties, dispute precedence with knights,.

245, 246

E

Ecclefilaica jurisprudence, more perfect in its plan than the civil

courts of the middle ages, 6z

Eccljijics, when, and by what degrees they claimed exemption

from civil jurifdiAion, 238. Military talents cultivated and
exercised by those of the middle ages, 243

Edw:.ard III. of England, his endeavours to introduce commerce in-

to his kingdom, 77

E/,itors of Germany, the rife of their privileges, i6z
£lvy, St. his definition or description of a good Christian, 194,

Note xi.
E.rrori of Germany, an inquiry into their power, jurifdidionj

13b3

and revenue, 276, Naet xlii. The ancient mode of eleding
them, 278
Isgland a summary view of the contests between, and France,

82. The consequences of its losing its continental poffeflions,
84. The power of the crown, how extended, 94. See Henry
VII. VWhy so many marks of Saxon usages and language,
in comparison with those of the Normans, to be found in, 172
Nite iv. When corporations began to be eltablilied in, 21o.
Instances of the long continuance of. personal servitude there,
216. Inquiry into the Saxon laws for putting an end to pri-
vate wars, -a;i. The causes of the speedy decline of private
wars there, proposed to the researches of antiquarians, 223.
The last instances of judicial combat recorded in the history of,
20o. The territorial jurisdiction of the barons how abolished,
2;8 Cause of the flow progress of commerce there, 253.
The firR commercial treaty entered into by, 254

E. iier.-, the imperfect nature of that admitted in law-proceedings

during the middle ages, 48. Rendered ineffe6tual by the judi-
cal combat, -29

£.Ert-, the alterations in, by the conquests of the Romans, 9.

The improvements the nations of, received in exchange for
their liberties, ib. Its disadvantages under this change of cir-
curmfances, ;t. Inquiry into the supposed populousness of the
ancient northern nations, 1o. The savage desolations exercised
by the Goths, Vandals and Huns, IS. The universal change
occasioned by their irruptions and conquest, 16. The first
rudiments of the present policy of, to be deduced from this pe-
riod, 16. Origin of the feudal system, Ig. See Feudal Sy.jfen
The general barbarism introduced with this policy, 22. At
awhat time government and manners began to improve, 25.
The caufcs and events which contributed to this improvement,
s6. See Crifader, Corporatioon, Peop.le The miseries occaffoned
bv Drivate wars in, 45. Methods taken to suppress them, 46.
JI;;:iical cen hits prohibited, 48. The defects of judicial pro-
ceeti:ngC in tl:e middle ages, i. The influence of superstition in
these proreedings, co. The origin of the independent territorial
juridlictions ot the barons, 36. The bad consequences of their
judicial power, it. The fleps taken by princes to abolish their
c-urts, 9. An inquiry into the canon law, 61. Revival of
tt.e Roman law, ib. Effeds of the spirit of chivalry, 67. How
improved 1,y the progress of science and cultivation of litera-
ture, 69. Clriftianitv corrupted when first received in, 71.
SchSoiaftic theology the firfi objec of learning in, 72. Low
ftalc of ccmmerce in, during the middle ages, 73. Com-
rer.ce revives in Italy, 74. Is promoted by the Hanseatic
kague, 75. I; cultivated in the Netherlands, 76. The effe&ts
es the progrcis of commerce on the poiilhing of manners, 77.
The efftets of the marriage of the heirers of Burgundy with the
archduke M.Dxirrilian, on the Hate of, 97. By what means
ftr.daig frrces becalne general in, lo3. Consequences of the
league us Canmbray to, lc7. A view of the political conflitu-

tion of-the several fiates of, at the commencement of the fix-
teenth century, 15o. Italy, 112. The papacy, 113. Venice,
izo. Florence, izz. Naples, 123. Milan, ia6. Spain, lz9.
France, 146. Germany, I53. Turkey, 165. Instances of the
small intercourse among nations in the middle ages, 246.

F

Feodum, the etymology of that word, i88
Ferdinan., king of Aragon, unites the Spanish monarchy, by his

marriage with Isabella of Castile, 131. His schemes to exalt
the regal power, 142. Resumes former grants of land from
his barons, 143. Unites to the crown the grand masterships of
the three military orders, 144. Why he patronized the affoci-
ation called the Hovy Brotherbood, against the barons, i45
Frudal system, the origin of, deduced, i8. The primary objed of

this policy, it. Its deficiencies for inferior government, i9.
Tenures of land, how established under, zo. The rile of in-
teftine discords among the barons under, ib. The servile state
of the people, za. The weak authority of the king, ib. Its
influence on the external operations of war, 2z. The general
extinction of all arts and sciences effected by, ib. Its operation
on religion, 24. Its influence on the character of the human
mind, ib. At what time government and manners began to
be improved, 25. The caures and events which contributed to
this improvement, 26. See Crusades. The ancient state of ci-
ties under, 33. The frame of national councils under this po-
licy, 38. How altered by theprogrefs of civil liberty, 40. An
inquiry into the administration of justice under, 42. Private
war, 48. Judicial combat, sI. The independent jurisdiction
of the barons, 5 . The diftinftion between freemen and vas-
fals under, 185. How strangers were confidered and treated
under, 247
Fiefs, under the feudal system, a history of, 183. When they be-

came hereditary, r85
1Fitztfpben~, observations on his account of the state of London at

the time of Henry II. z21

-Slanders. See WVNelerland.
Florence, a view of the constitution of, at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, t12. The influence acquired by Cosmo
di Medici in, ib.
Franc%, by what means the towns in, first obtained charters of

community, 36. Ordonnances of Louis X. and his brother
Philip in favour of civil liberty, 4I. Methods employed to
suppress private wars, 46. St. Louis attempts to dilcounte-
nance judicial combat, 54. A view of the contests between,
and England, 8z. The consequences of its recovering its pro.
vinces firom England, 84. The monarchy of, how ftrengtherr-
ed by this event, 85. The rife of standing forces in, 86. The
regal prerogative strengthened by this measure, 88. The ex-
tension of the regal prerogative vigorously pursued by Louis
XI; 9o. See Loui. Xi. The efidcls of the invalion of Italy by

Charles VHT. 99. See Clar/, VIII. National infantry efla-
blidhed in, Ics. Leag.e of Cambray formed againfi the Vene-
tians, xce. Battle of Ghiarradaaa, 1o8. An inquiry into its
ancient government and laws, 146. The power of the gene-
ral affimbiies under the firit race of kings, 147. Under the fe.
condand third, i6. 148. The regal power confined to the king's
own donains, 149. When the general assembly or itates gene.
ral loll their legislative authority, ib. When the kings began
to assert their legislative power, 50o. When the government
of, became purely monarchical, Jt. The regal power neverthe-
less restrained Ly the privileges of the nobility, ib. An inquiry
into tie jurifdicdion of its parliaments, particularly that of Pa.
ris, 52. How the allodial property of land there was altered
into feudal, IX8. The progress of liberty in that kingdom
traced, 2I11, A .- xix. The attempts to eftablilh liberty there
unlfuccefsful, 212. The last instance of judicial combat record-
ed in the hiflory of, 230. The present government of, com-
pared with that of ancient Gaul, 265, Noet xxxviii. The
states general, v, hen first afftmbled, 273
Frani, I. of France, his charaCter influenced by the spirit of chi-

valrv, 69. Is emulated by the emperor Charles V. 78.

Fr.-,wr Bararofa, emperor, the free cities of Italy unite against

him, 2:2. Treaty of Conllance with them, id. Was the first
who granted privileges to the cities in Germany, a09

Fredia, in the ancient German usages explained, 231
freew.s, how diftinguithed from valffls, under the feudal policy,

182, 191. hvy often induced to urrender their freedom, and
become slaves, 192
F:icbteriuJ Carnotenfis, his charader of the city of Constantinople,

199

G

G.1a, hew allodial property of land was changed into feudal there,

187. The goxernment of, compared with that of modern
France, 265, Ntre xxxviii. The ftmall authority the kings of,
enjoyed over their armies, illustrated in an anecdote of Clotaire
1. 265. Account of the popular assemblies of, 266. The Salic
laws how enaced, ib. Were not fubjedt to taxation, 267. See
Frane

Geoffre de i.'Ietardai-, his account of the magnificence of Conflan-

tinople at the time when taken by the Crusaders, 200

Getrnans ancient, an account of their usages and way of life, 177.

Their method cf engaging in war, ib. A comparison between
them and the North Amtrican Indians, 179. Why they had
no cities, zc8, y* e xvii. The pracice of compounding for
pecrbnai injuries by fines, deduced from their usages, a3o.

Germany, iitti; interested in foreign concerns at the beginning of

the fifteenth century, 84. National infantry established in,
Ic5. State of, under Charlemagne and descendents, 153. Con-
rad, count of Franconia, cholen emperor, 154. His luccefTors
in the imperial dignitv, ib. How the nobility of, acquired in-
dependent iovercign authority, ib. The fatal effles of aggran-

d;z;ng the clergy in, 25S. The contest between the emperor
Henry IV. and Pope Gregory VII. 156. Rife of the factions
of Guelfs and Ghibellines, 157. Decline of the Imperial au-
thority, ib. The house of Aufiria, by whom founded, ib. A
total change in the political constitution of the empire, 158.
The Itate of anarchy in which it continued to the time of Max-
imilian, the immediate predeceflor of Charles V. ib. 159. Di-
vided into circles, ib. The imperial chamber instituted, ib. The
Aulic council reformed, id. A view of its political constitution
at the commencement of the ensuing history, z60. Its defedts
pointed out, ib. The imperial dignity and power compared,
a61. Election of the emperors, x16. The repugnant forms of
civil policy, in the several states of, 163. The opposition be-
tween the secular and ecclesiastical members of, ib. The united
body hence incapable of ating with vigour, 164. When ci-
ties first began to be built in, 208, Note xvii. When the ci-
ties of, first acquired municipal privileges, o09. The artizans
of, when infranchifed, ib. Immediate cities in the German jurif-
prudence, what, ib. The great calamities occafiorfed there by
private wars, 124. Origin of the league of the Rhine, 2:5.
When private wars were finally abolished there, ib. Inquiry in.
to the power, jurifdition, and revenue of its emperors, %76»
Note xlii. The ancient mode of electing the emperors, 279.
Account of the diets, iS

Glikbllines. See Gudlfs
Gbiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the Venetians, o08
Glanville, Lord Chief Justice, the first who compiled a body of

common law, in all Europe, 141

Geobi, Vandals, and Huns, overrun the Roman empire, and pre.

cipitate its downfal, so. The fRate of the countries from
whence they issued, Ix. The motives of their firlt excursions,
i. How thev came to fettle in the countries they conquered,
12. A comparison drawn between them and the Romans, at
the period of their eruptions, ii, l. ' c. Compared with the
native Americans, 15 The dcfolation :hey occafined in Eu-
rope, ib. The universal change made by them in the Htare of
Europe, I6. The principles on which they made their it.cle-
ments, 17. Origin of the feudal system, I8. See Feudal Sy/pem.
An inquiry into the administration ofjultice among, 43. Their
private wars, 44. Destroy the monuments of the Roman arts,
69. Their contempt of the Romans, and hatred of their arts,
171, Note ii. Their aversion to literature, ib. No authentic
account of their origin, or ancient hiitory existing, 16
Government, how limited by the feudal policy, 2o. The effe&ts of

the crusades on, 32. How affe&ed by the infranchifement of
cities, 33. Legislative aflemblies how formed, 36. Private
wars deitruCtive to the authority of, 45. Methods employed
to abolilh this hostile mode of redrefing injuries, 46. How as-
feted by the supreme independent jurifdidions of the barons,
56. The steps towards abolishing them, 6o. The origin and
growth of royal courts of justice, i6. How influenced by the
revival of science and literature, 73. A view of, at the begin-

ning of the fifteenth century, 78. The power of monarchs
then verv limited, ;9. Their revenues small, o8. Their ar-
mies unfit for crnqut.ft, il. The princes hence incapable of
extensive plans ot operation, 8i. The kingdoms very little
eonnectcd ,m ith each ether, Si. How the efforts of, from this
period became more powerful and extensive, 84. The confe-
ouences of England losing its provinces in France, 85.. The
scheme of Louis XI. of France to extend the regal power, 90.
See /..-. XI. The power of the English crown enlarged, 94.
See 1h-1 VII. As alio that of Spain, 5. How the life of
flandinr armies became general, sos. A view of the political
confi:ut;on of the several Rtates of Europe, at the commence-
ment ofthe sixteenth century, ili. In what refped» the chart-
ers of cormmunities granted by the kings of France, tended to
introduce a regular form of, 2c4.

Grmc, the breeding of silk worms, when introduced there, $So
Git emperors, their magnificence at Constantinople, 199
Gre'gr of lours, remarks on the state of Europe during the peri

od of w-ich he wrote the hiftorv, 24
-- eti:e Great, pope, his reason for granting liberty to his

laves, 1 3
- VI. pope, the foundation of his contests with Henry IV.
emperor of Germany, 156. The mean submission he extorted
frorn Henry, ;. His own account of this afair, 276

Gudf, and Ghibe!ines, tife of tlofe faflions in Germany., 7
Guieccirdis', the historian, inflance of his fuperffitioua reverence

for pope Clement VII. t11, A.'e

Gusibera., a monk, his character of Conilantinople, at the time
when taken by the crusaders, aoo

H
Hase;'i league, when formed, and its influence on the extension

of comme-ce, 76, 253
Hcnr~ IV. ot C.b Ile, solemnly tried and deposed by an assembly

o0 Cafliliai, nb'es, 134
*- cnrperor of Germany, the humiliating slate to which he

w-s reduced lby Po.'e Gregory VII. 156, 276, NVoie xli.
- VII. of E,';n:d, his situation at his accession to the crown,
94. Erub!_s -s harons to break their entails and ifi1 their e-
fi;tr, 9;. Prci:;bi:s his barons keeping retainers ib. En-
courages 3aricuirture and coinnmerce, 95
Hereawrnrm, the nature of this fine under the feudal policy, ex-

plained, 183

Icrrand.d, Santa, account of that institution, 164
Ji,,rrv, thle most calamitous period of, pointed out, 15
JiiT Brotherhood, an afioclation in Spain under that name, on

what occasion formed, 145.
- Land, the origina; inducements of the Chriflians to rescue it

from :he hands ot the infid-ls 25. See Crufad'Je & Peter te, HIrmit.

Hie,,w, points o; the ancient Swedifa law for determining, 216
idfti:iia, enr:rced by ftatuter during the middle ages, 247

Huns, instance of their enthufiaflic passion for war, 172, Note iii.
Some account of their policy and manners, 174. See Gotbl.

I

Janizaries, origin, and formidable nature of those troops, r68
Impeial chamber of Germany instituted, 159. The occalion of

its institution, 281
Indians, North American, a comparison drawn between them and

the ancient Germans, 179
ldtifry, the spirit of, how excited by the infranchifements of ci-

ties, 38
Ifintrv, the advantages of, beyond cavalry, taught to the reft of

Europe by the Swiss, IC5. National bodies of, eftabliflcd in
Germany, i3. In France and Spain, ii. 106
Inlrritance, and right of representation, between orphan grandsons

and their uncles, how decided in the tenth century, 227
Intrreft of money, the necessity of admitting, in a commercial view,

2Sr. Prepolteroufly condemned by the churchmen of the mid-
dle ages, ib. The cause hence, of the exorbitant exactions of
the Lombard bankers, it.
I.aly, when the cities of, began to form themselves into bodies po-

litic, 35. Commerce firt improved there, and the reasons of it,
75. 'Ihe revolutions in Europe occasioned by the invasion of,
by Charles VIII of France, 99. The slate of, at the time of
this invasion, xoo. The rapidluccefs of Charles, 0ol. A con-
bination of the states of, drives Charles out of, and gives birth
to the balance of power in Europe, 0oz. The political situation
of, at the commencement of the sixteenth century, 12. The
papacy, ib. Venice, Io. Florence, 12z. Naples, I23. Mi-
lan, 126. Evidences of the desolation made there by the north-
ern invaders of the Roman empire, I76. How the cities of,
obtained their municipal privileges, 201, Note xv. State of,
under Frederic I. ib. Treaty of Constance between the free
cities of, and the emperor Frederic Barbarossa, 202

yudgment of God, modes of acquittal by, in the law proceedings

during the middle ages, 50, 225, Note xxii.

.uridicum Crucis, method of trial by, z22
Julius I1 pope, forms a confederacy against the Venetians at Cam-

bray, Io8. Seizes part of the Venetian territories, ib. The
confederacy dissolved, 109. Turns his schemes against France,
ib.

Jurfprndence, ecclefiaflical, more perfect in its plan than the civil

courts in the middle ages, 47. See Law.
Jflice, an inquiry into the administration of, under the feudal

policy, 43. The steps towards the improvement of, as civil li-
berty. advanced, 44. Redress chiefly pursued by private wars,
45. Methods taken to suppress private wars, ib. Judicial com-
bats prohibited, 47. The defects of judicial proceedings in the
middle ages, ib. Compurgators, the nature of that kind of evi-
dence, 49. Methods of trial by ordeal, or acquittal byjudgment
of God, 50. Origin of the supreme independent jurifdiftions

of the feudal barons, 56. The extent and bad effeAs of their
privileges, 7. The steps taken by monarchs to reduce the ba-
rons courts, 59. The growth of royal courts of jultice, 60. In-
quiry into the canon law, 61. How improved by the revival
of the Roman law, 63. When the administration of, became a
diftindt profession, 66

7ftia, or supreme judge of Aragon, his office and privileges, 136.

An inquiry by whom this officer was eleced, 254. Who was
eligible to this office, 255. Nature of the tribunal appointed to
controul his adminiltration, i/. Infiance of his extensive pow-
er, 256

K
Xd;, his power how circumferibed by the barons, under the feu-

dal fyfiem, 20. By what means the crusades tended to enlarge
the regal authority, 31
KEtr., its influence in checking the sultans of the Ottoman em-

pire, 167

L
L.ad, how held at the eftablifhnent of the feudal system, 20. See

Feudal Syfu.

- the property of, how confidered by the ancient barbarous

nations, 181, Vte viii. Allodial possession of, explained, 182.
The proprietors how fubjeaed to military service, ib. Allodial
and beneficiary possession diflinguifhed, 183. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal, 184

Las, when the fludy of it became a diflin& employment, 66
- Canon, an inquiry into, 61. The maxims of, more equita-

ble than the civil courts of the middle ages, ib. When firi
compiled, 240
- Roman, how it funk into oblivion, 62. Circumflances which

favoured the revival of it, 63. Its effects in improving the ad-
riniftration ofjufiice, 64. Its rapid progress over Europe, 14I,
SXte XXV

Lacb'rroavJ, in the Scottihf law, explained, 204
ilrtj, civil, the rife and progress of, traced, 35. How favoured

by the ordonnances of Louis X. of France, and his brother Phi-
lip, 41. The spirit of, how excited in France, zii, Note xix.
The particulars included in the charters of, granted to hulband-
men, 2aI, Note xx. The influence of the Chriltian religion in
extending, ib. The several opportunities of obtaining, 220
L;mcge,, council of, its endeavours to xctinguilh private wars,

a:1.
.Lrteftrre, the cultivation of, greatly inflrumental in civilizing the

nations of Europe, 69. Why the first efforts of, ill-direded,
70o The good effe&s nevertheless of the spirit of inquiry ex-
erted, 72. How checked in its progress, 73. Its influence on
manners and government, it.
Litrgy, the preference between the Muarabic and Romil, how

ascertained in Spain, 117.

Zocmards the first bankers in Europe, 25I. The motive of their

exacting exorbitant interest, ib.

London, its flourilhing state at the time of Henry IT. xro
Louis le Gros, of France, his inducement to grant privileges to

towns within his own domains, 35. See Charers
- St. the great attention he paid to the adininiftration of jul-

tice, in appeals which came before him, 236
- X. -of France, his ordonnances in favour of civil liberty,
41
- XI. of France, his character, 90. His schemes for depressing

the nobility, 91. Sows divisions among them, ib. Increases
the sanding forces, 92. Enlarges the revenues of the crown,
ib. His address in overruling the assembly of states, 93. Ex-
tends the.bounds of the French monarchy, it. The activity of
his external operations, ib. His treacherous baseness towards
.the heireft of Burgundy, 9, 98., The effets of his condut,
i&.
- XII. his hesitation in carrying on war against the pope, 119,

Note. Afterts his right to the dutchy of Milan, and retains Lu-
-dovico Sforza in prison, 128

M

,Maunfrnd,this struggles for tre crown of Naples, 124
.rManind, the most calamitous period in the history of, pointed

out, 16

Manners, the barbarity of, under the feudal eftabliihments, after

the overthrow of the Roman empire, 23. When they began
to improve, z5. Effets ofthe Crusades on, 29. How improv-
ed by the infranchifement of cities, 38. How improved by the
erection of royal courts of juftiee, in opposition to the barons
courts, 60. Effects of the revival of the Roman law on, 63.
The beneficial tendency of the spirit of chivalry on, 67. How
influenced by the progress of science, 69. How polished by the
revival of commerce, g5
?Manumijfon, particulars included in the charters of, granted to

huibandmen or slaves, z21, Note xx. The form of, 213.

&Maximilian, archduke of Austria, married to Mary heiress of Bur-

gundy, 98. The influence of this match on the state of Europe,
ib.

emperor, institutes the Imperial chamber, 159. Re-

forms the Aulic council, ib.
Medici, Cosmo di, the firif of the name, the influence he acquired

in Florence, x22
Milan, the fate of the dutchy of, at the commencement of the

sixteenth century, z26. Rife and progress of the disputes con.
cerning the fucceflion to, ib.
2Mind, the human, a view of, under the first eflahlilhment of the

feudal policy in Europe, 23. The aera of its ultimate depref-
sion, and commencement of its improvement, 24. The progress
of its operations, before the full exertion of it, 70.
Vol. I.. C c

i]fVfi9;elo, a cafs of the Oblati, or voluntary saves, the pious
motives of the obligations they entered into, 14

Jfori., make a conquest of Spain, I29. By what means weak-

ened during their eftabliihment there, 130. Remarks on their
conduct in Spain, 13I

Mmrispal privileges, how obtained by the cities of Italy, 201, NAle

xv. Secured to them by the treaty of Conflance, 203. The
favourite slate of, under the Roman government, 208

N
.aplr, a view of the conflitution of that kingdom, at the com-

mencement of the sixteenth century, x23- The turbulent un-
fettled fate of that kingdom, it. State of the disputes concern-
ing the succession of the crown of, 124. The pretensions of
the French and SpaniHi monarchs to the crown of, z x
NTarIe~, , community of, preamble to the writ of summons of Phi-

lip the Long to, ain, Note :ix.
Naigaftiw, proof of the imperfect Rate of, during the middle ages,

151
Nftberalad, vigorous prodecution of the manufactures of hemp

and flax there, on the revival of commerce in Europe, 76
Normaas, why so few traces of their usages and language to be

found in England, in comparison with those of the Saxons, 1x2,
Kia iv.

0

Clts, or voluntary saves, the classes of, specified, a14
Ord, methods of trial by, during the middle ages, So. The in-

fluence of fuperfition in diCtating these means, ib

Ouo, Frifingnis, his account of the slate of Italy under Frederic

1. a20

Ottaa empire, the origin, and despotic nature of, 165. Becomes
formidable to the Chriflian powers, 169

P

Parpa. See Pos~d
Paper, when firfl made of the present material, 194
P"i,, an inquiry into the pre-eminent jurifdicioa of its parliament

over the other parliaments of France, Ij2. Its origin traced,
273, Note xl. The royal edics regi~red by, before admitted
to be laws, 2 75.
Prluarrat,, or kgiflative affemlies, how formed under the feudal

policy, 38. How altered by the progress of civil liberty, 39.

fPeopte, their wretched servile fiate under the feudal fyflem, az, 40.

Released from their ilavifh state by the infrnchifement of cities,
38. How they obtained a representation in national councils,
39- Those who lived in the country and cultivated the ground,
an inquiry into their condition under the feudal policy, 189,
Nv ix.
pfo, murder in, how puniihed there, 23a

Peter the hermit, excites the European princes to undertake th

Holy War, 27
- IV. king of Aragon, defeats the leaders of the Aragonefe

union, and destroys the privilege of these aTfociations, 258
Plilip the Long, preamble to his writ of summons to the commu-

nity of Narbonne, 2 z, Note xix
Pbilofopfy, cultivated by the Arabians, when loft in Europe, 244,

Note xxviii. Itsprogrefs from them into Europe, 245
Pilgrimaget to the Holy Land, when first undertaken, 26. See

Crusades and Peter the Hermit
Plentia, council of, the Holy War resolved on by, 27. See Peter

the Hermit and Crufadei
Plivder, how divided among the ancient northern nations, 18. II-

lustrated in an anecdote of Clovis, iSi, Note vii

Popedom, the highest dignity in Europe at the commencement of

the sixteenth century, 112. Origin and progress of the papal
power, 113. The territories of the popes unequal to the sup-
port of their fpiritualjurifdiaion, 14. Their authority in their
own territories extremely limited, ib. The check they receiv-
ed from the Roman barons, ix5. Nicholas Rienzo attempts
to establish a democratical government in Rome, and to destroy
the papal jurifdi6tion, ib. The papal authority considerably
firengthened by the popes Alexander VI. and Julius II. 1i6.
See julitu II. The permanent nature of ecclcfiaftical dominion,
117. The civil adminifiration of, not uniform or consistent,
it. Rome the school of political intrigue during the sixteenth
century, II8. The advantages derived fiom the union of fpi-
ritual and temporal authority, ib. A view of the contests be-
tween the popes and the emperors of Germany, 156
opulofneJis of the ancient northern nations, an inquiry into, io
PrifcuJ, extra&t from his account of the Roman embassy to Attila

king of the Huns, 172, Note iii.
Procopiu:, his account of the cruel devastations made by the irrup-

tion of the northern nations, 172, Note v. 173, 174
Property, the possession of, how secured by the French charters

of communities, 203
Proveditori, in the Venetian policy, their office, ixz

R
RR;igion, how corrupted by the northern nations eftabliihed in Eu-

rope under the feudal policy, 23. Its influence in freeing man-
kind from the feudal servitude, 213

Repledging, the right of, in the law of Scotland, explained, 234
Reproach, words of, the ancient Swedish law of fatisfaAion for, 236
Revenues, royal, very small under the feudal policy, 80. By what

means increased, Io6

Rbine, origin and intention of the league of, 225
Rienzo, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue Rome from the papal au-

thority, and eftablif a democratical form of government thecre
ISC

Cc 2

Retters, the anathema pronounced againfi them during the mid-

dle ages, 249
Aca.dob of HaF.burgh, how he attained eletion to the empire of

Germany, i57
R.mJ,-, an inquiry into those advantages which enabled them to

ccl:qier the reft of Europe, 9. The improvements they com-
muoicated in return for their conquefis, ib. The difadvan-
tages the provinces laboured under, from their dominion, Io.
Their empire overturned by the irruption of the barbarous na-
tiors, -i. The concurrent causes of their ruin, l3. A com-
pavifon drawn between them and the northern nations, 14.
Ail the civil art- erfahlised by them obliterated, is. The
mcnuments of their arts induirioufly defiroyed by their bar-
barous invaders, 69

AJwtr, pazpl. See P.oedm
.Ry.ltruce, an account of, zI

S

Salic laws, the manner in which they were enaled, 266

axor-s, bhy so many traces of thtir laws, language, and customs,
to he found in England, , 2, Nte iv. Inquiry into their laws
for p'-;ting an end to private wars, 123
S:-:-r', the revival and prcgrefs of, how far infrumental in civi-

lizing the nations of Europe, 69. A fummarv view of the re-
vival and prcgrefs of, in Europe, 144, Note xxvmii
cfi--=. Francis, the foundation of his pretensions to the dutchy of

Mlilan, 127. Is murdered by his uncle Ludovico, t28
- Ldovico, his private views in engaging Charles VIII. of
Frsrce to invade Italy. 99 See C¢arles VIII. Murders his
nephew Francis, and ftizes Milan, s2a. Is firipped of his do-
minions vb Louis XII. of France, and dies in prilbn, i6.
S:li/ r.ti^, tie right lords of manors claim to, whence derived,

148
;E.;, the rar'it of, and the high price it bore in ancient Rome,
remarked, 2;o. The breeding of silk-worms, when introduc-
ed into Greece, it.

.:n., tetters of, in the law of Scotland, what, 231
s.i-.., ur.der the feudal policy, their wretched Rate, 189. Obla-

ti, cr vc'iuniarv slaves, the several classes of, 214
Si- i:, civil, the rude tate of, under the feudal eflahlifhments as-

trr tl.e downfal of the Roman empire, 22. The influence of
the crusades on, 29. How improved by the flablifhment of
municipal communities, 33. The effets the infranchifements
of tLe people had on, 42. Private wars how deftrutive to, 44.
These inteltine hoftiiities, how suppressed, 46. The admini-
flrarion of juflice in proved by the prohihition of judicial com-
ats. 47. TIhe growth of roxyal courts ofjufiice, in oppoition
to the barons ccurts, 59. How advanced by the revival of
the Fcman law-, 63. T'he effcts of the spirit of chivalry in

improving, 67. The revival of commerce and its influences,
47

Solyman, sultan, his character, I69
Spain, a summary view of its situation, at the commencement of

the fifteenth century', 78. The power of the crown of, how
extended by Ferdinand, 95. National infantry established in,
10o. Is conquered by the Vandals, and after by the Moors,
z19. The empire of the Moors in, how weakened I30. RiTe
of the kingdoms of Castile and Aragon, 131. Their union in-
to the Spanibh monarchy, ib. The ancient customs still retained
amidst all its revolutions 132. Peculiarities in its constitution
and laws remarked, I33. See Aragr and Cafile. Various
causes which contributed to limit the regal power in, 139. The
cities of, how they attained their consideration and power, 141.
The schemes of Ferdinand and Isabella, to exalt the regal
power, 141. The grand masterships of the three orders, an-
nexed to the crown, 143. The association of the Holy Brother-
bood, on what occasion formed, 145. The tendency of this as-
fociation to abridge the territorial jurifdilions of the barons, ib.
The cruel devastations made by the Vandals in the invasion of
that province, l73. When the cities of, acquired municipal
privileges, zio, Note xviii. The long continuance of the prac.
tice of private wars there, 223. The total annual revenue of
the nobility, in the time of Charles V. 261. An inquiry into
the origin of communities or free cities in, ib.
St. J go, the military order of, when and on what occasion infi-

tuted, 26z, Note xxxvi

Staniing armies. See Armies
States general of France, causes which rendered their authority

imperfect, 148. When they loft their legislative anthnrity,
149. When firfi afembled, 7 i. The form of proceeding in
them, 273
Stephen earl of Chartres and Blois, his account of the progress of

the Crusaders, 197

Stirncolk, his account of the ancient Swedish law of fatisfadion

for words of reproach, 226
Strangers, in what light confidered, and how treated during the

middle ages, and under the feudal policy, 247
Sugar canes, when firit brought from Afa into Europe, and

thence carried to America, 50o
Sultan,, Turkish, their despotic power, i67. How nevertheless

limited, 168
Super/itiio, its influence in the legal proceedings during the mid-

dle ages, 50

SwVfi, the superior discipline of their troops, in the fifteenth centu-

ry, 104 Teach other nations the advantages of infantry over
cavalry, ib.

T

Tacdtus, his account of the ancient Germans compared with that
of Caeiar, 177

T~irt', feudal, the origin of, 19. See Feudal SIj/l and Lmnd

-rloc:, scholastic, the firit literary pursuits at the revival of

learning in Europe, 7o

Tr, a/s Gd, an account of, 2zI
Tfi,ra origin of its government, z65. The despotic genius of

this government, 166. No hereditary nobility in, ao. The
authority of the sultans, how checked, b. Origin of the Ja.
nizarie, 167. Becomes formidable to the Chriflian princes,
?70

V
VFrtMb, their cruel devftatons in the invasion of Spain, 173.

The havoc made by them in Africa, ir. See Gftbr.
FPali, under the feudal ryftem, a view of their lavyib condition,

18, 40. How they obtained infranchifemrnt, 41. How anci-
ently diftinguilhed from freemen, 183. Their wretched slate
under their feudal maters, 189. N e ix.

Fewie, the long duration of its civil constitution, and its flourish-

ing fate at the time of the league of Cambray, 107. Its pof
feflion dismembered by the confederates, Io8. Dissolves the
confederacy, o09. Its rife and prorefs, tao. Defedts in its
constitution, i. The excellency of its naval intitutions, z11.
Its extenfire commerce, iS
's"enti rife of the family of, in Milan, 1z7
UiVio of the Aragonefe nobles to contronl the undue exercise of re-

al power, explained, 57. This privilege abrogated by Peter
UaivJePti, the firfi eftablifment of, in Europe a4

W

War, a comoprifon between the manner of carrying on, by bar.

barousand by civilized nations, 14. How rendered feeble in
its operations by the feudal policy, 19. The profession of arms,
the molt honourable in uncivilized nations, 65. The rife of
standing armies traced, 87. By what means standing forces
became general, 103. The superiority of infantry in, how
taught, 104

W nrr, privatefor the red-cffing personal injuries, under the feudal

policy, an inquiry into, 44. Methods taken to abolish this ho-
file praslice, 46. Judicial combat prohibited, 47. Inquiry in-
to the sources of these cnftoms, ai6, Note xxi. 'Who entitled
to the privileges of exercising, i 7. On what occasions under-
taken, it. Who included, or bound to engage in these dif-
putes, zI8. Who excluded from undertaking, it. The cruel
manner of prosecuting them, 2i9. A chronological account of
the expedients made nfe of to suppress them, ib. Truce of God,
an account of, Brotleriood of God, an account of, ió. Royal Truce,
what, 12; . Saxon laws of England for putting an end to them,
223. The obstinate attachment of the Spaniards to this prac-
tice, ib. The calamities occasioned in Germany by, 24

Weld, ancient, strangers killed with impunity by them, 248
Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extrac6 from her charter of manu-

miflion, granted to Cleriza, one of her slaves, z 3

Willermur, archbishop of Tyre, his account of Contantinople, 200
Wittiiindus, abbot, his testimony in favour of the.judicial combat,
229

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
