~

7,
PUrh- yJames Imay..Bookgcs1r. Glasgow.1.8o0..

THE
IIISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND,

DURING TUE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY, ANP KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION TO THE CROWN OF ENGLAND.

WITH
A REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY

previous to that Period;
And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

BY WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY O EIWkORGII, AiD US11:

TORIOGlcRAER TO HIS MAJESIY FOR SCUILUND.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

G L A S G W,

ptrintb bE Cbapmtan anuD ILagT
FOR J. IMRAT, BOOKSELLEI,

1800.

# THE AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

T H E
AUTHOR'S PREFACE.

-esiw»eee

I DELIVER this book to the world with all the difsi,
dence and anxiety natural to an Author on publilhing
his first performance. The time I have employed, and
the pains I have taken, in order to render it worthy of
the, public approbation, it is, perhaps, prudent to con-
ceal, till it be known. whether that' apprqbation fial
ever be beltowed- upon it.

But as I have departed, in many instances, from for-

mer Historians, as I have placed fa~ts in a, different
light, and have drawn charadters with new colours, I
ought to account for this qondut' to my readers; and
to produce the evidence, on which, at the distance of
two centuries, I presume to contradicA the testimony of
cotemporary, or of lefs.remote Historians:

The tranfa6tions in Mary's reign gave rife to two

parties, which were animated against each other with
the fiercest political hatred, embitlered by religious zeal.
Each of these produced Historians of considerable me-
rit, who adopted all their sentiments, and defended all
their ations. Truth, however, was not the sole object
of these Authors. Blinded by prejudices, and heated
by the part which they them elves had acled in the
scenes they describe, they wrote an apology for a sac-
tion, rather than.the history of their country. Suc-
ceeding historians have followed these guides almost
implicitly, and have repeated their errors and mifrepre-
fentations. But as the fame passions which inflamed
parties in that age have descended to their posterity; as

A

almost every event in Mary's reign has become the ob-
je& of doubt, or of dispute; the eager spirit of contro-
'Verfy soon discovered, that without some evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of Historians,
none of the points in. question could be decided with
certainty. Records have therefore been searched, ori-
ginal papers have been produced, and public archives,
as well as the repositories qs private men, have been
ransacked by the zeal and curiosity of writers of dif-
ferent parties. The attention of Cecil to colleA what-
ever related to that period, in which he adled lo con-
fpicuous a part, hath provided such an ammenfe lore
of original papers for illustrating this part of the Eng-
lifh and Scottish hiitory, as are almnoft fuficient to satis-
fy the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Robert
Cotton (whose library is now the property of the pub-
lic) made great and valuable additions to Cecil's col-
lection; and from this magazine, Digges, the compilers
of the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith, Haynes, and Sorbes,
have drawn most of the papers which they have printed.
No hiflory of Scotland, that merits any degree of at-
tention, has appeared since these collecions were pub-
lissed. By consulting them, I have been enabled, in
many initances, to correct the inaccuracies of former
Historians, to avoid their mistakes, and to detect their
misrepresentations.

But many important papers have escaped the notice

of those industrious collefors, and after all they have
produced to light, much still remained in darkness, un-
observed or unpublinhed. It was my duty to search for
these, and I found this unpleasant talk attended with
considerable utility.

The library of the hoinurable Faculty of Advocates

at Edinburgh, contains not only a large collection of
original papers relating to the affairs of Scotland, but
copies of others no less curious, which have been pre-
served by Sir Robert Cotton, or are extant in the pub-
lic offices in England. Of all these, the Curators of
that library were plrafed to allow me the perusal.

Though the Britih Museum be not yet open to the

public,: Dr. Birch, whose obliging difpoltion is well
known, procured me access to that noble collection,
which is worthy the magnificence of a great and po-
lifhed nation.

That vast and curious colletion of papers relating to

the reign of Elizabeth, which was made by Dr. Sorbes,
and of which he published only two volumes, having
been purchased, since his death, by the Lord Viscount
Royflon, his Lordship was so good as to allow me the
ule of fourteen volumes in quarto, containing that part
of them which is connected with my fubjeat.

Sir Alexander Dick communicated to me a very va-

luable collection of original papers, in two large vo-
lumes. They relate chiefly to the reign of James.
Many of them' are marked with Archbilhop Spots-
wood's hand; and it appears from several passages in
his history, that he had perused them with great atteu-
tion.

Mr. Calderwood; an eminent Presbyterian Clergy-

man of the last century, compiled an history of Scot-
land, from the beginning of the reign of James V. to
the death of James VI. in fix large volumes; wherein
he has inserted many papers of consequence, which are
no where else to be found. A copy of this history,
which ffill remains in manuscript, in the possession of
the Church of Scotland, was put into my hands by my
worthy friend, the Reverend Mr. George Wiihart,
principal Clerk of the Church

Sir David Dalrymple not only communicated to me

the papers which he has colleced relating to Gowrie's
conlpiracy; but by explaining to me his sentiments with
regard to that problematical palTage in the Scottish his-
tory, has enabled me to place-tiat tranf:ation in a light
wuhich dispels much of the darkness and confufiou in
i hlich it has been hitherto involved.

Mr. Goodail, though lie knew my sentiments with

regard to the conduct and character of C.een Mary to
lie extremely different from his own, communicated to
rne a volume of manuscripts in his puffefnion, whici
,untaiins a g:'-at inuib.br of valuable papers, copied

A j

from the originals in the Cottonian Library and Paper
Office, by the late Reverend Mr. Crawford, Regius
Profeflor of Church History in the university of Edin-
burgh. I likewise received from him the original Re-
gifter of Letters kept by the Regent Lennox during his
administration.

I have consulted all these papers as far as I thought

they could be of any use towards illustrating that pe-
riod of which I write the history. With what success
I have employed them to confirm what was already
known, to ascertain what was dubious, or to determine
what was controverted, the public must judge.

I might eafil- have drawn from the different repofi-

tories to which I had access, as many papers as would
have rendered my Appendix equal in size to the ioft
bulky colleaion of my predeceflors. But I have satis-
sied myself with publihfing a few of the most curious
among them, to which I found it necessary to appeal
as vouchers for my ovn veracity. None of these, as
far as I can recollect, ever appeared in any former col-
lection.

I have added to the Appendix a Criitcal Di;Jrtation

cnerncin- the murder of a'ing enry, and the genuinenef, of
Ite _turmn' letltrs to Bct-rill. The facts and obferva-
tions which relate to Mary's letters, I owve to my friend,
Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks to the Signer,
who hath examined this point with his usual acutenef4
and indufry.

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK FIRST. CONTENTS. The origin of the Scots. The peculiar obscurity of their history. Four remarkable ... A review of the national history from the death of Alexander III.

THE
HISTORY

or
SCOTLAND.

BOOK FIRST.

CONTENTS.
I . be ori-iin ofthe Scots. he peculiar olcuarity of tleir hb/lor.,

Four; emnarltable ira:., A review of the national iT:ory' s/-oo m
the death of Alexander III. to the accefon of

S lfr.i Gene-

tal caufcr wbicb limited the potwer f a feudal mo,,arch. Pe-
clltlr force of the Scottij arflocracy, Its caJfts. E£fort
to extend the royal authority. fame~ I. yam:s II. Jamer
IL s ames ZV. Jaae s

V. His death.. Ertraordinary

irJ.Ihenec of the Scotlif kings in parliament. Extrrcm inj, -
n ,fioca'lcy of public /flatues. State of Europe at the beginnirlg
f the l6th centuzy Francis I. Charles V. Their cba-
t aotrs. Hn.ry VIII. His plan of condust in th br flirs
of Scotland.

"1 HE firfi ages of the Scottish hiflory are dark and fa-
bulous. Nations, as well as men, arrive at maturity by
degrees, and the events, which happened during their
infancy or early youth, cannot be recollefled, and de-
i serve not to bh remembered. The gros5 ignorance which
'anciently covered all the North of Europe, the conti-
rdual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent and
deflruqive revolutions which there occasioned, render
it impoflible to give any authentic account of the ori-
gin of the different kingdoms now eflahlifhed there.
Every thing beyond that short period to which well at-

teflcd annals reach, is obscure; an immense space is left
for invention to occupy; each nation, with a vanity in-
fiparable from human n-ture, hath filled :tat void with
events calculated to dilplay its o.; n antii;uity and luf-
tre. An hiflory, which ought to 1rtcord truth and to
teach w-ifd(m, often fcts out with retailing flcions and
absurdities'

The Scots carry their prctenfion; to antiquity as high

rM any of their neighbours. Rrlying upon uncertain
lcgends, and the traditions of their bards, litll more un-
certain, they reckon up a series of kings fevcral ages
l;bore the birth of Chrill, and give a particular detail
of the occurrences which happened in their reigns. But
with regard to the Scots, as well as the other northern
rations, we receive the earliest accounts on which we can
't.pend, not from their own, but from the Roman au-
;,cr.. h%.en the Romans, under Agricola, first car-
-ird their arms into the northern parts of Britain. they
found it possessed by the Caledonians, a fierce and war-
like people; ind having repulsed, rather than conquered
them, they erected a strong wall between the friths of
Forth and Clyde, and there fixed the boundaries of
their empire. Adrian, on account of the difficulty of
defending such a distant frontier, contraled the limits
of the Roman province in Britain, by building a second
wall, which ran between Newcastle and Carlfle. The
ambition of fucceding emperors endeavoured to reco-
xer what Adrian had abandoned; and the country be-
tween the tw.o walls was alternately under the domi-
nion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. About the.
hbc-ir.ning of the 5th century, the inroads of the Goths
and other barbarians ohliged the Rorans, in order to
tde-'nd the centre of their empire, to reta! t'ioc leIgions
which guarded the frontier prnoinces, and at that time
they quitted all their conqucits in Britain.

Their lung reidence in he island had polfied, in

some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Britons were
i.n'e!hted to their iIerconriie with the Rumans for the
art of wliting and tl.e u!' of nulml'ers, . iitlhout which
i. ir

in..iolSot :

k.,i t:o .0 r e.: *e lcn.,:v of Iaft

C> t
..

North Britain was, by their retreat, left under the do-

minion of the Scots and Pids. The former, who are
not mentioned by any Roman author, before the end of
the 4th century were probably a colony of Ccltat, or
Gauls; their affinity to whom appears from their lan-
guage, their manners, and religious rites; circunlilances
more dccifive, with regard to the origin of natbTns, than
cither fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-informed
and credulous annalists. The Scots, if we may believe
the common accounts, fettled at first in Ireland; and,
extending themselves by degrees, landed at last on the
roasts opposite to that island, and fixed their habita-
tions there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during fe-
v-ral ages, carried on between them and the Pidl. At
length Kenneth ]I. the fixty-ninth king of the Scots
(according to their own fabulous authors) obtained a
complete victory over the Pias, and united under one
monarchy, the whole country, from the wall of Adri-
an, to the northern ocean. And his kingdom became
known by its present nrame, which it derived from a
people at first fettled there as ft-angers, and remained
long obscure and inconsiderable.

From this period, the history of Scotland would me-

rit tome attention, were it accompanied with any cer-
tainty. But as our remote antiquities are involved in
the fame darkness with those of other nations, a calami-
ty peculiar to ourselves has thrown almost an equal ob-
fcurity over our more recent tranfations. This wat.
occasioned by the malicious policy of Edward I. of
England. Towards the end of the I th century, this
monarch called in question the independency of Scot-
land; pretending that that kingdom was held as a fiif
of the crown of England, and fubjeted to all the con-
ditions of a feudal tenure. In order to establish hi.;
claim, he seized the public archives, he raifac!kcd
churches and monasteries, and getting polIeffTon, by
force or fraud, of many historical monuments, that
tended to prove the antiquity or freedom of the king-
dom, he carried some of them into England, l.nd coin-

manded th. reft to be burned°. An universal oblivion
of past tranfaftiins might have been the effec of this
fatal event, but some impcrfcc chronicles had escaped
the rage of Edward; foreign writers had recorded some
important sas.s relating to Scotland; and the tradi-
tions concerning recent occurrences were fresh and
rorthy of credit. These broken fragments, John de
Fordun, who litied in the I4th century, collected with
a pious induflry, and from them picked out materials,
which he formed into a regular hillory. Iis work was
received by his countrymen with applause; and as no
recourse could be had to more ancient records, it sup-
plied the place of the authentic annals of the kingdom.
It was copied in many monasteries, and the thread of
the narrative was, by different monks, continued
through the subsequent reigns. In the beginning of the
l6th century, John Major and HecIor Boethius pub-
lissed their histories of Scotland, the former a fuccincA
and dry, writer, the latter a copious and florid one, and
both equally credulous, Not many years after, Bu-
chanan undertook the fame work; and if his accura-
cy and impartiality had been, in any degree, equal to
the elegance of his taste, and to the purity and -igour
of his fIyle, his hiflory might be placed on a level with
the mofl admired compositions of the ancients. But,
inr-ead of rejecRing the improbable tales of chronicle
writers, he was at the utmost pains to adorn them; and
hath clothed with all the beauties and graces of fiction,
those legends, which formerly had only its wildness and
cxtravagance.

The hiflory of Scotland may properly be divided in-

to four periods. The firfi reaches from the origin el
the monarchv, to the reign of Kenneth II. The fe-
cond, from Kenneth's conquest of the Pids, to the
death of Alexander III. The third extends to the
death of Jamce V. The lafi, from thence to the accef-
sion of James VI. to the crown of England.

The first period is the region of pure fable and con-

InniP, Eftlly 5.2.

jcture, and ought to be totally neglected, or he aban-
doned to the industry and credulity of antiquaries.
Truth begins to dawn in the second period, with a
light, feeble at first, but gradually increasing; and the
events which then happened, may be slightly touched,
but merit no particular or laborious inquiry. In the
third period, the history of Scotland, chiefly by means
of records preserved in England, becomes nore au-
thentic: not only are events related, but their caules
and effeCts explained; the charaCters of the atfors are
displayed; the manners of the age described; the revo-
hltions in the constitution pointed out; and here every
Scotsman should begin, not only to read, but to fludy
the history of his country. During the fourth period,
lhe affairs of Scotland were so mingled with those of
other nations, its situation in the political slate of Eu-
rope was so important, its influence on the operations
of the neighbouring kingdoms was ib visible, that its
hiftorv becomes an objeCt of attention to foreigners,
and without some knowledge of the various and extra-
ordinary revolutions which happened there, they can-
not torm a just notion either of the molt illuitrious
events, or of the charaiter of the most diftinguilfhd
perfunages in the I6th century.

The tollowing hiflory is confined to the last of thelf

periods. To give a view of the political state of the
kingdom, during that which immediately preceded it,
ii the drtign of this preliminary book. The imperfect
!;owledge whiclh frangers have of the affairs of Scet-
rind, andl the prejudices Scotfmcn themfeIves have im-
iibed with regard to the various revolutions in the go-
:vrnment of their country, rendered flch an introduc2
i on equally neccllary to both.

Tlhe period, from the death of Alexander III. to the
Idatl of James V. contains upwards of two centuries
:nld an hall, from the year 1286, to the year 1542.

It opens with the famous controverly concerning the
indcpendency of Scotland, before the union of the two
kingdoms, this was a queflion of much importance. If

n;
c onl crown had beeni confidered not as imperial and

independent, but as feudatory to the other, a treaty of
union could not have been concluded on equal terms,
and every advantage which the dependent kingdom
procured, must have been esteemed the concession of a
sovereign to his vaflal. Accordingly, about the begin-
ning of the present century, and while a treaty of union
between the two kingdoms was on foot, this controver-
fy -.as agitated with all the heat, which national ani-
inofitics naturally inspire. What was then a fubjeit of
serious concern, the union of the two kingdoms hath
4reni!crcd a matter of mere curio ity. But though the
obji.s, which at that time warned and interested both
inatios, exist no longer, a question, which appeared lb
irinmentous to our ancestors, cannot be altogether in-
diflrcnt or uninftrutive to us.

S;;me of the northern counties of England were ear-
.1 in the hands of the Scottifl kings, who, as far back
..- the feudal customs can be traced, held these posses-
£.ons of the kings of England, and did homage to them
ci that account. This homage, due only for the tcr-
ritories which they held in England. was in noways
derogatory from the royal dignity. Nothinzr is mr,,
iuitable to feudal ideas, than that the fame perfoln honil
be both a lord and a vassal, independent in one capacity,
nrd dependent in inother'. The crown of England

* A very singular proof of this occurs in the French

hitorv.-.Arpin fold the vifccmpte of the city of Bourge.
to Philip I. who did homage to the count of Sancerre
for a part of these lands, which held of that nobleman,
A.D. i ioo. I believe that no example of a king's do-
ing homage to one of his own fubj-cts is to be mW.
with in the histories cilher of England or Scotiani.
Philip le Bell aho!ifekd th's practice hi France, A.D.
3302. Hena.ut. Abregc Chron. Somewhat similar t,
this, is a charter of the abbot of Me!rofs, A.D. 1535.
c-onfituting James V. the bailiff or fleward of that al-
bey, vetiitig in Ihim aIl the powers which pertained to
that ffice, and requiring hihn to be anft.ver.ble to the
abbot .'l I;i- sxcr:ift c: de C fain. Archiv. pl;
. Ed'. '.

was, without:doubt, imperial and independent, though
the princes who wore it were, for many ages, the vas-
fals of the.kings of France; and, in consequence of their
poTfeffions in that kingdom, bound to perform all the
services, which a feudal sovereign has a title to exact.
The fame was the condition of the monarchsof Scot-
land, free and independent as kings, but, as poffelling
.English territories, vassals to the king of England. The
English monarchs, content with their legal and uncon-
"roverted rights, were neither capable, nor had any
thoughts of ulurping more. England, when conquered
by the Saxons, being divided by them into many fmrall
kingdoms, was in no condition to extend its dominion
over Scotland, united at that tine under one monarch.
And though these petty principalities were gradually
formed into one kingdom, the reigning princes, ex-
posed to continual invasions of the Danes, and often
fibje&ed to the yoke of there formidable pirates, fel-
dom turned their arms towards Scotland, and were ut-
terly incapable of cftab!ifhing new rights in that coun-
try. The firfi kings of the Norman race, buried with
introducing their own laws and manners into the king-
dom which they had conquered, or with maintaining
themselves on the throne, which some of them poses-
fed by a very dubious title, were as lit'le anxious to ac-
quire. newi authority, or to form neu prctenfions il.
Scotland. An unexpccted calamiLy that hesel one of
the ScottifhAiings firit encouraged the English to think
of bringing his kingdom under dcpcndencc. William',
king of Scotland, beiai. taktn prilbner at Allwick,
Henry i!. as the price of his ll crly, not only extorted
from him an exorbitant raifonm and a pronirfe to finm-
render the places of g 'c:tti'l lr'ength, but compellr.l
hin to do homage .or Lis whole kilbIdom. Richard i.
a gcnero::s princf, rricrmnl reno.cced the claim o:
i... :!o-lnage, and abiollvced \Vi:in.a from the hard con-
ditions twhich Henry had imTpofed. Upon the death or
Alexander 111. near a century after, Edward I. availin.

Sirnamed the Librt.
Vrn!. t.

hirfeif of the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired
an influence in that kingdom, which no Englifli mo-
narch before him ever pofieffed, and imitating the in-
terested policy of Henry, rather than the magnanimity
of Richard, revived the claim of sovereignty to whic
the forrher had pretended.

Margaret of Norway, grand-daughter of Alexander,

and heir to his crown, did not long survive him The
right of fuccefion belonged to the defeendents of David,
earl of Huntington, third son of David I. Among
these, Robert Bruce and John Baliol, two illustrious
competitors for the crown, appeared. Bruce was the
son of Isabel, earl David's second daughter; Baliol, the
]rand-fon of Margaret, the eldest daughter. Accord-
mg to the rules of fueceffion which are now eftahlifhed,
the right of Baliol was preferahle, and, notwithstanding
Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to earl David,
Baliol's claim, as the representative of his mother and
grand-mother, would be deemed inconteltible. Bur,
in that age, the order of faccefflon was not ascertained
with the fame precision. The quei;on appeared to be
no less intricate, than it waS important. And though
the prejudices of the people, and pe"haps the laws of
the kingdorn, favoured Bruce, eacil of the rivals were
fi'pported by a powerful faction. Arms alone, it was
feared, muAf rtmminate a dilp::te too weighty for the'
laws to decide. But, in order to a-vnid the mifcries of
a civil war, Edward was chosen umpire, and both par-
ties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This had well
nigh proved fatal to the in lependence of Scotland;
and the nation, by its cagernefs to ?ui;ird aainft a civil
war, was not only exposed to :hat calamity, but almost
fubjefted to a foreign yoke. Edward v\-a. artful, brave
enterprizing, and comman .l d a po.'Acrfu! and martial
people, at peace with the hlole v;c 'rd.' The anarchy
which prevailed in Scotland, and the ant'iition of com-
petitors ready to sacrifice their count:rv in o-der to ob'-
tain even a dependent crow-n, iivited 'him first to fcize,
and then to subject tie kingdon:. !'le authority of
an umpire, which had b:en Lr-,wri. iy lv.fowed upon

him, and from which the Scots dreaded no dangerous
confequcnces, enIblled him to execute his fchelmes witi
the greater fari!iUv. Under pretext of examrinieg the
queflion with tile utinoil Ibleninity, he fummoncl all
the Scottilh lai, is to Norhain, and ha-.:ig gained
some, and intimilated others, he prevailed on all whbo
were present, not exceptiig Bruce and Baliol, the com-
petitors, to acknowledge Scot!aid a fief of the EngliHh
crown, and to fwr;ar fealty to iiim, as their fvercgii. or
liere lord. This flep led to another tiill nore important.
As it was vain to pronounce a Icntence which le had
not power to execute, Edward demanded poffeflion of
the kingdom, that he might be able to deliver it to hlini
whose right should be found preferable. And, such
was the pusillanimity of the nobles, and the impatient
ambition of the competitors, that both affcntcd to this
flrange demand, and Gilbert de Umphraville, earl of
Angus, was the only man, who refused to surrender
the caflles in his custody to the enemy of his country.
Edward. finding Baliol the most obtequious and the
leait formidable of the two competitors, soon after gave
judgment in his favour. Baliol one: more professed
himlelf the valfal of England, and submitted to every
condition, which the sovereign whom he had now ac-
knowledged was pieafc.e to prescribe.

Edward having thus placed a crrature of his own

upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled the nobles
to renounce the ancient liberties and independence of
their country, had reason to conclude that his domi-
nion was now fully eftablilfed. But he began too
soon to assume the master; his new vassals, fierce and
independent, bore with impatience a yoke to which
they were not accuflomed. Provoked by his haugh-
tiness, even the passive spirit of Baliol began to mu-
tiny. But Edward, who had no longer use for such
a pageant king, forced him to resign the crown, and
openly attempted to seize it, as fallen to himself by the
rebellion of lfis vassal. At that critical period arose
Sir William VIallace, a hero, to whom the fond admni.
ration of his countrymen hath ascribed many fabulous

B

ai&s of prowess, though iis real valcur, as well as in-
.egrity and wifdomr, is filh as needs not the heighten-
ings of fifcion. He, almotl single, ventured to take
arms in defence of the kingdom, and his boldness re-
vivcd the spirit of lii, countrymen. At last, Robert
Bruce. the grandson of him who flood in competition
with Baliol, appeared to aCfirt his own rights, and to
vindicate the honour of his country. The nobles,
aihamed of their former hafenef, and enraged at the
many indignities offered to the nation, crowded to his
flandard. In order to crush him at once, the Englifi
monarch entered Scotland at the head of a mighty ar-
my. Many battles'were fought, and the Scots, though
often vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent zeal
with which the nobles contended for the independency
of the kingdom, the prudent valour of Bruce, and
above all a national enthusiasm inspired by such a
cause, baffled the repeated efforts of Edward, and
counterbalanced all the advantages which he derived
from the number and wealth of his subjects. And
though the war continued with little intermission up-
wards of seventy years, Bruce and his posterity kept
possession of the throne of Scotland, and ruled with an
authority not inferior to that of its former monarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate judge of all dif-

putes between contending nations, was employed to
terminate this controversy, neither Edward nor the
Scots seemed to distrust the justice of their cause; and
both appealed to history and records, and from these
produced, in their ou-l favour, such evidence, as they
pretended to be unanfiwerable. The letters and' memo-
rials addfefled by each party to the pope, who was then
reverenced as the common father, and often appealed
to as the common judge of all Chritfian princes, are
till extant. The fabulous tales of the carly British
history, the partial testimony of ignorant chroniclers,
fuppotititious treaties and charters, are the proofs, on
which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty of
Scotland; and the homage done by the Scottiih mo-
narchs for their lands in England, is preposterously sup-

posed to imply the lubiciion of their w hoae kingdlom.
ll-founded as their right was, the English did not fail
to revive it in all the fuhfequent quarrels between the
two kingdoms; while the Scots diftlaimed it with the
utmost indignation. To this we must impute the fierce
and implacable hatred to each other, which long in-
flamed both. Their national antipathies were excited,
not only by the usual circumfiancts of frequent hofri-
lities and reciprocal injuries, but the English confidered
the Scots as vassals who had presumcd to rebel, and the
Scots, in their turn, regarded the English as usurpers
who aimed at enslaving their country.

At the time when Robert Bruce began hi; reign in

Scotland, the fame form of government was established
in all the kingdoms of Europe. And the surprising si-
milaritv in their conllitution and laws demonstrates that
the nations which overturned the Roman empire, and
trented these kingdoms, though divided into different
tribes, and diflinguilhed by different names, were origi-
nally the fame people. When w: take a view of the
frudal system of laws and policy, that flupendous and
singular fabric ereced by them, the first ohject that
strikes us is the king. And when we are told that lie
is the sole proprietor of all the lands within his do-
minions, that all his fiiljefts derive their possessions
from him, and in return conferrate their li\es to his
service; when we hear that all marks of distinction,
and titles of dignity, flow from him, as the only foun-
tain of honour; when we behold the most potent
peers, on their lended knees, and with folded hands,
swearing fealty at his feet, and acknouwledging him to
be their JfoCrcign and their liere lord, we are apt to pro-
nounce him a powerful, nay an absolute monarch. No
conclusion, however, would he more rash, or worl:
tounded. The genius of the feudal government was
purely ariftocraticJl. With all the cnfigns of royalty,

* Anderson's Hillorical Essay concerning the Inde-
Fendency, &c,

B3 .

and with many appearances of despotic power, a feudal
king was the most limited of all princes.

Before they sallied out of their own habitations, to

conquer the world, many of the northern nations seem
to have been fubje& to the government of kings*;
and even where monarchical government was establish-
ed, the prince pofiTcfed but litte authority. A general,
rather than a king, his military command was exten-
five, his civil jurifdiUtion almost nothing'. The army
which he led was not compo!cd of foldicrs, who could
be compelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily fol-
lowed his ftandardp. These conquered not for their
leader, but for themselves, and being free in their own
country, renounced not their liberty when they ac-
quired new settlements. They did not exterminate
the ancient inhabitants of the countries which they
subdued, but seizing the greater part of their lands,
they took their persons under protetion. And the dif-
ficuity of maintaining a new conquest, as well as the
danger of being attacked by new invaders, rendering it
necessary to be always in a posture of defence, the form
of government which they eltablifhed was altogether mi-
litary, and nearly refembied that to which they had been
accustomed in their native country. Their general still
continuing to be the head of the colony, part of the
conquered lands were allotted to him; the remainder,
under the name of c /f;:.,. ors:, was divided amongit
his principal officers. As the common safety required
that these officers shou!d, upon all occasions, be ready
to appear in arms for the common defence, and should
continue obedicnt to their general, they bound them-
selves to take the field, when called, and to serve him
with a number of man, in p-rpo-:ion to the extent of
their territory. These .at officers again parcelled
out their lands among tliir foll'oAuer%. and annexed
the fame condotion to the grant. A feudal kingdom
was properly the eicamp:nent of a gricA arm)-; mlui-
* Cf.llb. vi. c. 23. t ''acit. dc Mior Germ.c. 7. II.

, C z lib. vi. c. 2'.

tary ideas predomhnated, military subordination xwas
elablifhed, and the possession of land was the pay whicMh
fi)ldiers received for their personal service. In conie-
;utence of these notions, the poffefiton of land vas
frantid during pleasure only, and kings were eleaivc.
In or thr words, an officer, difagreealile to his general,
veas !dprived of. his pay, and the pcrfon .who was molt
.apale of condu&ling an arm,, was choifn to com-
iand it. Such were the firfl rudiments, or infalncy of
faellal overnlment.

But lo;,, before the beginning of the 14th century,

the feudal system had undergone many changes, of
Whlich the following were the molt confilerable.-
Kings, formerly eleótivc, were thin hereditary; and
fest:., granted at sirss during pleasure, d.lietlecd firo
f.:,ler to son, and were become perpetual. Thefl
changrs, not less advantageous to the nobles than to
the prince, made no alteration in the aritlocratical fpi-
rit of the fculdal conftutiion. The king, who, at a dif-
tanm', ferned to be invefled with majefly and power,
appears, on a nearer view, to possess none of these ad-
viantges, w *.lich bcftow on monarchs their grandeur
and atithority Ilis revenues were scanty, he had not
a ftandiig army, and lhe enjoyed no proper jurifdic-
t ioI.

At a thne wvhen pomp and splendor were unknown,

even in the Ialaacs of kings; when the officers of the
cirow. received little salary besides the fees and per-
qluifite of tiheir ofi;.:e; when embafTies to foreign courts
w'cre rare; h armnis wire conipofcd of fol!ditrs
who lirved without pay; it wa3 not lici;:l.'y that a
kiin nliould polll's a :;'cat re'v:'nu¢; nor did the coi(!l;-
lion of Europe, in tholf ares, allow its princes to I;c
pule.nt. Commerce niad. Ii'tle progress in the klin-
dllins, whcre tth feudal goverincint was eltall!ilhid.
Inliftttions, which had no ot icr ohbjcc't but to iiifpir.
a martial jpirit, or to train n.cn up to he soldiers, and:
to nrrke arms the only honcl-eirale profession, naturaliy
d(.ici.uraged thle cormmercial arts. 'I'lh revenu.., a:.l-
ing fiom t.e taxes nple>ifed onl the dfi.rnllt tb:r.':.lit of

cnnrr.e-r, -.:'rte y consequence irconfiderable, and
the prince's treasury received little supply from a
source v hich, among a trading people, flows with such
abundance, and is almost inexhauflible. A fixed tax
was not levied even on land; filch a burthen would
have appeared intolerable to men who received their
estates as the reward of their valour, and llo .c'on-
fidered their icrvice in l!:e field as a full retribution for
u-hat they possessed. The king's dr-tnes, or the por-
tion of land which he still retained in his own hands
unalienated, furnished subsistence to his court, and de-
frayed the ordinary expence of government'. The,
only stated taxes which the feudal law obliged vassals
to pay to the king, or to those of whom they held their
lands, were three; one when h;s ildeft son was made
a knight; another when his eldest dauRhtcr was n.:r-
ried; and a third in order to ransom him if he fhouid
happen to be taken a prisoner. Betides these, the king
received the feudal carualties of the ward, marriage, &c.
of his ovn vaflals. And, on some extraordinary occa-
sions, his subjeCts granted him an aid, which they dif-
tinguiflnd by the name of a bene-tolnce, in order to de-
clare that he received it not in consequence of any
right, but as a voluntary gift, flowing from their good
wills. 411 there added together produced a revenue
scanty and precarious, which, far from enabling the
king to attempt any thing that could excite the jealotfy
or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual indigence,
anxiety, and dependence.

Nor could the king supply the defect of his rvenure

by the terror of his arms. Mercenary troops and stand-
ing armies were unknown as long as the feudal go-
vernment subsisted in vigour. Europe was peopled
with soldiers. The vassals of the king, and the sub-
vassals of the barons, were all obliged to carry arms.
And while the poverty of princes prevented them frm'l

Craig. de Feud, lib. I. Dieg. 14. Du Cange Gloss.
voc. Dominicum.

t Du Cange voc. Auxilium,

£,-tiftvinp their frontier towns. s iili a campaign con-
t;nued butt a si: week;, a!d wli!e a ticrre and impe-
tuous courage w Mas innoatient to hi inh every quarrel to
rLc cI(-;fior oi a bait 'i , r.n army without pay, and
wvith !ii!l di' :llire, was !I:fii'ient for all purposes,
both f,' lti.e Jecurit, and Plory ot a nation. Such an
;., niv, however, fat- fromn beinr. an engine at the king's
dl:ipolal, was ouien nro lei; formfnd:le to hini than to
hi: enemines. ' he more warlike any people were, the
in. iri: iti(cpendeint they became; and the lame persons
ti-ing hith oicliers and fubjeqcs, civil privileges and
inmrn:'!tits v. ere the conlie',luence cf thrir victories, and
the rtlv,'-;rd of their martial exploits. Conquerors,
'.vw m mercer.arv armi-cs, inder our present forms of
^cuvcr3n eLt, ofrtei render the tyrants of their own peo-
pit, :is .vcli as the fcourgcs of mankind, were common-
1m, under the feudal constitution, the muoi indulgent of
11 princes to their fubjets, because they flood most in
iretl of thrir affiflance. A prince, whom even war
ant( vicories did not render the maficr of his own ar-
my, of{efied no shadow of military power during
times of peace. His disbanded soldiers mingled with
his other fitbjefts; not a fintle man received pay from
him; many ages elapsed beiore a guard was appointed
ro defend his person; and destitute of that great in-
firument of dominiclo, a standing army, the authority
of the king continued always feeble, and was often con-
temptih!re.

Nor were these the only circuimfances which con-

tributed towarids depressing the regal power. By the
feudal fyflem, the king's judicial authority was extreme-
lx circumif'rihcd. At firlf, princes lecnl to have been
the fi;prcii j.:dges of their people, and in person heard
and l&tcrlincd all controverlies amr.oii themn. The
inuitillicitv of ca::fcs rccn made it neceirary to appoint
jui',g.s, l, , in the king's lameil, I'det! d mnatticr that
Lciolnged to the royal juri!i'iicion. iBut the harlarians,
x tlo over-ran Europe, havin! defirotved mofi of the
great citicr. and the countries wlhli.!i they seized being
tai!tonlid out amiong powerifl barsoi, \wo were bli;i.-

ly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in return, they
were bound to protet from every injury; the admi-
nifration of justice was greatly intrc:;upted, and the
execution of any legal sentence became almost imprac-
ticahle. Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder of all
kinds prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de-
gree almost incredible, and Icarce compatible with the
filfifience of civil society. Every offinder flcltercd
himself under the protection of some powerful chief-
tain, who screened him from the pursuits of jullice.
To apprehend, and to punish a criminal, often required
the union and effort of half a kingdom". In order to

* A remarkable instance of this occurs in the fol-

lowing history, so late as the year 1561. Mary having
appointed a court of juflice to be held on the borders,
the inhabitants of no less than eleven counties were
summoned to guard the person who was to act as
judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convinc-
ing proof of the feebleness of the feudal government,
deserve our notice.-" And because it is necessary for
the execution of her highness' commandments and
service, that her justice be well accompanied, and her
authority sufficiently fortified, by the concurrence of a
rood power of her faithful fubje&ts-Therefore com-
inands and charges all and sundry earls. lords, barons,
fretho!ders, landed men, and other gentlemen, dwel-
ling w-ithin the said counties, that they, and every one
of them, with their kin, friends, fcrvants, and houf-
hold men, well bodin in the feir of war, in the most
lubftantious rnanne:, (i.e. completely armed and pro-
vided', and with t'cr.nv days victuals, to meet and to
pass toward him to the burc ugh of Jcdburgh, and there
to remain during the said space of twenty days, and
to receive such dircqit:l c

and commands as lhall be

given by him to then, in our sovereign lady's name,
ior the quietness of tv'- country; and to put the fame
in execution, under the p:n of losing their life, lands,
and goods. Keith's Hiit. Cf ' ?.:-,-t', r9S.

remedy there evils, many persons of distinction were
intrusted with the administration ofjultice within their
own territories. But what we may presume was, at
sirs, only a temporary grant, or a personal privilege,
the incroaching spirit of the nobles soon converted into
a right, and rendered hereditary. The lands of some
were erected into bronifs, those of others into regalities,
The jurifdicRion of tile former was extensive, that of
the latter, as the name imiplies, royal and almost un-
bounded. All caulfs, wvhcther civil or criminal, were
tried by judges, whom the lord of the regality app-'vi:-
ed; and if the king's court called any person within tii
territory hefore them, the lord of regality might put a
ltop to their procced(ig<, and by the privilege of rep:.
i;,,, remove the c:afe to his own court, and even pun;Jh
Iris vafTal, if he submitted to a foreign jurifdiliontt.
Thus almost every qurflion in which any person, who
resided on the lands of the nobles, was interefled, being
determiled by judges appointed by the nobles them-
selves, their vassals were scarce sensible of being, in any
degree, fubjeet to the crown. A feudal kingdom was
Iplit into many finall principalities, almost independent
and held together by a feeble, and commonly an im-
perceptible bond of union. And the king was not on-
ly stripped of the authority annexed to the person of a
fiprenie judge, hut his revenue suffered no small dimi-
nution, by the loss of those pecuniary emtlluments,
which were, in that age, due to the person who admini-
ftered justice.

In the fame proportion that the king funk in power,

the nobles rose towards independence. Not fatisfi-d
wxith having obtainrd a hereditary right to their fief,
which they formervl held during pleasure, their ambi-
tion aimed at fbmething bolder, and by introducing ca-
tail., endeavoured, as far as human ingenuity and inven-
tion can reach that end, to render their poreffions una-
lienahle andt everlafiing As they had full power to add
to the inheritance transmitted to them from their auL-

t Cr,;g, hb. iii. Deig. 7.

ceflors, but none to diminish it; time alone, by means
of marriages, legacies, and other accidents brought. con-
tinual accefflons of wealth, and of dignity; a great fa-
mily, like a river, became considerable from the length
ofits-courfe, and as it rolled on, new honours and new
property flowed 1ilc; eiTie'elv into it. 'Whatever influ-
ence is derived frcini tit',: o;f honour, the feudal nobles,
likewise pofi-eted in an amiple manner. These markcs of
diiiineion are, in their own nature, ei-.er off:cial or per-
fonal, and being a::nex'dc to a particular charge, or be-
flowed by the admi:-'aio:n of rankiid upon illuflriols
characters, ought to he appropriated to thele. But tlh.
son, however unwoni.y, could not bear to te flr;ppted
of that appellation, by which his father had been diftin-
guifihed. His presumption claimed, what his virtue d:r
not merit; titles of honour became heredilai-v, and add-.
ed new lufire to nobles already in pofftiiion of too Inur i
pow^er. Something more audacious and more extrav;a-
gant fill remained. The lupreme direction of all as-
fairs, both civil and military, being committed ro ti~i
great officers of the cros iu, the fame- and safety of prir-
ces, as well as of their people, depended upon the fdelh-
ty and abilities of these officers. But such was the pr c.
pofterous ambirion of ihe nobles, and so fuccelfful eve:!
their wildtet atten.pTs to aggrandize thenmfelYes, that i.:
ali the kingdoms x; here the feudal inflitutions prevai.ed,
most ofthefe offices were annexed to grt-at families, and
held like fiefs, by hereditary right. iK person, whoie
undutiful behaviour rendered him odio;s to his prince,
cr whose incapacity exposed him to tlie contempt ci
the people, often .celd a pla;e of power anri trlfl, of the
2reateft importance to both. In Scotla;.d, the o.fic':
of lord jufiice general, great chamberlain, high fte-,-
ard, high constable, earl marihal, and high admira',
w-ere .ll hercditarv; and in many counties, tli ofii'e
ot' fnerifT was lield in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose property was io exteGfive, and whofc

power so great, could not fail of being turbulent aur
tormidable. Nor did they want initruments for x--
cuting their boldest defgns. That Fcrion of rie..:

lands, which they parcelled out among their followers,
supplied them with a numerous band of faithful and de-
termined vassals; while that, which they retained in
their own hands, enabled them to live with a princely
splendour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was
often more crowded than the court of his sovereign.
The firong caftleG, in which they resided, afforded a
secure retreat to the discontented and seditious. A great
part of their revenue was spent upon multitudes of indi-
gent, but bold retainers. And if at any time they left
their retreat, to appear in the court of their sovereign,
they were accompanied, even in times of peace, with a
vast train of armed followers. The usual retinue of
William the sixth earl of Douglas consisted of two
thousand horse. Those of the other nobles were mag-
nificent and formidable in proportion. Impatient of
fiuhordination, and forgetting their proper rank, these
potent and haughty barons were the rivals, rather than
ihe subje&s of their prince. They often despised his
orders, insulted his perlbn, and wrested from him his
crown. And the history of Europe during several ages,
contains little else, but the account of the wars and re-
volutions, occalioned by their exorbitant ambition.

But, if the authority of the barons far exceeded its

proper bounds in the other nations of Europe, we may
affirm that the balance which ought to be preserved be-
tween a king and his nobles was entirely loft in Scot-
land. The Scottish nobles enjoyed, in common with
those of other nations, all the means for extending their
authority which arise from the ariftocratical genius of
the feudal government. Besides thefi, they possessed
.'dvantages peculiar to theminlves; the accidental ibur-
ces of their power were considerable; and singular cir-
cumltances concurredwith the spirit of the constitution
to aggraudize them. To enumerate the rnoft remarka-
Hle of these, will serve both.to explain the political state
of the kingdom, and to illufirate many important oc-
currences,'in the period now under our review.

I. The nature of their country was one cause of the
power and independence of the Scuttifh nobles. Levc!

\.o! I, C

and open countries are formed for ferv'tude. The an-
thority of the supreme magistrate reaches with ease to
the most difant corners, and when nature has erecacd
no barrier, and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxi-
ous are soon dcteced, and punished. MIountains, and
fens, and rivers, 'et bounds to defiotic power, and a-
midst these, is the nat:ral feat of freedom and indepen-
den:e. In such places, did the Scottish nobles usually
fix their residence. By retiring to his own castle, a mu-
tinons baron could defy the power of his sovereign; it
being impraflicabie to lead an army through a barren
country, to places, almost inaccefible to a single man.
The fame causes, vhich checked t}e progress of the
Roman arms, and rendered all the eft-ors of Edwardl
I. abortive, often protected the Scottish nobles from the
vengeance of their prince; and they owed their per!snal
independence, to those very nmountains and marfies,
which saved their country from being conquered.

II. The want of great cities in Scotland contributied

not a little to increafc the power of the n.o!es, and tn
weaken that of the prince. XWherever numbers or
men assemble together, order mutt be eftablifled, and a
regular form of government instituted, the authority of
the magifirate must be recognized, and his decisions In.<:
with prompt and full obedience. Laws and fiuhordina-
tion take rife in cities; and where there are few ciies .e
in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there are fcvw or nt,
traces of any fort of police. But under the feudal g:-
vemments, commerre, the chief means of aftembliir-
mankind, was negccdtd; the nobles, in order to
flrengthen tl!eir influen:e over their vasals, r,-lided a-
mong them, and feldoin apptared at court, when th;e
found a fuperi.n, or dwelt in citics, where they rn.ct
with equals. In Scotland, the rich counties in the Ibutt
lying open to the English, no town situated there couldl
ri'e to be great or ypoulous aniidit continual inreaiis
and alarms; the refideice of our monarchs was not si:-
ed to any particular place; many parts of the country
were barren ;nd uncul:ivated; and in consequence (;:
thl:ee pcculiar c;:-c;nn:RaceF added !o the genera! caufet

flowing from the nature of the feudal institutions, the
towns in Scotland were extremely few, and very incon-
ilderable. The vassal of every baron occupied a dif-
tin& portion of the kingdom, and unmingled with o-
thers, formed a separate and almost independent focie-
ty. Inflead of giving aid towards reducing to obedience
their seditious chieftain, or any whom he took under
his protection, they were all in arms for his defence,
.nd obltrualed the operations ofjuftice to the utmost.
The prince was obliged to connive at criminals, whom
he could not reach; the nobles conscious of this advan-
tage, were not afraid to offend; and the difficulty of pu-
nixing almost insured them of impunity.

1I1. The division of the country into clans had no

finall effect in rendering the nobles considerable. The
nations which over-ran Europe, were originally divided
into many frmall tribes; and when they came to parcel
out the lands which thev had conquered, it was natural
for every chieftain to beitow a portion, in the first place,
upon those of his oM n tribe or family. These all held
their lands of him; and as the safety of each indivi-
dual depended on the general union, these small focie-
ties clung together, and were distinguished by fonme com-
mon appellation, either patronymical or local, before
the introduction of firnames or cfsigns armorial. But
when theie became common, the descendents and rela-
tions of every chieftain assumed the fame name and
arms with him; other vassals were proud to imitate
their example, and by degrees they were communicat-
ed to all those who held of the fame filperior. Thus
clanflips were formed; and in a generation or two, that
conianguinity which was at firit, in a great measure,
imaginary, was believed to be real. An artificial u-
nion was converted into a natural one; men willingly
fellowed a leader, whom they regarded both as the iu-
perior of their lands, and the chief of their blood, and
firved him not only with the fidclity of vassals, but
with the affecion of friends. In the other feudal king-
donls, we may oblcrve lich unions as we have defcrib-
cd, imperfcttly follced; but in Scotland, whether they

C

were the produc'ion of chance, or the cffec' of policy,
or introduced by the Irish colony above-mentioned, and
strengthened by carefully preferrving their genealogies,
both genuine and fabulous, clanrhips were univerTal.
Such a confederacy might be overcome, it could not be
broken; and no change of manners, or of government,
has been able, in ofme parts of the kingdom, to diffoive
associations which are founded upon prejudices so na-
tural to the human mind. How formidable were nobles
at the head of followers, who, counting the cause just
and honourable which their chiefs approved, were ever
ready tortake the field at hi; command, and to sacrifice
their lives in defence of his person, or of his fame?
Againrt such men, a king contended with great difad-
vantage, and that cold service, which money purchases,
or authority extorts, was not an equal match for their
ardor and zeal.

IV. The frnallnefs of their number may be mention-

ed among the causes of the grandeur of the Scottish
nobles. Our annals reach not back to the first division
of property in the kingdom; but so far as we can trace
the matter, the original poffefiions of the nobles seem to
have been extensive. The ancient thanes were the e-
quals arid the rivals of their prince. Many of the earls
and barons, who succeeded them, were the matters of
territories no less ample. France and England, coun-
tries wide and fertile, afforded settlements to a nume-
rous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom nei-
ther extenlive nor rich, could not contain many f.rch
overgrown proprietors. But the power of an ariito-
cracy always diminishes, in proportion to the increase
of its numbers; feeble if divided among a multitude;
irresistible if centered in a few. When nobles are nu-
merous, their operations nearly refembte those of the
people, they are routed by what they feel only, not by
what they apprehend; and submit to many arbitrary
and oppressive acs, before they take arms against their
sovereign Afmall body, on the contrary, is more fen-
fible, and more impatient; quick in discerning, and
prompt in repelling danger; all its motions are as-sid-
den as those of the other are flow. Hence proceeded

the extreme jealouiiy with which the Scottifl nobles ob-
served their monarchs, and the ficrccnefs with which
they opposed their encroachments Even the virtue of
a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less eager
to defend their rights, and Robert Bruce, notwith-
fianding the splendor of his victories, and the glory of
his name, was upon'the point of experiencing the vi-
gour of their resistance, no less than his unpopular de-
I;:endent James III. Besides this, the near alliance of
the great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural consequence of their small number. And as
consanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful bond of
union, all the kindred of a nobleman interefied them-
fclves in his quarrels, as a common cause, and every
contest the king had, though with a single baron, soon
drew upon him the arms of the whole confederacy.

V. Those natural connexions both with their equals,

and with their inferiors, the Scnttiih nobles itrength-
cned by a device, which, if not peculiar to themselves,
was at least more fiequent among them than in any
other nation. Even in times of profound peace they
formed associations, which, when made with their e-
quals, were called leagues of mutual defence; and when
with their inferiors, bonds of manrent. By the former,
the contracting parties bound themselves mutually to
asSist each other in all causes, and againfl all persons.
By the latter, protedcion was flipulated on the one
land, and fidelity and personal service promised on the
other ". Self-prefervation, it is probable, forced men at
firit into there confederacies, and while disorder and ra-
pine were universal, while government was unifttled,
ant( the authority of laws little known or regarded,
near ncighlbolls found it necelfary to unite in this man-
ner for their security, and the weak were obliged to
coulrt the patronage of the strong. By degrees, there
associations became so many alliances offenlive ndt de-
fcnfive againit the throne; and as their obligations
acre held to be more sacred than any tie whatever,

' Act. 3o. Parl. 1424. Adt 43. Parl, ;4.

C 3

they gave much umbrage to our king', and contribut-
ed not a little to the power and independence of the
nobility. In the reign of James I1. William, the eighth
earl of Douglas, entered into a league of this kind with
the earls of Crawfurd, Ross, Murray, Ornmond, the
Lords Hamilton, Balveny, &c. and so formidable was
this combination to the king, that lie flabbed Douglas
with his own hand in order to difiolve it.

VI. The frequent wars between England and Scot-

land proved another cause of augmenting the power
of the nobes. Nature has placed no barrier between
the two kingdoms; a river, almost every where ford,
able, divides them towards the east; on the weft they
are separated by an imaginary line. The fniall reve-
nues of our kings prevented them from fortifying, or
placing garri',ons in the towns on tl'e frontier; no:-
-ould the jealousy of their fu!-jecs have rernitted
such a method of defence. The barons, wht.fe estate;
lay near the border;, ce.fidered themfel-es as bound in
honour andintereft to repel the enemiy. The 1.:rder-
f.p of the different r.icLb,, offlice of great trust and
dignitv, were alsvas heftowed on theml. This gaine:l
them the leading of the warlike counties in the flnth;
and their vafTals, livig in a itate of ?erpetu?.l hifli-y,
or enjoying at bet an i;ecl:re peace, bccan.e more in-
ured to war than even the reft of their conirtrymen,
and more willing to accompany their chieftain in hi;
rnofi hardy and dangerou; enterprise.. It was the va-
lour, no lei- than the u lnibcr of teir followers, tha-
rendered the Doug'r.-Jis great. The nobles in the nor-
tlern and midland couniics., we:e often dutiful and ob-
fequious to the crown, Iut our monarchs alwavs olm;xd
it impracicable to f.:ddue the mutinous and ungovern-
able spirit of the borders. In all our domeffic quarrels,
those who cculd draw to their fide the inhabitlits or
the foutliern courties, were tf:reof vicRorv; and, con-
fcious of this advartage, the lords who possessed autho-
rity there, were a;pt to forget the duty, which they ow-
ed their fdvercigl, and to aspire beyond the rank of
ifubects.

VII. The c.-r'mi.i v.:hich besel our kings, contri-

buted more than any other cause to diminirn the royal
authority. Never was any race of monarchs so unfor-
tunate as the Srottifh. Of fix successive princes, from
Robert III. to James VI. no one died a natural death;
and the minorities, during that time, were longer and
more frequent than ever happened in any other king-
dom. From Robert Bruce to James VI. xwe reckon ten
princes; and seven of thes`e were called to the throne,
while they were minors, and almost infants. Even the
most regular and befl eflablifhed governments feel fen-
sibly the pernicious effects of a minority, and either be-
come languid and inactive, or are thrown into violent
and unnatural convulsions. But under the imperfect
and ill adjufled rvflem of government in Scotland,
thcls efiecSs were flill more fatal; and the fierce and
mutinous s1pirit of the nobles, unrestrained by the au-
thority of a king, scorned all fubjetion to the delegat-
ed jurifdifion of a regent, or to tlk feeble commands
of a minor. The royal authority was circumflribed
within narrower limits than ever; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced al-
nloft to nothing; and the ariftocratical power gradually
:-ofe upon the ruins of the monarchical. Leit the per-
fi;nal power of a regent should enable him to azt with
too much vigour: the authority, annexed to that office,
was sometimes rendered inconliderable by being divid-
ed; or if a single regent was chosen, the greater no-
Hles, and the heads ofthe more illuitrious families, were
feillom railed to that diinitv. It was often conferred
upon men who pofTeffec little influence, and excited no
j':aloufy. They, confcions of their own weaknels, were
obliged to overlook some irregularities, and to permit
others; and, in order to support their authority, which
was deflitute of real strength, they endeavourled to gain
the moil powerfil and aAive barons, by granting them
pofflfions and immuniries, which railed them to fill
greater power. W'hen the king himlelf came to as-
fir.c the reins of government, he found his revenues
wafted or alienated, the crown lands fcized or given
aw.av, and the nobles so accust(omed to independence,
that'after the firuggle of a wvlhole reign, he was fe!doolu

able to reduce them to the fame slate in which they had
been at the beginning of his minority, or to wrent from
them what they had usurped during that time. If we
take a view of what happened to each of our kings,
who was so unfortunate as to be placed in this situation,
the truth and importance of this observation will fully
appear.

The minority of David II. the son of Robert Bruce,

uws diflurbed by the pretensions of Edward Baliol,
who, relying on the aid of England, and on the support
of some difaffeaed nobles among the Scots, invaded
the kingdom. The success which at first attended his
arms, obliged the young king to retire to France; and
Baliol took possession of the throne. A small body of
the nobles, however, continuing faithful to their ex-
iled prince, drove Baliol out of Scotland; and, after an
absence of nine years, David returned from France, and
took the government of the kingdcm into his own
hands. But nobles, who were thus w asing their blood
and treasure in defence of the crown, had a right to the
undiflurbed pofcffi.on of their ancient privileges, and
even some title to arrogate new ones. It seems to have
been a maxim, in that age, that every leader might
claim as his own, the territory which his sword had
won from the enemy. Great acquisitions were gained
bv the nobles in that way; and to these the gratitude
-nd liberality of David added, by difiributing among
fich as adhered to him, the vail poffcfiions which fell
to the crow n by the forfeiture of his enemies. The
family of Douglas, which began to rife above the other
nobles, in the reign of his father, augmented both its
,ower and its propel ty, during his minority.

James I. was seized by the English during the conti-

nuance or a truce, and ungenerously detained a prison-
er, altmof nineteen years. During that period, the
kingdom was governed, firfl by his uncle, Robert duke
of Albayv, and then by Murdo, his son. Both these
noblemen aspired to the crown, and their unnatural am-
bition, if we may believe most of our hiflorians, not
onlv cut fliort the days of prince David, the king's el-
der brother, but prolonged the captivity of Jalnc.

They flattered themselves, that they might flep with
less opposition into a-throne, when almolt vacant; and
dreading the king's return, as the extinction of their
authority, and the end of their hopes, they carried on
ihe negctiations for obtaining his liberty, with extreme
remilTite!. At the fame time, they neglecded nothing
that could either soothe or bribe the noliles to approve
their schemes. They slackened the reins of govern-
ment; they allowed the prerogative to be encroached
utpon; theyfuffered the mofi irregular aeis of power,
and even wanton inflances of opprefiion, to pass witl
impunity; they dealt out the patrimony of the crown
among those -hose oenmity they dreaded, or whose fa-
your they had gained; and reduced the royal authority
to a slate of imbecility, from which fuccecding mo-
narchs laboured in vain to raise it.

During the minority of James II. the administration

of affairs, and the custody of the king's person, were
committed to fir William Crichton, and fir Alexan-
der Iivingfton. Jealousy and discord were the effects
of their conjunca authority, and each of them, in or-
der to flrengthen himself, bestowed new powers and pri-
vileges upon the great men, whose aid h- courted.
While the young earl of Douglag, encou:age i by their
divisions, erected a fort of independent principality with-
in the kingdom; and forbidding his vaflals to acknow-
ledge any authority but his own, he created knights,
appointed a privy council, named officers civil and mi-
litary, afliimed every ensign of royalty, but the title of
king, and appeared in public witn a magnificence more
than royal.

Eight persons were clofen to govern the kingdom,
during the minority of James 111. Lord Boyd, how-
ever, by seizing the person of the young king, and by
the alcendant which he acquired over him, lbon in-
grossed the whole authority. He formed the ambitious
profped of raising his family to the fame pitch of power
and grandeur with those of the prime notbility; and lie
cifecied it. While intent on this, lie relaxed the vi-
gour of government, and the nobles became accuftorn-
cd, once more, to anarchy and indeperldenc.c. '1ic

power which Boyd had been at so much pains to ac-
quire, was of no long continuance; and the fall of his
tlanily, according to the fate of favourites, was sudden
and defiructise; but upon its ruins, the family of Ha-
milton rose, which soon attained the highest rank in
the kingdom.

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was like-
`e more turbulent than those of the preceding kings.

And the contending nobles, encouraged or protected
tither by the king of France, or of England, formed
themselves into more regular factions, and disregarded
more than ever the restraints of order and authority.
The French had the advantage of feeing one, devoted
to their interest, raised to be regent. This was the duke
of Albany, a native of France, and grandson of James
II. But Alexander lord Home, the most eminent of
the Scottish peers, who survived the fatal battle of
Flowden, thwarted all his measures, during the first
year of his adminiltration; and the intrigues of the
queen dowager, lifter of Henry VIII. rendered the lat-
ter part of it no less feeble. Though supported by
French auxiliaries the nobles defpiled his authority, and
regardless either of his threats, or his entreaties, peremp-
torily refused, two several times, to enter England, to
the borders of which kingdom he had led them. Pro-
voked by these repeated instances of contempt, the re-
rent abandoned his troublesome station, and retiring to
France, preferred the tranquillity of a private life to an
office destitute of real authority. Upon his retreat, Dou-
glas earl of Angus became master of the king's pcrfon,
and governed the kingdom in his name. Many efforts
were made to deprive him of his usurped authority.
But the numerous vassals and friends of his family ad-
hered to him, because he divided with them the power
and cAoluLi:nts of his office; the people reverenced and
loved the name of Douglas; without the title of regent,
I.e exercised a fuller and more ablflu:e authority than
any who had enjoyed that dignity; and the ancient but
dangerous pre-cinience of the Douglaffcs, feiemed to be
restored.

To these and to many other causes, omitted or unoh-

served bv us, did the Scottish nobility owe that exorbi-
tant and uncommon power, of wxhich instances occur
Io frequently in our hiflory. Nothing, however, de-
monfirates so fully the extent of their power, as the
length of its duration Many years after the drcleil-
sion of the feudal ffitenm in the other kingdoms of
Europe, and when the arms or policy of princes had
every where shaken or laid it in ruins, the foundations
of that ancient fabric remained firm and untouched in
Scotland.

The nowers, which the feudal inflitutions vefled in

the nobles, soon became intolerable to all the princes
of Europe, who longed to p(oflefs something more tihan
a nominal and precarious authority. Their impatience
to obtain this, precipitated Ienry Il1. of England,
Edward II. and some other weak princes, into rafil and
premature attempts agaiuft the privileges of the barons,
mi which they were difappoilted or perished. Pricts
<,f greater abilities were content to mitigate evils whlich
they could not cure; they tbught occupation for the
turbulent spirit of their nobles in frequent wars; and
allowed their fierce courage to evaporate in foreign ex-
peditions, which, if they brought no ot-.er advalllt.ge,
lfcured at least domestic tranquillity. But time and
;ccidents ripened the feudal governments for deilruc-
tion. Towards the end of the rsth century, and be-
ginning of the 6th, all the princes of Europe attacked,
as if by concert, the power of their nob!es. IMen of
genius then undertook with fiiccefs, what their ulfcil-
f!tl predecenffrs had attempted in vain. Louis XI. of
lrance, the moit profound and the most adventuroni
genius of that age, began, and, in a single reign, al-
Imoft completed the scheme of their deftrutiion. The
sure, but concealed policy of Henry VII. of England,
produced the fame efftc. The means, indeed, em-
ployed by thtre monarchs, were very diffcrent. The
hlow which Louis struck was fidden and fatal The
artifices of Henry resembled those flow poisons, which
walle the constitution, but become not mortal till form:

distant period. Nor did they produee consequences
les opposite. Louis boldly added to the crown what-
ever he wrefled from the nobles. Henry undermined
his barons by encouraging them to fell their lands,
which enriched the commons, and gave them a.weight
in the legifiature unknown to their predecessors. But
while these great revolutions were carrying on in two
kingdoms.with which Scotland was intilately connctn-
ed, no alteration happened there; the king neither ex-
tended his own prerogative, nor enabled the commons
to encroach upon the aristocracy; the nobles not only
retained their ancient privileges and poffefiions, but
daily made new acquifiuons.

This was not owing to the attention of our princes

or to their want of ambition. They were abundantly
fenfikle of the exorbitant power of the nobles, and ex-
tremely foli-itous to humble them. They did not, how-
ever, posiess ameans sufficient for accomplishing that
ncid. The refourcts of our monarchs were few, and
the progileL which thev made inconsiderable. Bit
as the number of their followers, and the extent of their
iurifdi&ion, were the two chief circumflances which ren-
dered the nobles formidable; in order to counterbalance
the one, and to restrain the other, all our kings had re-
course to the fame expedients.

I. Among nobles of a fierce courage, and of unpo.

i;fled manners surrounded with vaiTals bold and licen-
tious, whom they were bound by interest and honour
to protec, the cLufes of discord were many and una-
voi'ahble. And as the contending parties could seldom
ngree in acknowledging the authority of any common
u.perior or judge, and their impatient spirit would.ftl-
drm wait the flow decisions of juslice, their quarrels
were ufially terminated by the sword. The offended
baron affernhled his vassals, and waited the lands, or
sned the blood of his enemy. To forgive an injury
was mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly'.

The spirit of revenge was encouraged not only by
-*:e manners, Lut hat is more remarkable, by the la"-

Hence quarrels were transmitted from father to son,
and, under the iname ors deadiyfend, fibfifited for many
generations with uhmitigated rancour. It was the in-
terest of the crown to foment, rather.than to extin-
i nilih these; and-by frattering or'cherifhing the feeds
of di cord among the nobles, that union, -which would
' have rendered the- aristocracy invincible, and whicl
mutt at once have annihilated the prerogative, was es-
f cually prevented. To the fame cause our kings
' were indebted for the success with which they some-
times attacked the most powerful chieftains. They
employed private revenge to aid the impotence of pub-
1 lie laws, and arming against the person who had incurs

red their displeasure, those rival families which wished
his fall, they rewarded their service by sharing among
them the spoils of the vanquished. But this expedient,
though it served to humble individuals, did not weaken
the body of the nobles. Those, who were now the in-
si ruments of their prince's vengeance, became, in a

of those ages. If any person thought the prosecution
of an'injury offered to his family, too troublesome, or
too dangeros, the salique laws perniitted him publicl-
to defilt from demanding vengeance; hut the fame
laws, in order to plinih his cowardice and want of as-
section to his famil.y deprived him of the right of sic-
ceflon. Henaut. Abrege Chronol. p. 8r. Among- the
Anglo-Saxons, e find a singular institution, diftineuilf-'
ed by the name of fsIitiumw; a voluntary association'
the object whereof was the pcrlbnal security of thole'
who joined' in it,' and which the feebleness of govern-
ment'At that time rendered necefiarv. Among other'
regulations, .\hich''are contained in one of thole still
extant, the following defenre notice. " If any aflb-
date shall either dafter dnk with a person who h'is
killed any member of the fedalitirm, unless in the pre-
letce of the kingy, the -hifhop, or the count, and uitels
he can prove that he did not know the person, let hint
pay a great-fine." flicks' Dificrt. Epifto!ar:apudl' Thl
bor.. Lig. ptentr: vol. i;' p. 21.
Vol. I1. D

fort time, the -clbjeds of his fear. Having. acquired
power and wealth by serving the crown, they, in thei?
.turn, set up for independence; and though there might
be a fluCauation of power and of property, though old
families fell, and new ones rose upon their ruins, the
rights of the ariflocracy remained entire, and its vigour
unbroken.
, I. As the administration of justice is ore of the
inoft powerful ties between a king and his fubjeas,
all our monarchs were at the utmost pains to circunn-
scribe the jurifdjtion of the barons, and to extend that
of the crown. The external forms of subordination
natural to the feudal fyflem, favoured this attempt.

An appeal lay from the judges and courts of the ba-

rons, to those of the king. The right, however, of
jadging in the firil infllace, belonged to the nobles, and
they cafily found means to defeat the effee of appeals,

's well as of many other feudal regulations,- The

royal jurifdition was almost confined within the nar-
row limits of the. king's delnef es, btyond which, his
judges climned indeed,. much authority, but-pofelfTed
next to none. Our. kings were sensible of these limita-
tions, 'nd bore themn witjh mpatience. But it was inl-
'offible to overturn, in a momeat, what

k was fa deeply

rooted; 'or to siip the .pobles, at once, of privileges
which they had held so long, arnd which wrere wrought
alpoil into the frame of the feudal conlitution, To
accomnplub -Js, however, was an objeOt of uniform
and anxious attenticn to all our princes. James 1. led
the avhere, ,s well as in other inltances, toyards a-
reore regtular. and perse t police. He nmde choice,.
rmon;g tei estates of parliament, of a certain number
f 'persons, whoin he diftinguiihed by the name of
Iaj,;
L Sct ,; and appointed them tg hold courts for de-
retaiicng civil cufes, three times in the, year, and for-
ti days 'at'a time, in wihatever place he lleafed to naine.
Trhii%. jnrirdilon exteiiad. tpo all matters which for-
rfirly came: undei the cognizance of the king's council,
and, being a cmnriittee of parliament, their decisions
were final. Jarics II. cLtaircd; a law armexing all rc-

galities, which should be forfeited, to the 'rown, and
declaring the right of jtrifdiction to be unalienable for
the future. 'James IIl. imposed Ifvere penalties upon
those jdges, appointed by the barons, whose decisions
Thould be frotihd on a review to be unjust; and by ma-
ny otherregulations endeavbured to extend the autho-
rity of his own court'. James IV on pretence o'fre-
medying the inconenienieies arifiug from the thort terms
of the court of feflion, appointed other judges, called
Lords of Daily Ceuncil. The /ELo;n was an ambulatorycourt,
and met seldom; the daily council was fixed, and fat
constantly it Edinburgh; and though not composed of
members of parliament, the fame powers, which the
lords of feflion enjoyed, were veiled in it. At last,
James V. erected a new couit, which still fubfifls, and
which he named the CulleCg of yuJfire, the judges or foa-
to;, of which were called Lordi of Council and SefTion This
court not only exercised the fame jurifdicidn which
formerly belonged to the fefion and daily council, but
new rights were added. Privileges of great import-
ance were granted to its members, its forms were pre-
fcribed, its terrt fixed, and regularity, power, and
fplendorornferred upon it. The persons, constituted
judges in all these different courts, had,'in many re-
tpedt the advantage of those who presided in the
courts of the barons;. the't'were more eminent for
their skill in law, their rules of proceeding were more
uniform, and their decifinns more confiltent. Such ja-
dicatories becamhe thhe'6bjea -of confidence and of ve-
neration. Men willingly submitted their property to
their determination, and their encroachments on the jll-
rifdifions of the nobles were popular, and for that rea-
son successful. By devices of a fnnilar nature, the ju-
rifdiflion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrain-
ed, and-the atthority of the cbturt ofjufteiary extended.
The' rown, in thi patieular; gaining innfeflbly upon
the nobles, recdvered 'nmbr ample authprity;' and the
king; whose jurilfdition once resembled thaitrf a ba-

. t *. -- -

'_ _;- ..-. · '
* Ad a6. P. 1469. AM 94. P. 1493. AdI 99. P. 1487.

D a

roni rather than that of a sovereign*; came more and
more to be confidered as the head. of the communitr,
and the supreme dJilpenfer of jultice to his people.
These acquisitions of our kings, however, though com-
.parativey great, were in reality inconsiderable; and,
inotwithftanding all their efforts, the separate jurifdic-
tions of the nobles remained, many of them, in great
.vigour; and their final abolition was rePerved to a dif-
tant and more happy period.

The most perfect idea of the feudalfyftem of go-

vernment may be attained by attending to the- state of
·Germany, and to the hiflory of France. In the for.
mer, the feudal intfitutions still fubfilt with great vi.
gour; and though altogether abolished in the latter,
ihe public records have been fo.carefully.preferved, that
the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled,
with more certainty and prceifion, than those of-any o-
ther country in Europe, to trace its rife, its progress and
revolutions;- In Germany, evrry principality may.he
.confidered as a fief, and all its great princes as vaiTals,
holding of the emperor. They poflefs all the feudal
privileges.; their fiefa are. perpetual ; their .u.ifdiclion
within their own territories, ieparate- and extensive;
and the great offices of the empire are.all hereditary,
and annexed to.particular families. At the.fame time
lhe emperor retains many of the prerogatives.of the
feudal monarchs, Like them, his claims and.preten-
lions are. innumerable, and his- power small; his jurif-
4di&oin within his own demelnes or herediary countries,
is complete; beyond the bounds of those it is almost no-
.thing. And so permanent are feudal principles, hat al
though the feuds system be overturned .in almost every
.particular slate in Germany, and.although its. princes
have all become absolute, the original feudal cmitiru-
tion of the empire still remains, and ideas peculiar to that
form of government, dire&t all itsoperations ard deter-
ir.ne the rights of all-its. princes... Our observations,
vith regard to the liniited jurifidicion of thbe king un-
dcr the feudal govrn,n.ents, are greatly.illutnratpd by

But besides these methods of defending their prero-

gative, and humbling the aristocracy, which may be
confidered as common to all our princes, we Ihall find,
by taking a review of their reigns, that almost every
one of our kings, from Robert Bruce to James V. had
formed some particular fytfem for depressing the au-
thority of the nobles, which was the obje& both of
their jealousy and terror. The conduct of our mo-
narchs, if we reft satisfied with the accounts of their
historians, must be confidered as flowing entirely from
the resentment against particular noblemen; and' all
their attempts to humble them muf be viewed as the
rallies of private paflion, not as the consequences of any
general plan of policy. But, though some of their ac-
tions may be imputed to those passions, though the dif-
ferent genius of the men, the temper of the times, and
the slate of the nation necessarily occasioned great va-
riety in their schemes, yet, without being chargeable
with excessive refinement, we may affirm, that their
end was uniformly the fame. And the project of re-
ducing the power of the ariflocracy, sometimes avowed
and pursued with vigour, sometimes concealed or seem-
ingly suspended, was never altogether abandoned.

what happened in France. The feebleness and dotage
of the descendents of Charlemaigne encouraged, the
peers to usurp an independent jurifdition. Nothing
remained in the hands of the crown; all was seized by
them. When Hugh Capet ascended the throne, A. D.
987, he kept polfronrr of hii private patrimony the
Comte of Paris, and all thejurifdiclion, which the kings
his successors exercised for some time, was within its
territories. There were only four towns in France,
where he could eftablifhl GRANDS BAILLIS, or royal
judges; all tbeother lands» towns, andbaillages belong-
ing to the nohles The methods to which the French
monarchs had recourse for extending their jurifdidlion
were exadtl similar to rhofe employed by our prines.
Renault's Abrege, p. 617. &C. De tL'prit des TLix,
Liv. 30. ch. a2. &c.

D 3

No prince was ever more indebted to his nobles than

Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the kingdom,
and placed hiin on the tlrone. His gratitude and gc-
nerofity bestowed on them the lands. of the vanquished.
Property has seldom undergone greater or more sudden
rev6lutipns than those io v.hicir it was filbie&, at tha:
·time, in Scotland. Edward I. having forfeited the c-
ittcs of^noft of the ancient Srottiith nobles, granted
them to his Englfh fubjeds. These were expeiled by
the Scots, and their . nds seized by new masters. A-
-nmdft fich rapid changes, confusion; waa unavoidable;
and rmany poflefied their lands by titles extremely lanic
During one of those truces between the two nations,
occasioned rather by their being lweary of war, than
deftrous of peace, Robert formed a scheme for checking
the growing power and wealth of the nobles. Ile fini-
moned them to appear, and to heiw by what rights .they
'held their larids. They assembled accordingly, and- i,e
·queftiorn being put, thev flarted up, at; once, and dlrew
tneirfwprc'".' Bythefe, said they,wec acquired our lnd-,
and w-ith thcfe we ill defend t he" Theking-irg;
micdaed by their bollnefs, prudently dropt the proje:.
But so deeply did the nobles refcnt this attack up,,!l
thber order, that notwithstanding Robert's. pppular adll
splendid virtues, it occ4fioncd a dangerous conspiracy
2gainft his life. ..

David his son, at first an exile in France, afterwards

a-prifoner in Engt2nd, and involved in a continual war
'-with Edward HlI. had' not leilure to. atte0d to the in-
ternal police of his; kingdom, or to think of retrenchinr
the privileges of the nobility.'

Our historians have been more carefil to relate the

mr.iitar-, thzh the'civil tranfagions orhe reign of Iu-
.ert II. Skinni;hes and inroads.o£littke coniequemi,
thcy describe minutely, but with regard to every thing
'that happehed, during several years of tranquillity, the;
are altogcther .Scnt. . .

The fehle "a'dminiftratioh. of Robert Il.- nufl likr-

-ife be pa-a'veFr'ightlv. 'A prijicr, of a mean ge-
r.i:s, and cf a f;. l ;id si'.:!' ccaiit2txiuni -a, no '-.

person to enter the lifts with active and martial nobles,
or to attempt wresting from them any of their rights.

The civil tranfations in Scotland are better known

fincethe beginning of James I's reign, and a complete
·series of-our laws supplies the defects of our historians.
The Englilh made some amends for their injuffice in
detaining that prince a prisoner, by their generous care
of his education.. During his long reiidenc', in Eng-
land, he had an opportunity of observing. the feudal fy-
ifem in a more advanced state, and refined from many
ot the imperfeLions which still adhered to it, in his
own kingdom. He saw there nobles great, but not in-
dependent; a king powerful, though far front absolute;
he saw a regular administration of government; wile
laws enacted; and a nation flourishing and happy, be-
cause all ranks of men were accultomed to obey them.
i:ull of thele ideas, he returned into his native rountry,
which presented to him a very different scene. The
royal authority, never great, was now contemptible, by
being so long-delegated to regents. The ancient patri-
snony and revenues of the crown were alnoft totally
alienated. -During his long ablence, the name of a
king was.little known, and less regarded. The licence
of many years had rendered the nobles independent.
Uniyerfal anarchyv. pevailed. The weak were expoldl
to the rapine, and opprefflon of the itrong. In every
corner Iome barbarous chieftain ruled at pleasure, and
neither feared the king, nor pitied the people. ,

James was too wife a prince to employ open force to

correc such inveterate evils. Neither the men, nor
the times,.would have borne it. He applied the gen-

*.A contemporary monkish writer describes these ca-

Iimities very feelingly, in hia rude Latin. In diebus
iiis, nonl erat lex in Scotia,fed quilibet potentiorumnju-
;io;e-n oppreflit; et toturn reglum suit unum latroci-
;.J'li; homicidia, deprnedltiones, incendia, et ca-tera
uaiteficia-remanierunt impunita; et juftitia relegata cx-
ta terminos regni exulavit, Chartular. Morav. apul,
-".:l; Efiay, vol. i. . Zi72

tier and less offensive remedy of laws and statutes. In
a parliament held immediately after his return, he gain-
ed the confidence of his people, by many wife laws,
tending visibly to re-efablilh order, tranquillity, and
jaftice in the kingdbam But, at the fame time that he
endeavoured to secure these bieflings to his fubjies, he
discovered his intention to recover thole poffeiions, of
which the crown had been unjustly bereaved; and for
that purpose obtained an ad by which he Was empow-
ered to fiummon those, who had obtained crown lands
during the three las reigns, to produce the rnghts by
which they held them'. As this flatute threatened the
property of the nobles, another, which pafled in a sub-
sequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their
power. By it, the leagues and combinations which
we have already described, and which rendered the
nobles so formidable to the crown, were declared un-
lawfult. Encouaged by this success in the beginning
of his enrprife, James's next flep was fill bolder and
more decisive. During the fitting of parliament, he
seized, at once, his coufi Murdo, duke of Albany, and
his sons; the earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus, March,
and above twenty other peers and barons of prime rank.
To all of them, however, he was immediately recon-
ciled, except to Albany and his sons, and Lennox.
These were tried by their peers and condemned; for
what crime is now unknown. Their execution struck
the nobles with terror, and their forfeiture added vafi
pofefiions to the crown. He seized, likewifc, the earl-
doms of Bochan and Strather, upon different pretexts,
and that of Marr fell to him by inheritance. The pa-
tience and inaaivity of the nobles, while the king was
proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown,
are amazing. The only obfirution he met with was
from a flight infirreclion, headed by the duke of Al-
bany's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The splendor and presence of a king, to which the no-
bles had been long unaccuitomed, inspired reverence;

Ad 9. P. 1424. f At 30. P. 1324.

'James was-a- prince of great abilities, and conducted
his operations' with imnh prudence. lIe was ill friend-
ship with England; cloifly allicd with'the French kirng;
he was adored By the people, who enijoed unul'al le-
curitY and happiness under his adminiifration; and all
his acqtifitions, holtever fatal to the body of the no-
bles, had been gained by attacks upon in!viduals;
were obtained by decifons of lawv; and being founded
on circumntinces peculiar to the peri(!ns who iuffered,
might xcrite murmurs and'apprelieni,) ms, hut afforded
no colourable pretext for a gentral rebellion. It was
not so with the- next attempt which the king made.
Encouraged by the facility with which he had hitherto
advanced, he ventured upon a meali!re that irritated the
wioleO nobleR, and which the' event shews either to have
been entered into with too much precipitancy, or to
have been carried on with too much violence. The
father of George Dunhar, earl of March, had taken
arms againit Robert ll. the king's father, but that
crime had been pardoned,' a.nd his lands restored by
Robert, duke of Albany. James, on-pretext that the
regent had exceeded his power, and that it was not
competent to any-but the king himlflf to pardpn trea-
lu;, or to alienate lands annexed to the crown, obtain-
ed a' fenttnce, declaring the pardon to be void, and
dtpriving.Dunbar of-the earldori. Many of the no.
bies heid lands.by no other right than what they de-
rived from grants of the two dukes of Albany. Such
a decision, th.ug-h they had reaton to expect it in con--
sequence of the statute which the king had obtained,
occafioled a. general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at
prelent, tlhe only fifierer, the precedent might be .cx-
tended, and their titles to poflcffions, which they con-
lidered as the rewards of their valour, might be lulhject-
ed.to the review of courts of law, whole forms of
proceeding, and jurisdiction were in a martial age little
known, and extremely odious Tcrror.and diicontent
lprrat fafft upon this dil.overy of the killg's irtentions;:
the common danger called on -the whole-order to unite,
and to make one bold itland, before-they were ftrippce

piecemeal, and reduced to a slate of poverty and infig-
nificance. The prevalence of these sentiments among
the nobles, encouraged a few desperate men, the friends
or followers of those who had been the chief sufferers
under the king's administration, to form a conspiracy
against his life. The firfl certain intelligence of this
was brought hiin while he lay in his camp before Rox-
burgh cattle. He durst not confide in nobles to whom
be gave so many causes tf disgust, but inflantly dif-
miffed them and their vassals, and retiring to a monas-
tery near Perth, vas soon after murdered there in the
tnoft cruel manner. All our historians mention, with
aftonifiment, this circumstance of the king's disbanding
his army, at a time when it was so necessary for his
preservation. A king, fay they, surrounded with his
barons, is fectire from secret treason, and may defy
open rebellion. But those very nobles were the persons
'whom he chiefly dreaded; and it ii evident, from this
review of his adlniniitration, that he had greater reason
to apprehend-danger, thath to expeit defence from their
hands. It was the misfortiine of James, that his rhax-
Ims and manners were too refined for the age in which
he lived. Happy! had he reigned in a country more
civilized; his love of peace, of justice, and of elegance,
would have rendered his fchtines fuccefful, and iiftead
of his perilhing because he had attempted too muth, a
grateful people would have applauded ahd seconded his
efforts to reform and to improve them.

Crichton, the most able man of those, who had the

diredlion of affairs during the minority of James II.
had been the minister of James I. and well acquainited
with his resolutions of humbling the nobles. He did
not relinquish the design. and he endeavoured to inspire
his pupil with the fame sentiments. But what James
had attempted to effedi slowly, and by legal means,
his son and Ctichton pursued with the impetuosity na-
tural tb Scotsmen, and with the fierceness .peculiar to
that age. gilliam, the sixth earl of Douglas, was the
first viqaimt to their barbarous policy; That young no-
blemai (as we have already observed) contemning the

authority of an infant prince, almof openly renounced
his allegiance, and alpired to independency. Crichton,
too high-fpirited to bear such an insult, but too weak
to curb or to bring to justice so powerful an offender,
decoyed him by many promises to an interview in the
castle of Edinburgh, and, nptwithfianding these, mur-
dered both him and his brother. Crichton, however,
gained little by this act of treachery, which rendered
him universally odious. William, the eight earl of
Douglas, was no less powerful and no less formidable
to thd crown. By forming the league which we al-
ready mentioned with the earl of Crawford and other
barons, he had united against his sovereign almost one
half of his kingdom. But his credulity led him into
the fame fllare which had been fatal to the former earl.
Relying on the king's promises, who had now attained
to the years of manhood, and having obtained a safe
conduct under the great feal, he ventured to meet him
in Stirling caRle. James'urged him to abandon that
dangerous confederacy into which lie had entered; the
earl obstinately refused; " If you will not (said the en-
raged monarch, drawing his dagger) this hall;" an4
fiabbed him to the heart.' An a<5ion so unworthy of a
king, filled the nation with aflonifhment and with hor-
ror. The earl's' ,afials ran to arms with the utmofitfu-
rv, and dragging thefafe conduct, which the king had
granted and violated, at a horse's tail, they marched to.
wards Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to bed
liege the castle. An accomnmodation enlued, on what'
terms is not known. But the king's jealouly, and the
earl's power and resentment, prevented it from being of
long continuance. Both took the field at the head o-
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the earlt
rompofed chiefly of borderers, was far superior to the'
king's both in number and in valour; and a single bat-
tie mull, in all probability, have decided whether th.
house of Stewart or of Douglas was henceforth to pof
ieli the throne of Scotland. But, while his troops im-
pati ntly expected the signal to engage, the earl order-
cd them to retire to their camp, and fir James I-amil-

ton of Cadvow, the person in whom he placed tle
greatet confidence, convinced.of his want.nf- genhis to
improvean opportunity, or of his want of conrage to
fkize a crown, delerted him that vervy nig-Lh. i-his.e.-
ampie was followed by many; and the earl; dti.f'ird
or forsaken by all, was soon driven ant of the'kiiredoll,
znd obliged to depend for his fubliitence on -ahefrien.!-
sfip of tie-king of England. The ruin of this pre.it
family, which had so long rivzAled and- overawed tilc
crouAn,- and.the terror with which such an example of
Iunfuccefsful'ambitioirfilled the nobles, secured the kcingl
for some time, from opposition; and the royal autho-
rity remained uncontrolled-and almoft.ahfolute. James
did-not susser this favourableinterval to pail unimprov.
ed; he' procnred. the.. consent of parliament to laws
more advantageous to the prerogative, and'mnhre-lilh-
verfive of the privileges of the ariftocracu,than w'ere
ever obtained by any former or subsequent monarch of
ScotandL. . -

- .
. .

By one of thee, -not: only-all the vat. possessions of

the earl of Deuglts .were-arnexed to. .tre.crown, but
all prinr and future-alienaiions-of crown lands were de-
clared-.to -be -void, and the:king was empowered to
seize them -at pleasure, without any proceiisor- form of
la.w, and oblige the poffeot-s to refund .whatever they
had received firo then '. A dreadful -iftrument of
oppreffioitin the hands of a prince.

AnotherlaP prohibited the wardenihip of the marches
to be .granted hereditarily; restrained, in several in-
stances, the jurifdiciton of that office; and extended
tie authority of the king's courtst.

By a third,. it was ordained that no reralityi or ex-

c'.uive right of administering justice within a-man's
ownJands, fiould be granted in time to come,.without
the couifcnt of parliamnent , a condition which implicd
almoif an expreis prohibition Those noblsr, whJbo al-
ready poffiffrd that great privilege, would naturally be
solicitous to prevent it from becoming co:mnon, by be-

* Ait 4I. P I 55-. Ibid. Act 42. i Ibid. Ac 43.

attained it, would envy others the acquisition of such a
flattering diftin&ion; and both would concur in rr-
jeling the claims of new pretenders.

· By a -forth act, all new grants of hereditary offices
|were prohibited, and those obtained since the dcath of
the last king were -revoked U.

Each of thebe statutes undermined some of the great
p illars on which the powher of the arillocracy refted,

lring the remainder of his reign, this prince pursued

tiHe plan -hbich he had begun with the utmost vigour;
anld had not a sudden death, occasioned by the splinter
o1 f a calnon vwhich blurit near him at the ficge of Rox-
I Irurh, prevented his progress; he wanted neither ge-
1r:riu8 lir courage to perfee t it: and Scotlaad might, in
;11 probabiiity, have been the filfi kingdom in Europe,
u-llich would liave tlien thlic fbverfiol: of the icudal i' f-
i :trl:.

J ames 111. discovered no Icfs eagerness than his fa-

h ier or grandfather to humble the nobles; but far in-
ferior to either of them in abilities and addrtfs, he a-
dopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his reign was
dilafiirous, as well as his end tragical. Under the feu-
dal governments, the nobles were not only the king's
inriniflers. and pofleffed of all the great offices of power
or of trust they were likewise his companions and t4-
vourites, and scarce any but them approached his per-
fun, or were entitled to his regard. But James, who
both feared and hated his nobles, kept them at an up-
usual distance, and bestowed every mark of confidence
and affe&ion upon a few iman persons, of professions so
tlifhonourable, as ought to have rendered them unwor-
thy of his presence. Shut ulp with these in his caffle of
Stirling, he ieldom appeared in public. and amused-
himfelt with architeture, music, and other arts, which
were then littlc eftecned. The nobles beheld the
power and favour of these minions with indignation.
Even the sanguinary mealures of his father provoke4

1. Aat 44.
Vol. !, E

them less than his negledt. Individnals 2Tone suffered
by the former; by the latter, every man thought him-
.lcf injured, beraufe all were contemned. Their difcon-
tcnt was much heightened by the king's recalling ail
rights of crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
e-erv other concession, which was detrimental to Ilis
prerogative, and which had been extorted during his
minoritv. Combinations among themselves, ferret in-
trizues wvith England, and all the ufial preparatives for
civil war werie the eie&s of their resentment. Alexan-
der duke of Albany, and John earl of Mirar, the king'.
hrothers, two young men of turbulent and ambitioun
spirits, and incensed against James, who treated thtir
,-ith the fame coldness as he did the other nobles, entcr-
er deeply into ai. their cabal;. The kin:j detected their
eletigris, before they w-ere ripe for execution, and sei7-
¼rig his two brothers, ronmmittcr the tduke of Ailany to
Edinburgh cafilc. The c erl of M.rr, having renion-
trated with too mnlch hbnlrn-s ag.int rile king'scon-
durt. was murdered, if wc maiv heii^ee our historians,
by his command: Albany, apprechcnfive of the fame
fate, male his efape out of t!e castle and fled into
France. Concern for the king'% honour, or indignation
at his measures', Svwre perhaps the motives, which first
induced him to join the malcontents. But James's at-
tachment to favourites rcndcring him every day more
odiouis to the nobles, the prospect of the advantage'
which might be derived froin thcir general difaffeatiot.
added to the resentment which he felt on account r,
his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon inspireid
Albany with more ambitious and criminal thoughts.
He concluded a treaty with Edward IV. of Englan;,
in which he afuimed the name of Alexander kin (,t
Scots, and in return for the affifl^nce which was 1pr'-
mifed him towards dethroning his brnther, he hnund
himself, so soon as he was put in poefllion ofthle k1; '-
dom, to swear fealty and to do homage to the Engl'li
monarch, to renounce the ancient alliance with France,
to con:radl a r-ew one witl England, and rto i!rrn.!c:
some of the flr;cr!f castles, and Imolt vall:.ll l co;.i'.'

in Scotland'. That aid, which.the duke so. hafely
purclafcd at the price of his own honour, and the
indepnldency of his country, was punctually gralnt,
-et him, and the duke of Gluocclcr, with a powsr-
iful army, conducted him towards Scotland. The
.danger of a foreign invasion obliged Jamns to in-
plore the atliflance of t.hole nokhl, \c whol hc had lJ
long treated aviath contempt. Sonic of them mtre in
i close confederacy with the duke of Alba-ny, and ap-

provedof all his pretensions. Othcrs were inmpatilnt
for any event, which would rectore their order to ito
ancient pre-eninence. Th y took the field, however,
at the icad of a powerful army of their followers, but
witi a fironger disposition to rcdrefs their own gricy.
aliccs, than to annoy the enemy; and with a fixed refo-
lution of punilhing those minions, whose insolence they
could no longer tolerate. This relblution they executed,
in the camp near Lawder, with a miiiary dispatch and
rigour. Having previoully concerted their plan, tle
earls of Angus, Huntvl, Lennox, followed by almost
the whole barons of chief note in the army, forcibly
·entered the apartment of their sovereign, seized all hi*
favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they could not
tear from the king, in whose arms he took shelter, and,
,without any form of trial, hanged them inftanily over a
bridge. Among the inoft remarkableof those who had
engrossed the king's affection, were Cochran, a mason;
Hommil, a taylor; Leonard, a smith; Rogers, a mu-
fician; and Torfifan, a fencing-mafter. So despicable
a retinue discovers the capriciousness of James s cha-
rater, and accounts for the indignation of the nobles,
when they beheld the favour, due to them, belfowed
on fuchl unwuorthy objeCis.

James had no reafuo to confide in an army so little

under his command, and difiuifing it, shut himfhif up
in the caflc of Edliburgh. After various intriguec,
Aibany's lands and honours were at length iretorcd to
hir, anid he seemed c-en to have regained his brothcr'.

' Abei-r., Mart. Atch. v. i. 443.

E z

favour, by forfie important services. But their friend.
ship was not of long duration. James, once more, a-
bandoned himrelf to the guidance of favourites; and
the fate of those, who suffered at Lawder, did not de-
ter others from courting that dangerous pre-eminence.
Albany, on pretext that an attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and retir-
ing to his castle of Dunbar, drew thither a greater mul-
titude of nobles than attended on the king himself. At
the fame time, he renewed his former confederacy with
Edward; the earl of Angus openly negociated that in-
famous treaty; other barons were ready to concur with
it; and if the sudden death of Edward had not pre-
vented Albany's receiving any aid from England, the
crown of Scotland would, probably, have been the re-
ward of this unworthy combination with the enemies
of his country. But, inffead of any hopes of reigning
in Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety, and flying firit
to England, and then to France, he seems, from that
time, to have taken no part in the affairs of his native
country. Emboldened by his retreat, the king and his
ministers multiplied the insults which they offered to
the nobles. A sanding guard, a thing unknown under
the feudal governments, and inconfifent with the fami-
liarity and confidence with which monarchs then lived
amidst their nobles, was raised for the king's defence,
and the command of it given to Ramsay, lately created
earl of Bothwell, the fame person who so narrowly e-
fcaped when his companions were put to death at Law-
der. And, as if this precaution had not been sufficient,
a p.oclamation was iflued, forbidding any person to ap-
pear ;' arms within the precincts of the court'; which,
at the time when no man of rank left his own house
without a numerous retinue of armed followers, was,
in effec, debarring the nobles from all access to the
king. James, at the fame time, became fonider of re-
tirement than ever; and, funk in indolence or super-

- TFerrerius, 398.

ftition, or ittein:r; only to anmfements, devolved his
whole autljority ulpon his favourites. So many injuries
J yrovoked the iloft confideralie nobles to take arms,
rnd haring:pertiraded or obligd llhe duke of Rohilta,
;lhe king's cidelt Ibin, a youll of fifteen, to ftt iil:iftlf
at tleir head, they openly declared their iitcuntiil oi
depriving James of a cr.own, o0 wLich he had dfl(c-
vcrcd himnftcf to be ;£ unu ortliv. Rousld vy llJis dan-
g er, the king quiurld his retirement, took tle field, and
Cltcountertd thtc;t near Eannockburn; utr iihe valour
of the bordLeres, of wl:oii the armr of the z;ialcontenrt
5 us chiciEy co;nmp:fed, Icon put his troops ro ilight, aun
lie himlllf was ilais in the purliLt. tufpicin(, illuo-
lence, immoderate ;ttcl.mcnt to favoIrites, and al! the
vices of a febiee. mind, are vi ihile in his wlvo!e coiidIct;
i;:t the ci:araier of . cru-i and uinreler;t;in tyrnli:
iirmns to be' utuflly ar.;el to) ihim by ot.r ililoriai,.
lHis negkat of the nobles irritated, but did not weaken
them; and their diicontent,:the immoderate ambi:ioin
of his two brothers, and their unnatural confederacir;
with England, were sufficient to have diflurbed a niore
.vigorous adminiftrationi, and to have renldered unhap-
py a prince of superior talents.

The indignation which many of.the nobles expret-

£ed against the condua of the coufpirators, together
with the terror of the f3ntene.o of excommunication
which the pope pronounced against them, obliged them
:o ule thrir vistorv with great moderation and humani-
ty. And being conscious how detestable the crime of
imhruing their hands in the blood of their sovereign
lappearec, they crdeavoured to regain the good. opinion
of their countrymen, and to atone for their treatment
of the father, by their loyalty and duty towards the
ion. They placed him instantly on the throne, and the
whole kingdon flon united in ackilowldging his au-

thority. James IV. was naturally generous and brave; he
itlt, in an high degree, all the palfions which animate a
young and noble.mind. tie loved magnificence, he de-
iSghted in wsar, and Iyas eager to obtain fan::. During

' £~~~E3

his reign, the ancient and heredifafy enmity between
the king and nobles seemed almost entirely to- have
ceased -He envied not their splendor, becanfe- it don-
tributed to the ornament of his court; nor did he dread
their power, which he confidered as the fecurityof his
kingdom, hot as an objea of terror to himself. This
confidence, on his part, met with the proper return of
dut and affetion on theirs; and, in his war with Eng-
land, he experienced how much a king beloved by his
nobles is able to perform. Though the ardour of his
courage, and the spirit of chivalry, rather than the pro-
fpe& of any national advantages, were the motives of
that-expedition; such was the zeal of his fubjeAs for
the -kiig's glory, that he was followed by as gallant an
army u ever any of his anceflors had led upon Englifn
ground. - But-though James himself formed no scheme
dangerous orFdetrimental to the nobles, his reign wa3
ditingaihed by an eveat, extremely fatal to.them; ard
one -accidental blow- humbled them more than all the
prtemeditared attacks of preceding kings. In the rafl
and unfortunate battle of- Flowden, a brave -nobility
chafe r-ithet- to die, than to desert .their..fovereign.
-Twelve earls, thirteen lords, five eldest. finsof noble-
tiien, arid an inctedible-number of -barons.fell ith the
tiig *. The whole body of the nobles, long and fenfi-
-bly,- felt this dfafter;- and if a prince,-of full age, had
'then afetnded-.the throne, their consternation and fee-
-btener i-would have afforded-him advantages which no
:formtr monarcb ever poffefled.
- -But James V, who succeeded his father, was'an in-
-sant- of a year old; and though the office of regent was
conferr on the duke of Albany, a man of.genius
: and enterprise, a native of France, and accustomed to
- agovernnerit where the-power of the king was. alrea-
-dy-great; though- he made many bold -atlimpts to e.-
tend: the-royal authority; though. he put to de ;.h lord
Home, and baniihed the earl of Angus,. the two no-
blemen of greatest influence in the kingdom, the arif-

*Aber. ii. 540.

tocracy lot -no ground under his adminiflration'. A
ftraner to the mariners, the laws, and the language
of the people which he was called to rule, he adstd,
on some occasions, rather like a viceroy of the French.
king, than the governor of Scotland; but the nobles
.afitted their nvn privileges, and contended for the in-
terest of their country, with a boldness, which con-
vinced hint of their independency, and of the impo-
tecne of his owtn authority. After several unsuccessful
flrnigies, he volunarily retired to France, and the king
being then in his thirteenth year, the nobles agreed
that he should assume the government, and that eight
persons should be appointed to attend him by turns,
and to advise and altift him in the adminifiration of
public affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of
that number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained some of his colleagues, re-
moved others, and intimidated the reft. When'the
term of his attendance expired, he frill retained autho-
rity, to which all were obliged to submit, because none
of them was in a condition to dispute it. The assec-
tion of the young king was the only thing wanting to
fix and perpetuate his power. Butan aadive and high-
fpirite i prince submitted to the restraint, in which he
wvas kept, with great impatience. It ill suited his years
or disposition to be confined as a priolner within hi'
own palace; to be treated with no refpec, and to be
deprived of all power. He could not, on some occar
lions, conceal his indignation and resentment. Angus
foresaw that he had mucb to dread from these, and as
he could not gain the king's heart, he resolved to make
sure of his person. James was continually surrounded
by the earl's spies and confidents; many eyes watched
all his motions, and oblfrved every ftep he took. But
the king's eagerness to obtain liberty, eluded all their
vigilance. 'He escaped from Falkland, and fled to the
ealtle of Stirling, the.refidence of the queen, his: rb-
ther, and the only place of strength in the kingdom,
which was not in the hands of the Douglasses. The
nobles, of whom forme wreinltue';i·&l by their hatre4

-tp Angus, and others by their refpe& for the king,
crowded to Stirling, and his court -was foonl f.ilcd'wit,
p:erfonsof the greatest diftinclion. The carl, thoiugh
aflcnilhed at rhis unexpected-revoluticn, retblved a;
'firlt to make one bold push for recovering:his autholrit:-,
by marcting to Stirling at the head of his follow;'r;
'but he wanted ei;her-courage or flrength to exccutr
this rdbolption. In a parliament held loon after, i,c
and his adherents were attainted, and after fccapiin
from many dangers, and enduring much miserys, he wa:s
at length obliged to fy into England for refuge..

James had now not only the name, but though cx-
rtcmely-yoig, the full authority of a king, he was in-
ferior -to no prince of-that age in gracefulness of per-
son, or in vigour of mind. His urrderftanding. was
-good,-and his heart warum; theformer capable of grcat

nimprovement, and the latter susceptible of- the becf im-
prefions.. -But, according to the ultial fare of princec
whoare called to tile throne in their infaplcv, his edi.
-ation had been iregledced. His private preceptors were
.more ready to flatter than to inflruct him. It was thc
interest of those who governed the kingdom, to pre-
.vent him from knowing too unueh. And the earl of
.Angus,-in order to divert him'frosm bufin.fs, gave-hirn
*an early taflefor such plcalires, as afterwards occupied
and engrofied him more than became a king. Accord-
ingly We discover in James all thp features of a great
.but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand, violent pas-
lions, implacable refeutrneut, an immoderate deilic of
.pover, -and the utmost rage at difappointmnent. On
the ether, love to his people, zeal for the punifhnre;'t
of private oppressors, confidence in his favourites, and
the molt etgaging openuefj and affability of behavi-
our.

What he himself had. fuffcred from the exorbitant
ow'er of the nobles led him early to imitate his prede-
cefcfrs, in their arternpts to lumhble them. The plau
he formed for thatpuirpofe was more profound, more:
ivfiemat-ic, and pursued with greater conflancy and
,cadincfs, thar. that of any of his areccfors. Au;d ti;

influence of the events in his reign upon those of the
Itibrequlent period, render it neceflary to explain his
eonduct at greatel length, and to enter into a more mi-
nute detail of his actions. He had penetration enough
to discover those defects in the schemes adopted by for-
mer kings, which occalioned their miscarriage. The
example of Jamnes I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and the fierce spirit of
the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by these alone.
The effets of the violent measures of James II. con-
vinced him, that the oppression of one great family is
apt either to excite the suspicion and resentment of the
other nobles, or to enrich with its spoils fbme new fa-
mily, which would soon adopt the fame sentiments, and
become equally formidable to the crown. He saw,
from the fatal end of James IIL. that neglec was till
more intolerable to the nobles than oppression, and that
the ministry of new men and favourites was both dif-
honourable, and dangerous to a prince. At the fame
time, he felt that the authority of the crown was not
sufficient to counterbalance the power of the nobles,
and that without some new acceflion of Itrength, he
could expect no better success in the firuggle than his
ancestors. In this extremity, he applied himself to the
clergy, hoping that they would both relish his plan, and
concur, with all their influence, in' enabling him to put
it into execution. Under the feudal government, the
church being efteened a third estate, had its reprefen-
fatives in parliament; the number of these was confi-
derable, and they pofleflcd great influence in that as-
fembly. The superstition of former kings, and the
zeal of an ignorant age, had bellowed upon ecclesias-
tics, a great proportion of the national wealth, and
the authority which they acquired by the reverence of
the people, was fixperior even to that which they de-
rived from their riches. This powerful body, how-
ever, depended entirely on the crown. The popeso
notwithstanding their attention to extend their ufurpa-
tions, had neglectted Scotland as a distant and poor
kingdom, and permitted its kings to exercise powers,

which they disputed with more confideralle prinlcs,
The Scottish monarchs had the ioe! right of nomluil.
ticn to vacant bishoprics and aibeys '; and Janmes in-
turally concluded, that men who expccted preifcrimtI t
from his favour, would be willing, to mcrit it, by pro.
rnoting his designs. Happily f<ix him, tile nobles ;iad
not vet recovered the blow given them at FIlow'den, asad
if we may judge, either from their conduct, or fiom
.the characer given of them by fir Ralph Sadler, the
Engljfl envoy in Scotland, they were nmen of little ge-
pius, of no experience in bufincls, and incapable of a.1i-
ing either with unanimity, or with rigour. Many of
the clergy, on the other hand. were diiitliguilhed by
their great abilities, and no less by their ambition. Va-
rious causes of disgust had arisen between them and the
nobles, who defpiled their charaaer, and envied their
power, or their wealth. By acing in concert with the
king, they not only gratified him, but avenged Lthen-
selves, and hoped to aggrandize their own order, Lv
deprefling those, who were their sole rivals. Secure of
.so powerful a concurrence, James ventured to proceed
with greater boldiies. In the first heat of refentmcmi,
.he had. driven the earl of Angus out of the kingdom;
and sensible that a person, so far superior to the other
nobles in abilities, might create many obstacles, which
would retard, or render ineffcAual all his fchcemes, Ih
folcmnly swore, that he would never permit him to re-
.turn into Scotland; and, notwithflapding the repeated
solicitations of the king of Englaid, he adhered to his
vow with unrelenting obstinacy. He then proceeded
to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh, Stirling, and
.other cafiles, and to fill his magazines with a-nms and
ammnunition. Having taken thefc precautions by v. ya
of defence, he began to treat the nobles with the it-
tmofi coldncls an.d reecrve. Thole offices, whicld they
.were apt, from iorg pofllihop; to confider as appro-
priated to their order, were now erilowed on .cLirli-
aflics, wuho alone pofffefcd the king's ear, and togethcr

p EpilL. Reg. Scot. 9,&c. -c97 t. 2 4.
p.j

with l f ew gentlemen of inferior rank, to whom he
} }"dl cnmrr.nini:'ated his fcheme.l were intrultcd with
the ria'l nrgment of all public afiairs. These niniilers
w 'r-e choien wxith judgment; and cardinal Beatoun;
w} tln fonn hecnme the molt eminent among them, was
a mnn on fi;perinr genius. They served the king with'
fidehli, they carried on his mea!flrcs with vigour, witli
reputation, and with success. James nu. longer conceal-
e d hIis contempt of the nobles, and li;ffered no oppor-

" tunity of mortifying them to elcape. Slight offences
: wese asgra-ated into real crimes, and punished with

feeritv. Every accusation against perlbns of rank
w as hear-d with pleasure, every appearance of guilt was
examined with rigour, and every trial proved fatal to
the -perfon.accufed: the banishing Hepburn, earl of
Bothl.ell, for realbns extremely frivolous, the behead.
in" the master of Sorbes without fiufficient evidence of
his guilt, and the condemning lady Glamis, a filler of
the ca-l of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch-
craft, of which even that credulous a be helieved her
innocent, are monuments both of the kimn's lhatred of
the nobles, of the feveritv of his government, and of
the stretches he made towards abfoiltte power. By
tefe afts of authority, he tried the spirit of the nobl.es,
I and how much they were willing to bear. Their pa-
tience increased his c6ntempt for them, and added to
tl:e ardour and boldncrs with which he pmrfited his
plian. The nobles obflrived the tendency of his f.ihet.!'
-ith concern, and with refentmcnt; but the kinp's fa-
g.city, and the vigilance of his ministers, anl the s;laut
of a proper leader, made it dangerous to concert any
n'-alllres for their defence, and impofli)lc to a:'l vitrh
hcomning vigour. Jarnes and his c.uaf!llors, hi a faife
!krp which thev took, prfe-flied to trlim, at l.,gthi, an
a'!:mntage which they did not tail to improve.

Motives, which arc well known, hnd IpompTted Ilen-

ry VITI. to disclaim the pope's allthorit:., .,i. 1 li
the revenues of the regular clelr: s. I-i. i t-rim .i re-
formation fatidfied noIe of his lill j,'i.

: tiIC w.re
enralged becaufce e h:d proceeded fb f;ir, .,hrrs sru.r-

mured because he proceeded no farther; and- by his
imperious temper, aid alternate persecution of the.zea.
lots forpopery, and the converts to the protestant opi-
nions, he was equally formidable to both. Henry was
afraid that this general diflatisfaftion of his people
might encourage his enemies on the continent to ia-
vade his kingdom. He knew that both the pope and
emperor courted the friendlhip of the king of Scots,
and endeavoured to engage hin in an alliance againfi
England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint the es-
ffts of their negociations, by entering into a .lpofer u-
nion with his nephew, and. for that purpose sent am-
baifdors into Scotland to prppofe a personal nmteview
with him- at York. It was plainly. amnes's .intcef tg
acejp-of thbis'lnviUton;' the-aflifianze f ifo;peferful
an ally, the hilh 'hepours which wiere .promiled, him,
and the liberal fuiidiesje might hive pbtainedi.wvould
hive-added no little diaiity.to his.domuieftic gvern-
ment, and mufl hate greatlyt faciiitated.the. e^eution
ps his favourite plan; ' O thecther..a'dd a xva. with
England, which he had'fieaffqnt aipprbeend, .f he re-
jeded Repry's offers 'qf'Jendiidwhpwa ingfiftent
with all his views.. Tiis wiAld bringr huimr. depend
uponr hisi--obles; ai arny cu uld not b raid fc witbout
their affance: to' call n-oblet:.iddceril.d again-t their
prince into the field, was to iiiite-iis enemies, [o makl
them sensible of their'owinfilrc-ngth, and ctowaffrd-them
an opportunity of revenging. their wrongs. James,
Who was not ignorant that all there confequdnces might
follow a breach with Englind, lilaened at first to Heu-
ryss proposal, anid consented to'the inSerview at York.
,ut the clergy dread,- i' uaion,. whiich mituf have
ben eflablifhed on the 'ruins.of the church,. lIenry
Lad taken great pains to infuse into-his.nepkew his own
ftntimnnts concerning religion, ard had. trequeagtly fa-
licited him by an!batladors, to renoiuce tJe ulurped do-
nmiron of the pope, whch was .no less d;lhonoprable
to princes, than grievous to. their fubjeds. The clergy
had hitherto, with great address, diverted the. king
frosn reg-d7i.g thecfe fo!li:irtins. But, inan atics-

ble cdnference i enry expeced, and they feared that
James would'-ield to hlisentreaties, or be convinced
by his iagum'eits. They knew that the revenues of
thle .churcll were an alluring objet to a prince '.who
wanted money, and who loved it; that their pride aid
ambitioi. taifed'ihe Indignation of the nobles;. that
their iiidecent lives gave offence to the people;' that
the protestant opinions were spreading fast throughout
the nation; and that an universal defecion from the
eftabliihed. curch, would be the confeqeince .of giving
the smallest degree of encouragemrent to' these princs-
ples. For thele reasons, they emrployed all their credit
with the king; 'and had recourse to every artifice 'and
insinuation, in order to divert him from a journey,
whiehtnuft'have be'm fofatal to their'i terest. Tiey
endeavbired to inftire him with fear,'by' magnifying
the danger:- to bi:hh he wiibuldexpofe his person, by
venturing :so a.;r idto England, without' any fecurity.but
the wold'of i'prirtce,-who having violated every thing
venerable atnd faced in reilrgio1, was n.o .onger to be
i trusted; :and:by'way.of compenfatiun for thie rums

which'he might have received from Hen.ry; they offer-,
ed an annu ial n-ttive of fit't thoufahd crowns; they
pronlifed so cntiitbute iiberally to6wrds carying.on a
1 ar with England, and flattered him with the.profpet
of immense riches, arising from the forfeiture- of per-
funs who were to be tried anid conderned is heretics.
Influenred by these c6dnideiatiols, 'James broke his a-
greemeint with Henry, whd, in 'exieetatibn of meeting
hlim, had already come to York; 'nd that haughty and
impatient monarch, resented the affront, by detlaring
war against Scotland.' 'His arny was fooan ready to
invade the kingdom. JameS 'wan obliged to have .re-
course to the inobles, for the defence of his. dominions.
At hir eomnmand, they afelmbled their'followers; but
with' ihe f'ine 'dispositions which' animated their an-
ceftors in the reign of 'James III. and w ith a f6 'rei'6-
lution of irmitating their exianile, 1i . pu'rifniing'.tlofe
to whom they'imputed the gnevgaic's, of which they
had rcafon- to complain; and if the Kliig's mnifier5
Vol. 1.

Lad not been men of abilities, superior to those r,
Jzmes III. and of considerable interest even with their
enemies, who could not agree among themlfives wMliat
victims to f-cr;ice, the camp of Fala would have hebe
as remarkable as that of Lawder, for the daring 'en
croachments of the nhbles on the prerogative of ti.e
prince. But though his miniflers were laved by tlin
accident, the nobles had Ibon another opportunityv
difeovering to the king their difTatisfacinil with his c-
vernment, and their contelmpt cf his authority. Scar-
city of provifins, and the rigour of the featon havinl
cbliged the English army which had invaded Scrtlal,i
to retire, J.amet imagined that he could attack them,
-with great advantage, in their rctreat; bit the noble,
with an obflinacv and disdain, which greatly aggravan
ed their difnbediniice, refused to-advance a ftep beyon,
the limits cf their own country. Provoked by this in
fult to himfcif, and suspicious of a lnew con(piracy a
gainfi his miniflert, the king inflantly difianded an ar
mnv, which paid so little regard to his orders, and lie re
turned abruptly into the htart of the kinldonm.

An ambliicus and high-fpirited prince could nto

lbrook such a niorrifying afiront. His hopes of luctc:
Ehad been raih, and his despair upon a d;',ppointmr-il
was excefiive. lie felt hirn;lcf enmza'red in an nnnec.
farv war with England, which, ineliad of yielding hir
the laurels and triumphs that he expected, had beiir
with. such circumstances, as encouraged the infileni'e
of his fubjets, and exposed him to the scorn of h!-
enemies. lH tfai how \ain and inefi;,-anal all his pr,,
jccq's to humble the nobles had been, and -thnt, thot!h!l
in times of peace, . prince may endeavour to depit-i
them, rihev -ill rile, during war, to their former illu-
portr.ce and d;l nit:. Imypatiencc, rci:ntnent, inrl?!-
naticn, filled his bosom by turns. The violence ,i
tilefe pafions altered his temper, and, periraps, in,-
paired bhi rcaf.n. He beerme petfiv-e, l}ilen, and Ir
tired. Hie fccn:cd, through the day, to be swallow-!
up in profound meditationm and through the'night, Z.
aas disturbt.d wi:. t..ofe visionary terFurs v.hicl n;ai--

imnreflion upon a weak underfianding orly, or a di-f
rdered fancy. In order to revive the king's spirits, an
ijiroad on tile western borders was concerted by his mi-
nilters, who prevailed upon the barons in the neigh-
bouring provinces to raile as many troops as were
thouglit necefary, and to enter-the nermy's country.
4 But nothing could remove the king's avcrilon for his
nobility, or diminifi his jealousy of their power. He
w i/ould not even intrufl them with the command of the
forces which they had afrcinbled: that was relerved for
Oliver Siltclair his favourite, who no sooner appeared
to take pollilfion of the dignity conferred upon him,
than rage and indignation occasioned an universal muti-
inv in t-he arntny. Five hunh-ed Etiglifh, who happen-
el to be drawn up in fight, attacked the Scots in this
di!'oIlcr. latred to the king, and contempt of their
.c {neral produced an cffect, to wlhich there is no paral-
il in hiftorv. They overcamne the fear of death, and
tie lo.veof li'erty; and ten thousand men surrendered
(to a number ib far inferior, witlout 4Iliking a single
bIluw. lKo man was defirois of a vitory, whilch
would have been acceptable to the king and to his fa-
vourite; few endeavoured to lave themselves by flight;
the Englilh had the choice of what prisoners they pleas-
cd to take; almofl every perlbn of diftinftion, who was
engaged in the expedition, remained in their hands.
This aftonihinlg event was a new proof to the king of
the general difaiffeion a' the nobles, and a new disco-
very.of' iis wn-I l xeak.Sfs and wailt of authorit.y. In-
(apable of bearing thefr repeated inltilts, and ul;able to
revenge them, his spirit funk altogether. The deepest
nlelanclioly and despair luccceded to the furious tranf-
ports of rage and indignation, which the first account
ot.the rout of his army occtaiolicd. All the violent
pallitols, Whih are tlh enemies of life, preyed upon
his mind, and wafted and consumed a youtihtul and vi-
gorous conltitution. tione authors of that age imtpute
his untimely (leatil to poison; but die difealcs .of the
mind, w.hcl they. rife to an eicight, are often imortal;
ild tli.e known , Clets of dilappoiiitmint, rage, and in-

rS

dignation upon a sanguine and impetuous temper, fuffi.
ciently account for his unhappy fate. " His death
(fays Drunmond) proveth his mind to have been raised
to an high firain, and above mediocrity; he could die,
but could not digest a disaster." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things must have happen-
ed: either the violence of his temper would have en.
gaged him openly to attack the nobles, who would
have found in Henry a willing and ooweerful protector,
and have derived the fame aflifiance from him, which
the malcontents, in the succeeding rei.n, did from his
daughter Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war
would have been the certain consequence. Or, per-
haps, necessity might save obliged him to accept of
Henry's offers, and be reconciled to his nobles. In
that event, the church would have falfet a sacrifice to
their union, a reformation, upon Henry's plan, would
have been eftabliflhed by law, a great part of the tem.
poralities of the church would have been seized, and
the friendlhip of the hing and nobles cemented by di-
viding its spoils.

Such were the efforts of our kings, towards reduc-

ing the exorbitant power of the nobEes. If they were
not attended wiMh success, we muit not, for that reason,
conclude that they were not conduted with prudence.
Every circuaftance seems to have combined against the
crown. Accidental events concurred vwith political
causes, in rendering the best concerted measures abor-
tive. The assassination of one ling, the sudden death
of another, and the fatal despair of a third, contributed
no less than its own natural strength, to preserve the
aristocracy from ruin.

Amidst thee struggles, the influence whikh our kings

pofieffed in their parliament, is a circumstance seeming-
ly inexplicable, and which merits particular attention.
As these assemblies were composed chiefly of the no-
bles, they, we are apt to imagine, must have dictated
all their decisions; bur, inflead of this, every king
found them obsequious to his will, and obtained such
laws as he efieemed necessary for extending his author-

ty. All things were conduicd there with' dispatch
and unaninity;. and, in none of our historians, do we
find an inltance of any opposition formed againlt the
court in parliament, or mention of any difficulty in
l carrying through the measures which were agreeable ta
rii kinI. In order to accouit for this fingilar fat, it
:, neceadarv to il}nqire into the origim and conflitutioa
of parliament.

'lhe gehits of the feudal government, uniform in all

; nks operations, produced the fame effcfls in small, as in

great societies; and the territory of a baron was, in
i nminiature, the model of a kingdom. He pofrcffed the
right of jurifdilion, but those who depended on him,
being frce men, and not slaves, could be tried by their
peers only; and, therefore, his val'als were bound to
attend his courts, and to assist both in pafling and'e:-
idcting his sentences. When assembled, on these oc-
calions, they efiallifed, by mutual consent, such -regu-
::tions, as tended to the welfare of their froall society;
snd often granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their
fperi'tr as ilis necessities required. Change now a fin-
j gle-name: in place of baron, fubftiutte king, and we
j lrhold a parliament in its firit rudiments, and observe
Ith firfl exertions of those powers, which its members
now poufels as judges, as legislators, and as difpeniers
of the public revenues. Suitable to this idea are the
Iappellations of the K'ins Courti, and of the King's
(;Ieat Council, by which parliaments were anciently dif-
tinguithed ; and fititable to this, likewise, wnere the con-
ltituent menmbers of which it was composed. In all
the feudal kingdoms, those who held the king in cLief
V cere bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to aflift in his courts. Nor was this eftcemed a
privilege, but a service. It Was exa&ted likewile of bi-
'iops, abbots, and the greater ecclefialtics, who, hold-
ing vait poffefiions of the crown, were deemed fubjenc
to the lame burden. Parliaments did not continue
'big in this slate. Cities gradually acquired wealth ;,

Du Cange, voc. Curiae

F3

confiderahle share of the public taxes were levied or
them, the inhabitants grew into eftinmation, and: bein~
enfrancliifed by-the sovereign, a pface in parliamen
was the consequence of their liberty, and of their -im
portance. But as it wonld have been absurd to confe-
sinh a privilege, or to mnpofe such a burden on a whol;
com unity, every borough was permitted to chlule one
cr-two of its citizens to appear in the name of-the cor
poration;- and the idea of rerrirefctation was firfL intre
duced in thi3 manner. An innovatior still more imn
portant aturally followed. The vassals of the crowi
were originally few in nnmber, and extremely power
ful; hut as' it is -irpoffible to render property fixed
and permancnt, many of ther pofieflions came, gradu
ally, and by various methods of alienation, to be fpli
and parcelled out into different hands. Hence aro!
the diftinfioa between the greater and Irff)r baron.
The former were those who retained their original fief
undivided, the latter were the new and less potent vas
fals of the crown. Both were bound, however, to ptr
form all feudal services, ana, of consequence, to gir
attendance in parliament. To the lesser barons, wlh
fprmed no inconsiderable bod., this was an intakorabl
grievance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure, bo
roughs renounced their right of eleaing, charters wer
obtained contaiining an exemption from attendance, and
the anxiety, with which omrr anceflors endeavoured td
get free from the obligation.of fitting in parliamer:
is furpafied by that only, with which their posterity Il
licit to be admitted there. In order to accommodae
both parties, and, at once, to secure to the ling a l'ui
ficient numlir of members in his great council, and t
save his vass front an unnecessary burden, an easy ex
pedient was found out. The obligation to personal ai
tendance was continued upon the greater barons, fror
which the lesser barons were exempted, on condition C
their elec&ing, in each county, a certain number of r
prtf/eat'ivr, to appear in their name. -Thus a parlil
-meirt became complete in all its membersm and wa
ipmpofedof lords lpiritual and temporal, of knights c

the shires, and of burgesses. As many causes contri-
buted to bring government earlier to perfection in
England than in Scotland, as the rigour of the feudal
inftitutiorfs abated sooner; and its defects were sup-
plied with greater facility in the one kingdotn, than in
the other: England led the way in all these changes,
and burgeftes and knights of the ihire appeared in the
parliaments of that nation, before they were heard of
in ourA. B!rgeffes were first admitted into the Scot-
tifh parliarments by Robert Brace', and i* the pream-
ble to the laws of Robert Ill. they are ranked among
the conftitnent members of that assembly, The lesser
barons were indebted to James I. for a ftIute exempt-
ing them from perlbnal 2ttendance, and permitting
them to eleCt representatives; the exemption was eagei--
ly laid hold on, but the privilege was so little valued.
that, except one or two instances, it lay negledted dur-
ing one hundred and sixty years, and James VI. firfL
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to par-
iameett.

A Scottish parliament, then, consisted anciently of

great barons, of ecclefiafiics, and a few repreefntativ.e
of boroughs. Nor were these divided, aq in England,
into two houses, but composed one assembly, in which
the lord chancellor prefidedt. And in rude ages, when

Abercromby, i. 635.

t Essays on Brit. Anti E. E II. Dalrymp. Hft. of

Feud. Prop. ch. 8.

t In England, the peers and commons seem early to

have met in separate houses; and James 1. who was fond
of imitating the English in all their cqtoms, had pro-
bably an intention of introducing foiW considerable
dintinEion between the greater and lesser barons in
Scotland; at least he determined that their confulta-
tions lhould not be carried on under the direction of
the fame president; for, by his law, A.D. 1427, it is
provided, " that out of the commiifloners of all the
ihires shall be chosen a wife and expert man, called the
common speaker of the parliament, who shall propote

the science of government was extremely imperfel,
among a martial people, unacquainted with the arts of
peace, strangers to the talents which make a figure in
debate, and despising them, parliaments were not iheld
in the fame eflimation as at present;' nor did haughty
ar'ons love those courts in which they appeared with
filch evident marks o;f inferiority. Parliaments were
otften haftiil affierh!ed, and it was, probably, in the
king's powoer, by the manner in which lie issued his
writs for that purofe, to exclude those who were a-
verse from his measures. At a time when deeds of vio-
lence were common, and the refiraints of law and
decency were little regarded, no man could venture
with titfety to oppose the king in his own court. The
great barons, or lords of parliament, were extremely
iew-; even so late as the beginning of James Vl's.
rei-ns, they amounted only to fifty-three. The ec-
(leiaftirs equalled them in number, and being devoted
implicitly to the crown, for reasons which have been
already explained, rendered all hopes of vit6ore in any
firuggle desperate. Nor were the nobles themfelvcs so
anxious as might be imagined, to prevent afts of par-
liament favourable to the royal prerogative; conscious
of their onwn flrength, and of the king's inability to
carry these aes into execution without their concur-
rence, they trusted either to elude, or to contemn them;
and the statute revoking the king's property,- and an-
e:xin r aiiena:ed juriffiinions to the crown, repeated in
reery reigni, and violated and despised: as often, is a
tanding proof of the impotence of laws, when op-
posed to power. So many concurring causes are sus-
ficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendence which
our kings acquired in parliament. But without hav-

all and sundry needs and causes pertaining to the com-
mons in the parliament or general council." No such
speaker, it *ould seem, was ever chosen; and, by a
iibfcquent law, the chancellor was declared perpet'al
president in parliament.

e.d. Co!. VL i. pref. 40,

ing reeonrfe to arty of these, a single circr.flance, pe-
culiar to the contitution of the Scottish parliament, the
mentioning of which we have hitherto avoided, will
abundantly explain this fad, seemingly so repugnant to
all our reasonings concerning the weakness of the kings
and the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enables us to trace the

confiitntion of our parliaments, we ind a committee,
diflinguifhed by the name of Lords of Articles. It was
their business to prepare and to digest all matters which
were to be laId before the parliament; every motion
for a new law was firtt made there, and approved or
rejected by them at pleasure; what they approved, was
formed into a bill, and presented to parliament; what
they rejefted, could not be introduced into the hoiue.
This committee owed the extraordinary powers veited
i h it, to the military genius of the ancient nobles; too
impatient to submit to the drudgery of civil business,
too impetuous to observe the forms, or to enter into the
details necessary in conducting it, they were glad to lay
that burden upon a small number, while they them-
selves had no other labour than gnply to give or to re-
fuse their fanAtion to the bills which were presented to
thern. The lords of articles, then, not only dired-
ed the whole proceedings of parliament, but poffffed
a negative before debate. That committee was cholent
and conltituted in such a manner, as put this valuable
privilege entirely in the king's hands. It is extremely
probable, that the king once had the sole right of no-
minating the lords of articlest. They came after-

t It appears, from authentic records, that a parlia.

ment was appointed to be held, March 12, 1S66, and
that the lords of articles were chosen, and met on the
7th, five days before the assembling of parliament. If
they could be regularly eleced so long before the meet-
ing of parliament, it is natural to conclude, that the
prince alone possessed the right of electing them There
are two different accounts of the manner of their elec-
tion at that time, one by Mary hesftlf, in a letter to

wxards to be elected by the parliament, and consisted of
an equal numher out of eat h estate, and most common-
Iv of eight temporal and eight spiritual lords, of eight
representatives of hororghs, and of the eight great
officers of the crown. -Of this body, the eight ecclefi-
aflics, together with the officers of the crown, were en-
tirely at the king's dev-otio, and it was-fcarce possible
that .th droe c ouk fall on tuch temporal lords antd
burgeffcs.as would unite in oppotition to his measures.
Capable either of irdtluncing their ele-tion, or gaining
them when cleted, the king commonly found the
lords of arricles no less obfcquious to his will; than
his own pri-y council, and by means of his authority
with them, he could put a negative upon his parliament
before debate, as well as after it; and what may feern
altogether incredible, the most limited prince in Europe
.dually possessld, in one hiftancc, a prerogative whichi
the molt ablblute could never attain '.

the archbishop of Glasgow, " We, accompanied with
our nobility, for the time, past to the tolhuith of Edin-
,urg'h, for 4holding of our parliament on the 7th day of
this instant, and elteed the lords articulars." If we
explain these words, according to ftrit grammar, we
mutl conclude, that the Queen herself elected theni.
It is however, more probable, that Mary meant to fay,
that the nobles the-n present ith her, viz. her privy
counsellors, and others eleAed the lords of articles,
Keith's Hist. of Scotland, p. 33I. The other account
is lord Ruthven's, who expressly affirms that the queen
herfilf elected them. Keith's Append. 126. Whether
w-e embrace the one or the other of these opinions, is
of 1o consequence. If the privy counsellors and no-
iles attending the court had a right to eLkAt the lords
of articles, it was equally advantageous for the crown,
ns if the prince had had the gile nomination of theln

* Having deduced the hiltory of the committee. of

lords of articles, as low as the subject of this prelimniia-
rv hook required, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to olime
ceaacrs, to know the iubftequcnt :;ariations in this illwg-

To this account of the internal conflitution of Scot-

land, it will not be improper to add a view of the poli-
tical slate of Enrope at that period, where the follow.-
ing hillory conmmences. A tilroutgh knowledge of that
general f'ftem, of which every kingdomi in Europe

.tar institution, and the political ufc which our kinlg,
made of thefc. WVheln parlianments became nmore nl-
merous, and more considerable by the adliilhon oif l!t
reprelentatives of the leirer barons, lth pirtervlimg thlei-
influence over the lords of articles, ihkl!-il. becamre an
olbjct of greater importance to our kingo. Jamciy V1.
om pcilce, that the lorid! of arti, ies could Inot fi.d 'i-
j fre to confider the great multitude of' aflhi-is !aiti b('lire
them, obtained- n ac), .-,ipointitn ti 'r pirl;:., to hi,.
named.out of each Esl'Ai-., \ho1 I]:(,ul:l Ime! t:,-.ni,-
days before the comlellncernipt o; p: lianl(t :: , Ir rc-
reive all fipplications, &a. and rei-Jtii;i wl;l;t tl; *'
thlought fi-ivolous, fl;ouli eng:;-' ill a l)k \ i:t i: t
thlough't worthy the attenion ,i ti:e l:', or ci' :-:i. i..
No prt -iiln is made in lhe atct i'o' tc i t e ; j:..,
fclet bodv, and the kini; would, o( corli' i. ,:.!vi !;i!,.-
edl that privilege. Ia 6; , wilc Ct,! ii I. l\a'

hó 3i-

sing to introduce thoit ililova;uO:s wlt.iii ::.v, ' 'i,.uci:
offence to the nation, lie dreadltd tih: i;:pilitli:l o( Ii-
parliament, and in order to prtv< nt thlat, 'in artiftl . . .s
lmade uiii of to secure the lord.' ui artices for tlhc crown.
' he temporal peers were appointed to clntle Cr;:ht b-
Ihops, and'the bishops eight peers; thel lix'ccn r.0t 1it-
tgether, and eleted eight kniiditb of tie fiire, and1 t ig':
Iturgcflt:s, and to these the crown officers were a(iddi
as usual. If we can only ibippole tish!t ptrl. ns if 'l
iumerousis a body, as the pelers of t'otialil were ibcco!;nc
hs that time, attached to the court, thele it i; olvioii,,
vwoull be the men whom tile biflps woulld cliu-i, al('
if rconfcquence, the whole lords ot articles were the tooul.
andl creatures of the king. This pratie i, io inconllfit-
tut with liberty, was aboliflhed du;'i::g the tivii' war; ani.

t ,9 a L. P. 5.94.-

forms a part, is nat less requisite towards underfianding
the history of a ation, than an acquaintance with its
peculiar governm mt and. ws. The latter may ena-
ble us to compreh end domeflic occurrences and ;evolu-
tions, but without the fo-mer, foreign transaCtions must
be altogether myflerious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark paflages in our )ilftry may be
placed in a clear ligt-: and where the bulk of hiftori-
ans have seen only dre effcd, we may be able to dif:o-
ver the cause..

The subversion of the feudal government in France,

and its declension in the neighbouring kingdoms, occa-
sioned a remarkable lteration in the politicatflate of
Europe. Kingdoms, which were inconsiderable when
broken, and parcelled out among nobles, acquired firm-
ness and firslgth, by being united into a regular u~o:ar-
-by. Kings became con!cious of their own power and
importance. They meditated schemes ofconqueft, and
rngaged in wars at a diflance.- Ntwerous armies were
raised, and great taxes inipofed for their fubfiflence.
Coufidcrable bodies of infantry were kept in conitant
pay; that service grew to be honourable; and cavalry,
in which the strength of European armies had hitherto
ronfifted, though proper enough forthe short and vo-
luntrrv e"curfions of nobles who served at their own

fie fiatute of James VI. was repaled. After the Re-
fioration, parliamen:s became more servile than ever.
W^at was only a temporary device, in the reign of
.l1arles I. was, then, converted into a ianding law.
"For ry part," (ays the author from whom I have
porrowed many of these particulars, " I lhould have
*' thought it less criminal in our Reftoration.parliament,
' to have openly beflowed upon the king a negative be-
" fore debate, than in such an underha:dartificial man-
" ner, to betray their conftitaents, and the nation" Es-
fayson Brit. Antiq. 5. It is probable, however, from
a letter of Randolph's to Cecil, loth Aug. t56o, tliat
this parliament had some appearance of an ancient p; (-
,cdnt to juify their unworthy condus.

ea.penceiswere found to be unfit either for making, or
defending-any important conquest.

It was in Italy that the powerful monarchs of France

and Spain-and Germany first appeared to make a trial
of.theirown. strength. Thedivifion of that country in-
to so many frmall fates, the luxury of the people, ind

' their effeminate aversion for war, invited their more

martial neighbours to an easy prey. The Italians, who

-i had been accuftomed-to mock battles only, and to de-

cide their quarrels by innocent and bloodless vicRories,
were aftonlfhed at the fight of real war; and as they
could not refilthe torrent, they suffered it to take its
courle, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy sup-
plied the want of itrength; and neceffitv and 'eif-pre-
ltrvation taught that ingenious people the great secret
of modern politics, anLd hesred them howv to balance
the powetrof one- prince, by throwing that of another
intto rheoppofite scale. By this happy device, the liber-
ty of Italy-waslong preserved. The Icales were poised
i;y very i;lilful bands; the fmalle -variations were at-
tended to, and no prince was allowed to retain any fu-
perioritv, tlat could be dangerous.

A fvlcnm of condon, pursued with so much success
in Italy was iot.long confined to that country of politi-
cal refinement.' The maxim of prelerving a halaitce of
power is iounded so much upon obvious reasoning, and
the fiuation of Europe rendered it so necessary, that it
loon became a matter of chief attention to all wf-i poli-
ticilns. Evetry ftep.any prince took was observed by
all his neighbours. Ambalfadors, a kind of honourable
Ipics, authorised by the mutual jcalouly of kings, refid-
ed a'nmot constantly at everv differe.t court, and 'had it
in charge o watch:allits motions. Dangers were fore-
seen at agreater;diftance, and prevented with mbrne earc.
Cotfedtlnaiesli vere.fonned to humble any p6wer'c(lrich
roe- a Sove its due proportion. - Revenge or It'tlfdefen'e
wrre no longer the& only caifes of hottilitv,-'it behatne"'
:ciimon to taltkearms out-of policy; and war, both' in

c: c;nmDencement, anl n i ts pera'rtiis, 'xwas moe- u'i"

.:c'"le of the judgmnrt, than of- the passions of me'n.
V\>. G

Am!nfit every war in Europe became general, and tl.:
mofi inconfiderahle states acquired importance, becaulf
tlhey could add weight to either fiale

Francis I. who mounted the throne of France in tl.e

year iS11, and Charles V. -ho obtained the Imper;.i
crown in the vcar iS19, divided betweenn them the
strength and affections of all Europe. Their perpe-
tual enmity was not owing either to pcrfoual jcaloul\,
or to the caprice of private pafion, but was folunded ii,
much in nature and true policy, that it fuiiited be-
twX-en their pofitrity for k-veral ages; and, notwitl-
ltandirg their present accidental and unnatural union,
mufl again revive. Chal lzs fuccecdcd to all the deoii-
nicns of the house of Auiria. No family liad ever gain-
ed so much by wife and fortunate marriages. By a;-
quifitions of this kind the Auflrian princes rose, in a
ihort time, from ohfcure Counts of I-lapfbourg, to l.
archdukes of Airfria, and kings of Bohemia, and were
in poficflion of the Imperial diguity !v a fiort of htrc(li-
tary right. Besides thele territories in Germany, Charlce
was heir to the crown of SDain, and to all the do.
minions which btlonged to the liouie of Burgun(y.
The Burgundian provinces engrrflicd, at that time, tlI:
riches and commerce of one half of Europe; and c
drew from them, on many occasions, those iiminelC
iums, vhich no people without trade and liberty are a-
ble to contribute. Spain furnished him a gallant adal
hardy infantry, to whose discipline le was indhelted i(;'
all his conquefis. And at the flame time, by the difeu-
very of the new world, a. vein of wealh was opened :,
linl, which all t he extravagance of anbition could not c x-
hauft. These advantages rendered Charles the first pri;.c:
in Enroge; but he m ihed to be more, and openly ali)i:-
ed to universal monarchy. His genius was of that
kind which ripens flowl-, and lies long conceal d; h!ut
it grew up w iti. uti ohleration, to an unexpected heii:l;!
aind vigour. l t pIffeffed, in an eminent degree, tl:
il.-arat- riflic vrtucs ofall.the different races oti ptrini :
t.- hcio he was allied. In forming his ichenile, lie
,.t!;-e ere.d all the subtilty and penetration of Ferdi::ar.i

}his grand-father; he pult'ued them with that obftlilnte
rnd inflexible perl'ecraince which has ev,-r been
pecuuliarto the Austrian blood; and in executing thtni
hie could employ the magnanimity and boldneli of his
Burgundian ancestors. His abilities were equal to his
power, and neither of them would have been inferior
to his designs, had not providence, in pity to mankind,
and in order to preserve them fi-om the worst of all evils,
universal monarchy, raised up Francis 1. to delend the
liberty of Europe. His dominions were lels extensive,
but more united than the emperor's. His f'ulbjtis were
numerous, adtive and warlike, lovers of glors, and
lovers of their king. To Charles power was the only
oljecl of desire, and he pursued it with an unweaie
and joyless industry. Francis cnuld mingle pleafil:
ap.i elegance with his ambition, and though he neg!: t-
A! !o:le advantages, which a more pillegmalic or ino:'
tiugal prince would have improved, an active andm in-
trepid courage supplied all his defec's, and checked or
defeated many of the emperor's deflrns.

The reft of Europe observed all the motin'ls of the!;'

mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On the one
lide, the Italians ltw the danger whitch tlihrc:itueii
Chliflendom, and in order to avert it had retourll'e t
the expedient, ~which they had often emploved with
success. They endeavouredc to divide the p oiw;-r of the
two contending monarchs into equal liales, aud hby tt!l
union of leveral imall Itates, to couinterpoib hlinl, w holl'.
power became too great. But what they clcer'.d
with much wisdom, they were able to executr with lit-
tle vigour; and intrigue and refin-.ient were feeble
fences against the encroachmients of militaly power

On the other fide, Ilenry VIII. of England held! the

balance with less delicacy, but with a Ittonger hand.
lie was the third prince of the age in dignity And in
power; and the advantageous situation of his domini-
ons, his domestic tranquillity his immense wealth and
absolute authority rendered him the natural guardian of
the liberty of Europe. Each of the rivals courted him
with emulation; he knew it to be his interclt to keep

G a

the balance even, and to restrain both, by not joining
entirely with either of them. But he was seldom able
to reduce his ideas to prac.ice; he was governed by ca-
price more than by principle; and the pafions of tlc
man were an overmatch for the maxims of the king.
Vanity and resentment were the great springs of all hi,
undertakings, and his neighbours easily found the way,
by touching these, to force him upon many rash and in-
confifent enterprises. His reign was a perpetual ferics or
blunders in politics, and while he efleemed himself the
v-ifeft prince in Europe, he was a conflant dupe to thole
-who found it necessary, and could submit to flatter
him.

In this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had li-

therto wafted her strength in the quarrels between
France and England, emerged from her obscurity, took
her station in the system, and began to have some influ-
ence upon the fate of distant nations. Her assistance
a-as frequently of consequence to the contending par-
ties, and the balance was often so nicely adjusted, that
it was in her power to make it lean to either fide The
part assigned her was to divert Henry from carrying his
arms into the continent. That prince, having routed
the French at Guinegat, and invested Terouenne,
Francis attempted to divide his forces, by engaging
JamesIV. in that unhappy expedition which ended with
his life. For the fame reason, Francis assisted and en-
couraged the duke of Albany to ruin the families o'
Angus and Home, which were in the interest oI
England, and would willingly have persuaded tl:e
Scots to revenge the death of their king, and to enter
into a new war with that kingdom. Henry and Fran-
cis having united not long after against the emperor, it
was the interest of both kings, that the Scots fliould con-
tinue inactive; and a long tranquillity was the effect oi
their union. Charles endeavoured to break this, ant! to
embarrass Henry by another inroad of the Scots. feu
this end, he made great advances to James V. flattering
the vanity of the young monarch by electing hinm
knight of the golden fleece, and by offering him a marth

' in the Imperial family; and in return for there empty
' honours, he demanded of him to renounce his alli.anu

with France, and to declare war againll England. BHi
James, who had much to lose, and who could gain little
by embracing the emperor's proposals, rejeAled themi
with decency, and keeping firm to his ancient allie',
left Henry at full liberty to aic upon the continent with
his whole strength.

Henry himfeif began his reign, by imitating the ex-

ample of his ancestors with regard to Scotland. Iic
held its power in such extreme contempt, that he was
at no pains to gain its tricndthip; but on the contrary,
he irritated the whole nation, by reviving the antiquat-
ed pretensions of the crown of England to the foivereign-
ty over Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex-
ample of his enenmics, gave him an higher idea of its
importance. It was impossible to defend an open andl
extensive frontier, against the inc:lrfions of an a'tive and
niartial people. During any waron the contii;,.t, tl.;
obliged him to divide the llrength of his kin. 'o! i. It:
was neccifary to m aintain a kind of arnm of ;lfcrvatiot
in the north of England; and after all precalitio;ns, the
Scottish borderers, who were luperior to all mankindi i:t
thlil pradice of irregular war, often made hic.-i.fl! iu-
rtoal,, and fpreadl terror and d(lblation over man omil-
tics. He fell, at last, upon the true ftcret of po'!\,
with refpecr to Scotland, wlicih his p:-edec(ri-s hlad :.u
little penetration to diio-over, or too rnimucl pride to iln-
ploy. The situation of the country, and the bravci v ui
the people made the conquest of Scotland iiiipoifil'd:
but the national poverty, and the violence ut J.'a!ion
rendered it an easy matter to divide and to ?vitiil it.
I l alanduoned, theretfore, the former i lii. i, anl l.lv-
t I to elmploy the utrn:oft addrf:l in Cexe itiillg rhe latter.
It had nut xct become hotnouraLle f,,r ount pince to re-
rice pay fronm another, llidcr the mnJr d.ccit tlaltic
i a flibfidy. But, i all a ag-, tie lime argulents Lhave
l.ccn ,id ill court, alnd of weci lit with inlilifters, sac-

.::U,- }tI IC, 's. atl t.sio tlit .s. \ ]li;it t -,'c- tli.c :I!';u titsll
o:' :., iz.'! .lltnv LL'n:L:l;r uver lb n..' to h. iitentl

(G

during the minority of James V. we knowu by the ori-
ginal warrants for r mitting considerable linis into Scot-
land, which are fiiil extantt. By a proper (iftributiort
of these, many pcrfons of note were gained to his pa.
ty, and a faction which held secret correfpoi.dence wi:;h
England, and received all its directions from then;,
appears henceforward in all our domeflic contcfts. Ir
the sequel of the hiforv, we fiall find Henry labourin
to extend his influence in Scotland. His fuccefbors ;-
dopted the fame plan, and improved upon it. The at-
fairs of the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
intcrefts were often the fame. Elizabeth divided he:
attention almost equally between them, and the autho-
rity which she inherited in the one, was not great;,
than that which she acquired in the other.

Burn. Hlft. Ref. v. i. p. -.

>:' )

''
r Jt'^MM.V

s^y%1

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK SECOND. CONTENTS. Birth of Queen Mary. State of Scotland. Earl of Arran Regent. Schemes of Henry VIII. State of Parties. Persecution of the Reformers. Invasion of Scotlan ...

T E

7 H I S T O R Y

i HISTORY
ij~ ~O F

SCOTLAND.

BOOK SECOND.

CONTENTS.

i; ', of a^n Arv. Stae of

Se oftand. Fr--! of Arran

ReIr, t. S.rm' vj Htenry I1"UI. State cf .l-, r:i. Per-
/:.ttion of the Reformeri. I. Jo,,'n ofc Sctlna':. .'1 Peace.
'rl,e murtder f Bfatour.. NA'cv reach 7wit.b lE'^llt. Bat-
;/- o Pinlry. frearty i'lith FtfN, Peace conclvtJ. ueen.
l) .v,,er RK'ent. Proo,,JfJs fthe ?,./,rmut:on. I, c::,.jf.

fal,'rarge of 9uCNeen Iary ,.':h the Daluphin. £!,xz, bld'.
Pl rfecutson of tbe Rformed. Cri'ond f cf thce 1e'n Ne>,l,.
11.r s-otd. nrnfur'retftn at Perth, A sI efy c'.n.lud'd,.
A second rupture. Afecotid treat made and mioi,,lte. Suce
rrl/ f the Protefl,:,nii. A third Iruaty. Ai.,,/icrn rJ rancis
iJ. 'Tr,ops arrive from France. ProtyJLnlt tSae arm..
I1,prive trhe ., een Rheget of autho,iiy.

,V'.IRY nueea of Scots was born a few da;'s l' fore the
i;.:i of hei father James V. The [itL.ation in whih
i,c left the kingdom alarnmle all ranks of mtin a ith the
,ro.rpeCt of a turbulent and dialhfllous rei!gn. A war a-
,7iinlt EnFlanrl ha'd been undcr:aken witbinut iccefllity,
and! carried on withlout liluce!e. Many peroubns of the
i:'lt rank had fail'n into the bands of the English, in
:ile uifortunate rrut nea- tell frith of Solwaa and were

,:il priboneros jt l.oundon. A nong th rcfl ouf thi noblis
. .:r ta ..s lie t. ulinl, ith: In their vi'. .. Jr in trhei.

affeclions; and the religious disputes, occasioned by the
opinions of the reformers, growing every day more
violent, added to the rage of those factions which are
natural to a form of government nearly ariftocratical.

The governmefit of a queeh was Unknown in Scot-

land, and did not imprint rduch reverence in the minds
of a martial people. The government of an infant
queen was fill more destitute of real authority; and
the profpeft of a long and feeble minority invited to
faction, by the hope of impunity. James had not even
provided the common remedy against the disorders of
a minority, by committing to proper persons the care
of his daughter's education, and the administration of
affairs in her name. Though he saw the clouds ga-
thering, and foretold that they Would quickly burfi in-
to a form, he was so little able to disperse them, or to
defend his daughter and kingdom against these immi-
nent calamities, that, in mere despair, he abandoned
them both to the mercy of fortune, and left open to
every pretender, the office of regent, which he could
not fix to his own fatisfacion.

Cardinal Beatoun, who had for many years been co:-

fidered as prime minister, was the firfit who claimed th.:
high dignity; and, in support of his pretensions, t:
produced a testament#, which he himself had forg:d
in the name of the late king; and, without any other
right, instantly affilmed the title of regent. He hoped,
Ity the affiflance of the clergy, the countenance ot
France, the connivance of the queen dowager, and the
support of the whole popish faction, to hold by force,
what he had seized on by fraud. But Beatoun had
enjoyed power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Those among the nobles who wished for a reforma-
tion in religion dreaded his severity, and others conli-
dered the elevation of a churchman to the highest of-
fice of the kingdom as a depreflion of themselves. At
their intligation, Jarnes Hamilton, earl of Arran, anl
next heir to the queen, routed himself from his ilu. -

* Sadler's Lett. I6x.

tivitv, and was prevailed on to aspire to that flation,
to ~which proximity of blood, and the practice of the
kingdom gave him an undoubted title. The robles,
1 who were afiTinblcd for that purpose, unanimoulflv con-
fIrred on him the office of regent; and the pub.ic voice
applauded their choice.

No t o men diiTcred more widely in difpofiticn and

; character, than the earl of Arran and cardinal B, touin.
i he cardinal was by nature of immoderate amlition;
j by long experience lie had acquired address and rLfine-
i nient; and inlblence grew upon him by continual fuc-

cess. His high station in the church placed him in the

.' way of great employments; his abilities were equal to

the greatest of these; nor did he reckon any of them

i to be above his merit. As his own eminence was found-
t.d upon the power of the church of Rome, he was a
zealous defender of that fupcrflition, and for the fame
reason an avowed enemy to the dotrine of the reform-
: ers. Political motives alone determined him to sup-

port the one, or to oppose the other, IHis early appli-
cation to public business kept him unacquainted with
the learning and controversies of the age; he gave
judgment, however, upon all the points in dispute, with
a precipitancy, violence, and rigour, which cotempora-
ry hiflorians mention with indignation.

The charater of the earl of Arran was, in almost

every thing, the reverse of the cardinal. He was neither
infected with ambition, nor inclined to cruelty: the
love of ease extinguished the former, the gentleness of
l]is temper prefTrved him fiom the latter. Timidity
and irrelblutior were his predominant failings; the one
occasioned by his natural conflitution, and the other
arising from a consciousness that his abilities were not
equal to his station. With there dispositions he might
have enjoyed and adorned private life; but his public
oondudt was without courage, or dignity, or consist-
ence. The perpetual save of his own fears, and, by
consequence, the perpetual tool of those, who found
their advantage in prafliling upon them. But as no
other person could be let in oppolition to the cardinal,

with any prohability of success, the nation declared in
his favour with so general a conoent, that the artifices of
his rival could not withstand its united fireneth.

The earl of Arran had scarce taken poffreilon of his

new dignity, when a negociation was opened with
England, which gave birth to events of the most fatal
consequence to himself and to the kingdom. After the
death of James, Henry VIII. was no longer afraid o.
any interruption from Scotland to his designs agaiilf
France; and immediately conceived hopes of renderiii
this security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward, hi;
only son, w.ith the young queen of Scots. He commu-
nicated his intention to the prisoners taken at Solwav,
and prevailed on them to favour it, by the promise of
liberty, as the reward of their success. In the mean
time, he permitted them to return into Scotland, tiat,
by their presence in the parliament which the regent
had called, they might be the Letter able to persuade
their countrymen to fall in with his proposals. A
cause, intruded to such able and zealous advocates, could!
not well miss of coming to an happy iftue. All tho!r
;-ho feared the cardinal, or who desired a change in re-
ligion, were fond of an alliance, which afforded pro-
tection to the doctrine which they had embraced, as
well as to their own persons, against the rage of that
powerful and hauglty prelate.

But Henry's rough and impatient temper was inca-

pable of improving this favourable conjuncture. Ad-
dress and delicacy in managing the fears, and follies,
and interests of men, were arts with which he was ut-
terly unacquainted. The deligns he had formed upon
Scotland were obvious from the marriage which he had
proposed, and he had not dexterity enough to disguise,
or to conceal them. Instead of yielding to the fear or
jealousy of the Scots, what time and accidents would
soon have enabled him to recover, he at once alarmed
and irritated the whole nation, by demanding that the
queen's person should be immediately committed to
his custody, and that the government of the kingdom
should be put into his hands during her minority.

Ilenrv couhl not have prescribed more ignominious

conditions to a conquered people, and it is no wonder

- they were rejected with indignation, by men who
ti tcointid to purchase an alliance with England at the

price of their own liberty. The parliament of Scot-
land, however, intluenced by the nobles who returned
. from Entgland, desirous of peace with that kingdom,
and delivered, by the regent's confining the cardinal as
a i riolbier, from any opposition to which he might have
given rife, confepted to a treaty of marriage and of
. liiiR, hut upon somewhat of a more equal footing.
Altl '.:ter some dark and unfuccelsful intrigues, by
,hli h his anibaffador endeavoured to carry off the
\oJ ung queen and cardinal Beatoun into England, Hen-
! rv as obliged to give up his own propolals, and to ac-
- rpt of theirs. On his fide, he consented that the
querll should continue to reside in Scotland, and him-
icf remain excluded from any share in the government
,i the kingdom. On the other hand, the Scots agreed
to liend their sovereign into England so soon as Ille
attaited the full age of ten years, and inflantly to de-
ll;crw fix persons, of the first rank, to be kept as hof-
tagrs by lHenry till the queen's arrival at his court.
1 lTe treaty was fill lb manifestly of advantage to
Eigland, that the regent loll much of the public con-
fidence by conlenting to it. The cardinal, who had
now recovered liberty, watched for such an opportunity
of regaiinig credit, and he did not fail to cultivate and
ilpro;ve thlis to the utmost. He complained loudly,
tlLat the regent had betrayed the kingdom to its molt
i:Jctcrate enemies, and sacrificed its honour to his own
amnbition. He foretold the extintRion of the true ca-
tholic religion, under the tyannny of an excommuni-
catic heretic; but above all, he lamented to fee an
anci nt kingdom conernting to its own slavery, de-
li'cillig into the ignominious station of a dependent
pru\iirce; and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery
of a single man surrendering every thing, for which
t!lh Scottish nation had Iihi-ggled and fought during lo
,n v;. ts. Thelt rcLirinif!l..nces of the cardinal were

not without effect. They were addrefTed to piejudices
and passions which are deeply rooted in the human
heart. The fame hatred to the ancient enemies of
their country, the fame jealousy of national honour,
and pride of independence, which, at the beginning if
the present century, went near to prevent the Scots
from consenting to an union with England, upon terms
of great advantage, did, at that time, induce the whole
nation to declare against the alliance which had Ihten
concluded. In the one period, an hundred and fifty
years of peace between the two nations, the habit of
being fohjederd to the fame king, and governed by tile
fame maxims, had confiderahly abated old animfi'lics,
and prepared both people for incorporating. In tlh
other, injuries were still fiefh, and the wound!s on both
fides poen; and, in the warmth of resentment, it s::s
natural to seek revenge, and to be avcrlf from rec.l-
cilement. At the union, in 1707, the wisdom of p.'-
liament despised the groundless murmurs occasioned b\
antiquated prejudices; but in 1543 the complaints uo
the nation were better founded, and urged with a zeal
and unanimity which it is neither jufl nor safe to diif-
regard. The rage of the people rose to fitch a heighlt,
that the English ambaffdor could hardly be protecled
from their infuits. The clergy contributed a great
fi:m towards pref.rviing the churi h from the dominion
ot a prirce, xvl,ote lvftem of reformatilo was so fat:ll
t.j their power. The nobles, after haviig mortified tli
cardinal so lately, in such a cruel manner, were lno.'
ready to applaud and to lecond him, as the defender or
ti}e honour and liberty of his country.

Argvie, Huntly, Bothwell, and other powerfiul l-

rnns, openly declared againfi the alliance with Englalil!.
By their aftiftancc, the cardinal fi;.ived on the pcrl!si
o0 the young queen and her motl:,r, and added to lii
T artv the plen(inur and authcrity of the royal namte
.; rtiieivvrd, at tile fame time, a micre real acccfniun :

' Kiei:h'i ilil of S.ot. 30.

his strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart, earl
of Lennox, whose return from France he had earnuet-
ly Solicited. This young nobleman was the hereditary
enemy to the hoife of Hlamilton. lie had many
claims upon the regent, and pretended a right to ex-
clude him, not only from fuiceeding to the crown, but
to deprive him of the poffeflion of his private fortune.
The cardinal flattered his vanity with the profped of

i marrying the queen dowager, and affedld to treat
I him with so much tudied respect, that the regent be-
: came jealous of him as a rival in power.

This suspicion was artfully heightened by the abbot

of Paisley, who returned into Scotland some time li.-

' fore the earl of Lennox, and iacted in concert with the

cardinal. He was a natural brother of the regent, with
whom he had great credit; a warm partizan of France,
and a zealous defender of the ellablifhed religion. He
took hold of the regent by the proper handle, and en-
deiavoured to bring about a change in his sentiments by
. working upon his fears. The desertion of the nobili-
tv, the difaffeition of the clergy, and the rage of the
people, the resentment of France, the power of the
cardinal, and the pretensions of Lennox, were all re-
presented with aggravation, and with their moil threat-
cuing afpeil.

Meanwhile, the day appointed for the ratification of

the. treaty with England, and the deliver) of the hotl
'tes, approached, and the regent was rill undeter-
min;ed in his own mind. He aAed to the lati with
that irresolution and inconfiflence which is peculiar to
weak men when they are so unfortunate as to have the
ftiief part in the conduct of d(fiiutll!t afbirl. (n tie
2sth of August he ratified the treaty with I .ci:' )t, 1and
proclaimed the cardinal, who rilll contliumlel to oppiofe
it, an enemv to his country. On the 3d of Sciptcm-
ber, he lecretly withdrew -onlm Elillhurghl, met withl
the cardinal at Callendar, ren:otnced the friendship oi
In.gland, and declared for the intcrefts of France".

+ Rymer, Fced. xv. . 4. * Sadlcr. 3-9. 3 -':
Vo. I. 1i

Henry, in order to gain the regent, had not spared

the most magnificent promise3. He had offered to give
the princess Elizabeth in marriage to his eldest son, and
to confritute him king of that part of Scotland, which
lies beyond the river Forth. But upon finding his in-
terest in the kingdom to be less considerable than he had
imagined, the English monarch began to treat him with
little refpet. The young queen was now in the culS
tody of his enemies, who grew every day more nume-
rous and more popular. They formed a separate court
at Stirling, and threatened to elect another regent. The
French king was ready to afford them his protecion,
and the nation, out of hatred to the English, would hare
united in their defence. In this situation, the regent
r culd not retain his authority, without a sudden change
of his measures; and though he endeavoured, by ratify-
ing the treaty, to preserve the appearances of good faith
with England, he was obliged to throw himself into
the arm.s of the party, which adhered to France.

Soon after this surprising revolution in his political

principles, the regent changed his sentiments concerning
religion. The spirit of controversy was then new
and warm; books of that kind were eagerly read by
men of every rank; the love of novelty, or the convic-
tion of truth, had led the regent to express great eftetin
,or the writings of the reformers; and having been
pow.eriully fuppcrtcd by those who had embraced the:-
opinions, he, in order to gratify them, entertained il
his ow.n family, two of the mioft noted preachers of tle
protcftant doctrine, and in his firfi parliament contint.
ed to an act, by whicn the laity were permitted to rl.;!
the scriptures in a language wlih they underllooil
Truth needed only a fair hearing to he an over-mnatl
for error. Abfurditi; , which had long impolcid ".
the ignorance and credulity o mankind, were dcrected.
and exposed to public ridicule; and under the cuiitn -
nance of the regent, the Reforli.tion made crealt atdv-e
ces. The cardinal ob'.rve-d its ironiegcf with coincC:t,
and wvas at the utmost pains to obhlrtru it. He r1pr-
fciitid to the regent hiii ;reat iirp uldence in giving Iti:

couragement to opinions lo favourable to Lennox's pre-
tensions; that his own legitimacy deptended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce founded on the pope's
] authority; and that by iiifferi:g it to be called in quel:

tion, he weakened his own til!e to the filcceflion, and
furnished his rival wi;h tlc ;l.y argument, 1b which it

' could be rendered doubtful ' 'I'heei. infiiu:itti(is made
' a deep imprieflon on the regent's timorous f1pilit, 'who,

at the profpcd of such imaginary dangel s, was as much
i tartled as the cardinal could have wishcd; and Iis zeal
for the protestant religion was not long proof againfl his
;e tar. He publicly abjured the dotrine of tlti reform-
e crs in the Francifean church at Stirling, and declared

!- not only for the political, but tuh religious opinions of
i his new confidents.
.: The protestant doArine did not susser much by his

apoftacy. It had alrcady taken so deep root in the Iting-
i dom that no discouragement or severity could extirpate
it. The regent indeed consented to every thing, that
the zeal of the cardinal tliought neccffary for the pl-e-
servation of the eflablified religion. I he reformers
' ere persecuted wish all the cruelty, which superstition
inspires into a barbarous people. Many were condemn-
ed to that dreadful death,.which the church has appoint-
d for the puniilhnitnt of its enemies; but they fuffcred.
Mith a fpilit so nearly resembling the patience and for-

* The pretensions of the earl of Lennox to the fit:-
tcfion were thus founded. AMIry the daugihter of Jaicts
I. was married to James lord Hamilton. Eiizabeth
a daughter of that marriage, was the wife of Matthew
earl of Lennox, and the prelent earl was her grandlon.
The regent was likewise the grandson of the prinelit
Mary. But his father, being tivorced frno his fecoril
wifc Elizabeth Ilorme, married Janet Beatiol;, the re-
cent's mother. Lennox pretended tlat the lelntelcc tof
divorce was uljutft, and that the regent being blor
vwile Elizabeth Home was still alive, ought to be col-
'ticred as illegitimate. Crawfurd's Peer. 19:.

11 z

titude of the primitive martyrs, that more were con.
verted, than terrified by theif fpeaacles.

The cardinal, however, was now in possession of eve

ry thing his ambition could desire; and exercised all
the authority of a regent without the envy of the name,
He had nothing to fear from the earl of Arran, who
having by his inconfiflency forfeited the public elteem,
was contemned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretenfious of the earl oi
Lennox were the only thing which remained to embar-
rafs him. He had made use of that noblemah very fur-
cefsfully to work upon the regent's jealousy and fear,
but as he no longer stood in need of such an mnlrtuinten
he was willing to be rid of him with decency. Lennox
soon began to fufpecl his intention; promises, flattery,
and refpeA w-ere the only returns he had hitherto re-
ceived for substantial fen-ices; but at lafl the cardinal's
artifices could no longer be concealed, and Lennox, in-
stead of attaining power and dignity hirtlfelf, saw that
he had been employed only to procure these for another.
Resentment and disappointed ambition pudled himn on
to seek to be revenged on that cunning prelate, who,
by sacrificing his interest, had so ungenerouflv purchal-
ed the earl of Arran's' friendihip. lHe witlhdrew, ftr
that reason, from court, and declared for the party at
enmity with the cardinal, whichm with open anns, re-
ceived a convert, who added so much lufire to their
cause.

The two factions which divided the kingdom were

still the fame, without amn alteration in their views or
principles; but, by one of those fhange revolutions,
which were frequent in that age, they had, in the course
of a few weeks, changed their leaders. The regent was
at the head of the partizans of France and the defenders
of popery, and Lennox in the fame fation with the ad-
vocates for the English alliance, and a reformation in
religion. The one laboured to pull down his own
work, which the other upheld with the fame hand, that
had hitherto endeavoured to deflroyit.

Lennox's impatience for revenge got the flart of tlie

cardinal's aALvity. -He surprised both him and the re-
j gent by a fidden march to Edinburgh with a numerous

army; and might easily have crushed them before they
could prepare for their defence. But he was weak e-
nough to liften to propofils for an accommodation; and
the cardinal amused him so artfully, and spun out the
treaty to such a length, that the greater part of the earl's
troops, who fcrved, as is usual wherever tle feud.cl in-
fitutions prevail, at their own expence, deserted him;
and in concluding a lpace, infiead of giving the law,
ie vwas obligcd to receive it. A second attempt to re-
iricve his affairs enced yet more unfortuniately. One
1 ody of his trool) x. as cut in pieces, and the reft dlil-
iperfd; and with the poor remains of a ruined party, he
minuft either have fubmlitted to the conqueror, or have
lctl out of the kingdom, it the approach of an Englifi
;rmy had not brought linn a short relief.

llenry was not ofa temper to bear tamely the indig-
iity with whichl ht had beetn treated, both by the regent
and parliament of Scotland, w ho at the time whenl they
relnounced thieir alliance with him, had entered into a
n 'w and ilricetr contederacy v ith France. The rigour
£f the heafun retarded for otbne time ith execution of
his vengeancre, But in the 'pling a considerable body
,f intfaitry x l hiclh as dcltind for France, received or-
eicra to fail for Scotland, and a proper number of caval-
ry Xas appointcd to join it by land. The regent and
cirdinal little txpteled fiuili a visit. They had trultcd
rl:at the lrench war would find employment for all
Ienr)y's lorceC; a!d from a;t unaccotlnrable fccuirity

ere w-liolly unprovid(cd for t he d(lfence of the kingdom.
The earl oi Il;lrirol,, a name fatal to the Scots in that
age, coinma;;ied thi., arms, anId landed it, without op-
poiition, a 1tew uinl:s olm;e Leith. lie was qluickly
rniiler of thlat plla.,; and marching directly to Edi;n-
bilrh, ,niterr d it i ili the fame- ease. After plundering
irc ; jaceit ( Oiiit)try, thei richlift and most open in Scot-
!;.,il hie lt nil lire both thele towns; and upon tih ap-
l'ro(j i t lmine troops atll rcd togcther by the regent,
i .t his boot onl board tlre leet, aind with his land fu'-

if 3

ces retired fafelv to the Englilh borders, delivering the
kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of an invasion,
concerted with little policy, carried on at great expence,
and attended with no advantage. If Henry aimed at
the conquest of Scotland, he gained nothing by this ex-
pedition; if the marriage he had proposed, t'as flill in
his view, he loft a great deal Such a rough courtihip,
as the earl of iHuntly humorously called it, difgufled the
whole nation; their aversion for the match grew into
abhorrence; and exalpetatcd by so many indignities,
the Scots were never, at any period, more attached to
France, or more alienated from England.

The earl of Lennox alone, in lpite to the regent and

French king continued a correspondence with England,
which ruined his own interest without promoting lHen-
ry's. Many of his own vaflals preferring their duty to
their country before their affiecion to him, refuted to
concur in any design to favour the public enemy. And
after a few feeble and unfucceisful attempts to difiurh
the regent's administration, he was obliged to fly for
fafery to the court of England, where Henry rewarded
services which he had the inclination, but not the pow-
er to perform, by giving him in marriage his niece 'lie
lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy exile, howe;.-r
was destined to be rhe father of a race of tings. H-r
saw his son lord Darnly muunit the throne of Scotlanl,
to the perpetual exclution of that rival who now tri-
umphed in his ruin. And from that time, his poftrri-
tv have held the sceptre in two kinidoms, by one '!
which he was cast out as a criminal, and by the otler
received as a tifilive.

lManwhii!e hoiti!iiies were continued by both nations,

but with little vivour on either fide. The hiflolians o'
that age relate minutecy the circunmflances of flvr:;i
lkiirmihes and inroads, but they were without any cii-
fiderable effccA, and at this distance of time dcldrve !i)
remembrancc . At last an end was put to this 1.1 -

- Though tii s -ar was diltinguilied by no impor:-
ant or decfiie adion, it wva, howuevvcr, extrrme!y l:.i:-

guifhing and inactive war, by a peace, in which Big-
land, France, and Scotland were comprehended. Hen-

| ry laboured to exclude the Scots from the benefit of

this treaty, and to reserve them for that vengeance
which his attention to the affairs of the continent had
hitherto delayed. But although a peace with England
was of the lait confcqilence to Francis I. whom the em-
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces, he was
too generous to abandon allies, who had fcrved him
with fidelity, and chose rather to purchase Henry's
friendship with disadvantage to himself, than to leave
thrm exposec to danger. By yielding lome things to
the intcrrlt, and more to the vanity of that haughty
prince; by iilmr.ilfion, flattery, and address, he in the
endr, prevailed to have the Scots included in the peace
agreed upon.

ous to indvidi:ila!. There still remain two original pa-
pers, whiih cgivre C ' illo idea of the milfrieis, to which
the nloit fe:ti!e counties in the kingdom wert expolfd,
b- the fi'nld.ct and deilrutiive incursions of the lborder-
rrs. The tirit lI.ems to he the report made to lcenry
bv the }Inglith wardlns of the marches, for the year
1I44, and contains their exploits from tie zd of July,
to rthe 1 7thi f Noveril, er. 'I')l: a, count it gives of the
aliifircnt inroadls orJ',','.r , as t);ey are called, is vers
nu:iute; and in concltufioll, tle fu:n total of lifchliet
tihv did is this coniputrtl:

To\wns, to'.t rs 'b:dei ,

I at'ys, irnrkvi, pahe-churches,

hailtl hout2ls call dowln, or l)lr;it, - - - - r

Scot., flii - - - - - - - -
Prilobners t k cn, - - - - - ----
Nolt, i. e. black cat:e', .takien, - - - - 1o,386
Sheli, -.- - -

-- 1--...42,

NaT's ld yelding's, ----.--- 1,29(ó
(oat4,- - - - - - - - - - - 20

lIBol. of cor, - - - - - - - - - -
lt!lilagt-geir, i. e. lrooiih .'-Jld fti niiture, mit r'. koiuc .

.J// .L 's .,'t.1

an iti,¢cs 4 3

Thei otie:r cotaiin5 ;i i -U'
, .'i' nII inre'ad 1hv '1i;

The consternation occasioned by an event, w hiT h lial

pened a Ihort time before the conclusion of tLi, peat,..
rendered it more acceptable to the whole natlil. c r.
dinal Beatoun had not used his power wvith modcltiani,.
equal to the prudence by which he attained it. Net.
withstanding his great abilities, he had too ilair,- or i!h.
passions and prejudices of an angry leader of a inalionl
to govern a divided people )with tcrn-per. Ilis reii,;
ment againfi one party of the nobility, his niblcince nt.
,wards the reft, his leveritv to the relotitis, an, .i, ali
all, the barbarous and illegal executio:n (t the iirpni!.
George Wifhtart, a man oflionoula!)ie ii! th, and of1i
mitive fancity, wore out the patiinic ct a iicrcc :ac:':
and nothing but a bold hand was -.va'luii to arntii ii..
public wish bv his dcf.ructiun. Pr'ivatc icvcl:c, i;.l'all.
cd and fanclified by a falls zt al iur rcliiiou, ciii !i .
iupplied this wanrt. Norman Leftl, the cl !tl ;(;! (i
the earl of Rothcs, had been tltatedi lv tih ca '!:'.,:
with injufilie and contempt. lt X ', not tl: e n:;iPI; -
the mati, or the spirit of the tinies, ql:uitly to dil; , :
affront. And as the prcic;iion h lii. .vti.i lv lcrit,
ed him from the effecAis of xw iiat i, ciai!f an holnll, ..* :.
resentment, he recolved to rake tl;ait ii;i laCit(tz., xx 1:.
he could not demand. 'Thi, rluibutis: t!'cvb ds nii.Ji

earl of Hartfcrd, betLween the Sth alii ';i of0 Seplci.-
ber, 1545; the narratrie is m(rc rl;te al, bin a ; Pii
that he had burnt, razed, and dellhi eLd inl tilhe Lc.i.o
of Berwick and Roxburgh culy,

Monalteries anu iriar-ihuulcL, -- .---
Castles, toweri, and piles, - - - - - - - I
Mlarket towns, - - - - - -
Vil!ages, - - - --------
MVilns, - -- - - --------

Holpitals, - ----
All these wcrc ca.i dcx; n or burnt. A-i.,:::, .: / -

the Scots a ere no Ids Ikilful in the practice of ic:,' .
war, we may c hncltde that the damage iwhich th.ey .
in Englaid w;as not iniinlfderable; andt that tleir ::..

, \::t !' iCi's ' 1

.

!'::L.:. : i} . r
;' .'.;a;. j of t':c rng!if.r .

censure, as the singular courage and conduct with which
he put it in execution excite wonder. The cardinal,
at that time, relided in the castle of St. Andrews, which
he had fortified at great expence, and in the opinion of
the age had rendered impregnable. -lis retinue was
nulmerous, the town at his devotion, and the neighbour-
ing country full of his dependents In this fituatioil,
sixteen persons undertook to titrprife his caitle, andl it
affafiinate himielf; and their success was equal to the
boldness of the attempt. Early in the morning they
seized on the gate of the cattle, which was set open to
the workmen who were employed in finilhing the forti-
fications; and having placed sentries at the door of the
cardinal's apartment, they awakened his numerous do-
mrltics one by one, and turning them out of the cafle,
they without noise, or tumult, or violence to any other
person, delivered their county, though by a most un-
juttifiable action, from an armbitious man, whose pride
was insupportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and cun-
ning were the great checks to the Reformation.

His death was fatal to the catholic religion, and to

the French interest in Scotland. The fame zeal for
both continued among a great party in the nation, but
when deprived of the genius and authority of so skilful
a leader, was of linall conlequence. Nothing can equal
the corntemation which a blow so unexpected occasion-
ed among his adherents; while the regent secretly en-
joyed an event, which rid him of a rival, who had not
only eclipsed his greatness, but almost extinguiihed his
power. Decency, however, the honour of the church,
the importunity of the queen dowager, and her fadlion,
his engagements with France, and above all there, the
delire of recovering his eldest son, whom the cardinal
had detained for some time at St. Andrews in pledge of
his fidelity, and who, together with the cafle, had fal-
len into the hands of the conspirators, induced him to
take arms in order to revenge the death of a man he
hated.

He threatened vengeance, but was unable to execute
i. One part of military science, the art of attacking

fortified places. m as then unknown in Scotland. The
weapons, the dilripiile, and imnlctiiofity of the Scots,
rendered their armies as untr fir i-.rc, as thely vwere ac-
tive in the field. An hundreld -.ud fi!:v lmen, whlich
was the grcateir nuimber the conspirators ever afiei:;l:k',
refifled all the eficlts tf the regent for five niontlls', il
a place, whi-h a tingle battalion, with a few bI.ltcl,::
cannon, wo:ld now reduce in as mal:v days. hi .-
dious siege was concluded by a truce. ' lTe regr i.n-
dertook to procure ior the conspirators ;.i a;!,oih:t:.
from the pope, and a pardon in parliament; :ad url pl'
obtaining thcle, they engaged to uricnldcr tlic caltit,
and to set his son at liberty.

It is probable, that neither of them were fincerc in

this treaty. On both fides they foutllit only to anmul,
and to gain time. The regent had applied to Frail.
for aifiltance, and expeCted toon to have the coiipi'altl.i
at mercy. On the other band, if Lcfy and his afliNi-
ates were not at first incited to murder the cardinal by
Henrn, they were, in the sequel, powerfully fuppoltid
byhim. Notwithltanding the filcenc of cotcmporaryl
historians, there are lrong prcfumptions of the sorner;
of the latter there is undoubted certaintlvt. During tlic
liege, the conspirators had received froin England iun-
plies-both of money and provilions; and as llcnryv ias
preparing to renew his propoftions concerning tlie Ilr-
riage and the union he had projected, and to lieond i.is
negociations with a nuinerous army, they hoped, Iy'
czoncurring .with him to be in a fitnation, in which tvry
wvould no longer need a pardon, but might c'ailii a e-
ward.

The death of Henry blafied all these. hopcs. It l1ip-

pened in the beginning of next year, after a reign lt
greater splendour tlhan true glory; bultling thoi:oi;h ::!'
ac'ive; oppirefive in donieflic government, and inl l-
reign politics wild andi irregular. But the vices or tl:i
prince were more bcneficial to mankind than the virtils
of others. IHis rapaciou!nefi, his profulion, and e:'i;

_"
Eviit. R .' io:. 2. 3-.4 t _.l, 60.

; his t ranny, by dcprefiing the ancient nobility, and by

adding new property and power to the commons, laid
the foundations of British liberty. His other passions
contributed no less towards the downfal of popery, and
the eftahlifhment of religious freedom in the nation.
}iis refentmen t led him to abolish the power, and his co-
vrctlfneis to seize the wealth of the church; and by
withdrawing thele supports, made it ealf, in the follow-
ing reigrn, to overt!lrn the whole fabric of 1'uperftition.

I ri1ncis I. did not long lIrvive a prince, lwho had been

a 'rr'natrel his rival and his fiiendl; but his fuccefror

i Hernrv 11. was not neglectful of the French interest in

S otlrand. He tfent a confideralle bolv of men, under
th-- command of Leon Strozzi, to the regent's afitanlce.
By ti;etr !bn exp)ericnce in the Italian and German
wars, 'i;e French had become as dexterous in the con-
dtl& of sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the
lih!lnet- and dcljalir of the conliirators could not de-
fen(. them apgaiift tlheir superior art, they fiurrendered
to Strozzi. after a lhort resistance, who engaged, in the
name of the king his mafler, for the security of their
i;ves; and as his priloners, traniported them into France.
Tle cast!e itritf, the monument of Beatoun's power and
vait:., was demoliffhld, in obedience to the canon law,
wvhi, l, with adinmiralle policy, denounces its anathemas
c'.';l :;ainf the lihoufes in which the ltcred blood of a
r:roil;nil hapl)rcs to lie sicd, and ordains thern to be
b. i i21 riui si.

'I h ar( hIlifinlr k' of St. Andrews was bhetowcd by

' · r- ent lIpoi his natui al brother, Juhn llamilton ab-

i5< ('f P.iitlr'.

'I i c'l.: , '

. .L-e..vcks w ld have saved the con-

ira:(; ll.;. rr'l' iifers of lienry VIII. who had the

',i.ti' !ir(.iin oi afiT:irs durin., the minority of his son
i ,tiard \ .

i :oiluk cd tliemi'vi's -with rcgard ro Scot-

i,', hi tlIl' I:;::im;s o i tll;ir late Inalter, ;ii(i resolved

;' irlgitc: :li;' Scts i,;to a trctys, , hii.!

h tih y had not
. te:;i)lcs or atdircis to hring: aSi t . ;:' y other nmethod.

; BE;n. lill. K . t. ;S.

But before we proceed to relate the events which their

invasion of Scotland occasionrd, we shall flop to take
notice of a circumstance unobserved by cotemporary
hiforians, but extremely remarkable for the discovery
it makes of the sentiments and spirit, which then pre-
vailed among the Scots. The conspirators againfi car.
dinal Beatoun found the regent's eldest son in the calile
of St. Andrews; and as they needed the proteticn of
the Engli/h, it was to be feared that they might endea-
vour to purchase it, by delivering to them this import-
ant prize. The presumptive heir to the crown, in the
hands of the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a
dreadful profpedó. And, in order to avoid it, the par-
liament -fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
an ac6 made on purpose, they excluded " the regent s
" eldest son from all right of succession, public or pTi-
4 vate, so long as he should be detained prilbner, and
4 fubflituted in his place,his other brothers, according
4 to their seniority, and in failure of them, thofc who
Is were next heirs to the regentt." Surceffion by :e-
reditary right is an idea so obvious and so populal, lthat
a nation seldom ventures to mike a breach in it, ill!
in cafies of extreme necessity. Such a necessity did t!
parliament discover in the present situation. Hatred tn
England, founded on the memory of pas hoiilities, Zn".
heightened by the rmart of rcernt injuries, ws ;lwa ; i-
tional pafion. This ditcated that uncommonr latill,
hy which the order oflineal fucceffiin was il rctiiarkall!v
broken. The modern theories, which represent thi-
right as divine and unalienable, and that ought not :v
be violated upon any consideration whlatloe'vcr, iocni :;
have been then altogether unknown.

In the beginning of September, the earl of HI-artfos¥,

now duke of Somerset, and protlecor of Engianl, c.-1
tered Scotland at the head of eighteen thouliaid n:o';
and, at the fame time, a fleet of lixty ships appeared oi
the coatl, to second his forces by land. The Scots I.;!
for some time obfcrved this storm gathering, and 't..

t- pifl. Reg. Scot. z. i 9.

prepared for it. Their army was almofi double to that
of the enemy, and posted to the greatest advantage on
a rising ground, above Muffelburgh, not far from the
rirer Eike. Both these circumstances alarmed the duke
of Somerset, who saw his danger, and would willingly
i have extricated himlelf out of it, by a new overture of
peace, on conditious extremely reasonable. But this
moderation was imputed to fear, and his proposals re-
jested with that scorn, which the confidence of success
inlpires. And had the conduat of the regent, who com-
mandcd the Scots army, been in any degree equal to his
confidence, the deftruttion of the Englilh must have
heen inevitable. They were in a situation precisely li-
milar to that of their countrymen under Oliver Crom-i
well, in the following century. The Scots had choifen
their ground so well, that it was impoflitle to force them
to give battle; a few days had exhaulted the forage and
provision of a narrow country; the fleet could olly fur-
nifli a scanty and precarious fubfillence; a retreat there-
fore was necessary; but dilgrace, and perhaps ruin,
were the consequences of retreating.

On both these occasions, the national heat and impe-

! tuofity of the Scots saved the English, and precipitated

their country into the utmost danger. The undifcip-
lined courage of the private men became impatient at
the fight of an enemy. The general was afraid of no-
thing, but the English would elcape from him by flight;
and leaving his advantageous lituation, he attacked the
duke of Somerfit near Pinkey, with no better success
than his ralhnefs deserved. The proteltor had drawn
up his troops on a gentle eminence, and had now the
advantage of ground on his fide. The Scottish army
consisted almoit er.tirely of infantry, whose chief wea-
pon was a long spear, and for that reason their files were
very deep, and their ranks close. They advanced to-
wards the enemy in three great bodies, and as they pal-
Ikd the river, were considerably exposed to the fire of
the English fleet, which lay in the bay of Mulfflburgh,
and had drawn near the shore. The English cavalry,
ilufhed with an advantage which they ihad gained in a
Vo!l f.1

fkirmih fnme (.:vs before, began thel a:tack with more
impetinlfy- than gnod conlduit. A body so firm and
corrpac as the Scots, easily resifted the impreflion of
cavalry-, broke themn, and drove them off the field. 'The
Englih infantry, however, advanced, and the Scot;
'were at once exposed to a flight of arrows, to a fire ii!
flank from four hundred foreign flfileers who 1serve
the enemy. and to their cannon which were planttl
behind th- infantry, on the highest part of the eminencw.
The depth and cloftnefs of their order made it impo!
sib!e for the Scots to fland long in this situation. Tiie
earl of Angus, who commanded the vnngu ard, endrca-
y-oured to change his ground, and to retire towards tle
main body. But his friends unhappily miflook tlii;
motion for a fight, and fell into confusion. At tht
very ir.lant, the broken cavalry having rallied, rctl:I;-
ed to the charge; the foot pursued the advantage thl
had gained; the profpeft of victory redoubled the ar-
dour of both; and in a moment, the rout of the Scottili
army became universal, and irretrievalle. The encouon-
ter in the siel was not long or bloody; but, in the pui,-
suit, the English discovered all the rage and fiercelcl-,
which national antipathy, kindled by long emnulatius;,
and inflamed by rcciprocal injuriet, is apt to inlpirc.
The pursuit wa . c.ntinued for fir e holurs, and to a great
distance. All the three roads, vy which the Scots licl',
wiere firewed with!i spears air d fv, >rds, and targets, ai.,l
rcvered witl:h the lodirs of the flair.. Above ten thul;
fard mc-n :ci on this day, one of the moll fatal Scotlai I
}.la! ever icn. .A fw v. were taken prisoners, anl a.
r.ong tiltfc otnr.e p--r;bn of diflr:nion. And the p!',,
tector had it now- in his power to become master ot .
kingdom, out of xhiichl, not m:iny holrs before, he sw.,
;:n.oft cb'li red to ret-ire with ir.fam y*.

* The foiowi:ng palfage il a curious and rare jourl::

cf ti.c p rc.c.'or's e.ptd'tion into S.otland, written i
XV. Patc?, .wh:o was joined in commiffmon with Cc.i:
a jitdgc marshal of the army, and printed in 1548, i
Itr-cs tur i:o:itc: .s it gives a jue; idea of the mi!ita'

But this vicnory, however great, was of n) real utili-

ty, for want of itill or of lci!ure to improve it. Eve-

dircipline of the Scots at that time. " But what after I
Larned, specially touching their order, their armour,
i nd their manner as well of going to offcnd, as o itland-
ilg to defend, I have thought neeelThry here to utter.
larkbutters have they lew or none, and appoint their
si lt most commonly always a foot. They nioe to
the field well furnimhed all ith jack and luil, dagger
and buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceed-
ing good temper, and universally so made to slice, that
as I never saw none so good, so T think it hald to de-
v ife the better. llere to every man his pike, and a great
kercher iwrapped twice or thrice about his neck, not for
cIld, but for cutting. In their array towards joining
x with the enemy, they cling and thrust so near in the
fore rauk, shoulder and 1houlder together with thleir
pikes in both their hands Itraight afore them, and their
followers in that order so hard at their backs, laying
their pikes over their foregoers Ihoulders, that, if they
do affiil undiscovercd, no force can well witifland them.
Standijig at defence they thrust shoulders likewise so
nigh together, the fore ranks well nigh to kneeling,
tloop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes
with both hands, and therewith in their left their buck-
Iers, the one end of the pike against their right foot, and
hle other agaiift the enemy brealt-high; their lollow-
rs crofling their pike points with them forward; and
tLius each with other so nigh .;s space and place will llt-
fcr, through the whole ward, si thick, that as ealily
(hall a. bare finger pierce through the tkin of an angry
hedge-hog, as any encounter the front of their piket."
Other curious particliars are found in this journal, :rcm
which Sir John Hayward lias borrowed his acus.!lt of
this expedition.

Life of Edward lI. 279, &c

The length of the Scots pike or ipear v.as appointed

hy ACt 44, P. 1471, to be fix ells; i. e. eibhltce ce; ir ix
it.clhes.

I

ry new injurv rendered the Scots more averse from an
union with England; and the protentor neglected the
only measure, which would have made it neceffarv for
them to have given their consent to it. He amuled
hinmfelf in wasing the open country, and in taking or
building petty castles; whereas, by fortifying a few
places which were accessible by sea, he would have lail
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a Ihort time,
the Scots must either have accepted of his terms, or
have submitted to his power. By such an improve.
mitnt of it, his viltory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the
command of Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no
other effect but to precipitate the Scots into new e;-
gagements with France. The situation of the Eng!iiZ
court may, indeed, be pleaded in excute for the diik:
of Somerset's conduct. That cabal of his enemies,
which occasioned his tragical end, was already formed;
and while he triumphed in Scotland, they secretly ul-
dermined his power and credit at home. Self-preterva-
tion, therefore, obliged him to prefer his safety before
his fame, and to return without reaping the fruits o(
his viltory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; the conspiracy by which he fell was not yet ripe
for execution, and his pretence suspended for some time
its effect. The supreme power still remained in hi.
hands, and he employed it to recover the opportunity
which he had loft. A body of troops, by his con;
mand, seized and fortified Haddington, a place which,
on Rccount of its distance from the sea, and from any
Eng'ifi garrison, could not be defended without great
expe.ice and danger.

Meanwhile, the French gained more by the defeat

of their allies, than the English did by their vifory.
After the death of cardinal Beatoun, Mary of Guise,
the queen dnwager, took a considerable ihare in the di-
rerion of affairs. She was warmly attached by blood
and by inclination to the French interest; and, in order
to promote it, improved with great dexterity every
event which occurred. The spirit and strength of the
Sc;ts were broken at Pinkey; and, in an assembly of

nobles, which met at Stirling to consult upon the situ-
ation of the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards
France, and no profpel of fafcty appeared hut in as-
lifiance from thence. But Hcenrv II. being then at
peace with Elgland, the queen repreeinted that they
culd not expua him to take part in their quarrel, Jut
I11on views of personal advantage; and that without
extraordinary concessions in his favour, no affinance in
proportion to their prlcint exigencies could be obtain-
c'l. The prejudices of the nation powerfully seconded
these reprefentatiolls of the queen. What often hap-
pens to individuals took place among the nobles in this
enventioln, they were swayed entirely by their pas-
lions, and, in order to gratify them, they deerrted their
!,)nmcr principles, and diiiregarded their true interelt.
In the violence of reik-ntntiit tl he forgot that zeal for
the independency of Scotland, which had prompted
them to rject the propositions of Hlenry VIII. and by
,ffering voluntarily their yomug queen in marriage to
the dauphin, eldelt son of Ilenry II. aud, which was
llill more, by proposing to fend her immediately into
France, to be educated at his court, they granted, out
of a thirst of vengeance, what formerly thevy would not
vield upon any consideration of their own safety. To
gain at once fucl a kingdom as Scotland, was a matter
of no small consequence to France. Henry, without
Ilfitation, accepted the offers of the Scottifn ambafsa-
dors, and prepared for the vigorous defence of his new
acquisition. Six thouland veteran soldiers, under the
command of Monlicur Dicf;', affled by some of the
heft officers who were formed in the long wars of
Francis I. arrived at Leith. They fcrved two cam-
plignts in Scotland, with a spirit equal to their former
lame; but their exploits w-re not confidcrable. The
Bcots 'olln became jealous of their dcligln:, and neglect-
td to support them with proper vigour; and the cau-
tion of the English, in acting wholly upon the defen-
five, prevented them from attempting any) enterprise of
conliquence, and obliged them to exhaust their strength
in tedious ficges, undertaken under many difadvar,-

1

tages. Their efforts, however, were not without some
benefit to the Scots, by compelling the Englith to eva-
cuate Haddington, and to surrender several small
forts which they poffefred in different parts of the king-
dom.

But the consequences of these operations of his troops
tere still of greater importance to the French kin-.
The diversion which they occaCioned enabled him to
w.ref Boulogne out of the hands of the English; and
the influence of his army in Scotland obtained the con-
currence of parliament with the overtures fnade to
him, by the afTre.bly of nobl-s at Stirling, concerning
the queen's marriage with the dauphin, and her edu-
cation at the court of France. In vain did a few pa-
triots remcnfirate againfl such extravagant concffloins,
by which Scotland was reduced to be a province of
Fiance; and Henry, from an aliy, raired to be mafler
of the kingdom; by which, the fiiendfhip of France
became more fat-l than the enmity of England; and
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that )ar
been bravely defended against the other. A point fr
so much confcqlence was hastily decided in a palli.:
meilt afTembled in a camp before Haddington; the
intrigues of the queen dowager, the zeal of the c!crg),
and relentmen t againfl England, had prepared a gri,!
party in the nationl for such a ftep; the French genocr.,
and amblfiador, by their liberality and pronlifc s, gai 1
over many more. The regent Ilimfelf was weak enoii=h
to stoop to the cfi'er of a pcnfiun from France, tngetli.;
with the title of duke of Chatelheroalt in that kinc.
dom. A conliderable majority declared for the trcar'.
and the interest of a faclion v.as preferred before ti!:
honour of the nation.

Having hurried the Scots into this rash and fatal rc-

solution, the lource of many calamities to thcmlelvt,,
and to their sovereign, the French allowed them nu
time for refledion or repentance. The fleet, whi.i
had brought over their forces, was fili in Scotland, aid,
without delay, convoyed the queen into France. Mary
was then fix years old, and, by her education in tll:

court, the politest, but most corrupted in Europe, she
acquired every accompliflment that could add to her
charms as a woman, and contracted many of those pre-
judices, which occasioned her misfortunes as a queen.

From the time that Mary was put into their hands,
1 it was the interest of the Frencn to fiffer the war in

Scotland to languish. The recovering of the Boulon-
nois was the object Henry had most at heart; and a
ifight diversion in Britain was sufficient to divide the
attention and fircngth of the Engliffr, whose domestic
factions deprived both their arms and councils of their
accustomed vigour. The government of England had
undergone a great revolution. The duke of Somerset's
powver wvas acquired with too much violence, and exer-
ciled with too little moderation, to be of long continu-
ance. Many good qualities, added to the great love of
I'is country, could not atone for his ambition in ufilrp-
ing the whole direction of affairs. Almost the whole
nobles combined against him; and the carl of Warwick,
no less ambitious, but more artful, conducted his nmea-
fures with so much dexterity, as to raise hirmfelf upon
lhe ruins of Iris rival. Without the invidious nanme ot
protecRor, he succeeded to all the power and inlhience
of which Somerf!t was deprived, and he quickly found
liace to be necessary for the establishment of his new au-
t'icrity, and the execution of the valt designs hC had con-
cci vetd.

Il:r' wr.'aq no firanger to Wrarwick's situation, and

impnroveid hiis kinowledge of it, to good purpoic, in con-
Ci!cinig tle ncgociatiols for a general peace. ile pre-
;.ibed sl hat terms he pleased to the English nminiltcr,
i kho licrupicd at nothing, however advantageous to that
monarch and his allies. England confiilred to rnlrlre
BcIulogne and its dependencies to France, and gave up
al! pretensions to a treaty of marriage with the qujeen ,of
Scots, or to lle conquest of her codunlry. A few finall
forts, of which the Englifli troops had litlerto kept
pofiefTion, were razed; and peace lietweeir the two
kingdoms s as eablifhed on its anriclt foundation.
Both the Britifih nation-: lo pow-r, as well as reputla-

tion, hb this unhappy quarrel. It was on both lides a
war of emulation and relcntmenrt, rather than of ilte-
reft; and was carried on, under the influence of nation.
al animnofities, which were blind to all advantages. The
French, who entered into it with greater coolncfs, con-
dulecd it with more skill; and by dexterously availing

lhemnflves of every circumntance which occurred, reco-
vered pofiftfion of an important territonr which they
had loft, and added to their monarchy a new kingdom.
The amhition of the Englifn minister betrayed to them
the fcrmer; the inconsiderate rage of the Scots agairlt
their ancient enemies l,eftoed on them the latter; their
own addrel's andi good policy merited both.

Immediately after the co;icl!fion of the peace, th.

French forces left Scotland, as much to their own fatii
fiction, as to that of the nation. The Scots soon found,
that the calling to their assistance a people more powerr
iui th:xn themlfe!.-cs was a dangerous expedient. Thcy
behchcl, with the utmost impatience, those who lhas
conme ov-er to protet the kingdom, taking upon them
to command in it; and on many occafiors they repent-
ed the rash invitation they had given. The peculiar
genius of the Frllnch nation heightened this disgust, .and
prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke, before they
had well begun to feel it. The French were, in that
a2e, what thec are in the present, one of the most po-
lifhsd nations in Europe. But it is to be observed, in
all their expeditions into fereign countries, whether to-
wards the south or north, that their manners have been
remarkably inlcompatible with the rr.anners of every o-
tller people. Barbarians are tenacious of their own cuf-
torns, bccaufe they want knowledge and taste to disco-
vcr the rcafc:nble;;els and propriety of customs which
tiifter fron them. Nations, which hold the first rank
in politeness, a:e frequently no less tenacious out ot
p ide. The Greeks were lb in the ancient world; and
the French are the lame in the modern. Full of them-
!'lves, and accufiomed, by the imitation of their neigh-
bours, to co;:rider their own modes as the fanldards or
l:.-gance: tl.cy scorn to diluife, or to lay aside the i

flinguilhing manners of their own nation, or to make
any allowance for what may differ from them among
others. For this reason, the behaviour of their armies
has, on every occasion, been insupportable to firangers,
and has always expoled them to hatred, and often to
derfructioa. In that age, they over-ran Italy four fe-
veral times, by their valour, and loft it, as often, by
their insolence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and
high-fpirited people, and who, of all nations, can least
bear the most distant insinuation of contempt, were not
of a temper to admit all the pretensions of such amusing
guests. The symptoms of alienation were soon visible;
they seconded the French in their military operations
with the utmost coldness, and this secret disgust grew
insensibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly
be refirained; and on occasion of a very flight accident,
broke out with fatal violence. A private French fol-
dier had an idle quarrel with a citizen of Edinburgh:
both nations took arms, and with equal rage, in defence
of their countrymen The provost of Edinburgh, his
son, and several citizens of diftinntion were killed in the
fray; and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Notwith-
ftanting the ancient alliance of France and Scotland,
and the long intercourse of good offices between the two
nations, an aversion to the French took its rife, at this
time, among the Scots; the effcts whereof were deep-
ly felt, and operated powerfully through the fubfequeilt
period.

From the death of cardinal Beatoun, nothing has

been said of the state of religion. While the war with
England continued, the clergy had no leisure to molest
the protestants; and they were not yet considerable e-
nough to expec6 any thing more than connivance and
impunity. The new doetrines were still in their infan-
cy; but during this short interval of tranquillity, they
acquired Itrength, and advanced, by large and firm steps,
towards a full establishment in the kingdom. The first
preachers againit popery in Scotland, of whom several
had appeared during the reign of James V. were more

eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Thein
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation wai
partial, and at second hand; some of them had been c.
ducated in England; all of them had borrowed thllir
notions from the hooks publilhed there; and, in the firll
dawn of the new light, they did not venture Inany fieps
before their leaders. But in a Ihort time, the dodlrincs
and writings of the forcign reformers hecame gencr;,iiv
known; the inquisitive genius of the age prefcd for.
ward in quest of truth; the diSovery of one error ope n-
ed the way to others; the downfal of one impoclor
drew many after it; the whole fabric, which ignorance
and superstition had erected in times of darkness, began
to totter; and nothing was wanting to complete its ruin,
but a daring and active leader to direct the attack. Such
was the famous John Knox, who, with better qualifica-
tions of learning, and more extensive views than any of
his predecessors in Scotland, possessed a natural intrepi-
dity of mind, which set him above fear. He began his
public ministry at St. Andrews in the year 1547, with
that success, which always accompanies a bold and po-
pular eloquence. Instead of amusing himself with lop-
ping the branches, he fruck direelv at the root of pope-
ry, and attacked both the doctrine and difciplinc of th:
iftablifhed church, with a vehemence peculiar to hiln-
iflf, but admirably suited to the temper and wishes o.
the age.

An adverfar- so formidable as Knox, would not have

cafily escaped the rage of the clergy, who obifrvcd the
tendency and progrcis of his opinions, with the utmoit
concern. But, at firit, he retired for fafetv into the ral;
tle of St. Andrews, and while the coifpirators kcIl
possession of it, preached publicly under their protction.
The great revolution in England, which followed upon
the death of Henry VIII. contributed no less than ti;e
zeal of Knox, towards demolishing the popilh church
in Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and light.
encd the yoke of popery. The miniflers of his son
Edward VI. cast them off altogether, and eftablifih.l
zie proteflant religion upon almost the fame footii;,

whereon it now flands in that kingdom. The influ-
ence of this example reached Scotland, and the happy
efftes of ecclesiastical liberty, in the one nation, infpir-
ed the other with an equal delirc of recover;'g it. The
rtformers had, hitherto, been obliged to conducQ them-
fclves with the utmost caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private houies, and at a difi:nce from
court; they gained credit, as happens on the first pu-
blication of every new religion, chiefly among persons
in the lower and middle rank of life. But fverlal noble-
men of the greatest diftinc(ion, having, about this time,
openly efpoufcel their principles, they were no longer
tinder the necellity of acting with th e

am relerve;

and with more security and encouragement, they had
likewise greater success. The means of acquiring and
spreading knowledge became r:ore common, and the
lpirit of innovation, peculiar to tlht period, grew every
lay bolder and more universal.

Happily for the Reformation, this spirit was flill un-

der some reitraint. It had not yet attained firmness
and vigour, ififc:'nt to overturn a lyflem, founded on
the deepest policy, anl fiipported by the most formida-
le power. Under the present circurnftances, any at-
te!ipt towards acdion mullt ave been fatal to the pro-
teltlnt dolrincs; and it is no small proof of the autho-
lity, as well as penetration of the heads of the party,
!hat they were able to restrain the zeal of a fiery and
Impetuous people, till that critical and maturejuncture,
when every Itep they took was decisive and success-
fill.

Mleanwhile, their canfe received reinforcement from

two diflerent ,quarters, whence they never could have
i:..peled it. The ambition of the houfi of Guile, and
hie bigotry of Mary of England hastened the fubvel-
lin of the pap-l throrre in Scotlan.,; and by a singular
iliiiofition of providence, the persons who opposed the
leformation iln every other part of Europe with the
f!erceft zeal, were made inltruments for advancing it in
that kingdom.
Mary of Guise polfcicd the fame bold and afpiiirg

spirit, which distinguished her family. But in her, it
was softened by the female chara&er, and accompani-
ed with great temper and address. Her brothers, in
order to attain the high objects at which they aimed,
ventured upon such daring measures, as suited their
great courage. Her designs upon the supreme powtr
were concealed with the utmost care, and advanced by
address and refinements more natural to her sex. ly
a dexterous application of those talents, she had ac-
quired a considerable influence on the councils of a na-
tion, hitherto unacquainted with the government of
u-omen ; and without the finallct right to any fharc in
the adminifiration of affairs, had engrossed the chici
direcion of them into her own hands. But fle did
not long reft latisficd with thie enjoyment of this pre-
carious power, which the fickleness of the regent, or
the ambition of those who governed him, might so
easily diflurb; and began to set on foot new intrigucs,
with a design of undermining him, and of opening to
herself a way to succeed him in that high dignity.
Her brothers entered warmly into this scheme, aind
supported it with all their credit at the court of France.
The French king willingly concurred in a meafurr, Ib
which he hoped to bring Scotland entirely under nll
nagement, and, in any future broil with England, ti
turn its whole force upon that kingdom.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the lquer.

dowager had only one of two ways to choose, cither
violently to wrefi the power out of the hands of tie
regent, or to obtain it by his consent. Under a ni
nority, and among a warlike and factious people, the
former was an uncertain and dangerous experinltl.
The latter appeared to be no less impracticable. 1'
persuade a man voluntarily to abdicate the fiupri.tln
power; to descend to a level with thole above wll!en
lie mwas raised; and to be content with the second plac
where he had held the firit, may well pass for a \\!i
,nd chimerical projeci. This, however, the queen a!.
tempted; and the prudence of the attempt was s'.i;,
ently)julified by its success.

The regent's inconflancy and irresolution together,
with the calamities which had befallen the kingdom
under his adminifiration, raised the prejudices both of
the nobles and of the people against him to a great
height; and the queen fecretlyfomented these with much
indultry. All who wished for a change met with a gra-
cious reception in her court; and their spirit of dil-
affeclion was nourished by such hopes and promises as
in every age impole on the credulity of the factious.
The favourers of the Reformation being the molt nu-
merous and spreading body of the regent's enemies,
she applied to them with a particular attention; and
the gentleness of her disposition, and seeming indiffe-
rence to the religious points in dispute, made all her
promises of protection and indulgence pass upon them
for sincere. Finding so great a part of the nation wil-
ling to fall in with her measures, the queen set out for
France, under pretence of visiting her daughter, and took
along with her those noblemen who possessed the greatest
ipower and credit among their countrymen. Softened by
the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the civilities
oth te French king, and the carefres of the house of Guise,
and influenced by the seasonable distribution of a few fa-
i ours, and the liberal promise of Imany more, they were
brought to approve of all the queen's prctenlions.

While f;le advanced by thef flow but hire ftcps, the

regent either did not forelee the danger which threaten-
e! him, or neglected to provice againfI it. The first
dilcovery of the train which was laid, came froim two
of his own confidents, Panter, bilhop of Ross, and
Carnegie, of Kinnaird, whom the queen had gained
(ovcr to her interest, and then employed as the molt
proper initruments for obtaining hlis conicnt. The
overture was made to him in the name of the French
king, enforced by proper tlhreatenings, in order to
w;ork upon his natural timidity, and fn'eetericd by every
pronmife that could reconcile hiln to a propolal so dil-
agrceable. On the one hand, the confirmation of his
French title, together with a conitderable penlion, the
p-rliainentarv acknowledgmen: of llis right of lucccl-
Vol. I. K

sion to the crown, and a public ratification of his con.
du&t during his regency, were offered him. On the
other hand, the displeasure of the French king, tih
power and popularity of the queen dowager, the dlilaf.
eition of the nobles, with the danger of an alter.
reckoning, were reprcfented in the firongeft colours.

It was not possible to agree to a proposal so extra-

ordinary and unexpected, without some previous itrug-
gle; and had the archbiihop of St. Andrews been prc.
sent to fortify the irresolute and passive spirit of the re-
gent, he, in all probability, would have rejected it witn
disdain. Happily for the queen, the sagacity and am-
bition of that prelate could, at this time, be no ob-
itruEion to her views. He was lying at the point of
.de;.ti, and in his absence, the influence of the queen's
agents on a flcx;ble temper counterbalanced several of
thr fLongeft pafflons in the human mind, and obtained
his consent to a voluntary surrender of the fuprcme
power.

After gaining a point of filch difficulty, withll so

much ea'e, the queen returned into Scotland, in f:li!
.(X pet.ron of tzking immediate poiTeffion of her new
dignity. But by th:s time the archbishop of St. An-
drews had recovered of that diflemper, which the ig-
nsoranc of the Scott:ilh physicians had pronounced to
he incurable. 'I his he owed to the affiflance of the fa-
Imous C.ird:.n. cne cf those irregular adventurers in
plilr.frcp.-, of whom Italy produced so many about
thios ric: .. A hold genius led him to forne ulfftUl (ii
< ov.ie., whn;.h merit the eicenm of a rmore dileterning

Pge; a a.ild

iin:i naionl engaged him in thole chime.

rlcal icienrcs, which drew the admiration of his con-
i;:npora;nrs. As a 1prcrender to afirologv and niaric,
}:c xas re;-crec a:nl cenfu!ted by all Europe; as a 1ir0-
:! icnt in nrtu.i ! 1i ii.-iphy, he was b:t little knownr,
'I he rc .bi iop. it is prolable, corfidered him .'
-o'.erd!l lnac'it::1 . v.-':n he arn'pltd to him for re!t!;

lu. it was h;i kl,'.ie,;; -.

:s a piiiiolopher which cs.
;!led him .o cure his difejii'.

Card.i h:n-elf was mco:c d-f:rous of being c: ':

Together with his health, the archbishop recovered
the entire government of the regent, and quickly de-
termined him to recal that dishonourable promile, which
he had been seduced by the artifices of the queen to
grant. However great her surprise and indignation
were, at this fresh inflance of his inconstancy, she was
obliged to difimble, that she might have leisure to re-
new her intrigues with all parties; with the protel-.
ants, whom ihe favoured and courted more than ever;
with the nobles, to whom ihe rendered herself agree-
able by various arts; and with the regent himself, in
order to gain whom, (he employed every argument.
But whatever impressions her emissaries might have
made on the regent, it was no easy matter to over-
reach or to intimidate the archbifllop. Under his ma-
nagement, the negotiations were Ipun out to a great
length; and his brother maintained his fiation with
that address and firmners which its importance tl well
merited. The universal defection of the nobles, the
growing power of the proteflants, who all arlhered to
the queen dowager, the reiterated solicitations of the
French king, and, above all, the intrrpolition of the
young queen, who was now entering the twelfth year
of her age, and claimed a right of nominating whom
fne pleased to be regent, obliged him at lait to rc.ign
that high office, which lie had held many years. He
obtained, however, the fame advantageous terms for
himself which had been formerly stipulated.

It was in the parliament which met on the loth of

iApril, 1554, that the earl of Arran cxecuted this ex-
traordinary resignation; and at the fame time. Mary
of Guise was raised to that dignity, which had been to
long the object of her wilhes. Thus, with their own

fidered as an astrologer than a philo!bpher; in his hook
tD Geiituri,, we find a calculation of the archbihop's
nativity, from which lie pretends both to have pre-
diiled his disease, and to have efieced his cure. HI
;cived from the archbiflop a reward of 18oo crowns;
a great fum in that age. De vitafac, p. 3z.

K

approbation, a woman and a firanger was advanced
to the supreme authority, over a fierce and turbulent
people, who seldom submitted, without reluctance, to
the legal and ancient government of their native mo.
narchs.

While the queen dowager of Scotland contributed

so much towards the progress of the Reformation, by
the protection which she afforded it, from motives of
ambition; the Englilh queen, by her indiscreet zeal,
filled the kingdom with persons active in promoting
that cause. Mary ascended the throne of England on
the death of her brother Edward, and soon after mar-
ried Philip II. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of
the Romiih superstition, and the fierceness of that age,
she added the private resentment of her own and of
her mother's sufferings, with which she loaded the re-
formed religion; and the peevishness and severity of
her natural temper carried the acrimony of all these
pafions to the utmost extreme. The cruelty of her
p'efecution equalled the deeds of those tyrants lwho
have been the greatest reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could scarce keep pace with
the impetuosity of her zeal. Even the unrelenting
Philip was obliged, on some occasions, to mitigate the
rigoir of her proceedings. Many among the most
eminent of the reformers suffered for the doctrines
which they had taught; others fled from the form.
To the greater part of these, Switzerland and Gerna-
ny opened a secure asylum; and not a few, out of
choice or necessity, fled into Scotland. What they laid
seen and felt in England did not abate the warmth and
zeal of their indignation against popery. Their a:-
tacks were bolder and more successful than ever; and
their dodtrines made a rapid progress among all ranks
es men.

These doc&rines, calcula'ed to rectify the opinions,

and to reform the manners of mankind, had hitheri.
produced no other effects; but they soon began to
operate with greater violence, and proved the occalion,
not only of subverting the established religion, but oi

shaking the throne, and endangering the kingdom.
The causes which facilitated the introduation of thele
new opinions into Scotland, and which disseminated
them so fast through the nation, merit, on that ac-
count, a particular and careful enquiry. The Reforma-
tion is one of the greatest events in the history of
mankind, and, in whatever point of light we view it,
is inftmltive and interesting.

The revival of learning in the fifteenth and fixteentl

centuries routed the world from that lethargy in which
it had been funk for many ages. The humar l mind
ftlt its own strength, broke the fetters of authority by
which it had been ls long restrained, and venturiihg to
move in a larger iihere, pulhed its enquiries into every
lubje&t with great boldneis and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of cx.

crcifing their reason, than religion was one of the fil.s
objecqs which drew their attention. Long before Lu-
ther publilhed his famous theles which shook the pa-
pal throne, 'cience and philosophy had laid open, to
many of the Italians, the impoflure and absurdity of
the eflablifhed superstition. That subtle and refined
people, iatisfied with enjoying those difeoveries in fe-
crt, .were little dilipofed to asIume the dangerous clia-
rancr of reformers, and conclh!;dl the knowlecdge of
truth to be the prerogative of the wife, while vulgar
mliiiil.l must le overawed and govern.d b)y ponlp:lar er-
rors. But, animated witl a more noble and .'(intcrclt-
ed zeal, the German theologian bo!,l) ere'led the
I inda(rd of truth, and upheld J. witml an unconquerable
i:tr:jrlity, which merits the admiration and gratitude
of ail succeeding ages.

The occalion of Luther's being firfl difgufled with
the tenets of the Roniifl church, and how, from a
lirall rulptlr.-, the quarrrl widenedi into an irreparable
,.r ilch, is known to every one who has bren the leait
cro'; raa!it inl hiiorn. From the hia:-t of (e:'.:;any
hi, : inio;:s l read, vwith aftoniPliii r.pidlty, all over
1 l'or,; and, wherever they callc, c:'.; ;:gerrd or over-
tr::;; :!i
t anuint, but il.rbuilmdcl Iftletl. The .;ii-

Iv

lance and address of the court of Rome, and the power
and bigotry of the Auflrian family, Ihppreffed thelf
notions on their frit appearance in the southern kirg.
dorns of Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north,
irritated by multipied impositions, could neither hb
mollified by the

fame arts, nor fuded by the f

force; and encouraged by some princes from pi;tT,
and by others out of avarice, it eafi!y bore down tlie
feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral clergy.

The superstition of popery seems to have grown to

the molt extravagant height in those countries which
are situated towards the different extremities of Eu-
rope. The vigour of imaaination, and ienfibility of
frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of southern climates,
rendered them susceptible of the deepelf impressions or
fuperflitious terror and credulity. Ignorance and bar-
barity were no less favourable to the progress of ti:
lame spirit among the northern nations. 'Ihey knevw
little, and were disposed to believe every thing. TL;e
most glaring absurdities did not shock their gross un-
derfiandings, and the moil improbable ficions were re-
ceived with imrplicit assent and admiration.

Accordingly, tlat form of popery which prevailcd

in Scotland was of the most big.tted and illiberal kind!
These doc.rires which are ntilt apt to shock the .u-
nran ur.nerHl.-nin -, and thoe !kitnds which farthr!i
exceed b hiet, wi-- p.opuicd to t:he people witlhut a:,'
.:.t'lpt to palliate or disgu.ise ;lit-m; nor did thel eye
.-'! in ci;e.icn th; rcaif;labilenfs of the one, or :!:
t:uth ot tili oth:r.

T'c pxver 2and weaith of Lile church kept pace witn

the prcgrefs

, f far.r;titicin; for it is the nature of ti

spLit to tni.rrne no bounds in its relptct and liberali'y
'ovwards t i:ol' ihofe charaqer it cflecms ficred. Thi
S ottifn ki- s ear! I dcnoni'-ated how much they wtr:
t::.dcr its infit:.-:ce, by their vast additions to the in.-
;:un.niit s .:d r:irc s of tie clergy. The profu lh pit.
.· s irav-id I. -ho acquired c!n iht account the n.
If iaint, ti ns;crrcd alnmot the v.:hole crowni aI:.'i
w-hi t'-. wer at tLha t le of' lr.: Cextnt, into :he I_. -

of eeclefiaftics. The example of that virtuous prince
was imitated by his fuccefflrs. The spirit spread among
all orders of .ien, wvio daily loaded the priesthood with
new pofflefions. The riches of the church all over
Europe were exorbitant; but Scotland was one of those
countries wherein they had farthest exceeded the just
proportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half of every
tax imposed on land; and as there is no reason to
think that in that age they would be loaded with any
unequal share of the burden, we may conclude that,
hy the time of the Reformation, little less than one
half of the property in the nation had fallen into the
hands of a society, which is always acquiring, and can
never lose.

The nature, tno, of a considerable part of their pro-

pert', extended their influence. Many estates through-
out the k;ngdlom held of the church; clitirchlalid
were let in cease at an cafy rent, and were 1pollTedl by
the younger sons and defiendents of the belt families'.
'I'he conneOion between fupcrior and v/q.d, betwceen
llndlord and tenant, created dependencies, andi gave
:;iL- to an union of great advantage to the chli h; and
;l ellirnating the influence of the popish erclcfialtic
over the nation, these, as well as the real amounlt of
their revenues, mull be attended to, and taken into the
.:coulnt.

This extraordinary share in the national property
'.as accompanied with proportionable weight in the
i:pirtme council of the kingdom. At a timehewhen the
number of the temporal peers was extremely lirali,
and when the lefier barons and representatives of io-'
.oIugh6s clidom attended parliaments, the ecclefiaftiie
:I,.-Led a considerable l:(diy there. It appears from the
ancient rolls of parliamnent, and from the manner ot
hoofing the lords of articles, that the proceedings of
that high courtt musil have been, in a great mealure, tin-
ier their diredion4t.

' Keith, 521. Not. (b).
' potr. Hill. of 'hce Church of Scotland, 449.

The reverence due to their sacred characer, whici

was often carried incredibly far, contributed not a little
towards the growth of their power. The dignity, the
titles, and precedence of the popish clergy are remark-
able, both as causes and effecds of that dominion, which
they had acquired over tie reft of mankind. They were
regarded by the credulous laity as beings of a superior
species; they were neither subje&t to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judgest. Every guard, that religion
could iupply, was placed around their power, their pol:
sessions, and their persons; and endeavours were ul'cd,
not without fucccfs, to represent them all as equally la-
cred.

The reputation for learning, which, however incon-

fiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy, added ro
the reverence which they derived from religion. T'he
principles of found phi!ofophy, and of a jult tafle, wter
altogether unknown; in place of these, were fubhtitutcrl
Itudies, barbarous and uninfiruc'ive; but as the eccllli-
aftics alone were conversant in them, this procured them
esteem; and a very small degree of knowledge drce
the admiration of rude ages, which knew little. W.ar
was the sole profcffion of the nobles, and hunting their
chief amusement; they divided their time between thklt:
unacquainted with the arts, and unimproved by fcienrc,
they disdained any employment foreign from military
affairs, or which required rather penetration and adillrc:,
th-in bodily vigour. Wherever the former were nccdl:

t To what extent this exemption of the clergy from

lay jurifdiation extended, appears from a curious tranl-
ac'ion in the parliarent of 1346. When that court
was about to pronounce sentence of forfeiture upon lie
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, among whom was'a
priest who had aCtually joined in the affaifination, de.
testable as that crime was among the clergy, they fct:t
-ne of their order, a:!d claimed that he might be frecl
irom the judgrnent of parliament, becaulf he was a

, -

r. U! majn. Uponi t;:ir Hle was ex( m;l c';l friom thle b.-
c;:.-re. .Ept. Ri:-j. Scot. ii. _5.

fary, the clergy were intrufled; hecaufe they alone were
properly qualified for the trust. Almost all the high
offices in civil government devolved, on this account,
into their hands. The lord chancellor was the first sub-
ea in the kingdom, both in dignity and in power.
'From the earliest ages of the monarchy, to the death of
cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had held that high
office; and of these, forty-three had been ecclefaftics*.
The lords of session were supreme judges in all matters
of civil right; and by its original conflitution, the pre-
sident and one half of the senators in this court were
rhurchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being fepa-
rated from the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy,
and undiftracted by those cares, and unincumbered uwith
those burdens, which occupy and oppress other men,
the interest of their order became their only objet, and
they were at full leifilre to pursue it.

The nature of their function gave them access to all
persons and at all seasons. They could employ all the
motives of fear and of hope, of terror and of confola-
tion, which operate moit powerfully on the human
mind. They haunted the weak and the credulous; they
hefieged the beds of the sick and of the dying; they
suffered few to go out of the world without leaving
marks of their liberality to the church, and taught them
to compound with the Almighty for their fins, by be-
llowing riches upon those who called themselves his
servants.

When their own indufirv, or the fuperflition of
mankind failed of producing this effcEt, they had influ-
ence enough to call in the aid of law. Whoever died

.trjiatr, was presumed to have deflined his moveables to

pious uses. The church took poii'eflon of them. The
children, the wife, the creditors of the person deceaf-
et, were often excluded from any Ihare in what was
efiremed a sacred propertyt. As men are apt to trust

* Crawf. Offic. of State.
t Essays on Brit. Antiq 174. Annals of Scotland, by
Sir David Dalrymple, vol i. .Append. No. ii.

to the continuance of life with foolilh confidence, and
childishly shun every thing that forces them to think ,f
their mortality, mar.; die without fettling their affairs
bv will; and the bold usurpation of ecclesiastics in this
cafe, of which there are frequent vestiges in our laws,
though none in our historians, may be reckoned among
the most plentiful sources of the wealth of the church.

At the fame time all matrimonial and teftamentarv

raufes could he tried oi.l in the spiritual courts, and Ly
laws which the clergy themselves had framed. The pe-
nalty, too, by which the decisions of thcle courts were
enforced, added to their authority. A lentence of ex-
communication was no less formidable than a fentelcc
of outlawry. It was pronounced on many occasion,,
and against various crimes: and besides excluding tholr
upon whom it fell, from Christian privileges, it depriv-
ed them of all their rights as men, or as citizens; and
the aid of the secular power concurred with the fuperfti-
tion of mankind, in rendering the thunders of the
church no less deflruative than terrible.

Tothefe general causes may beattributed theimmenfe

growth both of the wealth and power of the popish
church; and without entering into any more minute
detail, this may serve to discover the foundations on
which a structure so flupendous was eredced.

But though the laity had contributed, by their own

superstition and profufcnefs, to raise the clergy from po-
vertv and obscurity to riches and eminence, they began
by degrees to feel and to murmur at their encroach-
ments. No wonder haughty and martial nobles fhouldi
view the power and possessions of the church with en-
Tv, and regard the lazy and inactive character o:
churchmen with the utmost contempt; while, at tsit
fame time, the indecent and licentious lives of the cler-
gy, gave great and just offence to the people, and c,.-
fiderablv abated the veneration which they were accuf-
tomed to yield to that order of men.

Immenie wealth, extreme indolence, gross igno-

rance, and, above all, the severe injunction of celiba-
cy, had concurred to introduce this corruption of nmo

rals among a number of clergy, who, presuming too
much upon the fubmilion of the people, were at no
pains either to conceal or to disguise their own vices.
According to the accounts of the reformers, coiiiircied
by several popilh writers, the most open and scandalous
d ifllution of manners prevailed among the S .tifh
clergy'. Cardinal Beatoun, with the fame public
pomp which is due to a legitimate child, celebrated the
marriage of his natural daughter with the earl of Craw-
ford's sint ; and, if we may believe Knox, he public-
s l continulrd to the end ol his days a criminal corrcfpon-
'i d nce with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
T ''Le other prelates seem not to have been more regular

and exempiary than their primate f.
Men of such characters ouglit,in reafon,to have been a-
lanned at the firlt clamours raited against t ,cir own
morals, and the do'r;ines of the church, by tIc pro-
t ;clialt preachers; but the propifh eccleliaflics, either out
lt pride or ignorance, ncglccted the proper mecthiods for
Il'cncilg thenl. Infliad of reforming their lives, or
ifguifing their vices, they aflfcctd to dclpife tlie cen-

i * R i t. a. a. Keith 2,

zo.Ap

d. , Lrfl. de
i Rebl. Ge. Scot. 232.

T 'he marriage articles, subscribcd witlh his own

hand, inl U hich he calls her izy dau.g4ler, are itill extant.
Keith, p. 4:.

! A remarkable proof of the dilTolute manners of the

,:Cgy is fouind in the public records. A greater nuni-
i.r of letters of ihil,, tion was granted during the first
iii:rtv years after the Reformation, than during the
.ti1le period that has e'apflcd since that itne. Tli;fe
:\-rc obtailled hb the sons of the popish clergy. T'lhe
iclefifi, ic who were allo ced to retain their bencrices
:!'cnated t}:em to tlcir ( ilircn; who, 'whtri tihey a.-
(itired wealth, uwere delfirois that the stain of ile iiinaa-
v mitght no lonlger rmnain upon their f.' iiies. in

/':;rih C .,&i,,c, of' Sc-:,Jh /k3Z,.ps, we finid Ikveral inflan-
-r of fich alienatio: , of cliurch lat.dt, by the popilh

: 'm:lz:rto to tit;lr laturirl children.

fures of the people. While the reformers, by their
mortifications and aufterities, endeavoured to refembl.
the firil propagators of Christianity, the popish clergy
were compared to all thole persons who are most ins..
mous in history for the enormity and scandal of tlhtir
crimes.

On the other hand, instead of mitigating the rigour,

or colouring over the absurdity of the established dnc.
trines; instead of attempting to found them upon scrip.
ture, or to reconcile them to reason; they left them
without any other support or recommendation but the
authority of the church and the decrees of councils.
The fables concerning purgatory, the virtues of pilgri.
mage, and the merits of the faints, were the topics on
which they insisted in their discourses to the people;
and the duty of preaching being left wholly to monks
of the lowest and most illiterate orders, their compoli.
tions were still more wretched and contemptible than
the fubjeas on which they insisted. While the reform-
ers were attended by crowded and admiring audien'es,
the popish preachers were either universally deserted, or
listened to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in order to re.

cover their declining reputation, or to confirm the A.wJ
vering faith of the people, was equally imprudent and
unsuccessful As many docrines of their church had
derived their credit at first from the authority of fi.i;
miracles, they now endeavoured to call in tlleie to thecr
aid'. But those lying wonders, which were beht!,t
with unlulpicious admiration, or heard with irpli.:
faith, in times of darkness and of ignorance, met wut!
a very different reception in a more enlightened peri..
The vigilance of the reformers detected thefeimpoftur,!
and exposed not only them, but the cause which netd
ed the aid of such artifices, to ridicule.

As the popish ecclesiastics became more and more tre

obieSts of hatred and of contempt, the difcourtfs ei':
reformers were listened to as tb many calls to liumir::

' Spotfwood, 6').

andbefides the pious indignation which they excited a-
gainft those corrupt dodrines which had perverted the
nature of true Chrillianity; besides the zeal which they
inspired for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of
religion; they gave rife also, among the Scottish nobles,
toother views and passions. They hoped to fliake ofl'
the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which they had long
felt to beoppreffive, aihd which they now dilcovered to
he unchristian. They expected to recover pofieffion of
the church revenues, which they were now taught to
confider as alienations made by their anceflors, with a
profusion no le's undifrerning than unbounded. They
flattered themselves, that a check would he given to
the pride and luxury of the clergy, who would be o-
bliged, henceforward, to confine thcmfelves within the
sp)here peculiar to their sacred charater. An aversion
tor the eftablifiled church, which flowed from io many
Icancurrilg causes, which was raised by conliderations
of religion, and heighltened b' motives of policy, spread
fail through the nation, and excited a fiicit that burit
out at last wit'h irresistible viplence.

Religious considerations alone were fiiiicient to have

rouscd this spirit. The points in controvcrfy with the
church of Rome were of fb much importance t, the
happiness of mankind, and so efi-ential to Chrifiianity,
that they merited ai! thle zeal with which the reformers
contended in order to eflablifll them. But the Reform-
ation having been reprrfcnted as the eff ct of rome wild
anud ejnthufiaftic frenzy in the hi]man mind, this attempt
to account for the eagcrnels and zeal with which our
ancerlors embraced and propagated the prolefant doc-
trines, by taking a view of the political motives alone
which influenced tllem, and bv ihewing how naturally
these prompted them to act with so much ardour, will
not, perhaps, be eltetlee d, an unnecefi'ry digrelfiou.
We now. return to the courle of the history.

Tlle queen's elevation to the office of regent seems to

lave tranliorted her, at first, beyond the known pru-
dence and moderation of her characer. She began her
Adminillration, by conferring upon foreigners fi.yerl
Vol. I. L

offices of trust and of dignity; a ftep which, both from
the inability of strangers to discharge their offices with
vigour, and from the envy which their preferment ex-
cites among the natives, is never attended with good
consequences. Vilmort was made comptroller, and en-
trusted with the management of the public revenues;
Bonot was appointed governor of Orkney; and Rubav
honoured with the cultody of the great feal, and th
title of vice-chancellor'. It was with the utmost indig.
nation, that the Scots beheld offices of the greatest emi-
nence and authority dealt out among ftrangerst. Br
these promotions they conceived the queen to have of.
sered an insult both to their understandings and to their
courage; to the former, by supposing them unfit for
those stations which their ancestors had filled with so
much dignity; to the latter, by imagining that they
were tame enough not to complain of an affront, whici,
in no former age, would have been tolerated with in:.
punity.

While their minds were in this disposition, an inci

dent happened which inflamed their aversion from
French councils to the highest degree. Ever since the
famous contest between the houses of Valois and Plan-
tagenet, the French had been accustomed to embarrafi
the English, and to divide their strength by the fuddtn
and formidable incursions of their allies, the Scots. But,
as these inroads were seldom attended with any real ad-
vantage to Scotland, and exposed it to the dangerous re.
fcntrment of a powerful neiglihour, the Scots began to
grow ltfs tradable than formerly, and scrupled any long-
er to icrve an ambitious ally at the price of their ow:l
quiet and security. The change, too, which was daily
introducing into the art of war, rendered the afifillac:
of the Scottish forces of less importance to the French
monarch. Forthefe rafons, Henry having relblvcdli:"

* Lefly de Reb. Gest. Scot. a189.
t The spirit of refcntment againfl the French wvs 5

violent, that it became necefiai- to pals an act of tF.
·liament to rellraii it. Parl. 6. QLM:.rv, c. 6o.

on a war with Philip II. and foreseeing that the queen
of England would take part in her huibandl'a quarc-l,
was extremely solicitous to secure in Scotland the aTfllt-
ance of some troops, which would be more at his colm-
mand than an undisciplined army, led by nobles who
were almof independent. In prosecution of this design,
but under pretence of relieving the nobles firom the ex-
pence and danger of defending the borders, the queen
regent proposed in parliament, to register the value of
lands throughout the kingdom, to inpofe on them a
finall tax, and to apply that revenue towards maintain-
ing a body of regular troops in eonflant pay. A fixed
tax upon land, which the growing expence of govern-
ment hath introduced into almost every part of Europe,
was unknown at that time, and feenled altogether incon-
filtent with the spirit of the feudal government. No-
thing could be more shocking to a generous and brave
nobility, than the entrusting to mercenary hands the de-
fence of those territories which had been acquired, or
preserved, by the blood of their ancestors. They re-
ceived this proposal with the highest indignation. A-
bout three hundred of the lesser barons repaired in a bo-
dy to the queen regent, and represented their sense of
the intended innovation, with that mauly and deter-
mined boldness which is natural to a free people in a
martial age. Alarmed at a remonstrance delivered in
so firm a tone, and supported by such formidable num-
bers, the queen prudently abandoned a fchllne, w'iid h
she found to be universally odious. As the queen h r-
self was known perfecfly to underfland the circurnltal-
ces and temper of the nation, this meraure was inpli;-
td wholly to the suggestions of her foreign couiicllors;.
and the Scots were ready to proceed to Lhe molt violent
extremities against then.

The French, inflead of extinguishing, added fuel to
the flame. They h::d now comnmenced lloftiiliris a-
gainft Spain, and Philip had prevailed on the quceen of
tngland to reinforce his aroy with a confirdra!,Je lhod'
cf her troops. In order to deprive him of tllis aid, lIrn-
ry had recourse, as he projected, to tile Scolts and at-

L

tempted to excite them to invade England. But, as
Scotland had nothing to dread from a princess of Ma-
rv's ctharacier, who, far from any ambitious scheme o.f
difturhing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in en-
deavouring to reclaim her heretical subjects; the no-
hies who were affcnmbled by the queen regent at Necw-
hattle, liRened to the solicitations of the French no-
narch with extreme coldnel'', and prudently declined
engaging the kingdom in an enrerprife so dangerous
and unnecessary. iWhat she could not obtain by- per-
suasion, the queen regen: ', clight about by flratr.em.
Notwithstanding the peace which rublifted between the
tvo kingdoms, she commanded her French soldier, to
rebuild a finall fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
ed, by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison o'
Berwick rallied out, interlrpted the work, and ravaged
the adjacent country. This infillt roused the fiery fpi-
rit of the Scots, and their promptnels to revenge the
least appearance of national injury, dissipated, in a mo-
ment, the wife and pacific resolutions which they had
so lately formed. W;ar was determined, and orders
inflantly given for railing a numerous army. But he-
fore their forces could assemble, the ardour of their in-
dignation had time to cool, and the Englilh having
discovered no intention to push the war with vigour,
the nobles reiumed their pacific fvitem, and resolvcd to
stand altogether upon the defenlive. They marched to
the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incursions
of the enemy; and having done what they thought fui-
ficient for the fafr:y and honour of their country, the
queen could not indu.ce them, either bv her intreatice
or her artifices, to advance another flep.

While th. Scots perfiHed in their inativitv, D'OV.

fcl, the comma:nder of tihe French troops, who lpoffe
fti entirely the confidence of the queen regent, eni'a-
voered, wi;h her connivance, to engage the iwo nation
in Ihotilitirs. Contrary to the crricrs of the Scotilh
general, he marchld ever the u c.t wiii his own ihl-
c.ers, and invested W'erk, a gnrri.;,! of the Enig!ilh.
The Seots, inflead of seconding hib alttmpt, wtclri-

raged at his prelfurption. The queen's partiality
towards France, had long been fiufpcted; but it was
now visible that the wantonly sacrificed the peace and
fifety of Scotland to the interest of that ambitious and
affmrning ally. Under the feudal gover;ments, it was
in camps. that fubjecs were accustomed to adcdres the
boldest remonfirances to their sovereigns. Wh'ile arms
were in their hands, they felt their own flren-':h ; andl
aat tht time all these representations of grievances car-
ried the authority of commands. On tiis occasion,
the indignation of the nobles broke out with such vio-
lence, that the queen, perceiving all attempts to en-
gage them in aci1ioi to be vain, abruptly diiiniffed her
armt, and retired with the lutmnoit hamne and difgult;
having diJcovrrcd( the inpotncie o' her own authority,
wi:horui citeinig any thing which coulli be of atid al-
taglc m Irance '.

It is oubhrvabe!, th. t this first inftanc of conrillp'
for the rcgent's aulthloity call, in no degrc, be inilit-
cd to the infrluence of the new opinions in rliigion. A.
the queen's pret lrfions to the regency i;:d been princi-
Fa2ly fippoorltd byv tholi 'wh: o tavoured the Rcforna-
tion, and. as fhei ll rtded them tor la c c.n.itLc oic' to(
the archbLiho)p ol St. Andrct' q, and tte partitlais of the
!;n.l;c of Lkmiltt,, , th!eyv \ir .l now tr. :!ted by , ier withl
g-t.t relpect. anLi '.'T-::l (d!;tled to ilo il'c'li'! rabk-
ffare in hte-r f!;.'r awli

, I dnicn'*. Kirka!lv i

(;r2an;e, and t!2' o<i .:' *.:",.il.; t:o.;'iratJrs 2-uililt
fardi;?. B i.no.ni. '.., ;.'t e l:is timis lrnecr.alit-d byv Ir.
rn !:ar:i:inrt..:: :;::,ar thlno;.nil her , . 'in li.ai;cr, tlic
I.rctltant prt a, i' . .: r;;r. ed :all interval o lit' aiiu.:iit-,
ul .in was a3 of -I' .l' alj' l '. to tjl-ir il;ir. bo lo;zi l
1:' lc i-,nl.;::' . .f t :v qirecns nioderation and lhiu
.;panitv, t; r ~.'i i:,LH[!? .,l'onc si¢ thie ofiice ot

O ieli((1

I .'.:iri4 rei ;;-:; n,:l:i tie ln;,( s'< h
rt tiltr oppolile t :ti-

:'. te': ll.. i;;'l ni:.i:mpc t,s' dlipu;ilig the S:li oi

:;. t'ir so' .'

r:i - :.

-.i tile nrrl ii I eiit f. it bio / liinei; ml1l. pre. ilii:IiL
' S;ry.'ps .ilcleir . iii. IAp;'clnd. 24s Lefly, 1'.iy

i. j

her authority was, while it depended on the poise of
these contrary factions, she endeavoured to eftablilh it
on a broader and more secure foundation, by hastening
the conclusion of her daughter's marriage with the
dauphin. Amiable as the queen of Scots then was, in
the bloom of youth, and considerable as the territories
were which ihe would have added to the French mo-
narchy, there did not want reaions to dissuade Henrv
from completing his first plan of marrying her to his
son. The conflable Montmorency had enrployed a'l
his interefi to defeat an alliance which refleCted ib
much lustre on the princes of Lorrain. He had rr-
presented the impoffbility of maintaining order and
tranquillity among a turbulent people during the ab-
fence of their Ibvereien; and for that reason had ad-
viled Henry to beitow the young queen upon one of
the princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scotland,
might preserve that kingdom an useful ally to France,
which, by a nearer union to the crown, would become
a mutinous and ungovernable province *. But at this
time the constable was a prisoner in the hands of the
Spaniards; the princes of Lorrain were at the height e;
their power; and their influence, seconded by the
charms of the young queen, triumphed over the pro.
dent but envious reronfrances of their rival.

The French king acccrdingly applied to the parlia-

ment of Scotland, which appointed eight of its mc;-n
berst to reprcdent the whole body of the nation at the
marriage of the queen. Among the persons on whom
the public choice conferred this honourable charac&er,
were fime of the most avowed and zealous advocato
for the Rctormation; by l hich may be eflimated the
degree of rel'iccOt and popularity x hich that party had
now attained in the kingdom. The inftrudtions of t;l

" Melv. Mem. 1S.
t Viz. The arclihbi:op of CI'gonw, the bishop

Ross, the bishop of Orkiey, t:e tarts of Rothes a.'.
Caffils, lord l'eming, lord Su:on, t!. trior of St. A:.
drews, and John Erikine of Dul,

parliament to those commiflioners still remain f, and do
honour to the wifldon and integrity of that affcmbly.
At the fame time that they manifefled, with refpec to
the articles of marriage, a laudable concern for the dig-
ility and interelt of their sovereign, they employed e-
very precaution which prudence could dictate for pre-
icrving the liberty and independence of the nation, and
for securing the succession of the crown in the house of
Iamilton.
3: With regard to each of thefc, the Scots obtained

i whatever fatisfalioin thilr fear or jealouly could de-
mand. The young queen, the dauuipin, and the king
ji of France, ratified every article with the most solemn

o oaths, and confirmed them by deeds in form under
t their hands and leals. But on the part of France, all.
! this was one continued scene of fludied and elaborate

deceit. Previous to thece public tranlaftions with the
.tkottifh deputies, Mary had been persuaded to subscribe
plrivatclv three deeds, equally unjust and invalid; by
rhicb, fai!ing the heirs tt her own body, she conferred
the kingdom of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or
f uceffion might accruel to it, in free gitt upon the crown
of France, declaring all promises to the contrary, which
the nece!fity of her affairs, and the solicitations of her
fubjtc&s, had extorted, or might extort from her, to be
,'oid and of no obligation'. As it gives us a proper
idea of tlh cliaradler of the French court under llenry
11. we may observe that the king himlcli, the keeper of
thc great feals, the duke of Guise, and the cardinal oi
I.orrain, were ti:c persons engaged in coLiduqilug this
perfidious and difliiinourable projes. The queen of

r:c."' w.a-s the only io innocent a&or in lt lkenc of ini-
:!,i:y. I Icr vyouth h, er inexperience, her education in

I , ,rcign ccuu::r- , and her detelencc to tIh alvi:ce of
i ncr in!s, mult vindicate her, in the judCnmcnt of eve-

impartia! pcrlon, fioJu i m

.n) i-putation ot blanl- c;:
t!.,i; ;acd:t:l;.t.

K li.'it, Append. 1,;.
' .rps dic!ina:. :'J:n. v. is. ni(,i::h, 5,7

This grant, by which Mary bellowed the inheritance

of her kingdom upon fitrangers, was concealed with the
utmost care from her subje&s. They feern, however,
not to have been unacquainted with the intention of
the French to overturn the settlement of the fucrcefii,n
in favour of the duke of Chatclherault. The zeal with
which the archbifiop of St. Andrews opposed all the
measures of the queen regent, evidently proceeded from
the fears and lulpicions of that prudent prelate on this
headt.

The marriage, however, was celebrated with great

pomp; and the French, wlho had hitherto affcrted to
draw a veil over their designs upon Scotland, began
now to unfold their intentions without any difgtiil.
In the treaty of marriage, the deputies had agreed that
the dauphin should assume the name of king of Scot-
land. This the- confidered only as an honorary title;
but the French laboured to annex to it fonne solid privi
leges and powers. They infiitt d that the dauphin's ti-
tke fould be publicly reco-nifed; rhat the crtn maui.
monial ffould be conferred upon ilin.; and that all the
rights pertaining to the hitltand ot a queen thould be
veited in his perIon. t- :he laws of S ctland, a pF-rfon
who married an heiress kept pofiduion ,f her estate dur-
ing his own life, if the hap. cidet to die without ch;l-
dren'. This was called t, c"-u'urv rj .c ,lnid. 'Tlie
French aimed at applying this rrue, which takes place
in private inheritances, to the fi.:ci ,?. oftl' kindloi;
and that feenns to be implied in tihir deu:;ind ,' tLie
crc-.vn .maririsnnia/ a plr: p eculiar to tlhe S-,ni:i. !ii.:
torians, and which they have neglected to cx-i;pint.

+ About this time tlhe French seem to have had fomc

design of reviving the earl of Le;nox's pretcntions :o
the fuccelun. in order to infllidate andi a.irn tie
duke of Chatciilerault. iiay)li, -

i i1. 219. Forbcs's co.-
;i -. vol. i. 189.

Reg. Maj. lib. ii. 48.

t It seems to have bein the usage of Scotland for tl c
i:ufand of':!e lceen:, bL :he gift us tie crovi riatrrii!.'

As the French had realon to expect difficulties in car-
rving through this mealure, they began with founding
the deputies who were then at Paris. The English in
the marriage-articles betweecn their queen and Philip
of Spain, had set an example to the age, of that pru-
(!nt jealousy and reserve, waith which a frceigner should
be admitted near the throne. Full of the lame ideas,
the Scottish deputies hald, in their oath ot allegiance to
the dauphin, exprefcid themselves with remarkable cau-
tiont. Their anfwcr was in the fame spirit, relpeetful,
but firm; and difsovered a fixed resolution of consent-
ing to nothing that tended to introduce any alteration
in the order of the filcceffion to the crown.

Four of the deputies § happening to die before they
returned into Scotland, this accident was universally
imputed to the effcEts of poison, which was supposed
to have been given them by the emissaries of the house
of Guise. The historians of all nations discover an a-
nazing credulity with respect to reports of this kind,
*'hich are so well calculated to please the malignity of
some men, and to gratify the love of the marvellous,
which is natural to all, that in every age they have been

nial, to afTume the title of king, to sign public inflru-
ments, along with the queen, and to have his name
tarnmped on all th coinage. Thus his authority be-
crr.me ecually pow i:rful and neceflary as that of the
qecil, becaute without his agreement and signature,
no public deed was ftecmecd as valid or binding. But
ti.; u!ii'e obtained only during the continuance of the
rr:' ii<e. Hence the commiliioners to the dauphin
t,-'!,ic bound by their oath of fidelity to him only dur-
int lie ie of the queen. But the affaifinators of Riz-
zi l'm lnd themcnllves to procure for Darnley a grant
I! the ir,.z-rn ,atri.'.vouial for the whole term of his life,

v:i;:h was departing from the custom of former times.
Krclih, Appenld. 120. Good, i. 227.

.xe:h, Append. 2o.

§ 'Ihe bishop of Orkney, the earl of Rothes, the earl
! Caffils, and lord Flemeing.

swallowed without examination, and believed contrary
to realon. No wonder the Scots should easily give cre-
dit to a suspicion, whhich received such firong colours of
probability, both from their own resentment, and from
the Known charac&er of the princes of Lorrain, so little
scrupulous about the jufiice of the en'is which they pur.
sued, or of the means which they emnployed. For the
honour of human nature it mufl, however, he ol)lrvcd,
that as we can discover no motive which could induce
any man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears no
evidence to prove that it was committed. But the Sc ots
of that age, inluenced by national aniniafitics and pre.
judices, were incapable of examining the circumflances
of the cafe with calmness, or ofjudging concerning thne
with candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty or this detestable action;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increalc the
aversion for them, which was growing among all ranks
of men.

Notwithstanding the cold reception which their pro-

pofal concerning the rcwn matrimnorial met with from
the Scottish deputies, the French ventured to move it in
parliament. The partisans of the house of Hamilton,
suspicious of their designs upon the succession, opposed
it with great zeal. But a party, which the feeble and
unsteady conduct of their leader had brought under
much difreputarion, was little able to withstand the in-
fluence of France, and the address of the queen regent,
seconded, on this occasion, by all the numerous adhe.
rents of the Reformation. Blfides, that artful princrfs
dressed out the Frerch demands in a less offensive garb,
and threw in so many limitations, as seemed to render
them of fmail consequence. Thelfe either deceived tle
Scots, or removed their feruplcs; and in compliance to
the queen, they passcd an at, conferring the cro-., ,a.
trimnial on the dauphin; and with the fondest crdl'lli-
ty, trusted to the frail fecuritv of words and ftitulcs, a-
gainft the dangerous encroachments of power*.

' The cdt of pariamreut is worded ,th , the utr.o0

The concurrence of the protestants with the queen
regent, in promoting a mealure so acceptable to France,
while the popish clergy, under the infiuenre of the arch-
bishop of St. Andrews, opposcd it with lb much vio-
lenee, is one of tholb singular circumftanccs in the con-
d!ir of parties, for which this period is lo remarkable.
It may lbe alc:-il.d, in sone degree, to the dexterous
management -,f the queen, but chiefly to tihe moodera-
ion of tholie who favol!red the Reformation. The pro-
tellants were by this time almotl equal to the catholics,
both in power and in number; and, conscious of their
own flrength, thes submitted with impatience to that
tyrannical authority with which the ancient laws arm-
ed the ecclesiastics against them. They longed to be ex-
empted from this oppressive jurifdi&ion, and publicly
to enjoy the liberty of profefling those opinions, and of
exerciling that worihip, which lb great a part of the na-
tion deemed to be founded in truth, and to be accept-
able to the Deity. This indulgence, to which the w-hole
weight of prirltiv authority was opposed, there were
only two ways of obtaining. Either violence must ex-
tort it from the rcluctant hand of their lovereign, orby
prudent compliances they might expects it from her fa-
vour or her gratitude. The former is an expedient for
the redr.i! of grievances, to which no nation has recourfti
fuddenl-; and ilbjes feidom venture upon refiflance,
x-hich is their !.ilt remedy, but in cafes of extreme nt-
celiit.!. On this occafici the Reformers wilfly held the
oppolite clnrle, and by their zeal in forwarding the
c;.: l s del 'hs, they I;oped to mcnrit her protctiaon.

rare: with a v*ict to ,ua. rd agraint any breach of the or-
tder of fiBccrilon. Bit tlhe duke, not relying on this a-
loe:, entered a folemnt proteflation to secure his own
rihlt. Keith, -5. it is plain that he litfpectd the
:rli ib of ljvi;:: ; lomrie i ntcntion: to ltt aiide hlis rig.ht
c; flr.fieon ; and indlecd, if they had no dcfiiin of that
Ln;. tc eagernel; v.';!: \;'hich thev u'-,-d tli.ci d;mand,
^5: c.idildifh.
t M.e,'.4 ..

This disposition the queen encouraged to the utmcft,
and amused them so artfully with many promilies, and
some concessions, that, by their affifiance she furmoult.
ed in parliament the force of a national and perhaps a
laudable jealousy, which would otherwise have swayed
with the greater number.

Another circuinfiance contributed somewhat to ac-

quire the regent such confiderahle influence in this par-
liament. In Scotland, all the liflhoprics, and those al.
beys which conferred a title to a leat in parliament,
were in the gift of the crown- . From the time of her
accession to the regency, the queen had kept in her own
hands almeft all those which became vacant, except
such as were, to the great difgult of the nation, hcltti.
ed upon foreignrrs. Among tlicfe, her brother the car-
dinal of Lorrail had obtained the ahhevs of Kello and
Melrofs, two of the molt wealthy ioundations in'.:
kingdom[. By this conducif, (he thinned the eeclefl-a.i-
cal benchll, which m as entirely under the influence.
the archbifhep of St. Aindrev.'s, and by its numbers :;ld
authority had great weight in the hotife, I as to rcnc!i
any opposition it could give at that period of littie cun-
sequence.

The earl of Argyll, and James Stewart prior of St.

Andrews, one of the r.oli po:werful, and tle othLr the
tnoft popular leader of the proteflanlt, were appoiw.r:l
to carry the crown and other cniigns of royalty to tie
dauphin. But from this they were diverted 1y' tlie iar
they were called to acl i:fa more interclling lct l, which
now begins to open.

Before we turn towards ti:L, it is necessary to obincr.,

that on the th of Novcmber, 55 8, Mary of Engllr!
finiihed her short and inglorious reign. Her filer E .-
zabeth took pcfeffiion of the throne skithout oppoltiioll
and the protestant religion was once more ellabliihrcd

t See Book 1. t Lefly, 202.

1I It appears from the rolls of this parliament, whicl;

Lefly calls a very full one, that onlr seven bifflops a:C,
lxtccn abbot= ' ,:. i-,e.,::,

by law in England. The accession of a queen, who,
Duder very difficult circumflances, had given strong in-
dications of those eminent qualities, which, in the fe-
quel, rendered her reign ib illufbrious, attracted the eyes
of all Europe. Among the Scots both parties observed
her first motions with the utmost solicitude, as they ea-
ily) foresaw that (he would not remain long an indifie-
rent lpedator of their tranfadions.

Under many discouragements and much oppression,
the Reformation advanced towards a full eftabliihment
in Scotland. All the low country, the molt populous,
and that time the molt warlike part of the kingdom,
! was deeply tindcured with the proreflant opinions; and
if the fame imprefilons were not made in the more di-
'itit counties, it was owing to no want of the hame dif-
pOttiions among the people, hut to the fearcity of preach-
crs, whose molt indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the
avidity of those who desired their inftrutions. Among
a people bred to arns, and so prone to mutiny as the
Scots, and in an age whlen religious paflions had taken
:!ich firong pofefrioni of the human mind, and moved
and agitated it with lb much violence, the peaceable
2nd regular demeanour of to numerous a party is truly
A tonilhing. From the death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton,
iie first who filffered in Scotland for the protestant rc-
i igion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so long a
;priod no violation of public order or tranquillity had
proceeded fi-om that feda"; and though, roused and
.:rimated by the most cruel cxceies of ecclesiastical ty-
r.:nni tley did, in no inflance, tranfg-res those bounds
'f duty which the law prescribes to fubjedts. Besides
thc prudence of their o i leaders, aind the protefaion
);ich the queen regent, Ifom political motives, afford-
ed thern, the moderation of the arclbilhop of St. An-
drews encouraged the pacific difpotition. That prelate,

The lcurder cfcarJinai3 Beatoun was occasioned by

pr.vate revenge, anJd l:eing contrived and executed by
l:xteen persons, cannot witll juitice be imputed to the
v iole proteltant partv.

:.I. 1.' .I

m'hofe private life contemporary writers ta; ' w?' h ::
irregularities', govcined the church, for fin. tea',
with a terper and prudece of which there arc few ..
amples in that age. But snore time hrlore the mc.i;-
of lalt parliament, the archhifhop departed fr,.m ti,.
humane maxims by which he had hitherto rtlu!:,
his condiuc ; and whether in spite to the (!lueen, x;
had entered into so cloe! an union with the proteill;,
or in cmnpiiance with the irrportuiltisos of his ckirlt,
he let loose all the raze of perifcution ar ainft the r-
formed; sentenced to the flames an aged prif, \v! J
had been convi.ctl of eml;racing the pE-roef;i:t (ij;i.
ens: and fummorcld !excral others, fuitfpec-d of th
Ime crime, to appear before a fynod of the c!crl' ,
wuiich was ':cn to convcne at Edinburgh.

Nothing couldi e houal

:th hoiror of tilt prot-enlts :

this unexpected and barbarous execution, iolt the z
with which they elpoufed the defence of a caulnl ti!l:
now feeited devoted to cdeftruflion. They had i:i
mediate reconrte to the queen regent; and as her si,..
cess in the parliament, which was then about to ncc:,
depended on their corcurr.cnce, she not only fhelhc:=.t
them from the impendilng Itorm, but permitted tl:J::
the exercil; c.f their relicion v.ith more freedsi I,
they hid hitheito en;oved. lr.fa.;-d wii: th: 1
c.r:ous tentue bv whi.:hh they h'. t;-ir ilgiouts 1.lr.
tv, the prote.r :'l.t L ;ured to rend!- titeir

tpof te.lt

i , :

ir more ierure and in'crendc: . '\ii;h this

\ iw ti'

determinLred tu i ti rote

t iarilament ts, some i.

prutecdion .*-:ai: ::!e exouri .unt l]d oupriclrI. r':::
ciilion of th.t cck fiical couts i c, iich 1),hii . :.
hitrary m:-hcd of proc:eding, e fou.dl : en thi c.!:...
law, xere led to fentenccs t):i mnolt u:ouking to i.:.
liitv, by naxims ti: mi.ct repugn.nt to jul;ie. '
the outen, who dreaddi' the eS.5; of a del:ate ol ti;, .
licate fubjesl, which -cn:d lnot fail of cxciing hii ..
dangerous paftiors, prcvailed on the -'idcrs oi,;..
ty, by new and Imre ioletin promicl of hier prtc. . '

* 'rncx, BUcha.ln.. K;i:h, 2o8.

lo delilt from any application to parliament, where
thltir numbers an(l influence would, in all probability,
iave procured them, if not the entire rcdrcls, at leall
lome mitigation of their grievances.

The)' applied to another affemhly, to a convocation

of the popish clergy, but with the fame ill success which
hath always attended every proposal for reformation,
addrelfed to that order of men. To abandon uflurped
power, to renounce lucrative error, are sacrifices, which
the virtue of individuals has, on some occasions, offrced
to truth; but from any foricty of men no Iluch effort can
be expected. The corruptions of a focicty, recom-
lmended by common utility, and juilifcd by universal
pracfice, are viewed by its nmemlbers without fliame or
horror; and reformation never proceeds from them-
fdr'cs, but is alwavs forced upon them by some foreign
hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit
was the behaviour of the convocation in the present
conjunmiture. All the demands of the proteflants were
rrjected with contempt; and the popish clergy, far from
endeavouring, by any prudent concessions, to soothe,
and to reconcile such a nume:ous body, aflerted the
ldoltines of their church, with rel'pedt to some of the
mofi exceptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour,
which gave new offence t.

During the fitting of the convocation, the protestants
first began to fiiflpec some change in the regent's dilpo-
s,!ion towards them. Though joined witl them for
many years by interefl, and united, as they coinciveld,
hy the f'rongeft ties of affecrion and of gratitude, she
<!ifovered, on this occasion, evident symptoms, not on-
ls of coldlefs, but of a growing disgust and aversion.
In order to account for this, our historians do little
more than produce the trite observations concerning
tie influerce ofprofperity to alter the character and to
corrupt the heart. T'he queen, fay they, having reach-
ed the utnioft point to which her ambition aspired, no
longer prlecrvcd her accutonied moderation, but, with

e Kcith, 81.

M 2

aninfolence usual to the fortunate, looked down upon
those by whose affiflance she had been enabled to rife si
high. But it is neither in the depravity of the hiumm
heart, nor in the ingratitude of the queen's difpofitioi:,
that we must search for the motives of her present con.
duct. These were derived from another, and a snore
remote fourcc, which, in order to clear the fnibfeque::
tranfaclions, we shall endeavour to open with fobn:
care.

The ambition of the princes of Lorrain had been no

less successful than daring; but all their schemes were
diflinguilhed by being vat and unbounded. Stranger!
at the court of France, their eminent qualities had raised
them, in a short time, to an height of power, superior
to that of all other fuiijeCs, and had placed them on i
level even with the princes of the blood themfe!vr:.
The church, the army, the revenue, were under theic
direction. Nothing but the royal dignity remained
unattained, and into a near alliance with it they were
elevated by the marriage of the queen of Scots to the
dauphin. In order to gratify their own vanity, and to
render their niece more worthy the heir of France, they
set on foot her claim to the crown of England, which
was founded on pretences not unplaufible.

The tragical amours and marriages of Henry VllI.

are known to all the world. Moved by the caprices of
his love, or of his resentment, that impatient and arbi-
trary monarch had divorced or beheaded four of the fii
queens whom he married. In order to gratify hiln,
both his daughters had been declared illegitimate by ad
of parliament; and vet, with that fantastic inconliflen:c
which diflinguifhes his characdtr, he, in his last A 2.1,
whereby he was empowered to fettle the order of liuc
celfion, called both of them to the throne upon t!:e
death of their brother Edward; and, at the fame tine,
passing by the posterity of his eldest sifter Margaret
qteen of Scotland, he appointed the line of ficcrlhi,'!
to continue in the descendents of his younger filter, tihe
duchcfs of Suflblk.
In consequence of this defLination, the validity xwicrc.:

was admitted by the English, but never recognised by
foreigners, Mary had reigned in England without the
tIaft complaint of neighbouring princes. But the
lame cauces which facilitated her acceffiol to the throne
uwre obitacles to the elevation of her filler Elizabeth,
. and rendered her possession of it precarious and insecure.
R ome trembled for the catholic faith, under a prote-
!!rnt queen of such eminent abilities. The fame fu-
p rflitious fears alarmed the court of Spain. France
b)elield with indignation a throne, to which the queen
;J cf Scots could form tb many pretensions, occupied by

a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of all good catho-
lies, excluded her from any legal right of succession.
The impotent hatred of lte Roman pontiff, or the flow
rouncils of Philip II. would have produced no sudden
ior formidable effeIt. The ardict and impetuous am-
jition of the princes of Lorrain, who at that time go-
vcrned the court of France, was more decisive, and
; more to be dreaded. Initigated by them, Henry, soon

fter the death of Mary, perfiladed his daughter-in-

j law, and her husband, to assume the title of king and
queen of England. They affecled to publiih this to all
LEurope. They uscd that ficle and appellation in pu-
1llic papers, tomle oft wiich still remain ". The arms of
Englalld were engraved on their coin and plate, and
borne by them on all occasions. No preparations, how-
ever, were made to fiupport this impolitic .nd prema-
ture claim. ]Elizabeth was already feated on her throne;
i lie ponffcfed all the intrepidity of fpint, and all the arts
!f policv, which were necelfiary for maintaining that
clilaion. England was growing into reputation for na-
valpower. The marine of lrance had been utterly
rlIcflced and Scotland remaiied the only avenue by
which t!le territories of Elizabetlt could be approached.
it was, on that fidr, therefore, that the princes of Lor-
rain determined to make their attanki; ald, by ifing
the name and pretenlions of the Scottifl queen, they

.Anlderf. Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and 164.
Foirbes, ColleQt. i. 253.

Al 4

hoped to route the Englifil catholics, formidable at ttL:
time by their zea! and numbers, and exasperated to ti,.
otmcft againfl Elizabeth, on account of the clan.I;
which ihe had made in the national rcligion.

It was vain to expeLt the afiftance of the S.:ott::

protestants to dethrone a queen, whom all Europ t-
fteemed the guardian and defender of the reiurt-.:
faith. To break the power and reputation of that pl;a:t
in Scotland became, for this reason. a neceflTary t;v
towards the invaf.nn of England. With. this the prin.
ces of Lorrain resolved to open their clhenle. And :.
perfccution was the only method for fupprelfing rci!
ginus opinions known in that age, or dictated by th.
dieipotic and finguinan- spirit of the Romfi fi:,In-
fiition, this, in its utmost violence, they determincl ij
emp!ox. The earl of Argyle, the prior of St. Andrre s,
and other leaders of the party, were marked out L),
them for immediate dtflruCtion t; andc they hoped, !.'
punishing them, to intimidate their followers. Inlfllt,-
tions for this purpose were sent from France to til,
queen regent. That humane and sagacious pril:-;,
condemned a nmafulre which was enuallv violent ail
impolitic. By long residence in Scotlanti, fhc had1 i-
come acquaintedi with the eager and impatient tcrr. p:r
of the natio'l; fTe well knew the power, the nulli;;r,
and popnurity of the protestant leaders; and had Ibe>
a witness to the intrepid and unro,3iqueral)lc reibinluGi
-rhich religious fervour colld infiire. W'hat then ci.i!
he gained by rouling tilis dant-'-ous spirit, w.'i;.
hithcrto all the ar:s of pelicy .ad tlarclv been able t,
reitrain If it once liroke !.hct:, the authoritv of a r,
.?ent wouu!'ir '.i:;lcap3, t'!ct ,uli.J;uc, orevenitomodera':
its ragte. I'. in or.ier to eoeil it, fore;gn forces ':r.'
calied in, this would giv.e the alarm to the whoie 0.
tion, irri;ated alreadv at t.c rxceflive power xvhichl t.L
f'rench poiefiTed in the kin-dom, and suspicious ot a:
their defignc. Amnrl tidi:e 51ccl: which this minhlt
calion, far fronm lop.i. to extermiinate the prcti:.:

, For-bcs, i, 14a.

doctrine, it would be well if the whole fabric of the e-
fliblifhed church were not shaken, and perhaps over-
tirned from the foundation. 'hefe prudent remon-
franccs made no impression on her brothers; precipi-
tant, but inflexible in all their rcfolutions, they infilled
onl the full and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary,
paflionately devoted to the interest of France, and ready,
on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions to the
inclinations of her brcthers, prepared to execute their
commands with implicit fubmiflion , and, contrary to
her own judgment and to a'l the rules of found policy,
Ihe became the infirument of exciting civil commotions
in Scotland, which ended with the ruin of the French
power, and of the popish religion in that kingdom.

From the time of the queen's competition for the re-

gency with the duke of Chatelherault, the popish cler-
gy, under the direcrion of the archbilhop ot St. An-
drews, had set themselves in opposition to all her mla-
fitres. Her firfit tep toward the execution of her new
fheme, was to regain their favour. Nor was this
reconcilement a matter of difficulty. The popish ec-
rlefiaffics, separated from the rclt of mankind by the
law of celibacy, the boldest and molt successful inven-
tion of human policy, and combined among themselves
in the clofefi and molt sacred union, have been accuf-
tomed, in every age, to ifcrifice all private and parti-
cular pafflons to the dignity and ilitereft of their order.
Delighted on this occasion with the profrpelt of triunph-
ing over a fation, the encroacilnniits of whicll they
had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes of rc-
citablithing their decliinig grandeur on a Eirnier bafi ;
they at once cancelled the memory of palt injuries, and
engaged to second the queel n all her attempts to
check the progrels us the Reformation. The queen, be-
Ilc secure of their assistance, openly approved of thl
dicres of the convocation, by which the principles ot
tl c reformers were condemnetd; and at the faime time
l:c issued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to ob-
' 3Ielv. 48. Menr. de Cafilcnua, ap. Jcltb, vol ii. 446.

serve the approaching feffival of Easter according to the
Romish ritual.

As it was no longer possible to miflake the queen's in-

tentions, the protestants, who saw the danger approach,
in order to avert it, employed the earl of Glencairn, and
Sir Hugh Campbell of London, to expostulate with her
concerning this change towards severity, which their
former services had so little merited, and which ier
reiterated promises gave them no reason to expect.
She, without disguise or apology, avowed to them her
resolution of extirpating the reformed religion out of
the kingdom. And, upon their urging her former en.
gagements with an uncourr!y, but honest boldness, fle
so far forgot her usual moderation, as to utter a lenti-
mert, which, however apt thole of royal conditlon
may he to entertain it, prudence fiould teach them to
conceal with the utmofl care. " 'T hr promises of prin-
ces, (savs fine) ought not be too carefully remembered,
nor tle periurimaice of them exacted, unless it suits tllci:
own convenier.c."

The indignatlcn whicl betrayed the oueen into tlis

rash expression, was nothing in compariloii of that wil;t
which ihe was animated, upon hearing that the public
cxercife of the reformed religion had been introduced
into the town of Perth. At once she threw offthe matki
and issued a mandate, commanding all the proteftal:
preachers in the kingdom to be funmmoned to a coI:rt
ofjuftice, v hich was to be held at Stirling on the ten:h
of May. The proteflants, who from their union, be-
gan about this time to be diftinguifled by the name (f
the CoNcGREc.A itON, were alarmed, but not intimi-
dated by this danger; and instantly refoived not to a-
bandon the men t w-hom they were indebted for thi
mofi valuable of all bleffngs, the knowledge of truth.
At that time there prevailed in Scotland, with refpcre
to criminal trials, a cuflom, introduced at firfl by the
institutions o v-affaiage and clanfhip, and tolerated as-
ternvards under a feeb!e government: persons accused oi
any crime were a.comncunied to the place of trial by a re-
:inue of their fricndis ;,id adherents, assembled for tdat

purpose from every corner of the kingdom. Authlril-kd
by this ancient practice, the reformed convened in
great numbers, to attend their paflors to Stirling. The
queen dreaded their approach with a train so nu-nerous,
though unarmed; and in order to prevent them froml
advancing, she empowered John Erikine of Dun, a
person of eminent authority with the party, to promiic
in her name that (he would put a flop to the intended
trial, on condition the preachers and their retinue ad-
vanced no nearer to Stirling. ErIkine, being convinced
himself of the queen's sincerity, served her with the ut-
moflzeal; and the protestants, averse from proceeding
to any act of violence, liflened with pleasure to lo paci-
sic a proposition. The prea:hers, with a few leaders
of the party, remained at Perth; the multitude which
had gathered from different parts of the kingdom dif-
perfed, and retired to their own habitations.

But, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the queen,

on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to trial the per-
sons who had been iummoned, and upon their non-ap-
pearance the rigour of jutiice took place, and they were
pronounced outlaws. By this ignoble artifice, so in-
compatible with regal dignity, and so inconliftcnt with
that integrity which should prevail in all tranihations
between sovereigns and their fubjecrs, the queen for-
feited the eleem and confidence of the whole nation.
The proteitant., shocked no lesl at the indecency with
I which she violated the public faith, than at the danger
which threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erskine, enraged at having been made
the instrument for deceiving his party, inflantlv aban-
doned Stirling, and repairing to Perth, added to the
zeal of his affuciates, by his repreleutations of the queen's
inflexible resolution to fupprels their religion.

The popular rhetoric of Knox powerlully fccnnded
his reprelentations: but having been carried a prifoncr
into France, together with the other perfols taken in
ihe castle of St. Andrews, soon made his escape out of
t.:at country; and residing fometires in England, and
limnltimes in Scotland, had at last been driven out of
b;lh kingdoms by the r::;c of the popish clergy, and

vas obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence he was ca.
led by the leaders of the proteltants in Scotland; and, ir
compliance with their solicitations, he set out for his na
tire country, where he arrived a few days before tli
trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried inflantly t.
Perth to faare with his brethren in the common dani:-
or to assist them in the common cause. While tlti;
minds were in that ferment, which the queen's peri.
dioufnefs and their own danger occasioned, he mount4d
the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue againfi idolh.
try, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage. The
indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately after Knox's
sermon, was preparing to celebrate mass, and began to
decorate the altar for that purpose, precipitated them in.
to immediate adcion. With tumultuary, but irrefifltab
violence, they fell upon the churches in that city, over.
turned the altars, defaced the pictures, broke in piects
the images; and proceeding next to the monasteries,
they in a few hours laid thole fimptuous fabrics almolt
level with the ground. This riotous infurretion was
not the effect of any concert, or previous deliberation:
censured by the reformed preachers, and publicly con-
demned by persons of most power and credit with the
party, it mull be regarded merely as an accidental i-
ruption of popular rage *.

But to the queen herself these proceedings appeared

in a very dinferent light. Betides their manifelt con-
tempt for her authority, the proteflants had violattd
every thing in religion which she ecteemed venerable or
Iholv; and on both these accounts the determined to in-
fiit the severest vengeance on the whole party. Sir1
had already drawn the troops in French pay to Stirliirg;
with these, and what Scottish forces ihe could levy (i'
a sudden, she marched directly to Perth, in hopes of
furpriting the protestant leaders before they would a!-
fimble their followers, whom, out of confidence in i'.r
disingenuous promiies, they were rashly induced to difl
mifls. Intelligence of these preparations and mena,:s

' Knox, IIif. 127, I28.

was soon conveyed to Perth. The protellants would
gladly have soothed the queen, by addreffls both to her-
telf and to the persons of greatefi credit in her court;
but finding her inexorable, they, with great vigour,
took meafules for their own defence. Their adherents,

? animated with zeal for religion, and eager to expole

themselves in so good a cause, flocked in: such numbers
to Perth, that they not only i'ccured the town from dan-
er. but were, within a few days, in a condition to take
the field, and to face the queenl, who advanced will an

;I army seven thousand firong.
oi either party, however, was impatient to engtage.

The queen dreaded the event of a battle with men,
w3 hom the fervour of religion railbd above the fInfe of
j frar, orof danger. The prtcellarlta behelld, with regret,

the earl of Argyle, the prior of St. Andrews, and tome
ether eminent perlons of their party, flill a!dlcring to
the queen; and deflitute of thrir aid and council, de-
ciined hazarding an aDion, the ill filcccfs onl'Fhiclh miight
have proved the ruin of their caucii. The profpcc' of
an accommodation wvas for these reasons highly accept-
able to both fides, Argyle and the prior, who were the
queen's commifiioners tor cond'iidling the negociation,
i trm to have been lincelrly dt firo(mt of reconciling the
rt(nte-dilg failions; anld the ea:l of Glencairn arriving
tinexpedle(llv with a powerlul rc;lfolrcement to the con-
regaticn, augmented the queen's cagernie's for peace.
A treaty was accordingly concluded, in lwhich it was
Ilipulated, that both armies ihould be difbanlded, and
tie gates of Perth fct open to the queen; that indemni-
ty should be granted to the inlhabitants of that city, and
to all others concerned in the late infurredlion; that no
French garrilbn should be left in Perth, and no French
Ibldiers should approach within three miles of that place;
a:;d that a parliament fnould immediately be held, in
order to compose whatever differences miight fliil re-
iiain '.
The leaders of the congregation, difiruftful of the

* Keith, S9.

cueen's sincerity, and sensible that concessions, flon.
ing not from inclination, but extorted by the neceffitr
of her affairs, could not long remain in force, entered
into a new association, by which they bound themselves,
on the first infringement of the present treaty, or in the
least appearance of danger to their religion, to re-affem.
ble their followers, and to take arms in defence of what
they deemed the cause of God and of their country '.

The queen, by her condudc, demonstrated theie pre.

cautions to be the result of no groundless or unneceniary
fear. No sooner were the proteflant forces difminled,
than she broke every artirle in the treaty. She introdu-
ced French troops in:o Perth, fined some of tie inllali-
tants, banished others, removed the magistrates out ot
office, and, on her retiring to Stirling, she left btclii;(l
her a garrison cf fix hundred men, with orders to al!ow
the excrcifu of no other rriigion than the loman ratho-
lic. The fituatio: of Perth, a place at that time of lorme
flrength, and a tcu-n thle mofi proper of any in the
kingdom for the fPation of a garrison, seems to have al-
lured the qu(en to this unjustifiable and ill-judged
breach of public faith; which The endeavoured to cn-
lour, by alleging that the body of men left at Perth
m as entirely compoled of native Scots, though kept i::
pay by the king of France.

The queen's fiheme begin gradually to unfold; it

was now apparent, that not only the religion, hnt: he
liberties of the kindonm were threatened' and that thr
French trools werr to be employed as instrumen!t l;:r
subduing the Scots, .and wreathing the yoke upon tlir;:
necks. Martial as the genius of the Scots then was, tihe
poverty of their couintry made it impossible to keep their
armies long aTer-nibled; and even a very small body ci
regular troops mi:ht have proved formidable to the nm-
tion, though co-afifling wholly of soldiers. But viL.:
rn:mher cf French forces were then in Scotland, at xvh-;
times, ard under what pretext they returned, a:t'.
2aving left the kingdom in the year lxSo, we car. ::

* Klox, I;',.

with any certainty determine. Contemporary hillori-
ans often felc& with little jtrdgment the circumstances
which they tranfinit to posterity; and, with rcl)pec to
matters of the greatest ciriofity and importance, leave
succeeding ages altogether in the dark. We may con-
jerurc, however, from some palrages in Buchanan, that
the French, and Scots in French pay, amounted at lealt
to three thousand men, under the command ofMonfieur
D'Oylcl, a creature of the houre of Guile; 'and they
were soon augmented to a much more formidlable num-
her.

The queen, encouraged by having so confider.,ble a
body of well-difciplined troops at her ccninand, and
instigated by the violent counsels of D'Ovlfl, hlad ven-
tured, as we have obfcrved, to violate the treaty of Perth,
and, by that ra.'h action, once imoire tlihrew. tlhe nation
into, the mbinc d.ianleroius convullicus. The earl of Ar-
gyll and prior of St. Andrews inflantly deserted a cc'rt
where tfaih and honour seemed to he no longer regard-
el, and went over to the leaders of th''congregation,
who had retired to the eastern extremity of Fife. The
barcns from the neighbouring counties repaired to them,
the preachers roused the people to arnis, and wherever
they came, the fame violent op,'rati(?ns which accilent
had occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged out of po-
licy. The enraged multitude was lt loofr, and church-
es and monafleries, the monuments of eccleliallic pride
and luxury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

In order to check their career, the queen, without
losing a moment, put her troops in motion; but the
zeal of the congregation got the iHart once more of her
vigilance and activitv. In that warlike age, ii ell all
men were accustomcd to arms, and on the left profpret
of danger were ready to run to them, the leaders of the
protestants found no difficulty to raile an army. Tho'
they set out fiom St. A.ndrews with a llendcr tr'an of
an hundred horfc, crowds flocked to their f.andards
from every corner of the country through which they
marrledr; and before they reached Falkland, a villa ge
Vul. 1. N

only ten miles distant, they were able to meet the queen
with fnperior force i;.

The queen, firprifed at the approach of so formida.

ble a body, which was drawn up by its leaders in such
a manner as added greatly in appearance to its numbers,
had again recourse to negociation. She found, how.
ever, that the preservation of the protestant religion,
their zeal for which had at first roused the leaders of
the congregation to take arms, was not the only obijrt
they had now in view. They were animated with the
warmest love of civil liberty, which they conceived to
be in imminent danger from the attempts of the French
forces; and these two passions mingling, added recipro.
cally to each other's strength. Together with more
enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation filled the
human mind with more liberal and generous sentiments
concerning civil government. The genius of popery
is extremely favourable to the power of princes. The
implicit submission to all her decrees, which is exaced
by the Romish church, prepares and breaks the miid
for political fervirude; and the do&trines of the reform-
ers, byoverturnine the established system of fuperfition,
weakened tie ,irrclft foundations of civil tyranny,
That bold spirit of inquiry, which led men to reject thel
ological errors, accompanied them into other fcierceF,
and discovered -erv where, the fame manly zeal foa
truth. A rew liud(y, introduced at the fame time, add-
ed greater force to the spirit of liberty. Men became
more acruainttd with the Greek and Roman authors,
-rho dt-iril:ed exquisite models of free government, far
superior to the inaccurate and opprefive fyftcni cltE
blilhcd by the feudal law; and produced such illuftrioui
examples of public virtue, as wonderfully suited both
the circumfiances and£piit of that age. Many among
the nmot eminent reformers were themselves confidera
bie masters in ancient Icarni;g; and all of them ragtr-
ly adopted lie maxims and spirit of the ancients, \sii

;1 lrno0, 141.

regard to governments. The most ardent love of liber-
tv accompanied the protestant religion throughout all
its progress; and wherever it was embraced, it roused
an independent spirit, which rendered men attentive to
their privileges as fubjedcs, and jealous of the encroach-
ments of their sovereigns. Knox, and the other preach-
ers of the Reformation, infused generous sentiments
concerning government into the minds of their hearers;
and the Scottilh barons, naturally siee and bold, were
prompted to assert their rights with more freedom and
boldness than ever. Inflead of obeying the queen re-
gent, who had enjoined them to lay down their arms,
they demanded not only the redress of their religious
grievances, but as a preliminary toward fettling the na-
tion, and securing its liberties, required the immediate
expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. It wa
not in the queen's power to make so important a con-
cedlion without the concurrence of the French monarch;
and as some time was requisite in order to obtain that,
lie hoped, during this interval, to receive such rein-
forcements from France, as would insure the accom-
plilhnent of that design which Ihe had twice attempted
with unequal strength. Meanwhile, she agreed to a
cessation of arms for eight days, and before the expira-
tion of these, engaged to transport the French troops to
the other fide of the Forth; and to fend commissioners
to St. Andrews, who Ihould labour to bring all differ-

§ The excessive admiration of ancient policy was the
occasion of Knox's famous book concerning the Govern-
ment of Women, wherein, conformable to the maxims of
the ancient legifiators, which modern experience has
proved to be ill founded, he pronounces the elevation
of women to the supreme authority to be utterly de-
flructive of good government. His principles, autho-
rities, and examples, were all drawn from ancient writ-
Crs. The fame observation may be made with regard
to Buchanan's Dialogue, D: Jure Regni apud Scotos. It
is founded, not on the maxims of feudal, but of ancient
r*publican government.

N z

ences to an accommcdation. As ihe hoped, by means
of the French troops, to overawe the protestants in the
fcuthern counties, the former article in the treaty was
punctually executed; the latter, having been infected
merely to amfCe the congregation, was no longer re.
mtmrnhered.

By these reiter-ted and wanton inflances of perfidy,

the queen lcft ai! c-dit with her adversaries; and no
frfety aypearing in any other course, they again took
.rms with more inflanmed resentment, and with bolder
and mnre etenfiv-e views. The removing of the French
forces had laid open to them all the country fitnr:.td
between Forth and Tav. P.rth alone rmrnained fob-
jtcted to the insolence and exdtions of the garl'Sbn
which the queen had left there, and impiored the alTf
ance of the congregation for their relief; 'hittiLr t'ey
marched, ard having witirou: flcft required the queen
to evacuate the tow.n ini terms ofthe former treaty, they
rrepared to hcf-ce it :n ornn. The queen enmployd
the earl of h:lirn id ('llrd Erskine to divert them from
this erterprirc. 'tut her wonted artifices were novw of
ncl a\ .;; reF. at.-d so often, they could deceive no long.
er; a;'dl witt. ,: liftcning to her offers, the protellants
corir.ucd the liegt, and soon obliged the garrison to ca

itl .; tC.
After the Icfs of Perth, the queen endeavoured to

fc;zc Stirling, a place of fime strength, and, from its
corman-r d of the onlv bridge over the Forth, ufgrta!
im crrtance. Bitu t:Ie leaders of the congregation, ha:-
ni.- ;n:c!l;crnce of her design, prevented the execi.t; n
rs it, hv .n -i flv rrarch thlither with part of their 1sr-

r. 'h i-. hbtar. s, heartil- attached to tlhe c.fi,

fti cp<n to ther tl.e gates of their tosn. Tlic:.;e

ti =c-enr.-cd, r;i:}'

tie lfnme rapidity towards E.!it

h;re!:, vki ..l ii.c qr:ecn, on :I 'r approach, altanidc<::d
v ,:! r-ectitatnr:-n, and1 r c-i-d :o Dunhar.

'.'.-c .ro;ftarni .mr;v, x hlcrevcr it canie, kindlei! or

f;re-d ;'he ardour o' clt.forn:atiun, and the urmiof rn'
c'. e-r c ','l .: e :-r .crc t' mitiitcd upon churi h(r .
l s;:c-i>rrics. T'!.c crnl:or wrce spoiled of ev:!'y dte'

ration, which was then efleemed .acred; the latter
were laid in ruins. WVe are apt, at this distance 'of
time, to condemn the furious zeal of the reformers, and
to regret the overthrow of so many flately fabrics, the
Monuments of our anceflors magnificence, and among
the noblest ornaments of the kingdom. But amidst the
violence of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to
legal authority, some irregularities were unavoidahle;
and perhaps no one could have been permitted more
proper to allure and interest the multitude, or more fa-
tal to the grandeur of the eflablifhed church. How ab-
surd soever and ill-founded the speculative errors of
popery may be, some inquiry and attention are requi-
site towards discovering them. The abuses and cor-
ruptions which had crept into the public worlhip of
that church lay more open to observation, and, by ftrik-
ing the senses, excited more univcrfal disgust. Under
the long reign of heathenism, superstition seems to have
exhausted its talent of invention, so that when a siper-
ttitious spirit seized Chriflians, they were obliged to
imitate tle heathens in the pomp and magnificence of
their ceremonies, and to borrow from them the orna-
ments and decorations of their temples. To the pure
and simple worlhip of the primitive Chriflians, there
succeeded a species of splendid ;dolatry, nearly refemb-
ling those pagan originals whence it had been copied.
The contrariety of such olbfervances to the spirit of
Chriflianity was almost the first thing, in the Romimf
fylten, which awakened the indignation of the reform-
ers, who, applying to these the denunciations in the
Old Tcflament against idolatry, imagined that they
could not endeavour at fupprcfFlng them with too much
zeal. No tafi could be more acceptable to the multi-
tude, than to overturn those feats of fuperfiitioni; they
ran with emulation to perform it, and happy was the
man whose hand was molt adventurous and successs l
in executing a work deemed so pious. Nor did thew-
leaders labour to refrain this impetuous spirit of re-
formation. Irregular and violent as its tallies were,
they tended dirc¢i'y to that end '.hi'.h they lad Jn

N 3

iwX-; frr. b- c'emolifl;ing the monafleries thro!ghinit
th. i.';rr:l' : , and setting at liberty their wretclh!d in.
l;al,;;it-;. tij'v hr.pted to renler it impolFible ect r to
rc-edl' te ic .e, or to r-e-cT mil '. the other.

r.ut,; .-mlit thef' irregular ;roceerdiligs, a ciirim-

fiance -hlic-h dc s honour to th i. crncdudc and liurmr;ii-
tv of tl-e leaders of the conprr.i:, n dte-i-f:-s nodisi.
Ti.cx so far rcfira:rcd the raec of tLeir follol crs, ,::'
w-ere able so to ten:per their heat and :,, ai, diat ;c.. , ^
tl PIr cmai r ar.';c.- xri.e txpofird to anyV cro1;;. :.
fl', L_.d i.ct .

':C;:e t::
'ln fuFrcrd dt-atit.

.A; thL fian:e r-s re- di;i.' er, by the sati'::\ ',

,.i;-h t.cfe ,r ;i! re .'c ilt. l'. s \i-re - fil'<ctled, h(\ \ i-
] 1;': ;tle .c u'i..'. ( t lat'i':'..l > .1vtUlir ran towards t.e
l i , ;'nmationm, -.

. r.- t..in three hundred !::re

i,-;.rcit.dl out cf Pct' ti'iI- the earl of Arglc :.'!
r-ior of St. An rc't,.- it. \\'rith this inconfilcra!ilc t,":^
tli - j.'\ ai'ri ; ' ,

i . v.';tr.;(r thty can:e, ile ',^; '

j:cir.,"' :r!: ;. Ia b , '; th.'il army .'. as fthloin l' i ...
r.crci, th.m r.-.e tl:!.r!nd nri:n; tle gates of tx ;'
t1(5r v -e li. -.

: \,in :o rt.ci ive therr:; and, \';ti'.;

friKii.;t a i,.:!- !'.

a, , tae'.y ;ok poilkfion of tlir ca-
pi'a! i,' the i..,.'r.'e;,

'ITs ra .'! al .i f -<;n ucfiing fces eems to Ihae (!-

c.nu.agcd -L' :t-eornelrs to e:tend their views, an(i I"
rife in h.,i- dcmal: s. Not satisfied with tllcir silt
(caim of tclri:.!ii tfor their religion, they now oprl'.
aimerd at etta' ' .

i;:ig . ic jrtc tlant dicftrine on thr i;i:

cf p^-'-r.

F r t'!s re-alhty 4c deteriinicd to fix ,!

rLl.ce: cc ct C :rburo!l; and li their appointnment Kii',x,
and io'kom. o;hr prcahiiers, taking pollfffion of thle il-
pits, w: hih I:zid } .1i abai2doned bL tle affrighteil i

t :1'-
cv, drc'i:rd caintmf the errors of popery xv.ili hiil

vic x'-r: zer.l a- cou!d not fail of gaining many proic-l;t.
Tn :hL ;:rt; i i'r.c the queen, : who had'pru(!cl;l givril
axV ro a torrt:,t v hici i e could not resist, ollti:'it

v .th ! Iafure t
aa : it now began to subside. The !ca'-:

L.':_, ap. Jebh, vol. i. 231.

; K':h, ,4.

of the congregation hal bccn above two months in arms,
and by the expences of a campaign, protraced so long
bevond the usual time of service in that age, haid ex-
hauficd all the money which a country, where riches
did not abound, had been able to supply. The multi-
tilde, dazzled with their fucefs, and concluding the
work to be already done, retired to their own habita-
tions. A few only of the more zealous or wealthy ha-
rons remained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars witli little di.icul-
Iv, whatever was tranfacRd at Edinburgh was loon
kiirio n at Dunhar. And the queen, rcgulating hlr own
co:liullO by the situation of her adversarics, artfully a-
i:.ii!:d them with the proflef of an immediate accom-
i!.,dlation; while, at the fanie time, she by fludied de-
lays spun out the negotiations for that purpofc to sech
a length, that, in the end, thel party dwindled to an in-
onifiderable number; arnd, as if peace had been already
rrl-eiablifhed, became careless of military difciplhe.
'I lie q(.cc, who watched for fich an opportunitv, ad-
a:;:c-d unexpectedly, by a fuddcn mi.arch in the night
uitl all her forces, ard! appearing before Ediiili!rgh, fil-
lil ti.at city wtith th rtin flon crilttriationl. 'hlie pro-
t'flair;s wutakentd lby ti. iii.prudcnt dili(crlron of their
fi,!lowere. durfi not encounter the French troops in the
rpcn field; ai:d were t.veni unable to defcnd an ill-forti-
f.do town agrailnf their afT;l:ls. Unwilling, however,
to al:andon ti:e citizens lo the queen's mercy, tihe cen-
iea\voilrced, hy faci i tirc encmi)- 's a-rmy, to g aii

;i:il

jfu coi!c1Cng i!;ch-ir - afiociate . I', thI <i:'t., in
tii:r cf all tihtir refifll;jice, voa !l have euiilv furced lier
lay irto ihe town, if the rc.ilbnal.le coniclrfi'i of a
tru.-e had not procured her adinillion wvithout th.e i ffu-
lion ot blood.

Their dangerous firtution eafilr induced the leaders

ofthre coilgr .gation to linen to aii;. overt!rnts of eace;
anld as the quetn was looking dail'y for- the arri.al ol a
l!:t;ng reinlorcimcnt from lFrance, and expcthd great
a. ,.:ttcs fi-orro a cci.,tion o( arms, she alfi) agrecd to
;: u! .:;: .o unequal Cor..i.i . o t'iric: '.v!!i a fL:!f-

pension of hoffilites, from the twenty-fourth of July to
the tenth of January, it was stipulated in this treaty,
that, on the one harld, the protestants lhould throw open
the gates the next day to the queen regent; remain in
dutiful fubjec&ion to her government; abftain.from all
future violation of religious houses; and give no inter.
ruption to the established clergy, either in the difrharge
of their fundcions, or in the enjoyment of their benefics.
On the other hand, the queen agreed to give no moleli-
ation to the preachers or professors of the protetlant re-
ligion; to permit the inhabitants of Edinburgh, while
the truce lafled, to enjoy the exercise of whatever reli.
gion appeared most congenial to the mind of every indi-
vidual; and to allow the free and open profession of the
protestant ritual over all the kingdom*. The queen
hoped to soothe the protefiants by these liberal concel-
sions in behalf of their religion, and expected, from in-
dulging their fivourite passion, to render them more
compliant with refpe& to other articles, particularly the
expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the queen expressed for retaining this bo-
dy of men rendered them more and more the ol.jccls
of national jealousy and aversion. The immediate ex-
pulfion of them was therefore demanded anew, and with
greater warmth; but the queen, taking advantage of the
distress of the adverse party, eluded the request, and
would consent to nothing more than that a French gar-
rilon should not be introduced into Edinburgh.

The desperate slate of their affairs impoled on the

congregation the necessity of agreeing to this artile,
which, however, was very far from giving them fatistfac
tion. Whatever apprehensions the Scots had conceived,
from retaining the French forces in the kingdom, were
zbundantly justified during the late commotions. A
mlall body of those troops, maintained in constant pay,
and rendered formidable by regular difcipline,had check-
ed the progreis of a martial people, though animated
with zeal both for religion and liberty. The finall

Aihi:and, 1Hilt. of Ejin. 16.

addition to their number, and a considerable one was
daily expected, might prove fatal to public liberty, and
Scotland might be exposed to the danger of being redu-
ced from an irdependent kingdom to the mean condi-
tion of a province, annexed to thejurifdiction of its pow-
erful ally.

In order to provide against this imminent calamity,
the duke of Chatelherault and the earl of Huntly, im-
mediately after concluding the truce, desired an inter-
view with the chiefs of the congregation. These two
noblemen, the most potent at that time in Scotland,
were the leaders of the party which adhered to the efta-
blilhed church. They had followed the queen during
the late commotions, and having access to obflrve more
narrowly the dangerous tendency of her councils, their
abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing for their
country, surmounted all other considerations, and deter-
mined them rather to endanger the religion which they
Irofeffed, than to give their aid towards the execution
of her pernicious designs. They proceeded farther, and
promised to Argyll, Glencairn, and the prior of St. An-
drews, who were appointed to meet them, that if the
queen should, with her usual insincerity, violate any ar-
ticle in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the wiflh-
es of the whole nation, by difiniffing her French troops,
they would then infla.tly join with their countrymen
in compelling her to a mealfre, which the public fafetv,
and the preservation of their liberties, rendered necefla-
ry1.

About this time died Henry II. of France; juil when
he had adopted a fyflem nwith regard to the affairs of
Scotland, which would, in all probability, have reflored
union and tranquillity to that kingdomt. Towalavt
the close of his reign, the princes of Lorrain began vili-
bly to decline in favour, and the conItable Montmnortn-
cy, by the assistance of the duchess of Valentinois, rcco-
vercd that ascendant over the spirit of his maftlr, w-hich
l.: great experience, and his faithful, though often utn-

e Knox, I54. t Melv. 9y.

fortunate services feemedjuftlyto merit. That prudent
minister imputed the infurredlion in Scotland wholly to
the duke of Guile and the cardinal of Lorrain, whoie
violent and precipitant councils could not fail of tranf-
porting, beyond all bounds of moderation, men whole
minds were poffefled with that jealousy which is infepa-
rable from the love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that
ardour which accompanies religious zeal. And, in order
to convince Henry that he did not load his rivals with
any groundless accusation, prevailed to have Melvil*, a
Scottish gentleman of his retinue, dispatched into his na-
tive country with inftrulions to observe the motions
both of the regent and of her adversaries; and the king
agreed to regulate his future proceedings in that king.
dom by Melvil's report.

Did hiflory indulge herself in these speculations, it

would be amusing to inquire what a different diredtion
might have been given by this resolution to the national
spirit; and to what a different issue Melvil's report,
which would have set the condudt of the malecontents
in the molf favourable light, might have conducted the
public disorders. Perhaps, by gentle treatment, and art-
ful policy, the progreS of the Reformation might have
been checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon
France. Perhaps, by gaining poffefiion of this avenue,
the French might have made their way into England,
and, under colour of supporting Mary's title to the
crown, it is not improbable, they might not only have o-
verturned all Elizabeth's schemes of encouraging the
Reformation, but have re-eftablimhed the Roman catho-
lic religion, and destroyed the liberties of that kingdom.
But into this boundless field of fancy and conje&dure the
historian must make no excursions; to relate real occur-
rences, and to explain their real causes and effefts, is
his peculiar and only province.

The tragical and untimely death of the French mo-

narch put an end to all moderate and pacific measures
with regard to Scotland. The duke of.Guife, and the

* The author of the Memoirs.

cardinal his brother, upon the accefllion of Francis II.
a prince void of genius and without experience, affum-
ed the chief direction of French affairs. Allied so near-
ly to the throne, by the marriage of their niece the
queen of Scots with the young king, they now want-
ed but little of regal dignity, and nothing of regal pow-
er. This power did not long remain inacive in their
hands. The fame vast schemes of ambition, which
they had planned out r.lder the former reign, were a-
gain resumed; and they were enabled, by possessing
such ample authority, to pursue them with more vigour
and greater probability of success. They beheld, with
infinite regret, the progress of the protestant religion
in Scotland; and, sensible what an unfiirmountable ob-
facde it would prove to their designs, they bent all their
strength to check its growth, before it role to any great-
er height. For this purpose they carried dn their pre-
parations with all possible expedition, and encouraged
the queen their filter to expect, in a short time, the ar-
rival of an army so powerful as the zeal of their adver-
saries, however desperate, would not venture to op-
pose.

Nor were the lords of the congregation either igno-
rant of those violent counsels which prevailed in the
court of France since the death of Henry, or careless of
providing againlt the danger which threatened them
from that quarter. The success of their cause, as well
zs their personal afety, depending entirely on the una-
nimity and vigour of their own resolutions, they endea-
voured to guard against division, and to cement toge-
ther more closely, by entering into a strider bond of
confederacy and mutual defence. Two persons con-
curred in this new association, who brought a great ac-
cellion both of reputation and of power to the party.
'Ihefe were the duke of Chatelherau;t, and his eldest son
the earl of Arran. This young nobleman, having re-
fided some years in France, where he commanded the
Scottish guards, had imbibed the protestant opinioris
concerning religion. Hurried along by the heat of
':i .i and the eail of a profel)te, he had uttered ic.-

timents with refpe& to the points in controversy, which
did not suit the temper of a bigotted court, intent at
that juncure on the extinction of the protefant religi-
on; in order to accoiplilh which the greatest excefles
of violence were committed. The church wvas:fuffered
to wreak its utmoff fury upon all who were fufpeihcd
of heresy. Courts were eredted in different' parts of
France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by their
sentences several persons of diltincion were condemnied
to the flames.

But, in order to inspire more universal terror, the

princes of Lorrain resolved to feleet, for a sacrifice, some
person whose fall might convince all ranks of men that
neither splendour of birth, nor eminence in flatiodi,
would exempt from punifhmcnt those who should be
guilty of this unpardonable transgression. The earl of
Arran was the person destined to be the unhappy vic
tim t. As he was allied to one throne, and the prefup.l
tive heir to another; as he possessed the firfi rankl .n Iils
own country, and enjoyed an honourable flation i
France; his condemnation could not fail ofmaki"g tlie
desired impreflion on the whole kingdori. . But the car-
dinal of Lorrain having let fall fore exprefflons hi'l
raised Arran's fifpicions of the design, he escaped tle
intended blow by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal,
resentment, all pro.r.pted him to seek revenge upen
these perfccutors of himself and of The reiigiori which-he
profeGfed; and as lie passed through England, oh his
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes and
promises, inflamed those pamions, and sent him back in-
to Scotland, animated with the fame implacable aversion:
to France which polfefed a great part of his country-
men. He quickly communicated thefe'fentiments to
his father the duke of Chatelherault, who was already
extremely dilgufted with the measures carrying on in
Scotland and as it was the fate of that nobleman to be
governed in every inflance by those about him, he now
suffered himself to be drawn from the queen reócnt;

i Thuan. lib. xxiv. p. 462. edit. Francof.

and, having joined the congregation, was confidered,
from that time, as the head of the party.

But, with refpec to him, this diflinftion was merely
nominal. James Stewart, prior of St. Andrews, was
the person who moved and acuated the whole body of
theproteftants, among whom he pofLcfrd that unbound-
ed confidence which his strenuous adherence to their in-
terest and his great abilities so juftlv merited. He was
the natural son of James V. by a daughter of lord Er-
fline; and, as that amorous monarch had left several
others a burden upon the crown, they were all deflined
for the church, where they could be placed in stations
of dignity and affluence. In consequence of this refolu-
tion, the priory of St. Andrews had been conferred up-
on James: but, during so busy a period, he soon became
disgusted with the indolence and retirement of a monas-
tic life; and his enterprising genius called hinr forth to
at a principal part on a more public and conspicuous
theatre. The icene in which lie appeared required ta-
lents of different kinds: military virtue and political
discernment, were equally ntceffary in order to render
him illustrious. These he ponitc-Td in an eminent de-
gree. To the most unqueitionable perlbnal bravery,
he added great skill in the art of war; and in every e;.-
terprife his arms were crowned with success. Iis saga-
city and penetration in civil affairs enabled him, amidit
the reeling and turl)nlercle of tactions, to hold a prolspc-
rous courke; while his boldness in defence of the Retor-
mation, together with the decency, and even leveritv,
of his manners, secured him the reputation of being fin-
cerely attached to religion, without which it was im-
possible in that age to gain an ascendant over man-
kind.

It was not without reason that the queen dreaded the
enmity of a man so capable to obstruCt her designs.
As Ihe could not, with her utmost address, make the
Iraft imprefion on his fidelity to his aflbciates, she en-
deavoured to lefien his influence, and to Icatter among
thell the feeds of jealoufyv and diltruft, by insilluating
that tlir ambition of tle prior as:)ired beyol;d :hi cuu-
Vol. I, O

dition of a fubjeAt, and aimed at nothiig eife than tie
crown itself.

An accusation so improbable gained but little credit.

Whatever thoughts of this kind the prefumiption of
unexpected fucerrs, and his elevation to the higlieft d:g.
nity in the kingdom, may be alleged to have infpirrl
at any subsequent period, it is certain that at this junc-
ture he could form no such vast design. To detlrone
a queen, who was lineal heir to an ancient race of nio-
narchs; wht had been guilty of no action by which
she could forfeit the efleem and affiecion of her fuijtfts;
'who could employ, in defence of her rights, the forts
of a kingdom much mere powerful than her own; and
to fuiititute in her place a person, whom the iilegitiina.
cy ot his birth, by the praEtice of all civilized natins,
rendered incapable of any inheritance either public cr
private, was a prcjet so chimerical as the molt extra-
vagant arrbition' would hardly entertain, and could r.-
ver conceive to be practicable. The promise too, which
the prior made to Melvil, of residing ccnlll:tlv i!
France, on condition the public gricvances were rcdrcl
fed'; the confidence reposed in him by the cduke c
Chatelherault and his son, the prelumptive heirs to the
crown; and the concurrence of almost the whole Scot.
tilh nobles, in promoting the meafires by whichc hr a.
offence to the French court; go far towards his s\:!i
cation from those illegal and criminal designs, with the
imputation of which the queen endeavoured at tlat
time to load him.

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers comptnr;-

ed, in some degree, for the loss which the queen fullai-
ed by the defection of the duke of Ch'atelherault. 'fh!i:
were immediately commanded to fortify Leith; in
which place, on account of its commodious harhocr,
and its situation in the neighbourhood of Edlilillr:h,
and in a plentiful country, the queen resolved to iix Ihe
head-quarters of her foreign forces. This untpolpul
measure, by the manner of executirg it, was rtntcrn

* Melvi', 54.

fiill more unpopular. In order to bring the town en-
tirely under their command, the French turned out a
great part of the ancient inhabitants; and taking pof-
ieflion of the houses, which they had obliged them to
ahandon, presented to the view of the Scots two objects
squally irritating and offenfve; on the one hand, a num-
ler of their countrymen expelled their habitations by
violence, and wandeling without any certain abode; on
the other, a colony of foreigners, fettling with their
wives and children in the heart of Scotland, growing
inte strength by daily reinforcements, and openly pre-
paring a yoke, to which, without some timely exertion
of national spirit, the whole kingdom mufl of necessity
submit.

It was with the utmotq concern that the lords of the
cengregation beheld this bold and decisive ftep taken by
Ihe queen regent; nor did they hefit.te a moment
hlicther they should employ their whole firenltli, in
lne generous eftbrt, to rescue their religion and liberty
from impending deftruófion. But, in order to justify
tlliir own conducq, and to throw the blame entirely on
their adverlaries, they resolved to preserve the appear-
anres of decency and refped towards their superiors,
and to have no recourse to arms without the mofl ur-
gent and apparent necefity. They joined, with this
view, ill an address to the regent, representing, in the
strongest terms, their diffatisfadion with the measures
the was pursuing, and befreching her to quiet the fears
and jealousies of the nation, by defilting fromi fortifying
Leith. The queen, conscious of hrr present advantage-
ous situation, and elated with the hopes of freih succours,
was in no disposition for liflening to drruands utterly
inconfilfent with her views, and urged with that bold
importunity which is so little acceptable to princes"

'The suggestions of her French counsellors contribut-
er, without doubt, to alienate her still farther from any
fchtime of accommodation. As the queen was ready
oi ail occasions to discover an extraordinary deference

Haynes, 11r.

0 a

for the opinions of their countrymen, her brothers, who
knew her secret disapprobation of the violent measures
they were driving on, took care to place near her such
perions as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into many
actions, which her own unbiafled judgment would have
highly condemned. As their success in the present
juncture, when all things were hastening towards a cri-
sis, depended entirely on the queen's firmness, the prin-
ces of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the influence oi
their ordinary agents; but, in order to add the greater
weight to their councils, they called in aid the ministers
of religion; and, by the authority of their sacred cha-
racter, they hoped effectually to recommend to their
sifter that system of severity which they had efpoufedt.
With this view, but under the pretext of confounding
the protestants by the skill of such able malters in con-
trovtrf-, they appointed several French divines to re-
fide in Scotland. At the head of these, and with the
character of legate from the pope, was Pelleve bilhop
of Amiens, and afterwards archbishop and cardinal of
Sens, a furious bigot, fcrvilely devoted to the house of
Guise, and a proper infirument for recommending or
executing the most outrageous measures.

Amidift the noise and danger of civil arms, there doc-

tors had little opportunity to dilplay their address in the
use of their theological weapons. But they gave no
small offence to the nation by one of their ations They
persuaded the queen to seize the church of St. Giles in
Edinburgh, which had remained, ever since the late
truce, in the hands of the protestants; and having, by a
new and solemn conlccration, purified the fabric from
the pollution with which they supposed the profane nil
nifirations of the protestants to have defiled it, they, in
diredc contradiction to one article in the late treaty, re-
eflahlifhed there the rites of the Ronlifh church. ;'his,
added to the indifference, and even contempt, with
which the queen received their remonstrances, convinced
the lords of the congregation, that it was not only vain
t Lcfly, :,-. Caftlenau, ap. Jebb, vol. ii. 446, 473.

to expc& ant redress of their grievances at her hands,
hIt' abfo!utcly neccffary to take arms in their own dc-
fcncc.

The egecr and impetuous spirit of the nation, as well
as every cofiGderation of good policy, prompted them
to take this Lold ftep without delay. It was but a small
1art of the French auxiliaries which had as yet arrived.
T'!c fortifications of Leith, though advancing fast, were
!ifll far from being complete. Under there cilrcuinltan-
tcs of disadvantage, they conceived it poffihle to surprise
lie queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive blow,
to prevent all future bloodshed and contention. I'ull of
their expectations, they advanced rapidly towards Edin-
burgh with a numerous army. But it was no cafv mat-
ter to deceive an adversary tb vigilant and attentive as
the queen regent. With her usual sagacity, she both
fortfau tihe danger, and took the only proper courtc to
-.Tid it. Inflead of keeping the field againtt teneieis
luperinr in number, and tormidable on a day of-battle
lt, the ardour of their courage, hfe retired into Leith,
atid determined patiently to wait the arrival of new re-
i)lforcements. Slight and unfinished as the fortifications
es that town then were, Ihe did not drtad the efforts of
an army, provided neither with heavy caunorn, nor with
niliital-y stores, and utterly ignorant of the method of
at;cking any p'ace fortified with more art than thole
arcirit towers eredted all over the kingdom iu defence
c! private property against the incursions of banditti.

Kor did the queen mean while neglec to have re-
courle to those arts which she had often employed to
wcakl.n or divide her adversaries. By private bflicita-
t;< i.s and promises ihe ihook the fidelity, or abated the
aro!,ur, of forne. By open reproach and accusation she
blaited the reputation, and diminished the authority of
others. Her emissaries were every whereat work; and,
nl'withitanding the zeal for religion and liberty which
t,, n animated the nation, they leem to have laboured
i..: vithout fuczefs. We find nox, about this period,
-:un:ding in conmplaints of the lukewarm and languld

03

spirit which had begun to spread among his party'. But
if their zeal slackened a little, and suffered a momentary
intermission, it loon blazed up with fresh vigour, and
rose to a greater height than ever.

The queen herself gave occasion to this, by the reply

which ihe made to a new remonitrance from the lords
of the congregation. Upon their arrival at Edinburgh,
they once more represented to her the dangers arising
from the increase of the French troops, the fortifyirk,
of Leith, and her other measures, which they conceivtd
to be deftrutive to the peace and liberty of the king.
dom; and in this address they spoke in a firmer tone,
and avowed, more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order to put a
flop to such dangerous encroachments. To a remon.
firance of this nature, and urged with so much boldness,
the queen replied in terms no less vigorous and explicit.
She pretended that the was not accountable to the con-
federate lords for any part of her conduct; and upon no
representation of theirs would She either abandon mea-
iures which fle deemed necessary, or dismiss forces which
she found useful, or demolish a fortification which might
prove of advantage. At the fame time Ihe required
them, on pain of treason, to dilband the forces which
they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious style founded harfhlv to

Scottish nobles, impatient, from their national charadcer,
of the slightest appearance of injury; accustomed even
from their own monarchs to the most refpedful treat-
ment; and poflcfing, under an ariflocratical form of
government, luch a share of power, as equalled, at all
times, and often controlled that of the sovereign. They
were sensible, at once, of the indignity offered to tien.-
selves, and alarmed with this plain declaratior. of t.c
4ueen's intentions, and as there now remained hut on:
ftep to take, they wanted neither public lpirnt nor rclbli.
tion to take it.

ilBt, that they might not seem to depart from tle eftli
blifed forms of the conflituticn, fur which, even amiil;

'''Knox, li^,.

their molt violent operations, men a!lwys retain the
greatest reverence, they afiminblcd the whole peers, ba-
;ons, and rretprlcntatives of boroughs, who adhered to
l:rcir party. Tinfe formed a convention, which exceed-
cd in number, and equalled in dignity, the usual meet-
ings of parliament. The leaders of the congregation
lid before them the declaration which the queen had
givcn in anfCer to-their remonllrance; represented the
unavoidable ruin wlhich the measures ihe therein avow-
cd and jutlified would bring upon the kingdom; and re-
quiring their direction with regard to the obedience due
to an administration so unjust and oppressive, they sub-
mitred to their decrifon a question, one of the most deli-
cate and interesting that can possibly fall under the con-
fid ration of subjects.

This assembly proceeded to decide with no leTs dif-
patch than unanimity. Strangers to those forms which
pmrtrat hufinefs; unacquainted with the arts which
make a figure in debate; and much more fitted for
·,tion than dilcourfe; a warlike people always hafl
ttn to a conclulion, and bring their deliberations to the
iforteft issue. It was the work but of one day, to exa-
mine and to rebolve this nice problem, concerning the
behaviour of fubieces towards a ruler who abuses his
power. But however abrupt their proceedings may ap-
lieary they were not destitute of solemnity. As the de-
termination of the point in doubt was conceived to be
no lets the office of divines than of laymen, the former
v ere called to assist with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
m-ithout hesitation, both from the precepts and examples
in flripture, that it was lawful for subjects not only to
rlilt tyrannic-l princes, but to deprive them of that au-
tiority, which, in their hands, becomes an instrument
tur destroying those whom the Almighty ordained them
TJ protect. The decision of persons revered.fo highly
tfr their sacred character, but more for their zeal and
itheir pietv, had great weight with tlhe whole assembly.
Not latiincd with the common indilfritninate manucr
or fri' ilig content, every person prlcfelit w.- called if.

his turn to declare his sentiments, anti rlsing up in o01 -,
all gave their fuffragcs, without one dissenting voce. for
depriving the queen of the office of regent, which she
had exercised so much to the detriment of the king:doi'.

This extraordinary sentence was owing no dles to th

love of liberty, than to zeal for religion. In the ad cf
deprivation, religious grievances are slightly mentioni;
and the dangerous encroachments of the queen :;;i,
the civil constitution are produced, liy the lord-s Ci th
congregation, in order to prove their (erdutl1 to i ax:
been not only just but ueccfiary The u:;roducir; t'-
reign troops into a kingdom at peace with all the . ol i;
the feizicg and fortifying towns in diffrcln: pauis (l
the country; the promoting firangers to ofiices of g;rat
power and dignity; the dehating the current coin +; ti.e
fubvertirg the ancient laws; tl:e imposing of new and
burdensome taxes, and the attempting to fubduC tL.e
kingdom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and r-
peated acis of violence, are enumerated at great lengit',
a.d placed in the strongest light. On all these accouci:s
the congregation maintained, that the nobles, as coui-
fellors by birth-right to t.heir monarclis, and the gualu-
ans and defenders of the cunfitution, had a rislht to in-
terpofe; and therefore, by virtue of this right, in the
name of the king and.quecn, and with man) expr, iSous
dofduty and fubmifion towards them, they deprivedi the
queen regent of her office. and ordained that, for the fu-

+ Knox, 184.
t The standard of money in Scotland was conti;,:.!-

iy varying. In the i6th es James V. A. . i..';. I
i-ound weight of gold, when coined, prod.:c(ld i
pounds of current mnony. But undcr tiLe queen r~ .: s
zdminifiration, A. D. ij56, a pound weight (i ; .,
although the quantity of alloy was confiderablh iir, !-
td, produced 1441. current money. In I529, a pL i,!
'weight ot silver, when coir.ed, produced ol. 2f.; i :t
.' 15536, it produced 31. current money, luddi:'-;,.
'Pr'iat. ad Anders. Diplomat. Scotia, p. 8o, 8, ir, i
x !:;h it appears, that this complaint, which the n:_.-

ture, no obedicne fllould be given to her commandst.

Violent as the action may appear, there wanted not

principles in the constitution, nor precedents in the hifto-
rv of Scotland, to juflify and to authorise it. Under the
anflocratical form of government eftablified among the
Scots, the power of the sovereign was extremely limit-
ed. The more considerable nobles were themselves pet-
tv princes, poffefllng extensive jurifdidtions, almost in-
dependent of the crown, and followed by numerous vas-
fals, who, in every contest, espoused their chieftain's
nuarrel, in opposition to the king. Hence the many in-
iances of the impotence of regal authority which are
to be found in the Scottish history. In every age, the
nobles not only claimed, hut exercised, the right of con-
trolling the king. Jealous of their privileges, and ever
eager to take the field in defence of them, every error
in administration was obfcrvcd, every encroachment up-
on the rights of the aristocracy excited indignation, and
no prince ever ventured to transgress the boundaries
which the law had prescribed to prerogative, without
meeting refiftance,which shook or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the conftitutlon, and coun-
tenanced by the example of their ancestors, the lords of
the congregation thought it incumbent on them, at this
juncture, to inquire into the mal-administration of the
queen regent, and to preserve their country from being
nflaved or conquered, by depriving her of the power to
cxecute such a pernicious scheme.

The ac of deprivation, and a letter from the lords
of t!e congregation to the queen regent, are itill ex-

contcnts often repeated, was not altogether deflitute of
;:,uniiation.

t 5M. Caitienan, after condemning the dangerous coun-
cils ot th- princes of Lorraln, with regard to the affairs
of Scotland, acknowledges with his usual candour, that
t!:ic Scots declared war against the queen regent, rather
from a desire of vindicating their civil liberties, than
ieom any motive ot religion. Mem. 446.

tantt. They discover not only that masculine and un-
daunted spirit, natural to men capable of so bold a refio
lution, but are remarkable for a precision and vigour of
eKpreffion, which we are surprised to meet with in an
age so unpoliiled. The fame observation may be made
with refpec to the other public papers of that period.
The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the
compositions of authors by profession obscure, or affia-
ed, or absurd; but the language of business is nearly
the fame at all times; and wherever men think clear!-,
and are thoroughly inrerefted, thly express thcimfelts
with perspicuity and force.

t Knox, 184.

^^p^N^^^X
5is ^^^^^^ ^ ^

rca· K :^~~C~c:~~~8
/y ^.-^^s:^ \

-^y ^^:~·8

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK THIRD. CONTENTS. Situation of the Reformed. Their Repulse at Leith. Apply to Elizabeth. Arrival of an English Fleet. Siege of Leith. Death of the Queen Dowager. A Treaty ...

i ISTORY

F
SCOTLAND.

BOOK THIRD.

CONTENTS.

Sil;ot;in of the ri'rrid. Their Repulse at Leilb. Atlp

1o E i'fe:/'. Arrivtl. of an EnItl/b /'7(et. SieCe of I.r:tb,
Dea!r of Ilbe qur. I)iDorager. A 'r'eaty of Peace. A Par.
Irmmnt. Srl cerJ;,l .;tt:ark on Pore~y. l)ea!fb of Fra,;-j;
/I. FJ?,hs:,'/..nt rs Pf/.ltri, ;i G .vcrntert. (Ca e, of
llisfisatnt betzvteen l, za/ si and JA'ar¥. The Arr s

mz.d f

ji'a-7v in ScotlLi./. Slate 'f t/'t Kiniom. xi!ranj,/r i,,y
Prrf:/i; .-f Ccur: of Yhjiir. Por-ly ,j tIc P,.:. ,,n;
Clcrey. Difenf/;oio aoa t lir, .

. ',, onr. o,,

'*I.'in if Hri,,,y.

.lat!/f 'I Luriyhie. I'rcpcfhlJ for Il, e '.', . Ir,ol.ra,e
Dlaz.:'y Rizzio. Con;vet,,ioln J V, bl. Ttla CL'./;, J-
tier. 'he _tFe//e' A¥a rri.,'e witl/ lIar.'/v. ];;i ht of
JZlsrrav ai.Id hi Af.iaes-e. PrJfidioui Cod..-./ oj E.uz,t-
kib. Churbch /1Airs.

T1 H lords of the congregation soon found that their
zeal had engaged them in an undertaking which it was
bevnnd their utmlft ability to accomplifl. The French
parrifon, despising their numerous but irregular forces,
refuled to surrender Leith, and to depart out of the
kingdom; nor were they sufficiently skilful in the art
of war to reducelthe place by force, or poffrfed of the
ar:ilerv or magazines requisite for that purpose; and
their followers, though of undaunted coura ;e, yet he-
inz accuftorned to decide every quarrel by a battl,,
:;'re ibrangers to the fatigues of a lung c-lr;u.aign, and
lfcn became intpatient of the severe and conilant duly

which a siege requires. The queen's emniaries, who
found it easy to mingle with her countrymen, were at
the utmost pains to heighten their disgust, which disco.
vered itself at firit in murmurs and complaints, but, ol
occasion of the want of money for paying the army,
broke out into open mutiny. The mfit eminent lead-
ers were hardly secure from the unbridled insolence of
the soldiers,' while some of inferior rank, interposing
too ralhly in order to quell them, were torn in pieces
by their rage. Discord, conilernation, and perplexity,
reigned in the camp of the reformers. The duke,
their general, funk, with his usual timidity, under the
terror of approaching danger, and discovered manifelt
symptoms of repentance for his rafhncfs in espousing
such a desperate cause.

In this situation of their affairs, the congregation had

recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protee4ion they could
derive their only reasonable hone of success. Some of
their more sagacious leaders, having foreseen that the
party might probably be involved in great difficulties,
had endeavoured to secure a resource in. any such exi-
gency, by entering into a secret correspondence witl
the court of England'. Elizabeth, aware of the dan-
gerous designs which the princes of Lorrain had form-
ed against her crown, was. early sensible of how much
importance it would be, not only to check the progrce
of the French in Scotland, but to extend her own in-
fluence in that kingdomt; and perceiving how effeadu-
ally the present infurre&ions would contribute to re-
tard or defeat the schemes formed against England, fle
listened with pleasure to thele applications of the maie-
contents, and gave them private affurarces of power.
ful support to their cause. Randolpht, an agent ex-
tremely proper for conduding any dark intrigue, was
despatched into Scotland, and residing secretly among

Burn. Hilt. Ref. 3. Append. 278. Keith, Ap:
pend. 2I.

t See Append. No. I. lIcith, Append. 29,

the lords of, tlihe congregation, observed and quickened
their-imotiobs. 'Money seemed to be the only thing
they *anted at -that time; arid it was owing to a sea-
fonable remittance from England', that the Scottilh
nobles had been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
vance towards'Leith. But as Elizabeth was diftruifful
of :the Scots, and ltudious to preserve appearances with
France, her subsidies were bellowed - at first with ex-
treme frugality. The subsistence of an army, and the
expences of a siege, soon exhausted this penurious sup-
ply, to 'which the lords of the congregation could make
little addition from their own funds; and the ruin and
dispersion of the party must have inflantly followed.
. In order to prevent this, Cockburn; of Ormifioun,
was Sent with the utmost expedition to the governors
of the town and castle of Berwick. As Berwick was
at that time the town of greatest importance on the
Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler and Sir James Crofts,
persons of considerable figure,- were employed to com-
mand there, and were entrusted with a discretionary
power of supplying the Scottish malecontents, accord-
ing to the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock-
burn received four thousand crowns, but little to the
advantage of his party. The earl of Bothwell, by the
queen's infligation, lay in wait for himon his return,
dispersed his followers, wounded him, and carried off
the money.

This unexpected disappointment proved fatal to the
party. In mere despair, tome of the more zealous at-
tempted to alfault Leith; but the French beat them
hack with disgrace, seized their cannon, and pursuing
them to the gates of Edinburgh, were on the point ds
entering along with them. All the terror anilconfu-
sion which the prospect of pillage or of imafacre cani
excite in a place taken by storm, filled the city on this
cccalion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by the
opposite gate; the forces of the congregation were ir-
rtdoltc and difmiayed; and the queen's'partifais in ite

* Knox, 214. Keith, Append. 44.
Vol. I. P

town openly insulted both. At last, a few of the no.
bles ventured to face the enemy, who, after plunder:n
some houses in the fuburlbs, retired with their booty
and delivered the city from this dreadful alarm.

A second ikirmifh, which happened a few days after,

was no less unfortunate. The French sent out a (e.
tachment to intercept a convov of provisions which
was designed for Edinburgh. The lords of the cci.
gregation, having intelligence of this, marched in a!l
halle with a confiderabler body of their troops, and fai!.
ing upon the enemy between Reflalrig and Leith, i'h
rnore gallantry than good conduct, were almost fir-
rcundcd by a second party of French, who advan.:d
in order to support their own men. In this situation a
retreat was the only thing that could save the S;r-.s:
but a retreat over marshy ground, and in the face of al
enemy luperior in number, could not long be conduct.
ed with order. A small body of the enemy hung i;I.
on their rear, horse and foot fell into the utmuft cc.ir ,
sion, and it was entirely owing to the caution of t;:t
French, that any of the party escaped being cut ii
pieces.

On this second blow, the hopes and spirits of ti::

congregation funk aitogethcr. They did not t,;.i
thrmfelCtes ifcure even within the walls of Edin'jr::r,
l};u inftant!v deterimnied to retire to some place a; t

r'eatr r iilta'lce :fomn the enemy. In vain did the Iri
of St Andrex ;, and a few others, cppcolbe :is c;,.\ '.
iv and igncrini.::, flight. The dread of thc p)c . :
danger prevailed over both the sense of honour a:;i
zeal for the canfe. At midnight t;iey set out Iroll
Edinburgh in great confufirin, and marched oitll' :
halting till they arrivcd at Stirling.

During this lfR 5nrurreciiln, the great ho(lv oi ;:i

Scottifil nobles ioined the coiigregation. Tile Io:
Srton and Boriw.-rick were the only perl;ns of ra!,.
who took arms tor time queen, and a.lilted her in '
fending Leith'. Bothwell openly favoured her t...

' t-;ith, Append. jI.

hut resided at his own house. The earl of IIuntlv,
conformable to the crafty policy which diflinguifhes his
chlaracter, amused the leaders of the congregation,
whom he had engaged to assist, with many fair pro-
mises, but never joined them with a tingle man'. The
earl of Morton, a member of the congregation, fluc-
tuated in a tfate of irrelblution, and did not aRl hearti-
lv for the common cause. Lord Erskine, governor of
Edinburgh cafile, though a protestant, maintained a
neutrality, which he deemed becoming the dignity of
lis office; and having been entrufled by parliament
with the command of the principal fortress in the
kingdom, he resolved that neither factionl should get it
into their hands.

A few days before the retreat of the congregation,

the queen suffered an irreparable loTs, by the dlettdtion
of her principal iecretary, William Maitland, of Leth-
ingtoni. His zeal for the reformed religion, toge-
tier with his warm remonfirances againit the violent
measures which the queen was carrying on, exposed
Ilim so much to her refcntment, and to that of her
French counsellors, that he, suspecting his life to be
in danger, withdrew secretly from Leith and fled to
the lords of the congregation ; and they with open
arms received a convert, whose abilities added both
itrength and reputation to their cause. Maitland had
carly applied to public bufnefs admirable natural ta-
lents, improved by an acquaintance with the liberal
arts; and at a time of life when his countrymen of the
lime quality were following the pleafires of the chace,
or lerving as adventurers in the armies of France, he
was admitted into all the secrets of the cabinet, and
put upon a level with persons of the most confum-
mrate experience in the management of affairs. lHe
ponflcfed, in an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit
which delights in pursuing bold designs, and was no
lcfs master of that political art and dexterity which is

Keith, Append. 31. Knox, 2az.
'Knox, 192.

P »

necessary for carrying them on with success. Bet
these qualities were deeply tinctured with the neigh-
bouring vices. His address sometimes degenerated in.
to cunning; his acuteness bordered upon excess; his
invention, over-fertile, suggested to him, on rome oc-
cafions, chimerical systems of policy, little suitable to
the genius of the age, and his enterprising Ipirit en-
gaged him in projects vast and splendid, but beyond
his utmost power to execute. All the contemporary
writers, to whatever faction they belong, mention him
with an admiration which nothing could have excited
but the greatest superiority of penetration and abi-
lities.

The precipitate retreat of the congregation increafre

to such a degree the terror and confusion which 'had
seized them at Edinburgh, that, before they reached
Stirling, their army dwindled to an inconfiderahle
number. The spirit of Knox, however, still remained
undaunted and eret, and having mounted the pulpit,
he addressed, to his desponding hearers an exhortation
which wonderfully animated and revived them. The
heads of this discourse are inserted in his hiftoryt,
and afford a itriking example of the boldness and free-
dom of reproof assumed by the first reformers, as well
as a specimen of his own ikill in chooling the topics
most fitted to influence and rouse his audience.

A meeting of the leaders being called, to confider

what course they should hold, now that their own re-
sources were all exhausted, and their deftruEtion ap-
peared to be unavoidable without foreign aid, they
turned their eyes once more to England, anid resolved
to implore the affifance of Elizabeth towards finilhing
an enterprise, in which they had so fatally experienced
their own weakness, and the strength of their adver-
saries. Maitland, as the most able negociator of the
party was employed, in this embassy. In his ablence,
and during the inactive season of the year, it was agreed
to dismiss their followers, worn out by the fatigues c!

Knox, 193.

a campaign which had lb far exceeded the time of lir-
vice. But, ill order to preserve the counties most de-
vnted to their interest, the prior of St. Andrews,
with part of the leaders, retired into Fife. The duke
,f Chatelherault, with the reft, fixed his rcfidence at
Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's adldrlrc
or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take his clruntrv
under her protection., She oblfrved the prevai!nce of
the French counsels, and the progress of their arms
in Scotland, with great concern; and as the well tore-
!iw the dangerous tendency of their schemes in that
kingdom, she had already come to a refolntion with
rctard to the part she herielf would anc, if their power
there should grow still more formidable.

In order to give the queen and her privy council
afull and diftindt view of any important matter which
might come before them, it seems to have been the
practice of Elizabeth's minillers to prepare memorials;
in which they clearly stated the point un'der delibera-
tion, laid down the grounds of the condu& which they
hicli to'be most realbnahle, and proposed a method for
carrying their plan into execution Two papers of this
kind, written by Sir William Cecil with his own
hand, still remain, which were submitted by the queen
to the deliberation of her privy council; they are en-
titled, " A ihort difcuflion of the weighty mattie of
Scotland," and do honour to the indultry and penetra-
tlon of that great miniiter. The motives which deter-
mined the queen to espouse so warmly the defence of
tie cofigregation are represented with perfpicuitv and
fore; and the consequences of suffering the French to
eftlalih themselves in Scotland, are predicted with
great accuracy and difcernmlent%'.

Ii laya it down as a principle, agreeable to the laws
aoth of God and of nature, that every Ibciety hIath a
7ighlt to defend itself, not only from present dangers,

til from luchl as may probably ensue, to which he adds;
hat nature and realbn teach every prince to defend

Bnurn, vo!. iii. Appenl. 283. Keithl, Append. 24,

P3

himself by tie fame means which his adversaries em-
ploy to diftrefshim. Upon these grounds he eftahlifhes
the right of England to interpose in the affairs of
Scotland, and to prevent the conquest of that king-
dom, at which the French openly aimed. The French,
he observes, are the ancient and implacable enemies
of England. Hoffilities had sublisted between the two
nations for many centuries. No treaty of peace into
'which they entered had ever been cordial or sincere.
No good effeft was therefore to be expected from the
peace lately agreed upon, which, being extorted by
present necessity, would be negligently observed, and
broken on the slightest pretences. In a very short
time France would recover its former opulence; and,
though now drained of men and money by a tedious
and uufuccefsful war, it would quickly be in a condi-
tion for a&ing, and the refilefs and martial genius of
the people would render aftion necessary. The princes
of Lorrain, who at that time had the entire directioln
of French affairs, were animated with the most virulent
hatred against the Englifhi nation. They openly called
in question the legitimacy of the queen's birth, and by
advancing the title and pretensions of their niece the
queen of Scotland, fludied to deprive Elizabeth of
her crown. With this view, they had laboured to ex-
clude the English from the treaty of Chateau en Cam-
brefis, and endeavoured to conclude a leparate peace
with Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
queen of England; and even since the condufion cf
the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and obtained a
hull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be illegitinate.
Though the wisdom and moderation of the Conflabl:
l.:ontmorencv had for some time checked their career,
.yt these restraints being now removed bv the death

I;ts lenry II. and the dilglrace of his minifttr, the i.;-
most excesses of violence were to be dreaded 1r:'I:
their furious ambition, armed with sovereign powr:.
Scotland is the quarter whence they can attack Eng .i
with mclft advantage. A war upon the borders o...:

country exposes France to no danger, but one unfuc-
cefsful acfion there may hazard the crown, and over-
turn the government, of England.. In political con-
dua, it is childish to wait till the designs of an enemy
be ripe for execution. The Scottish nobles, after their
utmost efforts, have been obliged to quit the field;
and far from expelling the invaders of their liberties,
they behold the French power daily increasing, and mult
at lafi cease from fruggling any longer in a corteft lb un-
equal. The invading of England will immediately fol-
low the reduAion of the Scottish malecontents, by the
abandoning of whom to the mercy of the French,
Elizabeth will open a way for her enemies into the
heart of her own kingdom, and expose it to the cala-
mities of war, and the danger of conquelt. Nothing
therefore remained but to meet the enemy while yet at
a difiance from England, and by supporting the con-
gregation with a powerful army, to render Scotland
the theatre of the war, to crush the defgns of the
princes of Lorrain in their infancy, and, by such an
early and unexpected effort, to expel the French out
of Britain, before their power had time to take root
and grow up to any formidable height. But as the
matter was of as much importance as any which could
fall under the confiderarion of an English monarch,
wisdom and mature counlel were uccefiary, in the first
place, and afterwards vigour and expedition in con-
ducl; the danger was urgent, and, by lufirg a single
moment, might become unavoidable *.

These arguments produced their full effect upon
Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme degree, or
every pretender to her crown, and no less anxious to
preserve the tranquillity and happinets of her finbjects.
From these motives she had acted, in granting the con-
gregation an early supply of money; and from the

* The arguments which the Scots employed, in

order to obtain Elizabeth's assistance, are urged with
reat force in a paper of Maitland's. See Append.

fame principles the determined, in their present exi-
gency, to afford them more effectual aid. One of
Mait'and's attendants was instantly despatchcd into
Scotland with the strongest afilrances of her protec-
tion, and the lords of the congregation were defirel
to fend commificners into England to conclude a
treaty, and to fettle the operations of the campaign
with the duke of Norfolkt.

Mean while, the queen regent, from whom no mo.

tion of the congregation could long be concealed,
dreaded the success of this negotiation with -the court
of England, and foresaw how little she would be all!e
to resist the united efforts of the two kingdoms. For

- this reason she determined, if possible, to get the start

of Elizabeth; and by venturing, notwithitanding the
inclemency of the weinter lfafon, to attack the male-
contents in their present dispersed and helpless fitna-
tion, fle hoped to put an end to the war before the
arrival of their English allies.

A considerable body of her French forces, uln

were aumrnented about this time by the arrival of the
Count de Martigues with a thousand veteran foot ard
some cavalry, were commanded to march to Stirling.
Having there crossed the Forth, they proceeded along
the coast of Fife, destroying and plundering, with
excefifve outrage, the houses and lands of those whom
they deemed their enemies. Fife was the most popu-
lous and powerful co.!ntv in the kingdom, and most
devoted to the congregation, who had hitherto drawn
from thence the molt considerable supplies, both of
men and provisions; and therefore besides punishing
the disaffection of the inhabitants, by pillaging the
country, the French proposed to seize and fortify St.
Andrews, and to leave in it a garrifou sufficient to
hridle the mutinous spirit of the province, and to
keep pofrefio of a port situated on the Ilaill
octan.

But on this occasion, the prior of St. Andrews,

t Keith, 114.

lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few of
the most aftive leaders of the congregation, performed,
by their bravery and good condu&, a service of the
utmost importance to their party. Having assembled
fix hundred horse, they infested the French with con-
tinual incursions, beat up their quarters, intercepted
their convoys of provisions, cut off their firaggling'
parties, and so harassed them with perpetual alarms,
that they prevented them for nore than three weeks
from advancing *.

At last the prior, with his feeble party, was con-
flrained to retire, and the French set out from Kirk-
aldy, and began to move along the coast towards St.
Andrews. They had advanced but a few miles, when,
from an eminence, they delcried a powerful fleer
fleering its course up the frith of Forth. As they
knew that the marquis D'Elbeuf was at that time pre-
paring to fail to Scotland with a numerous army, they
haflily concluded that these ships belonged to him,
and gave way to the most immoderate transports of
joy, on the profpeft of this long-expected succour,
Their great guns were already fired to welcome their
friends, and to spread the tidings and terror of their
arrival among their enemies, when a small boat from
the opposite coast landed, and blasted their premature
and fliort-lived triumph, by informing them, that it
was the fleet of England which was in fight, intended
for the aid of the congregation, and was loon to be
followed by a formidable land army t.

Througflout her whole reign Elizabeth was cautious,
but decisive; and by her promptitude in executing her
resolutions, joined to the deliberation with which she
formed them, her administration became remarkable,
no less for its vigour, than for its wisdom. No sooner
did she determine to afford her protefion to the lords
of the congregation, than they experienced the acdivity,
as well as the extent of her power. The season of the
year would not permit her land army to take the field;

I Knox, o02. t Ibid. 203.

but left the French should, in the mean time, receive
new reinforcements, she instantly ordered a firong
squadron to cruize in the frith of Forth. She feenlr,
by her inftrucaions to Winter her admiral, to have
been desirous of preserving the appearances of friend.
ship towards the French '. But these were only ap.
pearances; if any French fleet should attempt to land,
he was commanded to prevent it, by every acd ot
hostility and violence. It was the fight of this fqua.
dron which occasioned at first so much joy among tie
French, but which soon inspired them with such terro;,
as saved Fife from the effedts of their vengeance. Ap.
prehenfive of being cut off from their companions on
the opposite shore, they retreated towards Stirling with
the utmost precipitation, and in a dreadful fealbn, and
through roads ali.oft impassable, arrived at Leitli,
harasscd and exhausted with fatigue t.

The English fleet cafi anchor in the road of Leith.

and continuing in that flation till the concluflon o;
peace, both prevented the garrison of Leith from re-
ceiving succours of any kind, and considerably facili.
tated the operations of their own forces by land.

Soon after the arrival of the English squadron, ti;

commiflioners of the congregation repaired to Berei ick,
and concluded with the duke of Norfolk a trety,
the bond of that union with Elizabeth which was to
so great advantage to the cause. To give a check to
the dangerous and rapid progress of the French ani!
in Scotland, was the professed design of the contraling
parties. In order to this, the Scots engaged never tL
susser any closer union of their country with France;
and to defend themselves to the uttermost against all
attempts of conquest. And for their assistance Eliza
beth promised to employ in Scotland a powerful anril
which the Scots undertook to join with all their forcec;
no place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of til.
Englith; whatever should be taken from t:, elunli
was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at thc:r

* Keith, Append. 45. t -nox, 2co.

choice; if any invasion should be made upon England,
the Scots were obliged to assist Elizabeth with part of
their forces; and to ascertain their faithful observance
of the treaty, they bound themselves to deliver hosta-
ges to Elizabeth before the march of her army into
Scotland; in concluGion, the Scots made many protefta-
tions of obedience and loyalty towards their own queen,
in every thing not inconsistent with their religion, and
the liberties of their country '.

The Englilh army, consisting of fix thousand foot
and two thousand horse, under the command of lord
(Gav of Wilton, entered Scotland early in the spring.
The members of the congregation assembled from all
parts of the kingdom to mreet their new allies; and
iaving joined them, with great multitudes of their fol-
lowers, they advanced together towards Leith. The
French were little able to keep the field against an ene-

o;;y to much superior in number. A strong body of

troops, defiined for their relief, had lately been ic-at-
trred by a violent florm, and had either perilhed on
hc coast of France, or with difficulty had recovered
the ports of that killgdomt. But they hoped to be
:.; to defend Leith till the princes of Lorrain fhculd
rake good the magnificent promises of afliltancc with
s.iti.h they daily fed them, or till fearcity of provifilns
fnould conlfrain the Englifll to retire into their own
cruntry. In order to halen thils latter event, they did
irot negleit the ulual, though harbarous precaution,
fur diltreffing an invading enemy, by hurning and
layipg waste all the adjacent country t. The zeal,
loa-ever, of the nation frufQrated their intentions;
a;ier to contribute towards removing their oppreflors,

p!. people producccd their hidden Slorcs to lupport

t!leir friends; the nliighbomuing.countries ilpplied every
ll;in i necessary ; and far from walning fuLliftence, the
t-Lglfll found in their camp all forts of provilions at

' Knox, 1;7. t Mem. de Caflel. 450.
' Iu'X, 225,.

a cheaper rate than had for some time been known in
that part of the kingdom§.

On the approach of the Engliih army, the queen re-

gent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her health
was now in a declining state, and her mind broken and
depressed by the misfortunes of her administration. To
avoid the danger and fatigue of a siege, she committed
herself to the protection of lord Erikine. This noble-
man still preserved his neutrality, and by his integrity,
and love of his country, merited equally the esteem of
both parties. He received the queen herself with the
utmost honour and respect, but took care to admit no
such retinue as might endanger his command of the
cafile l.

A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the Eng.

lifh invested Leith. The garrison shut up within the
town was almost half as numerous as the army which
fat down before it, and by an obflinate defence pro-
trated the siege to a great length. The circumflances
of this siege, related by contemporary hiforians, men
without knowledge or experience in the art of war, are
often obscure and imperfec, and at this diflance of time
are not considerable enough to be entertaining.

At first the French endeavoured to keep poffeflion

of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far difant from
the town, but were beat from it with great slaughter,
chiefly by the furious attack of the Scottish cavalry.
Within a few days the French had their full revenge;
having sallied out with a firong body, they entered the
English trenches, broke their troops, nailed part of their
cannon, and killed at least double the number themselves
had loft in the former lkirmii. Nor were the Englifs
more fortunate in an attempt which they made to take
the place by afault; they were met with equal courage,
and repulsed with considerable loss. From the detail
of these circumflances by the writers of that age, it is
caty to observe the different characers of the French

§ Knox, 225.
i Forbes's Collect. vol. i. o;. I;eith, xzt.

and Eisglirn tro6bs. The former, trained th w-ar ninder
the active reigns of Francis I. and Henry II. defenlded
themselves not ohly with the braverv hut t'irih the Piil
6f veterans. The latter, who had been more accunfion-
dto piace, fitll preserved the intrepid and del-,erate
valour peculiai to the nation, but difcorered feic, mark.
of'miitiay ggenius, or' of expeiience in the ora3';ce of
7ar. Eiery misfortune or disappointmenlt during the
siege itift be imputed to maniielf errors in colrolit,,.
The luccefs of the belieged in their fall)i w.rs oi'g,, en-
tirely'to the lecturity and negligence of the Enyr!ih;
mahy of their officers nwere ablent'; their lohliers ha:
left their fltti6dns; and the trenches ¢Were almofI with-
out a guard. The ladler;s, which had been pr.-vii.ed
for the assault, 'vantetd a great deal of the nc(icftr.
length anrid the troops employed in that flrvi.e wcr-e
il fuppofted. The trenches were opened at firil in an
improper place; and, as it was found expedient to chlanlg
thee grusnd, both time and labbur were loft. The
ieaknes of their own generals, no less than the fitrngthl
hs the'Fierieh garrilol, relndered the p-rogrc!. of the
Englith tbnriderftllv flow. The length, however, of
the ficge, and the lots of part of their magh7iincs by an
szcidental fifre reduced the French to extreme difrlcis,
which 'tie profpcet of relief made them bear with ad-
mirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French protraaI-
erl the siege so .fr bevoh d c xpecation, the Scottish n.alc-
contents \e'cre not idle. By new afirniations and con-
fetlracies, tiev laboured more perfectly to unit, their
party. 'By pdblicly ratifying the treaty concluded at Bcr-
wick, they ehdeavouried to render the alliance with Eng-
bnd firm and idi(iolbluble. Among the fhb!cribe! s of
these paper' we firnd the earl of Huntlv, and ibrme others,
who had nor hitherto cericurred with the congregation in
'ny of their meailures t. Severat of these oirds, particii-
hrly the earl of HuntIv, itill adhered to the poplifl'
ulrchI; but, on this ,:cainon, neither their relicus

t Burn. vol. iii. 287. Knox, i2r.

sentiments, nor their former cautious maxims, were re-
garded; the torrent of national rcfcntment and indigna-
tion against the French hurried them on t.

The queen regelt, the infirument, rather than the

cause, of involving Scotland in those calamities undrr
which it groaned at that time, died during the heat of
the siege. No princeis ever pofi-ficd qualities more ca-
pable of rendering her administration illufilious, or lrr
people thappy. Of much discernment, and no lets ad-
(lrefs; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence; ~tentle
and humane, w:ihout weakn-fs, zealous for her religicr,
without bigotr- ; a lover of jorficc, without ri;:,:'
One cicurmflance, however, and that too the ex, ci.,
a virt!.., rather tlhan any vice, poitlbnd all tel!ri cre'
q!ali:i -, and rendered her governiment unfortunate ali'!
Lcr name cdious. Devoted to the interest of Fri:i.r,
;er nt;ve con-itr.y, and attacheid to the princes of l.--
rin, her brotherl, vir;; imofl paP.onaie fondnetlf; fri
deparied, in order- :o gi atilv thein, f--in every inaxi
xihic, hli-; own . fd;'in or lihu:anity wouid have np.
;proved. She o:tlivcd, in a great meai.lre, that reput;-
ti.-n and pcr.p':lia.- v -hicih had finootledl her wa- :n
the liihe lt !tat;in in t!ie kinldomn; and many exan.-
p'lcs of fal'i-hcod, alnd so;ne ro 1 ve-itv, i: ti;e laittr pn.t
o hier ad:nin;firation, tnta!lv alienatad l-foir her the :-
ftcticns of a ptnp!e wxho had once plalced iri helr .n i:.-

t The dread of the French power did on many nre;-

flons fu' .ount t:e zeal which t'.e catholic nob!les I!
for thtir religion. Besides the prefnumpiive e;dtlenccti
this, arifinY from the memroria! menn:ioned by !)'r lr,
Hilt. of tL- Refornation, vol. t:i. ISl. and pulifhid Ih.
}irm, p. ,8; the inllrucions c'f

F iizabeth tu l.::illl,)p1'

h'.r aget., t:1!t it beyond all dutbt, ihiat n!.imy 2ai.:;s
papifl thouhit the alliance wi'h . ngl.ild to be r t'r,.fp
rv for p eferving the liberty and independene to lt.e
kir.r.'Oir.. K-;th, i;S. Huntly himfell beran a ,lrrc-
-a:.den:.'e with kli:ab'eth's m liitcrs, befoie t}- i! ';
ot the Enghlih army into Szctland. HlaltS' = S:. '
c-rs, :.6., 53- . Sec Appei:d. . o.Ill.

borlnded confidence. But even by her enemies these
unjustifiable actions were imputed to tle facility, not
to the malignity, of her nature; and while thev taxed
Ier lrothers and French counsellors with ran'lilicls and
cruelty, they ifill allowed her the praile of prudence and
Ienity;*. A few days before her death, lhe desired an
interview with the prior of St. Andrews, the earl of Ar-
gyle, and other chiefs of the congregation. To them
Ihe lamented the fatal iffiie of thole violent councils
which /he had been obliged to follow; an!, uxili lhe
candour natural to a generous mind, conliikl tilie errors
of her own administration, and beggel fo-givei lts ot
tihof to whom they had been hurtful; but at the laime
time she warned them, amillt their frirugles i;r liberty
and the (hock of arms, not to loIe fight of tle 3). nty-
and subjection which was due to their fovcrerrin t. 'l'iic
remainder of her time she employed in rcli iot;u miedita-
tions and exercises. She even invited the atten!ance
of Willox, one of the molt eminent among the reform-
ed preachers, liflened to his inftrucions with reverence
and attention t, and prepared for the approach of deaill
m;:h a decent fortitude.

Nothing could now a ve the French troops fnut up in
Leith, but the immediate concluGion of a peace, or the
arrival of a powerful army from the continent. The
princes of Lorrain amulid their party in Scotland with
continual expecrations of the latter, and had thereby
kept alive their hopes and their courage; hut at lail,
the situation of France, rather than the terror of the
English arms, or the remonfirances of the Scottish male-
contents, cojlftrained them, though with rcluctance, to
turn their thoughts towards pacific councils. The pro-
teltants in France were at that time a party formidable
by their number, and more by the valour and entcrprif-
ing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had treated
them with extreme rigour, and discovered, by every
ftep he took, a fettled resolution to extirpate tlieir reli-
* Buchan. 324. tLefly, de Rebus Cefl. Scot. 2:.

i Knox, zzS.

Q-:

ion, and to ruin those who profeifed it. At the pro-
spot of this danger to themselves and to their cause,
the protestants were alarmed; but not terrified. Ani.
mated with zeal, and inflamed with resentment, they
not only prepared for their own defenice, but resolved,
by some bold action, to anticipate the fchernes of their
enemies; and, as the princes of Lorrain were esteemed
the authcrs es all the king's vio'rtn measures, they mark.
ed them out to be the first vicinms of their indignat;an.
Hence. nud net from any difloyalv to the king, pr-..
cecded tLe fauous confliriacy of Alk-oife; and tlhotiil
ti'e vigiiarce and goodl foltune of the princes of L(i.
rain di!i.;.ered and disappointed that design, it was easy
to cbfi-rve new florms gathering in every province cf
the kingdioem, and ready to bulft out ith all the firy
and outrage oi civil war. In this situation, the an!l)l-
ticn of the louse of Lorrain was called off from tle
thou;iots of foreign ccr.cuefts, to defend the lonour and
diignitr of tle French crown, and instead of fending
rew rcin:crcenients into Scot'.l.id, it became neceftirv
to withdraw ti.e veteran troops alhread'y employed in
:hat kingdom .

in order to conduc& an arTair of io much importar (c

and ddlicyce, the princes cf Lorrain mlade choic c(f
Menhia biLiAop of Valence, and of the Gicur de l:.;n'al:.
As both thi c, eópecially the former, were reckoned in-
*crior to no pcrfLns of that age in ddr-cfs and politica!
refienecnt, l:tizabetih oppos'e to tliem ambaiffa!rlrs on
ecual aliiities; Ccci! eitr prime niniftir, a man p'rl.as
rs the graat;!i capacity x ho had ever held that ofn:;
aid \ ottc rn dean ot Canter-bury, grown old ill thr a.
cf negct;ating u:(:ir three ftucetfiive mnonalchs. 'c1
intcrtefs of the French acd English courts we: c loon 1;.-
jutted by nin cf lo great dexterity in bullcfs6; and

:l

1 rancte eafi^v c( le< l.ted to withd(raw tliefe forces ui':.h
lad Itern t.ie c.;Icf ccraficn ot the war, tl:h otl!er pci;t;
in difutc between that kingdom and England L uic L-:
I:';.":cI c.. i;cu. s or of difficult difi:utlon.

* Lfly, 3a4.

The grievances of the congregation, and their de-
mands upon their own sovereigns for redrels, employed
longer time, and required to be treated with a mure de-
licate hand. After lb many) open attempts, carried on
by command of the king and queen, in order to ovcr-
tuin the ancient conffitution, and to lupprefs the rc!i-
gion which they had embraced, the Scottilh nobles could
aiut think thenifclhes fucure, without fixing fonie new
barrier againfl the future enicroachmt nts of reral power.
But the legal steps towards accomnplihiing tlls were not
lo obvious. The French amnbaf'adors confitllrcd the
rsciring into any treaty with fubjcliSs, and with rc-lel,
as a condelcenfion uniuitable to the dignity of a Ibve-
reigni; and their Ikruples on this head iight have put
an end to the treaty, if the impatience of both partli
tor peace had not fuilgeicd an expediient, whiIih emed
to provide for the fcuriity of the fulbjecd, without dero-
gating from the honour of the prince. IThe Scottifi no-
bies agreed, on this occasion, to pafl from the point to
right and privilege, and to accept the riedl-rec of their
zriJvances as a matter of f:avo:r. 'V'.atcvi- additional
fccuriry their anxiety for perlonal fahet:y, or thcir -^al
lor public liberty, prompted them to demalnd, wa, gr.at-
td in the name of Francis anrd Mary, as ats of their ro. -
al favour ard indulgence. And left conlCelnio l ol this
kild should lenm p;recarious, ;a:t1 liable to be i;c;ri;ai t
by the fame power which had mlade thein, thie i'rclr.-
aibaffador agreed to inli:rt therni in the trt:iv with E-
liz;beth, and thlereby to bind the king and q(y.ie i:nu.j-
Ila!) to obfiervc therm'.

In relating this tratilaclion, conremporary hiftoriar.s
have confounded the concellions ot i'ranci, anid Mary
to their Scottisl ilbjccts, with thl't'reaty bleewern Fraa e
and England, the latter, bice!tcs the ratifica;ion of fir-
iter treaties between the two k!ingdoins, andl tiplla.iio0ns
uith regard to the tinie and Irnatler of removiih both
arlies out of Scotland, conrail: d :an article to ,hich,
;i:he fourcc of many important e\ cits, we fPail oitAn

Keith, ;34, &.

Q3

ha',;i rr,'ran 7 rtcf' . T-l;Th right of Elizabcth te 1.:
clio.wn is thereby ackncwxiitltd 'n the li'o:ntl tcrmn:
a-d i ant is anti Miary fotk I1I! ctegage nCithrl t. a-
i:irte eitec, nior to bear the arms ot king and (:.n
of £Iniland in any time to conme,.

IHonourable as this artikle wcas for Elizalctli hlt.;i,

tie condiiiins f e obtained for her aliics tiit Stiots \ti-I
no tk' advanrageou to thmrn. MrNmlurh and. RH:,ill
o':fea.n:d, in the nanme of Irancis ai' iMary, tl. i; t;
French forces in Sotland fltould inltantlv be It itt .k
to their own country, anti no forcign troops ht ltlc. h:itcr
iltroducc-d into the kingdom wvithlout the kuov:itd,':
ar.d on.fe"nt of par:lianint; that the fiortificaticls (,f
Leith and Dlu;!'ur :i'ould iinollditc;!! v be razed, and r,,
niew fort be crtcitd without 't c ptrmniffion of parIa-
r'en;l: tlat a r..rlamcnnt fno:ikd e htld on the f., ('
of A!Ln'uf, a'.i that afinl'.y be deenicd as valid ill .l
rvefpie ;s iT it h-( brnll Ced

n c iid i:e express con;.:;:-

mr.cnt of the kin; and queen; that, cointtfou able ti ,:.
a:cient Iax s and cufroms of the country, the king .11.
queen miouid no. dtecl:r wvar or conclilde peace xi'i i::
the cencurrc-nc of D .riiarnent; tl.at durtil thie cl..ti ',
iRh nice, the acdinilraticn ot government fo;lud be '. :t-
et in a council cr t:elve ptr!ons, to he chosen out i;
tv.-entv four arimed by pariiarent, levcn of .'kich c...:-
c;I to be clececd by the qeen,; Znd five h i.e pai'.-
..c:::; that i.e: caf:er the king; and queen c.culd i:; ..
x alnce ioreignerc to places or trust or dignity in the I -
riom, ncr confer thre oices of trcafurer c; coiip:ro;icr t:
the revenues. upon any ecclefiati';; that an ad of c(t -
vilnn, abno!hing the guilt and memory of all offcn-
conmitted since the E.x:h of March one thelfand si.,
hundred and fiftv-eigl;t, should be paflfd in the enhi.:,
parliament, and be ratified by the kiing and qucn;; t:.:
thr king and queen 1iould not, under the colour (. i
nihiLng any violation of their authority durin, ti,..t.pz-
ried, seek to deprive any of their iubjecqs ofthe ofi.. '-
benefices, or cftates which they new held; tha:i:- .

1 Keith, 134.

driis dinl to cltrchmen, for the injuries which tc i had
iillaiicl during the late iiifiire&ions, fhiould be left en-
tirely to the cognizin': e of parliament. With regard
:o Icliigioh controveries, the ambassadors declared that
tl.cs \would i!ct prellhni .tIo decide, but permitted tle
irlliainrent, at their flirft meeting, to examine the points
il lifiercn e, a rid to replreliit their lense of temn to the
king and queenl.

'io such a mcniorable period did the lords of the
congregation, by their collirage and perseverance, con-
diuct an cnttrpr'le whliih at lirfi promilfd. a velr dir-
itrcnt iiue. Il'rtl ireglilniUtgs extremely feehle, alnd
rCtl conteinptii.le, the pa.rty grew by degrees to great
power; and being favuiirel iy mainy fortunate inci-
lrnts, basH-d all the effirts of their own queen, aided
liv the torc.- of a nire conrid.r-able kingdom. 'TIli

hilt: libvic rcin auith, :'itv was transferred by this trea-
:.. ;-,an he ih.,d otli', cncgr(gation; that limited prc-

Tal i.t, .ahi' rh, crown h1l

.hi thoern to pofFelTct!, wais

:ll(.t tin:i IY aliiiiiatid; nand arifocratical pnew,
vi;, lI alwasvi p)edcCintl3;,' in the Scottinl go-vrin.
::.,t:l, becan;. tI'l'prIenic tid iiitrotrolalile. By this trea-
:* rii the ilnf.lliice it i rance, wl;iich had long been oi
i:.' ii \'cght in llie ..fi''t-s of Scotland, wva' geaitly di-
Il.,ifiid; a:i! not (ilyS lecre tile prdrnt encroach-
. lt.; ot tl;., l aii'i.;i s ;!ly rflt;'aintd, but, hy con-
ii-irrating v.:h l.rg!aiiil,, protecion was provitird a-

i] ill anv litiAtl atteil:pt irom the bame quarter. A\t

ii.C ifn;e tiIti, tin ro0li11 vcrlies in religion being lcit
:.i the conderation oft parliament, the proteltants
i ;/ht reccrnl ulpon obtaining whatever decifiG. .s
i!.lit favourable to tie opin;iols x-which they profe.T'L.

A tfew days alter the conclu!ir. of the treatv, boiih
1,1 FrIench intd E£giifh armies qluited Scotland.

site vces i:f' e'rv i1n11 in that kingdom were ttumil

ion1A al; thc approaching parliamecnt. A meeting, finm-
I'm.ilJ in a manner t1

e -.rraordinary, at such a criti-
L.-ii u::lure, and to dclib.rate upon matters otf '

* iti:h:, z' 7, &:.

much consequence, was expected with the utmost
anxiety.

A Scottish parliament, suitable to the ariflocratical

genius of the government, was properly an afiemlbly
of the nobles. It was composed of bilhops, abbots, ba-
rons, and a few comniifnioners of boroughs, who met
all together in one house. The lesser barons, though
poffffed of a right to be present, either in person ur
by their representatives, fcldom exercised it. The ex-
pence of attending, according to the fashion of t:e
times, with a numerous train of vassals and dependenm;
the inattention of the nation to the regular details of
government; but above all, the exorbitant authority rs
the greater nobles, who had drawn the w-hole power
into their own hands, made this privilege of so little
value, as to be almost negleded. It appears from the
ancient rolls, that during times of tranquillity, few
commiffionrrs of boroughs, and almost none of the
letlr barons, appeared in parliament. The ordinary
adminifiration of government w-as abandoned, without
icru:ple or jealousy, to the king and to the nobles. Bu!
in extraordinary conjunctures, when the struggle for
hberty was violent, and the ipirit of oppolition to the
cr-own roie to an height, the hurgrefTs and le-fcr laroiis
were rouscd from their inaclivity, and itood forth ti
vindicate the rig-hts of their country. The turbultit
reign of James 111. affords exallples in proof of ti:s
obslrvation' The public ind;ila;ioln against the raii'
dcigrns of that mxeak and il -aiviled prince brougi!
into parliiment, Lcitdes :ie noLlcs and prelates, a ull-
i;..-rabic nunber of the Irfier barons.

The fame caulis occasioned the unusual confluence

of all orders of men to tie parlianlLcnt, which n:rt ,na
the first of Ar;guu. The univcir-al paffton for l;!hrty,
c.vil anr. relig:ous, which had i -izcd the nation, i.'-
ftre t few pcriors to remain unronciced Ipecqatcrs t.
an a;cr -rrbly, wi:.le ae's were likeIl to prove dcl;!i'c
' itlh rtelpc to loth. From all ccrc;:s ot thic kis;lg'e.K

* Keit.i, 14,

flocked in men, eager and determined to aid, with
their voices in the senate, the fame causes which they
had defended with their swords in the field. Besides a
full convention of peers, temporal and spiritual, there
appeared the representatives of almost all the boroughs,
and above an hundred barons, who, though of the
lefler order, were gentlemen of the highest rank and
fortune in the nation'.

The parliament was ready to enter on bufnefs with
the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was flarted concern-
ing the lawfulness of the meeting. No commiiifoner
appeared in the name of the king and queen, and no
signification of their consent and approbation was yet
received. There were deemed by many essential to
the very being of a parliament. But, in opposition to
this fentimcn;, the exprelii words of the treaty of Edin-
burgh were urged, by which this aftnmlly was declared
to hc as valid, in all refpeLs, as if it had been called
and appointed by the express command of the king
andi queen. As the adherents of the congregation
greatly outnumbered their adversaries, the latter opi-
nion prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and those of
noft approved zeal, were cLofen to be lords of the ar-
ti.'lcs, who formed a committee of ancient uli, and of
greit importance in the Scotilfh parliamentt. The de-
iile.rations of the lords of the articles were carl-ed on
\ith the mofl unanimous and adivx zeal. 'The act of
oblivion, the nomination of twenty-four peribns, out
ci whom the council, intl'ufled with Iuprene authilrit',,
,as to be elcicld; and every other thing plreiribrd ly
tir late treaty, or which feenled lit -c(1.ar to render it
cfi:;'ual, palled without dispute or delay. 'The a;ti, l

' Keith, 146.
t From al original letter of Hamilton, arthii(,ifp o1
S. .\ndrcws,' it appears, that the lords of articles were
.'hoiin in the manlner afterwards appoint, d lby an act:
e! lparliainclt, i6.;3. Klithi, p. .,;. Spotiil\wo)( It-erni
:' icll'idcr tl.is tto ].ave c.nll ;!,e cnmo; prafcl:n '.
ll9t. 149.

of religion employed longer time, and was attendl-d
with greater difficulty. It was brought into parianlen:
by a petition from thoi'e who adopted the principles oi
the Reformation. Many doctrines of the popifl cl.urrh
w-ere a contradiction to reason, and a dilgrace to reli
gion; its discipline had become corrupt and oppreftive;
znd its revenues were both exorbitant and ill-applied.
Agaiiif all theef, the proteflants remonstrated with thi
utmost afperitv of flyle, which indignation at their a?-
firdity, or experience of their pernicious tendtex,,
could inspire; and encouraged, by the number as w:.l
aq zeal of their friends, to improve such a favolir:abl,
junqiure, they aimed the blow at the whole fabric o,
popery; and belbught the parliament to interpoie i:i
authority for rectifRing these multiplied abufest.

Several prelates, zealously attached to the an,:ielt

fi:perflition, were prcfent in this parliament. But dur-
ing these vigorous proceedings of the protestants, they
flood confounded and at a gaze; and persevered in a
silence which was fatal to their cault. They confider-
ed it impossible to resist or divert that torrent of re!i-
gious zeal, which was still in its full strength; they
dreaded that their opposition would irritate their ad-
verfaries, and excite them to new acRs of violen.u:
they hoped that the king and queen would soon be at
leisure to put a flop to the career of their insolent iuli-
jecis, and that, after the rage and havoc of the prcl'il
florm, the former tranquillity and order would be re-
flored to the church and kingdom. They were willilg,
perhaps, to sacrifice the doilrine, and even the pouxcr
of the church, in order to ensure the safety of their
own persons, and to preserve the poffcffion of thole re-
venues which were still in their hands. From uhat-
ever motives they acted, their silence, which was iGn-
puted to the consciousness of a bad cause, afforded
matter of great triumph to the protestants, and en-
couraged them to proceed with more boldness and ala-
crity*.

t Knox, 237. * Ib. 253

The parliament did not think it enough to condemn
those do6r-ines mentioned in the petition of the pro-
tefants; they moreover gave the fandion of their ap-
probation to a Confession of Faith, presented to them
by the reformed teachers'; and compoled, as might be
etpected from such a performance at that junature, on
purpose to expoIe the absurd tenets and practices of the
Komilh church. By another act, the jurisdiction of the
icclefiaftical courts was aboliihed, and the causes which
ftomerly came under their cognizance were transferred
:o the decision of civil judgest. By a third flatute, the
ecr:il;e of religious worfiip, according to the rites of
the Romish church, was prohibited. The manner in
whicli the parliament enforced the observation of this
il;r discovers the zeal of tllt aflembly; the first tranf-
grcflion fubjeeted the offender to the forfeiture of lis

acnods, and to a corporal punilhmnent, at the discretion
!' the judge; banifhtnent was the penalty of a second
;vilation of the law; and a third act of disobedience
v\a declared to be capital t. Such firangers were men

that time to the spirit of toleration, and to the laws
t humanity; and with such indecent haste did the
:;r perfoons who had just escaped the rigour of cc-
ciriJtical tyranny proceed to imitate those examples
a k\verity of which they themselves had. so juilly
Croi;plaincd.

'Tl;e vigorons zeal of the parliament overturned in a
;v' days the ancient fyRfem of religion which had been
d(aidlithed so many ages. In reforming the docl-rine
`;4l difcip!ine of the ichurci, the nobles kept pace with
,ie ardour a.nd expcctations even of Knox himfell.
liut their proceedings, with rcfpcCt to thele, were not
!'c rapid and impetuous, than they were flow and

!i:atr, wlhen they entered on the consideration of ec-
:lt'i.iical revenues. Among the lay members, fbme
were al-eady enriched with the spoils of the church,
;ldi others devoured in expectation the wealthy bene-
':.is \hich ltili remained untouched. 'The alteration

K)O.\, 2zj. t Keith, 152. " \ Knox, 254.

in religion had afforded many of the dignified eccle-
faftics themselves an opportunitv of gratifying their
avarice or ambition. The demolition of the monas-
teies having set the monks at liberty frort their con-
finement, they instantly dispersed all over the kingdom,
and commonly betook thefifelves to some secular en-
joyment. The abbot, if he had been so fortunate as
tb embrace the principles of the Reformation from con-
vidion, or so cunning as to espouse them out of policy,
seized the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, ex-
cept what he allowed for the fubfiflence of a few fupe--
annuated monks*, applied them entirely to his owe
use. The proposal made by the reformed teachers, fr
applying these revenues towards the maintenance tf
minihers, the education of youth, and the support ci
the poor, was equally dreaded by all these order; of
men. They opposed it with the utmost warmlth, and
rb their numbers and authority easily prevailed on :!he
parliament to give no ear to such a disagreeable de.
mandf. Zealous as the first reformers were, and ali-
mated with a spirit superior to the low confideratiols
of interefl, they beheld there early fvmptors of selfish-
nets and avarice among their adherents with indignt-
tion; and we find-Knox expressing the utmost fensi!i-
litv of that contempt with which they were treated ',
manv from whom he expected a more generous ce.,-
rern for the success of religion and the honour of is
ministers t.

A difficulty hath been flarted with regard to l tl

a&is of this parliament concerning religion. This d!i-
ficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this diflance o! lime
of no importance, is founded on the words of the trc2;v
of Edinburgh. By that, the parliament was permittcd
to take into review the state of religion, and to signify
their sentiments of it to the king and queen. Btr:
infiead of prefentisg their desires to their foverrigns in
the humble ferm of a filpplicaiion or address, tle i;:-

K* eith, 496. Append. i90, 191.
t- See Apend.o. No; IV. K onox, 39 , S6.

liament converted them into so many a&s, which, al-
though they never received the royal afient, obtained,
all over the kingdom, the weight and authority of
laws. In compliance wuth their injuniicions, the eftab-
lifhed system of religion was every where overthrown,
and that recommended by the reformers introduced in
its place. The partiality and zeal of the people over-
looked or supplied any defecl in the form of theit acts
of parliament, and rendcied the oblirvance of them
nore universal than ever had been yielded to the fta.
tincs of the most regu:lar or coiIltitrtional afflnblv.
By there proceedings it niut, lhowever, be confessed
that the parliamrent, or rather the nation, violated the
lil article in the treaty ot Edinburgh, and even ex-
cceied the powers competent to libjecds. But when
nilic men have been accustomed to break through the
coinmron boundaries of fibljetlion, and their ninds are
inidaniid with the paflions which civil war inspires, it
i; mere pedantry or ignorance to meafilre their conducd
il. those rules which can be applied only where govern-
lent is in a state of order and tranquillity. A nation,
v hen obliged to employ li;ch extraordinary eTfforts in
dcience of its liberties, avails itself of every tling 'wthich
can promote this great enid; and the necreft oft' the
care, and rhe importance of tlie ob:ict, jiftify any dc-
tprtire from the common and cflal!ilfrcd torirs of the
cunititution.

In consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, aq well as
Lb the ordinary forms c!i b:ilincf, it became nicc.ary
to lay the proceedings ot parlialmlent bL'ure the king
and queen. For this purpose, fir James Sandiland of
Calder lord St. John was appointed to repair to the
cuirt of France. After holding a courle so irregular,
..c leaders of the congregation had no rcafin to liatrt.r
:'emfelves that Francis and MAary would ever approve
thtir conduct, or confirn it by their royal alillt. The
.:cption of their ambafiador ,saa no otlhr tlian they
;i.t have expected. lie was treatcd lbv ti, king
a',: q'!cen with the utmofl croldnifs, and iiiifiild with-
':'obtaininig the ratilica!ion of :ll :a;riaoe it' s p:a -

R

reedings. From the princes of Lorrain, and their par-
tifans, he endured all the scorn and inlfut vhich it was
natural for them to pour upon the party he reprr-
sented*.

Though the earls of Morton, Glencairn, and Mait-

land of Lethington, the arnbaiadors of the parlialrt nt
to Elizabeth, their prntec&trt;, met with a very di'-
fererit reception, they were not more fuccefsfrl in one
part of the negotiation entrusted to their care. Ti.e
Scots, sensible of the security which they derived from
their union with England, were desirous of rendering
it indissoluble. With this view they empowered thie.c
eminent leaders of their party to testify to Eliza'i!eth
their gratitude for that fcaonable and effeitual all
which (he had a..frded them, and at the lame time t,)
beretch her to render the friendship hetween the na-
tions perpetual, by condescending to marry the earl ,i
Arran, who, tho'ngh a ful'jcC, was nearly allied to t:
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the ur:-
doubted heir to the crown.

To the former part of this commission Elizabheth

listened with the utmost fatisfadion, and emouramc<i
the Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the. cc:-
tiulunce of her good offices; with regard to the htr:c,
Qte difco-ered those fcntiments to which she adhcred
throughout her whole reign. Averfi from man'ia-,
as some maintain tlrougli choice, but more probalt:
out of policy, that anbitiious princeis would rever l 1-
mnit any partner to the throne; but delighted with t1;c
entire and uncontrolled exerciie of power, fhet ltaci-
siced to the enjoyment of that the hopes of tra::!-
mitting her crown to her own pofierity. The nma-
riage with the earl of Arran could not be a tcni.li
with any such extraordinary advantage as to fna;e ili
refolutiun; she declined it therefore, but wi:h m-.ny
expreiions of good-will! towards tle Scotftilh n:..::,
arid or ref.pe&t for Arran lim.feh t.

Knox, 255. Buh. 27.
Burn. 3. Append .
3c Kcith,' , &c.

Towards the conclusion of this year, diflinguiifled

bv so many remarkable events, there happened one of
great importance. On the fourth of December died
Francis 11. a prince of a feeble confiitution, and of a
mean underitanding. As he did tnot leave any) ilue by
the queen, no incident could have been more fortunate
to those who, during the late commotions in Scotland,
had taken part with the congregation. Mary, by the
charms of her beauty, had acquired an entire afcencdant
over her iufbanrtl; and as she transferred all her in-
fluence to her uncles, the princes of I.orrain, Francis
followed them implicitly in whatever track they were
pleated to lead him. The power of France, under fucli
direclion, alarmed the Scottish malecontents with ap-
prehensions of danger, no leis formidahle than well
founded. The intestine disorders which raged in France,
and the seasonable interposition of England in behalf
of the congregation, had hitherto prevented the princes
of Lorrain from carrying their designs upon Scotland
into execution. But under their vigorous and fortified
adminiftratiol, it was inmpofible that the commotions
in France could he of long continuance, and many
thiings might fall in to divert Elizabeth's atlcntion, for
the future, from the affairs of Scotland. In either of
these events, the Scots would stand exposcd to all the
vengeance which the resentment of the French court
coiud inflist. The blow, however long fufpendecl, was
unavoidable, and mult fall at lafl with redoubled weight.
Irom this prolptcoA and expectation of danger, the Scots
were delivered hy the death of Francis; the ancient
confederacy of the two kingdoms had already been
broken, and by this event the only bond of union which
remained was ditlolved. Catherine of Medicis, hlo,
during the minority of Charlts. IX. her second tin,
cnrroiled the entire dirdtioon of the French clnnc]i},
was far from a;ly thoughts of vindicating the Scottiih
(n'!cr's authority. Catherine and Mary ihad bhen ri-
vJ!s in power during the reign of Flrairi i If. end had
i.ltruded for the govcrnment of that weak and un-
t\i'rienced pirce; but as the char'ns (,' the ii

1 {

easily triumphed over the authority of the mother, Ca.
therine could never forgive such a disappointment in
her favourite passion, and beheld now, with secret plea-
sure, the difficult and perplexing scene on which her
daughter-in-iaw was about to enter. Mary, overwhelm-
ed with all the sorrow whicl so fad a reverse of fortune
could occasion; flighted by the queen mothert; and
forsaken by the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in
the sunshine of profperitv, retired to Rheimns, and there
in folitudc indulged her grief, or hid her indignation.
Even the princes of Lorrain were obliged to contract
their views; to turn them from foreign to domeflic ob-
jecis; and, inIead of forming vast projects with regard
to Britain, they found it necessary to think of acquirin
and eflablifhing an interest with the new adminiftra-
tion.

It is impofimble to describe the emotions of joy which,

on all these accounts, the death of the French mo-
narch excited among the Scots. They regarded it as
the only event which could give firmrncfs and flabiiitv
to that system of religion and government which was
now introduced: and it is no wonder contemporary
historians should a!cribe it to the immediate care ot
Providence, which, by unforeseen expedients, can i;-
cure the peace and happinels of kingdoms, in thoic
situations wlhere human prudence and invention woull
utterly despair t.

About this time the proteflant church of Scot!aind

began to affuine a regular formn. Its principles lha
obtained the faninion of public authority, and ilrlm
fixed external policy became neceilary for the gox;e!i-
ment and prclervation of dte infant focictv. ' he Insdliil
introduced by the reformers diflered extremely trlon
that which had been long cftablihecd Tihe i.iliv.L
which induced them to depart lo tar from the anciti,
fyflem deserve to be explained.

As the vices of the clergy, had, at flrf, excited th:
' Henault, 340. Cafteln. 454. t Knox, 259.

indignation of mankind, and routed that spirit of in-
quiry, which proved fatal to the whole popith iyllem;
and, as this dilfuft at the vices of eccllialtics was soon
transferred to their perfons,and flii'ting from thein, by
no violent transition fcttled at last on the offices which
they enjoyed; the effecs of tic Reformation would
naturally have extended not only to lte doctrine, but
to the government in the popish church, and the
lame lpirit which abolished the former would have
overturned the latter. But, in Germany, England,
and the northern kingdoms, its operations were checked
by the power and policy of their princes; and the
ancient episcopal jurifdiclion, under a f.e limitations,
was still continued in those churclhs. 'he epificopal
hierarchy appears to be more confornmable to the prac-
tice of the church, since Chrillianity became the elba-
I!ifned religion of the Roman empire. 'The ccclci.-
sLircal government was, at that time, plainly copik
!rcm the civil; the Grit not only boreowed its torn,
t!!t derived its authority from the latter; and the
linorelies and juritidlCtions of patriarchs, archlbifhopq,
and bishops, correlponded with the diviiion and con-
flii:tion of the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-
rou!nrics, the nature of the governmient all, wing fill
' oe to the genius of the Ieformation, all pre-emi-
rTice of order in the church was dtellroyci, a.l(l all
,,'lialii t liab!iflled more suitable to the lIpirit ot repub-
Iban poiicv. 'he situation of the primitive church
lig;Cefled the idea, and furnished the modll etf the
i.lter f)-ylen, which has since beien called I'r.Jvyrii...
'Ihe firIt Chriitians, oppressed by continual pcrflciltions,
ri;(l ebliged to hold their religious afTeinblics by ilcaltrl
.;: in cornirs, were contented with a forin of govrn-
1: Ia1 cxr'nimely simple. The influence or relii<ion con-
:i-ici 'iith tie icnfe of danger, in extirginiliin' a-

t:.!n.' i!: ) t he ipirit of ambition, and in prcfc-rvilg a

:'ity (. rank, the effect of their flffl-ings, and tlh

, .!1tc o ,-l!alry of their virtues. Calvin, ia hole dcci fimi-;
x' crc received among the proteitants of that age with

- r'.'.'; fubmii.T;un, was thlie patron; and r . r
, '! :

I) .

this scheme of ecclefiaflical policy. The church ,i
Geneva, formed under his eye and by his direction, xa9
deemed the most pei-fec model of this government; ail
Knox, who during his residence in that city, had fil!dild
and admired it, warmly recommended it to the imiita-
tion of his countrymen.

Among the Scottish nobility, rome hated the perfonrs,

and others coveted the wealth of the dignificd cle'r!-;
and bvyabolifiing that order of men, the former il; l:-
ged their resentment, and the latter hoped to grca i,
their avarice. The people, inflamed cith the inu!i
violent aversion to popery, anti approving of e.rv
icheme that dcparted farthest fiom the practic-r of ti.i
Romifih church, w-ere delighted with a ivfite; I'; a;!r:,-
rably suited to their predominlant pafii)o: -. hld ::c
friends of civil liberlt beheld vxith pl;a:'ilre tli,- .'V.,-
fiant clr-gy i ;ili ow; down with their own hanids ;..1
fabric of ecclefialtical power which their urcrdcc-i. :-
had reared wvi; h .'; rniu.-h art and induilrr,; and afi:cr: i
themselves, that Lv lcnding their aid to ftril; cl,:rc'!.
men of their dignitv and vealth, they migilt c-n::.';
.deliver thi nati.n trom their exorbitant and opt:;i :.:c
jurifdiifiion. 'I'e iew mede of govri:iictt t:.ii
made its wav amorr men thus prepa.td, b- u..Lisr .: .L.
interetis and sailoni, for its reception.

But, in the firt introduiion of his fftiem, lo!,:x

did not deemi it cyoed;ent tn d-epart airirt-li!r ..1,i'
the anci-r.t orm-n. Infile-d of bifsnps, he pr' -
tn clt-!.lilth ten or tr-tlve fulierini .edndts in i_ '-:::
parts of the kinrd..m. TI clti, as the nan'e i;?.its,
wert ctnlr'wercid to i;,liccdt thi lile .nd! d(c.i-iin: ( i..
otsthr cl;-t-,dy. T niy pr c-;dd in tle inhc iorj ud, :.,r,:is:
tiSc churh-, a.il p.rl'rS lr.d f, tw-r.il ot!;

ir parts ,l t ':c t lt:-

copal t:ut;i.c- . T'ic.r Uv!rildi;zii, ;;:.vcvcr, ,- .t:.'..i
t, iCc<red tth} ; on': ltcv cl(ansed o11 fIr0 't Lu: t ".'.:
ilicnt, anti },r..;rn.'nk- no ri'.;it to the di jnliy or it,:-

''L> oF f i'i . i rC'i'C r l; lopS. C-'
' !. :i!.'ibcrl of i.l:crio;- ci.r;:v, to .-toum thc c.:.

, .'Si,.':;-\.voud, iS,

of parochial duty enuld be committed, was still ex-
tremely froall; thev had embraced the principles of tle
Reformation at different times, and from various mo-
tives; during the public commotions, they were scat-
tcred, merely by chance, over the diff'irent provinces
of the kiingdom; and in a few places only -were formed
into regular clafl's or societies. The first general arr.im-
biW of the church, which was held this vear, hears
ail the marks of an infant and unformed society. The
imembers were but few in number, and of no confider-
ahle rank ; no uniform or confifent rule Irems to have
been oblerved in electing them. From a great part of
ihe kingdom no reprentictatives appeared. In the name
cf Ibme entire counties, but ont periti was present;

liile in other places, a lingle town or church lent lfve-
ral nmemlbers. A convention, lb feeble and irregular,
cnuld pol'ies no great authority; and contiious ot their
c-An weakinfce, the mcmbers put an end to their dr-
!ates, withou; venturing upon any deciliuin of much
i:,loi'tance' L.

In order to give greatcr ftrengthl and ronfrlince' to

!tl.c ireivterian p!an;, Knox, withv the aliif::ncLe of lhi
brthrCen, compolthd the firit ibook ot dili;.p!itc, u hiich
co;n;iinis the moricl or plat!'onr of the intil -llecd policey.
''lhey prrefinted it to a conventlion of citl!-., which
wv.s held in the beginning of this year. \Viat:iccr rc-
g::la:ionis were propost-d vwith regard to rcc!etlia.fiie: i
dtilciipin, : arid jltrifdidion, would Lave ea-ilv.I ohi:lta iid
tl.c lalciinn ol that al!emll)v; but a dclicn o r1c0.t-r-'
the patrimony of the churchl, wl hi is th:i. e.iinuatcd,
tlet with a very diffitrent recepti ir.

In vain did tile clergy dilpiay1 the aiv .-ntates whi;h

would accrue to the public, b)y a p;rtper appli ii.-.ion
of ec(clcialtical revenues. In V;iii (i'id tiicr p'o:pfce,
I' an impartial diihribution of tiis i'.!;, to prom oe'
ttie religion, to encoui a:ie leniriiII7, anI' to tiipptrt t!ie
i"('t'. In vain did thle evetn irte; mir,n .ie thr, at, n:ii'
c, 1ic divine dilirai!bre a.ainhli tiie unliit iltaiti .:A L

K.cilth, 4,S. S[,otl. I.

what aas appropriated to a sacred itfe. The nobles
he!d fait the pre- which they ltad frized; and lIefow-
ing upon the propolal the name of a Jdvot irlag.n.jir,
they affeic-e d ro confider it al:oyether as a project
altogether vi!ionarv, and treated it with the utnioft
scorn +.

This convention appointed the prior of St. Andrews

to repair to the queen, and to irvite her to rc-trn inlto
her native country, and to aflime the reins of govc-n-
ment, which had been too Ion, committed to othtr
hands. And though 'ome of her silhich s dreaded her
return, and others fcrelaw the dang-.erou ron:r-qnurnrcs
with w-hich it might le attended, tile hulk of tircm ic-
fired it with fb much ardour, that the invilaztun wv-;
piven with the greatell appearance cf unanimity. liut
te 7zeal of ;he Roman atiholics got the ia.rt of tl.e
prior in priayi-. curt to Manr; and I.rlie at.tr:war:i
bifop of Ros, wlio was corrmifiicned by thi'v m, rrivrd
before him at the pia, e of her refider.ce. J,-fiv c!.-
cdeariored to iif'.:c i:no tl:e ouern's nlind futpi;iol:s
ot her pliotflta,: t.!l- cs, and to peri-uade hrr tn
throw lierfi' if l.tidrev n:o the arrms of thoif *ulwi ad.!-
hlrcd to L.er own rcrliien. I-or this pirpol.'. .e ;r:.it-
ed that fnc shou!d land at Alcre-tr,; and as !lie :':-
rltar.' dtcrimn-s }a!b( lade ni cif:crMbl- 'ru 1r: iin
tl;?t part of t!.e kingdom, h'- rave :er auiu:ainc- 1:
leire- joinct, in .-. xw t'!av 1sv l w'nty tlitllanlud me;ll
;nd tllterf!d .Ier, Ilat w

ith lich an army, t:iC-ll.-;ri .i

iby her prrc:-ncc and atntlirity, lhc i!teFht ca{i<v Ove;iuni
;hC refionnied ch:rch, bcLore it was lirnly Iltt!td ( i itd
;oul d!ationt. .

But at tlis inr'i;re 'te princes ot Jn-rain vcre r('t

'i;lpoitd to lit!ti to tllis xt'ra2vagint and ui-Li-.r(u u
propoeal. lr.'ctt rn dfc,-rdinr tilcmicl:ts againilt t'ia;:-
:':re of iMi dici, wlhof!i ilifid!itsC plicii- X as (ir;;i.ncx

ndin t:n nir.g thcir corlrtiant; ncx r, ileC lat.Ti

r,

]!-iollre to a'tnd to t e af.cirs -!' tltind, aiuld w .t
i'. ir ;.-ie.- ake pc-!'iflin of l.r k.indoim i 'i
i

Stre Apr td..' o. \'.

little diturhance as poflible. Tlhe French officers too,
who had served in Scotland, diffitaded Mary trom all
violent ineafires; and by representing the power and
number of the protestants to be irreltilible, determined
her to court them by every art; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as her minitfers, than to
provoke them by a fruitlels opposition to become her
enemies . Hence proceeded the confidence and assec-
tion with which the prior of St. Andrews was received
by the queen. His repreftntation of the slate of the
kingdom gained great credit; and Lefly beheld with
regret the new channel in which court favour was likely
to run.

Another convention of estates was held in May.
The arrival of an ambassador from France seems to
have been the occasion of this meeting. He was in-
itruflcd to iblicit the Scots to renew their ancient alli-
ance with France, to break their new confederacy with
E'ngland, and to reftort the popish eccleliallics to the
poifellion of their revenues and tht exercise of their
tiundions. It is no eofy matter to form any conjec-
ture concerning the intentions of the French court in
making these extraordinary and ill-timed propositions.
They were rejeled with that liorn which might well
have been expected from the temrper of the nation t.

In this convention the protestant clergy did not obtain
a more favourable audience than formerly, and their
prolpedt of recovering the patrimony of the church
hl'l remained as diilant and uncertain as ever. But,
uith regard to another point, they found the zeal of
the nohies in no degree abated. The book of dilcipline
eerned to require that the monuments of popery,
which Itill remained in the kingdom, should be demo-
lflled ; and, though neither the amne pretence of
pullcy, nor the lame ungovernable rage of the people,
remained to juftliy or excule this barbarous havoc,
the convention, confidering every religious fabric as a

* Mclv. 61.
Knox, 269, 273. ¶ Spotfwood, I53.

relic of idoldtry, pafied sentence upon them by an a&
in form; and persons the most remarkable for the
activity of their zeal were appointed to put it in
execution. Abbies, cathedrals, churches, librarie3, re.
cords, and even the sepulchres of the dead, perishcd
in one common ruin. The firiL fltrm of popular irnur.
refion, though impetuous and irrefiflible, had ex-
tended only to a few counties, and Ioon spent its ragt;
but now a deliberate and univcrlal rapine conpletcd
the devaflation of every thing venerable and magnifi-
cent which had escaped its violence .

In the mean time, Mary was in no haile to return

into Scotland. Accullomed to the cc!gance, splendour,
and gaiety of a polite court, she flill fondly lingered
in France, the scene of all these eninjoments, and con-
templated with horror the barbarilin of her own coun-
try, and the turbulence of her subje&s, which prc-
iented her with a very different face of things. 'Ilh
impatience, however, of her people, the perfuafinn;
of ler uncles, but above all, the tludied and rlorti-
fying neglcdt with which she was treated by the queln
Trr:otLe, forced her to think of beginning this *dil;-
grecalbc voyage t. But while she was preparing fcr
it, there were bown betueicn her and Elizabeth th.
ifeds of that perlonal Iealou-v and diicord, which em-
bittered the lite and ihortencd the days of the Scottifr
queen.

The ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh was

the immediate occasion of this fatal animolitv; the
true cause of it lay much deeper. Almof every articl
in that treaty had been execiutd by both parties uiih
a fcruFulous exacnnefs. The fortifications of Leith
were demolished, and the armies ot Flrance and Erl:g-
land withdrawn within the alpointld tile. 'Il h
grievances of the Scottish maltcolitriits wc-r rc<ir-lil',
and they had bid

wth btaied whatever thly could (lertant! l
thtil fmuire fccuritv. W'ith regard to all tl:cl., dM.:

' w''oc , ul.

.d. 174.
lBrant!imir, Jebb, ¥ul. ii. 482.

could have little reason to decli:e, or Elizabeth to urge,
the ratification of the treaty.

The sixth article remained the only source of contest
and difficuity. No minister ever entered more deeply
into the schemes of his sovereign, or pursued them
with more dexterity and success than Cecil. In the
conduEt of the negotiation at Edinburgh, the found
anderftanding of this able politician had proved great-
ly an overmatch for Monluc's refinements in intrigue,
and had artfully induced the French ambassadors 1not
only to acknowledge that the crowns of England and
Ireland did of right belong to Elizabeth alone, but al-
so to promise that in all times to come Marsy hould
abfiain from uling the titles, or bearing the arnms, of
tlof. kingdoms.

The ratification-of this article would have been of the
most fatal ccnfequence to Mary. The crown of
Ergland was an object w orthiy of her ambition. I-fcr
prctenfions to it gave her great dignity and importance
in the eyes of all Europe. By maniy, her title was
eiteemed preferable to that of Eliziabetl. Among the
Ena!ifh themilf-cs, the Roman catholics, who formed
at that time a numerous and adtive party, openly cf-
jaost-d this opinion; and even the piotnefants, who
'rpported Elizabeth's throne, could not diny the quenc
Of Scots to be her immediate heir. A proper ojppor-
:unity to avail herrflf of all thete advanltacs eruld
not, in the course of things, be far diilant, and many
incidcnts might tall in to bring this opportunity nearer
Ithn was. expefced. In thele ci-eminnitalccs, iai v, by
rtifying the article in dispute, would have lolt that
raik which fie had hith-rto held among neighbouring
princes; the zeal of her adherents muit have gradually
cooled; and fcll might have renounced, fiom that
mom-nt, all hopes of ever wearing the Etnglilhm
¢rowi'. t

None of thief; beneficial confequetcces cf-ipcd the
p:nictratiiig evc ot Elizaleth, who, for thia rcaiun,

**-a! ?, ;
, -

had recourse to every thing by which lhe could hope
either to soothe or frighten the Scottiih queen into
compliance with her demands; and if that princess had
been so unadvised as to ratify the raih conceflons of
her ambaffidors, Elizabeth, by that deed, would have
acquired an advantage, which, under her management,
must have turned to great account. By such a renun-
ciation, the question with regard to the right of fur.
cession would have been left altogether open and un-
decided; and, by means of that, Elizabeth might eithtr
have kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and dependence,
or, by the authority of her parliament, fle might have
broken in upon the order of iineal ihccefion, and trans-
ferred the crown to some other descendant of the roval
blood. The former conduct fie ohferved towards J.;res
VI. whom, during his whole reign, she held in pe:-c-
tual fear and fubjeaion. 'I he latter and more rigor;::s
method of proceeding would, in all probability, hale
been employed against Mary, whom, for many reaioni,
she both envied and hated.

Nor was this ftep beyond her power, unprece(ente:!

in the history, or inconsistent with the confrtuit ir., ,.
England. Though succession by hereditary rol:t It
an idea so natural and so popular, that it has ber-n i'-
blifhed in almost every civilized natinr, yet Englarl1 r-
fords many memorable instances of deviations f'rci
that rule. The crown of that kingdom having (oi,
been fcized by the hand of a conq-eror, thus inlrul
the hold and enterprising in every age to hiriate fil;:
an illustrious example of fortunate an.bition. L':or.
time of WVilliam the I. the regular course of dci.en! ih A
seldom continued through three successive reigns. 'J'!:
princes, whose intrigues or valour opened to theli a ways
to the throne, called in the authority of the great tn.!-
cil of the nation to confirm tiheir diu)ious U'ies. Iic.t
parliamentary and hereditary rihzt became :n l lnclhr.;
of equal consideration. That great afimbly cial.
and acuallv poffefled a power of a:tering the ordr '
regal fucceflon; and even so late as Il nr-v VIII. a2 a'i
of parliament had authorised that cp:;ci.lt mir.or.ar.-

fettle the order of succession at his picafiire. The Eng-
liih, jealous of their religious liberty, and averse from
the dominion of fitangers, would have eagerly adopted
the passions of their sovereign, and might have been ca-
fily induced to exclude the Scottiih line from the right
of uicceeding to the crown. These seem to have been
the views of both qurens, and those were the difficulties
which retarded the ratification of the treaty of Edin-
burgh.

But, if the sources of their difiord were to be traced

no higher than this treaty, an iirconliiderab!e aiteration
in the words of ittmight have brought the preleiit quell
tion to an aniicablL illie. The indefinite and ambigu-
ous expreflion which Cecil had inserted into the treaty,
might have been cl.haged into one more limited but
more preciel; anc! Mary, initead of promilingl to abitain
frln bearing the title of queen of England, in all times
to cume, might have engaged not to alltcin ;'iat title
dililig the life of Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful
Fefierity .

A* n event so important, as a reconcilement between

Elizabeth and Mary, could not dciape the penetrating
tye of Cecil. 1n a letter to 'I'hrokminrton, dated July
14, 156t, he thus energetically 1le'aL-rs linillf: " T'here
hlath been a matter ficretly thoiught of, which I dare
communicate to vou, altihough I meal nlever to be an
author thercof; and that is, if an ccord night he made
lrtwixt our miltrels and the Scottilh queen, that this
should by parliament in Scotland, &c. ilrrcnier unto
tile queei's majety all matter of claim, and unto the
i:tirs ft licr body; and in consideration thereof, the
Sniittif qill((el's izlterell. should lie acknowlc-dled in de-
liilt of heirs of the boly ofthe queen's maicfty. V'lil,
l;oi filnd ou- miitrefs a hufbaild, and by time a flb,
that we may hope our pofieritr Thall have a niafculine
lirln cilion. T'li matter is too big for weak silks, and
t>o deep for simple. The queen's naijeltv knoweth of
it." lardw. State Pap. i. i 74 VWhatever cetncerned the
lIu'r- iin, Elizabeth always regarded it with a jealous
Vol. 1. S

This amendment, however, did not suit thle views of

either queen. Though Mary had been obliged to hlif
pend for some time the prosecution of her title to the
F.ugiifa crown, site had not however relinquished it.
She determined to revive her claim on the firit profpel
of success, and was unwilling to bind herself by a poii-
tive eng-agment, not to take advantage of any liili
fortunate occurrence. Nor would the alteration ha.v
been more a.c.ptahle to Elizabeth, who, by agretin.t
TO it, would have taci.ly recognis-d the right of her ri:;i
to afc, nd the throne after her deceaie. But neither ti-
Sc:t;tiih nor Enlif a queen durfi avow tlief secret f-ni-
Initits of their.hearts. Any open dilroverv of an iicii-
nation to di:furb the tranqiility of England, or to writ
the fieetre out of E!i7ablcli's hands, might have pr(.v-
ed rata. to Marv. Any ftifpicon of a dcfien to a!;ct
the oldcr of fu,ceffion, and to ift aside the claim otti,c
SretiUni qt:cen, -would have expcfcd Elizabeth to n,,.li
and d£lL rved culure, and have raised up a!rairift !.:"
ni..nv and (ialgeroaus tnemics. '1 hcl, however ci: -
lull- concrt icd or artfully diituifrd, u ere, in all 1u !..-
hiiit-v, the real moiivcs which dctermined the one qit -:
to ioiicit. and the other to result, the ratification olt t!:
treaty in its origia2l form; while neither lad reito:l
to tliat explication ofit, which to an heart unl\i alt;l
Iy polh:ical intcrcft, anid fincrel desirous of union lind
concord, would have appeared lo obvious and na::-
ra'.

Bt tholgh crnfideration of intcrerf first occallnnc:

tlhis rupturc betwveen the Britilh queens, rivallhip f a;i:-
other ki!nd contributed to widen the bleach, and tfnil-.
jealousy increased the vilcence of their political h:t! .

eye; 2nd the most confidential of her rminilie rs aSl!
with the greatest prec aution Al hcir:vcr that fuiticc 'a-;.
J5fcuiflcd. Even Cecil, wvhlo was her chief aitl r.
iR.trcate bufiells, Ipeakiinz- of the fuccecfion ;n ra!;'

i

Elizabeth dyin.g withou ilfti, thus cxprePii:s hir:!,i-:.
". '1 'is ong ha'h mi:n p arts; but, fcr my part, !
no fiil but in r!-: 1 ;i;. ' l:.;d. IS.

Elizabeth, with all those extraordinary qualities by which
Ihe equalled or furpaficd filch of her l x as have merit-
ed the greatest renown, dilcovered an admiration of hcr
own person, to a degree which .wonmen of ordinary un-
derflandings either do not entertain, or prudently en-
dcavour to conceal. Ier attention to dress, her iolici-
tide to display her (harms, her love of fiattery, were
all excessive. Nor were these vwealinef'es confined to
that period of life when they are more pardonable. E-
ven in very advanced years, the wisest women of thlat,
or perhaps of any other age, uwore the garb, and af!rit-
ed the manners of a girl t. Though Elizabeth waa as
much inferior to Mary in beauty and gracefulness or
prrfon, as lhe excelled her in political abilities and in
lie arts of government, fie was weal; enough to coin-
pare herself with the Scottish queen t; and as it was im-
possible she could be altogether ignorant how much Ma-
rv gained by the comparison, fne envied and Lated her
as a rival by wlhom ihe was eclililc. In judlgilg of the
collduet ot priices, we are apt to arcrilbe too imclic t)
political motives, and' too little to tlhi paflionf which they
tr:-l in'conmmon with the reft of nia;kind. In order to
i count fiOr Elizabel h's prelcnt, as we!l a, her hfubfeqltcnt
cindd't towards ,lalyv, we must not anot vs confidrr
l cr as a queen, we mull fometines regard her nK-rely
ai a w-oman.

IElizahctl, though no fir,.nger to MTar';'s (lifficiult,

with rc.le'e to the trrcat, i .n:iliirid to ul ge l;er, b) re-
peated applications, to r.'arfv it '. Mar>), tmider variu-:
pretences, itill contrired to :::i:i time, and to (!ude the
requelt. But twhik the oce queen tblictilcd wih p]lr!:-
vetilng imporrutiity, and the oIther evadedl wvith artttll
dclay, they both iid1iedi ail extreme polihenecf of bchla-
viour, and loaded eat h orter witlh pro'leiionis of fitierl-y

t Johnston IHill. Rer. Briran. /16, :47. ( 'rCte, r-,1.

ili )'9. Catalogue of Royal and i';ojle ;Au:iiors, artr-

te :,qs-.

t M\Ai,,, 08. 'e- lr.:,l ...

/
..

love, with reciprocal declarations of unchangeable eftecn
and amity.

It was not long before Mary was convinced, that a-

mcn.g princes thcir exprcfiiols of fri-ndflip are com-
monly far diflant iron the heart. In failing from rl'ance
to Scotl^rnd, the course ics along the Englilh coast. l3i
order to lbe safe from the ini'ults ;' the Englifi fleet, or,
in cafe of tempestuous weather, to secure a retreat i:
the harbours of that kingdom, Ma.ry lent MI. )D'Ovll
to deniznd of Elizabeth a safe condu during her oV.e
age. This request, which Ilcccncv alone obligedl iite
prince to grant to anothe;, Elizabeih rejected, in fi,.ch.
manner as gave rilf to no fiight iul'picion of a delfin,
either to obitri-u the paff.:ge, or to intercept the perlon
of the Scottifi queen%.

Iary, sh-uck with indli-:ation at this ambiguous con-

duct of Elizabeth, imnnedl:iate! reilonfr-ated to Thrrt.
mcrton the Engiiih ambalTa,'or, uponll ftch uIgenrl'lCl
usage. In this conference, Marnv exerted all tliat (lgnity
and vigour oi mind of which lie was so capable, alti
at no period of her lile were her abilitics diplayed tt
greater advantage. She was then in iher eightcciti
year; and as Throkmolton's obfcrvations on what 11at
ied were direictd inmmediately to Llizabeth, it is c(vi
dentil clear, that crafty countfllor would not dilplav til
abiiiites cf the Scottish queen in a fiyle too favourable.

T'i'is ungenerous u;sage, liowevrr; rlid not intimidla: .

Mary frcnir profe,'utig her intended voyage She ~a
accomnpanicd to Calais, tle place hrewhere Ihe embakc
mn a manner tuitable to her diguity, as the queen o tOtt
powerful kingdoms. Six princes of I.orrain her un:k-
vith many of the molt einiient among the Frenth n1
bles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who lecrctel re
joiced at her departure, graced it with every circumiafta:
of magnificcnce and rclpc&A. After bidding adieu t.
her mourning attendants, with a fad heart, and e.c
bathed in tears, Mai v left that kingdom, the ihort ):.
only scene of her life in whi.li fortune finiled upon he'

t Kcith, i;I. Camndcn. See Appendix, No. VI.

While the French coast continued in fi.it, f.ee ilinttly
eazed upon it, and nmulinpg, in a tlhoi.ohtuli pofi:re, o;1
th;at height of fortunl whene hhc e ihal tailcrl, and pre-
i'aingh, pe:haps, the dilaflers and calamitits which rlm-
I it.red the reniai r'it:r ot her d. vs. (he li:hcel otten, and
cri dl out, " Iaitv.'cl ' Fraice! Frewoel blhoved culiur.t,
wl.ich I shall never more hold '" Even when the dark-
: cfR of the night lhad lid the laind Irom her ''iew, (nle
would n Iitli.r retire to the r iFi, ncr ta fl food, illt

ommrandinig a couch to be placed on the deck, she
there waited til return of day with the" ltinoft imnpa-
·icnce. Fortune soothcd hEr on this occ.laliiii, the gal-
!'. marc litt!e way during tie night. In the moriing,
Itie coafl of France was ,qiil u ithini lih:lt, and (lie conti-
nued to feLd her nielanchoil with thle jrolijcti; and as
long as her eves coul! difiingiliih it, to utter the fame
trnder expreirioins of regret '. At lafl a brilk gale aroie
b llt:e favour ol which for flme days, and attcr'ar(ds
mli(!;lr the co cr of a thick feog, Mary c.flapld the lng-
lifh fltet, w hich lay in wait to initrritp; herl; and on
:t'i nineteentllh of Auguit, afrtr an alyence of near

· Beantome, 43 ,. lie hirlzlt was i the lm galley
'.::i tile queen.

: Tlii. wa.s iltd.mubtedl\ the opiidnns of the timns.

'mrdc:ln dclarch that tle lord Jamens, in his rcturn from
;i.i11- , advifcl JIlizalitth, ir thle ilttreft of religioll,

.1 rl:(- own i:cu'ity, to Mize Mary inl her way to S:ot-
':nI; Ctanlden ,7-. Maiiland of ilichigton, a mnan cf
':7t ilnfluence in Scotland, and cloftly attached to
j;tllaes, recommended alli the lamne fltp; ibid. Tlis
i llroniglv fippiorted by I.ethington's own words; Keith,
;t)pund. p. 92. Hleince there is no 0doubr that Elizabeth
l.it a large squadron of snips to intercept Mary, as is
!:llly alltided to in a speech dielivered by tlie lord keep-
er Bacon Ibme time after in the privy council: And-tihe
acr coindi!ct of queen Elizabeth and of the lord James
I-aves not a ifhadow of doubt that they were capable cf
ilnniimg fitch a dtlign.

11
.

thirteen years, landed safely at Leith in her native king-
dom.

Marv was received bv her fisibjeIs with Ihouts and

acclamations of joy, and with every) dmonfiration ot
welcome and regard. But a ierr arrival was ul;rxltct'
cd, and no suitable preparation had lc n made for it,
they could not, with all their cilbrts, hide from her li.t
povrrt-, o. the cour;ry, and were obliged to condl.,;
her to the palace t' Ilolvrood-hoelfi with little pomp.
The olecn, acclitrnmt-d from h l- infancy to the iitiitui
fpicnkd:r an

m nar.ri ce anti fian nd o( thtell, , w

\

natura! at her ae. c.iuld not li.rp olberviig the chalnc
in her iitnatii.n, a;.'. lin cd to !.e depyi aflc't.d with i'.

Neverdi.l aprince ariend thc t}i.-on at a jictuur e di. !

called for more wi!con in council, or more courage anrJ
fteadineif in acsion. 'Thl r ge of religious cl't!o:vcrr v
was flill unabated. the r.n-r.ory oft'p.i opprcliol cxai-
perated the prctcfiants; tle linart of recenit iljuries rcn.
dered the papists dlcl;eratel bth ,- rc ztaleus, i.:-'r,
and irreconcileable. The abrc:ile of their l oerci, n h;i
accustomed the noh'i to iladepticndcl:, and during t!.,
late ccmmnotin!ls tlhe: !Lad aci; rc'd iu h an ihrc..i .;
wealth, as threw rreat weight into the l;Zlc of tiie tr:-
tocrarv, whi'l l,-'d not in lt .d o anll actcL'i.n'.
poxver. The kir.tn a.d i^. ec u- r

t l ..:,-

meit of regents, who exer-ircid a c.iti:td n iilil.;
attended with little ah.i: 'i' v, a-,d 'h-l inn ilpired 1, ;
verence. A slate of prne anarcliy lad prva!-d r
last two years, withi.ut a cCci nt, without a lu.: cnie

· .. -

ril, without the p enw' or or.n ! ;e Ti.i.l, of a

, '..

government'. li-etntkis ,'irit, u.unai: ', '
tubordination, and dli:.;;.nirG th, rcdi':.i; ot !\ . :
justice, had :r;ra. ;ve; al ki '

: n. '. ....

ence of Frar;ce, t'.z an,:i ct alvy .' :;t ki.';.

t t

-withd-awn or dcpii'i. 'l'h Enr.1zl

i.. of I'n,;-.

;- L.

come confedra:es, hL:d -rown in:o .ui;>tnce x :':

' .

nation, and ai;-. d an a!Me!inda;t over ail its c,O .
The Scottif mcnaorchs: did not derive noi-re li;' .

~ Br-at. 434. * L-d;i., A; i"idi-, 9z.

or power from the friendship of the former, than they
had reason to dread injury ant dimunition from the in-
terpofition of the latter. Every confidcration, whether
of interelt or of felf-prefervation, obbliged Elizabeth to
depress the royal authority in Scorland, and to create
the prince perpetual difficultics, by fomenting the ipirit
of diftatisfaaion among the people.

In this posture were the affirb of Scotland, when the

adminifiration fell into the hands of a voung queen, not
nineteen years of age, unacquainted with the maliners
and laws of her country, a Piranger to her lubijets,
without experience, wihicut allies, and almost without
a friend.

On the other hand, in Mary's situation we find tome

circumstances, which though they did not balance thcfe
(liladvaiitai.,s, contributed however to alleviate them,
and, with li'liul management, might have produced
great eflci'ts. lter li;i! j's, unarcliftomed so long to
the refilcnce of thlir rlinice, were not only dazzled by
the novelty and fi.lcnodour of the royal preience, buit in-
f,'l:rd withl a\e and reverence. 3efidcs the places of
power and profit hetir!'ctd hb the favour o' a prince,
liis prioectiniln, Is tfamili;riry, and even his liniles, con-
ior i!oli:.ir, nld winl thie harts of mle. froin all cor-
r s,-:' .f the kii: m,

[h e hti!e 'ls crowded to teftift tihir

(tll:! aed aTiciioin to their foverkigii, and ftudiced Ly
C\'ery art to v.i i) out the nienory of pall milcon(di:c,
',a:i to lay in a lbrk of titure nierit. The amui.!-
i'ln:: s a;id gaiety ol her court, which was filled uvitli
tlhc I]If accoiillpi:ctl of thce French nobility, whoi had
a'.ttl!dede her, b'--an to liiien and to polhfh tle ride

;i:.miers {e th!: nation. iMa'1- hlce-lif pofiT.li'd many
i' ;!:ole q'c-:!iri'ti'u.io!s which raise aiTcAiioii anti procure

oitC!tn. '.I'h- Ir i i' aild gracic-tflllcs of her Ip:-lolI

di''C\e univcrf.d a''lir:ition, te tlegance anid puliteiiel:
cr her manners rui:nialn:del gci. al rei'pe,'. 'To all
tiihe charms of' lihr ox n tex, lie aleI.d many of the ac-
tn(eirilniancnts of the other. The progrei's fh- had

.'ic ian a!i tlir arts anld J.iiicca, wh.l i e ere tl;Cul
;~,.;J;d niCC'ii.I'y Ur crraili:l .al, was far beyond what

is commonly attained by princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a courtecols
iffaiility, which, without lenffning the dignity of a
prince, fleals on the hearts of i'ubjets with a bewitchiig
insinuation.

From there circrmfiances, notwithstanding the tlreat-

ening afpe of asirs

afai t Mary's return into Scotlill',

xtotwithftanding the clouds which gathered on evt-.
hand, a political observer would have predicted a vcre:
different ilTue of her reign; and whatever sudden g;!.:i
of faction he might have expctted, he would never l:a\ -
dreaded the deftrudLive violence of that storm which fol-
Icwrd.

Wfli!e all parties were contending who flould discover

the moRt dutiful attachment to the queen, tle zealous
and impatient fpiritof the age broke out in a remark-
able infiance. On the Sunday after her arrival, tl;c
queen commanded mals to be celebrated in the clapsel ,'
her palace. The first rumour of this occasioned a lrclc:
murmuring among t}e protestants whlo attended tiic
c-urt; complaints and threatenings soon followed: i! c
iervants belonging to the chapel were inlulted and a-
bufctd; aanl, if the prior of St. Andrews had not itainn-
ably interposed, the rioters might have proceeded to 11;
utnioft exccffes,.

It is impossible, at this difiance of time, and tuin\

circuwrflan-ccs so very different, to conceive the violcri e
,f that zeal a;ainfl poperv wlhich then pofircfld tlhe n>-
tion. Every intiance of condel'enfion to the papills v -
esteemed an aat of apofiacy, and the toleration of a fii-
gle mass pronounced to be more formidable to the l!a
,ion rhan the invasion of ten thouland armed mcn'.
Uinder the inill'ence of these opinions, many proteltanllt
would have ventured to go dangerous lengths; andl,
v-ithout attempting to convince their sovereign ly ar-
::umont, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have
abruptlv denied her the librty of worhiipping Go(l in
;lhat manner which alone she thought acceptable to l;in.

t Ktlo.x, 2.. K lItox, 287.

But the prior of St. Andrews and other leaders of tiih
party, not only restrained this impetuous ij irit, but, in
spite of the murmurs of the people and the exclamations
of the preachers, obtained lor the queen and her donmei-
tics the undiflurled ( xercile of the catholic religion.
Nrar an hundrted years after this period, when the vio-
lence of religiois aniniofities had begun to fub,.de, when
time and progrels of learning had enlarged the views of
the human mind, an English houle of comnrions refused
to indulge the wife of their fovereigni in the private use
of the mast. The proteflant leaders delcrve, on this
occasion, the praise both of wifdlom and of moderation
for conduct Ib diflercnt. But, at the fame time, who-
ever reflefts upon the encroaching and sanguinary spirit
of popery, will be far from treating the fears and cau-
tion of the imore zalous reformers as a!together inagi-
nary, and de-ititite of any real foundation.

'he proteflants, however, by this compliance with
the queen's prejudices, a few days after her arrival in
Scotland, obtained from her a proclamation highly fa-
vouralle to their religion. The reformed doctrile,
though eftahlifhed all over the kingdom by the parlia-
ment then met, had never received the countenance or
fanetioln of royal authority. But, to soothe the minds of
tliole who had joined in that doctrine, and to do away
sny doubts that they might entertain, the queen pub-
licly announced, " that until she Lhould take filal orders
concerning religion, with advice ofparliament, any at-
tempt to alter or subvert the religion which flhe found
universally practised in the realm, Ihould be deemed a
capital crime'." The following year another declara-
tion to the fame purport was proclaimedt.

The queen, conformable to the plan which had been
concerted in France, committed the adrnniiitration ot
affairs entirely to protestants. Her council was fil!ed
sith the most eminent persons of that party; nro. a lin-
gle papist was admitted into any degree of confidence n .
TIh prior of St. Andrews and Maitland of Letiingtoin

Keith. 504. t Ibid. 51I3. Knox, 285.

seemed to hold the firfi place in the queen's affeclior,
and possessed all the power and reputation of fayvoirite
ministers. Her choice could not have fallen upon per.
sons more acceptable to her people; and by their rn!.
dent advice, the conducted herself with so much nod.l:.
ration, and deference to the sentiments of the nation, ,z
could not fail of gaining the affection of her fiiljels',
the firmest foundation of a prince's power, and the on-
ly genuine fourceof his happiness and glory.

A cordial reconcilement with Elizabeth was another

obijec of great importance to Mary; and thouch fh
seems to have had it much at heart, in the hegninnin;;.:
her administration, to accomplish such a desirable ron-
junction, yet many events occurred to widen, ratllcr
than to close, the breach. The formal offices of frien..
lhip, however, are seldom neglected among prin((;
and Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to ('bflrlc:
the queen's voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a t'::
days after her arrival, to command Randolph to con-
grarulate her safe return. Mary, that she miglt hl nrn
equal terms with her, ftnt Maitland to the l.nl-lic
court, with mans ceremonious expressions of regardi s"
Elizabethf t. Both the ambassadors were received wi:!;
the utmost civilitv; anld on earh fide the professions :
kindness, as thcy were made with little sincerity, we-:
litened to with proportional credit.

Both were intrufed, however, with something mrTor

dJan mere matter of ceremony. Randolph urged \l1rn,
with fresh importunity, to ratify the treaty of E!in-
L.urgh. Maitland endeavoured to amuse Elizabeth, 1'v
apologizing for the dilatory condudt of his mistress wi:
r-gard to that point. The multiplicity of public at-
fairs since her arrival in Scotland, the importance of tid'
quellion in dispute, and the ahfeimn, ot many noblemen,
with whom she was obliged in decency to consult, wt'
the pretences offered in excute for her conduck; the r'
caules of it were tho!e which have alre(.di, been mcr-
tioned. In order to extricate herself out of tlefe di'fi,

*Lefjl , 235. t citli , ltl, -

tli, into which the treaty of Edinburgh had led her,
Marv was brought to yield a point, which formerly fie
Ircncd determined never to give up. She initru&ed
Maitland to lignify her willingness to disclaim any right
to the crown of England, during the life of Elizabeth,
;id the lives of her posteritv; if, in the failure of these,
fie were declared next heir by acd of parliament .

Reasonable as this propolal might appear to Marvx
who thereby precluded herself friom dilLurhing Eliza-
!,h's ponffffioil of the throne, nothing could be more
,laciililtent with Elizabeth's intertft, or more contradic-
:ory to a paifion which predominated in the character
r that princess. Notwithltanding all the great quali-
'.c whiich threw uchl luflre on her reign, we may oh-
:;rve, that fhl was tinctured with a jcaloufy of her right
' thli crown, which often betrayed her into mean and
iicnerlius aCtions. The peculiarity of her situation,
;uichteled, no doubt, and increascd, but did not infuhle
, .pallion. It dclcended to her from llenry VII. her

;;!nidlalthlr, whomn, in fcveral features of his charac-
-, lhe nearly relemnbled. Like him, Ihe furflrcd the
:.ilc bv whiclh he held the crown to remain ambrliuous
.IId iontrovrted, rather than lbinbit it to pariiamcetary
c.u;:lllon, or derive any addition to her right llrot Infch

thorirv. Like him, (he oblcrved every pretender to
;!:i lccrfion, not only with that attention which pr1u-
crni p.wclcribes, but with that aversion which lul';i-

it, intiiires. The prel:nt uncertainty w ith rCgar. Ito

;:lc ri'it of fuccelioun opcrated for Elizabcth's adi '.'-

', both on her li)hjecAs and on her rivals. Aimi,;
' tuorncr; evcry lover of his country regarded her litc
.'.:e great lfcurity of the national tranquill;tv; and
... rather to acknowledge a title which was dubious,
.i.1 to lf-ar.ch for one that was unknown. The latter,
.;,i nothing was decided, were held in dependence,
n I obliged to court her. The manner in whiclh llc rc-
zricl iilis i!l.ltried propolhal of the Scottifi iii !een 'was
i'l.!;;r thali might ha.ve been expi)cJed. She rj.: ted

' Camd'nn, j;7. Buch. 329.

it in a peremptory tone, with many expressions of a re-
solution never to permit a point of so much delicacy to
be touched.

About this time the queen made her public entry in-

to Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing was Ie;l:k.-
ed which could exprcfs the duty and affection of the ci-
tizens towards their fovcreign. But amidst theft dc-
monfLrations of regard, the genius and fentimern. rot
the nation difovered themselves in a circumliace,
which, though inconfidcrable, ought not to be over-
looked. As it was the mode of the times to exhibit ma-
ny pageants at every public solemnity, molt of their, rn
thi, occasion, were contrived to be representations of tle
vengcance which the Almighty had inflicqed upon ido.
laters '. Even wlile they fludied to amule and to flatter
the quecn, her fubjecs could not refrain from tcetiifin,
ti;eir abhorrence of that religion which she profelled.

To restore ti.e regular adniiniftration of justice, andl

to reform the internal policy of the country, bec.!.ll
the next object of the queen's care. The laws enadel
for preservation of public order, and the fecuritv of pri-
vate property, were nearly the fame in Scotland as in
every other civilized country. But the nature of tlic
Scottilh constitution, the feeblenels of regal authority,
the exorbitant power of the nobles, the violence of 'ac-
tion, and the fierce manners of the people, rendered tle
execution of these laws feeble, irregular, and par-ri!.
In the counties which border on England, this dci:'i
was monft apparent; and the conflcqiences of it molt 11 i-
si v felt. The inhabitants, firangers to indultry, avrli
from labour, and unacquainted with the arts of ptr. t,
fif;bfed chiefly by spoil and pillage, and, being co!:i'
deratedl in sents or cians, committed thele excefis li:
onv i-ih inpunity, but even with honour. Dun,'
the unltttled state of the kingdom from the death ii
James V. this dangerous licence had grown to an un-
t.iual leight; and the inroads and rapine of thole free
bootcrs were become no less intolerable to their c\l

lKeith, 139.

countrymen than to the English. To refrain and pu-
nifh these outrages, was an action equally popular in both
kingdoms. The prior of St. Andrews was the person
chosen for this important service, and extraordinary
powers, together with the title of the queen's lieutenant,
were vefled in h-im for this purpof.

Nothing can be more surprising to men accustomed
to regular government, than the preparations made on
this occasion. They were fich as might he expecled in
the rudest and most imperfect fRate of lociety. The
freeholders of eleven several counties, with all their fol-
lowers completely armed, were summoned to assist the
licutanant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
resembled a military expedition, rather than the progress
of a court ofjuiticc . The prior executed his commis-
sion with such vigour and prudence, as acquired him a
great increase of reputation and popularity among his
countrymen. Numbers of the banditti suffered the pu-
nifhment due to their crimes; and, by the partial and ri-
gorous administration of justice, order and tranquillity
wererefRored to that part of the kingdom.

Durling the absence of the prior of St. Andrews, the
leaders of the popish faction feein to have taken rome
Iteps towards insinuating themselves into the queen's fa-
vour and confidences. But the archbishop of St.
Andrews, the most remarkable person in the party-for
abilities and political address, was received with little
favour at court; and whatever secret partiaiity the queen
might have towards those who profeflcd the fame reli-
gion with herlclf, she discovered no inclination at that
time to take the adminifiration of affairs out of the hands
to which Ihe had already committed it.

The cold reception of the archbishop of St. Andrews
was owing to his connection with the hoile of llamil-
ton, from which the queen was much alienated. The
duke of Guile and the cardinal could never folgive tile
zeal with which the duke of Chatcllerault and his son
the earl of Arran had efpouled the caule of the conre-

o Keith ry8. t Ibid., 0oj.
Vol. 1. T

garton. Prres feldrm view their fucceffrors witholt
jealoufv and difiruft. The prior of St. Andrews, per.
haps, dreaded the duke as a rival in power. All thtle
caxfes concui red in infusing into the queen's mind an a-
verGon for tlat family. The duke, indulging his Il;' e
ofretirement, lived at a distance frcmn court, withitt

t k iir.g n

pars to irfinuate himflIf into favour; aid

th.o!gh the eail of A:ran openly aspired to marrsy i.e
qut-tr, he, by a mofl unpardonable act of imprudence,
m a2 the onh. neobleman of diftindlion who oppolfd Ma-
r-'s erijo ing :he exercise of her religion; and by raf!iv
en-rring a public proteltation againlt it, entirely so! Ile:
ed her avour' At the fame time, the fordid partimo
ny of. his fa-her cbliged h:m either to hide himfc!i i:
frnle retirerrent, or to appear in a manner unbhecc iJ,,
b:s dignity as firfl prince of the blood, or his high ,lr-
tenficns as fl;ior to the queen t. iis love inflanicd 1 ;
cirfapoitnrm:nt, and his Impatience exali)erated by r:-
gliA, -reyed gradually on his rtafin; and, acter man;
extravaganció-,, broke rut at !alt in ungovernablle frt.elii

Towards the end of the year, a conven ion of eflai ,

was held, chicfly on account of ecclefiaitical afl'ii,.
The affemnbly of the church, which fat at the fame tin:r,
presented a petition, containing many demarnds wi;;l
rc-fpet to the lupprtfling of popery, thl encoira.il.
the proteflant religion, and the providing for the nlal-
tenance of the clergy t. 'I he lafl was a matter ot trc,.
iloportance, an:d the iteps takcia towards it dclferv to I c
t.. ced.

'"irougb th, n'rmlber of .roteflant preachers was now

cr.,.un;idcablv ii;(reaft d, inarny rnore were fltil l n.iCtd *n
c(t ry corner of the kingdom. N'o Iega! prosilon ia--
nig been mra'e for thnm, they had hitlherto draun .i

i. )y -nd I ;'cc; ar;'ns fifififlence frcm thr hen.'vci!rnl

(<! thlvr pec;le. To !:i'fer the minifiers ofan eialliini.:
hllrcr: tn cc nt;nll i. this flae of indigrnce and de,.cii-
r..' us an11 inccci.cy tqual:y rerpugnant to thie pri;,.i

:-I, , C X,

ples of religion, and to the maxims of found polihv; aind
wou;d have juflificd all the imputations of ., m -ri, witlih
which the Refornation was then loaded bv its enemieq.
The revenues of the pnpifh church were tic onvly find
which could be employed for their relici; but during the
three last years the state of these waas greatly aitere . ..
great majority of abbots, prior., aind oth-r heads of re-
ligious houses, had, either from a i.nlie of duty, or tronr
views of interest, renounlcedt the errors of po --v'\; an:l
nt twithitandiig this change in thlir cnthint.-:ts, tlitc
retained their ancient revenurs. Ahlnoit ihc whole w"-
lIcr of bishops, and levcral of the other didnitari-s, It!l
adhered to the Romilh luperflition; and thingh dcl:ar-
rid from every Ipiritl;al function, con:i'tled to eniov-
the temporalities of their benefices. Somle layen, e'tlc-
cially those who had been adtive in promoting t:c iRe-
formation, had, nnder various pretenees, and :!1iMllt
the licence of civil wars, got into their hands pol i1,h:s
which belonged to the church. Thus, Ib,'ore any ,.trt
of the ancient ecclelialtical revenues could b, appl.;rl 1.-
wards the maintenance of the proteltanlt miniftcrni matnl
different interests were to be adjullted; many claims to
be examined; and the prejudices and paiions of the two
contending parties required the application of a delicite
hand. After much contention, the following plan was
approved by a majority of voices, and acq.,i-rCcdc i.i
even by the popish clergy themfehevs. An exact accolnt
of the value of ecclefialtical benefices throTlrhout the
kingdom was appointed to be taken. The present in-
cumbents, to whatever party they adhered, were allow.r-
ed to keep poffeifion: two thirds of their whole revenue
were reserved for their own ule, the rernainder was an-
nexed to the crown; and out of that, the queen undlci-
took to assign a sufficient maintenance for the proteltanl
clergy t.

As most of the hifhops and several of the other 'i;.-

nitaries were still firmly attached to the popish religiun,
the extirpation of the whole order, rather than an act

t Keith, Append. I75. KInox, 1)4.

Tz

of such extraordinary indulgence, might have been ex-
pected from the zeal of the preachers, and from the fpi.
rit which had hitherto animated the nation. But, on
this occasion, other principles obflruded the operations
of such as were purely religious. Zeal for liberty, and
the love of wealth, two passions extremely oppofitc,
concurred in :ietcrrinig- the proteitant leaders to fall
in with this p!- which deviated so manifeflly firon the
maxims by wxinch they had hitherto regulated their
conduct.

If the reformers had been allowed to ant without con-

troul, and to level all diflin~cion in the church, the im-
melfe revenues annexed to ecclefiaflical dignities could
not, with any colour of justice, have been retained by
tholr in whefe hands they now were; but mult either
have been distributcd amongst the protefcant clergy,who
performed ll religious offices, or muff have fallen to
the queen, fiom the bounty of whose anccftors the
greater part of them was originally derived. The for-
mir, however suitable to the religious spirit of many a-
mcng the people, was attended with manifold danger.
'Ihe popish ecclrfiafiics had acquired a Ihare in the na-
tional property, which far exceeded the proportion that
was confifttnt with the happiness of the kingdom; and
tile nobles were determined to guard againfl this evil,
by preventing the return of those vast poffeffeonst in:o
the hands of the church. Nor was the latter, which
expo!fd the ronfiii:tion to more imminent hazard, to
be avoided s ith lets care. Even that circumscribed prc-
rtgative which the Scottish kings poffiffed, was the ol-
i t of jer'oil to the nobles. If they had allowed thl
crow-n to fcize the spoils of the church, such an increase
of powe r r.ult have followed that accession of property,
as wculd have railed the royal authority above coutroul,
aud have rendeircd the most limited prince in Europe the
most alllnlte and independent. The reign of Helry

1III. prelented a recent and alarming example of this
ntature. 'the ralth which flowed in upon that prince,
from tle lill prcffion of the n,onaftl ris, not only clai]ig
td ;Ilt maitxiis of his governmll nt, but the tiin,)er Jr

his mind; and he who had formerly submitted to hi:
parliaments and courted his people, tdi.lated frolm !th.
time to the former with intolerable iniblt n.-e, and tyran-
nized over the latter with unprecedented severity. Ai:1
if his policy had not been extremely Ihort-tiglited, ii 1-
had not squandered what he acquired, wilh a profulio;
equal to his rapaciousness, and which defea:td his am-
bition, he might have eflablilhed cdelpotiinu inl Englaid:
on a basis so broad and firong, as all the cfifirts ;f ti.
fubjeats would never have been able to lhake. In Sre.-
land, where the riches of the clergy bire as great a pri( -
portion to the wealth of the kingdom, the acquilition
of church lands would have been of no letr inmporrance
to the crown, and no less fatal to the ariltucra-cy. ^ h.
nobles, for this realbn, guarded againit lich an inrcr.;'e
rt the royal power, and thereby secured their own, ind.:-

pendence. Avarire mingled itf-lf w;th their concern for the in-
itrclt of their order. The re- uniting tnc pjofflfions cf
tie church to the crown, or the b .ltowiln thelnl un t'.-:
protestant clergy, would have hbe-n a fatal blow, lio:.i
to those nobles wilo had, by fraud or violen.e, !¢izcl
part of thele revenues, alid to tholk' abbots and prior,
whlo had totally renouncaed their ccletiafiEial cilar.' cr.
But as the plan whli.h was pro!slctd gave lome itinit:on
:o their ufilrpation, thly pro mioted it v.ith their utl:iit
influence. 'FlTe l opifh ccce!fii.tlse, thouagh I le lopping
ufi'a third of their trvelntis v.'wa by no m1 ans g;'ccatil,-
to hiern, consented, ijtl '

r tb,:ir p'It_,cL'IU circu nli;s:m ,

to !lfcrifice a part of thlir pi;flUions, i:l order to pui-
rilcha the fe'ur c enjoyiltrilt of'the remailinder; and altt r
ilentiing the whole irrero-'erably loft, they confidered
xwhaitvcr they could retrieve as lb milch gain. Ma;ny
of the ancient dignitaries were rien of noble birth; and
a, they no longer ent,.rta;in d i oprs of rtitoring the poip-
ilh religion, they wifihed ;heir own relit . i, ratheLr t!.z;a
tiln crown, or tile proteltant clergy, to be inriched Iw\i,,
t'c tisoils of the church. They conirte cd, t cr

this re.i-

foi, at the enlracliments of tieh nobles; they evcn a:.'-
td their aa;rice and violetre; they dealt out the pft:.-

'1' j.

rcor. of the churrh amone their own relations, and by
grantirg ,'s and peipetual leafes of lands and tithes,
gave, tc the utioflt of thieir power, some colour of legal
pciTeffion to what was former!y mete ufilrpation. Ma-
ry vcflties of foch alienations still remain- ' The no-
bles, w-ith the concurrence of the hicumbents, daily ex-
tendced their encroachments, and gradually stripped the
etcletiaifhcs of their riceLft and molt valuable poflffiions.

-ven that third part, which was given up in order to
ii!ence t:.e ciamours of the proteflant clergy, and to l;t
iomnL teqiivalent to the crown for its claims, amounted
to no crllfiderable fum. The rtirds due by the niur
powcrtul nobces, efpecia!ly by such as had embrared t!re
Kt foi mation, werem-amonftunix'erialiv remitted. Others,
by producing iraudulent rentals; by estimating the cor-n,
and other paymnents in kind, at an undervalue; anld !I
the co;:inlvaic.- of collectls, greatly diminished thei
charge agai:lit temfRches t: and the nobles had rnill,
reason to ie fatiafid with a device, which, at no fil.a;l
exp. n.e, secured to them filch vast poffrflions.

Nor were the proreftant clergy conliderable gainers

hr tl:; new- rgu!ation; they found it to he a morc ca.
fv maltcr to kini!e 7-al, than to extinguish avarice.
Those very itrn, whom formerly they had ifayed viwi:'l
aljfolkute authority, were now deaf to all their renon-
fra-ncc.:. The Drior of St. Andrews, the earl of Argyle,
i;h earl of Morion, and Maitland, all the molt zealo:s
';c.adc'r of the congregation, were appointed to aifier,
or, as it x as called, to tvaJifv their ftiplends. An ht:n-
di-td merks Scottifn was the alluwance which their !i-
htcizlitv affordedt to the generality of nlinift-rs. 'So a
few, three hundred merks were granted *. Aleut
tw.n't- four tl:oufand pounds Scottish appears to have
L.en the whole fium alloted for the maintenalnce ,
a na:ional church tftablifhcd by law, and eitnemlt.
throughout the kingdom the true church of (GodJ

tKc:ith, tr7. Spotfw. 274
tKei'h, Append. 288. Spotfw. 283.
*' Kirr, -.I. 9 K-cth, Append. 188.

Even this fum was paid with little exaclnefs, and the
miniflers were kept ill the fame poverty and dependence
as formerly.

The gentleness of the queen's adminifiration, and the
elegance of her court, had mitigated, in some degree,
the ferocity of the nobles, and accuflomcd them to great-
er mildness and humanity; while, at the fame time,
her preetnce and authority were a check to their sac-
tious aad tumultuary ipirit. But, as a state of order
and tranquillity was not natural to the teudal aristocracy,
it could not be of long continuancr; and this year he-
came remarkable tor the most violent eruptions of in-
tcfline diliord and aninmoity.

Among the great and independent nobility of Scot-

land a monarch could pofi:'s little authority, and exer-
cile no extenive or rigorousjuirifdielion. T'he interfer-
ing of interest, the unsettlcd slate of property, the fre-
quency of public commotions, and the fierceness of their
own manners, liwed among the great families the feeds
of many quarrels and contnttions. These, as we have
already oblirved, were frequently decided not by law,
but 1bv violence. T'he offcnded baron, without having
rccourle to the monarch, or ai knowildging his fiuutrior
authority, afemll lc(d his o wn followers, and invaded the
lands of his rival in an hft;ic l mlanner. 1 ogether with
lis efate and honour;, cverv nobleman tranfiittcd loime
hereditary ftud to hiis poitcrity, who were bound in
honour to adopt and to prolccaltt it with the fame in-
veterate rancour.

Such a diffenlion had subsisted between the house of
Hamilton and the earl of Bothwell, and was heightened
by nmutal injuriers during the late commlotions '. Both
the earl of Arran and Bothwell happening to attend the
tourt at tle i ime time, their 1'llowerj quarrelled Irc-
quently in the firctts of idibugl, and excited ddan-
gerous tumults in that city. At last, the mediation ci
tleir fri(nds, particularly of Knox, br, glht alou: a :-:-

. _Kch,; [.

conci;er.ent, but an unfortunate one to both thele no-
blemen il.

A few davs after, Arran came to Knox, and, with

the utmost terror and confusion, confessed firit to him,
and then to the prior of St. Andrews, that, in order
to obtain the sole direction of affairs, Bothwell, and
his kinsmen, the Hamiltons, had conspircd to murd,.r
the prior, Maitland, and the other favourites of the
queen. The duke of Chetelherault regarded the prinr
as a rival, who had supplanted him in the queen's fa-
vour, and who filled that place at the helm, which he
imagined to be due to himself, as first prince of the
blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal injurii
which he had received from the prior during the late
commotions, was no lets exafpcrated againit hiin.
But whether he and the Hamiltons had agreed to ce-
ment their new alliance with the biood of their com-
mon enemy, or whether the conspiracy exifled only
in the frantic and difordtred imagination of the earl
of Arran, it is impossible, amidst the contradi(oion ,'
historians and the defcdtiveneli of records, pofitivclv
to dctermine. Among men inflamed with reentinci,
and impatient for revenge, rafl exprcffions mighr lie
uttered, and violent and criminal expedients prop:i'cl;
and on that foundation, Arran's difeiml-e cd ia!. y
nsioht rear the whuoe fuperftruchuire of a coniiiira;..
Ail the pcrfons accutfcd, denied thir guilt with the ut-
most confidence. But the kl)okn tharacters oi dil.
met:, and. tLe \iolcir! spirit of the age, added great!,'
ti the prcbabilitv or ile accusation, anid abundaint,'
j'ift'il the conduct o; the queen's minillers, who ccn-
'fined Bothiweii, Arran, and a few of the ringleaders, 1i
fIrtarate pril:r., :nd o'bli'ged tie duke to iLirrclldrr il.-
Lr;n; Clf atc Dcoi ib-rron, which he had held c\r
tir.C- t;iime i f Sii rliS i; ing thie orfiice of regent '.

The definri off tar

o ily against the piir

of St. Andrewvs were dtrpr I-id, and prudiccd n!lire
rn.;lrcrab!ic and Iore tragical -ev.l;s. Gi-orgc t'uridui

F.K!.-, ,c;. * Ibid. _-, .cS.

earl of Huntly having been one of the nobles who
conspired against James III. and who raised his Ion
James IV. to the throne, enjoyed a great share in the
confidence of that generous prince §. By his bounty,
great accessions of wealth and power were added to a
family already opulent and powerful. On the death
of that monarch, Alexander the next earl, being ap-
pointed lord lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth,
left the other nobles to contend for offices at court;
and having retired to the north, where his eltate and
influence lay, resided there in a kind of princely inde-
pendence. The chieftains in that part of the kingdom
dreaded the increaling dominion of such a dangerous
neighbour, but were unable to prevent his encroach-
ments. Some of his rivals he secretly undermined, o-
thers it subdued by open force. His estate far exceed-
ed that of any other lubject, and his fuperiorltics and
jurisdictions extended over many of the northern coun-
ties. With power and pofleflions so immenl', under
tuo long and feeble minorities, and aniidif the Ihock of
civil commotions, the earls of Huntly might have in-
dulged the most elevated hopes. But happily for the
crown, an aftive and enterpriling spirit was not the
hlarlaceriftic of that family, and whatever object their
ambition might have in view, they chore rather to ac-

t:ire it by political address, than to seize it openly, and
b' tforce of arms.

The conduct of George the present earl, during the
late commotions, iad been perfedtly fuijtable to the
hlaraaer of the family in that age, dubious, variable,
and crafty. While the fucces; of the lords of the con-
gregation was uncertain, he affilled the queen regent
in attempting to crufl them. When their affairs put
on a better afpecd, lie pretended to join them, but
never heartily favoured their caule. He was courted
and dreaded by each of the contending parties; both
connived at his encroachments in the north; and, by
artifice and force, which he well knew how to.cmploy

§ CraAi. Offi. of State, 56.

alternate!y, and in their proper places, he added evern
day to the exorbitant power and wealth wfhich L.
poffcfled.

He observed the groewing reputation and authority ni

the prior of St. Andrews with the greatest jealonilf
and concern, and corlfidred him as a rival who had
engrossed that snare in the queen's confidence, to whidi
his own zeal for the popish religiQn seemed to :ive
him a preferable title. Personal injuries soon increal',
the mifunderfianding occasioned by rivalfhip in power.
The queen determining to reward the services of ti.r
prior of St. Andrews, by creating him an earl, iiiade
choice of Mar, as the place from which he should take
his title; and, that he might be better able to fipy.l-t
his new honour, hcflowed upon him at the fame tir;e
the lands of that na.ne. These were part of t'.t r:.\-
demesnes ', but the earls of IIuntly had been perini:td
for leveral vears to keep polffltlon of them t. On th';
o.cafion, the earl not only complained, with fonim r.-
son, of the loss wh;ch he fuhlaincd, but had real t(a:lc
to be alarmed at the intrusion of a formidable nci;h-
bour into the heart of his territories, who might be
abie to rival his power, and excite his opprefled val'a.i
to ihake off his yoke.

An incident which happened soon after, increafd

and confirmed IIn'itly's lulpicions. Sir John Gordon,
his third son, and lord Ogilvie, had a dii'ute ahbl::t
the property of an eflate. This diispu'< l.'cainr 2
deadly quarrel. They happened unfortu latelyv o inc:
in the streets of Edinburgll, and being both att ,'i.l
with armed followers, a scuffle ensued, in which in1l
Ogilvie was dangerously wounded hy fir John. 'Ihe
magistrates apprehended both the offenders, anl trte
queen commanded them to be clofelv confined. ULdkr
any regular government, such a breach of public peace
and order would expose the perifun offending to certain
punifhmnt. At this time some severity was n-ceffary,
in order to vindicate the queen's authority fronm a

'Crawf. Peer. 297. 1 Buch. 334.

insult, the mofi heinous which had been offered to it
fiice her return into Scotland. But, in an age ac-
cultomcd to licence and anarchy, even this moderate
extrcife of her power, in ordering them to he kept
in cutod-y, was deemed an acl of intolerable severity;
and the friends of each party began to convene their
vassals and dependents, in order to overawe, or to fru-
iiraie, the decisions of jufgice '. Meanwhile Gordon
rmaking his ckape out of prilbn, and flying into Aber-
dcrnfhire, complained loudly of the indignity with
uhich he had been treated; ant as all the queen's ac-
!i.-ns mere, at this juncrture, imputed to the earl of
Mar, this added veiv mituch to the resentment which
ifuntly had conceiveid againfl that nobleman.
At r.e very time when there pafiions fermented, with
!:e Fgreateft violence, in the minds of the earl of
iintvly and his family, the queen happened to si t out
': a prorerls into the northern parts of the kingdom.
Sil was attended hy the earls of Mar and Morton,
.Mailandl. and othei leaders oi that party. The pre-
i .nc of l:te q:..zn in a country whbere no name greater
:ban the earl ot (luntl'-s had becn heard of, and no
.n-cr fupcrior to his Ihad been exercised, for many
i.'rs, was an event of itself abulldantly mnortifying to
':!,a laughlty nobleman. But while the queen was en-
.li\ under the dirce!io:n of Miar, all her aftions were
I.re apt tu lie niircprelrcted, and confirued into inju-
i.ci; and a tlioulfnd circtirlflanlces could not but ocriir
:uawaken lurtl 's jealourly, to oficnd his pride, and
i infiame 'iis reft-n tent. Amnilft the agitations of

' nr.ny vioknt pallions, forme eruption vas unavoid-

()n Mar's arrival in the north, r-iurtly employed

'.ift, a i

omal capaile of executing the coniniiflion

il abundance of dexteiity, to frjthe the queen, and
;n!trcede for pardol tio their son. But the queen
' etptirilv rr-quirc'! tha!t het' loiild again deliver him-
.,: it the bla:.ds of ju(icre, and rely un her clemency.

"t',

?2-
?,. I'C i'I, 22 '*

Gordon was persuaded to do so; and being enjoined
by the queen to enter himself prisoner in the castle of
Stirling, he promised likewise to obey that command.
Lord Erlkine, Mar's uncle, was at that time governor
of this fort. The queen's feveritv, and the place in
which (he appointed Gordon to be confined, were in-
terpreted to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and aug-
mented the hatred of the Gordons againit him.

Meantime fir John Gordon set out towards Stirling;

but, instead of performing his promise to the queen,
made his escape from his guards, and returned to take
the command of his followers, who were riling in anns
all over the north. These were destined to second and
improve the blow, by which his father proposed, fe-
cretly and at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Mait-
land, his principal adversaries. The time and place
for perpetrating this horrid deed mwere frequently ap-
pointed; but the executing of it was wonderfully pre-
vented, by some of those unforcfeen accidents lwhich
so often occur to disconcert the schemes, and to inti-
midate the hearts of assassins . Huntly's own house
at Strathbogie was the last and most convenient scene
appointed for committing the intended violence. But,
on her journey thither, the queen heard of voung
Gordon's flight and rebellion, and refusing, in
the first transports of her indignation, to enter under
the father's roof, by that fortunate expression of her
resentment saved her ministers from unavoidable dc-
lruction t.

The ill success of these efforts of private revenge

precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the qutcn
was entirelv under the direclion of his rivals, it was
impossible to work their ruin, without violating the
allegiance which he owed his sovereign. On her arri-
val at Inverness, the commanding officer in the caflle,
py iluntly's orders slut the gates againfi her. llarr

Keith, 230. t Knox, 318.

was obliged to lodge in tile town, which was open and
defenceless; bit this too'waq quickly surrounded by
a multitude of the earl's follower s t The utmoRt con-
fternation seized the queen, who was attended by
a very slender train. She every moment expected
tile approach of the rebels, and Io;ne ships were already
ordered into the river to secure her escape. The loy-
alty of the Monroes, Frazers, Mackintoshes, and fonme
neighbouring clans, who took arms in her defence,
saved her from this danger. By their alliftance, she
even forced the castle to surrender, and inflicced on
the governor the punishment which his insolence de-
served.

This epen act of difobcdience was the occasion of a
neafure more galling to Huntly than ano the queen
had hitherto taken. Iord Erlkine having pretended a
ri;,ht to the earldom of Mar, Stewart refi.ned it in his
r..vour; and at the lame time Marv conferred upon him
,:<; title of earl of MBurrav, witl{ the estate ann-xcd
\i that dignity, which had been in possession of the
c:al of Hnitly since the year I548 -. I'rom this he
,'lncided that his family was devoted to defirufion;
.ld dreading to be Itrippi.di gradually of those posss-
.,ns which, in reward of their services, the gratitude
of the crown had bestowed tn hinmfil!f or his anceflnrs,
!.i rio longer difguiled his iirtentions, but, in defiance

l the que:n's proclamnati.n, opornly took arms. In-

':i'l of yielding tliofe places of ftrerngti wih iiahry
;-uiired hirn to furrelidcr, i:s followers diflprfed or

. in pieces the parties which fh, r cl at hed to take
por.:fiion of them ; andl hi liiiii:Clf arlvancing with a
.aifiilerable body of men towards Ab;crdncn, to lwhich
;:ace the queen was now returned, filled her fina11
'uart with consternation Murray hlad only a hl.lld-
:l! of men in whom file cruldl c;n f te §. In order to
firm t!he appearance of an army, he was oblig.ed to
a!l in the assistance of the iiigihbloiiiig barons; but as
iCrawf. Offic. of State, 2,, 8S. - Cra f. Peer. 359

t Knox, 379. '

K ,eith, z o.
Vol!. I. U

most of there either favoured Huntly's designs, or flood
in awe of his power, from tl. .n no cordial or effcAtual
frrvice could be expected.

'With these troops, however, Mlurray, who could

gain nothing by delay, marched briskly towards the
enemy. He found them at Corrichie, posted to great
advantage; he commanded his northern associates
Inflantly to begin the attack; but on the firit motion
of the enemy, they treacherousLy turned their hacks;
and Huntly'; followers, throwing aide their fpcars,
and breaking their ranks, drew their swords, and ruitcd
forward to the pursuit. It was then that Murray
gave proof, both of fleady courage and of prudent
conduct. lie flood imn:oveable on a rising ground,
with the small but trusty body of his adherents, who
presenting their spears to the enemy, received themn
with a determined resolution, which they little expect-
ed. The Highland broad sword is not a weapon fit
to encounter the Scottish spear. In every civil coril-
motion, the superiority of the latter has been evident,
and has always decided the contest. On this cccafn.
tl.e irregular attack of lluntly's trotops was eafiy rc-
pulsed by IMurray's firm battalion. Before thcv re-
covered from the confusion occaGoned by this, uml; ,:C-
seen resistance, those uho had beg'n the flight, A l-
ling to regain their credit with the victorious partv,
fell upon them, and completed the rout. liun-ly Li,n-
self, who was extremcely corpulenl, was trodducn nt
death in the pur'uit. Iis f;ns, fir. J,hn ani, Ac.kq!, .,..
taken, and Mlurray returncd in tiluniph :o Aberdeen
with his prisoners.

The trial of men taken in aciual rehellion agninll

their sovereign was extremely short Three days at':t
the battle, fir John Gordon was beheaded at Aberilciin.
IHis brother Adam was pardoned on account of I.s
voutih. I.ord Gordon, h no had been privy to his la-
ther's deligns, uwa, fcized in the south, and upon tri!i,
found guilty of trafon; but, through the queen's cl.-
mcrivL, the punif'nmeent was remitted. Th_ first pali
lirscnit proccedcd agaiatf thi- g-eat famlily u;-it t'.e

utmost rigour of law, and reduced their power and
fortune to the lowest ebb *

As the fall of the earl of Hun'tly is the moll import-

ant event of this year, it would have been improper
to interrupt the narrative by taking notice of lesser
tranfaafions, which may now be related with equal
propriety.

* This conrpiracy of the earl of Huntly is one of the

mnft intricate and mysterious passages of the Scottish
hiftorv. As it was a transaction purely domestic, and
in which the English were little intercfied, few original
papers concerning it have been found in Cecil's col-
ledtion, the great storehouse of evidence and informa-
tion with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design
about this time of destroying Murray, and of employ-
ing the power of the earl of Huntly for this purpose.
But his account of this whole tranfadtion appears to
be so void of truth, and even of probability, as to
deserve no serious examination. At that time Malr
wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination
to commit any a6t of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order
to explain this matter, but they appear to be equally
removed from truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the queen's jour-

ney to the north was a scheme concerted by Murray ,
in order to ruin the earl of Huntly. i. Huntly had
resided at court almost ever finct the queen's return.
Keith, I98. Append. 175, &c This was the proper
place in which to have seized him. To attack him in
Aherdeenfhire, the feat of his power, and in the
midst of his vassals, was a project equally ahfirud and
hazardous. 2. The queen was not accompanied with
a body of troops, capable of attempting any thing a-
gainit Huntly by violence; her train was not more
numerous than was usual in times of greatest tranquil-
lity. Keith, z3o. 3- There remain two original let-
ters with regard to this conspiracy, one from Randolph

U X

In the beginning of the summer, Mary, who was

desirous of entering into a more intimate correfpondenc e
and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed Maitland to
desire a personal interview with her, somewhere in tlhe
north of England. As this proposal could not be re-
jc&ed with decency, the time, the place, and the cir-
cumrtances of the meeting, were instantly agreed upnl.
But Elizabeth was prudent enough not to admit into

the English refidelt, and another from Maitland; both
directed to Cecil. They talk of Huntly's measures as
notorioifly treaobnable. Randolph mentions his at.
tempts to affaitinate Murray, &c. No hint is given
of any previous rtfolution, formed by Mary's miniflers,
to ruin Huntly and his family. Had any such design
ever existed, it was Randolph's duty to have dil'overed
it, nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it
from the Englilh fecreiary. Keith, , 239, 3.

II. To suppose that the earl of Huntly had laid any

plan for seizing the queen and her minitfers, seems to
be lels improbable. i. On the queen's arrival in the
north, he laboured, in good earnett, to gain her favour,
and to obtain a pardon for his son. Knox, 318. 2.
He met the queen, first at Aberdeen, and then at
Rothemav, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any such treasonable rcf.iu-
tion. Knox. ,18. 3. tis conduCt was irrelolllte and
wavering, like that of a man diJcooc:erted by an un-
foreseen d'anter, nor like one executing a concert d
plan. 4. The most considerable persons of his clan
submitted to the queen, aud found furcty to obey hl:r
commands Ktith, .z6. Hlad the earl been previoui;
determined to rile in arms againlf the queen, or to
fcize her ministers, it is probable he would have im-
parted it to Ilis prinipal followers, nor would they
have defcrred ii in this manner.

For thefi reasons. we have, on the one hand, vin'li-

cated the earl of Mlurray from any deliberate intentlit.
of ruining the famil\- of Gordon; and on tlie otl!:

her kingdom a rival who outihone lierfelf l far in beau-
tv and gracefilnefs of person; and who excelled so emi-
nently in all the arts of insinuation and address. Under
pretence of being confined to London, hy the attention
which she was obliged to give to tilhe civil wars in France,
ihe put off the interview for that season ', and prevented
her fubjedts from feeing the Scottish queen, the charms
of whose appearance and behaviour she envied, and had
some reason to dread.

During this year, the afTimbly of the church met

twice. In both there meetings were exhibited many
complaints of the poverty and dependence of the church;
and many murmurs against the negligence or avarice
of those who had been appointed to collcdl and to di-
ftribute the small fund appropriated for the maintenance
of preacherst. A petition, craving redrctl of their
grievances, was prefcnted to .he queen; but without
any cfircc. There was no realfn to expedl that Mary
would discover any forwardness to grant the requefls
of such fipplicants. As her ministers, though all most
zealous protcfliats, were themselves grow'ing rich on
the inheritance of the church, they were equally regard-
cl'! of the indigence and demands of their brethren.

Mavr had now continue,' above two years in a fate

of widowhood. Iler gent.. adminifiration had ICctnrcd
the hearts of her subjects, who were inpatient for her
marriage, and wished the crown to descend in lthe right
line lroin their ancient monarchs. She herself was the
rr.of amiable woman of the age; and the famle of her
a2:omnplphiments, together with the favourable circh m-
!!flc': of her having one kingdom already in her pol-
clicini and the prolpecR of miounting the thrloer ot ai-
ohcr, prompted many different princes to luliLit an al-
'!i:ce bo illustrious. Scotland, hy its litluaticrn, thlrcw I
;aiuch :.'lght and power into whatever l:ale it teil, thia:

; .::rr, we have iinputcd the violent condt: t of the earl
: iliintlv to na fiddci start ofrefetiincln, x ithoii cl:.'g-

i· , irn with ary premeditated purpofc of rcScllioK.
!icit~h 2ó.jU

U5

all Europe waited with solicitude for Mary's determina-
tion; and no event il that age excited tironger political
fears and ,'-:lcufies, none interelted more deeply the
passions of l;vecral princcs, or gave rile to nore contra-
dictory intrigues, than the narriage of the Scortilt
queen.

The princes of the house of Auflria remembered what

vast projócts the French had founded on tlheir former
a.lir.ee u ith the queen of Scots; and though the unlx-
pee'cd death, first of tHenry and then of Francis, i:i:
hindered thcle from ta'.i;lg efi-et, yet if Mary fr.o;'id
a-ain ma.ke ch.oie of a hulband among the Freili(
princes, the l ame d mi:_ns might be revived and prolt-
cuted vUihi better fucccis.

In order to prey- nt tlis, the emperor entered into a

ncg.:,tiat!un with the c.,~-dinal of Lorrain, who had pro-
p<.sed to marrv the S.-:ttiis queen to the archlduke
Ch:rl.:s, Ferdinand', third for. The marter was com-
niut;icated to :larv; and Mi-ivil, who at that timr at-
t-ndicd the ekctor palati:ne, sas commanlded to ilnuii;c
i;.:o the character and ituatI.'i-n f the archduke .

Ph;i;p I1. though no iAs apprrher:five ot Mary's ..l-

lin c tore i;nto t.c h}inlds o(i l:1'ameC, envild his ur-
c:e 1.rdin.,i.l ti e n e! so import;n.t a priz-;

-ad as his o0.n iniatiahlc viniclticn glap.id at ail ti.i

kir.ngdomi of Llrop(, lie Linjlovcdl is ail'iatadolr at
the Flr. nch cout to 'i,.i. it tl!e primi s nt i .orra.ini iln l
-als o. his son Do'n Car' .s, at that ntie the )I,-ir' ..i
the e.xt'.fi'tc doninions which be!onged tou le S;ia-:
monr. .iy v.

Ca: ;;nc of Iled'i' c,on the ohcer land, drea., d'i!.

nari?.ge of t he Sco ti;h queen to anv of the Au'i!i
p;- ictts, uhiich wo uld haive adld Io munch to the po\.-

d'r anpd p-tr :hn'is of *! :.t ;l:iilicus race. tiec jcai;:.

1;- tif the rili o3f L.'-r:n r'ldelrcd her no lic, av'er;

.mron an al!ia.ic-, wehi ':,.b f .curia7 t!;hm tile p,;-m ,:,'

ut the emperor or k;ng of Sp:i;, wuld give ilev. ;..

t-'.i-;: G-ó 6;. KL; ;--,.* Soee Append. VII.
t i.c-:.; ). ;41 . . ;a LabJu:'- :,
5::- .

nets to their enterprising spirit, and enable them to set
the power of the crown, which they already rivalled, at
open defiance: and as she swas afraid that these splendid
proposals of the Austrian family would dazzle the young
queen, rhe instantly despatched Caftlenau into Scotland,
to offer her iln marriage the duke of Anjou, the brother
of her former hulbantd, who loon after mounted the
throne of Francet.

Mlarv attentively weighed the pretensions of so many

rivals. The archduke had little to recommend him but
his high birth. The example of lIenry VIII. was a
warning againfl contrating a marriage with the bro-
ther of her former huiband; nor could ihe bear the
thoughts of appearing in France, in a rank inferior to
tl.at wlhich file had formerly held in that kingdom. Sha
litined there-fore with partiality to the Spanish propoli-
tio:ls, and the pIrofprct of such vail power and domni-
niils flittered the ambition of a young and alpiritug

'Tlirce several circumItances, lhowever, concurred to
dI','crt Mary from any thoughts of a loreign ailianice.

ihe iir'ft of thlee was tle niurdtr of lher uncle the

du'kl of Guilb. 'I'lhe vioicncc anil ambition of thiat I,)-
u :n.ill had involved his country in a civil war, \ hi, ih
.as conduilcd witli furious auilnufity, and various mlc-
clis At lalt the duke laid siege to Orleans, tile bul-
wark of the protcilant cause; and lie had reduced that
c:ty to the lalt cxtrti-iity, wlhen he \as afital;atecd Ib il h
Iratiic zeal of Poitrot. This blowm proved razal to ihe
quec.n of Scots. Tlhe young duke was a minor; and
tiie cardinal, though subtle and initriguing, waited tl It
uiidaunited and cnLcrprifing courage which rendered tl:e
ambition of his brother rt formidable. Catherine, in-
llcad of elcouraging this aimbition, or furtlilring thil
pretenlions, of her daughter in law, took p!cal:u' inl
morltify ing the one, and in difappoil:ting th: ot !.er. In
this lituation, and wi;hout luch a protector, it becaint
incci;lry Ior Mar). to contracl hcer views, andl to. pro-

t Cafttena.u 461.

ceed with caution; and whatever profpe as advantage,
might allure her, she could venture upon no dangerous
or doubtful measure.

The second circumstance which weighed with Man',

was the opinion of the queen of England. The ma:-
riage of the Scottish queen intetrefed Elizabeth more
deeply than any other prince; and she obfcrved all 'cr
deliberations concerning it with the mo1t anxious attrn-
tion. She herself seems early to have formed a refo!i.
tion of living unmarried, and she discovered no fi:all!
inclination to impose the famelaw on the queen of Scnts.
She had already experienced what use might be m2de
of Mary's power and pretensions to invade her domi-
nions, and to disturb her possession of the crown. Thle
death of Francis n. had happily delivered her from this
danger, which she determined to guard against for the
future with the utrnoft care. And as the restless anmbi-
tion of the Auflrian princes, the avowed and bigotted
patrons of the ca:holic superstition, made her, in a par-
ticular manner, dread ther- neighbourhoo(d, .e inflru&tcd
Randolph to remonfirate, in the Itrongeft terms, azaid:it
any alliance with them; and to acquaint Mary, tl:at as
ihe herIelf would confider fucli a match to be a breach
of the personal fricndfhip, in which they were so hap-
pily united, so the Englihi nation would regard it as tl:e
difiolution of that confederacy which now subsisted be-
tween the two kingdoms. That, in order to prei;r;, e
their own religion and liberties, they would in all -ro-
iability take some ftep prejudicial to her right o i:lc-
refiion, which, as she well knew, they nei.thr wa: : ,!
power nor pretences to invalidate and set aitde. Titis
threatening was accompanied with a promiec, but er:-
pressed in very ambiguous terms, that il Marv's croicI
es a htbfband should prove agreeable to the Eng!if i r.-
t.on, Elizabeth would appoint proper perions to examnle
ler title to the succession, and, if ell fotnded, ccrl.-
mand it to be publicly recognited. She observed, huv: -
ever, a myfierious silence concerrlinz the pe-lcrin i
v i.om flie wished the choice of the S.cctifh (queI.
fa!!. 'Th rcveclinj of this recret ->vs rel'.c ed Lt. r::;

future negotiation. Meanwhile fie thrlew out ome ob-
fcure hints, that a native of Britain, or one not of pri i c-
Iv rank, would be her fafelt and rnoft inoffensive choice t.
An advice offered with such an air of fupcriority and
command mortified, no doubt, the pride of the Scottith
queen. But, under her present circumstances, she was
obliged to bear this indignity. Destitute of all foreign
affiltance, and intent upon the English fuccefi(on, the
great objec of her wishes and ambition, it became ne-
ctcfary to court a rival, whom, without maniflet im-
prudence, flie should not venture to offend.

The inclination of her own fubjeds was another, and

not the lealt considerable circumitance, which called
for Marv's attention at this conjuncture. They had
been taught by the fatal experiment of her former mar-
riage, to dread an union with any great prince, whose
power might be employed to oppress their religion and
liberties. They trembled at the thoughts of a match
with a foreigner; and if the crown &hould be firength-
ened by new dominions or alliances, they foresaw that
the royal prerogative would soon be itretched beyond
its ancitnt and legal limits. Their eagerness to prevent
this could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms of
England. Elizabeth would be ready to afford them her
aid towards obflructing a measure so difagrecable to
lierfclf. It was easy for them to seize the pcrlon of the
1lnereign. By the afiitance of the Engliih fleet, they
*i.uld render it difficult for any foreign prince to land
in Scotland. The Roman catholics, now an inconfider-
able party in the kingdom, and difilirited by the loss of
the earl of 1luntly, could give no obitrucrion to their
designs. To what violent extremes the national abhor-
rence of a foreign yoke might have been carried, is ma-
nifeft from the traniaCions both previous and iubfequent
to the present period.

For there reasons Mary laid aside, at that time, all
thoughts of foreign alliance, and stemed willing to fa-
'rificc her own ambition, in order to iemove the jealou-

Keith, 242, 245.

fies of Elizabeth, and to quiet the fears of her own sub-
jeels.

The parliament met this year, for the first time since

the queen's return into Scotland. Mary's adminiftra-
tion had hitherto been extremely popular. Her miniflers
possessed the confidence of the nation. And by confe-
quence, the proceedings of that assembly were conduted
with perfed unanimity. The grant of the earldom of
Murray to the prior of St. Andrews was confirmed;
the earl of Huntly, and several of h:s vaflals and depen-
dents, were attainted: the attainder againl Kirkaldy
of Grange, and some of his accomplices in the murder
of cardinal Beatoun, was reversed i: the at of oblivicn,
mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received the roy-
al sanction. But Mary, who had determined never to
ratify that treaty, took care that this fanftion should not
be deemed any acknowledgement of its validity; she
granted her consent merely in condescension to the lords
in parliament, who, on their knees, besought her to al-
lay the jealousies and apprchcnfions of her fubjedts, by
such a gracious lawt.

'o attempt was made, in this parliament, to procure

the queen's assent to the laws establishing the protestant
religion. Her minitlers, though zealous protestants
themselves, were aware that this could not be urged with-
out manifcft danger and imprudence. She had con-
fcnted, through their influence, to tolerate and protet
the reformed docEtrine. They had even prevailed on
her to imprison and prosecute the archbishop of St. An-
drews, and prior of Whithorn, for celebrating mass con-
trary to her proclamation -. Mlarv, however, was tlill
paffonately devoted to the Romilh superstition; ant
though, from political motives, The had granted a tern
porary indulgence to opinions which The disapproved
there were no grounds to hope that the would agree to
establish them for perpetuity. The moderation ofthof
who professed it was the best method for reconcilinI
* Knox, 3o, t Parl.. Q. Mary, c. 67. Spots. lEl

hKeith, 39.

the queen to the proteflant religion. Time might a-
bate her bigotry. Her prejudices might wear offgra-
dually, and at last she might yield to the withes of her
people, what their importunity or their violence could
never have extorted. Many laws of importance were
to be proposed in parliament; and to defeat all there,
by such a fruitless and ill-timed application to the queen,
would have been equally injurious to individuals, and
detrimental to the public.

The zeal of the proteflant clergy was deaf to all there

considerations of policy. Eager and impatient, it brook-
ed no delay; severe and inflexible, it would condescend
to no compliances. The leading men of that order in-
silted, that this opportunity of establishing religion by
law was not to be neglected; They pronounced the
moderation of the courtiers, apoftacy; and their endea-
Yours to gain the queen, they reckoned criminal and
servile: Knox solemnly renounced the friendship of
the earl of Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so
blindly zealous for her service, as to become regardless
of those obhjecs which he had hitherto esteemed molt
sacred. This rupture, which is a strong proof of Mur-
ray's sincere attachment to tile queen at that period,
continued above a vear and an halft.

The preachers ecing dilappointed by the men in
whom they placed the greatefl confidence, gave vent to
their indignation in their pulpits. Thcle echoed iore
loudly than ever with declamations againlt idolatry;
with difinal presages concerning the queen's mnarriage
with a foreigner, and with bitter reproaches againilt
those who, from interenfed motives, had deserted that
cause which they once reckoned it their honour to filp-
port. The people, inflamed by such vehement d(ecla-
mations, which were dictated by a zeal Imore fincCre
than prudent, proceeded to rash and unjultifiable acfi
of violence. During the queen's abliince, on a progreis
into the weft, mass continued to bc celebrated in her
chapel at Holyrood-houlc. The multitude of thole v. ho

KIIox, 3,3r.

openly resorted thither gave great offence to the citizens
of Edinburgh, who, being free from the restraint which
the royal preftence imposed, assembled in a riotous man-
ner, interrupted the service, and filled those present with
the ntmofi consternation. Two of the ringleaders in
this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for their
trial t.

Knox, who deemed the zeal of these persons lauda-

ble, and their conduOt meritorious, confidered them as
fuffcrers h: a good cause; and in order to screen them
from danger, he issued circular letters, requiring all who
professed the true religion, or were concerned for the
preservation of it, to assemble at Edinburgh, on the dav
of trial, and by their prelence to comfort and affiil their
distressed brethrenU - One of these letters fell irto ter
queen's hands. To assemble the fubjeets without ti e
authority of the sovereign was construed to be trt-alo.,
and a resolution was taken to prosecute Knox for tha:
crime, before the privy council. Happily for him, his
judges were not only zealous protestants, but the vtry
men who, during the late conmoticus, had openly r:-
sifted and set at defiance the queen's authority. It wa
under precedents drawn from their own condut t, it
Knox endeavoured to shelter himself. Nor would it
have been an easy matter for these counsellors to hai,:
found out a diftincion, by which they could cerlj -e
him, without condemning themfclves. After a lo!g
hearing, he was unanimously acquitted. Sinclair, t!-
shop of Ross, and president of the court of ft ion, a ::--
lous papilt, heartily concurred with the oilier coul:i'.
lors in this decision t, a remarkable adt, which fhom s
the unsettled slate of government in that age; the lo.1
condition to which let-al authority was then fiimk; 3;,l
the impunity with which the lubjeas might invade thole
rights of the crown which-zre now held sacred.

The marriage of the Scottifn.queen continued still to

be the objef of attention and intrigue. Though Eliza-
beth, even while she wished to direct Mary, treated l: r

t Knox, 35 . ( Ibid. .
336. Kno:, 4-

with a difguffilf reserve; though The kept her, without
neceffitv, in a slate of fifpenfe; and hinted often at the
pertbn Wihom the deltined to he her humband, without
direcly mentioning his name; vet Marv fralcd ;il her
stions to express filch a prudent rclpccl for the English
quee'n, that foreign princes began to imagine flic had
given herself upl implicitly to lcr direction'. I he nro-
spect of this union alarmed Catherine of Medicis. 'i ho'
Catherine had taken pleaflire all along in doing ill offices
to the queen of Scots; though, soon after the duke of
Guile's death, Ihe had put upon lhtr a molt morlifying
indignity, by flopping the payment of her dowry, by
depriving her flilijtct the duke of Chatellierault of his
pension, and 1y bfelowing the comtlmalld of the Scottifn
guards on a Frenchrrnait; Ihe rtfolved, hIownever, to pre-
vent this dangerous conjiulcioun of the 1rilifl q(ueens.
'or this purpose the now cripl,, ed all her art to appeale
Maryt, to whom tfi e had glvrl lb many caulfs of of-
fence. 'he arrears of her dowry were inftantlv Spaid;
niore puictiltal remittances s crc cir(mnilcd for the tfuture;
and ofliers made, not only to riltire, but to extend the
privileges of the Scottish nation in Fralnce. It w as ealy
or Maarv to penetrate into the motives of this luddic
change; hile well knew the character of her niother-in-
law, and laid little itrefs unon prot.llions of friendefiip
which came from a princeli' of fucli a falil and lifecl-
ing heart.

The negotiation with England, relative to the mar-

riage, ltutered no interruption from this application of
thIe French quecn. As Mary, in compliance to her fiub-
jrcs, and pressld by the flrongel motives of interelt.
irternlliicd Ipecdily to nmarry, Elizabeth wa.s lh!iged to
bh'tak tha uinaccountable silence which file had hitherto
air.cled. The tecret was dilclocld, and her tavourite
ir(t Robert Dudley. afterwards car! of Leicetler, wa.
declared to be the happy imanl whom she had cholen to
he the huiband of a qtucen courted by so :nany princes .
'Keith, 248. t Ibid 244. t See Apptild. No. VII!.

§ Keith, 251.
Vl,. I. X

Elizabeth's wisdom and penetration were remarkable

in the choice of her miniflers; in diftinguilhing her fa-
vourites, those great quaiities were less conspicuous. She
wavs influenced in two cafes so opposite, by merit of very
differcn: kinds. Their capacity for buGfnefs, their know-
ledge. their prudence, were the talents to which alone
ihe attended in chufing her nmirifters; whereas beauty
and grarefulnefs of person, polished manners, and court-
lv address, were the acromplifhments on which she be-
fov.dl her favour. She ac(led in the one cafe with the
wisdom of a qiuenl, in the other she discovered the weak-
nels of a woman. To this Leicefler owed his grandeur.
Though remark;:l:!e neither for eminence in virtue nor
superiority of abilities, the queen's partiality diftinguiih-
ed him on every occaflin. She railed him to the high-
ell honours, she beflow'ed on him the mofl important em-
ployments, aid nialift ft. d an a fiTeion so disproportion-
ate to his merit, that, ;n the opinion of that age, it
could be accountid for only by the power of planetary
influence'.

The h',ih f;,irit of the Sccttih queen could not w:ll

bear the fil-s overture of a match with a filhjet. ihr
own rank, the Irlt-n dor of her former marriage, anid the
folicitatirns at this time ot io iany powcriul prinl s,
crowded i:to !her thlouglis, and n:ase1 her lt-nfiblv frel
how hln.bli-ng anlr di;rctptelftil I:ii;abeth's propo al
\was. Slier i. 'll 'If'r .

r 1 rw\iv

r, r, with the EnglIHi re!i-

,!ert; a:-d t.cs.: .i, he ict larcld. in firong terms, h;: a
degr.dua:ticu 1e- uwoldd dctn, this alliance, wxliicih i,roi!;:. t
a!in Z with it no advanta t;.at could juftir such

s ileg;. :

o "' .- .n dignltv, she imenti;ne(ne the earl of Leicc:e:',
no:v.-:t f:2ndiig, in ter-ns fulll of rel'tC -.

T..izleth, we may prtfurr.e, did nit wiTh that the prn-

potil e'.e;ld he rec-ived in any oth:-r man:er. After the
extraor;:naryn m.arls ih. hail oive-n of her cv. attaci.-
nien to Leictiler, .ndi wh:! h e lit was ill in the v:iry
fcei'ht of !'-' i'r. it is not pr-oa!bi iP.;e cotutl.link ftrn-
oufly of t'!iiuwing ! in; ;II.n a'.thcr. It v.-as not ,.r

sCamdcn,^49. t· Kj;.'.., 2;;2.

aim to persuade, but only to arnmfe Maryi. Almost
three years were clapsed since her return into Scotland;
and though solicited by her fubjrcts, and courted by the
greatest princes in Europe, she had hitherto been pre-
vented from marrying, chit ti; by the artifices of Eliza-
beth. And if at this time thl English queen could have
engaged Mary to liften to her proposal in favour of Lei-
cefler, her power over this creature of her own would
have enabled her to protract the negotiation at pleafilrc;
and by keeping her rival unmarried, she would have ren-
dered the prolpec of her succession eItf acceptable to the

English. Leicefler's own situation was extremely delicate and
embarrafling. To gain poffcffion of the moflt amiable
woman of the age, to carry away this prize from so ma-
ny contending princes, to mount the thrune of an an-
cient kingdom, might have flattered the ambition of a
fulje& much more conliderablc than hin He law all
thele advantages, no doubt, and, in fecrct, they made
their full imprelfion on him. But, without offlnlding E-
lizabetl, he durst not venture on the nioft difallt dileo-
very of his fentilncnts, or take any fep towards facilitat-
ing his acquisition of ohjects ft worthy of detire.

On the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality towards him,

which she was at no pains to conceal", might inspire him
with hopes of attaining the supreme rank in a kingdom
more illustrious than Scotland. Elizabeth had ofien de-
clared that nothing but her resolution to lead a lilgle
life, and his being born her own fillbjec-, wouid have
hindered her from chuling the earl of Lcictfter for a
husband. Such considerations of prudence are, ho i-
ever, often filrmounted by love; and Leicester might
flatter himself, that the violence of her aficdlion would
at length triumph both over the maxims of policy and
the scruples of pride. T'heft hopes induced him, now
and then, to conclude the propolnl of his marriage with
the Scottish queen to he a projcdt for his dclltrictioi;
and he imputed it to the malice of Cecil, who, under

Mclv. 104, l0o. * Iil.d. 9ci, .4.

X z

the specious pretence of doing him honour, intended to
ruin him in the good opinion both of Elizabeth and Ma-
ry!.

A treaty of marriage, proposed by one queen v-llo

dreaded its fucccfs; liftrned to by another, who wa i c-
cretvl deternincd againft'it; and scarcely delired by the
nian hinmlcif, %whoi'c intcreft and reputation it was calcu-
lated, in appearance to promote; could not, under so
many unfavourable circu-mfances, be brought to a f'or-
tunart ifsI.e. Both Elizabeth and Mary continued, how-
ever, to act with equal difijinldation. The former, not-
wi httfandin hler fears of losing Lcicefler, f,)licitrd warnl-
!v in his behalf. The lattr-, though she began ahonit
this time to cait her eves upon another filljeIt of Eng-
land, did not at onc velntiure fitnall to rcjct Elizabeth's
£avourite.

The person towards who:n Mry began to turn her

thoughts was Henry Stewart lord Darnlv, cideft son of
the earl of Lenlnx. That noblemanl having been dri-
ven out of S&otland under the regency of the duke of
Chatelherault, had lived in banlifmilelnt for twenty years.
LLis wife, lady Margaret Douglas, was Mlary's most dan-
gerous rival in her claim upon the Englihih luccefliol.
She uas the daughter of Margaret, the eldest filler of
Henry VIII. by the earl of Angus, w-homt that queen
married after the death of her husband James IV. In
that age, the right and order of fuccfiion was not frt-
tied with the lame accuracy as at present. Time, and
the decision of almofl every cafe that can possibly hap-
pen, have at lait introduced certainty into a matter,
.vhich naturally is fulieSt to all the variety arising from
the caprice of lauye)rs, guided by obscure and often iila-
ginary analogies. Ladv l.ennux, though horn of a fe-
:ond marriage, \'as one degree nearer the royal bloo.1
of England than Mary. She was the daughter, Mary
only the grand-daughter, of Margaret. This was not
dte only advantage over MaDy which the lady Lennox
enjoyed. She was born in England; and by a maxim

Mclv. ICI.

of law in that country, with regard to private inher-iLan-
ces, " whoever is not born in England, or at leafi of pa-
rents who, at the time of his birth, were in thie obedi-
ence of the king of England, cannot enjoy any inheri-
tance in that kingdomr . ' This maxim, Hales, an Eng-
lilh lawyer, produced in a treatise * hi.ch he published at
this time, and endlavourcd to apply it to the right of
succession to the crown. In a private caulti, thlee pre-
texts might have given rife to a long and doubtful litiga-
tion; where a crown was at flake, such nice difpntcs
and lulbtilties were to he avoided with the ulnolt care.
If Darnly ffiould happen to contraCt an alliance with any
of the powerful families in England, or (hould publicly
profess the protltant religion, tlhel plaulfible and poptu-
lar topics might lie lb urged, as to prove fatal to the pre-
tensions of a foreigner and of a papill.

Mary was aware of all thi.; and, in order to prevent

any' danger fiom that quarter, liad early cl!o:lavourcd
to cultivate a friendly corrcliondence with tile tamily of
Lcnnox. In the year I562 f, both the earl and the lady
Mlargaret were taken into cuflodl hy hy liz.ttli's orders,
on account of their holding a fecci-t corrciiondcnce with
the Scottish queen.

From the time that Mary ubecanie sensible of the diffi-

rulties which would attenld her marrying a foreign
prince, fle entered into a still clolfer conlnexion with the
carl of Lennox 1, and invited him to return into Scot-
land. This she endeavoured to conceal from E!izabeth;
hut a tranfaltion of so much inportance did not escape
the notice of that diScerning princels. She observed,
hut did not interrupt it. Nothing could fall in more
perfectly with her views concerning Scottish affairs. She
was pleased to fee the pride of the Scottish queen sloop
at last to the thoughts of taking a fuljeci to hir bed.
Darnly was in no litu:laion to c(xrite her jealoufv or her
frars. Ilis father's eliate lay il Enlgland, and by means
cf this pledge fle lhoped to keep the negotiation entilrely

Carte, Ilift. c!' Fog. vol. iii. 42. t Cauid. 39.

, Ibid. ,96.

X 3

in her own hands, to play the fame game of artifice and
delay x-hich she had planned out, if her recommenda-
tion rs Leicrficr lad been more favourably received.

As before thc union of the two crowns, no fuhijec of

one kingd:om could pa! into the other without tle peir-
milison of both sovereigns; no sooner did L.cnnox, un-
der pretence of profccutir.g his wife's claim upon the
earldom of Anegu, apply to Elizabeth for her licence t,)
go into Scotland, tlhan he obtained it. Together u ith
it, she gave him letters, warmly recommendirn his per-
son and canfe to Mary's fricndfhip and protection'.
But at the fame tine, as it was her manner to involve
all her tralfacl:ious with regard to Scotland in orne t de-
cree of perplexitv and contradiction, she uwayncd Mary,
that this indulgence of tnncox might prove tatal to her-
1t!f, a- his return could not fail ot reviving thle ancient
animnofir tvctwcen h m an>d the house of Hamilton.

This a.:toTloilio.n tave unmbrage to Mary, and drew

freom bcr an angry rtpi-, hlii.h rccationcd ior fonim
time, a to:al ir:tc-rupltion cf ail corrcfp,'p::ni.'.cn e hetwc :
the two quecns s. Malr was not a little alarn;l .t
this; {he both dreaded tle !t cI&s of Elizab thli' rt !tnt-
ment, and frlt si. I:.l i the dd'riiv-antase ot 'ilng exct In' -
ed from a free intercu.rf'e with .nltlai.d, lhcre her ail-
liafTadors !;ad, all along carried en, with; some fuccefe,
lecrct neotiatiaiLns, whill incrtalftl tie i1 ll;bcro li htr
rartizans, and paved hirr xtay tot airds the throne. In
orler to reir.ove the caufc, of the prtl'rnt difricul;\
.'erlvil was ient exprels to tile court of England. 1I.
fiund it ro .':licuit irat-r to ,iriun al-lout a recncinlc-
men:; and soon re-e!t.albih-d the appcarance, lbt l.,,;
tl. cor.fidr'nce of fritndihip, which was all that L.a
fihfiited, for some tinit, licl een the two (;'icens.

During this ncgotian:ien, Elizabeth's profftions (,;

Inve to Manr, and Mcvil's replies iu thie l:am; tof i1:i
miitrcfs, were made in I.e language of the warinclt
and mnofl cordial frirndthi*. But what i Melvil trui;
oiTfrves, with rtfpect to L;iizabeth, Ima lie extendt'

I;titl:, ij5, 2C. t Keith, 253. ,Mcv. 8;.

without injufice to both queens. " There was neither
plain dealing nor upright meaning, but great diffimu-
lation, envy and feart.

Lennox, however, in consequence of the licence

which he had obtained, set out for Scotland, and was
received by the queen, not only with the rel'pct due to a
nobleman, so nearly allied to the royal family, but treat-
ed wirh a distinguished familiarity, which could not fail
ofinfpiring him with more elevated hopes. The ru-
mour of his son's marriage to the queen began to
spread over the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scotland,
were turned upon hir, as the father of their fiture ma-
fler. The duke of Ciharelherault was the firIt to take
the alarm. He conlidired Lennox, as the ancient and
hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton; and, in his
grandeur, saw tlhe ruin of hinifelf and his friends. But
the queen interposed her authority to prevent any vio-
lent rupture, and employed all her influence to bring
about an accommodation of the differcnces .

The powerut l famnily of Douglas no leTs dreaded

lennox s return, frocm an apprehension that he would
Ureft the earldom of Angus out of their hands. But
t;le queen, who well knew how dangerous it would be
to irritate Morton, and other great mien of that nanie,
prevailed on Lennox to purclhail their fricndfhip, by
allouwing his lady's claim upon the carldom of Angus
to dr opt.

Aftcr t;ih e pre'imi:la:- steps, Mary ventured to call

a imeeting of parlianment. 'Fle act of forlcitire paircd
againlt I.,-mnox in tlie year one tliouflndl five hundlred-
and forty-five was repealed, and lie was publicly re-
itucr l to the honours and ttlate of his anceltors j.

The ecclicui.tiial tranfacctionis of this vcar were

not confidctrallc. In the aftllmblics of the church, the
la:rme complaints of the incre.:il of idolatry, the laitm
rcprtlintations concertling tie poverty of the cicrgv,
were renewed. '1lu. reply which the queen imade tl.
tiic!e, and her prolmilcs of redrcl-d, , \re rre
i lort rfaiil;

;. c. iv :4. ' Keith, 2i9. t lbid i_.2'. Noutc (1.,

' See A:\i'.'I. "'lu. IX.

to the proteflants than any they had hitherto obtainedt.
But, notwithfianding her declarations in their favour,
they could not help harbouring many suspicions con-
cerning Mary's dcfigns against their religion. She had
never once consented to hear any preacher of the re-
formed doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigot-
ted attachment to the Roman faith. The genius of
that fupcrfiition, avcrfe at all times from toleration,
was in that age fierce and unrelenting. Mary had
given her friends on the continent repeated assurances
of her resolution to eftablif the catholic church p.
She had indufriouflv avoided every opportunity of
ratifying the acts of parliament, one thouland five
hundred and sixty, in favour of the Reformation. Even
the protection which, ever since her return, she had
afforded the protefiant religion, was merely tempo-
rary, and declared, by her own proclamation, to be of
force only " till she should take some final order in
the matter of religioHn ." The vigilant zeal of the
preachers was inattentive to none of thele circuni-
fiances. The coldness of their principal leaders, who
were at this time entire!v devoted to the court, added
to their jcaioufies and fears. These they uttered to
the people, in language which they deemed fiitable to
the necffi'tv of the times. and which the queen reckon-
ed difrelpectful and infolcnt. In a meeting of the
gc'ner.a aLTcmbly, Maitland publicly accused Knox of
teaching seditious doctrine, concerning the right of
ful -ejts to resist those sovereigns who trespass against
the duty which they owe to the people. Knox was
not backward to justify what he had taught; and
rpon :his general doctrine of resistance, fojult in its
own nature, but so delicate in its application to parti-
cu:ar cafes, there ensued a debate, which admirably
dii',iavs the talents and character of both the difpu-
tants; the acuteness of the former, embellished with
learning, but prone to subtlety; the vigorous under-

t Ki-t;h, 533, 5;9. 11 Carte, vol. iu. 415.

s'Kcirh, 5c4, 5 lO.

tlanding of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments,
and tluperior to all fear'.

Two years had already been consumed in fruitlers

negoitiatons concerning the marriage of the Scotti.h
q.een. Mary had full leisure and opportunity to dil-
ccrn the fallacy and deceit of all Elizabeth's proceed-
ings with recfect to that affair. But, in order to fct
the real intentions of the Englith queen in a fair light,
and to bring her to some explicit declaration of her
llntiments, Mary at last intimated to Randolph, that,
on condition her right of fucceflion to the crown of
lngland were publicly acknowledged, she was ready
to yield to the solicitations of his miflrefs in behalf of
Leceifter . Nothing could be farther than this from
the mind and intention of Elizabeth. The right of
fucceflion was a mystery, which, during her whole
rrign, her jealousy preerved untouched and unex-
plained. She had promised, however, when she first
began to intcreft herself in the marriage of the Scottish
queen, all that was now demanded How to retreat
with decency, how to elude her former offer, was, on
that account, not a little perplexilng.

The facility with whicll lord Darnly obtained per-

miflion to vilit the court of Scotland, was owing, in
all probability, to that embarraffinent. From the time
of Melvi!'s embaffr, the countess of Lennox had
warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Elizabeth
was no firanger to the anmbitious hopes with which
that young nobleman flattered himself. She had received
repeated advice, from her ministers of the sentiments
which Mary began to entertain in his favour;. It was en-
tirely in her power to prevent his stirring out of Lon-
don. In the prefenlt conjunlture, however, notlhilg
could be of more advantage to her than Darnly's i:,lr-
ecy into Scotland. She had already brought one auIor
upon the flage, who, under her management, ha'l, for
a long time amused the Scottish queen. She hoped no

' Knox, 349. T Keith, z69.

{ Keith. 259, z6I, 266.

less absolutely to dire& the motions of Darnly, who
was likewise her fubje&1; and again to involve Mary
in all the tedious intricacies of negotiation. These mo-
tives determined Elizabeth and her ministers to yield to
the solicitations of the lady Lennox.

But this deep-laid scheme was in a moment difcon-

certed. Such unexpected events, as the fancy of poets
ascribes to love, are at some times really produced by
that passion. An affair which had been the object of
so many political intrigues, and had moved and in-
terested so many princes, was at last decided by the
sudden liking of two young pcrfons. Lord Darnly
was at this time in the first bloom and vigour of youth.
In beauty and gracefulness of person he surpassed all his
contemporaries; he excelled eminently in those arts
which add ease and elegance to external form, and which
enabled it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary was
of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full power of
there accomplishments. T:e impreflion which lord
Darnly made upon her was visible from the time of
their firfi interview. The whole business of the court
was to amuse and entertain this illufirious guest t; and
in all those scenes of gaiety, Darnly, whole qualifica-
tions were altogether superficial and fhuwy, appeared
to great advantage. His conquest of the queen's heait
became complete; and inclination now prompted her
to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which
had been suggestcd by confidcratiors merely politi-
cal.

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not without de-

sign, to increase the violence of this passion. Soon as-
ter Darnly's arrival in Scotland, hfe, in return to tlat
meflage whereby Mary had signified her wxilliignefs to
accept of Leiceftcr, gave an answer, in such terms as
plainly unravelled her original intention in that in-
trigue . She promised, if the Scottish queen's mar-
riage with Lcirefler should take place, to advance him
to great honours; but with regard to AMary's titlt to

- Knox, 369. < Keith, z27. App. iS).

the English succession, {he would neither fiff'er any
legal inquiry to be made concerning it, nor permryt it
to be publicly recognised, until Ihe herself should de-
clare her resolution never to marry. Mary, notwith-
Itanding Elizabeth's former promises, had realon to ex-
pecl every thing contained in this reply; her high spirit,
however, could not bear with patience such a cruel dil:
covery of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery, with
which, under the vail of fi-icndfhip, she had been so long
abused. She burfi into tears of indignation, and exprei-
fed, with the utmost hitternefs, her tfnfe of that dilinge-
nuous craft which had been employed to deceive heril.

The natural efi;ct of this indignation was to add to

the impetuosity with which she pursued her own fheme.
Blinded by refentmcnt as well as by love, &he obirlrved
no defects in the man she had chosen; and began to take
the neceff.rv steps towards accomplishing her design,
with all the impatience natural to those passions.

As Darnlv was so nearly related to the queen, the ca-

non law marde it necessary to obtain the pope's dilpenfa-
tion before the celebration of the marriage. For this
pirpofe Ihe early set on foot a negotiation with the court
of l{ome *.

She was busy, at t:e fame time, in procuring the con-

sent of the French king and his mother. Having com-
miinicated her defligl, and the motives which d(Ictermiin-
el her choire, to Caitelniau the French amnbablhador, he
eipilyed him as the moil proper perlon, to bring iii.
ourt to fall in with her views. Among other argu-
nments to this pirpoie, Caftelnau mentioned Marv's at-
tachients to Da!-nly, which he repreflnted to be ti vio-
lrnt and dteep-rooted, that it was no longer in her own
pi] (r to break off the nmatch . Nor were tlh French
niillllrl-s backward in encoulraging Mary's pafion. lrer
,ride would never flo p to an alliance with a tilbjeCt of
t'rance. By this choice they were delivered from the
apprch(enfon of a match with any of the Austrian prin-
ces, as well as thc danger of too close an union with Eli-

.iitl, A .pp ul. I9. t Camd. 39; . Caficln. 464,

zab-th; and as Darnlv professed the Roman catholic re-
ligion, this suited the bigotted fcherres which that court
adopted.

While Mary was endeavouring to reconcile forciern

courts to a measure which she had Ib much at heart;
Darnlv and his father, by their behaviour, were raifinl
up enemies at home to ,bflruift it Lennox had, during
the former part of his life, discovered no great compals
of abilities or political wisdom; and appears to have
been a man of a weak understanding and violent paliencs.
Damlri was not fupcrior to his father in underitadin;n',
and all his passions were still more impetuons'. 'Io
these he added that inlolence, which the advantage rs
external form, when accompanied with no quality more
va!uable,'is apt to inspire. Intoxicated with the quern's
favour, he began already to afiume the haughtincfs ol a
king, and to put on that imperious air, which majltl
itself can scare render tolerable.

It was by the advice, or at least with the confenr tif

Murray and his party, that Lennox had been invited ill-
to Scotiand4: and yet, no sooner did he acquire a firm
footing in that kingdom, than he began to enter into si-
cret cabals with those noblemen who were known to lib
avowed enemies to Murray, and with regard to rcli-
gion, to be either neutrals or favourites of poperyl.
Darnly, still more imprudent, allowed some rash exprref
sions concerning those favours which the queen's boun-
ty had conferred upon Murray to escape him5.

But, above all these, the familiarity which Darnly rul-

tivated with David Rizio, contributed to increase the
suspicion and dilfuft of the nobles.

The low birth and indigent condition of this man

placed him in a station in which he ought naturally to
have remained unknown to posterity. But lhat on--
tune called him to art and to luffer in Scotland, oblig('
hiflory to descend from its dignity, and to record his ad-
ventures. He was the son of a musician in Turin, and

'* eith, 272, 273. . ] Knox, 367. Keith, 274.

t Keith, 2-7, § Keith, -4.

having accompanied the Piedmontere ambassador into
Scotland, gained admission into the quecn's familv lv
his skill in music. As his servile condition hiad taugiht
Ilim suppleness -of spirit and infiinuating m .nners, he
quickly crept into the queen's favour, and her Fienci
lecretary happening to return at that time into his o".
country, was preferred by her to that ofice. lie now
began to make a figure in cuirt, an,! to :;ca as a mni
of conlicquence. The whole train or lui)i's :nid explC:!-
ants, who have an extreme figc:ti i:l dir'uoverin :~ the
paths whlich lead most dire,'tly to filcetls, apll:.d to
him. Hlis recomrnminlaio;n were ohirvi-d 1 lito have
great influence over the queen, and he grew to l)e cru-
fidered not on!- as a favourite, but as a nintiltcr. 'Nor
was Rizio carefui to abate that envy which a!.-avs .:-
tends such an extraordinary and rapid cli.1.. ot (uIr-
tune. lie studied, on the contrary, to dilp!1)' thec : '.!e
extent of his favour. lie afRcited to talk o!ttn all ta-
imliarly with the queen in public. He eiu!t!.d'd tht
gre.teft and rntol opulent filjects, in richnei; of (!ricT,
and in the n':mh)-r of his attendants. le dl:l,)ve:'ed,
in all his behaviou;r, that afuj:Lng illolenc, wi;h wr:;icil
unmerited prolperity inijiirs an ignoble nii:l. Jt '.s .
with the ut:nolt indignation that the nobles ichle;d :!ie
power; it was wilth the utnioft difficulty thar they tir-
lerated the arroganc-c, of this unworthy minioni. i vc
ill the queen's pre!ence they coul-l not forbear trea;lin
him with marks of contempt. Nor was it ils < ; i-
tant power alone which txalperated the o'ti.,. Tie v
con.lidered him, and not without retalin, as a rdni. r-
oius enleiyl to the protcftant rciigion, anl i'l;i;-t- ', It
lii held, for this pu.'pofe, a Ifc;ct coricinori.;ci;. wi:h
tile Court of Rome

It was 1)arnly's misfortune to fIli iilrrr the ma-

na;:cinent of this mani, wh.oO by flatt.ry and afii iit)y,
ralilv gained on his vaniit. :n.l inel) cri.r n. Kzi(o's
'hlilie inifluence on the que':! was cinploy.Cl in h:.s b-
halt, and contrriblted, witho;:t doii!):, lIow.ilr c.t:abi-

J Bucha.l 340. Miclv. C'7.
Vol. T. Y

ing him more firmly in her affections+. But whatever
benefit Darnv nmight reap f-om his patronage, it did
nrt coninterbal.nee the contempt, and eveni infamy, to
w-hich he was txpolcd, on account of his familiarity
with such an upfiart.

Though Datiylv daily made progress in the queen's

affections, she conductrd herself, however, with fillh
pn:dent rtferle, as to imrofe on Randolph the Englilh
rcefdcnt, a nr..n otherwiie fhrcwd and penetrating. It
appears from hi, letters at this period, that he entertain-
ed not the least frfpicion of the intrigue which was car-
r-ing on: and gave his court repeated assurances, that
the Scorthil queen l:ad no design of marrying Darilt 1.
In the n:ld,. of this rcurity, Mary difpa:chcd Mitlaidt
tuo fjniiy her intcrnon to Elizabeth, and to folcit hlr
conieit to the ma-rinae with I)arnly. This eniaflv

.:_ ihe first tlilng - hich openeci the eves of Randolph.
Elizabeth affi ed the greatrft lurp.ife at this fu;l',: n

resolution of the Scct;iih queen, libt without re.;'.:l.
The train' was Lid bv erfcrif, and Le had no caule to
wxcn,;er lwhtn it tocii ci.:;:. She exprefncd at the !an.e
time her difnpprnltion of the match, in the ftronifii
termrs: and pretnr.ci to foreice imany dangers anl in-
coni-vniencies arifine fr mn it. to both 'ingdo:ns. Bint
thi; too was mere aff:-c tion. ?a'r had often t.nd pl.;i,n!y
de;li:red her refuthiun to marry It was imipoffille Pie
could make any choice nore inofrfni;.e. 'hr ain-
ger c; :r.:r., :. *rg a f> -iign interest into Brita:i
-rhictl £1i,.ah tih iad io juinlv dreact-d. was entirivy a-
v) idcd. Dl:riiv, ti :ui.h ail;ed to hbth crowns, al:
rviTcfl-ed of ia:.ds in lo;h kiin'.on, o'n..d be foi r;:i'.-
ble ro nrirher. It is evident from all thrfe cin:r:i:-
;t :ces, that E!izaib prcnh'ons

a . dusgs r c li.'

r.c possibly he 'erious; and that in all her violent d.-
ra. - ions aegainft Darny', there was ntuch more es gri-
mnac than of reality '.

+tMelv. rIr. i Keith, 27., and Append. ir9.
* E.' n the historians of that age acknow ictde, thar t! e
rl. . iaie Qs -'e Scottiih qucen with a subjet wvas isu

'I here were not wanting, however. political motives

of fuh c weight, to induce that wife pricncel to) put ot
the appearance of great difplcafnre. Mairy intinim.:;:cl
by this, might perlaps delay her marriage, wijchb Eli-
zabeth deired to obltruii with a weak1nels tili.t little
suited the dignity of her mind and tlh eleva:i , o of

.er characrer. iBcfidts, the tranquillity oi her own.
kingdom was the great objece of Elizabeth's policy;
and bv declaring hr diffaitisfati,.n with Mary's con-
duqt, ihe hoped to alarill that party in Scotland, which
Al attach.c to the Englifl inltercfl, .liil to , encourage
such of the nobles as fIcreltl d;falllpro r. d thi math-i
openly to oppIof it. The lfe;tl of di'li.ord would b hlis
means he tIattercd through that kingdom. Inteftie
corilmotions riinliht ari!e. Amidfl thli.l AI.r\ coiuld
torin none of tholf dangerois I'clemes to v lich the
union of her pe. plc might have promlpted ihe. She
would becomie the umpire between Ma-) and l er con-
tel ling ltibjles; anid Enigliand i night look on \with ic-
clrity, while a iolrin, whi.h the had raile:l, walkd tel i;e
only kingdom whik h could pofllijl dilturi) its peace.

Iu proiecution of this lhcielil, fle laid ilCi lo Iii pri-

vy coulcil the mellragc from the Scottish q;:cll, and
confiJlted them with regard to tie ani; cr Ihe :ho i!d re-
turn. Their detcermination, it is eal\ to conctli, was
pcrfcctly conformnable to her . Scret view\s. T yI dre
up a remnolifrance agaiiift the intendied malnil, 'ull of
the imaginary dangers with which that event treatened
the kingdom-. Nor did Ihe think it enough to ligimly
her dilapprobation of the nmcaure, eiticr by Ma;ialld,

from being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, j9'? ^ 71.
Bul9ian. 339. Caleltidan, who at that time was well
acquainted with the intrilues of boti the !.itifh courts,
alffrts, upon grounds ot great pro!.ahiliy, that the
match was wholly Elizabeth's own work: Calleln. 46z.
and that she rejoiced at the accoumplithn.-it of it, ap-
pears from the letters of her own ainbailL.irs. Keith,
28o, 288.

tKeith, 274. See Append. No. X.

Yz

Mary's aml;affador, or by Randolph, her own resident in
Scotland; in order to add more dignity to the farce
whi< h she chose to at, she appointed fir Nicholas Throk-
morton her ambafiador extraordinary. She command-
ed him to declare, in the firongeft terms, her diffatisfac-
tion uith the fep uhich Mary plcpofed to take; and
at the fame tine to produce the detcrmination ot the
privy council, as an evidence that the fentimn-nts of the
nation were not different from her own. N'(t long as-
ter, fTe confined lady Lennox as a prisoner. first in her
own house, and then sent her to the Tower*.

nteiligence of all this reached Scotland before the

ar;rval ot the Engl:fh aml)inlador. In the first transports
of her indi.nation, I.arv relblx ed no lonrer to keep any
measures with Eiizal)tth; andl sent orders to Maitinand,
who aicompanied Thickmorton, to return inflantly to
the Fngl;f. cu.rt, and in her naine to declare to Eliza-
heth, that after havirg bcen amutld so long to so litt'e
Flrp1ec; after having heen fooled, and. imposed on io
rofl iv I." lher artifices; 'he was now trcllvcd to gratify
her own inclination. and to ack no othtr conftnt, I;ut
that of her n lui; dcs. in the choice of an hufbr,c!.
M.aitla.:d, witlh his u;ual tagacity, forelaw all the effcis
of such a raih and angry message, and ventured rather
to incur the dilfieaiure of his mrifircf,, by difub,.ying
her coinrranlis, tian to be niade the infirument of tear-
ine al:rinder lb vio!tntly the Sew remaiuing ties which
flil lir.icrd together thei t o queens t.

Mary v lcrfclf feron Ici-n.e tl-nielle of her error. She

received the n!nlifh anbtaihtdor with refpeA: juflifticl
her own conducl with d-crncy; and though unaltera.l!
in ler resolution, fl.e affedett a u onderftil solicitude tc
recor.ncile Eiizahcth to the neaiaure; and even prettnded
out rs complaiiaince to ards trr, to purt cffthe confim
mrati'n ot rhce n:arriage !or o rne nionthst. It it pn.la
!te, Iltowever, tliat the vX ant of the ]pcpe's difpenllatliI
and t'. I ronl el es gair. ir' ihe ccr.lnt otf htr omn ai'
jce.s, wcre tl. rcal in:otiv.s of this delay.
* Kckh, Append. xIl. t Ibid. 16o. Keith, z;S

This consent Mary laboured with the utmost induitry

to obtain. The earl of Murray was the pelfion in tile
kingdom whose concurren:e was of the greateit im-
portance; but she had reason to fear that it 'xouiid not
be procured without extreme difficulty. From the
time of Lennox's return into Scotland, MIu-ray perceiv-
ed that the queen's affi ctions began gradluallv to he e-
ftranged from him. Darnly, Athol, R!zIo, all the court
favourites, combined againlt him. His ambitious tpirit
could not brook this diminution of his power, which
his former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whiom he
was unable to contend (. The return of the earl of
Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been aiculed of a
decign upon his life, and who had residcd for fomie time
in foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his own
safety. No intreaty of the queen could pe:!iltle ahln
to a reconcilnement with that nobleman. lle inifte on
having him brought to a public trial, and prevailed, 1h
his importunity, to have a day fixed for it. Borhwl 11
durfi not appear in oppoftion to a man, who carie to
the place of trial attended by five thouland of his fol-
lowers on hori;.back. He was once more constrained
to leave the kingdom; but, by the queen's coliartid,
the sentence of outlawry, uhich is incurred by noul-ap-
pearance, was not pronounced againit him*.

Mary, sensible, at the fame time, of bow minth im-

portance it was to gain a lubjeat lb powcrftul ant io po-
pular as the earl of Murray, invited him hat k to court,
and received him with many demunfiratioiis of rcipcct
and confidence At last Ihe desircd him to kit an exam-
ple to her other fubjecas, by subscribing a paper contain-
ilg a formal approbation of her marriage with Darnlv.
Murray had rmany rcafbns to hesitate, and cven to wilh-
hold his afi-nt. Darnlv had not only unedcrmined his
credit with the queen, but dilcovcred, on every ocI.:li,,
? ,ooted averion to his perlon. 3By conlcntiii: to his c-

II Keith, 272, 274. Append. I59.
* Keith, Append. 16o-

Y3'

et-ation to trie throne, he would give him such an ac-
ct-ffon of dignity and power. as no man willingly be-
{tows on an enemy. The tihappv consequences which
might follow upon a breach with Englandi were like,.vife
of coniderable weight wi h Murray. IIp had alwaysv
openl- preferred a ccrtedrlrz y v-'ih England, befo e
the ancient alliance -with France. Bv his e.ins, chif.
iv, tlis change in the fvftem of naticnnl politics had
,een brought ahour. A i. ague wilh England had b:.n
eflabliiied; and hIe cotill not think of facrificin, to a
raih and vouthfu! pfhiin. an :'!iiance of so much ut;liy
to the kingdnm; and xwhicl he and the other no!l.lt-
vxere tb ;nd. nv ev,-rv ob!licrt. n, to maintain+. Nor
r5is the interrtl ot rciivion tforgotten on this occalion.
?Ms;-v, thoinJh ft'rr.o nmdied hb,' proteflarnt counfellors,ilaai
fiond n:cans to hiold a d.nzerouc rorrelpondence with
forcign catholiis. Ci.e ilh even courted the pope's
pr'Otcc'-on, who hal si-nt her a fuhbldy of eight tlihol':loi
ro'-n.n',. 'nho-ih .'lirrai3 hald hitherto elideavolriel
t., hri·e :he zeal oi the refonned clergy, and to let t!.e
o!:len's condcmi in t:he mofi favourable light, yet her

,,'"i.;.te adlerenct to lier own rcligion could not fail

'2 a!armin, him, and h\ her resolution to m.'irrv a pa-

t.it, the hoF rtf rt.larrming her, by an ulnion u ith a pro-
teftant, w-as icr evr cut off--. Each of these confic'-;!-
t.r.- had iti influen.eo on Murray, and all of thejn (de-
terairined himn to deciil: counplying at that time wt'.!
:le i:een's recur-ft.
\ Ts.e converton of nrc'lcs, which was anTmrriid a

-:w dav, a:Tr, di':.-ocr'erc a grcater dilpofition to r.ati-
rv the queen. iMrnv oi t;hem, witholit hesitation, cx:
!Jre£'d tht-i' approbation ct the intendrd match; b':
;: oth-crs w.er fiU'tled at ti:e i.r.e dangers whicll hla,
. arti:rd tl M:ra\, or were influenced by his example t,
icf,.- tl.cir r-c sent alnother convention was appointcr

:: i'th, in order to deilberare more fully colcenlie;h
;.t:, rritter '.

-f i,-i.:1. 169. I;bi, 295. A.elv. x14.
. X ;i .1'ed, c*'. le-h, gaj. KIIoz, 37:

Mean while Mary gave a public evidence of her own

Inclination, by conferring upon Darnly titles of honour
peculiar to the royal family. The opposition she had
hitherto met with, and the many contrivances employ-
ed to thwart and disappoint her inclination, produced
their uiilal effic on her heart, they confirmed her pas-
sion, and incrcased its violence. The fimplicitv of that
age imputed an affecion so excessive to the influence of
witchcrat '. It was owing, however, to no other charm,
than the irrefitible power of youth and bratOt, over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with his
prosperity. Flatitred by the love of a queen, and the
applaufc of many anong herfinljelts, his natural haugh-
tine's and infolenre became insupportable, and he could
no longer bear advice, far lels contradi6tion. Lord
Ruthven, happening to he the firfi person who informdd
him that Mary, in order to soothe Elizabeth, had delay-
ed for tobme time crcating him duke of Allbany, lie, in
a frenzy of rage, drew his dagger, and attempted to
ftla himn . It rcqtulire all Mary's attention, to prevent
his falling tinder that contempt to which luch behaviour
diClervcdly expoltd him.

In no i(:cinr o)r her life was ever Mary's own address

more r:'rnarka!,ly diijla)yd Love tharpened her iiven-
t;(n, a:nd made her fludy every mtthod of gaining her
fiiljects. Manv of the nobles fLe won by her addreis,
and more by her promises. On loime she beltowed
lands, to others fir gave new titles of honourt. She e-
ven condefceinded to cou-t the protestant clergy; and
having invited three of their liperintendlanits to S'tirling,
flie dec'ared, in Itrols terms, her resolution to protect
thrir religion, expreiT.d her willingnrfs to be prelent at
a rotnference ulpon the points in dolrine which were
(diipltte(d bretv.eei the iproteflants and papists, and went
so far as to fl;ew some deftre to hear such of their preach-
ers as were most -renmairkable for their moderation §. By
thlfe arts the queen gained wonderfully upon the pep-

K* eiti,. 28. . t Ibid. Append. I60.
t Keithl. R3K. § Knox, 373.

pie, who, unless their jealousy be raised by repeated
injuries, are always ready to view the acions of their
sovereign with an indulgent eye.

On the other hand. Murrav and his afiociates were

plainly the dupes of Elizaheth's policy. She talked in
so high a strain of her displeasure at the intended
match; lhe treated lady Lennox with so much rigour;
she wrote to the Scottilh queen in such firong terms;
ihe recalled the earl of Lennox and his son in such a
peremptory manner, and with such severe denuncia-
tions of her vengeance if thev should presume to dilfo-
bey 3; that all these expressions of aversion fully pcr-
fuadc-d them of her inceritv. This belief fortificd
their scruples with rcfpecf to the match, and encouraged
them to oppose it. F'hey began with forming amrng
themfclver bonds of confederacy and mutual def nre;
they entered into a lecret correspondence w-it the
Enslifh resident, in order to fccure Elizabeth's affiilance
when it should become needful ii; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprchelnions of ldnger as
mI: ht counterbalance the influence of those arts which
the oqi-n lhad employed.

B-efies there intrigues, there were secretly carried on

by both panics dark dcfigns of a more criminal nature,
and nl nle suited to the spirit of the age. Darnlv, impa-
tient of that oppoSition which he imputed wholly to
Murray, and resolving at any rate to get rid of ftl h a
po-werful enemy, formed a plot to affaflinate him,
during the meeting of the convention at Perth. Mur-
ray, on his part, despairing of preventing the marriage
by any other means, had, together with the duke of
Chatelhcrault, and the earl ot A-rgll, concerted mea-
fures tor seizing Darnly, and carrying him a prilbner
into England.

If either of these conspiracies had taken effect, tlis

cop cntion might have been attended with colli-
qucnces extremely tragical; but both were rendered

tKeith, 285, z86. i ibid. z8y, 292, 29g,

abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of those a-
gainft whom they were formed. MulTay, being
warned of his danger by some retainers to the court,
who still favoured his interest, avoided the blow by
not going to Perth. Mary receiving intelligence of
Murray's enterprise, retired with the utmost expedi-
tion, along with Darnly, to the other fide of Forth.
Conscious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed with
relentment, it was impossible they could either forget
the violence which themielves had meditated, or for-
give the injuries intended against them. lrom that
nmment all hope of reconcilement was at an cnd, and
their mutual enmity burst out with every fympton of
implacable hatred '.

The reality of thefr two opposite conspiracies has

given occasion to manyi ditlptes and nmuch contradic-
tion. Some deny that any dcfign was formed against
tlc life of Murray; others call in qttlicrn the truth
of the coniipiray agairit Darnly. There ferm, how-
ever to he plausible r alons for believing that there is
frme foundation for what has been afTcrte:(d with regard
to 1 olh; though tle zeal and credulity of' party-writers
have added to each many exaggerated cir(uniflan.cs.
Thei fotliowing argumencts render it prclable that fume
violnce was intended a-iainft Muiray:

I. This is politively asserted hy Buchanan, 74r. 2.

The l.llglifh resident write, to Ce'l;, that Murray was
afT.Idllv inforlnced that a (1tfign was frrn '.d ofnimur-
dering him at Perth, and nniitiins variouc circim-
flaiiccs concerning the manner i;, k ! it I the cri;r' was
tn Le conmmitted. If the whole ia;! been a ficditi of
his own, or of Murray, it i, inipfli;le that ie coild
have written in thib itrain to filch a (!;!Ci' -inr miu;fler.
Kth, 28,. 3. Murray hiiilflf conlianitly and pul ijcly
pct filled in affirming that fiicha dcfign -wat, tormed' a3?nlt
li. lite. Keith, Aplpend. Ic 8. lit was ri-iired by the
iq(ecn to iralfinit in v.riting an a(ccount of the eo';fi-
racy which he )prctcided lad been forlntd againll his
lic. This he did accordingly; but " h\\en it was

On Mary's return to ]'ii:iiurgh, she firimor.nid her

xv'aiTu 1vy procla.-maion, and lblh ito ' them b!v

, .er let,

tes, to repair thitiher in anrs, f(tr the pr.irtetion of
her perfoi; agjaiufi l}-- 1: i-.in and et'niiti eire:nies '.
S!: .as ov.atb v'.;- : al tlhe proltl

,l' . a:l-i aia.ritV

.-iti: mw .ich iubjtcts utin t,: defend a i .ii1'i i )O;)

. r

adr(mn :iratio. oh : pri. urarity, h scl. ihe ovAd
in a great mit.fiurc to .I r-ra)y, vh ,

ha'. (.;.'rcted her

adinmnifirratiLn uwith grear

- nru !dme. iiut 'i'c lcin: of

opp;efing her marrt-i:.c ,,L 'teraed iile mi Iriiori) oi his

bro:'ght to rr

he r

ma : ,-ft

1 her t-n'?'s .t for tl.at

pitr-lpo', it ai pprat-, '.- h r hil.- ,

i . ;n| her ] mI:tii

tt.a: hl p rr-m iin il ' tlt '-!ait w' a

*'- . t iO li;r' i c.t -s

tl= :,,a;tcr requireit." r'ci:h, A1r-.pi.. I59. I1' ,K;'
thterctor- f!lnr:;'n:- tro :p r',r witil: thre raiy.' br-f:'ce
the quctn ill Hoivi;roil-r .:r,,; anl in or-.l to i',Ou-
ra-e lhini to do fio a fare cu.indu'i \a:; ofiK'i d. l;:;n.
Ithid T'I.o,' he lid oner coi'ntrie to aipe-(r, lie
a'-r-w'?rr.c d. ined to (') Io. But ' ;.,t'vr

, i'fir'r ;

I-rra vs i;U:-:iionl, a'rd tlhe rhi-actcr iuf t!h e -x licn

di:'rcc-d Mary's co;i:;.ils at ht time, wiill l::iili d'i-cnl
it a drrifi 'e plr-of of ihl u:lt, t!at he dii !.:nt cl.:fi
to ritk ,jis ptrfon to fuih i tcirite. a. The fi:ri '.:
passions of Da:rn!y, :t ie erceners of h1i r i-;.[itmLt'.
which fruip!. d at no -vial-nec, an'! liiC mannles of tile
age, rendered the impu-ation of futh a crimec 1lPP iil-
prohiable

II. That Iurrar an:! h:s afMio-at-'s had! rcrolve: to

fcize Darnlv in his r--t:r-n from Perth, appica's \.:h
ftil; g-reatr certaintv; i. From- the exprcis tltinmny
of iMcivil, 12.; alt .ough B:lch1ia an, p. 341. and
Knox, p. 377. asser withrort r,'albn lo rcprelrnt tlis
as an idle rumour. z. The qr.-flion was put to Ran-
dolph, Whether the governor of B,-rw ick would receive
Lcnnox and his son, ii they were delivered at that
placc? lis answer mwas, " that they would not refilfe
their on, i

ir on, . heir own fUlbjccts, in wl,. ever Iort
they come unto us, i. ,. \\ he;her they had returned to

*Keith, 298.

sorier services; and Mary, impatient of contradic.
tion, and apt to confider those .ho dilimted h, r wil
as enemies to her perlon, determined to let hin ;itcl
the whlole weight of her vengeance. For this purpose
she fumnionred hiril to appear before her tupon a short
warnin'd, to anfwe r to such thingis as should he la.id to his
charge }. At this very time Murray, and the lords

England voluntarily, as they had been required, or
were hrollrht thitlhr by force.'" This plainly ihcws
that foti' I:ch dclfian was in hinld, and .Lu. do!lh did
tlot dil'our.ge it hv the anifwr whlich he 3ave. Kcitl,
2'yo. . Tlie prci;i;lation with which the queen re-
tir-l, a;nd the r a! n The cave for this sudden tlii:ht,
a'c mtnit!t i led hby Ral3,,:pli. K'itih, 291. 4. A great
pjit of tlhel c't't;lh nol)l'., and anilong trhefe tile carls
if Arvll and lti!lc, w\rl;) were tiliils'lves privy to
i!d: d, fi.n, aliert the rca!ily oi the collliracl. oold.
vlJ. ii. ,:;:.

All tl,.1! . cirienritancis reineer the trnth of hi(th ccn-

f:r-.:,-i .- l' . rt!d.:,i. ltit we iia! ol(je'!xc ihoC w tl r riis
1.vlof', tiiigh il:'.:wn tionit public records, falls lhort,

hI,'li 'iJlt s, Oi !t'.al : ntd

s ornal evidence. lii L.:;';ian

i'.n!d li;;.'lh'l!, in their a;ic, il.ls of tile con!pir.acy a-

,r. lIl iM>r

' cy, (,..T-r i:!dly il aT!molift c rv cir.tiln-

itti. 'T 'he aclolln;s *it tile a:tcrplDt uipn D-arnly are
ift i' (!'( co'lI rif i t. Tvl Ivil allet es tltat thle dtficn of
tl' con! iral!ors was to cTrr)y Darllv a priltlber into
I 'l iind ; tlc- rropl;l mnia ic to Raw!o!lpi agrees xwc;th
tl.i. R.iidolpi la il, lhat they intended to carry the
qi.'i. to St. 'nd.

i. ws, anid l)arnlly to Caiile Canipliell.

'i lcl ords, inl t!.cir- de' lar.iti, aslirm tile dcfijgn or the
rol, i.'atoi-s to !iex btnl tlo mt;Ir.r i)arnly and h!is
1t ,irr, to cosile i:c h (Iqucn in L ocilec'.l (iitriim- life,
:. to ifurp tie g,c-cti-nemit. To hilieve implicitly

'i. -"t-evr tl:.ey iild i ::i a ili;c'nt p;ilper, is a tfolv to
,i;."'! i every age,

ain ariis are

- xremely prone.

A.. ,int paters- }iever, lir, i i;cn ionin no imore [l]:mt
t. fl I'aud.crl, f j:-.rt', a,, the lie uit tl. d.ay. 'T'he

who adhered to him, were assembled at Stirling, to
deliberate what course they should hold in such a dif-
ficult conjuncure. But the current of popular favour
ran so flrongly against them, and notwithfianding some
fears and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such
a general disposition to gratify the queen in a matter
which lo nearly concerned her, that, without coming
to any other conclufon, than to implore the queen of
England's protedtion, they put an end to their ineffec-
tual consultations, and returned every man to his own
house.

Together with this discovery of the weakness of her

enemies, the confluence of her subjects from all cor-
ners of the kingdom afforded Mary an agreeable proof
of her own it.rng.h. While the queen was in this
prosperous situation, she determined to bring to a pe-
riod an affair which had so long engrossed her heart
and occupied her attention. On the twenty-ninth of J:l!y,
Ix65, she married Stewart lord Darnly. The ceremony
was performed in : 'e, queen's chapel, according to tlc
rites of the Romifli church; the pope's hull dispensing
with their marriage having been previously obtained ;.
She ilTued at the fame time proclamations, conferrin.

declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind;
it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of
faction. Many things afcerted in it are evidently f.llfe
or exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates, 1i
as ambitious as we can suppose, they must have lid
some pretences, and plaufiLle ones too, before tlic\
could venture to iniprifon their sovereign for life, a:i 1
to seize the reins of government; but, at that t.il.
the queen's conduct had afforded no colourable cxci ,
for proceeding to such extremities. It is likewie c-
markalle, that in all the '.roclamations againit Mirra\v
cf which so :rnaiy are pu)bishd i- Keith, Appcl.ho,
ic, &c. nte.dicr tha vi.,illt atteminpt upo Darnlv, 1nor
tlhat- x:!.i is alieged to have l'r:mn i agaih.ft;:
t'!Cet:i h.r!'.'s: are ever once mlentiornc.

f KIh, .:.

the title of king of Scuts upon her hutfland, and onm-
manding that hencerorth all writs at law should run in
the joint names of king and queen t. Nothing can
be a stronger proof of the sioltnce of Mary's lo:e, or
the weakness of her councils, than this lat Iirp. Whle-
ther she had any right to cliuic a hiufband without
content of parliament, was, in that aBe a matter of
some dilpute$, that flhe had no ri:.ht to conli-- urponI
him, by her private authority, the title and tl Ini:y of
king, or by a simple proclamation to tafi'e her IIuI;
band to be tie mailer of her pItollz, ;enls to c be -
vond all doubt. Francis 11. indeed lbo: tile lilc l title.
1. was not, however, the gift of the qi:e..u, but (f the
nation ; and the conluet of parl-iamlenlt was ohltaintd
hefore he ventured to affiuni it. Darnlv's cnidition,
as a filhjeEt, rendered it fitll nlore necc'llry tto have ;he
concurrence of the fiprenie colucil in his fa'. cr.
Such a violent and unprecedlented fIretch of pr-rt'ga-
tive, as the iulblituling a proaiia:iation l pi.,:c oll an
atr of parliament, might have jultly al-arn.d the na-
tion But the queen poilirffed lb cutilly tlle c(ilfi-
dence of her lubjcfis, that, notrithllat.iiitg al! the
clamours of the nialecontenits, no iVtly!ipo:ns ot general
difi (,n;tcnr appealed on tiat actniunt.

Even ami(ltt ihe Icene ot joy whicih alwavs accorn-

par:ies l'utcclstu! love, Ma:y dii, not lifitr ihe coutlle
of her vergeance .girilt tl;c nijl coiintent noiles to ie
interrupted. 'J'lii he d'avs aittL the niarriagr , I;it'iay
wnas again funmoned to c nur;, ulder the tI:.Irct penal:l-
ties, and upon his noi-app.ai','ite the rigour of jultice
tock ,lacc, and he was dic( ird an clit ;aw. A at llie
fance tine the (uiiern fi.t at lilcrty lord (;eordon, who
ever fil:ce his athiir's intilrrclio l ionlli tI ;car 156z, had
been detained a priloner, ifh recall.td tihe crll of
Sutherland, who, on account of his i-irn in that
crnlijiracy, had fledi into Flainders; alidl l.e permitted
Bothwell to return again into Scoiltand. 'I Ie first and

tAn(ctri-,n, i. .. Scc .-;'itc. No. XI.

i tuchan. . ,34.

1 ls.tli j. G .
Vol. Z

last of these were among the most powerful fubjets in
the kingdom, and all of them animated with implaca-
ble hatred to Murray, whom they deemed the enemy
of their families, and the author of their own sufferings.
Th;s common hatred became the foundation of the
ftric'eft union with the queen, and gained them an
afccndant over all her councils. Murray himself con-
fidcred this confedera'yv with his avowed elnmies as a
more ccrt.in i:; li a.-n than any measure ihe had \.e
take.n, o. her i!lcxer'ii'c rcfentment.

T]he in;'c'cr;tnts had not ( t recnlv taken up arms'.

But iL'i queen having ordered her iluhjbies to In!hll
againfi them, mteyv

i re driven to the 1t.f extrTl; ,.

'ltev frlnd thenci ives unahle to ltake L- ].l :.'i?:;;,
the irnuicrous forces 'A hich Mary lad af.Tcni)'d and
fled i:no Argvyc!hiic, in expectatoin tuf aii i-or Eli/.a-
beth, to whom they had fe-retvl del>.lI

, dI a il.f-

fen:-.-, in order to implore her ilnmcdiate a..il-
ante '.

Mv.-an vxlile, ! !:a!ctlh encdea"oured to ernllarr;''

Mary, hv a ni .v> t. L1a ltion ot di,'!l! at iLcr cut .Ie:i.
Slic liamed Lbot;l l,-r lchoice of lor/, Darn:y, ai:ti ;:.
prc.:;i;;!i''.u i;ii xVw.i. h fe' had c, n.,'uicd the n!a--
ri..-: Sti.- rcuirril CInnox and Darnly , wli; I%
ftiil .li!-d he r iuhJls, to return into LEngiand; ar! It
t;- lranc time ile warmly intercdcdl tn hi-al .
I.i :-;raX, x iw h e
iehviour cfnc rpr-el:ntd to bl Iu;

*.t ter their f-: lcls conlultation in Stirling, tl:e

lo-ds :;-ir-d to thi;r own, houf£s. Kri-lih, 304. M. .;
raiy was flill at St. .AXirews cn Juilv a2. Keitl, ;.
By l:e pl cts of :tn'.z O'us apl.intied f)r the i::, .
bitants of the (hiTY lit c'un:is, Aogiuli 4, it ;
pears that tl.e u. .n'; iint;cl:in was to narchi .
Site, th e county !;- w}.ii MIT:' .', it,

iKtnt i'k.v lii-k,.'.,

aind oth -r c!i;;s

,.f tire na'cuts:iti:c.s rli :

,

1. K ':1..

310. Th r'.l ii't,) he '.'l, eih,

h,, z. Irev, ..'

t.- t xp t.i:tun a,, t'h Icn .m r reudcl.zvuus was alt,.i-
ec.;:b ,,31 .,

r Kh,, 31z. Knox, 3°0.

only innocent but laudable. This mefage, so morti-
fying to the pride of the queen, and so full of contempt
for her husband, was rendered flill more infupporta-
ble by the petulant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth,
the person who delivered it l. Mary vindicated her
own conduct with warmth, but with great firength of
reason; and rejected the intercefllon in behalf of Mur-
ray, not without ligns of resentment at Elizabeth's pre-
tending to intermeddle in the internal government of
her kingdom §.

She did not, on that account, intermit in the least the

ardour with which Ihe pursued Murray and his adhe-
rents '. They now appeared openly in arms: and hav-
ing received a small flipply in moiney from Ellizabeth -,
were endeavouring to raile their followers in the -wet-
ern counties. But Mary's vigilance hiindercd them from
assembling in an), considerable body. All her military
oprrations at that time were concerted with wifilom,
executed with vigour, and attended w-;th ficefs. In
order to encourage her troops, Die hertlif, marched a-
long with them, rode with loaded pistols , and endured
all the fatigues of war with admirable fortitude. I-er
alacrity inspired her forces with an inviiuihb! rciolution,
which, together with their superiority in number. deter-
red the malecontents from facing them in the field; but
Laving artfully pafled the queen's army, tile- :arched
with the utmofl precipitation to Editr;l'rgh, ani endea-
voured to roule the inhabitants of that city to arlns.
The queen did not susser tlientoremlain long unillefl d;
and on her approach, they were forced to ahandon that

a Camb. :98. § Keith, Append. 99.

The mofl considerable persons who joincd Mturray,

were, the duke of Chatelherault, the earls of Argyl,
Glencairn, Rothes; lord Boyd and O:hiitrec; the lairds
of Grange, Cunninghamhead, Baleomrnie, Carmylie,
l.awers, Bar, Dreghorn, Pit!arrow, Comptroiler, and
the tutor of Pitcur. Knlox, 382.

t Knox, 380. t Keith, Append. 164.

%Lz

place, and retire in confuiion towards the western bor-
ders '.

As it was nncert:;n. for some time, what route they

had taken, Mary employed that interval in proceeding
for the security of the counties in the heart of the king-
dom. She seized the places of strength which belonged
to the rebels; and obiiged the confiderahie barons in
thofhe hirrs -which she most fufpeced to join in affocia-
tions for her dee-nce t. Having thus left all the country
behind her in tranquillity, she, with an army eighteen
thonfand firong, marched towards Dumfries, where the
rebels then were. Du,-ing their retreat. they had Irnt
letters to the queen, fi-.m almost every place where they
hakted, full of fi!bmiiT,.n, and containing various over-
tures onwards an accommodation. But Marv, m ho de-
terr-i;nd not to let si!p such a favourable opportunity of
crufii-,n the mutinous spirit of her fubjeacs, rejecred
them whith disdain. As (he advanced, the malecontents
retired. And, having received no effectual aid flrnm
Elizabeth t, they despaired of any other means of fairly,
fled into En!ar.nd, anr Fput themselves under the pro-
tection of the e.rl of Bedford warden of the mar nhs.

Nothing, which Bedford's personal friendflilp for

IMurray could fup;'l;'. was wanting to render their rc-
treat agreeable. Btlt Elizabeth herself treated them \ :;h
extreme neglect. She had fully gained her end, aid,
by their means, had excited fucll discord and jealous;'s
among the Scots, as would, in all probahaUi;y, long di-
firacri and weakeni Ma:y's counr:ils. Her hufinefs now
was to save appearances, and to jiftify herself to the ii-
niflers of France and Spain, who accused her of foment-
ing the troubles in Scotland by her int ignes. The ex-
pedient (he contrived for her vindication itrongly dif-
plays her own cha:aicrr, and the wretched cond.tion
of exiles, whl are obliged to depend on a foreign prtnce.
Murra , and ilamiltlon abbot of Kilwinninig, being ap-
pointed by the other fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, in-

* Keith . No. t Ibid. 113.
i Ste Append. No. XIJ. XIII.

flead of meeting with that welcome reception which
was due to men, who, out of confidence ill her prouli-
fes, and in order to forward her designs, had hazarded
their lives and fortunes, could not even obtain the fa-
vour of an audience, until they had ileanv! contfinted
to acknowledges in the preernce of the Ircnch andl Spa-
nifh ambafladors, that Elizabeth had given theri no en-
couragement to take arms. No luouitr did they make
this declaration, than ihe aflonifhed tlhem with this re-
ply: #' You have declared the truth; I am far fiom
setting an example of rebelliol to my own fubjc bys, by
countenancing those who rebel agai:lt their lawful
prince. The treason, of which you have bceni guilty,
is dcLefiable; and as traitors J banifl yvou si (Olm y pre-
lrnce'." Notwithflandiing this IfcIICe of farce ai.d of
i;lfcllood, so dishonourable to all the pcrlbns who adrtd
a part in It, Elizabeth'permitted the nmalecontents pea:e-
ably to reside in her dominions, fulpplitd lthin Iecrettv
v;lth nioniy, and renewed her lolicitations withl the
Scttlifli queen in their favourt.

The advantage she had gained o'-er ;thtm did not ra-

tisfy Mary; file resolvcd to follow the ,!wou, andl to pre-
vtnt a party, which fle dreaded, si L evrr rCecoering
a:.y footing in tle nation. Wit this v w ' !,: tA a
int ting of parliamocit, and in oir(:ir t)l.t a Jb iit( nic 't
l.elrieture might be legally prooluniiccd a.,.ti:l the 1'a-
rn;icd lords, The ftinimolocd thlem, by p:hlili procialila-
tian, to appear before itt.

The duke ofChatelhcrault, on his humille application,

obtained a liparate pardon; but n't without diilicultv,
as tlhe king violently oppotld it. Hic was obligei, how-
rctr, to leave the kilngtom, and to rclide lUnilc tinie in
I'ra nce §

The numerous forces which Mary3 broughit into the

f:ed, the vigour with which fhr acted, c..nl t!:c leiith
oftime she kept them in armtr, rclt;ibi ti:c colorts oi a
;':ince with revenues much t.lorc . t ilitclrabl. thani thole

MClv. it:. t Knox, .89 ic!:, 39.

Kilox, 339.

7.

which she pofeffed. But armies were then levied and
maintained by princes at small charge. The vassal fol-
lowed his superior, and the superior attended the mo-
narch, at his own expence. Six hundred horlemen,
however, and three cor.npanies of foot, besides her guards,
received regular pay from the queen. This extraordi-
nary charge, together with the disbursements occasioned
by her marriage, exhausted a treasury which was far
from being rich. In this exigency, many devices were
fallen upon for raising money. Fines were levied on
the towns of St. Andrews, Perth, and Dundee, which
were fufpeted of favouring the malecontents. An un-
ulual tax was irtpofed on the boroughs throughout the
kingdom; and a great fumr was demanded of the citizens
of Edinburgh, hy way of loan. This unprecedented
exa.-ion alarmed the citizens. They had recourse ;o
delays, and started difficulties in order to evade it.
These Malr construcd to be adcs of avowed difobedicnc-,
and instantly committed I'veral of them to prison. But
this fcverity did no; subdue the undaunted spirit ot li-
berty which prevailed among the inhabitants. Tie
queen was obliged to mortgage to the city the fupterc-
rity of the town of Leith, by which file otained a con-
fiderable fum of mon-v'. The thirds of ecclcfiaiiicA;
benefices proved ancther source whence thc queen dc-
rived obme fupp!y. About this time .Ae find th-t vo-
teflant clergy complaining more bitterly than ever (tf
their poverty. Tlie armn, it is probable, exhault-
great part of that fund which was appropriated loi 1iii!l
inaintenancef.

The assemblies of the church were not unconcerned

fpecrators of the commotions of this turbulent year. In
the meeting June twenty-fourth, previous to the qiceln's
marriage, fcveral of the malecontent nobles were prc-
sent, and feeln to have had great influence on its (dI i-
sions. The nigh itrain in which the assembly addrctil.d
the queen in be imputed only to thole fears and jea-
lIr;fi=- with regard to religion which they ende:.vourcld

* Kn.; , ;.S3 6 t
at. t Ii.Hlift. vs EdfIr.urth,

to infuse into the nation. The afTembly complained,
with some bitterness, of the stop which had been put to
the progress of the Reformation by the queen's arrival
in Scotland; they required not only the total fupprellion
of the popish worlhip throughout the kingdom, hut e-
ven in the queen's own chapel; and bltides the legal
eftabliihment of the proteltant religion, thve demanded
that Mary herfelfihould publicly enmbrace it. ihe queen
after ibme deliberation, replied, th:at nIither r con-
science nor her interci would permit hler to take ful(c a
ftep. The former would frO- ever ivpro.'(ce he: for a
change which proceeded from no inward co(iin'iCion,
the latter would il;Tcr hy the of'nce wh'ic hter ap',fiacy
mufl give to the king of France aml her other allics on
the continent .

It is remarkable, that the prosperous situation of the

queen's affairs during this year began to work omen
change in favour of her rc!ligin. Thi ear lc (of l.! inoo.
Athol, and Cailils, ort'nlv attendeld mals; :-he h1, li:' as-
forded the catholics a more avowed protl 'sitn thail for.
merly; and. by her permrffion Tome of tlie :i.lciinut
monks vetiturcd to preach publlicly to the .o;ile ;.

* Knox, 374, 376. tIbid. 3gy, 39.).

kz~ ""

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK FOURTH. CONTENTS. The conduct of Queen Mary to the exiled nobles. To Darrly, Rizio. His murder. The Queen's confinement. Her Escape. The flight of the conspirators. Impru ...

THZ
HISTORY

O F
$GOTLAND.

BOOK FOURTH,

CONTENTS.

7.r condua of una Mary to the eriled nobler. To D,,rl:A

Rizio. Hni morder. TZe Oteen's conjiemert. l:s
.scape. The fligt of the conspirators. Impruden:e of
larnly. BthTwell. Birth of James VI. Attaocmertl
of the Englf/ Parliament to Idary' title. Perplexity ,drd
address of Elizabetb. Aserjfon of the Zueen ol Scollarid '
Darnty. Church Affair,. Darnly'st ickncfi. His Nitur-
'er. HiJ cbhraoer. BSv'l/ll a¢ccufd cf khi dealt. Tri.,'
and acquittal of Botbhwell. A Parlament. T'be

'...

carried to Dunhar. Her rnarriaie to Botlb'ell. 1'; -
dfgupf. Combination of the nobles. An accomrmodatfi...

ffigbt of Bt6rcll. lMary'i farreiler to the reT6ls.

A s the day appointed for the neeting of parlian'rr.:
approached, Marn and her ministers were employed i:i
deliberating concerning the course which it was ncaii
proper to hold with regard to the exiled nobks. Alanr.
motives prompted her to set no bounds to the rigonr o'
ufllice. The malecontents had labou!rel to defeat a
Scheme, which her interest conspired with her pafiionis
in rendering dear to her, they were the leaders of a
party, whose friendship ihe had been obliged to ccurt,
w-hile Ihe held their principles in abhorrence; and the'i
were firmly attached to a rival whom she had good r1'. -
son both to fear and to hate.

Bu: on the other hand, several weigliMr considerations

mit ht be urged. The nohlemcn, wholr'fat. w\as in
fulpelice, were among the mofi powerful I'ltftC- s ill the
kingiom;. ti:"ir wealth great, their contnexions exten-
five, ani tirir ailherents numerouis. 'I'lc'v were niow
at mercy, the obj .ts of corolpYir on. alndi ilng tbr par-
don w ith the mol humble fubmiflion.

In those circu.lln:an ats, an at or c!emn ncv would ex-

alt the queen's charaAc r,, alnd appe;ar to li !'plnilid
among foreigner-, ti:n aw-cletable to hi:r own fii bicts.
Mary bhcrils I!ihonJh high!) incensed, wt ii ,,t inexo'-
able, bin th kli i.'' 'e was inplacable ani iirilI;ni
ing. They wv.re ' i itedl in lhl.ha! of tlhr ft'i itvcs
from various quart-es. Mo-rt'i, lR;i!vau], MatIi!.nd,
and all who had lci m mbers of the eongrezatioin,
were not f rgetiu! oi their ancient unionl with iMu.r-ay
and his 'ciluw uffcrers; nor n.glclccul of their latety,
which tlihy ecieitned of great inipirltarre to the king-
dom. MAlvil, I!ho at that time porfcflt.d the lqlcen'll
confidlelce, fi'coiided thcir fi)licitatios. Andl iurray,
having sloopld lo low as to court Rizio, that favourite,
who was defirons of fccuring his p :e rc~iili againlli the
khil., wh~f .r iipleafitre he iad llately incurred, Ifconlid
tli interceTions of his other iriends with the whole of
his influencte . The interpofitiot, o! lir Niiciolas t'hrok-
morton, who had latclh been Elizabethi's anibaffdor in
Scotland, in behalf ofthe exiles, was of more weight
than all there, and attended with more tibccels. Throk-
morton, out of enmity to Cecil, had einbarked deeply
in all the intrigues which were carried on at the Eng-
lifh court, in order to undermine the power and credit
of that minifltr. tIe efpotleld, for this realon, tile cause
of the Scottlfh quitn, towards whose title and preten-
fiois the other was known to bear little favour; and
ventured, in the present critical junclure, to write a let-
ter to Mary, containing the molt salutary adviccs with
regard to her conduct. He reonito eii(led the pardon-
ing of the earl of Murray and his aflbciates, as a inea-

tMciv. 1zj.

sure no lets prudent than popular. " Ai-a6óion of this
nature," fays he, " the pure efftct of your majesty's
generosity, will spread the fame of your lenity and
moderation, and engage the Englilh to look towards
your acccffion to the throne, not only without preju-
dice, but with desire. By the fame means, a perfect
harmony will be restored among your own fubjecls,
who, if any rupture should happen with England, will
serve you with that grateful zeal which your clemency
cannot fail of inspiring ."

These prudent remonstrances of Throkmorton, to

which his reputation for wisdom, and known attach-
ment to the queen, added great authority, made a deep
impression on her spirit. Her courtiers cultivated this
happy disposition, and prevailed on her, notwithftand-
ing the king's inflexible temper, to sacrifice her own
private refentmcnt to the intercession of her fubjecns,
and the withes of her friends t. With this view, the
parliament which had been called to meet on the fourth
of February, was prorogued to the seventh of April t;
and in the mean time she was busy in confidering the
manner and form in which she (hould extend her favour
to the lords who were under disgrace.

Though Mary discovered on this occasion a mind na-

turally prone to humanity, and capable of fergiving,
she wanted firmness, however, to refilt the influence
which was fatally employed to disappoint the effecs of
this amiable disposition. About this time, and at no
great distance from each other, two envoys arrived from
the French king. The former was entrusted with mat-
ters of mere ceremony alone; he congratulated the
queen on her marriage, and invested the king with the
ensigns of the order of St. Michael. The infiruations
of the latter related to matters of more importance, and
produced greater effrcts§.

An interv'icw between Charles IX. and his sifter the

queen of Spain had been often proposed, and after ma-
' Mclv. 119. Ibid. 25. t Good. vol. i. 224.

§ Keith, 32j. Append. x67.

ny obstacles at flng from the opposition of political in-
terefr, was at lafi appointed at Bayonne. Catherine of
Medicis accompanied her son; the duke of Alva at-
tended his mistress. Amidst the scenes of public pomp
and pleasure, which seemed to be the sole occupation of
both courts, a scheme was formed, and mneafures con-
certed, for exterminating the Hugonots in France, the
Protestants in the Low Countries, and for fupprcffing
the Reformation throughout all Europe'. The acive
policy of pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the cardinal of
Lorrain, confirmed and encouraged dispositions so suit-
able to the genius of the Rornifh religion, and so bene-
ficial to their own order.

It was an account of this holy league which the

French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring her at the
fame time, in the name of the king of France and the
cardinal of Lorrain, not to restore the leaders of the
protellants in her kingdom to power and favour, at the
very time when the catholic princes were combined to
drefroy that feit in all the countries of Europet.

P'(.pery is a lpecics of salic r-ligion, remarkable for

the' i rIng pcfi .flion it takes of the heart. Contrived by
nlic of deep inlight in the human characer, and im-
proved by tt:e experience and ol,i .rvation

of man;v fuc-

ccffive ages; it arrived at last to a degree of perfeciln,
vhii hI no former fvftcm of fuperfli ion had ever attain-
ed. l'here is no poswer in the undcrrlaiding, no pai-
iron in the heart, to which it does not prclent oljcihts
adapted to rouse and to interest them. Neither the
lnve of pleasure which at times prevailed in the court ot
France, nor the pursuits of ambition which occupied the
court ct Snain, had ICcutrc them Irom the dominion ot
;:'olry. I.aymen and courtiers were agitated with
that furious and unmerciful ycal wich is commonly
(ccnliti(rrd as peculiar to ecclefiaflics; and kings andt
iniillers thought themselves bound in conltirlnce to ex-

ripate the proteflant doflrine. Mary ihrliel'Fas deep-
ly tinlclu-cd with all the prejudices of popery; a p.l'-

Ti Thuan.iib 37, t Mlv. iT.

fionate attachment to that superstition is visible in every
part of her character, and runs through all the seenes
of her life: she was devoted too with the utmoit sub.
mission to the princes of Iorrain, her uncles; and had
been accuitomed from her infancy to liften to all their
advices with a filial refpel. The profpe& of rcfioring
the public excrcite of her own religion, the pleasure of
complying with her uncles, and the hopes of gratify-
ing the French monarch, whom the present situation of
her assai.s in England, made it neccfary to court, coun-
tertalanced all the prudent considerations which had
formerly weighed with her. She inftantlv joined the
conitderacv, which llhd been formed for the deftruc-
tion of the protcitants, and altered the whole plan of
her condrdt with regard to lurray and his adherents'.

To this fatal refi,ltion may be imputed all thefub-

fetuent calamiites ot Mary s life. Ever since her return
into Scotland, tortune iray be said to have been propi-
tious to her, rather than adverlc; and if her protperlty
did not ri!i to any great height, it had, however, fut-
sered no confideratic interruption. A thick and let-
tied cloud of adversity, with few gleams of hope, and
none of real enjoy.iient, covers the remainder of her
days.

The effils of the new fyltem which Mary had a-

dopttdwtre sion itlible. 'The time of the prorogation
of pariiament m as (hortened; and by a new proclama-
tion the twxeilth t March waq fixed ior its meeting t.
Alary refoived, without any further delay, to proceed
to tie attainder of the rebel lords, and at the fame time
determined to take lome tieps towards the re-eilablih-
mnentot the Romilh religion in Scotland4. The lords

* Ste Append. No. X1V. t Keith, 326.

t It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we

charge the queen with the design of re-eitablifiung the
Roman cathoel religion. He, indeed, asserts that the
altars, which tiuld have been erected in the church ot
St. Giles, were alreadi p(roviced, 394 I. Mary herfrif,
in a i't:.r to the archbffiop of GlaMgow, her ambaifa-

of the articles were chosen, as ulinal, to prepare the bu-
AiieAf which was to come before the parliament. Th'lc
yvere. all perions in whom the queen could confide, and
:bent to promote her dcigns. The ruin of Murrav and
his ;party seemed now inevitable, and the danger of
the reformed churchl irimminent, when an event unex-
pecdedly happened wlhich laved both. 11 we regard
either the barbarity of th;l age, when flch acts or vi-
olence were common, or the mean coldition of the un-
happy perlbn who hll-rcd, tliL event is little remark-
able; but ii we relltl upon the circurrdlaiices with
wlhich it was attended, or upon the conl(quenices
which followed it, it appears extreme!ly memorable;
and the rife and progress of it dcfcrve to be traced 'with
great care.

Darnly's external acconlplilhments had excited that

sudden and violent palliil whlich raild himn to the
throne. But tlle qualities of his mind coi-rrfponded ill
with the beauty of his p rlon. Of a weak undrfllanding,
and withoui expcl ienc, conceited, at the lEnme time, of
lhio o.vn abilities, al1d! alcribing his extraordilnary fuccels
cutirely to this dili iliguifhed merit; all the quccn's favour
liadr no imprlclion oin such a temper. All ler gentienell

dor in 1 rance, acknowledges, " tlhat in that parliament
she intended(l to have done tbioe good, with r e!peG to re-
lloring thle old religiion,' Keith, .; ,. 2. Thie l)iritual
lords, i. ,. the Pop;ill cclcfirilics, had, by her authority,
relumed their ancient place in that aictinbly. Ibid. 3.
She had joined the confederacy at Bayonne. Keith,
Append. 167. 4. Sll allowed ials to be celebrated in
nicirent parts of the kingdom, ibid.; and declared that
she would .have imals free for all men that would hear
r. Good. vol. i. 274. 5. Blackwood, who v a lJur-
niflied by the archbishop of Glasgow with Ixaterialb for
writing his Martre e A/ larie, affirms that the euuen in-
tended to have precured, in this parliaenlt, it' ;ot the
rc-ettablithment of the catholic religion, at lerat bonml
thing for-the ease of c.ltholics. Jcbb, vol. ii. 2c4.
\4 vt. L . A a

could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable spirit.
All her attention to place about him persons capable of
direcng his conlduct, could not preserve him from ralh
and imprudent actions'. Fond of all the amiufments,
and even prone to all the vices of youth, he became by
degrees careless of her perfun, and a stranger to her
company. To a w.oman, amli a queen, such behaviour
was intolerable. The lower she had stooped to raile
him, his behaviour appeared the more ungenerous and
crminaal: and in proportion to the lirength of her firlt
assee'. n, was the violence with which her disappointed
pafion now operat:d. A few rronths after the mar-
riage their damoefic aq:arrels began to be oibcrved. Tlhe
extravaganrce rs Darn-v'S ambiticn gave rile to thrlc.
Inftlad of being latid.;i x. i'h rl:at stretch of power by
which Marv had contarrei on l:irn the title of king, and
admitted him to a share in the aicminiftratic n, he ile-
manded the crowni n:at:-inonial with molt infol(nt
importunity--. Thourh vMary alleged that this gift
w.-zs beyond her Tow-er, and that the an:l:ri ity of par-
lianment mufi be iilterlprliec to bellow i, he u anl;:t
either udt-ritand.ing to rnn;prehcind, or timtl- r to ad-
mit, so just a defence; and often renewed and urged
his request.

R-zio, whom the kinp had at first taken into great

cnr.nri:-ce, did not humin.cur him in thcle folilcs. Bl
this lie incurred Hienry'v diiipl.alure; ai.d as it was iin-
pofiE'!e for Marr to ehavre towards her hufijand with
the time afiicfion which diftinguuilhect the liri' and liap-
py days of thcir u!:cn, he imputed this ccidnrcs, not to
his own bFl.aviour, which had so well im: .iid it, iL,.t
to the infin:: aios of Rizio. Mal 's owen c:ndUit lo.n-
firmed and flrcr.gthenced these fui'picion,. She trea.tl

* Good. sTo. i. 1 - .

! Keith,: -9. 1'.. ip 165, i'6. Klnox, 404. TI.e

eazerners- of ;!.e king to tlhtatn -lie crrr.-v ij.:riuo':'n' is
net si -,-;rif;ig, when the extent of the pow-ers which
that t.ire convevyed, as e..lain;l in it the te:;t and note,
p. 2:z, is takca _
il coniide'!-ticn.

this firanger with a familiarity, and admitted him to a
share in her confidence, to which neither his first con-
dition, nor the office she had lately beflowed on hiin,
gave him any title. He was perpetually in her pre-
fence, intermeddled in every buGnefs, and, togetther with
a few favourites,. was the companion of all her private
amusements. The haughty spirit of Darnil could not
hear the interference of iuch an upilart; and impatient
of any delay, and unreltrailed by any feruple, he in-
flantly reii)lved to get rid of him by violence.

At the lame time another delign, which took its rife

fiom very different motives, W :L carrying on againit the
life of Rizio. Morton, Rutliven, Lindhay, and Mait-
land, were thecontrivers of it. In all former commo-
tions they had been ftritly united with Murrav, though
in the late insurrection they had delirte(d himi, for va-
rious reasons. AMorton was nearly allied to the familyi
of Angus, and, during the minority of the prcfent ear,
acted as chief of the name of Douglas. Rutliven was
married to the king's aunt. ,indfay's wife was of the
fame blood. All thele had -warmly concurred with the
queen in ploiiotiolig a marriage which did Ib much ho-
nour to the house of )Doglas, and naturally expected,
that, under a king of their own blood, the chief mra-
nagenicnt of affairs would be committ-d to them.
lMatland, with his uluila sagacity, forelaw that Murray's
opposition to the match would prove dangerous and in-
eficlual; but whoever ruled at court, he hoped, by his
dexterity and talents, to rlinuer hiin:!el nccefarv and of
importantce. I h)y were all equally d:fappcited inl
their expectations. The king's hea(itrong temiper
rcndererd hiin incapable of advice. T'he queen could
not help diltrultig meni who had betenC long and ob
intimatel cronnectrd with Jlurray, and tgave- lhrltlr up
intirely to thof counillrs who complied w th ail her
inclinations. 'The return ofthat noibleman and h.is fol-
Inoers was thcictorel the onivy evyt which could rellore
IMorrn, vlaitlanld, and their allbriates, to theiri orii. r
aficendant I.ver tih- queen's councils. For this real;n,
otstililng coulid e liorre minrtityil;g to them, thanl thu

A a

resolution which Mlarv had taken to treat the exiles
with rigour. This thev imputed to Rizio, who, after
he had engaged to aid Murray with all his interest, was
now the most a tive infirilment in promoting the Inea-
fures which were concerted fir the ruin of that noble-
man. This officious zeal comnpl'ted the di;eult which
the nobles had concilved against him, and inspired
them wi'h thouzhts ofvenizcanl'c, in no ways suitable
to iustice, to hinianity, or to their own dignity.

While they were rtniim ating upon their feheine, the

king communicated his rel;riitiiin to he avenged of

izio to lord Ruihvcn, l nd ilnilored his affiflance, and
that of hisfriiends. towards the execition of this design.
Nothing could be more arcettahle to them thall this
overture. They- fhw at nlcu all the advanrnges they
would reap, by the cornurrence (f fiith an alfcia'ce.
Their own private r,'enge upon Riz-o would pass,
they hoped, for an act of ohedien-e to the king; and
they did not despair of obtainin, the rtflori-tion of their
banithed friends, .,nd f;critv for the protestant reli-
gion, as the price of their compliance with his will.

But as Henry was no less fickle than rash, the)' he-

fitated for fonme time, and determined to advance no
farther, without taking every poiTihle precaution for
thei- own fafet. They did not, in the mean time,
fufier the king's resentment to abate. Morton, who
was inferior to no man of that intriguing age in all the
arts of insinuation and address, took the voT ng prince
under his management. He wrought upnn his ruling
passion, ambition to obtain the matrimonial crown.
fie reprefeited Rizio's credit with the queen to he the
rhief and only ohftacle to his success in that demand.
This minion alone, he said, pcifFffed her confidence;
and out of complailance to him. her fuhljeas, her nolhi
lity, and even hr h-'lmand, were excluded from aly
participation of her secret councils Under the ap
pearance of a confidence merely political, he infinuatce
and having perhaps belived, that a familiarity of an
other and more criminal nature might he concealed

Of all our hiltoriass, Buchanan alone avowed!

Such various and complicated passions raged in the
king's bosom with the utinoft fury. tie became more
impatient than ever of any delay, and even threatened
to strike the intended blow with his own hand At last,
preliminaries were 'ettled on both fides, and articles for
theiri mutual security- agreed upon. The king engaged
to prevent the attaitnder of the banished lords, to con-
sent to their return into Scotland, to obtain for them ail

accures Mary of a criminal love for Rizio, 340, 244.
Knox slightly infinuares that such a fiufpicion was enter-
taine'!, 391. Mcivil. in a conversation with the queen,
intimates that he was afraid her familiarity with Rizio
might be liable to mifconillr ucCon, iJo. The king
himfnielf iecms, both hy Melvil's account, an, by his
expofitlatitin with the queen, which Rlithven mentions,
to have given credit to tleiec filipiciouns. Melv. 127.
Keith, Append. 2:i 24. Bit iln clliofition to there
fiupicions, and tlicy arc nothiing more, we may olhferve
that Raulet, the quieen's French lecretarv, wa; diiniffed
from her service, and Rizio advatceid to that offce in
Decemnler, 1.64. Keith, 268. It was in confcquence
of this preferment, tlhat lie acquired I:is great credit
with the queen. Mlelv. I07. )arnly arrived in Scot-
land about t so months alter. Keith, 269. The queen
immediately conceived for him a lpaifTon, which had
all the symptoms of gentline and violent love. Rizio
aided this pafiton, and prmlnoted the marriage with all
,is interest. Mclv. ;r., During Ibme months after
the marriage, the qticen's fondnels for Danily continu-
cd. She fbon proved with child. Front tlis enume-
ration of circunillances, it appears almost impofiible
that the queen, unleif we fulppoie her to have heell
a woman utterlv abandoned, could carrv on any crimi-
nal intrigue with Rizio. But the silence of Randolplh,
the English relident, a man abundantly ready to men-
tion and to aggravate'Mary's faults, aind who does not
once insinuate that her confidence in Rizio concealed
any thing criminal, is in itfelfa sufficient vindication of
Iher innocence.

Aa3

amp!e renmifTn of a'. their crimes, and toiupport, to the
utmoit ofhls power, the religion which was now elta-
blifhed in the kingdom. On their parts, they under-
took to procure the crown matrimonial for lHenrv, to
secure lis right of fuez-ffton, if the queen should die
before him, and to detend that right to the uttermolt,
againfi whatever perifn horltl prefiume to dispute it;
and if either Rizio, or any other peribn should happen
to be killtd in profecutini of the dcfign, the king pro-
miifed to acknowiedgu him self to be the author of the
enterprise, ald to protedt those who were embarked in
it '.

Nothing now remained hut to concert the plan of

opcra'ion. to choo!e tie actnrs, and to assign them
their parts in perpe:rating tl:;s detefiahle crime. Every
circnrmn.ila;' e ier p;i:nts i1nd rharaderifcs the manrlers
and Icnr of t-lt : gI., and fills us wiil horror at both.
'shk pl.2r crhoitni tir coi"nrin:tti ifuch a deed was the
queen's hrc- cl --'Tcr ' lh(u-h Mary was now in the
sixth mne.h of h.-r r-rgnancy, and though Rizio rri;lt
have bern faized cl;;- iih-rc wi.ho - any ;fficu'ltv, the
kingp''h-hed upltin :h: place, tl at he Toi;'lt enjo ,lle
maaictio,;s plCeaiur- of repip-oniii;, Ri.i u i:h hEis c.;:s
befo,-e t: c ;i.-n's face. 'I'The crl of vlorol-: , ithe 1I.'
hi h chanielior of the ki.gd-(orn, undert.ook to dil.rcct :,n
enterprise, carried en it defance of all the laws ot
'w-hichi he ',as bInid to Le :he guardia.n. 'I'be lord
Ruth:-en, u lo hud heen rconGiled to his bed lor thrst
In(riths bv a very danil-ous din:ftper, atsd

mh.o war

fll si fich'.e that hle t-onl:l flalce waik, or hear tlhe
we:i -t ot o1.s own :i ino:"r, as iil:rufltrl -vwh the ree-
cutive part; and v.-.h!- h hinileift !:cdel to be li.'
por:Cid by two In-rn, he caiTr, abroad tu curlmit a i;ur
Cer in ht prefencre of his I:'ereig's.

On the nintl. *t' Itarchl, Morton entered the conl

of the -palace v;'th an hou::r-d anti ti:tv n:tr. .me:

t i:thl:i noil , or u eeting x ith any refiltance, lezcd al
:ht. g- . \'Whil the ti'-een was at flipper 'a it! t!

Cte-. .-'ol i. 65G.

conntefs of Argyle, Rizio, and a few domeflics, the
king liddenly entered the apartment by a private pa:.
sage. At his back was Rluthven, clad in complete ar-
mour, and with that ghaltly and horrid look which
long sickness had given hin. Three or four of his
mnolf trusty accomplices followed him. Such an un-
usual appearance alarmed those who were present. Ri-
zio instantly apprehended that he was the vietim at
whom the blow was aimred; and in the utmnft con-
flernation retired behind the iuecin, of whom he laid
hold, hoping that tle reverence due to her person
might prove some protec'ion to him. The confpira-
tors had proceeded too far to be restrained by any con-
fideration of that kind. Numbers of armed men ruflh-
ed into the clhalber. Ruthven drew his dagger, and
with a furiouis mien and voice commanded Rizio to
leave a place of which l.e was unworthy, anti vhich he
had occupie d too long. Mary employed tears, and en-
treaties, and thrcttecnings, to save her favourite. But,
notwitiilaniding all thelit, lie was torn froin her by vio-
lence, and before l:e could he dragged through the next
npartenict, thli ra'e of his enemies put an end to his
lite, piercirii his body with fifty-lix woirds,?.

Athol, Iiun' ly, Both well, anl other confidents of the

(qucen whi, lili.c'el in the palace, were alariled at the
uproar, and lil!,-(l with the utinot terror (in their own
account; but eiitter no violence was intended afainft
thenm, or tihl' c:,liltiratos dinrit not thed the tnoi iet
lilood inl the kini<>lon inl the Itnte illegal ianner w'ith
\ hich tlhv had veltiu'c.d to take tie life of a traii;ger.
Sonte of them were diilmiifcd, and others made their
eflc:ape.

T1 he con!pilrators, in the mean time, kept ponfriont

of the pal.'tc, aind guarded the queetl wiih tilhe utinofl
care. A prtocialiationi was publiffhed by the kinig, pro-
hibiting the

) parli iienlt to mteCt on lthe day appuintel ;

and imcallfirel were takenl by hiil for prcventing any tu-
tn:ult in the ii' rM'y, lothihes, and their iollowers,

See .\l.ct11. No. XV. - Kiitllh , A;'pen. i16.

being informed of every ftep taken against Rizio, ar-
rived at Edinburgh next evening. Murray was gra-
cioufly received both by king and queen: by the for-
mer, on account of the articles which had been agreed
upon between them; by the latter, because she hoped
to prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take part
with the murderers of Rizio. q heir pou er she fiill felt
and dreaded; and the insult whi h they had offered
to her authority, and even to her peri .., so far exceed-
ed any crime which she could imprte to Murray, that
in hopes of wreaking her vcngeance on them, ihe he-
came extremely williong'to be reconciled to him. The
obligations, however, which Murray lay under to men
who had hazarded their lives on his account, engaged
him to labour for their fafetv. The queen, who scarce
had the liberty ot choice left, u as persuaded to admit
Alo.;ton and Ruthven into her pres'ence, and to grant
them the promise of pardon in vliatloever terms they
1hould deem necessary for their own security.

The king, mean while, flood aftonifned at the bold-

ness and success of his own enterprise, and uncertain
what course to hold. The queen oi,firved his irrelo-
lution, and availed herself of it. She en-ploved all her
art to disengage him from his new associates. His con-
fcioufnels ot the insult which he had offired to so il-
lifirious a benefadtrefs, inlpired him with uncommon
facility and complailance. In fpitc of all the warnings
he received to distrust the queen's artifices, she prevail-
ed on him to dismiss the guards which the conipirators
had placed on her person; and that fame night he made
his elcape along with her, attended by three persons
only, and retired to Dunbar. The tiheme of their
flight had been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell,
and they were quickly joined by them and l;veral
other of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that
corner of the kingdom, and his followers crowded to
their chief in such numbers, as Coon enabled the queen
to set the power of the confpi;-ators at defiance.

This sudden flight filled them with inexpressible con-
sterna.ion. They had obtained a promise of pardon;

and it now appeared from the queen's conducR, that
nothing more was intended by this promiie than to
armuie them, and to gain time. They ventured, how-
ever, to demand the acromplifhment of it; but their
meflenger was detained a prisoner, and the queen ad-
vancing towards Edinburgh, at the head of eight thou-
sand men, talked in the highest firain of refentmi.nt
and revenge. She had the address, at the fame time,
to separate Miurrav and his associates from the confpi-
ratnrs againIt ltizio. Scnfible that the union of these
parties would fornm a eonft(deracy which might prove
formidable to the cronw, she exprefli- d great willing-
neil to receive the former into favour; towards the lat-
ter ihe declared her'-lf inexorable. Murray and his
fillowers were no lels willing to accept of parnlon on
her own tcrms The conlpirators againfi Rizio, de-
prived of every resource, and incapable of resistance,
fled precipitatrly to Newcastle, having thus chanied
fituatlons with Murray and his party, who left that
place a few days before.

No man so remarka!le for wisdom, and even for

cuniing, as tle earl of Morton, ever engaged in a
more unfortunate enterprile. Deserted balely bv the
king, who now denied his knowledge of the confpira,-y
by public proclamations, and abandoned ungenerolfly
by Murray and his party l, he -was obliged to fly from
his native country, to ireign the higheit office, and to
part with one of 'the mofl opulent fortunes, in the
kin gdum.

O)n her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to pro-

ceed againfl thole conerinred in the murder of Rizio
with the utmofi rigour of law. But, in praise of her
clemnclcy, it mullt ie obltervcl, that only two persons,
and these of no coniidcrable rank, fulfered for this
crime 1i.

In this coflrpilacy there is one circumfance which,
though Ibmewliat detached, deserves not to be tor-

" Melv. I o.
¶ Keith, Appendix 130, 334.

gotten. In the confederacy between the king and the
conspirators, the real intention of which was affaffina-
tion, the preserving of the reformed church is, never-
thelefs, one of the most considerable articles; and the
fame men who were preparing to violate one of the
first duties or morality, affccted the highest regard for
religion. History relates these extravagancies of the
human mind, without pretending to justify, or even
to account for them; and regulating her own opinions
by the eternal and immutable laws of justice and of
virtue, points out such inconsistencies, as features of
the age which fne describes, and records them for the
inflrudion of ages to come.

As this is the second inltance of deliberate affaflina-

tion which has occurred, and as we ihall hereafter meet
with many other instances of the fame crime, the
caufcs which gave rife to a practice so shocking to hu-
manity defcrve our particular attention. Resentment
is, for obvious and wite reasons, one of the firongeft
passions in the human mind. The natural demand of
this passion is, that the person who feels the injury
thould himself infliit the vengeance due on that ac-
count. The permitting this, however, would have
been deftrutive to society; and punishment would
have known no bounds, either in severity or in dura-
tion. For this reason, in the very infancy of the so-
cial state, the sword was taken out of private hand;,
and committed to the magistrate. But at first, -wile
laws aimed at reflraining, they really strengthened the
principle of revenge. The earliest and molt simple
punishment for crimes was retaliation; the offender
forfeited limb for limb, and life for life. The payment
of a compensation to the person injured succeedcd to
the rigour of the former institution. In both these,
the gratification of private revenge wsas the ohject of
law; and he who suffered the wrong was the only ptr.
fen who had a right to pursue, to exact, or to remit
the purnilhment. While laws allowed such full fcoie
to the revenge of one party, the interests of the othcr
were not neglected. If the evidence of lis guilt did

not amount to a full proof, or if he reckoned himself
to be unjustly accused, the person to whom a crime
was imputed had a right to challen:g: his adversary to
single combat, and, on obtaining the victory, vindi-
cated his own honour. In alinoll every considerable
cause, whether civil or criminal, arms were appealed
to, in defence, either of the innocence, or the property,
of the parties. Justice had feidom occasion to use her
balance; the l;word alone decided every contest. The
passion of revenge was nilurifhcd by all these means,
and grew, by daily indulgence, to be incredibly strong.
Mankind Lbecame haliitiated to blood, not only in
times of war, but of pPa-c; :::.: fircn this, as well as
other causes, contractd an ?r.lzin; terocity of temper
and of manners. ''his fcr(,cirv, hwevcver, made it le-
ceffary to diliol!ragr the trial by comlbat; to abolish
the payment of compenfrtiions in criminal cares; and
to think of foinc rlil cer mteichod oi terniniating dif-
putes concerning civi! rights. The pul;ifhiicn;s for
crimes )bcarmlt more l;ver., and the rcsgulation; con-
cerning property more fixed ; but the princes wslofe
province it sx as to iniliji the one. and ert'ore the other,
po(ffifcd little power. (Gr-at oflfndr(ls Ielpiltcl tl;eir
authority; final'er ones fhcltercd tihctinlelvs tnrder the
jurhiiil.iln of tholt fioni whole p:otcCtion they ex-
pected in;puniy. !'lie adinnitifrr.!tilol t juflice was
extremely IcLiic andl dilatory A: attempt to pinifi
the crilmes o a chieLiain, or cvnl of; his v.l'.ld, often
excited rrbelliois and civil wars. To nobles, haughty
;a!l i nidierpenltil alno!g wIiro the ceal,.'s o0 dillord
were imanyiv and unavoi.dabiulc, wlho ,re qti;ik in dit-
(cr:iinnr all i!iury, and inilpat:ilt to (rvi,-l! it; who
!eermed it infalmous to iu'limlt to an enemy,

c and cow-

ardl! to foi;-'ivc hlinr; whol conii.kdrcd the right of
pu;,ifhing tl:tl': w.au Iad :njr ll. tinm as a p rivilege
01 thicr order, and a miark of isndep enct.sy ; ft flow
)pr cedcings were extremely ,nfatisia1lory. The blood
of thlir adiverfary was, in their opitiO n, thle o:ly thlng
mhich could walh away an aT-onit; wuhctr tlha was
not fieJk, tileir revenge wa:s di!alppcnted, tlier coukrage

became fufpe&.ed, and a stain was left on their honour.
That vengeance, which the impotent hand of the ma-
giltrate could not infiic, their own could easily exe-
cute, Under governments so feeble, men assumed, as
in a slate of nature, the right of judging and redref-
sing their own wrongs; and thus affaffiination, a crime
of 2ll others the most deftrucive to society, came not
only to be allowed, hut to be deemed honourable.

The history of Europe, during the fourteenth and

fiftrenth renturies, abounds with deteilabie inilances
of this crime. It prevailed chiefly among the French
and Scots, between whom there was a cloie intercourse
at that time, and a surprising refcmblance in their na-
tional characters. In one thousand four hundred and
fcven,' the only brother of the king of France was
murdered publicly in the streets of Paris; and instead
of punishing this horrible acdion, an eminent lawyer
was allowed to plead in defence of it before the peers
of France, and avowedly to maintain the iawfulncifs
of afaflination. In I4I7, it required all the eloquence
and authoritv of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on the
council of Constance to condemn this propofitiun,
" That there are Tome cafes in which assassination is a
virt::e much more meritorious in a knight than in a
fquirc, and more meritorious in a king than in a
knight*." The number of eminent persons who
icrc murdered in France and Scotland, on account
either of private, or political, or religious quarrels,
during the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, is almolt
incredible Even after those causes, which firlt gave
rife to this barbarous pracice, were removed; after
the jurif'icition of magiltrates, and the authority of
las s, were better established, and become more umver-
fal; after the progress of learning and philosophy had
polished the manners, and humanized the minds of
men, this crime continued in some degree. It was
towards the close of the leventcenth century before it
diLppeared in France. The additional vigour which

'
L'Enfant, Hlt. Cont. dc Conft.

the royal authority acquired by the acceffinn of James
VI. to the throne of England, seems to have put a flop
to it in Scotland.

The influence, however, of any national cuflom,

both on the understanding and on the heart, and how
far it may go towards preventing or extinguishing mo-
ral principles of the greatest importance, is remark-
able. The authors of those ages have perfedlly im-
bibed the sentiments of their contemporaries, with
regard to assassination; and they, who had leisure to
refledl and tojudge, appear to be no more fhonked at this
crime, than the persons who committed it during the
heat and impetuosity of paffloi. Buchanan relates the
murder of cardinal Beatoun and of Rizio, without e.-
prelfing those feelings which are natural to a man,
or that indignation which became an historian t. Knov,
whose mind was fiercer and more unpolifhrd, talks of
the death of Beatoun and of the duke (f Guiie, not
only without censure, but with the utmois exultation f.
On the other hand, the bishop of Ros mentions the
assassination of the earl of Murray with some degree
of applause 11. Blackwood dwells upon it with the nioft
indecent triumph, and ascribes it diredtlv to the hand of
God §. Lord Ruthven, the principal actor in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, wrote an account of it tome short
time before his own death, and in all his long narra-
tive there is not one expression of regret, or one fymp-
tom of compunction, for a crime no less dillonourabie
than barbarous ¶. Morton, equa!y guilty of the fame
crime, entertained the fame sentiments concern;ng it;
and in his last moments, neither he himself, nor the
ministers who attended him, fcem to have confidered
it as an aaion which called for repentance; even then
he talks of D)uid',IJlaughter as coolly as if it had been
an innocent or commendable deed ". The vicrs of
another age ativnifh and shock us: the vices of our
tBuchan. 295, 345- Knox, j34. l| Anders. 3. 84.

§Jebb. a. a6 . ¶ Keith, Append. 1X9.

' Crawf. Mem. Append.
Vol. I. 3 b

c-.n hecome fam;'.ir and excrte little horror *.
3iWe rc;nr] frnlm th;a dig.:iTon to the courl'e of the
h'Rr:'.

* Ti' cbTarri, .. ; ir1 a:;l a!t fir-t ttanhed the nu'eer to
Drn.i'., 'and h '.. th:-i.i or !bn:c tnire in an l::pp
lm,.'., xvex; now e-.: v (il:lvr;c; and il.c no l'n:.r
C0x,-rin: ':is TI' :-1 n'"l vi(t- with its iri.rndly ;c:!.
tji-'\ ai-p.rarc' to 5?-rv in their fuil din n!iKn znd

c.:"rl:.iF-,-+. 'T,: )':? h i.':nrv jl:;)iiite(d a proclan.anica

di! i. nyi".ln :nv kn .iwlh.'Ie of the con!firac( againit
lR'io, thr r:;:-rn was iillv c(nvincel, that lie wa,

,

o:.v ar c:'zr-' tO- Lhe contrivancp, but to the comlnlif-
flcn of that dioIs t -mei. 'lhat very power, u hi
w\: libers-' -.d l i.-,: i:fpi.-.'is fcdnift, site hadl coltfrrid
imon him, i,. 1i2d c(n'l.!erd to inf.il, i,-r altholilt-,
to lnrr.' :;'" rtro: iatic and to cnti;:lrtnir her pcrrion.

S: ch an ::r;;ic it awas

ir(:,b!e anlv wnioan c(.lild

he:r or fc-:ivce. Corld cvix'ditii-, !tc(crt difil'it, frt-
q';erni tIar"l-i.s fuccetdcil to tueir t-orm-lr tr:ilponrts of
a.tici:'n and oii.(l'.clice. 'Ilhe ci:rt-i'isifaxus vere
no -nri er convyrevrc. tho ' hh his handl. 1The cro(ov' of
exptc-. ::s ceat';r' to ouirt !;is patllonl.gc, which tliv
solind ito val ib lini;. Anong the nolilcs lorre
drea,!-ii hi; t!rifous tciipcr, rthrrj corrpinai;ic of his
perfi'Louliir!-; and all cf tilm tdir lilcd the wcaktida

'Th'iL. tx :tordlnarv c-rvn lociio reat htin Englanl ,
',- rt:rtc'd witih in:a-.: chciniltances, ,hich at this

diliaii.c or ti;rn. aoptc.R- a:i: 'g'ht r tu;iundld. And it

= prii'f's . o:):.'r: . l -.:: tlic mor f !arn:ed prelates asl,
l',,'c <r .i:.?t a t - t- .1 t¢onfi,'crd :tlis horril'lc min d rr
as nmrsiio,;:. Anc :'; t.ol '.;d to hd e llin vas one
friar i:ick, x.'hole dc:.n is ncnti; ntd in terms of c:-
ui t;' n l)v ihe thi'hc !i.,p . ' or wio:rvi

' Fri.Tct':l.'h qrii:'n i nonminc B ,i, papifiarim an-

tefig' anU,: cocdcm tn'mp!.re in au!a oc idit;l:t: Sic ni:.cr
lit. incbr. o, i; ra ' .'tJinc niortc pr'i;l;plits, invitas
rni.r rm iui.izo td-!;cniht in (Orc;ni." Bi:. Hill.
o?

Xt pp

ndi* Ar , No- I.-. I
t 3ce Appendix, No. X\I.I tKeith, j-

of his undlerfianding andl the inconfiancv of his hleart.
The people tihenlcirivc ohl):.rvd ;:):nt p.)rts ot' lis con-
ducI u'lxich ii;ttik l.ir-d tilhe diiy ( a1 k'. . Ad-
dited: to criilktriln c s, be- nd what the n.ll:i;irs of
that aec could Iear, and clc(icl!: ct. irr(. ,l-r ph'li ,n;,
which eveln tlihe hlltlioliilh Is ol v.Hiu: ciliid no)t .xeciIb,
ihe, hv his idid-c-nl t h

'chlviou,' o ir;,'(ik i:l the i(ui.. to

the utinolt, a.2d thel p. :!ion i iiic! it o. ;ftei,i ii, <'itn
soried tC.els fromi her evs, 1)rih Li pi!. ic , l -iv

'c'.

Her avcrlion for him inircilt c,'i.v ti.:y, at c)i itll

tructcld with o powtr. A1.'.id ual !,c. t1incle
wilo cenl(lct oiire.d to plali tl.- (; tl., \ 'li ; i\,, )urc(l
Morton and his aIlTciatr.i, (or IX ; :: ,l.r

, to t.c !ioule

of itanilton, Ihe wa left ailmolt alo:;. ill a n,:.c cd
and lilupitied olb .it,(i t.

Abhut this timn a new favou:ite grew in-tn r; eat

credit withi thle ql.ni;, an I i-on galcl i an at..

c .irnt

over her heart, xhich encoic-'..-d his e 'lI-r .;- .c-
nicis to forrn

o ddtins that pWolcd ' ;.al to .i:' I.F. j(lu

tile oe f

afion otf all Mar;' s J;i -

n

. O'1.u ' '.

! t i:c.

This was Ja'Lils lic:il)urn, tar! of !,,cih,~c;l, thc .,-ad
of alln a ict:ir tanci: , alnd, Iy. his tx.!ir ; iJ.!..;.is
and niiiu i-luus vai'.i., one of t'dc ;'Ill . .

ce.'; li;

.'!, c-

men inl the ki,ig(]lci . Elvx n ill tirl; I i l ili' .; :! re
whelt b m inany valt pr)ojcdli .:c;c lai;d op, n tic a- o':-.
ing Slmindl , 3.l ii viti to a ticll, i ,w ,in's s al;t ;',i
was Tnmo-re darinz tiihain 3BI.v; il', or h:.l * rcI()'c i o
bo'der or cco-re lt.],'lar ex;',..]:: s in, I.',i::a
power. Whlen l il:iot) every piic.lml *;'-i.tii,; i

* Keirh, 3,29. t.\!.lv. s .;t. &a

)Jebb, ii. 486. I'he atthior of C'aw'rdl's a .' mni-r,

who probably had 'ecii Bollhiw-ll, PI ...s of h..:, as
1' one of the handroinelt ilenrc of Liiz til,te, and wtil
Imade." Mern. 5.-And l'hrokinortoni, wlhtn I:,O(ai-
fador at Fran ce, tiiis dtccrii)s hhin as brawv and cl tcr-
priling. '" The earl of Bothli-eli is depalrted to r turn
to Scotland. iHe is a glorions, ralh, and hliaardous

Bb 2,

the kingdom, whether papist or protefiant had joined
the congregation in opposing the dangerous encroach.
xnents of the French upon the liberties of the nation,
be, though an avowed proteflant, adhered to the queen
reg-nt, and actid with vigour on her fide. The fuc-
ceis which attended the arms of the congregation
having obliged him to retire into France, he was taken
into the queen's service, and continued with her till
the time of her return into Scotland *. From that
period, every flep of his cond:cSl towards Mary was
rena' kably dutiful; and amidst all the shiftings of
faction we scarce'! ever find him holding any course
w-nch could be cffenfive to her. VWhen Murray's pro-
ce.iingy with regard to her marriage gave umbrage
to the queen, fie recalled Bothwrll frc'm that banish-
mel.t into which ihe had with reluctance driven him,
and cenfidered his zeal and abilities as the nmot power-
ful fupp-,rts of her authority. Wrhen the conspirators
age.ili Rizio seized her person, he became the chief
inftlument of recovering her liberty, and served her on
thal ocrafion, with lo much fidclity and success, as
made the deepeit impression on her mind, and greatly
imnrt.ald the confidence which she had hlithtrto placed
in Lhm . Her grat:tude loaded him with marks ot her
boun.ty; fe railed him to offices of profit and of trust,
and tranfacled no matter of importance without his
advice. By con:plaifance and affiduily he confirmed
and fortified there di:pofitions of the queen in his fa-
vour, and infcnfibly paved the way towards that vail
protect which his imnnoderate ambition had perhaps
already conceived, and which, in spite of so many dif-
ficulties, and at the expcnce of many crimes, le at
last accomplif.ed.

The hour of the queen's delivery now approached.

yourg rnan, and thtretftrr it were meet his adversaries
iho:ld have an ec ic him. and keep him short.'
IHardwi-k's CSate Papers, i. p. 149.

Anlderl. i. 6o. tlIbid. 92, 93.

delv. x33. Knox, 396.

As her palace, was defcnded r cl n!v by a fcndtrua!;-d,
it seemed imprudent to exp:r',_i r p 'rlon, ai t!lt
time, to the in(tlts fle mi 'ht fl!ler in a kiln',.-in
tprn by facitio s and lprone to mltttinl. For ;1;3

I' r n,;

the pirvy council advit'rd the qt,:-', to fix her i

rh 1.e

in the castle of Edinburgh, the i-t':n',:tzl fi.,t:z-fs in t:le
kiligdom, and the molt propelr p,.. il' tl I 'i:nit'
of her perIon '. In order to rcndLer tilt i, i.iiv .n.Ire
perfe&A, M. ry laboured to extit^dul tie (ioir.ilic
feuds which divided tome of til; 'i:';,l i ,; , iso.
Murray and Arpyle xA'. cY !;i;-.t-td a:.i.li llt ,:.i:Iy
and Botlitrcll , by rtrc;irloc l an i rlpe:. ;d h';ir i.
The queen, by her authutity .ad r-trca:::.-: . cl.

_''cl a.

reconcilemrent amo:ng thill], ai.dl d -,ix t'tnll ti l:il a
pronmile to bury their dilLo'.ds in Cev(r .fiil:.' ' ;'.s;v .
This reconnilementt Marv iltai lo i! i aI .t ..'l, lhat
fihc made it the con.lition Otl which 'i.c again tccr' .
Murray into tfa,,oirt.

Oni tilr ninetceintl of June, Tr;(L, M..,rv wa de-

livered of hler oniy ion Jances, a pr.iicce hlolc birth
was happy for tihe whole I;l. nd, and unll'-tuiinatc to lher
alone. His accefilon ti tle tinole of EnLi.und ul itetl
thile two divided kingdomns in olce ni:plty iniotarchy,
anti clbbilifhed the p iwcr of Great ii:ai:il 0'1 a i:i
tountlationl; while Ihe, torn car!i tfr-oln 1i iinr b

l the

cruelty of her fate, was nI:ver allnnecd to inl'ul(c tl:(;re
tender paiftios, n)or to t talt thol jo'ys, wh.ih si; tile
heart ol a mother.

Mclvil was initanitly dcp:ttched to rLo inln with an

accounlt of this event. It ilrluk Eliza!cth, at fi:.t, ilt
a Icnfibl manner; andt the advantag e anl !I:lrio)itr,
whticlh her rival had acquirdI bh thl lit:;h of a l;in, for-
ced cears from hler cyve. Biat !clr

:e _ .1;11 a-, admit-

ted to autdieilce, siec had so lar recovere l the tinmandl
of llerlell, as to receive hil not o;t: with tl (.:C:tlI,
blut with excelive clhcrfuin:cfa, antd lili.lity ac. pe:rd
thie invitation which M.iary gave her to litaa.i cl:noeher
to iher lIon i.
'ivcih, 33, ; Ibid.d. 3 · JAppeCnd. I39. t,'.I.:. I S.

) l j

As Mary loved fplcn(o-ur and magnificence, she re-

fo!vrd to cciebra-e the baptifin of the young prince
xi'r gerat -,nmrt ; and for that purpose sent invitations
of the fame kin;! to the French king, and to the duke
o.: a;-c.-, the ut ci- of her sorner hlufand.

The q:ien. on !.er rc:ovrrv, difrcvered no change

in her frniime-ns -r::h r!v-c to to the king'. The death
of Rizio, a-d the countenance he had given to an
action so in-o:rnt and unjuflifiable, were fill fresh in
her m nmory. She v.,s ircqliently pensive and dciecl-
ed-' Tho :gh Henry foiCr.ti;n. t attended at court, and
accompanied her in her prgrrelfe through different
parts of the kingdom, he met wrth little reverence
from the noIcs, hile M\arv treated him with the
greatest refkrce, and did nlt fuffir him to posiess any
authoritvT. The beach bretween them became every
day more appai-ir.t Attmcipnts were made towards a
reconcilement, particularly by Caftlenau the French
ambanTffior; h::t after such a violent ruptu-e, it was
found no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new;
and lhnoi:h he prevailed on the king and qiueen to pass
two nights together , we may with great probability
proninance this appearance of union, to which CaAfle-
aan trustcd, not to have been finccre, we know witlh
certainty that it was not lasting.

Bothwell, all th;s while, was the queen's prime con-

sident. Without his participation no business was
concluded. and no favour bestowed. Together with
this afcender.t over her councils, Bothwell, if we may
believe the contemporary hiitoriins, acquired no lefa
fx-vv aver her heart. B3;t at what pr-cife time this
a-hitious lonl first al!owed the sentiments of a lover
to occupy the place of that duty aid re!'ped which a
filhjeS owes his fiv.reign. or- wl.4n Marv, inlteal1 of
gratitude for his faithful fervic-s, felt a paflion of an-
other nature rising in her bjiom, it is no eaf' matter to
determine. Such deihcate transitions of pafGon can be

See Apend. No. XVII. t elv. 148. t Keith, 350.
,cilv. ,:x. jKeith, Append. 169.. Ibid. 162.

discerned only by thole who are admitted near the per-
sons of the parties, anti who can view the lecret work-
ings of the heart with calm and accute ol)frvation.
Neitlhr Knox nor Buchar.an enjoyed thlfe advantages.
Their hunmble flation allowed them only a difant access
to the queen and her favourite. And the ardour of their
zeal and the violence of their prejudices rendered their
opinions rash, precipitate, and ilaccurate. It is by the
efic;Cts of this reciprocal palion, rather than by their
accounts of it, that fubfiquent h:if.uians can judge of its
reality.

Adventurous as Bothwcll's prnjctc to gain the queen

may appear, it was formed and carried on under very
favourable circumstances. Maryv wa. young, gay, and
affable. She poiUlreld great fenfblililt of temper, and
was capable of the utim,it tendernels of affection. She
had placed her love on a very nnIilortliy objict, who
requited it with ingratitude, and trcaled her with ne-
gleet, with inllence, anid with brnuality. All ther she
ielt and relented. In this lituationl, the attention and
complailance of a man whlo had vindicatv;l her authori-
ty and protected her perlon, who entered into all her
views, who loothed a;l her palifios, who watched and
iniprovel every opportunity oof in liiuating his dcfign
and reconrinmnding his pallion t, could liardly fail ds
making au imprellionl on a heart ofl uch a frame as Mia-
ry'v s.

The haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flattery,

and accufltolied to command, could not hear the con-
temlpt under which he had now fallel, and the late of
insignificance to which le aw hilnf:lf reduced. But in
a cou:try where he was un;verfally hated or despised,
he could never hope to form a party, which xwould le-
cond any attempt he might make to recover power. He
addIrecfld hiimfllf, theretore, to the pope, and to the kings
of France and Spain, with many protefions of his own
zeal for the catholic religion, and with hitter complaints
against the queen, for neglcnting to promote thit ir.-

t Anders. I. 93, 94.

terefti: and soon after, he took a resolution, equally
wild and desperate, of cmharkinz on board a ship which
he provided. and of flying into foreign parts. It is al-
molt impossible to form anv fatiefa'lorv conjeóture con-
cenring the motives which influence a capricious and
irregular mind. He hoped, perhaps, to recommend
hlilrelf to the catholic princes on the continent by his
zeal for religion, and that they would employ their in-
terest towards reinflating him in the poffeflion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps he exprcfed nothing
more than the comirtort of hiding the dilgracte uniler
which he was new fallen, a;nong strangers, who had
never been witntefts of hiqs ornier prol)perity.

lie communicated the defigi to the French ambafra-

dor Le Croc, and to his father the earl of Lennox.
They boil: endeavoured to diff!ade him from it, but
without fuccc.'fs. Lennox, who froms, as well as his foil,
to have llt the qucen's confidnclie, and who, about this
time, was fe!dom at court, inl!!antly conimlnicated the
matter to her by a letter. Henry, % ho had refluted to
as-comipanv the queen from Stirling to Ed:nb.urgh, vwas
likewise abl'cnt from court. Lie arrived there, however,
on the fame dav illh receivrd the account of his intend-
ed fliight. But lie was more than uluallv waywarLd and
peevish; and fcrtpliing to enter the palace nlicl- cc:t;ainl
lords who attended the quctn were dillil.-i, Mary
wxas oUb'ied to mtet himn witliit the gates. At lal hli
fi:ffcred her to conduct himi into her own apartment.
She endeavoured to draw frmn him the rcafiots of the
aL-aune relolutioll which hie had taklen, and to divert hilit
fromi it. In spite, bho everr, of all her arguments and in-
trraties he remained fiicnt and inflexible. Next day
rhe Frivy council, by her directiol, expofluatcd wihil
}im onl thI la-ne head. Hc perliftcd, hoevelr, in his
luitl';cies and o!hfinacy; and neither deigned to explain
ti.e mo:ir of

v s

f hi co:duct, n(r iificniiie any inteiltion

o; altcri:g it. As ihe let the apart-ctintt, li tui ted to-
v. ar >tlhc quecn, an,! told h lr that flhl nofuld not kIe his

t . t -c, s9.9

face again for a long time. A few days after, he wrote
to Mary, and menuoned two things as grounds of his
disgust. She herself, he said, no longer admitted him
into any confidence, and had deprived him of all power;
and the nobles, after her example, treated him with o-
pen negleat, so that he appeared in every place without
the dignity and splendour of a king.

Nothing could be more mortifying to Mary, than

this intended flight of the king's, which would have
spread the infamy of their domestic quarrel all over Eu-
rope. Compassion for a monarch who would then ap-
pear to be forced into exile by her neglect and ill usage,
might have dilpofed mankind to entertain sentiments
concerning the caufts of their discord little to her advan-
tage. In order, therefore, to prepofrefs the minlds of
her allies, and to screen her reputation from any censure
with which Darnlv might endeavour to load it, the pri-
vy council tranfinitted a narrative of this whole tranlac-
tion both to the king and to the queen mother of France.
It is drawn with great art, and lets Mary's conduIc in
the mofi favourable point of light*.

About this time the license of the borderers called for

redress; and Mary resolving to hold a court ofjultice at
Jedburgh, the inhabitants of several adjacent counties
were summoncd to attend their sovereign in arms, ac-
cording to cuflomt. Bothwell was at that time heute-
nfant or warden of all the marches, an office among the
most important in the kingdom; and though usually di-
vided into three diflinct governments, bellowted by the
queen's favour upon him alone. In order to dilplay
his own valour and ativity in the diisharge of this
trust, he attempted to liize a gang of banditti, who
lurking among the marcles of i.lddlcfdalc, infeited the
reft of the country. But while he was laying hold up-
on one of those desperadoes; he was woundtd by hiln
in several places, so that his followers were obliged to
carry him to IHermitage caltle. Mary infantly flew
thither, with an impatience which strongly marks the

Keith, 345, 347. t Kcith, 353. 6ood, vol. i. 3ci.

anxiety 6f a li-er, but little suited the dignirvty ofa qurenl.
Finding that Bothw;ell was threatened rwith io dan;',r-
ous fymmpirn, fih retjrner! tih- fame d.v to J,!bu:igh.
The fatigue of !fuli a journey, addetd to the ai.li.h of
mind .he bad f;!fTred on Bo:hwell's account, thrlc, . her
next mning ir.nto a violent feverl- Her lift uais d!e-
fpai-ced or, bu: her you:h, a:id the vigour of her einllti-
tution, refftLed thte aligi t of her di!;afc D;! ing the
contin;::rnce of the q;ueen', iinnls, the king, w ho rilid-
ed at Srirling, never came Ien ir Jedburgh ; and whlic lie
sftertv2.rds tholuht fir to iaikce his appearance t thre. lie
met with such a cei'l rep:;i( n as did not ecolnt atCe iil'n
to make any long f:a:.'. Ml.rv iton recoverrid ft-rniItl
enoith to return aonr. the taliicn honrders to Dlunblir.

!While f.e reftied in thi.s p:ace, her a t .t:on was

turned towards England. Elizaetih, notwitl!tndiig
her promile, and even proclamations to tle conltrary,
not only al'o-ed hut encouraged, MIorton aind his afio-
ciates to remain in Eniland-. Ma-! , on the oiter
hand, offered her prote.tion to fcvriai lEnglifh i'tgitivcs.

acli queen u 2t.-lid lice motions of the other with a

1 The difftance between Jedliurg-h and llermitaec is

eighteen Scottish miles, through a country altolil inm-
paiTable. The se-ason of the year wais far advanced.
Bothwvell seems to have been 'wouinded in a !fuire, oc-
cafioned by the d-fpair of a single man, rather than any
npen in:u-ecction of the bordere:'. It do-s not a-encar,
that ihe cu.-rn was atrenicd thitricr by any coiiii.,lra-
ble train. Had any miitiarv o:;eratioi) een nce-ilr'y,
as is fuppofc(l, Good, vo!. i. .;e4, it would have i),cn
extr-e.-, I5 improper to -ifljic the Inceil's perli-n in an
expenirion aga!ift thicvcs. As soon as the quern found
Bothwei! to he :ii no danger, she inftant!y t elurncd, and
after this we hear no more ofthe infurrcdlion, o(ir have
we any proof that the rioters took refuge in England.
No other reason hut ;hIat l hlich wc have produced Ictcls
fuifiirnt to account for the queen's conduct.

IU Keith, ;S5, 52z. . Ibid. Append. i;13.
¶ Kslox, ;po. * Cald. vol. ii. p. ij.

jealous attentinn, and f. rctly countenancedl the prafin
ces whi:h were carrying on to dillurb the admliinillration
of her rival.

] n this ip)rpofc Mary's a;nli.tafadr, Robert Mclvil,

and! her oi!r cmif-ilrii-s, \were extremely a-live antd uc-
c-lbrli. \\ e may imln)te, ii a o;o(d dcree, to thetir in-
trigiues, that spirit which app ared in ll t parliament of
England, and which rail(! a ilorin that tlii.atliencd Eli-
zahe)th's (!ionii:lic tran(cuiliit nmore tilan any otlher event
of hlr rcii, and reqill'id ail i lr a:t alid Id! .trcily to.
allav it.

17,:,al'.ttl: had now rcigned cigllt vyears wkitlout dli';o-
evriing the leali intcntinit to in;arv. A vi Irnt ditemin-
per, willh m li( 1L file lad lately I l i;.izc i, l)hl ig en-
daiti i-cld >her life , aid ;arrn:(i tilhe n.'.ilo xitli tile pro..-
Ipitt ot all thlfc ca!lnitiits wl.iiil ait- (cl:uliuncd ly a
diiputcd aid (iouiii)us lit't f.onl ; a nlt.tion \ as made,
andtl .'e:I cll' liiittt t r) i) '.! i .''lt ,

l for a ilrclflTng

thie (lIk;nl I plovilc a:;;. ll ;i.n l>iet ditn - r in

t i inils

to coni-, cithllr I' li,~),l,, l:'. ,, ;I r,.lohil'tn to mar-
ry, or by ( 'o'iiil-) lto an act, t;bl:(h!i'l tilhe ord(r of
ci /Ltiron to th t -i'in.t 11t(1 i.> v lizt h l'Ibjicts, itr
dIltx tl)e ]i hlic, l'her coi.ccrn lrr pl .tt ritv, it was as-
xI ltid, 'lit oniy calleid Un, b:,t o!,ii],cd 1 ier tak!e one
of thele tit ps. '1'The Illipra'i! avcrtifii which fnie had
'il .ai<o'' Oiil'ov;'crid lt'r flarrir. e, iTe it im hprolaible
that Ihu xc olld i hull tite Iforiir; anld if fie coipiicd
'lil tihe laltter rcilU lt. no titl to th!.(r lo it coild, with
a;iy colour of jnl!:i, , 1 i ltrt ill -Fp litioni to iiat ot thl!
Stotlifnl qiu cl. ;hl/a! .:} i

uai s

l ilgtcioL, c t,'lilt o lee

tlih reIt;:. ft1 rs li.ii. orthii t i .ilio ,

i ti ai obt:ircl'.vtl

themil with the

to r'-ate ai :;ir-t. Mar:l, )Lv rtfulting tiu

oftll to rtil;v t. (

; ' ratv of L' i 'ihurglb li.i plainly mti-

Ilated -C d' lin ot cii.rat i:; liit f';.it p!o:iii nig ji oppor-
tunity lor- prL ,!i utiU hei rii.t . to tc l-!nrgfn croAn;
:;ld liv her l:rte i it^t-gliltioi,, Ps.c had il.iiid man'v to
tl:.lir- her tile '. All the -(na:i ca:l hiii.s ard;i-ily
wiliLed ftr iher fucc.i- ioi. irr dc'lt l; ' and hlI aniial-

t D'E,;cs Jcuin. of Pail. ic5. ' .1-v. r ;';-

ty had removed many of those apprehensions which the
protestants entertained on account of her religion. The
court faction, which envied the power of Cecil, and en-
deavoured to wrest the administration out of his hands,
advanced the pretensions of the Scottish queen in oppo-
fition to him. The union of the two kingdoms was a
defi-able obje& to all wife men in both nations; and
the birth of the young prince was a security for the con-
tinuance of this blessing, and gave hopes of its perpetu-
ity.

Under there circumltances, and while the nation was

in such a temper, a parliamentary declaration of Mary's
title would have been highly detrimental to-Elizabeth.
The present unsettled slate of the succession left much
in her power. Her resentment alone might have gone
far towards excluding any of the competitors from the
crown; and the dread of this had hitherto restrained
and overawed the ambition of the Scottish queen. But
if this check fnould be removed hv the legal acknow-
ledgment of her tite, Mary would be more at liberty
to pursue her dangerous designs, and to ad without fear
or reserve. Her partisans were already meditating
schemes for infurredlions in different parts of the king-
dom*; and an adt of parliament, recognising the rights
of that princess, whose pretensions they favoured, would
have been nothing less than a signal to arms; and not-
withstanding Elizabeth's just title to the affections of
her fubjedts, might have shaken and endangered her
throne.

While thls matter remained in fufpence in both hou-

fes, an account of it was transmitted to Mary by Mclvil
her ambassador. As she did nots want advocates for her
right, even among those who were near Elizabeth's
person, ihe endeavoured to cultivate the disposition which
appeared towards fettling the right of fuccefiion in her
favour, by a letter to the privy counsellors of England.
She expressrd in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's friend-
ship, which {he ascribes chiefly to their good offices with

*Melv. x47.

their Sovereign in her behalf. She declared her refolu-
tion to live in perpetual amity v ith England, ithout
urging or purfiling her clainm upon the crown, anm far-
ther than should be agreeab'e to the queen. But, ar the
fame time, as her ritilt of fuccefioon was iunolobted,
.he hoped it wtuld be examined with candour, and
judged of with impartiality. The nol-!rs who attend-
ed her wrote to the Englifn privy council in thr lame
fB-aint. -Mlary artfully gave theri letters tle air of be-
ing nothing moie than a declaration of her ou n and of
her luhjiAb s gratitude towai ds EIlizabetl) lut as fle
could not be ignorant of the jealonly and fear with
which Eliza-eth oblerved the proceedings of parlia-
ment, a Itep so uncommon as this, of one prince's en-
tering into pul!ic correimpondence with the privy colon-
lellors of another, could not be otherwile corfll-rued than
as taken with an intention to encoulrage the fiirit which
had already been raili-d among the i iel fh. In this
light it teems to have appear',d to Elizabeti hcrfelf'.
But the dilpolition of her penple rendering it necefniry to
treat Mary's perlbn with great decency, ad hler title
witht much regard, he mentioned it to her only in the
foftell language.

Nothing, however, could be a more cruel mertifica-

tion to a prineefs of Elizabeth's character, thani the tem-
per u hich both houles o; pariianment dilcuvered on this
occasion. She bent ail her policy to deleat or elude the
motion. Atter allowing the firit Ieat of their zial to
evaporate, she callel into her prci( nre a certain number
of each houl'e. She loorhtdi and careit-cd thern; fie
threatened and promiled; the remitted filiidlics swhich
were due, and retuled tholet which were oflfred; and in
the end prevailed to have this formidable motioen put oIf
for that leffion. Happily for her, the condutct of the
Scottish queen, and the misfortunes which heell hcr,
prevented the revival of luci a motion in any fututre
parliament ii.

t Keith, j54. Append. ,6. 'Keith, 357. 11 D'Ewes
Jiirn. 104-130. Carnd. '99. Melv. .s) lia. i-es, - 46(
Vol. 1. C c

Mean time, in order to preserve the reputation of im-

partiality, and that ihe might not drive Mary into any
defpeate measure, ihe committed to the Tower one
Thornton, who had published something derogatory
to the right of the Scottifl line; and signified her dif-
pleasure against a member of the house of commons,
who seemed, by some words in a speech, to glance at
Mary§.

Amidst all her other cares, Mary was ever folicitons to

promote the interest of that religion which the professed.
The re-eftabliihment of the Romifi dotrine seems to
have been her favourite paion; and though the design
was concealed with care and conducded with caution,
{he pursued it with a persevering zeal. At this time she
ventured to lay aide somewhat of her usual reserve; and
the aid which fTe expec&ed from the popish princes who
had engaged in the league of Bayonne, encouraged her
to take a ftep, which, if we confider the temper of the
nation, appears to be extremely bold. Having former-
ly held a secret correspondence with the court of Rome,
the now resolved to allow a nuncio from the pope pu-
blicly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at that
time hbihop of Mondovi, was the person on whom Pius
V. conferred this ofiee, and along with him he sent the
queen a present of twenty thousand crownsll. It is not
the character of the papal court to open its treasury up-
on distant or imaginary hopes. The bufinels of the
nuncio in Scotland could be no other than to attempt a
reconciliation ofthz kingdom to the Romish lre. Thus
Mary hertelf understood it; and in her answer to a let-
ter which she received from the pope, after expressing
her grateful sense of his paternal care and liberality, she
promises that she would bend her whole strength towards
the re-eftab'ilhment and propagation of the catholic
faith, that she would receive the nuncio with every pot-
fible demonftrarion of refpe6l, and concur, with the ut-
most vigour, in all his defigls towards promoting the
t-Cand. 4o. § Haynes, 4649 !j Vita Card. Laur. ap.

Burn. vol. iii. p. 325.

honour of God, and refloring peace to the kingdom;
that she would celebrate the baptism of the prince ac-
cording to the ceremonies which the Rormifh ritual pre-
scribes, hoping that her fubjets would be taught, by
this example, again to reverence the sacraments of the
church, which they bad so long treated with contempt;
and that she would be careful to inflil early into her son
the principles of a sincere love and attachment to the ca-
tholic faith*. But though the nuncio was already ar-
rived at Paris, and had sent over one of his attendants
with part of the money, the queen did not think the
juncture proper for his reception. Elizabeth was pre-
paring to fend a magnificent embassy into Scotland, a-
gainit the time of the prince's baptism; and as it would
have been improper to offend her, she wifely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurca at Parist.
The convu:fions into which the kingdom was thrown
soon after, made it impossible for him to pursue his jour-
ney any farther.

At the very time that Mary was secretly carrying on

theft negotiations for subverting the refonned church,
file did not scruple publicly to employ her authority to-
wards obtaining for its ministers a more certain and con-
fort.ble ful;liilencet. During this year, The i.Tued feve-
ral proclamations and ads of council for that purpose,
and readily approved of every lchcme which was pro-
posed for the more effectual payment of their flipends.
This part of her conduct does little honour to Mary's
integrity: and though juflified by the example of prin-
ces, who often reckon falsehood and deceit among the
neceflary arts of government, and even authorited by
the pernicious casuistry of the Roman church, which
transfers breach of faith to heretics from the lift of crimes
to that of duties; such dissimulation must however be
numbered among those blemishes which ever tain a
truly great and generous chara&ter.

As neither the French nor Piedmontcfe ambassadors

Cornei Vita Mariae, ap. Jebb, vol ii. p s . t Keith,
Append. 135. i Keith, 56i, 562. Knox, 401.

Cc z

were yet arrived, the baptism of the prince was put off
friom ti.ne to time. Mean while Mary fixed her refi-
de.ce at CraigmilLart. Such a retirement, perhaps,
fu;-:d the pr.C;ent temper of her mind: and induced her
to prefer i; before her own palace of lolvrood-houfe.
Her aversion for the king grew every day more confirm-
ed, and was become altogether incurable. A deep me-
lancholy filcceeded to that gaiety of spirit which wasa na-
tural to her. The raflnefs and levity of her own choice,
and the king's ingratitude and obstinacy, filled her with
fhrme and with delpair A variety of paifions preyed
at once on a mil!d, all whose lfnfations were exquisite,
and all its en cticr.s strong. alnd often extorted from her
the last wish of the unfortunate, that life itself might
conme to an end i.

The carl of Bedford, and the count de Brienne, the

English and Frinch arrbaff-lors, being arrived, Mary
used every effort to Imother i hat pasi-d in her bolbm,
and set out f. r'Stirling to celebrate the haptifm of her
son. Bedford was attended by a numerous and fplen-
did train, and brought prelents from Elizabeth iuitable
to her own dignity, and the refpert with a hich she as-
fetcd, at tlhat time, to treat the queen of Scots. Great
preparations had been made by Mary, and the magni-
ficence displayed by her on this occasion exceeded what-
ever had been formerly known in Scotland. The ce-
remony itself was performed according to the rites of
the Romish church. But neither Bedford nor any of the
Scottlif nobles who profcffcd the protcitant religion en-
tered witLin the gates of the chapel t. The spirit of that
age, firm and uncomplying, would not, upon any in-
ducement, condcfcend to witness an action which it
deemed idolatrous.

Hcnry's behaviour, at this junAure, perfettly disco-

vers the excess of his caprice, as well as of his folly. lie
chose to refidc at Stirling, but confined himteif to his
own apartment; and as the queen difhrultcd every no-
bleman who ventured to converse with him, he m as left

K eith, .5; t lcith, Pref vii.
v Keith, 360.

in ahlblute solitude. Nothing could be more singular,
or was less expected, than his clufing to appear in a
manner that both published the contempt under which
he had fallen, and, by exposing the queen's domestic
unhappiness to the observation of lo many foreigners,
looked like a ftep taken on purpol: to mortify and to
offend her. Mary felt this insult sensibly; and notwith-
standing all her efforts to assume the gaiety which suited
the occalion, and which was necessary for the polite re-
ception of her guests, file was lomtirnes obliged to re-
tire, in order to be at liberty to indulge her sorrow, and
give vent to her tears'. The king fill persisted in his
design of retiring into for-cign parts, and daily threaten-
ed to put it into executiont.

Keith, Pref. vii.

t Camden affirms, 401or, that Bedford was command-

ed by Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of king.
As this was an indignity not to be borne either by Ma-
ry or her husband, it hath been aetrted to be the caule
of the king's absence fronm the ceremony of his Ibn's
baptifli. Keith, 06o. Good. 3 j9. But, i. No such
thing is to be found among Bedford's inltruCeions, the
original ot which till remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bed-
ford's advice to the queen by Melvil is urterly incon-
filtcnt with Camden's assertion. iMllv. 153. Melvil's
account is confirmed by Elizabeth's inflructiolls to fir
Henry Norris, where the affirms that Ihe commnanded
Bedford to employ his heft offices towards reconciling
Mar), to her l ulband, which Ihe had attempted to no
purpose. Digges ( Coinpl. Ambafl p. 13. A paper pu-
biifled, Append. No. XVIII. agrees in the fame thing.
3. Le Croc the ' rench refidcnt mentions the king's ab-
I'nce, but without giving that reason for it, which has
been founded (il Camden's lwne:-s, though, it that had
been the real one, he Icarce ould have failed to men-
tion it. I-ls aconunt of this matter is that which we
have followed. Keith, Plcf. vii. 4. He informs his
court, that on am count of the difference betwixt the
king and queen, he had refuled to hold any further cor-

Cc3

The ceremony of wirneffing the prince's baptism was

nor the sole business of Bedford's embassy His inflruc-
tions contained an overture, which ought to have gone
far towards extinguiihing those jealousies which had so
long subsisted between the two queens. The treaty of
Edinburgh, which has been so often mentioned, was the
principal occasion of thele. The spirit, however, which
had risen to such an height in the late parliament, the
power of the party which abetted the Scottish queen's
title, the number and activity of her agents in different
pans of the kingdom, alarmed Elizabeth, and induced
her to forego any advantage which the ambiguous and
artful expressions in that treaty might afford her. All
she now demanded of Mary, was to renounce any title
to the crown of England during her life and the lives
of her pofleritr; and, on the other hand, she engaged
to take no siep which might prove injurious to Mary's
claim upon the fucceffiont.

Mary could not, with decency, reject a proposition

so equitable; she infited, however, that Elizabeth
should order the right upon which she claimed to be le-
gally examined and publicly recogniled, and particular-
lv that the testament ot einry VIII. whereby he had
excluded the drfcendents of his eldest filter the queen
or Scotland from the place due to them in the oroer ot
succession, might be produced, and confidtred bv the
Englfh nobility. Mary's mir.iters had crduloufly
embraced an opinion, that this telfamellt, which they

refponndncs with the former, though he appears, in
many initances, to have been his great confident. Ibid.
5. As the kiil,7r was not present at the baptifin, he seems
to hare been excl.idd Irom any share in the ordinary
adini't..rauotl i bauinels. Two aAs of privy council,
one on the 2ic.t, ad the other on the zift of Decem-
ber, are ,ound in Keith, .2'i. 'hey both run in the
quccn'b nimrn aiole. The king ft-cms not to have been
prlcnlt. Ti is cou.d nut be c;wing to Elizabetli' ii.
ftrit.&ons to Bcedo;rd.

i *;.L, ,5t.

so justly conceived to be injurious to their mistress, was
a mere forgery; and on different occasions had urged
Eliabeth to produce it. Mary would have lilffered
conliderably by gaining this point The original te-
fiameut is ttili extant, and not the least doubt can be
entertained of'its genuilenefs and autheuticity. But it
was not Elizabeth's intention to weaken or tof;- aside the
title of the holile of Stewart. She aimned at notthing
more than to keep the question concerning the filcrel:-
sion perplexed and undecided, and byv iidufirioifly e-
luding this request, Ihe did real lervice to Mary's
caue '.

A few days after the baptism of the prince, Morton

and all the other coni'iiators ag:tin ft Rlizio obtailne
their pardon, and leave to return into Scotland. Mary,
who hal hitlherto continued inexorable to ev;ry en-
treaty in thllir behalf, yielded at lalt to the filil itations
of Bothwellt. lie could hope ufo no fluccels inl t.llt
bold deligns on swhich his amnuition reelblved ti venturc,
without drawing aid troml every quarter. By )proctr-
ing a favour lor Morton and his afIls;ates, of which
they had gootl rcafon to drlfpair, he expccted to I'cure
a bapd of taithful and determiried adhiirc-ls.

The king till remained at Stirling iin ibliule and un-

der contempt. lIis impatience in this litiatiion, to-
gether with the alarm given hiln by the runiur of a dc-
sign to ltiize his person, and conline him to prillnlJ,
was the occafi.n of his leavilln Stirling ill all aiript
manner, and retiring to his father at (Ul.tliioi .

T'wo afemiliiies of the church were rhe l during tlis

year. New complaints werce madc,, anil Upo)It good
grounds, of the poverty and ccl:teiipt unider whiici th.e
proteltant clergy were ifl'lercl to I.iiignllut. PrnLrious
as tle ailotmlent for thlcir lih!ilht: -nc w tas, they h.idl ot
received the le:,!t ,art t' w hat was ldueL tr tile pr-cCl.dhlin
year . INot.l; iig l thail a zeal, ready to enduric atid

*Rymcr, xv. p. tlo. Keith, ,3I, 3,~-. Note' 1).

Mlurdin, i6S. t Good. vul. i, A4. Mel . 1s4. tlh,
PId,. v,,L;, : L':d. -6-,

to susser every thing for a goed cause, could have per-
fuadcd men to adhere to a church so indigent and so ne-
glc&ed. 1 he extraordinarn expences occasioned by the
prince's haptifin had exhaufied the queen's trealury,
and the fums appropriated for the fubfiflence of the
clergy were diverted into other channels. The queen
was therefore obliged to prevent the jufi remonftranes
of the afecmbly, by falling on some new method for the
relief of the church. Some fymptcms of liberality,
some firetch towards munificence, might have been ex-
pe&ed m an afficnment which was made with an in-
tention of foothilng and fi'encing the clergy. But both
the queen and the nobles held faRt the riches of the
church which they had seizcd A fum which, at the
highefl computation, can scarce be reckoned equal to
nine thousand pounds sterling ', was deemed fifficient
for the maintenance of a whole national church, by men
who had lately ften single monalitcris poffTffcd of reve-
nues far superior in value.

The ecclefiaflics in that age bore the grievances which

ai.dsed themiflvcs alone viith aflonfliing patience;
but herever the reformed religion was threatened,
they were extremely apt to be alarmed, and to proclaim,
in the loudest manner, their apprehensions of danger.
A just occasion of this kind was given them a short
time before the meeting of the affimbly. The ulurped
and opprelfive jurifd;iion of the spiritual courts had
been aholiflid by the parliament in the year one thou-
sand five hundred az;d sixty, and commiffaries were ap-
pointed to hear and de:ermine the causes which former-
ly came under their cognizance t. Among the few
acts of that parliament to which Mary had paid any re-
gard, this was one. She had confirmed the authority
cf the commiffaries, and had given them inflruftions
for diresting their proceedings |, which are flill of great
authority in that court. From that time these judges
haad continued in the uninterrupted exercise of their
lundion, when of a fudeicn the queen iflued a procla-
-:atioa, reitoring the arclhbihop of St. Andrews to his

Kidth. . 6 bid.. .
. Ibid. 1.

ancient iurifdicLion, and depriving the commifaries of
all authorityr

A notive.

. l,;hith cannot be jffifid,1. rerncered the

que n not wi!!i:; to \'c n!!e upon tlhs irah a';i.n. She
had be,'n :l ,.trivn,;- for !m.r timli.- hol to *-c elaliinfh
the .'.J,-h rbi ,;''n 21 1 tIh rctloliinl the da c:lnt ecclc-
iaIbl, stu t'ir f

t !, '

t ;1 '': ,"i tiiUlt lc-Ined to b)-* a 1onsli-

dcr-al.;lc . I t-w :.,''i' i r 'nr cll'l. ''he rit ive which
promtotedil o

iIi. ililicr ov-,r tlhi qieen

this attlion I ih 'nl! ii]', tl d. % was flill -ironr cri-
nmirial. tliseit-rd)!; ar.:

a ,i'.1o11 lad :slrc:a.lvfurnrdtl:it

hold de'i;n, which !:-i i oi aiter pit in execntion; and
the ufc which \it iall hI rcariir fin.l hin uniiki.Ti of
that aurlc(.,-ity iih;-:h r)ht ponl:;ni i s r-a lt iincd,
dilf overs tl,i isal i;t ofl i: . r.'I.nt r ri (dI't , in contri-
buting to revive tl.-ir p., )'. 'iTe }'r,tcfiant clergy
were not tnll.onic.'-rlr'l ii;cta tors o) a1 eve:nt whi:h
tllr'eatcelt the;r religimn \ilti. uniavoiLahle dcft'rucio;n; ;
hut as t:ecy '.dpaued(! of obainiiiiiz' , pi,tr remedy
firom the ql;cen e-lrlqi, thly .,:!i" fi;d a ! it)f!liratice
to the '-hole )ho(i ct ithe ,pro,-....t rnohili;y, full of
that jrdleit zeal for rhlmrion whiich tnt d,.L;ir to x hich
it was expoled at that rime frcin, to rrtul!l t. W! at
cflci'io this vcherlient cxhortatio(l l:i!it ill..;: p,-odccd,
we havec no o)lporIlnitly of jud ingi, t!,ir ;: ni<lol of the
nation being quickly turned toA'ardb c'tcnis of another
antl mnort lragial 11.ill'e

Iltln:cdi;etd!v uioin tilr kingr's leavina St'irlin, ;tnil be-

fore he rach w he was t:, wilth ;. ;ian-
gerouis dl!!fi::pcr. Ihe fyrnptois sicil .irtiC.'i it
werec v.olcnt anil unilliiii:, and in tl.at g.r it 's.is co<n-
moniv tiull tcd to the ei l.e ts i it ;,ion l . it i..pof-
fiblr, ainiiil til c ctnltrai.ctions ot hiitri.'lis, to dc-tide
with rcrtaiitl.tv coiL TrlItg its nlatu e or ilscaulice. Ilia
§ Knox,40o. 'Ibid. t Keith, 567. ' AJlv. 154.

Knox, 401.

¶ Buchanan and K'ic'x al-r politive that thle king had

been poifilied. 'l'iic,, -; ili'n thte black and ptitr:i pll-
tules which broke o;.t ail over h1s b:di. ilucitailian adtds,
tihat Abcri;c.h7 Ili. physician plainly declared tlhat poilba

life was in the utmost danger; but after languithing for
some weeks, the vigour of his confitution surmounted
the maliinitv of the disease.

Mary s neglect of the king on this occasion was equal

to that with which he had treated her during her ilblefs
at Jedburgh. She no longer felt that -armth of conju-
gal affecion which prompts to f1 mpathy, and delights
in all thole tender offices which fothe and alleviate sick-
ness and pain. At this junc'ure, she did not even put
on the appearance of this passion Notwitbfhanding
the king's danger, ihe amuled herfc! w'ith excursions
to different parts of the country, and f'.-crtd near a
month to elapse before ihe visited hin, : Glalgow.
By that time the violence of the d'iermper was over,
and the king, though weak and langulifing, was out of
all danger.

The breach between Mary and her h.tb. nd was not

occasioned by any of those flight difguils which in:er-
rupt the domestic union, without altogether dissolving
it, Alnoft all the passions which operate with greatct

was the cause oi these symptoms, and that the queen re-
fused to allow her own phtfician to attend him. Bach.
349- Krcx, 401 2. B!ackwood, Caufin, &c. Jebb,
vol. ii. 59. 2 i4. afcrt, that the finall pox wasthe disease
with which the king was ieizcd. He is called a Paijb

an in the queen's letter. Good. vol. ii. 14. The rea-
son given by Fr,-nh Pai, for lodging the king at the
Kirk of Field, viz. Itfl the young prince should catch the
infection if he flaid in her palace, seems to favour this
opinion. Anders. vol. ii. 193- Carte mentions it as a
proof of Mary's tendernifs to her husband, that though
the never had the fimall-pox herself, the ventured to at-
tend him, vol. iii. 446. This, if it had been true,
would have afforded a good pretence for not visi;ng
him sooner; but Marv had the small pox in her in"'an-
cy. 3. Bishop Lefy affirms, that the king's difcafe
was the French pox. Keith, 364. Note (./ Ir. that
age, this difSafe was efPeemed so contagious, that per-
sons intlacd with it were removed without the walls of
cits.

violence on a female mind, and drire it to the moit
dangerous extremes, concurred in raising and foment-
ing this unhappy quarrel. Ingratitude for the favours
she had bellowed, contempt of her person, violations
of the marriage-vow, encroachments on her power,
conspiracies against her favourites, jealoulfy, insolence,
and obstinacy, were the injuries of which Mary had
great reason to complain. She felt them with the ut-
most fenfibilitv: and added to the anguilh of difap-
pointed love, they produced those symptoms of delpair
whniah we have already defci ibed Her retenrment a-
gainfi the king seems not to have abated fronl the rime
of his leaving Stillng. In a letter written with her
own hand to her aniljaffadcr in Fiance, jutf before Ihe
set out for Glasgow. no tokens cf lildden reconcile-
ment appear. On the contrary, Ihe mejtions, with
some bitterness, the king's ingrati;tu:!e, the jealousy
with which he observcd her acotiols, an! tle inclina-
tion he discovered to dilturl) her govcrnmnenr, and at
the fane time talks of all his attempts wlLh the utnioft
scorn *

After this dirrovery of Mary's fcntitnnts, it was

scarce to he exprcled( that file wou!d viit the kine. or
that any thing but marks ofjealoul) and( d!fi:lift: Iotild
appear in such an intervie w. f'his, how\\v;r, was far
from being the cafe; the not only vifiied Darnly, Ibut,
by all her words and aftions, encrlavourd to cxpr'.ls
an uncommon alreciiol tor hiiin: and thon.h this ;imade
imprefflon on the credulous fjiii of ther hlufThmnt, no
lets flexible on some occafilns, than obflinat:c ,mn othiers
yrt, to thole who are acquainted with the hiritan
heart, and who know how seldom and how i owly, iich
wounds in domettic happineft are hcaled, th's f-dden
trnr.fition will appear with a very lul:icious air, and
wiil be confidercd by them as the cfcti of artifice.

13'-t it is not on hl;aice;on alone that Mary is charced

with ;:ffimulation in this part (of her condlult 'IJwo
of !:rr fIamous leters to Bothwel! were written during
her Itay at Glalgows, and fully lay open this scene of

' Keith, Pref. viii.

iniquity. HIe ad so far succeeded in his ambitious
and crimi:il d-fgn, as to gain an absolute ascendent
over tee quern: ani( in a fiua;ion such as Mary's, me-
rit nt si' cr :i'c, cus*, services of far inferior import-
ance, anid .."r.!;- much le's insinuating than Both-
wrl'E, r 3V

- ; -pc.id to fleal imperceptibly on a

female 1: -rr, -r' entirely to overconie it. Among
tho:e in :he hi:r!er ranks of life, Icrl.p!Bs with regard
to cfj.;:tai fidlciitv are ur!app:lv :zcither mranv nor
frrorg: ror did tihe m.aninrs of. ihat cio:rt in which
riarv ha.d l.cn ec;ica:ed co.:tl-t:iute to Increale or to
furtlyv t'hSri. Tile an.or',,ns tii-n of Francis I. and
Henn- II. tie - wilr.:es of the n:i! tary chiar,-er in that
aFe, an;: the lib.eri' (.1 al)pcarivn 'n all cnmpanies,

!l cil i--;. an ;, b we eJwt i o wc\';.i:., v. :o had not

vet acquircd. that ', ic-i x of ctlten nntn, and thlife po-
ii£ned na-'r.rLi, iic!: ai' li -an ret!cr tl. is liberty in-
noc-r'. hadj hitrl'd'.' ,:-, irn:o: the !'rtnth. a licen-
ticui:i ioi mrorals t .at rli it; ai aftnitlL'iii, height.
S.iI t.ixaipks, \h.! w..-o '-n'ii:',r to .'.iarv from
Ehr in'amc', cc:lld l.a ^.v all of d::i ifili:g tj,at hor-
ror o: \vicc u\lich 's !a:j:-' , a v,:;uot.:s miind ' lhe
ki;l,'s bchav;,ur v.uoadi ;- .dcr the firlt a'-pioach of
fir'i 'i'en fcrtiimtnts lei i'''r-Cng: rce:ntment, and
li'a?-,lrcd lover, xi' .u;' 1' -j i;( repr!cent wvhatcxrr
soo<: '. 1 c rex c!ie asi .:i:iabc on tlhi; account; and
so in-.- t

. ni... :-: 3. u

r.:;t. i t, almit.l irrmprcetptibly,
kL.rltl a: :.- pa.i (;nin ier. .h eiart.

BU, v \..;-Vcr opi:. c'I wr mav form with regard to

the rinr 2)d prc' r;s of .tlis pai;i:n, titl lirters them-
fl.' .-c I :-.th- all th- ardour and teniicrnr;s of love.
T'he js; o:u w' hich

i 1ary there exprti;s for orthwell

fu.!v a. 'culo' ior tevry filftcuent part oi her cundu01;
\hl;ich, 'ait;.o u a.:nit ng this circunllance, appears
al;c;terhcr rnoyo-t'o iioi nconlilent, aatd iiirxplicablei.
'I'!t reconci;iu!ilt with her hufbaid, of w-hith, if 'we
allow it to Le gcml.ile, i is itnlfiibi; to give any plau-
tikl- ac-'cu'.:;, is d.,c':ri-rd li'v thic q:.-n s on.n Con-
itfit.'n : }i;vc ye l;t- i nicce artir'i<ec and dccet. As hlr
aveerfi.n t.-r icr .ifjbUil, :..d the iluf'icicons attention
'i2k, hi'cL ,:;e cL.:ciitd l.is .cciduct, Lccaine univer-

sally known, her cars were officiouifl fiiled, as is uliai
in iitch cal's, with groundlels or a;lgravatedl accounts
or his actions. P\- ionie frhe was t(tl, til.t tie king
intended to seize tlhe p}c;lirl of the plinrce his ion, andL
in his name! to uilhrp the go'ernn!cIlt; by others ihe
was aifrred that hl- rclolcid initanlri t, !ta:'' th: king-
(lIom; that a eefirl was hlilrd )or ihis pl;r;;i;1. ;;llt1 iav
in the river- C!yde riadcv to rctciv- h:nll- 'I he lait
was v, hat Mary (chiil:- dlr.a.!it-d. ltitn1\s :-eitr-i g into
a forrigin c(lntrv mullt i;:r itcI l'e ; ]\' d:ltfli, loniralle
to the 411eeln, and wiou!il l:i:.e

tl' ii-- v ;:;7concel-teti

Bothsvwci's mca!iurc-. .i-h!ic he rli'ttl at (;laigow,
at a tliitancc ronm hrr, and in tl:ir piit ct, the kin;-
don) where the i;ntcrelt .oi 1is t;iiml:v was rtatcfit he
niir.ht \ith moor-c titeilt- accomltp.il)i his tllistlS In
or-del t- rer, th o pitor,'tilt hins ( t-ciutilng any li;icl
wild fclieme, it was l:c :tliitr) to t:r L: lim

I lito ;nce

place licrec he woulot lie i)iotre i1illtiia tly unl'. r her
oxtn eye. l.'r tiis p !r' ofe, iLc fiLl} cm;;;e-<lI ail her
art to rtgainl -is cITn :'it:-;, r, anLt i Iln Iopo.'rl to re-
mov\e Ilhim to the rigihiourheootl o' t l lbur ]]{, ,iOe-r
prctcnce that tlherc lI' wlou!<l ilav eali cr 3(i acs to the
advice ,or phi1vticias, a.-d l thrt ihe IL-rli.t could asir,-nd
hlinm \ilhtut being ahl;-nt fr'i,: her 1i n'. 'j te ki;
was v lea enough to lunftr llilrl !t to I\e p,.''uae.d;
and bcitg itill Icrbilr, and i'i)al,.il.l ot l)criugl Ja3uiguc,
was trarTied in a litter to l:ni:nh.rh.

The place prc)3ar.id fr his rct tptlon was

a. ho.lfe

belolngin to the provull of a co :ii.;e " iiIurt i, 'alltL
tlie Kirk of Sii!d. It Itiod .li i..i 1

u', l th'- L.m

Ipot mi here the houti' ill tn : tie- ii;ii (Lt i*t
univeri'uy now flands. Su.;l a tiitatitn on ' ilLui;g
ground, aind at that time in ;:.n open ii, ..l, 1l.' a'l' th,
advantt:gcs of hlIaltii iti aiu- tt rr.:,f.'L .. i;t, i.llt. ott
the other hand, tin- l.)t'li;': ( i tLi p ;a( t.- -rel d it
extrlrt::clv proper tor t'i ( cFn'inli:;n1 ' t .I..L: rcrn.
qith a ;jew- tuo wlI:ch it icccmiui tiallilctlii to ilave becr
chclien.

'Kith, Pr1'cf. viAi. +(Gcod. vol. ii. Z8
Vol. . ID .1

Mary continued to attend the king with the most

a2iiduous care. She seldom was absent from him
through the day; she slept two nights in the chamber
under his apartment. She heaped upon him so many
marks of tenderness and confidence, as in a great man-
ner quieted those fulpicions which had so long disturb-
ed him. But whilr he was fondly indulging in dreams
of the return of his former happiness, he flood on the
very brink of deflrtnrion. On Sunday the ninth of
February, i a67, about eleven at night, the queen
left the Kirk of Sie!d, in order to be present at a
mrafque in the palace. At two next morning, the
hoele in w-.;i: the king lay was blown up with gun-
powder. The noise and fiock which this fidden ex-
plosion occasioned alarmed the whole city. The inha-
birarts ran to the place whence it came. The dead
bodv of the king, with that of a servant who slept in
the fame room, were i ound ly. in in an adjacent garden
without the city wall, !ntouched by fire, and with no
brn:i! or mark of vicr'en-e.

S' h wrs the unhlappy fate of Henry Stewart lord

Darnly, in the twrnty-firft year of his age. The in-
dulg nrce of for-une, .nd his own external accoinplifh-
mnei<' wiThrnut *rnv nther merit, had raised him to an
he-rht of lignitv ot w-hich' he was altogether unworthy.
Bv l.is :o'l and inmratihde, he !oft the heart of a wo-
mr: whr i,'atrtd en him to diftraclion. His insolence
and :naoninrc a.l, ated from :inm those nobles who
had rcntrihllted ncr't 7 '^l,!!v towards his elevation.
His levity and cpr!i ,e cxpofed him to the tlorn of the
prople. who once rt red him as the delendent of
th ei -n-ient kir.gs and heroes Had he died a natural
deatli, his end wi.uld hav been unlamented, and his
mermory have hbeen Forgotten; but the cruel circum-
il.ices of his murder, and the slackness wvih which
it war afterwards axengtd, have made his nam;e to bh
remermbered with rerret. and have rendcrtd him the
ob,:rct of pity, to which he hal utherwie-i no title.

Every one's imagination was at work to guess who

l:ad contrived alnd executed this exc-rable deed. Ti.e
fufpiiicn fell, with almcll a general co.!enut, on Both-

uwell', and some reflex'ionns were thrown out as if the
queen herself was no liranger to the cr;ire. Of Both-
well's guilt there remains the fullell evidence that the
nature of the action will admit. 'he queen's known
fenliments with regard to her huLbiand gave a great ap-
pearance of probability to the imputationl w\lI which
the was loadedt.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was if-

filed by the queen, osiering a coil'ideral)le reward to
any person who should clii:over tlhole who had been
guilty of filch a horrid aind detethble crimet; and
though Bothwell was now one of the greatelt fuhjects
in the -kingdomr, formiidble on account of his own
power, and protedIcil by the quecen's facrur, it was
impollible to slt)pit'ls the nlintillcnts arnd itliiginatio
of the people. Papers wcre afixed to the itoft public
places of the city, accluing hlinl of the murder, and
naming his accomlplices, pictures appeared to the lame
purpole, and voices were heard in the middle o' the
night, charging lirn with that barbarous atlion. But
the authors of th-ele rumnours did not conlinc their ac-
cufaiions to Bothwell alone: they i:;iinuatcd that the
queen herf-lf was aeceflniry to the crirmec. 'Tliis )old
accusation, whlich li dircliy attacked Mary's reputa-
tion, drew the attention of iher councii; and by en-
gaging them in an enquiry after the autiors of there
libels, diverted ther fr, arcilccing flr tile nmu:derrs
of the kingS;. It fiarce could be expeciied that Mary
herlelf wout ld he ext:eclll;r. lu;icitouq to dilcover thoie
who had rid he' 'of an itiulbaid wiom l lhe had lo vio-
lently hated. It was Bothwell's interer!, whio had ithe
supreme direiclion of thi., as \weil as of ail otiher affirs,
to Itifle and fupprei wha:cver evidence fhoulhi be of-
sered, and to cover, if poilible, ti h le rhlc -ianiaclion

'MEilv. c55. Anderl.! vo. ii. ij6.

tSce Difertation concerlnirg the murder of Henry

Darnly, and rlt, gcluilnciincf of Mary's letter to Both-
well, Apipen dix. Anidcrf. vol. i. j6.

S§ Adcrf. vol. ii. i6. . Id. vol. i. 38.

Dd

under the veil of darkness and of silence. Some in-
quiry, however, was ,.r...c, and lor!e persons called
bcit.r' th- coiuntil: h.; the exarnination was cor. :cl-
ed ^i:. the ir.o it'o-e-n: rcemisnvb-, arnd in Ilbc a
nial-nrr Os 10 let in no i.ih; unnon that icenit of uiilt t.

It -as no; l.-r own l'b'cc i acne who fuipecctd

Miarv o: I.;

- , C'II a-'..i-':,- to thi ninatu;ial crimie;

nor did an o¥-.riin, so d.'.:.oura!'e r

ti ] ,|r chlarat-at -,

owe its ri'e a.-l- prngri.nr tfi ti:c ic.,.~ aUi'; ald nlalicc of
her fasfi'.:s nn.hlrc. ih r..t of the nanner and
cir-uinifaneCts of the kinlg's ni !-dcr i:.cald qoii;kly over
all Eurrpe, a'!'., e.'Ce n th iit :;., V hii.'i was ac-
cifuor-tl to (rdl- . o; '. :-; i; y.' d nnii-r'alI
lhorror. As her unhan-v - ,i.'.' il t her i.,.lad had
lonl- bee;i miaticr or . !:I;,:I i.;corii , the tir'f conjec-
tures wh'ch were i'or:nc,-! si ii rt .i-d to hi, death
\were extrem-.lv to her ,;ii ,

i2al2agc. Ilcr friitd., at

a lofi what .prilogv to olT'.r ,.r her ic-nilit, cai li oil
her to plroibcu'-ir the nimu:-iicrl-r wih the tl ii it .lii-
rzc.i'e, rad evxpcced tiiat the :oniir of hl-r procced;: ,s>
would prove the bcft and iusieit viidica;un of hcr
in) ncenc.- <.

l.ennox at the fame time incritd IMarx to vengeiance
,-ahh ince-ff-nt iinp riunitv, This noih'.! rnan had iha-rcd

in his r.-.'' dril ra. r, and being tr' a-cdl ):. Mariv with
necirt, ulf i iv rc!,i' d at a d;if;. i-c f:-o'0i conrt.

onutcd, I:,s.v vcr !'\v an event no h-. f,'-s cki-'nr, to thei

]:r'-t of a fathe-, tis;n f.a!l to all ;!is lhiies- o ainl-
biti(,.s, he vrVturde t i

to :

to the ci.-i. and to oiier

hiis ad'-ice \\'ith rt-fle'-e toi t)i mOst ei'ftUai nmctliod
tfor ri;_t-,vcring a z\ c-novic'!;in thls.i W-i n 'ld Il cruelly
dciri- ri him of a fi;n. and !,cr of a hiiibail. Ilc ur-
ged hi:- to ,rfi

- ': il '..h>; iwh) wxre guilty with vi;o!:r,

and tr 'r:l!-- :isrni tn a l'et edy tinl; he d-cla'td his
ow\M :usmi;is n i ho :!hs\el!, alnd of tholiie }lo vcre
naiscd :s . r.;-.' c. -cs. ; l;ics;: riqulitd tliat, oit (f re-
oard to derc--ncv, :and ini .: .':-r to ceisonir. .e cvideice
to apprar a tainl ,

t he perLilns ailcnfifd of iuich ail
iA.lacrf. t\L1. iv. pa.- il. .,, I6S. K-citih, Prcf. i.x

atrocious crime fiould be committed to custody, or
at least excluded from her court and presence *.

Mary was then at Scaton, whither she had retired

after the burial of the king, whole body was deposited
among the monarchs of Scotland, in a private but de-
cent mannert. The former part of the earl's demand
could not on any pretence be eluded; and it was re-
solved to bring Bothwell immecdiately to trial. But in-
flead of confining hirm to any prison, Mary admitted
him into all her councils, and allowed a perlon, uniyer-
sally reputed the murderer of her husband, to enjoy
all the security, the dignity, and the power of a fa-
vourite t. The offices which Bothwell alreadv poC-
fefled gave him the command of all the Ibutli of Scot-
land. The cafile of Edinbu-rgh, however, was a place
of so much conlequence that he wished earnefily to
have it in his own power. The queen, in order to
prevail on the earl of Malr to surrender it, concented to
put the person of the yvoing prince in his hands, and
iinm cdiatelv bellowed the government of that import-
ant fortrcfs' upon Botlhwell§ So many fleps in her
conduCt, inconlifilent with all the rilns of prudence
and decency, mull le imputed to an e'xcels eilher of
fully or of love. Mary's known character tully vin-
dicates her from the former; of the latter, many and
striking proofs ibon appeared.

No direc evidence had yet appeared against Both-

well ; but as timn nmight bring to light the circumn-
stances of a crime in which so many accornplic-s were
concerned, it was of great importance to h:urr over
the trial, while nothing more thian general filiicions,
and uncertain furnifes, could be produced by his ac-
cufers. For this rcalbn, in a meeting of privy council
held on the twenty-eighth of March, 5(17, the twelfth
of April was appointed for the day of trial Though
the law allowed, and tle nmanner in which crliminl

*Keith, 369. tAnderf. vol. i. 23.
{Anders. vol. i. 40, &c. §Anders. vol. i.lPre. 64.

Keitl, 379.
Dd 3

causes were carried on in tha: age required, a much
longer interval, it aFpears from several circumstances
that this ihort space was confiderablv contracted, ant
that Lennox had only clev-n days warning to prepar:
for accusing a person lo far filuerior to himself both
in power and i;; favour¶. No man could be left
in a condition to contend wv.-hi an antagoniit who was
thus fu por-trd. Thou:.h Leniox's paternal estate
had been rfitored to himnt v'i 1n he mwa called into Scot-
land, it frrn.s to have lern confiderahly impaired
dl:'-ig ?his t!,ni:,ment. }iii vcfValt , hile he resided
in Enrland, had been acuci!ftlned to some degree of
independence, and he hid not recovered that alcendent
over ihtmn, which a fiendlr chief ufualiv poifellid.
IHe had no reafol to exp;r- trie conicu:r.ence of anv of
lhofc facrions into which tle ni.hles were divided. Dur-
ir.g the short period of his finl's prolperity, he had

TThe a&t of privy counri!, a;poiiting the day of

Botthwell's trial. I-rars date M-cr.-h 2'th, I:h;, which
flappen.l on a Thurfdav. n.

An il. i.

i h

c. qhe uiieen's

warrant to the

t -: -:,'r.r', timor-c;rinln tlrnm to l';immon

LeCnro to I'r pircr,-'l, is dated -n the 29h Aidr!rf.
vol ii. 97.

9 !c' x f mrnn:icn.il hv public proclamation

at thle ci-ifs c.f fr(:)-:;' on t!o trh !:;ne (lay. Ibid Ioo.
Ie wra fi!nrr.licli; i:;- >l\.cli: i l.notfcs in (lafgow
and DIuni'artr!i on thc -.ii of . h

rch, the ift ant

l-2 davys 'f A'-;'. !';'d l... iic xas f'mnimned at
Perth, Ap.' - if. ii:',. I :. Tt. L"h Iennox rteidlcl
a; that ';,ti for:- n:'.:s f-i'l, Edinburgh, the citation
mi 1!t: ila2:e bt-clli l :iirn ni inccr. Such an uuincel'-
larsc t',' 2ayo: '.c: .. i:,. ca e-'r i':fpicion. It is true,
isar-;, in hr Ic;-e, :\Iare: -i'r:, invited I.ennox to
cc mc to F-iln.brh

i he -c iuhil-;

' week; this gave him

la-rnirin" tlnm :

d :s f.'crcr, 'ir ti fne itrtc:sled to blJrin;

o.I i.e tri. !

c ii:hoi:t d t-.- I t!::- pr,-r;f e tilmt- colct)

r.,t be olefav' or tertainl'.; k;:-.-'.' to Lennx lboni.-r
i':an e' i(n; tor ,;i--; ih:.;?: -c'nc diay an wr:irli

-

c x: z-c

:.ir'ed to 2apper. B3- tlhe law and p.iratitc

¢- *..:'._ irl,

- t

- ']:a. -- I n

tu e. par;u ¥

, -

''- Ie 'll ! i 1i, !.u

>._ r -. : - t t-;.'-> ^, l

*
i 'l",', .-'. t. ,

h
: .i

taken fulch flops as gave rife to an open breach s.itlh
Mlurray and all his adherents. The parti!ains of the
honilk of Hamilton were his hereditary and inortal ene-
mirs. lluntly was linked in the clofelt confederacy
with Botihwell; and tihus, to the ililcrace of tile nation,
Lcn nox floodl alone in a cau!e where hotli honour and
]utlmanity called li loudly on his countrymlen to second
him.

It is remarkahle too, that Bothwell himself was pre-

sent, and i;at as a nrml)ber in that meeting of' privy
cotunil, which gi:ive dire&iols with regard te ti inime
alld mianler of iis trial; and lie ilill cnjoicd not only
full lilbrty, but was received into the qucen's plretince
with thlc laite: dililiguilhr(l familiarity as loi-ln'ly +t.

Nolltli;: cotuldl l i a more cruel dilplpoiiitinciit to tlie

uwifths and rci:ntintiit of a iatlier than fulch a preila-
turr trial; every 'irp towards mwhiclh iccned lc !ie tak-
eti hs, dirtc tiis fromt tlic p.rlo(n li ho s a l;i:in!Cit ac-
cilldf ;it tlr clric, e, ai calculated on plit'po!i to> ccii .ctL
ra ti}.r tl: ;n to (dcti. his guilt. IJl-III;x t(l,rehwl' i,.t
riro;ld Ir th iifl;i! ot tlhis lilock ilquiry, anl! , iih iiov
little liafc. to hilltd ls, or iilCcc;3 to his (ca:!'c, l iic ou(:d
Vi l]]tc to apc'ear (Io the day prlcilxd. 1n his i: -!;. r
l: ttls, t'lttu,gi und(er exlpre'il";ns thle 1mfolt re'i '.t:';.,
loin-, iv' lti>s Its his dililruitiiig t}i-e iqutIC maC lt- I!'-
(Covcrd(. lie 'itiCe oi n11ow iln plain l.igig',,-?'. leC
compt!,n i'd ot tie iiilry d)one liat, Ly IJhrr>',n; on : ic
trial v.ith ftil h ilil.le

pr citC itailii . llc rtcrcltn'ed

toi;:e miorc tlihe ill oltc't ot s::!!o llv.'l Iotllt wc (i

: ,;t !1:1y

to c!joy p Itllnal iihry;, lIt to retain hi;, toinr it-
fb.1i.Ce .i),r Ler ,,:ittils. lic aalnI i itll-irid hier, as
ib1- r.'-lrd! i her o n l.o],ili' to givc I c. . i ,;,.: ct
1. *r ' incct-ri iln pro;'..icutilig tl1c murde(r, i.- ,' .:.F',':)g
tile perlin v i,,)

! .o1s . : . .i o .io ds lr;-:i .,! .<.

i 1.

tlite LIilols, it; :a d tiltlt hat , ere don le

l ie

l lilit'e !;:

o\,t .

' l ''iii l)

:> it at at} )it

p itt ai t a t ,

i.d, til 111t1.'. '11

ailn irct il;iialncs ot ii,'t WrcI'r l itretilar atil un-

.. 1is,:; l

o r

v
r .
li. fe lccis, hoowevcr, to have eXpetl.dl little 1., :of*

, ..nL2'rm. Ivo. i. c, ;z. ' A:t rL
vh . i. :.

from this application to Manr; and therefore at the
fame time besought Elizabeth to interpose, in order to
obtain such a delay as he demanded t. Nothing can he
a itronger proof how violently he fulpeaed the one
queen, than his fubmittirg to implore the aid of the
other, who had treated his son with the utmofl con-
tempt, and himclfi and famili with the greatelt rigour.
Elizabeth, who was never unwilling to interpose in the
affairs of Scotland, wrote inlltantly to Mary, advilied
her to delay the trial for some time, and urged in such
firong terms the fame arguments which Lennox had
used, as might have convinced her to what an unfa-
vourable conftrudion her conduf would be liable, if
she pcrfifled in her prcfent method of proceeding i.

Neither her intreaties, however, nor those of Len-

nox, could prevail to have the trial put off. On the
day appointed Bothwell appeared, but with fich a for-
midahle retinue, that it would have been dangerous to
condemn, and impossible to punish him. Besides a nu-
merous body of his friends and vassals afelnlbled, ac-
cording to cuflom, from different parts of the kingdom,
he was attended by a band of hired Ibldiers, who
marched with flying colours along the flreets of Edin-
burgh §. A court ofjuitice was held with the accuflom-
ed formalities. An indidtment was preiented against
Bothwell, and Lennox was called upon to make good
Iis accusation. In his name appeared Robert Cun-
ningham, one of his dependents. He excused his ma-
fter's abfcnce, on account of the shortness of the time,
which prevented his assembling his friends and vassals,
without whose affifiance he could not with lafety ven-
ture to set himself in opposition to such a powerful an-
tagonift. For this realon, he desired the court to flop
-roceding, and protested, that any sentence which
should be pasecd at that time ought to be deemed illegal
and void. Bothwell, on the other hand, infilted that
the court should instantly proceed to trial. One of
Lcnnox's own letters, in which he craved of the queen
t Good. vol. ii. 3i . t Anders. Pref. 6o. See Append.

No. XIX. 5 AEderf .
vol. i. 15.

to profeccute the murderers without delay, was prodliced.
Cinnii :inlaaill's oij "c l.i.ns was over-rlled, and the iurv,
conliftin: of peers and barons of the filrt rank, fttind
Both li il lint guillt of tih crime.

Nu perlon aiip!art d as an accuser, lnt a rinlle wit-

ness was examlined,, lnor any evidence prollicetd R,-aiilt
him. Ihe jury mln'r thcle Circiilnla:clt-',, could do
nothing cile but aciqiit himn. Their \erdili, hu vcr,
was far froln gratiting the willics, or liiciiiiig the
niiirniuis of tile pcople. l'..rv cirrcuinllaiice in the
trial gave grounds lor lihfplcion, and xci ;ted indi..a-
tinln; and lej! judgment p';-oiniunccd, inlftelad of' eing
;a pi'.c! ot i3utllhcl's iilnocell(:ce vwa elrcmri-ni ani ar-
ruiIlent o(f his gui:t. Pa',u;inadl s and ilibs were afix-
cd to i(ilferc t placc s, exi)cilililn tli Iiitiilniils of the
public with tle utiolt vii uiLi;;., o! language.

'ITh jury tlih(-rlve-s feemI to ia\ c been aware of the

cenlure to whicih their procecdiigs woulil be exp. i' d ;
anii, at the fame time that th? retiurnedi their Irrdicl
acquiittiig Both\well, thie : rl of Caitli nci' prot, led, in
their natie, that no crime should h imputetd to tlhenl
on that acconiit, hecatihe no acu ier had appeared, and no
proof was blrougiht oi the indiilinent. elr tooik notice like-
wile, that thle intli iiltcadl ot the tenth of February, was
mentioned in the ind.iLqnciint, as the day ol which the
murder had been comminittel: a ciicumliftante which
dilcovcls the extrenc inaccuracy of thoic who Ilpepa'ced
thel illm!iimrnt; andi at a timle when iil n were !;i.cl d,
andt not witlout rcealon, t ) lie luflliiou of cvecy thilig,
this finall matter contributed to confiirm and to incrieali
their liipi.li.r ,s f.

Even Bothwell hiinmfclf did not rely on the ijuiiment

wnich lie had ohtained in his favour, a1 a tll vindica-
tion of his ininccence. Imicin l;tely a:;.'iliis -cquittal,
he, in ceimplialnceC withl a cufloi whiicli w;: Iot then
ob i'lete, p i:bliihed a writi:g, in lhich lie offered to
fight ill finle colmiat any g lintlcliiiman o:( t ta ice wio
fhiculld )Irt!':l ' to a cure hii; of bcing acccflary to the
murder of the kinj.

Botlhw. Trial, Andlerf. vol. ii. 97. &c.

Mary, however, continued to treat him as if he had

been cleared by the moif unexceptionable and fatisfac-
tory evidence The ascendent he had gained over her
heart, as well as over her councils, was more visible
than ever; and Lennox, who could not expeCt that
his own person could be Iffe in a country w-here the
murderer of his son had been absolved, without regard
to jufiice; and loaded with honours, in contempt of de-
cency, fled with precipitation towards England 11.

Two days after the trial, a parliament was held, at

the opening of which the queen diftinguified Both-
well, by appointing him to carry the feeptre before
her-. Most of the aOLs passed in this assembly, were
calculated on purpose to strengthen his party, and to
promote his designs. He obtained the ratification of
all the poff-fions and honours xx hich the partiality of
the queen had conferred upon him; and the aCt to that
cfcft contained the firongeft declarations of his faithful
services to the crown, in all times pail. The surrender
of the castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed.
The law of attainder againit Huntly was repealed, and
he, and his adherents, were restored to the estates and
honours of their anceflors. Several of those who had
been on the jury which acquitted Bothwell, obtained
the ratifications of the grants made in their favour.
And as pasquinades daily multiplied, a law passed,
wherebv thole, into whole hands any paper of that
kind fell, were commanded intailtly to deft;oy it; and
if, through their neglec, it fnould be allowed to spread,
they were lubjered to a capital punishment, in the
fame manner, .s if they had been the original authorst.

But the ablolute lomninion, which Bothwcll had

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clearest
manner, by an Ia in favour of the protestant religion,
to whi-h, at this time, she gave her aficnt. Mary's
attachment to the Romifn faith was uniform and super-
fitious; file had never laid aside the design, nor 'loft
the hopes of restoring it. She had, of la:e, come under
new engagements to that purpose, and in coilequcnca

l Keitlh, j78. Note (J.) *Ild Ibid. lbid. 38'.

of these, had ventured upon some fleps more public
and vigorous than any she had formely taken. But,
Buthwell was prompted, by powerful motives to pro-
mote this law. He had been guilty of crimes, which
rendered him the objeca of jus and universal detcltation.
Ile was meditating others, which he easily foresaw
would heighten the public indignation against him.
By this popular law, he might hope to divert, or to
delav tile resentment of the nation, and flattered him-
self, that the obtaining this unexpecaed and legal tecu-
rity for the protestant religion, would atone for much
guilt, silence the claniours of the clergy, and induce
the people to connive at, or to tolerate his crimes. The
a& itfclf was so favourable to the doctrine of the reform-
ers, that the parliament, which met next year, under
very different leaders, could flbftitute nothing sti-nger
or more explicit in its place; and thought it ful.cicnt
to ratify it word for word t. To pals such an aat, was
utterly inconlfilent with all the maxims which Mary
fs;llowed in every other period of her life; bhlt what
could never he extorted from her hb the folicitati',ns
of the affesibll;cs of the church, or by the entreaties of
hler people, the moe powerful influence of Bothwell
now obtained i.
£very itep taken by Botlhwell had hitherto been at-

tParl. 1. Jac. VI.c. 3r.

tBucl!hnan, lliil. so, not only oiits taking any

notice of this law, but alt:rti, that the queen, though
(he had given promiil;is in favour of the reformed reli-
gion, refuled to nr-i it any at. to pass in fRpport of
it, and even dliniitd the diputi: s of the church with
contempt. Spotil\x'. 2,zz. and Calderwood, vol. iii. 41.
b;lb afLirm the f.ine tiing. It would not have been
necenahrv to oiltrve tris iiiltance of Bulchanan's inaccu-
rat y; b ut th!at an author lo converlhat in our laws as
Sot:;\-ood, -and one lb indiullri:lus as Calderwood,
Pfiuld commit such an error, when a printed acAt of
parli:antit to the contrary was before their eves, is re-
n;ar;.alhl . IEven Buclianan hin fclf has taken notice of
this az , Detc^io, p. 8.

tended with all the fuccels which his most sanguine
wiflhs could expc&. IHe ha. entirely gained the-
queen's heart; the murder of the king had excited no
public commotion: he had been a, quit:cd ib his peers
of anv share in that crime; and their decifiun had been
in fcnme fort ratified in parliament. But in a kingdom
where the regal authority was so extremely limited,
and the power of the ncbilcs fu fonirida'be, he dtlrft
not venture on the last action. towards which all his
anr.l. ji;tis nrojects tended, without their approbation.
In order to secure this, he, immediately after the dif-
fuiution of parliament, invited all the nnbles who were
prle!rnt to an entertainment. Having filled tie house
with his friends and dependents, and surrounded it
v.ith armed men§, he opened to the company his in-
tentino: f marrving the q:lecn, whofc conil-, t, he told
them. he had already obtained; and demanded their
app'o!;i'inl of this match, which, he laid, was no less
acecptablc to their sovereign, than honourable to hin-
feis't. Huntly and Seaton, who were privy to all Both-
well's fchcin-s, and promoted tlhem with the utmtlIt
zeal; the popish ecclefiaflics, ,who wsere ahlblutly de-
vo:td to the queen, and readv to loothe all her passions;
itfitan'i dci!aled their fatisfa.ition with what he had
propcfed. The refi, who dreadl-d the exorbitant
power v.hich Bothwel! had acquired, and oblcrved
the queen's growing affieltion touards him, in all her
ac&ions, were wil!ing to make a merit of yielding to
a n.cafure whlich they could neither oppose nor defeat.
Some e:w were confounded and enraged. But in the
end Bothwell, partly by promirfs and flattery, part-
ly by terror and force, prevailed ol all wllh were
prclent to fihfcrihe a paper, iwhich leaves a deep-
er fain than any occurrence in that age on the honour
and characer of the nation.

This paper contained the firongeft declarations of

B"z:hwell's innocence, and tle mnol ainple acknow-
ledgment of his geod i;i-\vice to the kingdom. If any
future accusation fnould he brought againift him on

GCood. xc!. ii. 14I. A;iderf. vol. i. 94g

account of the king's murder, the fubferihers promiser
to stand by him as one man, and to hazard their lives
and fortunes in his defence. They, recommended him
to the queen as the most proper perlbn Ihe could chuFe
for a husband, and if she could condelcend to hefinv
on him that mark of her regard, they undertook to
promote the marriage, and to join him with all their
forces in opposing any person who endeavounred to oh-
filuct it*. Among the filbfcrihers of this paper we find
some who were the queen's chief confidenrs, otherr
who were fitrangers to her councils, and obnoxious to
her dilpleafure; tome who faithfully adhered to her
through all the vicilfitudes of her fortune, and others
who became the principal authors of her lufferings;
some pallionately attachcd to the Roomifil fupcrftition,
,and others zealous advocates for the proteltant fairltt.
.No common interest can he supposed to have united
men of such oppolite principles and parties, in recolm-
mending to their ibvereign a ftep so injurious to her
honour, ant so fatal to her peace. This flrange coa-
lition was the effect of much artifice, and mult be con-
fidered as the loldeft and most masterly stroke of Both-
well's address. It is ohfervable, that amidst all the al-
tercations ant mutual reproaches of the two parties
which arose in the kingdom, this unworthy tranilictlnri
is Ieldom mentioned. Conlcious on both fides, that in
this particular their conduct could ill bear examina-
tion, and would redound little to their fame, thes,
always touch upon it unwillingly, and with a tender
hand, teeming desirous that it Ihould remain in dark-
ness, or be buried in oblivion. But as so many perfbns
who, both at that time, and ever after, poflTi-ed the
queen's favour, llhiLribted this paper, the flufpicion be-
comes strong, that Bothwel!'s ambitious hopes swere
neither unlnownl to Mary nor disapproved by her 5.

'Anderl: vol. i. 177. tKeith, 38a.

§ Of all the dtifferent i\frcms with regard to this t-ans-

atIion. that of Camden lrells to be the least ac(-ur:a-,
and the worlf rounded. He- liippoi's that ButhtAll

Vol. 1. E c

There suspicions are confirmed by the moit direc proof.
Melvil at that time enjoyed a considerable ihare in her
favour. He, as well as his brother, kept a secret cor-
refpondence in Engiand with those vho favoured her
pretensions to that crtw -n. The rumour of her intend-
ed marriage with Bothwell ha\ing early fprcad in that
kingdom, excited universal indignation; and Mclvil

was hated by Murray, Morton, &c. who had been his
afrociates in the murder of the king, and that they now
wanted to ruin him. He affirms, at the fame time, that
the subscriptions to this paper were obtained by thern
out of star ithat Botlweil might silk in his hopes, and
betray lhe whbce bloody secret, 404. But besides the
abfurd;ties of supposing that any man's enemies would
contribute towards raising him to such high dignity,
on the uncertain hopes of being able afterxvards to de-
prive him of it; bceides the impofiibility of accomplilh-
ing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to
the queen, or difag eeable to her; we may obrerve that
this supposition is dellroyed by the direct teflimonv of
the queen herfnlf, who aliribes the conl'nt of the no-
bles to Bothwell's artifices, v. ai urlafed it

e b ii-v'ig :.tem

to uvdr' jlnd tilt i71e UCre content tl.erv;th. Anders. vol.
i. 94, 99. It would have bten no small advantage to
Maly, if fLe could h-ve reprtfcr.ed t!ie conlent of the
nobles to have heen their cvn voluntary deed. It is
fill more surprising to find I. civ afcriitng this paper
to Murray and his fa&ion. znderf vol. i. 2. Tlhe
hiflicr h'mfelf was ore of the periorn whi; fubfcrircd
it. Keith, 383. Th king 's comimiTior. rs, at the con-
ferenceheitd at York - 68, pretendlrd that none of the
noe.ts, exctpt tl earl of I-li:!--, v-,u'ld uhlbcribe tlhis
pape, till a vwarrart

fir; ohc quten was produced, bv

which they were alicxv'e :o so fc: this warrant thee
had in their cu!lod--, ni txh;.'itcd. Andtrf. ,ol. iv.
part . 5 This difers rcm L.ucari an's account, whoL
fuppofcs that all tl:e'n:.! is pretint fuib!cribed this pa-
per on the 19th, grnd ih.t nrc: day ti.v obtaiined the
approbation of vhat licy Lad done, Ly way of fecu-
rity to themrelvcs, 3-5

received a letter fi-om thence, which reprerented, in the
strongest termns, what would be the fatal effcI-s of such
an imprudent ltep. MAelvil put this l"tter into the
queen's hands, and enforced it with the utmost warmti.
She not only diliregarded the!e remonstrances, but com-
municated the matter to Bothwell; and Mclvil, in or.
der to save his life, was obliged to si from? court,
whither he durst not return till the earl's rage began
to abate'. At the fame time Elizabeth warned Mary
of the danger and infamy to which flhe fCould expole
herself by such an indecent choice: but an advice from
her met with Ptill less regardt.

Three days after the rising of parliament Mary went

from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit the prince
her son. Bothwell had now brought his schemes to

Melv. 156. According to Melvil, Lord Hlerries

likewise remonfirated against the marriage, and con-
jured the queen, on his knees, to lay aside all thoughts
of such a dishonourable alliance, i56. But it has been
observed, that Herries is one of the nobles who fuib-
fcribed the bond, April 19 Keith, 383. z. That he
is one of the witnesses to the marriage articles between
the queen and IBothwell, May I4. Good. vol. ii. 6i.
3. That he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17.
Keith, 386. But this remonstrance of Lord Herries
against the marriage happened before those made hv
Melvil himself, 157. Melvil's remonstrance must
have happened some time before the meeting of
parliament; for after offending Bothwell, he retired
from court; he allowed his rage time to fubfidc, and
had again joined the queen when fe was seized, April
24. i58. The time which must have clapsed, by this
account of the matter, was perhaps sufficient to have
gained lerries from being an opposer to become a
promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvii may have
committed some miRake with regard to this fadt, so
far as relates to lord Herries He could not well be
milRaken with regard to what hinllllt did.

t Anders. vol. 1. I06.

Eez

full maturity, and every precaution being taken which
coulid render it safe to enter on the last and decisive
i!tp, the natural impetuolity of his spirit did not sus-
ti- h.in to dciiberate any longer. Under pretence of
an expcdition against the freebooters on the borders,
Lc ailtibled his followers; and marching out of Edin-
l:urgh with a thousand horse, turned suddenly towards
L,,lthgow, met the queen on her return near that
piace, dLperi-ld her fiender train without refiftatlce,
skyed on her perfin, and conducted her, together with
a tew of her courtiers as a priloner to his cafile at
Du!ll.ar. She expre-rrd ricither surprise, nor terror,
inor indignation, at fiuch an outrage committed on her
pcrfoni, and such an insult offered to her auhority, but
icemed to ield without fIruggle or regret t. Melvil
was at that time one of her attes(aits; and the offi-
cer by whom he was seizcd, informed him that nothihg
was done without the queen's own conlents. It wd
mav rely on the letiers publithed in Mary's narme, the
fchcme had been communicated to her, and every itec
to"ards it was taken with her participation and ad"
vite 1I

Both the queen and Bothwell thought it of advan-

tage to enl:ioy this appearrnire of violeice. It afforded
lrr a decent exceie for her corxltnd ; and while she
couild piead that it was owing to force rather than
chrice, iLe hoped that lier reputation among foreigners
at c-ail, would eidape without censure, or be exposed
to Irei reproach. Bothwell could not help difirufting
ail the methods whi h had hitherto been uled for vin-
dicating him iront any conceru in the murder of the
king. 6Soenitbing wa' fItill wanting for his security,
and for quitting his guilty fears. This was a pardon

ne';er the grea: teal. By the laws oi Scotland the
nclt heinous crime nuift be mentioned by name in a
Fardon, and then all lefetr offences are cdetued to he
includcd uhder the general claute, ,m.i all other ,rimer
n.Ltfrct.r §. 1 o leizc the person of the prince is high

-Keitih, <
. 1M~v i58. | ! G.od. U.L'. . 7.

5 Par!. 6. Jac. IV. c. c6.

treason; and Bothwcll hoped that a pardon obtained
tor this would extend to every thing of which he had
been accused'.

Bothwell having now got the queen's person into his

hands, it would 'have been unbecoming either a poli-
tician or a man of gallantry to have delayed confam-
mating his schemes. For this purpose, he instantly
commenced a suit, in order to obtain a sentence of di-
vorce from his own wife Lady Jean Gordon, the earl
of Huntly's filter. This process was carried on, at
the fame time, both before protestant and popish judges;
before the former, in the court of commnilTaries; and
before the latter, in the spiritual court of the archbishop
of St. Andrews, whose jurifdiaion the queen had
lately restored. The pretexts which he pleaded were
trivial or scandalous. But his authority had greater
weight than thejultice of his cause; and in both courts,
sentence of divorce was pronounced, with the fame
indecent and suspicious precipitancy f.

While this infamous trantatiion was carrying on, the

queen resided at Dunbar; detained a3 a prisoner, hut
treated with the utmost refpec. Soon after Bothwcll,
with a numerous train of his dependents, condusted
her to Edinburgh; but, instead of lodging ler in the
palace of Holyrood-houfe, he conveyed Ier to the
cattle, of which he was governor. Tie diliontcitl of
the natinil rendered this precaution necef:ury. Iln an
house unfortified, and of easy acccil, the qu;en might
have have been rlefued without dilficuliv out of his
hands. In a place of ftrcngth she was lIcured from
all the attempts of his enemies.

One fillall difficulty still remnained to be surmounted.

As the queen was kept in a fort of captivity by Both-
well, a marriage concluded in that condition might be
imputed to force, and be held inva'lid. In order to ob-
viare this, Mary appeared in the court of te'iion, and,
in prelence of the chancellor and other judges, and fe-
veral of the nobility, declared tlat ill: w.b nIuw at full

'Anders. vol iv. :art ii. b(. tlbi1. 1S.

3 3

tiLety: ania toingh B hthrell's eioiene ;i feizrng het
perfor had at first etrited her indignaii'n, vet his re-
fperEtff:. behaviour since that tir.e hba. not only ap-
ótar's - her retifirntitt, but dettrmiined he- to taife him
io t;¢lceir honeOrs '.

' xViat iefe w&e firon became ptdilic. The title 6t

duke rs Orknev was comftrirtd upoit Bothwrel; aird 0i
T!.e fftieeth rs May his inarriage with the qteeir
'h-'-l had so oing hbe'h the objedc if' his wifhlis, and
htfe octive of his crinet, wUas l;emhiztd The cere-
ir:onv w a "erfornme in public, accortrlng to the riteS
or the pi-feifrant charch, by A\fm Bothwti'l, bishop
ti Otrknitev one of the fe'- prerares who hzd e nbrated
tiie Riorftr..in, arta con the fam'e di', wa's ceiebrated
in privare, arcc6reiKt to tlh forms 'prc.ribt-d hy tht
cnr'f:T religion]t. The hbldlrefs with mhirh Craig, the
*r ino:f'er 'whb v 's coirinarnk-d tn publiti the hanns,
trfiti-d aairnft trt design; the ifnall rumber of the
i:..b!-Is who -cr'e prefi-nt 2t tie marriage; anrd the
kellen ai 'd 'difrrcfefiful filenre of the people when the
'uaeen appeared in ptutic; \fere manifest fvmptoms of
t1:e viblrnt and general d:lnhtificron oft her own sub-
i:C s The refufalof Le Croc, the French ambafatdor,
o he pref-nt at 'the nuptial vercrnony or entcrta:ntnent,
il>-;r.vtrs the fentinents of her allies with regdrd to
thEi part of her condiwt: andt although every other
.Cion in MarY's life cntild be jtltitied by the rules of

udtirin-e. or reconcilt-:l to the principles f 'virtue,

rits fatal marriage would renain an: iucontcltable proof
of her rainefts if not of her guiit.

Mlarv's firit care was to offer some apology for her

c dnJm:cq to the crrrts of France and Ezianrd. The
ihif'tions to her amnhblTadrs ftitl rernain, and are
('raxv: bv a n.iterilv halnd: But muder all the artificial

rintk. faif e(-rloring she employis it is easy to dilcovcr,

nx- nen!i that ir.a.yv of the Jteps she had taken were
u:ii.iifiiai . tbut that ihe lhcrif dfwas coilious that they
Ct iid nor be jilll;it d t.

The rict- of king was the only thing which was not

* A;;d. i. S. wTd. 36. ir. 2S7.
d. Lud. i. 89.

. p,

jbellowed uion B-.thwcil. Notwithflalidii; he-r attach-

tnent to hiln. Marw renmembered the inconveniencies
which hid arisen from the ralh advance-ment of her
formtnte luilbnd l o that honlour She agreed, however,
that he ihould lign, in token of conlent, all the public
writs issued in her name '. But though the queen with-
hced front hint the title of king, he poffeited all the
reality of power. 'The queen's peribn was in his
hairds; lhe was furroiinded mlore cloi-l; than ever by
his creatures; none of hler filltcqs( could obtain audi-
ence withnoat Iris peitmiflioi; and, unlels in his own
presence, none but his con'fidents were permitted to
converle with hir i. The Scottish monarrhs were ac-
·cuR}otied to live amcng thcir fiuhjets as as latthes or as e-
quais, wiihout distrust, and with little slate; atried
guards flanding at the doors tf rhe royal apartment,
difliculty of acctls, dlifance: alid retirement, were things
unknown and unpopular.

Thele precautions were necefliry for securing to

Bothliell the power which he had acquired. But,
without heing maller o thle person of the young prince,
ie eileened all' that hle had caiiined to he precarious
and uncertain. The queen had committed her fti to
the care of the earl of Mar. T Ie fidelity and Iloyalty
of that nobtemnan were too well known to expect that
lie would be willing to put the prince into thle hands
of the man w\h was lb Iohintl;v iulpelcted of ha.-ing
murdeted his father. Botlitmll, howevtr laboured to
get tlhe prince'into his power, with an anxiety whith
gave rife to the blackeli ful'picions. All his addrel',
as well as authority, were cnmployed to perluade, or to
force Mar into a cornphlia ce with his deiands'l. And
it is n o flight proof, both of the iirnineli and ilexteri-
ty of that noblel aan, tlat lie preferred a life of so
tiuchl importance to thu nation, front lyiuln at the mer-
cy of a man, wilolli fear or .ihibitioii miglht have
prompted to violent attemplts ig.aiilt it.

'Fc eyes of the neighbouuring i.hltiins were fixed, at

th.t time, upon the great cvetis which had happeted
God ii, 60. -iid.i. 56. IMely. i;,. DuJh. 36£

in Scotland during three months: a king murdered
with the utmost cruelty, in the prime of his days, and
in his capital city; the person fufpeted of that odious
crime suffered not cnly to appear publicly in every
place, but admitted into the presence of the queen,
diftinguithed by her favour, and intrusted with the
chief direction of her affairs; fubjeded to a trial which
was carried on with most shameless partiality, and ac-
-quitted by a sentence which served only to confirm the
suspicions of his guilt; divorced from his wife, on pre-
tences frivolous or indecent; and after all this, inflead
of meeting with the ignominy due to his action3, or
the punilhment merited by his crimes, permitted openly,
and without opposition, to marry a queen, the wife of
the prince whom he had assassinated, and the guardian
of those laws which he had been guilty of violating.
Such a quick succession of incidents, so singular and
so detestable, is not to be found in any other history.
They left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of in-
famy, on the charader of the nation. The Scots were
held in abhorrence all over Europe; they durst icarce
appear any where in public; and after suffering so many
atrocious deeds to pass with impunity, they were univer-
sally reproached as men void of courage, or of hu-
manity, as equally regardless of the reputation of their
queen and the honour of their country t.

These reproaches routed the nobles, who had been

hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or intimidated
by his power. The manner in which he exercised the
authority which he acquired, his repeated attempts to
become maler of the prince's perlbn, together with
fame rafl threatenings against him, which he let fallT,
added to the violence and promptness of their refolu-
tions. A considerable body of them alfcmbled at Stir-
ling, and entered into an afrociation for the defence of
the prince's person. Argyll, Athol, Mar, Morton,
Glencairn, Home, Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tulli-
bardin, Kirkaldy of Grange, and Maitland the fecre-
Arcderi. vcl. i. 128, 1x4. -- rl.16.. . ce Append.

iNo. XXI. T Melv. 16X.

tary, were the heads of this confederacsv. Stevart
earl of Athol was remarkable for an uniform and bi-
gotted attachment to popery; but his indignation on
accoulnt of the itiurder' of the king, to whom he was
nearly allied, and his zeal for the safety of the prince,
overcarne, on this oceafion, all considerations of reli-
gion, and united him with the inoft zealous proteflants.
Several of the othir nobles adted, without queltion,
from a laudlahle conceri for the atfety of the prince and
the honour of their country. But the spirit which foitr
of them discovered ddring the fubfequelnt revolutions,
leaves little room to doubt that antbition or refentnent
were the real motives of their conduO; and that, on
many occalions, 'ihile they were pursuing ends just
aIdl necelfary, they were a-nluated by principles and
paifions altogether urijuilifiahle.

s The firit aicouhts ot this league filled the queen and

Bothwell with gteat confernation They w ere no
firangers to the lintiments of thel nation with relpetr
to their condna; ahd thaugh their imarriage had not
met with public oppoiition, they knew that it had not
been cairied on without thu lcrcct difgruf and mur-
mulrings of all ranks of lien. 'Ihey utreflw the vio-
lInce with which this iildigiation would burfl out, as-
tet having been so iing lupprtfled; and it order to pre-
pare tor th. ltoin, Mary iit'ued a proclamation, requir-
ing her fubjcidt to take arms, and to attend her hus.
band by a day appointed. At thle llam tilmei, he pub-
lifhed a lort of Ilanifeflo, in which the laboured to vin-
dic:lte her government from tlofe imputations whith
it had bIeen loaded wi)l, andi employed the flrongeft
terms to expret3s hIr conlern for tler lafety and welfare
of the prilct. her ontl. Neither of ticl.C produced any
confidcrable efl&t. IHer proclaination s as ill obeytd,
and her rnanitetio met wilth little creditit.

']he :oonf:clrat. ; Iords crnried on their preparations
with no Itlk aCtivity, and wili: mmnlh morile iUccl,,. -

at

n5r a a:'iike p opie, in,.i of lo ii, uch po ,er and po-
Euitnh, -,94. t7ih S? ,; 96.

pularity found it an easy matter to raise an army. They
were ready to march, before the queen and Bothwell
were in a condition to refit them. The caffle of Edin-
burgh was the place whither the queen ought naturally
to have retired, and there her person might have been
perfecdly safe. But the confederates had fallen on
means to shake or corrupt the fidelity of fir James Bal-
four, the deputy-governor, and Bothwell durst not com-
mit to him such an important trust. He conduted the
queen to the castle of Borthwick, and on the appearance
of lord Home, with a body of his followers, before that
place, he fled with precipitation to Dunbar, and was
followed by the queen disguised in men's clothes. The
confederates advanced towards Edinburgh, where Hunt-
ly endeavoured, in vain, to animate the inhabitants to
defend the town against them. They entered without
opposition, and were instantly joined by many of the ci-
tizens, whose zeal became the firmest support of their
cause i.

In order to Let their own conduct in the most favour-

able light, and to route the public indignation against
Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration of the mo-
tives which had induced them to take arms. All Both-
well's pall crimes were enumerated, all his wicked in-
tentions displayed and aggravated, and every true Scots-
man was called upon to join-them in avenging the one
and in preventing the other§,

Mean while Bothwell assembled his forces at Dunbar,

and as he had many dependents in that corner, he soon
gathered such strength, that he ventured to advance to-
wards the confederates. Their troops were not nume-
rous; the suddenness and secrecy of their enterprise gave
their friends at a distance no time to join them; and as
it does not appear they were supported either with mo-
ney or fed with hopes by the queen of England, they
could not have kept long in a body. But on the other
hand, Bothwell durst not riik a delayt. His army fol-
lowed him with reluctance in this quarrel, and ierved
him with no cordial aficeion; so that his only hope of
ii Keith, 398 . § Anders. vol. i. 128. f Keith, 401.

success was in surprising the enemy, or in firlking the
blow before his own troops had leisure to recol!cld them-
selves, or to imbibe the-fame unfavourable opinion of
his actions which had spread over the refl of the nation.
'hefe motives determined the queen to march forward,
with an inconSiderate and fatalfpeed.

On the firfi intelligence of her approach, the confe-

derates advanced to meet her. They found her forces
1drauwn lp almost on the fame ground which the English
had poflTcsied at the battle of Pinkie. The numbers on
Lotil fides were nearly equal; but there was no equality
in point of dilfcipline. 'The queen's army confitled chief-
ly of a multitue, hastily afiembled, without courage or
experience in war. The troops of the confederates were
comipofi.d of gntmen

of rrank and reputation, foliow.

td by their molt trufly dependents, who were no leTs
brave tlita zealous t.

Le Ciot the French amnbaffador, vwho was in the field,
lal o:ared, by negotiating both with the queen and the
nobles, to put an end to the quarrcl witholt the effusion
of blood. lHe repretented to the confcderates the queen's
in:!linatioin towards peace, and her willingness to par-
don the oi.ences which thev had committed. Morton
recpli'ld il ih armnth, that they had taken arms not a-
galift the ij,!cc, hut againit the nmrlderer of her hus-
i)ai.t; and if lie were given iip to julfice, or hbnifiled
froli l Er projelice, fi.e Ihould find them ready to vicld
the obcdilence which is due froln filbjecis to their iovc-
r.tc in. Giencairn added, tliat they did not come to a£s
painron for anxv ofl'ence, but to ptinifh tihoe who had of-
f.i:(ded. Tlhe'ie halihtv answers convined tile anf.ia.
dor that lis n ediationl woilbd Ie inefliciual, and tlh.t
tlLir ipaf.ios , .cere too hikh to allowt thtm to liftcn to
aniv pacific p-opl-fitions, ur to think of retreating after
ha' in g prot cdeed 1i) lar,j.

T'he cuc';,'s arIy wta; po ctd to advantage, on a ri-

fil. grouind. 'FIe cm.:iCdleatcs advanced to the a:tack
r elhlteyi, but lt iily, ar;. witli the caution which was
natural on tliat u.l;haplpY ftid. i!er troops were alarm,

- Ca.Id. -c

ii. 4 -
4 . B Ktiti, 4l

ed at their approach, and discovered no inclination to
fight. Mary endeavoured to animate them; the wept,
(he threatened, he reproached them with cowardice,
but all in vain. Asew of Bothwell's immediate attend-
ants were eager for the encounter; the reft flood wa-
vering and irresolute, and some began to fleal out of
the field. Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by of-
fering to decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own
innocence, in single combat with any of his adversaries.
Kirkaldy of Grange. Murray of Tullibardin, and lord
Lindsay, contended for the honour of entering the lifts
against him. But this challenge proved to he a mere
bravado. Either the confcioufilets of guilt deprived
Bothwell of his wonted courage, or the queen by her
authority, sorbad the combat .

After the symptoms of fear discovered by her follow-

ers, Marv would have been inexcusable had she hazard-
ed a battle. To have retreated in the face of an eneny
who had already surrounded the hill on which she ltood
with part of their cavalry, was utterly impradlicable.
In this situation, (he was under the cruel neceffny of
putting herself into the hands of those fuhje&ts who had
taken arms against her. She demanded an interview
with Kirkaldy, a brave and generous man, who conm-
manded an advanced body of the enemy He, with the
consent and in the name of the leaders of the palty, pro-
mifed that, on condition she wMuld diimifs Bothwell
from her presence, and govern the kingdom by the ad-
vice of her nobles, they would honour and obey her as
their fovereignt.

During this parley, Bothwell took his last farewel of

the queen, and rode off the field with a few followers.
This dismal reverse happened exactly one month after
that marriage which had cost him Ib manv crimes to
arcomplifh, and which leaves so foul a fain on Mary's
memory.

As son as Bothwell retired, Mary fuirendered to

Kirkaldv, who conduiced her towards the confederate
army, the leaders of which received her with muth re-
Cald. vol. ii. 50. Cod. vol. ii. 164. MSclv. 1j-

fpe&; and Morton, in their name, made ample profef-
sions of their future loyalty and obedience*. But she
was treated by the common soldiers with the utmost in-
folence and indignity. As she marched along, they
poured upon her all the opprobious names which are
bestowed only on the lowes and most infamous crimi-
nals. Wherever fee turned her eyes, they held up be-
fore her a standard, on which was painted the dead bo-
dy of tle late king, firetched on the ground, and the
young prince kneeling before it, and uttering these
words, " Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord!' Mary
turned with horror from such a (hocking fight. She be-
gan already to feel the wretched condition to which a
captive prince is reduced. She uttered the most bitter
complaints, (he melted into tears, and could scarce be
kept from finking to the ground. The confederates
carried her towards Edinburgh; and in spite of many
delays, and after looking, with the fondness and credu-
lity natural to the unfortunate, for some extraordinary
relief, she arrived there. The streets were covered with
multitudes, whom zeal or curiolity had drawn together,
to behold ilch an unusual scene. The queen, worn out
with fatigue, covered with dull, and bedewed with tears,
was expol;id as a fpedacle to her own subjects, and led
to the provost's house. Notwithltanding all her argu-
nients and intreaties, the fame tlandard was carried be-
fore her, and the fame insults and reproaches repeatedt.
A woman, young, beautiful, and in distress, is naturally
the objec& of comTpaffion. The comparison of their prc-
sint misery with their former lplendour, ulually softens
us in favour of illullrious fufl:rers. But the people be-
held the deplorable situation of their sovereign with in-
fcnfibility; and so strong was their perfualo:i of her
iguilt, and so great the violence of their indignation, that
the futffrings of thiir queen did not, in any degree, mi-
tigate their rertimnclt, or procure her that vlnnpathy
which is lc!odom denied to unfortunate princes.

Good. vul. ii. i65. t Melv. (66. Bu:h. 654

LND OF VOLUME II'RS .
Vu' T. 1:
