--c~~ hlC~~rl·ó -/, ll. /11,1

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH A VIEW OF THE
3prog0re% of Society il Europc,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF TIlE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OP TIIE SIXTEP.NTH CKNTURY.

BY

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND

HiSTORIOGRAPMER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAID.

TENTH EDITION.
IN FOUR VOtUMES.

VOL. IV.
Embellished withfour elegant EngravYngr..

GLASGOW,
Frinteo be ans for Cbapman ant L tng.

1800.

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.

W HILE Charles laboured, with such unwearied indufiry,
to persuade or to force the protestants to adopt his regu,
lations with refpe& to religion, the effets of his fleadinefs
in the execution of his plan were rendered less considerable
by his rupture with the pope, which daily increased. The
firm resolution which the emperor seemed to have taken a-
gainlt restoring Placentia, together with his repeated en-
croachments on the ecclesiastical jurifdiaion, not only by
the regulations contained in the Interim, but by his attempt
to re-assemble the council at Trent, exasperated Paul to the
utmost, who, with tie weakness incident to old age, grew
more attached to his family, and more jealous of his autho-
[ity, as he advanced in years. Pufled on by these paflions,
ie made new efforts to draw the French king into an alli.
ince aga;nil the emperor*: but finding that monarch, not-
withfianding the hereditary enmity between him and Charles,
and the jealousy with which he viewed the successful pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms, as unwilling as formerly to in-
ovlve himself in immediate hostilities, he was obliged to
contraa his views, and to think of preventing future en.
croachments, since it was not in his power to inflc& ven-
geance on account of those which were past. For this pur-

* em. de Ribier, ii. zjo.

pose, he determined to recal his grant of Parma and Pla.
centia, and after declaring them to be re-annexed to the ho.
ly fee, to indemnify his grandson Ofavio by a new eftab-
liihment in the ecclesiastical state. By this expedient he
hoped to gain two points of no small consequence. He,
first of all, rendered his pofieflion of Parma more secure; as
the emperor would be more cautious of invading the patri.
mony of the church, though he might seize without fcru.
pie a town belonging to the house of Farnese. In the next
place, he would acquire a better chance of recovering Pla-
centia, as his solicitations to that effe& might decently be
urged with greater importunity, and would infallibly be at-
tended with greater effet, when he was confidered not as
pleading the cause of his own family, but as an advocate fdr
the interest of the holy fee. But while Paul was priding
himself on this device, as a happy refinement in policy, Oc-
tavio, an ambitious and high-fpirited young man, who could
not bear with patience to be spoiled of one half of his ter-
ritories by the rapaciousness of his father-in-law, and to be
deprived of the other by the artifices of his grandfather,
took measures in order to prevent the execution of a plan
fatal to his interest. He set out secretly from Rome, and
having first endeavoured to surprise Parma, which attempt
was frustrated by the fidelity of the governor to whom the
pope had entrusted the defence of the town, he made over.
tures to the emperor, of renouncing all connexion with the
pope, and of depending entirely on him for his future for.
tune. This unexpeced defection of one of the pope's own
family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated, almost to
madness, a mind peevish with old age; and there was no de-
gree of severity to which Paul might not have proceeded a.
gainft a grandson whom he reproached as an unnatural apof.
tate. But, happily for Oaavio, death prevented his carry-
ing into execution the harsh resolutions which he had taken
,ith refpet to him, and put an end to his pontificate in the

sixteenth year of his administration, and the eighty second
year of his age -.

i Among many inflances ofthe credulity or weakness of hifno-

rians in attributing the death of illuflrious personages to extraor-
dinary causes, this is one. Almost all the historians of the fix-
teenth century affirm, that the death of Paul III. was occafoned
by the violent passions which' the-behaviour of his grandson ex-
cited; that being informed, while he was refreihing himself in one
of his gardens near Rome, of Odlavio's attempt on Parma, as
-well as of his negotiations with the emperor by means of Gonza-
ga, he fainted away, continued some hours in a swoon, then be-
came feveriah, and died within three days. This is the account
given of it by Thuanus, 1h. vi 211. Adriani Iflor. di fuoi Tem-
Ai, lib. vii. 480, and by Father Paul, -a2o. Even cardinal Palla-
vicini, better informed than any writer with regard to the events
vhlich happened in the papal court, and when not warped by pre-
judice or sysem, more accurate in relating them, agrees with
their narrative in-its chief ircumftances. Pallav.-b. ii. 74. Pa-
-ruta, who wrote his hiitory by command of the senate of Venice,
relates it in the fame manner. Hiftorici Venez. vol. iv. 2rz.
rut there was no occasion to search for any extraordinary cause
to account for the death of an old man of eighty-two. There re-
'nains an authentic account of this event, in which we find none
of those marvellous circurflances of which the historians are so
fond. The cardinal-of Ferrara, who was entrufled-with the as-
fairs of France at the court of Rome, and lI. D'Urfe, Henry's
ambassador in ordinary there,-wrote an account to that monarch
of the affair of Parma, and of the pope's death. By there it ap-
pears, that Oclavio's attempt to surprise Parma, was made on the
twentieth of October; that next day in the evening, and not while

we was airing himself in the gardens of Monte Cavallo, the pope

received intelligence of what he had done; -that he was seized
with such a tranlport of pafion, and cried so bitterly, that his
'voice was heard in several apartments of the palace; that next
day, however, he was so well as to give an audience to the cardi-
nal of Ferrara, and to go through business of different kinds; that
Octavio wrote a letter to the pope, not to cardinal Farnese his
brother, intimating his resolution of throwing himelf into the
arms of tie emperor; that the pope received this on the twenty-
firfi without any new symptoms of emotion, and returned an an-
fwer to it; that -on the twenty-fecond of Ooober, the day on
which the cardinal of Ferrara s letter is dated, the pope was in
his usual slate of health. Mern. de Ribier, ii. 247. By a letter
of M. D'Uil', Nov. 5. it appears that the pope was in such good
health, that on the third of th.t month be had celebrated the an-
niverfary of his coronation with the -ufaal folemnities. Ibidem,
251 By another letter from the faie-perfon, we learn, that on
the sixth of November a catarrh or .defitxion fell down on the
[Lopc's lungs, with such dangerous 'symptoms, that his life was

Vol. IV. 1B

1530o.] As this event had been long expeAed, there was

-an extraordinary concourse of cardinals at Rome; and the
~arioos competitors having had time to form their parties,
and to concert their measures, their ambition and intrigues
protraed the conclave to a great length. The Imperial
and French faction firove, with emulation, to promote one
of their own number, and had, by turns, the profpe& of fuc-
cef. But as Paul, during a long pontificate had raised ma-
ny to the purple, and those chiefly persons of eminent abili.
ties, as well as zealously devoted to his family, cardinal Far-
cefe had the command of a powerful and united squadron,
by whose address and firmness he exalted to the papal throne
the ardinal di Monte FSeb. 7], whom Paul had employed
s- his principal legate in the council of Trent, and trusted
with his mo't secret intentions. He afftrned the name of
Julius III. and in order to express his gratitude towards his
beaefa&or, the firA a& of his administration was to put Oc-
tavio Farnese in poCieffon of Parma. When the injury
aich he did to the holy fee, by alienating a territory of
such value, was mentioned by some of the cardinals, he brisk-
iy replied, " That he would rather be a poor pope, with
the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich one, with the in-
famy of having forgotten the obligations conferred upon
him;, and the promises which he had made t." But all the
iuRire of this candour or generosity he quickly effaced by aa
a&ion moni shockingly indecent. According to an ancient
rnd elsabliihed pracice, every pope upon his eletion confi-
sers it as his privilege to befow,y on whom he pleases, the
ca-dinal's hat, which falls to be disposed of by his being in.
vestid with the triple crown. Julius, to the aftoniihment

im-edlately defpaLred of. Ibid. $52. And by a third letter we
ar- informed, that he died November the tenth. In none of these
etters is his death imputed to any'extraordinary cause. It ap-
pea~, that more than twenty days elapsed between Oatavio's at-
tempt on Parma and the death of his grandfather, and that the
ii;:afe was the natural effci of old age, and not one of those oc-
cfioned by violence of paflon.

t I:m de Siter.

of the sacred college, conferred this mark of diftintion,- to--
gether with ample ecclesiastical revenues, and the right' of
bearing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a youthi of
sixteen, born of obfeure parents, and known by the name-of
the Ape, fiom his having, been trusted with the care of an:
animal of that species, in the cardinal di Monte's. family.-
Such a prostitution of the highest dignity in the church:
would have given offence, even in those dark periods,-when
the credulous ftperflition of the people emboldened ecclefi--
allics to venture on the mofit flagrant violations of decorum.-
But in an enlightened age, when, by the progress of know-
ledge and philosophy, the obligations of duty and decency
were better understood, when a blind veneration for the pon-
tifical characer was every where abated, and one half ds
Christendom in open rebellion against the papal fee, this ac-
tion was viewed with horror. Rome was immediately filied
with libels and pasquinades, which imputed the pope's ex-
travagant regard for such an unworthy objeEt to the molt
criminal passions. The protetfants exclaimed against the ab--
furdity of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine truth:
could dwell in a breast so impure, and called more loudly
than ever, and with greater appearance ofjuftice,-for the itn;-
mediate and thorough reformation of a church, the head of
which was a disgrace to the Christian name-t The reflt
of the pope's condu& was of a piece with this firif specimen
fhis dispositions. 'Having now reached the summit of ec.
lefiaftical ambition,-he seemed eager to indemnify. himself,

an unrestrained indulgence of his defrres, -for the felf-de-

iial or diflimulation which he had thought it prudent to
pratife while in a -ubordinate fation. He became careless,
to so great a degree, of all serious business, that he could
eldom be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of extreme
leceffity; and giving up himself to amusements and diffipa-
ion of every kind, he imitated the luxurious elegance of

Sleid. 492. F. Paul, 2z8. Pallav. ii. 76. Thuan. lib. vi.-

k.2- -

Leo rather than the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of
which it was necessary to display, in contending with a fel
which derived great credit from the rigid and austere man.
ners of its teachers.

The pope, however ready to fulfil his engagements to the

family of Farnese, discovered no inclination to observe the
oath, which each cardinal had taken when he entered the
conclave, that if the choice Ihould fall on Irim, he would im-
mediately call the council to re-affnme its deliberationsi
Julius knew, by experience, how difficult it was to confine
such a body of men within the narrow limits which it was
the interest of the fee of Rome to prescribe; and how easily
the zeal of some members, the rashness of others, or the fug-
geftions of the princes on whom they depended, might pre.
cipitate a popular and ungovernable assembly into forbidden
i:quiries, as well as dangerous decisions. He wished, for
these reasons, to have eluded the obligation of his oath, and
gave an ambiguous answer to the first proposals which were
made to him by the emperor, with regard to that matter;
B3ut Charles, either from his natural obstinacy in adhering
to the measures which he had once adopted, or from the
mere pride of accomplishing what was held to be almost im-
peolible, perfiited in his resolution of forcing the protestants
to return into the bosom of the church. Having persuaded
himfclf, that the authoritative decisions of the council might
be employed with efficacy in combating their prejudices,
Lie, :1 consequence of that perfuafion,'continued to solicit
carne.t!y that a new bull of convocation might be issued;
and the pope could not, with decency, rejeA that request.
When TJ'.ius found tLat he could not prevent the calling of
a cuincil, he endeavoured to take to himself all the merit of
having procared tie meeting of an aflembly, which was the
ubj cft f such general desire and expe-aition. A congrega-
tion of cardinac, to whom he referred the consideration of
w-hat wva ,cceffary fur restoring peace to the church, recom-

* F. Paul, a8i.

mended, by his direaion, the speedy convocation of a coun-
cil, as the most effeEtual expedient for that purpose; and as
the new herefies raged with the greatest violence in Germa-
ny, they proposed Trent as the place of its meeting, that,
by a near infpe&ion of the evil, the remedy might be applied
with greater discernment and certainty of success. The
pope warmly approved of this advice, which he himself had
dictated, and sent nuncios to. the Imperial and French courts,
in order to make known his intentions. -

About this time, the emperor had summoned a new diet

to meet at Augsburg, in order to enforce the observation of
the Interim, and to procure a more authentic aft of the fu.
preme court in the empire, acknowledging the jurifdi&ion
of the council, as well as an explicit promise of conforming
to its decrees. He appeared there in person, together with
his son the prince of Spain [June 25J. Few electors were
present, but all sent deputies in their name. Charles, not-
withtlanding the despotic authority with which he had given
law in the empire during two years, knew that the spirit of
independence among the Germans was not entirely subdued,
and for that reason took care to over-awe the diet by a con-
liderable body of Spanish troops which escorted him thither.
The first point submitted to the consideration of the diet,

as the necessity of holding a council. All the popilh mem-
ers agreed, without difficulty, that the meeting of that as-
mbly should be renewed at Trent, and promised an impli-
it acquiescence in its decrees. The protestants, intimidat-
d and disunited, must have followed their example, and the
efolution of the diet would have proved unanimous, if Mau-
ice of Saxony had not begun at this time to disclose new
ntentions, and to a& a part very different-from that which
e had so long assumed.
By an artful dissimulation of his own sentiments; by ad.
refs in paying court to the emperor; and by the seeming
eal with which he forwarded all his ambitious schemes,

t F. Paul, a8. Pallav. ii. 77.

1 3

Maurice had raited himself to the ele&oral dignity; and
having added the dominions of the elder branch of the Sax-
on family to his own, he was become the moat powerful
prince in Germany. But his long and intimate union with
the emperor had afforded him many opportunities of obferv-
ing narrowly the dangerous tendency of that monarch's
schemes. He saw the yoke that was preparing for his
country; and from the rapid as well as formidable progress
of the Imperial power, was convinced that but a few fieps
more remained to be taken, in order to render Charles as
absolute a monarch in Germany as he had become in Spain.
The more eminent the condition was to which he himself
had been exalted, the more solicitous did Maurice naturally
become to maintain all its rights and privileges, and the
more did he dread the thoughts of descending from the rank
of a prince almost independent, to that of a vassal subjet to
the commands of a mailer. At the fame time he perceived
that Charles was bent on exacting a rigid conformity to the
dctrines and rites of the Romifll church, instead of allowing
liberty of confcienlce, the promise of which had allured feve.
rat proteltant princes to assist him in the war against the con.
federates of Smalkalde. As he himself, notwithflanding all
the compliances which he had made from motives ofintereft,
or an excess of confidence in the emperor, was sincerely at.
tached to the Lutheran tenets, he determined not to be a
tame fpeitator of the overthrow of a system which he be.
lieved to be founded in truth.

This resolution, flowing from the love of liberty, or zeal

for religion, was strengthened by political and interested con.
fiderations. In that elevated station in which Maurice was
now placed, new and more extensive profpets opened to his
'iew. His rank and power entitled him to be the head ol
the proteflants in the empire. His ptedeceffor, the degrad.
ed iector, with inferior abilities, and territories less confi.
derable, had acquired such an ascendant over the council!
of the paity; and Maurice neither wanted discernment tc

fee the advantage of this pre-eminence, nor ambition to aim
at attaining it. But he found himself in a situation which
rendered the attempt no less difficult, than the objec of it
was important. On the one hand, the conneaion which he
had formed with the emperor was so intimate, that he could
scarcely hope to take any fep which tended to diffolvc it,
without alarming his jealousy, and drawing on himself the
whole weight of that power, which had cruthed the greatest
confederacy ever formed in Germany. On the other hand
the calamities which he had brought on the proteflant party
were so recent, as well as great, that it seemed almost impof-
fible to regain their confidence, or to rally and re-animate
a body, after he himself had been the chief instrument in
breaking its union and vigour. These considerations were
sufficient to have discouraged any person of a spirit less ad-
venturous thant Maurice's. But to him the grandeur and
difficulty of the enterprise were allurements; and he boldly
resolved on measures, the idea of which a genius of an infe-
rior order could not have conceived, or would have trembled
at the thoughts of the danger that attended the execution
of them.

His passions concurred with his interest in confirming

this resolution; and the resentment excited by an injury,
which he sensibly felt, added new force to the motives for
opposing the emperor, which found policy suggested. Mau-
rice, by his authority, had prevailed on the landgrave of
Hesse to put his person in the emperor's power, and had
obtained a promise from the Imperial ministers that he should
not be detained a prisoner. This had been violated in the
manner already related. The unhappy landgrave exclaimed
as loudly against his fon-in-law as against Charles. The
princes of Hesse required Maurice incessantly to fulfil his en-
gagements to their father, who had loll his liberty by trusting
to hlim; and all Germany fufpeted him of having betrayed,
to an implacable enemy, the friend whom lie was most bound
to protect. Roused by these solicitations or reproaches, as

well as prompted by duty and affetion to his father-in-law,
Maurice had employed not only entreaties but remonstranceó
in order to procure his release. All these Charles had dif.
regarded; and the ihame of having been first deceived, and
then flighted, by a prince whom he had served with zeal as
well as fucccfs, which merited a very different return, made
fueh a deep impression on Maurice, that he waited with im-
patience for an opportunity of being revenged.

The utmost caution as well as the moR delicate address

were requisite in taking every ftep towards this end; as he
had to guard, on the one hand, against giving a premature
alarm to the emperor; while, on the other, something con.i-
derable and explicit was neceffiry to be done, in order to re-
gain the confidence of the protestant party. Maurice had
accordingly applied all his powers of art and dissimulation
to attain both there points. As he knew Charles to be in-
flexible with regard to the fubmifion which be required to
the Interim, he did not hesitate one moment whether he
Ihould eftabllh that form of doctrine and worihip in his do.
minions: but being sensible how odious it was to his sub-
jeds, inflead of violently imposing it on them by the mere
terror of authority, as had been done in other parts of Ger-
many, he endeavoured to render their obedience a voluntary
deed of their own. For this purpose, he had afiembled the
clergy of his country at Leipfick, and had laid the Interim
before them, together with the reasons which made it necef-
fary to conform to it. He had gained some of them by
promires, others he had- wrought upon by threats, and all
were intimidated by the rigour with which obedience to the
Interim was extorted in the neighbouring provinces. Even
Mlelan&hon, whose merit of every kind entitled him to the
firfl place among the protestant divines, being now deprived
of the manly counsels of Luther, which were wont to in.
spire him with fortitude, and to preserve him teady amidit
the torms and dangers that threatened the church, was
seduced into unwarrantable coacefiuons, by the timidity of

is temper, his fond desire of peace, and his exceflive com-
laifance towards persons of high rank. By his arguments
nd authority, no less than by Maurice's address, the asem.
ly was prevailed on to declare, " that, in points which were
purely indifferent, obedience was due to the commands of a
awful filperior." Founding upon this maxim, no less un-
controvertible in theory, than dangerous when carried intb
racice, especially in religious matters, many of the pro.
eftant ecclesiastics whom Maurice consulted, proceeded to
lass, among the number of things indifferent, several doce
trines, which Luther had pointed out as gross and pernici.
ous efrors in the Romiih creed; and placing in the fame
rank many of those rites which distinguished the reformed
from the popish worship, they exhorted their people to corn.
ply with the emperor's injunctions concerning these parti.
culars §.

By this dexterous-condu&, the introducion of- the Inte*

rim excited none of those violent convulsions in Saxony
which it occasioned in other provinces. But though the
Saxons submitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed a.
gainft Melanchon and his associates, as faife brethren, who
were either so wicked as to apostatize from the truth alto.
gether; or so crafty as to betray it by subtle distinCtions; or
so feeble-fpirited as to give it up from pusillanimity and cri.
minal complalfance to a prince, capable of sacrificing to his
political interest that which he himself regarded as moti fa.
cred. Maurice, being conscious what a colour of probabi.
lity his past condut gave to those accusations, as well as a.
fraid of losing entirely the confidence of the proteilants, if.
sued a declaration containing profcffions of his zealous at-
tachment to the reformed religion, and of his resolution to
guard against all the errors or encroachments of the papal
feet.

§ Sleid. 48r, 485. Jo. Laur. Mofhemii Inflitutionem Hist. Ee.

clfiafticae, lib. iv. ihclmi. 17 .5, 4to. p. 748. Jo. And. Schmi-
dii Hliftoria Interimiflica, p. 70, &c. llelmfl. 17jc.

t Sleid. 485.

Having gone so far in order to remove the fears and jea-

loufies of the protestants, he found it necessary to efface the
impreflion which such a declaration might make upon the
emperor. For that purpose, he not only renewed his pro.
feilions of an inviolable adherence to his alliance with him,
but as the city of Magdeburg still perfilted in rejecing the
Interim, he undertook to reduce it to obedience, and instant-
ly set about levying troops to be employed in that service.
This damped all the hopes which the protestants began to
conceive of Maurice, in consequence of his declaration, and
left them more than ever at a loss to guess at his real inten-
tions. Their former suspicion and dilfruft of him revived,
and the divines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings
in which they represented him as the moit formidable enemy
of the protestant religion, who treacherously assumed an ap-
pearance of zeal for its interefl, that he might more effec.
tually execute his schemes for its deftruAion.

This charge, supported by the evidence of recent fals, as

well as by his present dubious condut, gained such univerp
fal credit, that Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep
in his own vindication. As soon as the re-assembling of the
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his ambassadors
protested that their master would not acknowledge its au-
thority, unless all the points which had been already decid-
ed there, were reviewed, and confidered as still undetermin.
ed; unless the proteflant divines had a full hearing granted
them, and were allowed a decisive voice in the council; and
unless the pope renounced his pretensions to preside in the
council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and to absolve the
bishops from their oath of obedience, that they might deli-
ver their sentiments with greater freedom. These demands,
which were higher than any that the reformers had ventur-
ed to make, even when the zeal of their party was warmest,
or their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced in some de-
gree, the impression which Maurice's preparations against
Magdeburg had made upon the minds of the protefants, and

ept them in suspense with regard- to his designs. At the
me time, he had dexterity enough to represent this part of
is conduA in such a light to the emperor, that it gave him
o offence, and occaficned no interruption of the flrit con.
dence which subsisted between them. What the pretexts
ere which he employed, in order to give such a bold de.
aration an innocent appearance, the contemporary hiftori-
s have not explained; that they imposed upon Charles is
ertain, for he fill continued not only to prosecute his plan,
well concerning the Interim as the council, with the fame
rdour, but to place the fame confidence in Maurice, with
egard to the execution of both.

The pope's resolution concerning the council not being
et known at Augsburg, the chief business of the diet was
:o enforce the observation of the Interim. As the senate of
Iagdeburg; notwithstanding various endeavours to frighten
r to soothe them into compliance, not only persevered ob-
inately in their opposition to the' Interim, but began to
rengthen the fortifications of their city, and to levy troops
their own defence, Charles required the diet to assist him in
ulling this audacious rebellion againif a decree of the em-
ire. Had the members of the diet been left to aA agree-
ly to their own inclination, this demand would have been
jeced without hesitation. All the Germans who favoured,
any degree, the new opinions in religion, and many who
ere influenced by no other consideration than jealousy of
e emperor's growing power, regarded this effort of the ci-
zens of Magdeburg, as a noble stand for the liberties of
eir country. Even such as had not resolution to exert the
me spirit, admired the gallantry of their enterprise, and
ithed it success. But the presence of Spanish troops, to-
ther with the dread of the emperor's displeasure, over.
ed the members of the diet to such a degree, that, with-
ut venturing to utter their own sentiments, they tamely ra-
ified, by their votes, whatever the emperor was pleased to
;rcfcl-ibe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued

Having gone so far in order to remove the fears and jea.

loufies of the protestants, he found it necefTary to efface the
imprcfion which such a declaration might make upon the
emperor. For that purpose, he not only renewed his pro.
sessions of an inviolable adherence to his alliance with him,
but as the city of Magdeburg fill perfilted in rejecting the
Interim, he undertook to reduce it to obedience, and instant.
ly set about levying troops to be employed in that service.
This damped all the hopes which the proteflants began to
conceive of Maurice, in consequence of his declaration, and
left them more than ever at a loss to guess at his real inten-
tions. Their former suspicion and dillrulf of him revived,
and the divines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings
in which they represented him as the moll formidable enemy
of the protestant religion, who treacherously assumed an ap-
pearance of zeal for its interest, that he might more effec.
tually execute his schemes for its deftru&ion.

This charge, supported by the evidence of recent fats, as

well as by his present dubious condut, gained such univerp
fal credit, that Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep
in his own vindication. As soon as the re-assembling of the
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his ambassadors
protefied that their mailer would not acknowledge its au-
thoriry, unless all the points which had been already decid.
ed there, were reviewed, and confidered as still undetermin-
ed; unless the protestant divines had a full hearing granted
them, and were allowed a decisive voice in the council; and
unless the pope renounced his pretenifons to preside in the
council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and to absolve the
bithops from their oath of obedience, that they might deli-
ver their sentiments with greater freedom. These demands,
which were higher than any that the reformers had ventur-
ed to make, even when the zeal of their party was warmest,
or their affairs most prosperous, counterbalanced in rome de-
gree, the impression which Maurice's preparations against
Magdeburg had made upon the minds of the protestants, and

ept them in suspense with regard to his designs. At the
me time, he had dexterity enough to represent this part of
is conduc in such a light to the emperor, that it gave him

offence, and occasioned no interruption of the flria con.
ence which subsisted between them. What the pretexts
ere which he employed, in order to give such a bold de.
aration an innocent appearance, the contemporary hiftori-
s have not explained; that they imposed upon Charles is
tain, for he still continued not only to prosecute his plan,
well concerning the Interim as the council, with the fame
dour, but to place the fame confidence in Maurice, with
gard to the execution of both.
The pope's resolution concerning the council not being
et known at Augsburg, the chief bulinefs of the diet was
o enforce the observation of the Interim. As the senate of

agdeburg; notwithstanding various endeavours to frighten
r to soothe them into compliance, not only persevered ob-
inatcly in their opposition to the' Interim, but began to
rengthen the fortifications of their city, and to levy troops
their own defence, Charles required the diet to aflif him in
uelling this audacious rebellion againil a decree of the em-
ire. Had the members of the diet been left to am agree-
ly to their own inclination, this demand would have been
ejeced without hesitation. All the Germans who favoured,
any degree, the new opinions in religion, and many who
ere influenced by no other consideration than jealousy of
e emperor's growing power, regarded this effort of the ci-
zens of Magdeburg, as a noble stand for the liberties of
eir country. Even such as had not resolution to exert the
me spirit, admired the gallantry of their enterprise, and
ifhed it success. But the presence of Spanish troops, to-
ther with the dread of the emperor's displeasure, over-
wed the members of the diet to such a degree, that, with.
ut venturing to utter their own sentiments, they tamely ra-
sied, by their votes, whatever the emperor was pleased to
rcfcribe. The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued

by his own authority against the Magdcburgers, were con-
firmed; a resolution was taken to raise troops in order to
besiege the city in form; and persons were named to fix the
contingent in men or money to be furnilhed by each state.
At the fame time the diet petitioned that Maurice might be
entrusted with the command of that army; to which Charles
gave his consent with great alacrity, and with high encomi-
ums upon the wisdom of the choice which they had made§.
As Maurice conducted all his schemes with profound and im-
penetrable secrecy, it is probable that he took no ftep a-
vowedly in order to obtain this charge. The lecommen.
dation of his countrymen was either purely accidental, or
flowed from the cpinion generally entertained of his great
.abilities; and neither the diet had any foresight, nor the em-
peror any dread, of-the consequences which followed upon
this nomination. Maurice accepted, without hesitation, the
command to which he was recommended, instantly discern-
ing the important advantages which he might derive from
having it committed to him.

Meanwhile, Julius, in preparing the bull for the convoca-

tion of the council, observcd all those tedious forms which
the court of Rome can artfully employ to retard any-difagree-
able measure. At lal, however, it -was published, and the
council was summoned to meet at Trent on the first day of
the ensuing month of May. -As he knew that many of the
Germans rejcted or disputed the authority and jurifdiAion
which the papal fee claims with respect to general councils,
he took care, in the preamble of the bull, to assert, in the
strongest terms, his own right, not only to call and preside
in that assembly, but to diret its proceedings; nor would
he soften these expreflions in any degree, in compliance with
the repeated felicitations of the emperor; who foresaw whai
offence they would give, and what conftru&ion might be
1ut on them. They were censurcd accordingly with great
fcrcrity by several members of the diet; but whatever difgutf

S S-id. 5 03, 51.

or fufpicin they excited, such complete influence over all
their deliberations had the emperor acquired, that he pro-
cured a recess [Feb. 13, 155 l], in which the authority of
he council was recognised, and declared to be the proper re"
medy for the evils which at that time affli&ed the church;
all the princes and Rates of the empire, such as had made in-
novations in religion, as well as those who adhered to the fy-
tem of their forefathers, were required to fend their repre.
entatives to the council; the-emperor engaged to grant a
fafe-conduC to such as demanded it, and to secure them an
impartial hearing in the council; he promised to fix his re-
fidence in some city of the empire, in the neighbourhood of
Trent, that he might proteA the members of the council by
his presence, and take care that, by conducting their delibe.
rations agreeably to scripture and the doArine of the fathers,
they might bring them to a desirable issue. In this recess,
the observation of the Interim was more ftritly enjoined
than ever; and the emperor threatened all who had hitherto
negleaed or refused to conform to it, with the severest es-
seAs of his vengeance, if they persisted in their-difobedience§.

During the meeting of this diet, a new attempt was made,

in order to procure liberty to the landgrave. That prince,
no ways reconciled to his ftuation by 'time, grew every day
more impatient of retraint. Having often applied to Mau-
ice and the elecor of Brandenburg, who took every occa-
on of soliciting the emperor in his behalf, though without
ny effeft, he now commanded his sons to summon them,
i:h legal formality, to perform what was-contained in the
ond which they had granted him, by surrendering them-
fcves into their hands to be treated with the fame rigour as
he emperor had used him. This furnilhed them with a
reh pretext for renewing their application to the emperor,
ogether with an additional argument to enforce it. Charles
rmly resolved not to grant their requefl; though, at the
§ Sleid. 5z. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldafti Conflit. Imperia.
es, vol ii. 340.

'Vol. IV. C

-fame time, being extremely desirous to be delivered from
-their incessant importunity, he endeavoured to prevail on
the landgrave -to give up the bond which he had received
trom the two eletors. But that prince refusing to past
.wvith a security which he deemed essential to his safety, the
-emperor boldly cut the knot which he could not untie;
-and by a public deed annulled the bond which Maurice and
·the elecor of Brandenburg had granted, absolving them
from all their engagements to the landgrave. No preten.
sion to a power .so pernicious to society as that of abrogat-
ing at pleasure the most sacred laws of honour, and most
'formal obligations of public faith, had hitherto been form-
.ed by any but the Roman pontiffs, who, in consequence of
,their claim of supreme power on earth, arrogate the right
-of dispensing with precepts and duties of.every kind. All
,Germany was filled with astonishment, when Charles affum.
cd the fame prerogative. The fate of fubjeEtion, to which
*the empire was reduced, appeared to be more rigorous, as
,well as intolerable, than that of the most wretched and en.
slaved nations, if the emperor, by an arbitrary decree,
*might cancel those solemn contracs which are the founda-
.tion of that mutual confidence whereby men are held toge.
*ther in social union. The landgrave himself now gave up
all hopes of recovering his liberty by the emperor's consent,
and endeavoured to procure it by his own address. But the
plan which he had formed to deceive his guards being dif-
covered, such of his attendants as he had gained to favour
his escape, were put to death, and he was confined in the
citadel of Mechlin more clofcly than ever t.

Another tranfaclion was carried on during this diet, with

respect to an affair more nearly interesting to the emperor,
and which occasioned likewise a general alarm among the
prnces of the empire. Charles, though formed with ta.
knts which fitted him for conceiving and conducing great
ddlgns% was not capable, as has been often bbferved, d

i S!cid. c4. Thuan. L vi. 134, 235.

earing extraordinary success. Its operation on his mind:
as so violent and intoxicating, that it elevated him beyond
hat was moderate or attainable, and turned his whole at,-
ention to the pursuit of vast but chimerical obje&s.. Such,
ad been the effec of his victory over the confederates of,
malkalde. He did not long reft satisfied with the fubftan-
ial and certain advantages which were the result of-that e-
ent, but, despising these, as poor or inconsiderable fruits of'
ch great success, he aimed at nothing less than at bringing
Germany to an uniformity, in religion, and at rendering

he Imperial power despotic. These were objects extreme-
y splendid indeed, and alluring to an ambitiousemind; the
urfuit of them, however, was attended with manifest dan-
er, and the hope of attaining them very uncertain. But
he ileps which he had already taken towards them, having
een accompanied with such success, his imagination, warm-
d with contemplating this alluring objet, overlooked or de-
pifed all remaining difficulties. As he conceived the exe-
ution of his plan to be certain, he began to be solicitous
w he might render the poffeflion of such an important ac-
,;ntioa perpetual'iri h;s famir, by tranfittifig the Ger-;
an empire, together with the kingdoms of Spain, and his
lomnions in Italy and the Low-Countries, to his son.
aving long revolved this flattering idea in his mind, with.
ut communicating it, even to those ministers whom he.
oft trufed, he had called. Philip out of Spain, in hopes that

pretence would facilitate the carrying forward the-

heme.
Great obsacles, however, and such as would have deter-
ed any ambition less accuitomed to overcome difficulties,
ere to be surmounted. He had, in the year one thousand
'e hundred and thirty, imprudently aflitled in procuring
s brother Ferdinand the dignity of king of the Romans,
ld there was no probability that this prince, who was fill
the prime of life, and had a son grown up to the years of,
laood, would relinquish, in favour of his nephew, the -

C 2z

near profpe& of the Imperial throne, which Charles's in.
firmities and declining fate of health opened to himsel£
This did not deter the emperor from venturing to make the
proposition; and when Ferdinand, notwithstanding his pro-
found reverence for his brother, and obsequious fubmiflion
to his will in other inflances, rejeaed it in a peremptory
tone, he was not discouraged by one repulse. He renewed
his applications to him by his sifter, Mary queen of Hunga.
ry, to whom Ferdinand flood indebted for the crowns both
of Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her great abilities,
tempered with extreme gentleness of disposition, had ac-
quired an extraordinary influence over both the brothers.
She ertered -.' armly into a measure, which tended so manifest-
ly to aggrandize the house of Aufriai and flattering herself
that 'he could tempt Ferdinand to renounce the reversionary
poffefflon of the Imperial dignity for an immediate establish,
ment, he affi:red him that the emperor, by way of compen-
fation for his giving up his chance of facceffion would inflant.
ly beaow upon him territories of very considerable value, and
pointed out in particular those of the duke of Wurtemberg,
which might be confiscated upon different pretexts. But
r.either by her address nor intreaties could Ihe induce Ferdi-
nand to approve of a plan, which would not only have de-
graded him from the highest rank among the monarchs of
Europe to that of a subordinate and dependent prince, but
would have involved both him and his posterity in perpetu.
al contelfs. He was, at the fame time, more attached to
his children, than by a rash concession to frustrate all the
high hopes, in profpe& of which they had been educated.

Notwithitanding the immoveable firmness which Ferdi

nand discovered, the emperor did not abandon his scheme.
He flattered himself that he might attain the objea in view
by another channel, and that it was not impofible to pre.
vail on the eletors to cancel their former choice of Ferdi,
nand, or at least to ele& Philip a second king of the Ro.
mans, fubRituting him as next in fucceflion to his uncle.

ith this view, he took Philip along with him to the diet,
at the Germans might have an opportunity to observe
d become acquainted with the prince, in behalf of whom
courted their interefl; and he himself employed all the.
s of address or insinuation to gain the electors, and to
repare them for listening with a favourable ear to the pro- -
fal. But no sooner did he venture upon mentioning it to
em, than they, at once, saw and trembled t the confe.
iences with which it would be attended.' They had long
t all the inconveniencies of having placed at the head of
e empire a prince whose power and dominions were so ex-
five; if they fhodU now repeat the folly, and continue the
perial crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the fame fa-
ily, they foresaw that they would give the son an oppor-
nity of carrying on that system of oppression which the
ther had begun;- and would put it in his power to overturn.-
hatever was yet left entire in the ancient and venerable fa-.
ic of the German constitution.
The character of the prince, in whole favour this extra.
dinary proposition was made, rendered it fill less agree-
le. Philip, though possesed with an insatiable desire of
ower, was a firanger to all the arts of conciliating goods
ill. Haughty, reserved, and severe, he, instead of gaining
iw friends, disgusted the ancient and most devoted parti.
ns of the Autrian interef. He scorned to take the
ouble of acquiring the language of the country..to the go.,
rnment of which he aspired; nor would he condescend to.
y the Germans the compliment of accommodating him-
If, during his residence among them, to their manners and
floms. * He allowed the elecors and molt illustrious prin-
s in Germany to remain in his presence uncovered, assed-
g a flately and difant demeanour, which the greatest of,
e German emperors, and even Charles himself, amidst the
ride of power and victory, had never assumed. On the

Frediman Andreae Zultch Diflertatio politico.hiltorica de Ni.
poL;t .is Carvli V. Lipt; 1706. 4to p.
p .

C3

other band, Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Ger-
many, had studied to render himfedf acceptable to the peo.
pie, by a conformity to their manners, which seemed to
flow from choice; and his son Maximilian, who was born
in Germany, possessed, in an eminent degree, such ami.
able qualities as rendered him the darling of his country.
men, and induced them to look forward to his eleci.
on as a moRi desirable event. Their esteem and affection
for him, fortified the resolution which found policy had
suggested; and determined the Germans to prefer the po-
pular virtues of Ferdinand and his son, to the stubborn au.
fterity of Philip, which interest could not soften, nor ambi.
tion teach him to disguise. All the eletors, the ecelefiafti.
cal as well as secular, concurred in expressing such strong
disapprobation of the measure, that Charles, notwithltand.
ing the relutance with which he gave up any point, wan
obliged to drop the scheme as impraticable. By his un-
seasonable perseverance in pushing it, he had not only filled
the Germans with new jealousy of his ambitious designs, but
laid the foundation of rivalihip and discord in the Austrian
family, and forced his brother Ferdinand, in felf-defence, to
court the eleAors, particularly Maurice of Saxony, and to
form such connetions with them, as cut off all profpe& ol
renewing the proposal with fuccefe. Philip, foured by his
dilappointment, was sent back to Spain, to be called thence
when any new scheme of ambition should render his prefeunc
Recefaryt.

Having relinquished this plan of domeltic ambitions

which had long occupied and engroffd him, Charles ima
gined that he would now have leisure to turn all his atten
tion towards his grand scheme of establishing uniformity ol
Religion in the empire, by forcing all the contending partiet
to acquiesce in the decisions of the council of Trent. Bul
such was the extent of his dominions, the variety of con

Sleid. 505. Thnan. 180, Z38. Memoir. de Ribier, ii. Z9
a$s, 314. Adruiai olor. ib. viiL S07, 520.

etions in which this entangled him, and the multiplicity
f events to which these gave rife, as seldom allowed him to
pply his whole force to any one obje&. The machine
hich he had to condu& was so great and complicated, that
n unforeseen irregularity or obRlru&ion in one of the infe-
ior wheels, often disconcerted the motion of the whole,
nd prevented his deriving from them all the beneficial es-
ets which he expeted. Such an unlooked-for occurrence
appened at this junture, and created new obstacles to the
xecution of his schemes with regard to religion. Julius
II. though he had confirmed Osavio Farnese in the posses-
on of the dutchy of Parma, during the first effusions of his
oy and gratitude on his promtion to the papal throne,
on began to repent of his own generosity, and to be ap-
rehenfive ofconfequences which either he did not foresee, or
ad disregarded, while the sense of his obligations to the
mily of Farnese was recent. The emperor still retained
lacentia in his hands, and had not relinquished his preten-
ons to Parma as a fief of the empire. Gonzaga, the go-
ernor of Milan, having, by the part which he took in the
urder of the late duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult
o the family of Farnese, which he knew could never be for-
iven, had, for that reason, vowed its deflruction; and em-
loyed all the influence which his great abilities, as well as
ng services, gave him with the emperor, in persuading him
o seize Parma by force of arms. Charles, in compliance
ith his solicitations, and that he might gratify his own de.
re of annexing Parma to the Milanese, listened to the pro-
ofal; and Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement from the
ighteft appearance of approbation, began to assemble
roops, and to make other preparations for the execution of
iis scheme.

Octavio, who saw the impending danger, found it necef-
ary, for his own safety, to increase the garrison of his ca-
ital, and to levy soldiers for defending the reft of the coun-
y But as the expence of such an effort far exceeded his

scanty revenues, he represented his situation to the pope,
and implored that protetion and assistance which was due
to him as a vassal of the church. The Imperial minister,
however, had already pre-occupied the pope's ear; and by
difcouriing continually concerning the danger of giving of.
fence to the emperor, as well as the imprudence of support-
ing Octavio in an usurpation so detrimental to the holy fee,
had totally alienated him from the family of Farnese. Oc-
tavio's remonflrance and petition met, of consequence, with
a cold reception; and he, despairing of any affitance from
Julius, began to look round for prote&ion from some other
quarter. Henry II. of France was the only prince power.
ful enough to afford him t'.'s protection, and fortunately he
was now in a situation which allowed him to grant it. He
had brought his transactions with the two British kingdoms
which had hitherto diverted his attention from the affairs of
the continent, to such an issue as he desired. This he had
effected partly by the vigour of his arms, partly by his dex.
terity in taking advantage of the political facions which
raged in both kingdoms to such a degree, as rendered the
councils of the Scots violent and precipitate, and the opera-
tions of the Englifl feeble and unsteady. He had procured
from the English favourable conditions of peace for his allies
the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of Scotland not
only to affiance their young queen to his son the dauphin,
but even to fend her into France, that (he might be educat.
ed under his eye; and had recovered Boulogne, together
with its dependencies, which had been conquered by Hen.
ry VII I.

The French king having gained points of so much con.

feqveace to his crown, and disengaged himself with such
honour from the burden of supporting the Scots,.and main.
taining a war against England, was now at full leisure to
pursue the measures which his hereditary jealousy of the
emperor's power naturally fuggerled. He liflened accord.
iugly, to the first overtures which Octavia Farnese made

m; and embracing eagerly an opportunity of recovering
ting in Italy, he instantly concluded a treaty, in.which
bound himself to espouse his cause, and to furnilh him
the afiftance which he desired. This tranfaaion could
t be long kept secret from the pope, who foreseeing the
amities which must follow if war were rekindled so near
eecclefiaftical fate, immediately issued monitory letters
uiring O&avio to relinquilh his new alliance. Upon
refusal to comply with the requisition, he soon as.
pronounced his fief to be forfeited, and declared
r again t him as a disobedient and rebellious vas-
. But as, with his own forces alone, he could not hope
filbdue Otavio while supported by such a powerful ally
the king of France, be had recourse to the emperor, who
ing extremely solicitous to prevent the establishment of
e French in Parma, ordered Gonzaga to second Julius-
th all his troops. Thus the French took the field as the
ies of Oftavio, the Imperialists as the protecors of the
ly fee; and hofilities commenced between them, while
harks and Henry themselves still affected to give out that
ey would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. The
r of Parma was not distinguished by any memorable event.
any small rencountres happened with alternate success; thei
rench ravaged part of the ecclefiafical territories; the Im.
rialifts laid wafe the Parmesan; and the latter, after hav-
g begun to besiege Parma in form, were obliged to aban.
n the enterprise with disgrace *.
But the motions and alarm which this war, or the pre-
rations for it, occasioned in- Italy, prevented most of the
alian prelates from repairing to Trent on the firt of May,.
e day appointed for re-assembling the council; and though
e papal legate and nuncios resorted thither, they were o-
iged to adjourn the council to the first of September, hop-

Adriani litor. lib. viii. 5os, Sr4, 524. Sleid. S3. Paruta, p.
?o. Lettere del Caro feritte al nome del Card. Farnese, tom. ii. p,

ing such a number of prelates might then assemble, that
they m;ght with decency begin their deliberations.' At
that time about sixty prelates, moltly from the ecclefiatical
irate, or from Spain, together with a few Germans, conven.
ed t. The session was opened with the accustomed formali.
tics, and the fathers were about to proceed to business,
when the abbot of Bcllozane appeared, and presenting let.
ters of credence as ambassador from the king of France, de.
manded audience. Having obtained it; he protested, in
Henry's name, against an assembly called at such an impro.
per juncure, when a war, wantonly kindled by the pope,
made it impofble for the deputies from the Gallican church
to retort to Trent in safety, or to deliberate concerning arti.
cles of faith and discipline with the requisite tranquillity; he
declared, that his rr.afer did not acknowledge this to be a
general or oecumenic council, but muit confider, and would
treat it, as a particular and partial convention.. The leI
gate affected to despise this protest; and the prelates pro.
ceedcd, notwithstanding, to examine and decide the great
points in controversy concerning the sacrament of the
Lord's supper, penance, and extreme uantlon. This mea;
sure of the French monarch, however, gave a deep wound
to the credit of the council, at the very commencement ol
its deliberations. The Germans would not pay much re.
gard to an assembly, the authority of which the second
prince in Christendom had formally disclaimed, or feel any
great reverence for the decisions of a few men, who arrogat
ed to themfclves all the rights belonging to the reprefenta.
tives of the church universal, a title to which they- had fuel
poor pretentions.

The emperor, nevertheless, was Draining his authority tU

the utmolt, in order to eitablilh the reputation and jurifdic
tion of the council. He had prevailed on the three ecclefi
aftical electors, the prelates of greatest power and dignit)
in the church next to the pope, to repair thither in per

t F Paul, z68. tSlcid. si8. Thuan. i82. F. Paul, 301.

. He had obliged several German biflops of inferior
nk, to go to Trent themselves, or to fend their proxies.
e granted an Imperial fafe-condut to the ambafladors no-
inated by the elecsor of Brandenburg, the duke of Wur-

rmberg, and other protettants, to attend the council; and
horted them to fend their divines thither, in order to pro-
und, explain, and defend their do&trine. At the fame
me, his zeal anticipated the decrees of the council; and as
the opinions of the proteflants had already been condemn-
,he took large fleps towards exterminating them. With
is intention, he called together the ministers of Augsburg;
d after interrogating them concerning several controverted
ilits enjoined them to teach nothing with refpe't to these
ntrary to the tenets of the Romish church. Upon their
clining to comply with a requisition so contrary to the
dates of their corifciences, he commanded them to leave
e town in three days, without revealing to any person the
iufe of their banishment; he prohibited them to preach for
e future in any province of the empire; and obliged them
take an oath that they would punctually obey there in-
nEtions. They were not the only vitims to his zeal.
he protestant clergy, in most of the cities in the circle of
abia, were cjeted with the fame violence; and in many
aces, such magistrates as had distinguished themselves by
eir attachment to the new opinions, were dismissed with
e most abrupt irregularity, and their offices filled, in con-
quence of the emperor's arbitrary appointment, with the
oti bigottedof their adversaries. The reformed worship
as almoit entirely suppressed throughout' that extensive
ovince. The ancient and fundamental privileges of the
ce cities were violated. The people were compelled to
tend the minifiration ofprieNls, whom they regarded with
rror as idolaters; and to submit to the jurisdiction of ma-
frates, whom they detested as ufiorpr-s *.
I'The emperor, after this discovery, which was more ex-
Cit than any that he had hitherto made, of his intention

* Sleid. 516, 5 TI:a. Tua 276.

to subvert the German constitution, as well as to extirpate
the proteflant religion, set out for Infpruck in the Tyrol
He fixed his residence in that city [Novem.], as, by ifi
situation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and on the con.
fines of Italy, it appeared a commodious station, whence
he might infpe& the operations of the council, and observe
-the progress of the war in the Parmesan without losing
fight of such occurrences-as might happen in Germanys.

During these tranfa&ions, the siege of Magdeburg wa

carried on with various success. At the time when Charla
proscribed the citizens of Magdeburg, and put them unda
the ban of the empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined al
the neighbouring flztes to take arms against them, as rebel
-and common enemies. Encouraged by his exhortations a
well as ptomifes, George of Mecklenburg, a younger bro
-ther of the reigning duke, an acive and ambitious prince
colleced a considerable number of those soldiers of fortun
who had accompanied Henry of Brunswick in all his wili
enterprises; and though a zealous Lutheran himself, invadd
the territories of the Miagdeburgers, hoping that, by th
merit of this fern-ice, he might procure some part of thei
domains to be allctted to him as an-eftab!ifhment. The ci
tizens, unaccustomed as yet to endure patiently the calami
ties of war, could not be restrained from sallying out in or
der to fare their lands from being laid waite. They at
tacked the duke of Mecklenburg with more resolution the
-condud, and were repulsed with great slaughter. But a
they were animated with that unconquerable spirit, whid
flows from zeal for religion co-operating with the lovec
civil liberty, far from being diiheartened by their misfortune
they prepared to defend themarlvee with vigour. Many d
the veteran soldiers who had served in the long wars betwee
the errperor and king of France, crowding to their fland
ards under able and experienced officers, the citizens acqui
ed military fi'il by degrees, and added all the advantagesJ

Scitd. 29.

hat to the efforts of undaunted courage. The duke of
Mecklenburg, notwithltanding the severe blow which he
ad given the Magdeburgers, not daring to invest a town
rongly fortified, and defended by such a garrison, continued
o ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers to the
amp of this young prince, Maurice of Saxony began to be
ealous of the power which he possessed by being at the head
f such a numerous-body, and marching towards Magdeburg
With his own troops, assumed the supreme command of the
whole army, an honour to which his high rank and great a-
ilities, as well as the nomination of the diet, gave him an
ndifputable title. With this united force, he invested the
town, and began the siege in form; claiming great merit
with the emperor on that account, as from his zeal to exe-
ute the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself once more
o the censures and maledicions of the party with which he
greed in religious fentirtents. But the approaches to the
own went on slowly; the garrison interrupted the beiegers
y frequent sallies, in one of which George of Mecklenburg
was taken prisoner, levelled part of their works, and cut off
he soldiers in their advanced pofls. While the citizens of
Magdeburg, animated by the discourses of their paflors, and
he soldiers, encouraged by the example of their officers, en-
ured all the hardships of a siege without murmuring, and
efended themselves with the fame ardour which they had
t first difcoveredl the troops of the besiegers a6ted with
xtreme remissness, repining at every thing that they susser-
d in a service which they disliked. They broke out more
han once into an open mutiny, demanding the arrears of
heir pay, which, as the members of the Germanic body lent
n their contributions towards defraying the expences of the
ar sparingly, and with great reluctance, amounted to a
considerable fum*. Maurice, too, had particular motives,
hough such as he durst not avow at that junature, which

* Thuan. 277z Slid. 514.
Vol. IV. D

induced him not to puih the siege with vigour, and made
iim chufe rather to contirue-at the head of an army ex.
lpofd to all the imputations which his dilatory proceeding
drew upon him, than to precipitate a conquest that might
have brotght him fume accession of reputation, but would
have rendered it necessary to diiband his forces.

At laflR the inhabitants of the town beginning to fuffe

4iairefs from want of provisions, and Maurice, .finding it im.
possible to protra& matters any longer without filling the
remperor with such suspicions as might have disconcerted al
ihis measures, he concluded a treaty of capitulation with the
city T'Govem. 3] upon the following conditions; that the
Alagdeburgers Mhould humbly implore pardon of the empe.
sor; that they fmould not for the future take arms, or enter
into any alliance againit the house of Austria; that they
lhotd submit to the authority of the Imperial chamber,
that they should conform to the decree of the diet at A.ug.
burg with tepeA to religion; that the new fortifications
added to the tofn should be demolilhed; that they should
pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns, deliver up twelve pieces
of ordnance to the emperor, and set the duke of Mecklen.
burg, together with their other prisoners, at liberty, with'
cut ransom. Next day their garrison marched out, and
Maurice took poffefion of the town with great military
pomp.

Before the terms of capitulation were fettled, Maurice

had held many conferences with Albert count Mansfeldt,
who had the chief command in Magdeburg. He consulted
likewise with tount Heideek, an officer who had served with
great reputation in the army of the league of Smalkalde,
whomthe emperor had profcrbed on account of his zeal fm
that cause, but whom Maurice had, notwithflanding, secret
ly engaged in his service, and admitted into the most inti
mate confidence. To them he communicated a scheme
which he had long revolved in his mind, for procuring liber
tv to his father-in-law the landgrave, for vindicating the pri

leges of the Germanic body, and setting bounds to the-
ngerous encroachments of the Imperial power. Having
liberated with them concerning the measures which might
eneceflary for securing the success of such a, arduous. en-
rprife, he gave Mansfeldt secret assurances that-the fortifi-
tions of Magdeburg should not be deflroyed, and that the.
habitants (hould neither be diflirbed'in the exercise of their
ligion, nor be deprived of any of their ancient immunities.-

order to engage Maurice more thoroughly from confi-
rations of interefc to fulfil there engagements, the senate
f Magdeburg eleEted him their burgrave, a dignity which
ad formerly belonged to the Ole&oral house of Saxony, and.-
hich entitled him to a very ample jurifdi&ion not only in;
e city but in its dependenciest.
Thus the citizens of Magdeburg, asser enduring a- siege
twelve months, and struggling for their liberties, religious
d civil, with an invincible fortitude, worthy of the cause
which it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to
nclude a treaty which left them in a better condition than
e ret of their countrymen, whom their timidity or- want,-
public spirit had betrayed into such mean submissions to
e emperor. But while a great part of Germany applaud-
the gallant condua of the Magdeburgersi and rejoiced,'
their having escaped the deftrution with which they had.:
en threatened, all admired Maurices address in.the con-
Et of his negotiation with them, as well as the dexterity
ith which he cQnverted.every event to his-own advantage.
hey saw, with. amazement, that after having afflicted the
agdeburgers during, many monthswith all the calamities
war, he was at lafi, by their, voluntary eledion, advanced
the flation of highest authority in that city which- he had;
lately besieged; that after having been so long the object
their satirical invefives as an apostate and an enemy to
religion which he professed, they seemed now to place. -
Sleld. qa. Thuan. ii. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici D-.
ipio per Sebafl. Besndlmeierum, ap. Scard. ii. s$ 8.

D z

unbounded confidence in his zeal and good will*. At the
fame time, the public articles in the treaty of capitulation
were so perfetly conformable to those which the emperor
had granted to the other protestant cities, and Maurice took
such care to magnify his merit in having reduced a place
which had defended itself with so much obstinacy, that
Charles, far from fulpeting any thing fraudulent or collu-
five in the terms of accommodation, ratified them without
hesitation, and absolved the Magdeburgere from the sentence
of ban which had been denounced againit them.

The only point that now remained to embarrfs Maurice

was how to keep together the veteran troops which had
served under him, as well as those which had been employed
in the defence of the town. For this, too, he found an ex.
pedient with singular art and felicity. His schemes against
the emperor were not yet so fully ripened, that he durst ven-
ture to disclose them, and proceed openly to carry them in-
to execution. The winter was approaching, which made
it impcffible to take the field immediately. He was afraid
that it would give a premature alarm to the emperor, if he
should retain fiuch a considerable body in his pay until the
season of aftion returned in the spring. As soon then a
Magdeburg opened its gates, he sent home his Saxon sub.
jeds, whom he could command to take arms and re-assemble
on the shortest warning; and at the fame time, paying part
of the arrears due to the mercenary troops, who had follow-
ed his Randard, as well as to the soldiers who had served in
the garrison, he absolved them from their refpe&ive oaths of
fidelity, and disbanded them. But the moment he gave
them their discharge, George of Mecklenburg, who wal
now set at liberty, offered to take them into his service, and
to become surety for the payment of what was ftin owing
to them. As such adventurers were accustomed often to
change masters, they inftantli accepted the offer. Thu
these troops were kept united, and ready to march wherevec

* Aoldi vita Maurit. apud MIenken, ii. 1117.

Maurice should call them, while the emperor, deceived by
this artifice, and imagining that George of Mecklenburg
had hired them with an intention to assert his claim to a
part of his brother's territories by-force of arms, suffered.
this tranfation to pass without ofervation, .as if it had-:
been a matter of no consequence.;-

Having ventured to take these siep, which were of so

much consequence towards the execution of his schemes,
Maurice, that he might, divert the emperor from observing
their tendency too narrowly, and prevent the fufpicionswhlich
that must have excited, saw the necefity of employing some
new artifice in order to; engage his attention, and to confirm
him in his present security. As he knew that the chief ob-
jest of the emperor's solicitude at this junture, was how he
might prevail with the protestant states of Germany to re-
cognize the authority ofthe council of Trent, and to fend
thither ambassadors in their own name, as well as deputies
from their refpefive churches, he took hold of this predo-.
minating passion in order to amuse and to deceive him. He
asseted a wonderful zeal to gratify Charles in what he de-
fired with regard to this matter; he nominated ambassadors,
whom he empowered to attend the council; he made choice
of Melanathon and some of the motl eminent among his
brethren to prepare a confession of faith, and to lay it-before
that assembly. After his example, and probably in confe.
quence of his solicitations, the duke ofWurtemberg, the ci-
ty of Stra(burg, and other protestant fates, appointed am.
baffadors and divines to attend the council.: They all ap-
plied to the emperor for his fafe-condut, which they ob-
tained in the most ample form. This was deemed sufficient
for the security of the ambafadors, and they proceeded ac-
cordingly on their journey; but a separate fafe-condu& from
the council itself was demanded for the protestant 'divines.
The fate of John Iufs and Jerome of Prague, whom the

+ Thuan. -g8. Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. o064. Arno'di vita
Mauritii apud Mnken, ii. 12z7.

j3

council of Constance, in the preceding century, had condemnr
ed to the flames without regarding the Imperial fafe.conduc
which had been granted them, rendered this precaution pru-
dent and necessary. But as the pope was no les unwilling
that the protestants should be admitted to an hearing in the
council, than the emperor had been eager in bringing them
to demand it, the legate by promises and threats prevailed
on the fathers of the council to decline issuing a fafe-condut
in the fame form with that which the council of Basil had
granted to the followers of Huss. The protestants, on their
part, infifed upon the council's copying the precise words
of that instrument. The Imperial ambassadors interposed
in order to obtain what would satisfy them. Alterations
in the form of the writ were proposed; expedients were fug-
gested; protests and counter-protefts were taken: the le-
gate, together with his associates, laboured to gain their
point by artifice and chicane; the protestants adhered to
theirs with firmness and obstinacy. An account of every
thing that passed in Trent was transmitted to the emperor
at Infpruck, who, attempting, from an excess of zeal, or of
confidence in his own address, to reconcile the contending
parties, was involved in a labyrinth of inextricable negotia-
tions. By means of this, however, Maurice gained all that
he had in view; the emperor's time was wholly engrossed,
and his attention diverted; while he himself had leisure to
mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues, and to finish
his preparations, before he threw off the malk, and struck
the blow which he had so long meditated.

But previous to entering into any farther detail concern-

ing Maurice's operations, some account must be given of
a new revolution in Hungary, which contributed not a lit-
tle towards their producing such extraordinary effecs.
When Solyman, in the year 1541, by a firatagem, which
uited the base and insidious policy of a petty usurper, ra.
ther than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror, deprived

* Skid. ja6, 59. F. Paul, 323, 338. Thuan. 286.

the young king of Hungary of the dominions which his fa-
ther had left him, he had granted that unfortunate prince
the country of Transylvania, a province of his paternal king--
dom. The government of this, together with the care of
educating the young king, for he still allowed him to re-
tain that title, though he had rendered it only an empty
name, he committed to the queen and Martinuzzi bishop of
Waradin, whom the late king had appointed joint guardi-
ans of his son, and regents of his dominions, at a time
when those offices were of greater importance. This co-
ordinate jurifdiftion occasioned the fame diffenfioas in a
small principality as it would have excited in a great king-
dom; an ambitious young queen, possessed with an high o.
pinion of her own capacity for governing; and an bigh-fpi-
rited prelate, fond of power, contending who ihould engross
the greatest share in the administration. Each had their
partizans among the nobles; but as Martinuzzi, by his
great talents, began to acquire the ascendant, Isabella turn-
ed his own arts against him, and courted the protection of
the Turks.

The neighbouring bathas, jealous of the bishop's power

as well as abilities, readily promised her the aid which she
demanded, and would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have
given up to her the sole direction of affairs, if his ambition,
fertile in expedients, had not suggested to him a new mea-
sure, and one that tended not only to preserve but to enlarge
his authority. Having concluded an agreement with the
queen, by the mediation of some of the nobles, who were soli-
citous to save their country from the calamities of a civil war,
he secretly dispatched one of his confidents to Vienna, and en-
teredintoa negotiation with Ferdinand. As it wasno difficult
matter to persuade Ferdinand, that the fame man whose enmi-
ty and intrigues had driven him out of a great part of his Hun.
garian dominions, might, upon a reconciliation, become e.
qually inltrumental in recovering them, he listened eagerly to
the first overtures of an union with that prelate. Martinuz.

zi allured him by such profpe&s of advantage, and engaged,
with so much confidence, that he would prevail on the mofl
powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms in his favour,
that Ferdinand, notwithstanding his truce with Selyman,
agreed to invade Transylvania. The command of the-
troops defined for that service, confifing of veteran Spanilh:
and German soldiers, was given to Cafaldo marquis de Pia-
deca, an officer formed by the famous marquis de Pefeara,
whom he strongly resembled both in his enterprising genius
for civil busiess, and in his great knowledge in the art of
war. This army, more formidable by the difeipline of the.
soldiers, and the abilitiesof the general, than by its numbers,.
was powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and his fation a,
mong the Hungarians. As the Turkiih balhas, the sultan
himself being at the head of his army on the frontiers of Per-
fia, could not afford the queen such immediate or effeaual as.
fiftance as the exigency of her affairs required, Ihe quickly
left all hopes of being able to retain any longer the authori-
ty which she poffeied as regent, and even began to despair.
of her son's safety.

Martinuzzi did not susser this favourable opportunity of

accomplifiag his own designs to pass unimproved, and ven-
tured, while {he was in this Rate of dejecion, to lay before
her a proposal, which at any other time {he would have re-
jeted with disdain. He represented how impossible it.
was for her to reifif Ferdinand's vicorious arms; that even
if the Turks 1hould enable her to make head against them,
she would be far from changing her condition to the better,
and could not confider them as deliverers, but as masters, to
whose commands fbe must submit; he conjured her, there.
fore, as {he regarded her own dignity, the safety of her son,
or the security of Christendom, rather to give up Tranfyl
vania to Ferdinand, and to make over to him her son's title
to the crown of Hungary, than to allow both to be usurped-
by the inveterate enemy of the Christian faith. At the
fame time he promised her, in Ferdinand's name, a compen.

tion for herself, as well as for her son, suitable to their
nk, and proportional to the value of what they were to-
crifice. Isabella, deserted by some of her adherents, dif-
ufting others, destitute of friends, and surrounded by Ca-
ialdo's and Martinuzzi's troops, subscribed these hard con-
itions, though with a relucant hand. Upon this, she fur-
.ndered such places of strength as were still in her possession,
egave up all the ensigns of royalty, particularly a crown
gold, which, as the Hungarians believed, had descended
\om heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an undoubt-
1right to the throne. As Rhe could not bear to remain a.
[ivate person, in a country where {he had once enjoyed so-
reign power, he inflantly set out with her son for Silesia,.
ordei to take possession of the principalities of Oppelea
d Ratibor, the investiture of which Ferdinand had en-
ged to grant her son, and likewise to bestow one of his-
aughters upon him in marriage.
Upon the resignation of the young king, Martinuzzi,
d after his example the reR of the Transylvanian gran-
es, swore allegiance to Ferdinand; who, in order to tefti.
his grateful sense of the zeal as well as success with which
at prelate had served him, affected to diflinguifh him by
ery poflible mark of favour and confidence. He appoint-
him governor of Transylvania, with almost unlimited au-
ority; he publicly ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest
ference to his opinion and commands; he increased his
venues, which were already very great, by new ap-
intments; he nominated him archbishop ofGran, and pre--
iled on the pope to raise him to the dignity of a cardinal.
11 this ostentation of good-will, however, was void of fin-
rity, and calculated to conceal sentiments the most per.
ty its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's abilities
rusted his fidelity; and foresaw, that as his extensive au-
rity enabled him to check any attempt towards circum-
ibing or abolishing the extensive privileges which the
ngarian nobility possesed, he would Rand forth on every

eccafion, the guardian of the liberties of his country, rather
than act the part of a viceroy devoted to the will of his so:.
*ereign.

For this reason, he secretly gave it in. charge to Caftaldo,

to watch his motions, to guard against his designs, and to!
thwart his measures. But Miartinuzzi, either because he
did not perceive that Caitaldo was placed as a spy on hii ac-
tions, or because he despiscd Ferdinand's insidious arts, as-
fumed the dircetion of the war againfs the Turks with his-
usual tone of authority, and conduEted it with great magna-
nimity, and no less success. He recovered some places of
which the infidels had taken pofcffioni he rendered their
attempts to reduce otheras abortive; and eftablithed Ferdi..
nand's authority not only in. Transylvania, but in the Ban,
Rat of Tcmefw ar, and several of the countries adjacent. Ia
carrying on these operations, he often differedin. sentiments.
from Caftaldo and his officers, and treated the Turkilh pri.
foners with a degree not only of humanity, but even of gene-
rofity, which Caftaldo loudly condemned. This wasrepre-
tented at Vienna as an artfulmethod of courtingthe friend.-
ship of the infidels, that, by securing their proteftion, he
might shake off all dependence upon the sovereign whom he
now acknowledged. Though Martinuzzi, in jultification-
of his own condue, contended that it was impolitic by un--
necessary severities to exasperate an enemy prone to revenge,
Caffaldo's aecufations gained credit with Ferdinand, pre-pof-
fffed already against Martinuzzi, and jealous of every thing.
that could endanger his own authority in. Hungary, in pro-
portion as he knew it to be precarious and il-eftablilhed.
There suspicions Caftaldo confirmed and strengthened, by
the intelligence which he transmitted continually to his con.
sidents at Vienna. By misrepresenting what was innocent,.
and putting the worst conftrudion on what seemed dubious-
in Martinuzzi's conduit; by imputing to him designs which:
Be never formed, and charging him with acions of which he.
was not guilty; he at last convinced Ferdinand, that, in or.

der to preserve his Hungarian crown, he must cut off that
ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing that it would
be dangerous to proceed in -the regular course of law against
a subjef of such exorbitant power as might enable him to
set his sovereign at defiance, determined to employ violence
.in order to obtain that fatisfaaion which the laws were too
feeble to afford him.

He issued his orders accordingly to 'Cafaldo, who wil-

lingly undertook that infamous service. Having communi-
cated the design to Tome Italian and Spaniih officers whom
he could trust, and-concerted with them the plan of execut-
ing it, they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early one
*morning [Dec. x8], under pretence of presenting to him
fane dispatches twhich were to be sent off immediately to
Vienna; and while he peruled a paper with -attention, one
of their number ftruok him with his poignard in the throat.
The blow was not mortal. Martinuzzi started up with the
intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the affaflin, threw
him to the ground. But the other eonfpirators rufling in,
.al old man, unarmed, and alone, was unable long to sustain
fichl an unequal confliA, and funk under the wounds which
he received from so many hands. The Transylvanians were
reftrairrcd by dread of the foreign troops stationed in their
country, from rising in arms; in order to take vengeance on
the murderers of a prelate who had long teen the objec of
their love as well as veneration. They spoke of the deed
however, with horror and execrationi and exclaimed against
Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for recent and important
irevices, nor reverence for a charater confrdered as sacred
and inviolable among Christians, could refrain from shed-
ding the blood of a man, whose only crime was attachment
to his native country. The nobles, detesting the jealous as
well as cruel policy of a court, which, upon uncertain and
improbable furmifes,'had given up a person, no less confpi-
clus for his merit than his rank, to be butchered by affaf-
n., either retired io their own eclatcs, or if they contin;ued

with the Anftrian army, grew cold to the service. The
Turks, encouraged by the death of an enemy whose abilities
they knew and dreaded, prepared to renew hostilities early
in the spring; and instead of the security which Ferdinand
had expeated from the removal of Martinuzzi, it was evi.
dent that his territories in Hungary were about to be at.
tacked with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal,
than evert.

By this time, Maurice having almofl finished his intrigue~

and preparations, was on the point of declaring his inten-
tions openly, and of taking the field again~ the emperor.
His first care, after hte came to this refohttion, was to dif.
claim that narrow and bigotted maxim of the- confederates
of Smalkalde, which had led them to shun all connexios
with foreigners. He had observed bow fatal this had been
to their cause; and, iftru&ted by their err, he was as
eager to court the protetion of Henry II. as they had
been solicitous to prevent the interposition of Francis I.
Happily for him, he found Henry in a disposition toliften
to the first overture on his part, and in a situation which es.
abled him to bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into a&ion. Henry had long observed the progress of th
emperor's arms with jealousy, and wiihed to diflinguifh him
self by entering the lifts against the fame enemy, whom i
had been the glory of his father's reign to oppose. He ha(
: laid hold on the tiril opportunity in his power of thwartinI
the emperor's ddfigns, by taking the duke of Parma unde
his protection; and hostilities were already begun, not onl
in that dutchy but in Piedmont. Having terminated tb
war with England by a peace, no less advantageous to hin
self than honourable for his allies the Scots, the restless an
enterpriing courage of his nobles was impatient to difpla

tSleid. 535. Thuan.l;b. ix. 3og, &c. Ituanhaffii Hilt. Reg

Hungarici, lib. xvi. &. e. de R8r, , ii. 871. Nati
Comitis tlifloria, lib. iv. 84, Ac.

itself on some theatre of aAion more conspicuous than the
petty operations in Parma or Piedmont afforded them.

John de Fienne, bishop of Bayonne, whom Henry had

sent into Germany, under pretence of hiring troops to be
employed in Italy, was empowered to conclude a treaty in
form with Maurice and his associates. As it would have
been very indecent in a king of France to have undertaken
the defence of the protefsant church, the interells of reli-
gion, how much soever they might be affe&ed by the trea-
ty, werenot once mentioned in any of the articles. Reli-
gious concerns, they pretended to commit entirely to the
disposition of Divine Providence; the only motives afligned
for their present confederacy againl Charles, were to pro-
cure the -landgrave liberty, and to prevent the subversion of
the ancient conflitution and laws of the German empire.
In order to accomplish these ends, it was agreed, that all
tlih conitraAing parties Ihould, at the fane time, declare war
againif the emperor; that neither peace nor truce flould be
made but by common conftnt, nor without including each
of the confederates; that, in order to guard against the in-
conveniencics of anarchy, or of pretensions to jbint com-
mand, Maurice should be acknowledged as head of the Ger-
man confederates, with absolute authority in all military as-
fairs; that Maurice and his afociates fnould bring into the
f :id seven thousand horse, with a proportional number of
]infantry; that, towards the subsistence of this army, during
tile three sirs months of the war, Henry flould contribute
two hundred and forty thousand crowns, and afterwards fix-
)t thousand crowns a-month, as long as they continued in
arms; that Henry should attack the emperor on the fide of
Lorrain with a powerful army; that if it were found requisite
to elect a new emperor, such a person should be nominated as
fial! be agreeable to the king of France t. This treaty
was concluded on the fifth of Oftober, some time before
MSIgdcburg surrendered, and the preparatory negotiations

t Recueil des Tfaitez, ton. ii. z 8. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.
Vol. IV. E

with the Austrian army, grew cold to the service. The
Turks, encouraged by the death of an enemy whose abilities
they knew and dreaded, prepared to renew hostilities early
in the spring;, and infead of the security which Ferdinand
had expeded from the removal of Martinuzzi, it was evi.
dent that his territories in Hungary were about to be at.
tacked with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal,
than evert.

By this time, Maurice having almost finished his intrigues

and preparations, was on the point of declaring his inten.
tions openly, and of taking the field againit the emperor.
His first care, after he came to this refolhtion, was to dif.
claim that narrow and bigotted maxim of the- confederates
of Smalkalde, which had led them to hun all connexios
with foreigners. He had observed how fatal this had been'
to their cause; and, iRftru&ed by their error, he was ai
eager to court the protetion of Henry II. as they had
been solicitous to present the interposition of Francis 1.
Happily for him, he found Henry in a disposition to lifteR
to the first overture on his part, and in a situation which es.
abled him to bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into a&ion. Henry had long observed the progress of the
emperor's arms with jealousy, and wiihed to distinguish him
self by entering the lilts againif the fame enemy, whom i
had been the glory of his father's reign to oppose. He ha
'laid hold on the sirs opportunity in his power of thwarting
the emperor's dcfigns, by taking the duke of Parma unde
his protefion; and hotilities were already begun, not onl)
in that dutchy but in Piedmont. Having terminated tb
swar with England by a peace, no less advantageous to him
self than honourable for his allies the Scots, the restless an
cnterprifig courage of his nobles was impatient to difpla

tSleid. 535. Thuan.lib. ix. 39, &c. lftuanhaffii HiR. Regp

Hungarici, lib. xvi. 189, &c. Merm. dc Ribier, ii. 871. Nati
Cornitis HIl;fora, lib. iv. 84, a&c.

itfclf on some theatre of ation more conspicuous than the
petty operations in Parma or Piedmont afforded them.

John de Fienne, bifflop of Bayonne, whom Henry had

sent into Germany, under pretence of hiring troops to be
employed in Italy, was empowered to conclude a treaty in
form with Maurice and his afzociates. As it would have
been very indecent in a king of France to have undertaken
the defence of the proteRaat church, the interests of reli-
gion, how much soever they might be asseted by the trea-
ty, wereinot once mentioned in any of the articles. Reli-
gious concerns, they pretended to commit entirely to the
disposition of Divine Providence; the only motives assigned
for their present confederacy against Charles, were to pro-
cure the -landgrave liberty, and to prevent the subversion of
the ancient conflitution and laws of the German empire.
In order to accomplish these ends, it was agreed, that all
thei contraaing parties should, at the fame time, declare war
againit the emperor; that neither peace nor truce flould be
made but by common confcnt, nor without including each
of the confederates; that, in order to guard against the in-
conveniencics of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint com-
mand, Maurice should be acknowledged as head of the Ger-
man confederates, with absolute authority in all military as-
fai:s; that Maurice and his aifcciates flould bring into the
sild seven thousand horse, with a proportional number of
i]fantry; that, towards the subsistence of this army, during
tihe three first months of the war, Henry Ihould contribute
two hundred and forty thousand crowns, and afterwards fix-
ty thousand crowns a-month, as long as they continued in
alrns; that Henry should attack the emperor on the fide of
Lorrain with a powerfll army; that if it were found requisite
to elcft a new emperor, such a person should be nominated as
IEal! be agreeable to the king of France t. This treaty
was concluded on the fifth of Odober, some time before
Ma:igdLburg surrendered, and the preparatory negotiations

t Recueil des Tr'aitez, tom. ii. 2z8. Thuan. lib. viii. 279.
Vol. IV, E

were condu&ed with such profound secrecy, that, of all the
princes who afterwards acceded to it, Maurice communicat.
id what he was carrying on to two only, John Albert, the
Meigning duke of Mecklenburg, and William of Hesse, the
landgrave's ddeft on. The league itself was no less anxi-
oOly concealed, and with such fortunate care, that no ru.
inour concerning it reached the ears of the emperor or hii
tiniffers; nor do they seem to have conceived the moif dif-
tant fufpicien of such a tranfa&ion.

At the fame time, with a solicitude which was careful to

draw some accefion of strength from every quarter, Maurice
applied to Edwaid VI. of England, and requested a fubfi'
dy of four hundred thousand crowns for the support of a
confederacy formed in defence of the proteltant religion.
But the factions which prevailed in the English court dur-
ing the minority of that prince, and which deprived both
the councils and arms of the nation of their wonted vigour,
left the English ministers neither time nor inclination to at-
tend to foreign affairs, and prevented Maurice's obtaining
that aid, which their zeal for the reformation would have
prompted them to grant him 5.

Maurice, however, having secured the protection of fuct

a powerful monarch as Henry II. proceeded with great
confidence, but with equal caution, to execute his plan.
As he judged it neceflary to make one effort more, in order
to obtain the emperor's content that the laudgrave should
be set at liberty, he sent a solemn embassy, in his own name
and in that of the elecor of Brandenburg, to Infpruck
[Decem.] After resuming, at great length, all the fa&i
and arguments upon which they founded their claim, and
representing, in the strongest terms, the peculiar engage-
ments which bound them to be so afliduous in their folici-
ations, they renewed their request in behalf of the unfortu.
nate prisoner, which they had so often preferred in vain.
The deleor palatine, the duke of Wurtemberg, the dukei

Burnet's Ifl of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 3 7.
S

of Mecklenburg, the duke of Deux-Ponts, the marquis of
Brandenburg Bareith, and the marquis -of Baden, by their
ambassadors, concurred with them in their suit. Letters
were likewise delivered to the fame effe& from the king of
Denmark, the duke of Bavaria, and the dukes of Lunen--
burg. Even the king of the Romans joined in this applica-
tion, being moved with compaflion towards the landgrave
in his wretched situation, or influenced, perhaps, by a secret
jealousy of his brother's power and designs, which, since his
attempt to alter the order of succession in the empire, he
had come to view with other eyes than formerly, and dread-
ed to a great degree.

But Charles constant to his own sysem with regard' to

the landgrave, eluded a demand urged by such powerful.
intercessors; and having declared that he would communicate
his resolution concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as
he arrived at Infpruck, where he was every day expected,
he did not deign to deftend into any. more particular expli.-
eation of his intentions *. This -application, though of no
benefit to the landgrave, was of great advantage to Mau-
rice. It served to juRify his subsequent proceedings, and
to demonflrate the necefity of employing arms in order to
extort that equitable concession, which his mediation or in--
treaty could not obtain. It was of use, too, to confirm the
emperor in his security, as both the solemnity of the appli-
cation, and the solicitude with which so many princes were
drawn in to enforce it, led him to-conclude that they placed
a1 their hopes ofreftoring the landgrave to liberty, in gain.
ing his content to dismiss him.

I552z. Maurice employed artifices ftillmore refined to

conceal his machinations, to amuse the emperor, and to gain
time. He affeced to be more folicitons than ever to find
out some expedient for removing the difiiculties with regard
to the fafe-condud for the proteflant divines appointed to
attend the council, so that they might repair thither with-

* Sleid. s3. Thuan. Iib. viii. ao.

E ;2

out any apprehension of danger.- His ambassadors at Trent
had frequent conferences concerning this matter with the Im-
perial ambassadors in that city, and laid open their senti-
ments to them with the appearance of the most unreserved
confidence. He was willing, at lafd, to have it believed,
that he 'hought all differe!nces vith refpet to this prelimi.
nary article were on the toint of being adjusted; and in or-
der to give credit to this opinion, he commanded Melanc.
thon, together with his brethren, to set out on their journey
to Trent, At the fame time, he held a close correspondence
with the Imperial court at lufpruck, and renewed on every
cccafion his profffi.ons not only of fidelity but, of attach-
ment to the emperor. He talked continually of his inten.
tion of goirg to Infpruck in person; he gave orders to hire
a bouse for him in that city, and to fit it up with the great.
elf dispatch for his reception§.

But profoundly skilled as Maurice was in-the arts of de-

ceit, and impenetrable as he thought the veil to be, under
which he concealed his designs, there were several things in
his condut which alarmed the emperor amidit his security,
and tempted him frequently to fufpe& that he was meditat-
ing something extraordinary. As these suspicions took theit
rife from circumtances inconsiderable in themselves, or of an
ambiguous as well as uncertain nature, they were more than
counterbalanced by Maurice's addrefsN and the emperor
would not, lightly, give up his confidence in a man, whom
he had once trusted and loaded with favours. One particu.
lar alone feermed to be of such consequence, that he thought
it nec-firy to demand an explanation with regard to it,
The troops, wiLich George of Mecklenburg had taken into
pay after the capitulation of Magdeburg, having fixed their
qCartcrs in Thuringia, lived at discretion on the lands of the
r.ch ecclefiauics in their neighbourhood. Their licence and
rapaciousness were intolerable. Such as felt or dreaded their
txatiuni., complained loudly to the emperor, and represent-

* Arnoldi ita MIaurit. ap Mlnken, i 1;z9.

ed them as a body of men kept in readiness for some defpe -
rate enterprise. But Maurice, partly by extenuating the
enormities of which they had been guilty, partly by repre.
senting the impofflbility of disbanding these troops,'-or of
keeping them to regular difciplinei unlefe the arrears still"
due to them by the emperor were paid, either removed the-
apprehensions which this had occasioned, or, as Charles was
not in a condition to satisfy the demands of these soldiers, -
obliged him to be silent with regard to the mattert.'

The time of action was now approaching. . Maurice had

privately dispatched Albert of Brandenburg to Paris, in or-
der to confirm his league with Henry, and to haften the
march of the French army. He had taken measures tp
bring his own fubjets together on the firit summons; he,hag
provided for the security of Saxony, while be Ihould be ab-
sent with the army; and he held the troops in Thuringia, on
which he chiefly depended, ready to advance on a moment's
warning. All these complicated operationswerecarried on
without being discovered by the-court at ljopruck,, and the
emperor remaihed there in perfec tranquillity, busied entire-
ly in counterating the intrigues of thepope's legate at Trent,
snd in fettling the conditions on which the ptoteRant di-
vines should be admitted into the council as if there had not
been any tranfaftion of greater moment in agitation.

This credulous security in a prince, who, by his sagacity

in observing the condut of all around him, was commonly
led to an excess of distrust, may seem unaccountable, and has
been imputed to infatuation. But besides the exquisite ad-
dress with which Maurice concealed his intentions, two cir-
cumflances contributed to the delusion. The gout had re-
turned upon Charles soon after his arrival at Infpruck, with
an increase of violence; and his conititution being broken by
such frequent attacks, he was seldom able to exert his natu-
ral vigour of mind, or to confider affairs with his usual vigi-
lance and penetration; and Granvelle, bilhop. of Arras, his

t Sleid. 549. Thuan. 339.

E3

prime minister, though one of the most subtle statesmen of
that or perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the dupe
of his craft. He entertained such an high opinion of his
own abil;ties, and held the political talents of the Germans
in such contempt, that he despised all the intimations given
him concerning Maurice's secret machinations, or the dan.
gerous designs which he was carrying on. When the duke
of Alva, whose dark suspicious mind harboured many doubts
concerning the elecor's sincerity, proposed calling him im-
mediately to court to answer for his condut, Granvelle
replied with great scorn, That these apprelhenfions were
groundless, and that a drunken German head was too gross
to form any scheme which he could not easily penetrate and
baffle. Nor did he assume this peremptory tone merely
from confidence in his own discernment; he had bribed two
of Maurice's miniters, and received from them frequent and
minute information concerning all their master's motions.
But through this very channel, by which he expe&ed to
gain access to all Matuice's counsels, and even to his
thoughts, such intelligence was conveyed to him as com-
pleted his deception. Maurice fortunately discovered the
-correspondence of the two traitors with Granvelle, but in-
i'cad of punihing them for their crime, he dexterously avail-
ed himself of their fraud, and turned his.own arts» against
the bishop. He affected to.treat there ministers with great-
er confidence than ever; he admitted them to his confulta-
t.ons; he seemed to lay open his heart to them; and taking
care all the while to let them be acquainted with nothing
but what was his interefl hould be known, they transmitted
to Infpruck such accounts as possessed Granvelle with a firm
belief of his sincerity as well as good intentions*. The
emperor himfilf, in the fulnef of fccurity, was so little
moved by a memorial, in name of the ecclesiastical eleAors,
admoni;ling him to be on his guard againit Maurice, that
he ade light of this intelligence; and his answer to them

i Mc!vii's M:;moirs so!, edit p. I;.

abounds with declarations of his entire and confident reliance
on the fidelity as well as attachment of that prince:.

At lalt Mau ice's preparations were completed, and he

had the fatisfa&ion to find that his intrigues and designs
were slill unknown. But, though now ready to take the
field, he did not lay aside the arts which he had hitherto
employed; and by one piece of craft more, he deceived his
enemies a few days longer. He gave out, that he was a-
bout to begin that journey to Infpruck of which he had so
often talked, and he took one of the ministers whom Gran-
velle had bribed, to attend him thither. After travelling
polt a few stages, he pretended to be indisposed by the fa.
tigue of the journey, and dispatching the fufpe&ed mini-
sers to make his apology to the emperor for this delay, and
to alfure him that he would be at Infpruck within a few
days; he mounted on horseback, as soon as this spy on his
aitions was gone, rode full speed towards Thuringia, joined
his army, which amounted to twenty thousand foot and five
thousand horse, and put it immediately in motion [March.
iS] *.

At the fame time he publifliel a manifeflo containing his
reasons for taking arms. These were three in number; that
lie might secure the protestant religion, which was threaten.
ed with immediate deftruEtion; that he might maintain the
conltitution and laws of the empire, and save Germany from
being fubjeded to the dominion of an absolute monarch;
that he might deliver the landgrave of Hesse from the mise-
ries of a long and unjust imprisonment. By the first, he
roused all the favourers of the reformation, a party formid-
ablc by their zeal as well as numbers, and rendered desperate

t Sleid. 53-.
· Melv. Mem. p 13. These circnmPiances cencerning the
Saxon ministers whom Granvelle had bribed, are not mentioned
i' the German historians; but as Sir James Melvil received his
i'uirmation from the eletor Palatine, and as they are perfectly
c;:rcea!)le to the reft of Maurice's condudt, they may be confider-

o '. auth'<nic.

by oppression. By the second, he interested all the friends
of liberty, catholics no less than protestants, and made it
their interest to unite-with him in aflerting the rights and
privileges common to both. The third, besides the'glory
which he acquired by his zeal to fnlfil his engagements to
the unhappy prisoner, was become a cause of geniral con.
cern, not only from the compassion which the landgrave's
sufferings excited, but from indignation at the injtufice'and
rigour of the emperor's proceedings againf him. Together
with Maurice's manifefRo, another appeared in the nanie of
Albert marquis of Brandenburg Culmbach, who had joined
him with a body of adventurers' whom he had drawn tige.
ther. The fame grievances which Maurice had pointed out
are mentioned in it, but with an excels of virulence and'a.
nimofity suitable to the characer of the prince in whoft name
it was published.

The king of France added to these a mranifeto in his 6o*n

namne; in which, after taking notice of the ancient alliince
between the French and German nations, both descended
from the fame ancestors; and after mentioning the appliea
tions which, in consequence of this, some of the most illu-
ftrious among the German princes had made to him sot his
protection; he declared, that he now took arms to reCifta-
blilh the ancient conItitution of the empire, to deliver forte
of its princes from captivity, and to secure the privileges
and independence of all the members of the Germanic body.
In this manifesto, Henry aflured the extraordinary title of
iroteaor of tie Liberties of Germany and of its captive Prin.
c:s; and there was engraved on it a cap, the ancient symbol
of freedom, placed between two daggers, in order to inti-
mate to the Germans, that this blefling was to be acquired
and secured by force of armst.

Maurice had now to act a part entirely new; but his flex.

ble genius was capable of accommodating itself to every
situation. The moment he took arms, he was as bold and
t Slei. 549. Thuan. lib, x. 339. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 37x.

crnterprlfing in the field, as he had been cautious and crafty
in the cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards the
Upper Germany. All the towns in his way opened their
gates to him. He reinstated the magiltrates whom the em-
peror had deposed, and gave-poffeffion of the churches to the
protestant ministers whom he had ejeaed. He dire&ed his
march to Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison, which
was too inconsiderable to think of defending it, retired im-
mediately, he took possession of that great city [April I,J
and made the fame changes there as in the towns through
which he had paffedt.

No words can express the emperor's aflonifhment and

consternation at events so unexpe&ed. He saw a great
number of the German princes in arms against him, and the
relt either ready to join them, or wilhing success to their
elterprife. He beheld a powerful monarch united with
them in close league, seconding their operations in person at
the head of a formidable army, while he, through negligence
and credulity, which exposed him no less to scorn than to.
danger, had neither made, nor was in a condition to make,
any effetual provision, either for crushing his rebellious sub-
jeds, or resisting the invasion of the foreign enemy. Part
of his Spanish troops had been ordered into Hungary a-
gainft the Turks; the reft had marched back to Italy upon
occasion of the war in the dutchy of Parma. The bands of
veteran Germans had been dismissed, because he was not
able to pay them; or had entered into Maurice's service as-
ter the siege of Magdeburg; and he remained at Infpruck
with a body of soldiers hardly firong enough to gnard his
own person. His treasury was as much exhausted, as his
arnny was reduced. He had received no remittances for
some time from the new world. He had forfeited allcredit
with the merchants of Genoa and Venice, who refused to
lend him money, though tempted by the offer of exorbitant
ianrefR. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the molt consid-

Sleid. SSS- Thuan, 342.

rable potentate in Chrifendom, and capable of exerting the
greatest frength, his power, notwithstanding the violent at.
tack made upon it, being lill unimpaired, found himfelfij
a situation which rendered him unable to make such a fud.
den and vigorous effort as the juncure required, and was
neceflary to have saved him from the present danger.

In this situation, the emperor placed all his hopes upon

negotiating; the only resource of such as are conscious of
their own weakness. But thinking it inconsistent with hi
dignity to make the first advances to subjects who were it
arms against him, he avoided that indecorum by employing
the mediation of his brother Ferdinand. Maurice consid.
ing in his own talents to condu&t any negotiation in such 4
manner as to derive advantage:from it, and hoping that, by
the appearance of facility in hearkening to the first overture
of accommodation, he might amuse the emperor, and tempt
him to flacken the ativity with which he was now prepar.
ing to defend himself, readily agreed to an interview with
Ferdinand in the town of Linta in Austria; and having led
his army to proceed on it -mrch under the command of
the duke of Mecklenburg, he repaired thither.

Meanwhile the king of France puncually fulfilled his cen

gagements to the allies. He took the field early, with a n%,
merous and well-appointed army, and marching dire&tly ina
to Lorain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at his ap.
proach. His forces appeared next before Metz, and that
city, by a fraudulent stratagem of the constable Montmo
rency, who having obtained permifflion to pass through it
with a small guard, introduced as many troops as were sus.
ficient to overpower the garrison,. was likewise seized with,
out bloodshed. Henry made his entry into all these towns
with great pomp; he obliged the inhabitants to swear alle¢
glance to him, and annexed those important conqueRs tc
the French monarchy. He left a firong garrison in Metz,
From thence he advanced towards Alsace,. in order to at

tempt new conquests, to which the success that had hither-
to attended his arms invited him*.

The conference at Lintz did not produce an accommoda-

tion. Maurice, when he consented to it, seems to have had
nothing in view but to amuse the emperor; for he made
such demands, both in behalf of his confederates and their
ally the French king, as he knew would not be accepted by
a prince, too haughty to submit, at once, to conditions dic-
tated by an enemy. But, however firmly Maurice adhered
during the negotiation to the interest of his associates, or
how steadily soever he kept in view the obje&s which had
induced him to take arms, he often professed a strong incli-
nation to terminate the differences with the emperor in an
amicable manner. Encouraged by this appearance of a pa-
cific disposition, Ferdinand proposed a second interview at
Paffau on the twenty sixth of May, and that a truce should
commence on that day, and continue to the tenth of June,
n order to give them leisure for adjuRing all the points in
ifpute.
Upon this, Maurice rejoined his army on the ninth of
ay, which had now advanced to Gundelfingen. He put
is troops in motion next morning; and as sixteen days yet
emained for aiflon before the commencement of the truce,
e resolved, during that period, to venture upon an enter.
rife, the success of which would be so decisive, as to render
he negotiations at Pafau extremely short, and entitle him
o treat upon his own terms. He foresaw that the profpe&
fa cessation of arms, which was to take place so soon, to.
gether with the opinion of his earnefRnefs to re-eflablifh
)eace, with which he had artfully amused Ferdinand, could
ardly fail of inspiring the emperor with such false hopes,
hat he would naturally become remiss, and relapse into
ome degree of that security which had already been so fatal
ohim. Relying on this conjecture, he marched diredtly
It the head of his army towards Infpruck, and advanced

#Thuan. 349.

with the most rapid motion that could be given to so great
a body of troops. On the eighteenth, he arrived at Fieffen,
a poll of great consequence, at the entrance into the Tyro.
lefe. There he found a body of eight hundred men, whom
the emperor had assembled, strongly intrenched, in order to
oppose his progress. He attacked them inlfantly with such
violence and impetuosity, that they abandoned their lines
precipitately, and, falling back on a second body polled near
Ruten, communicated the panic terror with which they
themselves had been seized, to those troops; so that they
likewise took to flight, after a feeble resistance.

Elated with this success, which exceeded his most fan.

guine hopes, Maurice pressed forward to Ehrenbergh, a
caltle situated on an high and steep precipice, which corn
r.anded the only pass through the mountains. As thi
fort had been furrerdered to the protelfants at the begin.
ning of the Smalkaldic x*ar, because the garriron was them
too weak to defend it, the emperor, sensible of its import.
ance, had taken care, at this junaure, to tlirow into it a be
dy of troops sufficient to maintain it against the greatest ar
,Vr.y. But a ihepherd, in pursuing a goat which had itrayed
from his flock, having discovered an unknown path bj
which it was possible to ascend to the top of the rock, canm
with this seasonable piece of intelligence to Maurice. A
small band of chosen soldiers, under the command d
George of Mecklenburg, was inllantly ordered to follow
this guide. They set out in the evening, and clambering u[
-thle nrgged track with infinite fatigue as well as danger, thel
reached the furmmit unperceived; and at an hour which hat
been agreed on, when Maurice began the aflault on the on
fide of the calle, they appeared on the other, ready to fcal
the walls, which were feeble in that place, because it ha
been hitherto deemed inacceflible. The garrison, ftruc
with terror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter whe
they Lad thought themrflves perfectly secure, immediate
T!'r-w, dc-n :ei;r a-r..S. Mburice, almofl without bloo

heed, and, which was of greater consequence to him, with-
cut loss of time, took poffeflyon of a place, the reduction of
which might have retarded him long, and have required the
.tinio!l efforts of his valour and ftill'i-.

Maurice was now only two days march from Infpruck,

and without losing a moment he ordered his,infantry to ad-
vance thither, having left his cavalry, which was unfervice-
able in that mountainous couqtry, at Fieffen, to guard the
mouth of the pass. He proposed to advance with such ra-
pidity as to anticipate any accounts of the loss of Ehren-.
hergh, and to surprise the emperor, together with his at-
tendants, in an open town incapable of defence. But just
as his troops began to move, a battalion of mercenaries mu-
tinied, declaring that they would not stir until they had
received the gratuity, which, according to the cuitom of
that age, they claimed as the recompence due to them for
having taken a place by aftault. It was with great difficul-
ty, as well as danger, and not without some coniiderable loss
of time, that Maurice quieted this infurreftion, and prevail-
ed on the flders to follow him to a place where he promif-
ed them such rich booty as would be an ample reward for
1!l their services.

To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen accident, the
emperor owed his safety. He was informed of the ap-
roaching danger late in the evening, and knowing that no-
hing could save him but a speedy flight, he inilantly left
lrfpr-uck, without regarding the darkness of the night, or
the violence of the rain which happened to fall at that time;
ald notwithstanding the debility occasioned by the gout,
wvhich rendered him unable to bear any motion but that of
i litter, he travelled by the light of torches, taking his way
aver the Alps, by roads almnof impassable. His courtiers
imd attendants followed him with equal precipitation, some
)f them on ficlh horses as they could hastily procure, many
)f them on foot, and all in the utmost confusion. In this

t Arnoldi vita Maurit. Iz3.
Vol. IV. F

n.serable plight, very unlike the pomp with which Charles
-ad appeared during the five preceding years as the conquer.
or of Germany, he arrived at length with his dejeted train
at Villach ia Carinthia, and scarcely thought himself secure
even in that remote inaccefTible corner.

Maurice entered Infpruck a few hours after the emperor

and his atte.idants had left it; and enraged that the prey
Ihould efeape out of his hands when he was just ready to
seize it, he pursued them some miles; but flding it impof.
ibble to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave speed, he
returned to the town, and abandoned all the emperor's
baggage, together with that of the ministers, to be plunder-
ed by the soldiers; while he preferred untouched every
thing belonging to the king of the Romans, either because
he had formed some friendly connexion with that plince, or
because he wished to have it believed that such a connexion
fubfifed between them. As there now remained only
three days to the commencement of the truce (with such
nicety had Maurice calculated his operations), he set out
for Pafiau, that he might meet Ferdinand on the day ap-
poi.ted.

Before Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew the guards

placed on the degraded eleAor of Saxony, whom, during
five years, he had carried about with him as a prisoner, and
set him entirely at liberty, either with an intention to em.
barrafs Maurice by letting loose a rival, who might dispute
his title to his dominions and dignity, or from a sense of the
indecency of detaining him a prisoner, while he himself run
the riis of being deprived of his own liberty. But that
prince, feeing no other way of escaping than that which the
emperor took, and abhorring the thoughts of falling into
the hands of a kinsman, whom he justly confidered as the
author of all his misfortunes, chose rather to accompany
Charles in his flight, and to expect the final decision of hii
fate from the treaty which was now approaching.

Tbefe were not the only effets which Maurice's opera

tion! produced. It was-no sooner known at Trent that he
had taken arms, than a general conaternation seized the fa-
thers of the council. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the f.ifety of their
refpecftve territories. The reft were extremely impatient
to be gone; and the legate, who had hitherto disappointed
a!l the endeavours of the Imperial ambassadors to procure
an audience in the council for the protestant divines, laid
hold with joy on such a plausible pretext for difmifling an
aficrbly, which he had found it so difficult to govern. Ith
a congregation held on the twenty-eighth of April, a de-
crce was issued proroguing the council during two years,.
and appointing it to meet at the expiration of that time, if
peace were then re-eflablifhed in Europe*. This proro.
gation, however continued no less than ten years; and the
proceedings of the council, when re-assembled in the year
one thousand five hundred and fixty-two, fall not within the
period prescribed to this history.

The convocation of this affemlly had been passionately

deired by all the flates and princes in Chriflendom, who,
fiom the wisdom as well as piety of prelates representing
the whole body of the faithful, expe&ed some charitable and
efficacous endeavours towards composing the difenfions
whicih unhappily had arisen in the church. But the several
popes by whose authority it was called, had other objecs in
view. They exerted all their power or policy to attain
these; and by the abilities as well as address of their legates,
by the ignorance of many of the prelates, and by the fervil.
ty of the indigent Italian bishops, acquired such influence in
the council, that they ditated all its decrees, -and framed
them not with an intention to refsore unity and concord to
the church, but to establish their own dominion, or to con-
firn those tenets, upon which they imagined that dominion
to be founded. Dotrines which had hitherto been admit-
ted upon the credit of tradition alone, and received with

' F. Paul, 353.

F-z-

some latitude of interpretation, were deined with a fcrupu.
Ious nicety, and confirmed by the sanction of authority.
Rites, which had formerly been obfirved only in defer.
ence to cu'om supposed to be ancient, were. ettabliihed
by the decrees of the church, and declared to be essential
parts of its worfnip. The breach, instead of being closed,
was widcned, and made irreparable. In place of any at-
tempt to reconcile the contending parties, a line was drawn
with such Rtudied accuracy, as ascertained and marked out
the diftirrion between them. This still serves to keep them
at a diflance; and without some signal interposition of Di.
;ine Providence, miuft render the separation perpetual.

Our knowkdge of the proceedings of this aflembly, is de-

rived from three different authors. Father Paul of Venice
wrote his hiltory of the council of Trent, while the memo-
ry of what had pafied there was recent, and some who had
been members of it were till alive. He has exposed the in-
trigues and artifices by which it was conduced, with a free
dom and severity which have given a deep wound to the cre-
dit of the council. He has described its deliberations, and
explained its decrees, with such perspicuity and depth of
thought, with such various erudition and such force of rea
son, as have justly entitled his work to be placed among the
moss admired historical compositions. About half a century
thertafter, the Jesuit Pallavicini pulblished his hiMlory of the
council, in oppolition to that of Father Paul, and by em-
ploying all the force of an acute and refining genius to ina.
s2-c a:e e credit, or to confute the reasonings of his antagoe
nit, Lt labcurs to prove, by artful apologies for the proceed
ing s of the council, and subtile interpretations of its decree,
tha t it dlierated with impartiality, and decided with judg
ment as well as candour. Vargas, a Spanifin do&or of laws
w ho was appointed to attend the Imperial anbaffadors al
Trent, sent the biihop of Arras a regular account of thn
lianfaUtions there, expla',ing all the arts which the legat
err loyed to in5;.rence or overawe tLe council. His lettr

have been publifled, in which he inveighs against the papal
court with that asperity of censure, which was natural to a
man whose fituatiou enabled him to observe L.s intrigues
thoroughly, and who was obliged to exert all his attention
and talents in order to disappoint them. But whichsoever
cf there authors an intelligent person takes for his guide, in
forming a judgment colncerning the spirit of the council, he
mrnlt discover so much ambition as well as artifice among
sone of the members; so much ignorance and corruption a-
mong others; he must observe such a large infusion of hu.
man policy and palions, mingled with fiuch a scanty portion
of that simplicity of heart, sanctity of manners, and love of
truth, which alone qualify men to determine what doctrines
are worthy of God, and what worlhip is acceptable to him;
that he will find it no easy matter to believe, that any extra-
ordinary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over this as-
finbly, and dictated its decrees.

While Maurice was employed in negotiating with the
king of the Romans at Lintz, or in making war on the em-
peror in the Tyrol, the French king had advanced into AI-
face as far as Strafburg; and having demanded leave of the
senate to march through the city, he hoped that, by repeat-
ing the fame fraud which he had pradifed at Metz, he might
render himself mafler of the place, and by that means secure
a passage over the Rhine into the heart of Germany. But
the Straiburghers, inftruded and put on their guard by the
credulity and misfortune of their neighbours, shut their gates;
and having assembled a garrison of five thousand soldiers, re-
paired their fortifications, rafed the houses in their suburbs,
and determined to defend themselves to the utmost. At the
fame time they sent a deputation of their moll refpe&able
citizens to the king, in order to divert him from making any
hostile attempt upon them. The ele&ors of Treves and
Cologne, the duke of Cleves, and other princes in the neigh-
bourhood, interposcd in their behalf; beseeching Henry that
he would not forget so soon the title which he had gene-

F3

roufly assumed; and initcad of being the doliverer of Germa.
ny, become its oppressor. The Swiss Cantons seconded
them with zeal, soliciting Henry to spare a city which had
long been connected with their community in friendhfip and
alliance.

Powerful as this united intercession was, it would not

have prevailed on Henry to forego a prize of so much value,
if he had been in a condition to have seized it. But, in that
age, the method of subsisting numerous armies at a diftarice
from the frontiers of their own country, was imperfectly un.
derftood, and neither the revenues of princes, nor their ex-
perience in the art of war, were equal to the great and corn.
plicated efforts which such an undertaking required. The
French, though not far removed from their own frontier,
began already to susser from scarcity of provisions, and had
no sufficient magazines collected to support them during a
siege which must necessarily have been of great length§. At
the fame time, the queen of Hungary, governess of the Low.
Ccuntri.es, had assembled a considerable body of troops,
wrlcli, under the command of Martin de Roffem, laid waste
Champagne, and threatened the adjacent provinces of France.
T'efe concurring circumstances obliged the king, though
with reluctance, to abandon the enterprise. Bat being wil.
lng to acquire some merit with his allies, by this retreat
which he could not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss that
he had taken the resolution merely in compliance with their
rtqueft*; and then, after giving orders that all the horses is
his army should be led to drink in the Rhine, as a proof of
his having puffed his conquef so far, he marched back to.
wards Champagne.

While the French king and the main army of the confe.

derates were thus employed, Albert of Brandenburg was en.
truIt;l with the command of a separate body of eight thou0
sand men, consisting chkfiy of mercenaries who had resortet

§ Thuan. -ST, 352.
Sleid. 5 7. Brantome, tom. vii. 39.

to his flandard, rather fiom the hope of plunder, than the
expecation of regular pay. That prince, feeing-himfelf at
the head of fich a number of desperate adventurers, ready
to follow wherever he should lead them, soon began to dif-
dain a fiate of subordination, and to form such extravagant
schemes of aggrandizing himself, as seldom occur, even to
ambitious minds, unless when civil war or violent faAions
rouse them to bold exertions, by alluring them with imme-
diate hopes of success. Full of these aspiring thoughts, Al-
bert made war in a manner very different from the other
confederates. He endeavoured to spread the terror of his
arms by the rapidity of his motions, as well as the extent
and rigour of his devastations; he exaced contributions
wherever he came, in order to amass such a fum of money,
as would put it in his power to keep his army together; he
laboured to get possession of Nuremburg, Uln, or some other
of the free cities in Upper Germany, in which, as a capital,
he might fix the feat of his power. But, finding these ci-
ties on their guard, and in a condition to resist his attacks,
he turned all his rage against the popish ecclefialtics, whose
territories he plundered with such wanton and merciless bar-
barity, as gave them a very unfavourable impression of the
spirit of that reformation in religion, with zeal for which he
pretended to be animated. The bishops of Bambergh and
Wurzburgh, by their fnuation, lay particularly exposed to
his ravages; he obliged the former to transfer to him, in
property, almost one half of his extensive diocese; and com-
pelled the latter to advance a great fum of money in order to
save his territories from ruin and desolation. During all
those wild sallies, Albert paid no regard either to Maurice's
irdcrs, whose commands as generaliflimo of the league he
hlad engaged to obey, or to the remonfirances of the other
:onfederates; and manifestly discovered, that he attended
uily to his own private emolument, without any solicitude
about the common cause, or the general objects which had
i;nducc them to take armst.

t Slid. j6x. Thuan. jj7.

Maurice having ordered his army to march back into

Bavaria, and having publilhed a proclamation enjoining t!:e
Lutheran clergy and instructors of youth, to resume the ex.
ercife of their funtions, in all the cities, schools, and univer.
fities from which they had been ejected, met Ferdinand at
Pafau on the twenty sixth day of May. As matters of the
greatef confcquence to the future peace and independence
of the empire were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes of
all Germany were fixed upon it. Besides Ferdinand and the
Imperial ambassadors, the duke of Bavaria, the bishops of
Sal zburg and Aichf.adt, the ministers of all the elecors,
together with dpnuties from most of the considerable princes
and free cities, resorted to Paffau. Maurice, in the name
of his aflociates, and the king of the Romans as the ermp.
ror's repTefentative, opened the negotiation. The princes
'who were present, together with the deputies of such as
were absent, aded as intercessors or mediators between
therm.

Maurice, in a long d.fcourfe, explained the motives of

his own conduct. After having enumerated all the uncon.
ftitutional and oppressive ads of the emperor's adminiftra.
tion, he, agreeably to the manifesto which he had published
when he took arms against him, limited his demands to three
articles: That the landgrave of Ieffie hould be immediately
set at liberty; that the grievances in the civil government
of the empire should be rcdreffed; and that the protestants
should be allowed the public exercise of their religion with-
out molefiation. Ferdinand and the Imperial ambaffadon
discovering their unwillingness to gratify him with regard
to all these points, the mediators wrote a joint letter to the
emperor, beseeching him to dtliver Germany from the cala.
mities of a civil war, by giving such fatisfaftion to Maurice
and his party as might induce them to lay down their arms;
ar.d at the fame time they prevailed upon Maurice to grant
a prolongation of the truce for a short time, during which

tlhey undertook to procure the emperor's final answer to his
dcmands.

This request was presented to the emperor in the name

of all the princes of the empire, popish as well as protestant.
in the name of fucli as had lent an helping hand to forward
his ambitious schemes, as well as of those who had vi'.ved
the progress of his power with jealousy and dread. The
uncommon and cordial unanimity with which they concurred
at this junAure in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in re.
commending peace, flowed from different causes. Such as
were most attached to the Roman catholic church could not
help observing, that the protestant confederates were at the
head of a numerous army, while the emperor was but just
beginning to provide for his own defence. They foresaw
that great efforts would be required of them, and would be
necessary on their part, in order to cope with enemies, who
had been allowed to get the start so far, and to attain such
formidable power. Experience bad taught them, that the
fruit of all these efforts would be reaped by the emperor a-
lone, and the more complete any vitory proved which they
fhotild gain, the faster would they bind their own fetters, and
render them the more intolerable. These refletions made
them cautious how they contributed a second time, by their
indiscreet zeal, to put the emperor in possession of power
which would be fatal to the liberties of their country. Not-
with.-,nding the intolerant spirit of bigotry in that age,
they chose rather that the protestants should acquire that
security for their religion which they demanded, than by as-
fiiling Charles to oppress them, to give such additional force
to the Imperial prerogative, as would overturn the conltitu-
tion of the empire. To all these considerations, the dread
of secing Germany laid walte by a civil war added new force.
Many states of the empire already felt the deftruxive rage
of Albert's arms, others dreaded it, and all illhed for an ac-
omlllndati'on between the emperor and Maurice, which they
hIhpod would save them from that cruel scourge.

Such were the rcafons that induced so many princes, not-

withfiand-ng the variety of their political interests, and the
oppofiti;in in their rcligious sentiments, to unite in recom.
mending to the emperor an accommodation with Maurice,
not only as a fa!utary, but as a necefiary measure. The
mici-.:s which prompted Charles to dcfire it, were not fewer
or of less weight. He was perfedly sensible of the fuperio.
rity wh.ch the confederates had acquired through his own
negligence; and he now flt the insufficiency of his own re-
sources to oppofc them. Hlis Spanish fubjefts, disgusted at
his long absence, and weary of endless wars, which- were of
little benefit to their country, refused to furnish him any con.
fiderable supply either of men or money; and although by
his address or importur.ity he might have hoped to draw
from them at last more effectual aid; that, he knew, was too
distant to be of any service in the present exigency of his as-
fairs. His treasury was drained; his veteran forces were dif.
perfed or disbanded, and he could not depend much either
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied soldiers whom
he was collecting. There was no hope of repeating with
success the fame artifices which had weakened and ruined
the Smalkaldic league. As the end at which he aimed was
now known, Ie could no longer employ the specious pretexts
which had formerly concealed his ambitious designs. Every
prince in Germany was alarmed and on his guard; and it
was vain to th:r,k of blinding them a second time to such a
degree, as to make one part of them infiruments to enslave
the other. The spirit of a confederacy whereof Maurice
was the head, experience had taught him to be very differ-
ent from that of :he l-ague of Smalkalde; and from what he
had already fit, he had no reason to flatter himself that its
councils would be as irresolute, or its- efforts as timid and
feeble. If he nfoulJ r-esolve on continuing the war, he mglht
be 2ffured, that the mo:. conldcira.b states in Germany would
taie vart in it a airnt him; and a dubious neutrality was the
uL;>J,; lie cci-2 c-:pecit from the rit. While the confcdl-

rates found full employment for his arms in one quarter, the
king of France would seize the favourable opportunity, and
pilh on his operations in another, with almoit certain success.
That monarch had already made conquests in the empire,
which Charles was no less eager to recover, than impatient
to he revenged on him for aiding his malecontent fubjets.
Though Henry had now retired from the banks of the Rhine,
lie hld only varied the scene of hostilities, having invaded the
Low-Countries with all his forces. The Turks roused by
the felicitations of the French king, as well as itimulated by
resentment against Ferdinand for having violated the truce
in Hungary, had prepared a powerful fieet to ravage the
coasts of Naples and Sic;ly, which lae had left almost de-
fenceless, by calling thence the greatest part of the regular
troops to join the army which he was now affeirblng.

Ferdinand, who went in person to Villach, in order to

lay before the emperor the result of the conferences at Pas-
fan, had likewise reasons peculiar to himself for desiring an
accommodation. These prompted him to fccond, with the
greatest earneftncfs, the arguments which the piinces assem-
bled there had employed in recommending it. He had ob-
served, not without secret fatisfasdion, the fatal blow that
had been given to the despotic power which his brother had
usurped in the empire. He was extremely felicitous to pre-
vent Charles from recovering his foimer fierliority, as he
foresaw that ambitious prince would immediately refurre,
with increased eagerness, and with a better chance of fuc-
cess, his favourite scheme of transmitting that power to his
son, by excluding his brother from the right of succession
to the Imperial throne. On this account he was willing
to contribute towards circumscribing the Imperial authori-
t', in order to render his own poffeflion of it certain. Be-
ildes, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Transylvania, and
Will more at the fraudulent arts by which it had been seized,
h2d ordered into the field an army of an hundred thousand
ten, which having defeatcd a great body of Fcrdinand's

troops and taken several places of importance, threatened
rot only to complete the conquef of the province, but to
drive them cut of that part of Hungary-which was fill sub.
jec to his jurifdiaion. He was unable to refill such a
mighty enemy, the emperor, while engaged in a domestic
war, could afford him no aid; and he could not even hope
to draw from Germany the contingent, either of troops or
money, usually furniihed to repel the invasions of the Infi.
dels. Maurice, having observed Ferdinand's perplexity
with regard to this last point, had offered, if peace were re-
cftablilhed on a secure foundation, that he would march in
person with his troops into Hungary against the Turks.
Such was the effea of this well-timed proposal, that Ferdi.
nand, destitute of every other profped of relief, became the
most zealous advocate whom the confederates could have
employed to urge their claims, and there was hardly any
thing that they could have demanded which he would not
have chosen to grant, rather than have retarded a pacifica.
tion, to which he traded as the only means of saving his
Hungarian crown.

When so many causes conspired in rendering an accommo-

dat;on eligible, it might have been expected that it would
have taken place immediately. But the inflexibility of the
emperor's temper, together with his unwillingness at once
to relinquish objets which he had long pursued with such
earneflnefs and assiduity, counterbalanced, for some time
the force of all the motives which disposed him to peace
and not onlv put that event at a distance, but seemed to ren-
der it uncertain. When Maurice's demands, together with
the letter of the mediators at Paflau, were pprefented to him
he peremptorily refused to redress the grievances hliichewer
pointed out, nor would he agree to any stipulation r th
immediate security of the protestant religion, but propose
reftrring both these to the determination of a future die
On his part, he required that instant reparation should
madc to all who, duvinr th.e p-'efer.t war, had fuffcrcd citl

by the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or the ex.
actions of their leaders.

Maurice, who was well acquainted with the emperor's

arts, immediately concluded that he had nothing in view by
these overtures but to amuse and deceive; and therefore,
without litening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffau ab-
raptly, and joining his troops, which were encamped at
Mergentheim, a city in Franconia, belonging to the knights
of the Teutonic order, he put them in motion, and re-
newed hostilities. As three thousand men in the emperor's
pay had thrown themselves into Frankfort on the Maine,
and might from thence infest the neighbouring country of
Hefle, he marched towards that city, and laid liege to it in
form [July 17]. The briflnefs of this enterprise, and the
vigour with which Maurice carried on his approaches a-
gainit the town, gave such an alarm to the emperor, aa dif-
posed him to lend a more favourable ear to Ferdinand's ar-
guments inbehalfofan accommodation. Firm and haugh-
ty as his nature was, he found it necessary to bend, and figni-
fed his willingness to make conceflions on his part, if
Maurice, in return, would abate somewhat of the rigour of
his demands. Ferdinand, as soon as he perceived that his
brother began to yield, did not desist from his importunities,
until he prevailed on him to declare what was the utmost
that he would grant for the security of the confederates.
Having gained this difficult point, he instantly dispatched a
merlunger to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the em-
peror's final resolution, conjured him not to frustrate his en-
deavours for the re.establishment of peace; or, by an unfea-
fonable obtlinacy on his fide, to disappoint the wishes of all
Germany for that salutary event.

Maurice notwithstanding the prosperous situation of his

affairs, was firongly inclined to liften to this advice. The
emperor, though over-reached and surprised, had now be-
gun to assemble troops, and however flow his motions might
be, while the first effeas of his conftemation remained, he
Vol. IV. G

was sensible that Charles muff at lafl a& with vigour pro-
portional to the extent of his power and territories, and
lead into Germany an army formidable by its numbers, and
fill more by the terror of his name, as well as the remera.
brance of his past vi&ories. He could scarcely hope that a
confederacy composed of so many members would continue
to operate with union and perseverance sufficient to resist
the consistent and wel-dire&ed efforts of an army, at the ab.
solute disposal of a leader accustomed to command and to
conquer. He felt, already, although he had not hitherto
experienced the shock of any adverse event, that he himself
was at the head of a disjointed body. He saw, from the
example of Albert of Brandenburg, how difficult it would
be, with all his address and credit, to -prevent any particular
member from detaching himself from the whole, and how
impossible to recal him to his proper rank and subordination.
This filled him with apprehensions for the common cause. An.
other consideration gave him no less disquiet with regard to
his own particular interests. By setting at liberty the de.
graded eletor, and by repealing the at by which that
prince was deprived of his hereditary honours and domi:
nions, the emperor had it in his power to wound-him in the
ooft tender part. The efforts of a prince beloved by his
ancient fnbjeas, and revered by all the protestant party, in
order to recover what had been unjustly taken from him,
could hardly have failed of exciting commotions in Saxony,
which would endanger al that he had acquired at the ex.
pence of so much dissimulation and artifice. It was no les
in the emperor's power to render vain all the solicitations of
the confederates in behalf of the landgrave. He had only
to add one a& of violence more to the injustice and rigout
with which he had already treated him; and he had according.
ly threatened the sons of that unfortunate prince, that if they
persisted in their present enterprise, instead of feeing their fa.
ther retored to liberty, they Ihould hear of his having susser'
ed the punishment which his rebellion had merited .

Sleid. s 71.

Having deliberated upon all there points with his affoci-

ates, Maurice thought it more prudent to accept of the con-
ditions offered, though less advantageous than those which
he had proposed, than again to commit ail to the doubtful
issue ofwart. He repaired forthwith to Paflau, and signed
the treaty of peace; of which the chief articles were, That
before the twelfth day of Augut, the confederates (hall
lay down their arms, and disband their forces; That on or
before that day the landgrave lhall be set at liberty, and
conveyed in safety to his cafle of Rheinfels; That a diet
shall be held within fix months [August 2], in order to de--
liberate concerning the most proper and effecual method
of preventing for the future all disputes and dissensions a.
bout religion; That in the mean time, neither the emperor,
nor any other prince, ihall upon any pretext whatever, offer
any injury or violence to such as adhered to the confeffiow
of Angfburg, but allow them to enjoy the free and undif.
turbed exercise of their religion; That, in return, the pro-
terfants ihall not molest the catholics either in the exercise
of their ecclefiafical jtrifdi&ion, or in performing their re-
ligious ceremonies; That the Imperial chamber -hall ad.
rinifterjuftice impartially to persons of both parties, and
protestants be admitted indiscriminately witi the catholics
to fit as judges in that court; That if the next diet flould
not be able to terminate the disputes witdregard to religion,
the stipulations in the present treaty in behalf of the pro.
teltants Ihall continue for ever in full force and vigour;
That none of the confederates shall be liable to any ation
on account of what had happened during the course of the
war; That the consideration of those encroachments which
had been made, as Maurice pretended, upon the constitution
and liberties of the empire*, Ihall be remitted to the ap-
proaching diet;. That Albert of Brandenburg Ihall be com-

tSleid. Hit. 563, &c. Thuan . lib. x. 359 &c.

I Recueil des Traitez, ii. 26j.,

G 2

prehended in the treaty, provided he Ihall accede to it, and
diiband his forces before the twelfth of AuguR.

Such was the memorable treaty of Paffau, that overturn.

ed the valt fabric, in erecting which Charles had employed
so many years, and had exerted the utmost efforts of his
power and policy; that annulled all his regulations with re.
gard to religion; defeated all his hopes of rendering the Irn.
perial authority absolute and hereditary in his family; and
eftablif(ed the. protestant church, which had hitherto sub-
iifted precarioufy in Germany, through connivance, or by
expedients, upon a firm and secure basis. Maurice reaped
all the glory of having concerted and completed this unex.
pcaed revolution. It is a singular circumstance, that the
reformation should be indebted for its security and full eRa.
blihment in Germany, to the fame hand which had brought
it to the brink of deftrution, and that both events should
have been accomplished by the fame arts of dissimulation
The ends, however, which Maurice had in view, at thoft
different juncures, seem to have been more attended to than
the means by which he attained them; and he was now as
universally extolled for his zeal and public spirit as he had
lately been condemned for his indifference and interested p0.
licy. It is no less worthy ofobfervation, that the French
king, a monarch zealous for the catholic faith, should emr
ploy his power in order to protet and maintain the refor.
mation in the empire, at the very time when he was perse-
cuting his own protestant subje&s with all the fierceness of
bigotry, and that the league for this purpose, which proved
so fatal to the Romish church, ihould be negotiated and
signed by a Roman catholic bilhop. So wonderfully doth
the wisdom of God superintend and regulate the caprice ol
human passions, and render them subservient towards the ac
complifhment of his own purposes.

Little attention was paid to the interests of the French

king during the negotiations at Paffau. Maurice and hi
afociates, having gained what they had in view, discoveret

# BOOK XI.

no great solicitude about an- ally, whom, perhaps, they
reckoned to be overpaid for the alfifrance which he had
given them, by his acquisitions in Lorrain. A lhort clause
which they procured to be inserted in the treaty, import-
ing that the king of France might communicate to the con--
federates his particular pretenlions or causes of hofRilityi
which they would lay before the emperor, was the only
sign that they gave of their remembering hownmuch they
had been indebted to him for their success. Henry expe-
rienced the fame treatment which every prince- who lends
his aid to the authors of a civil war may expet. As soon
as the rage of fation began to subside, and any profpet of
accommodation to open, his services were forgotten, and his,
aiTociates made a merit with their sovereign, of the ingrati-
tude with which they abandoned their protector. But how
much soever Henry might be enraged at the perfidy of his
allies, or at the impatience with which they hastened to
make their peace with the emperor, at his expence, he was
perfe£tly sensible that it was more his interest to keep well
with the Germanic body, than to resent the indignities of-
sered him by any particular members of it. For that rea.
fun he dismissed- the hostages which he had received from.
Maurice and his associates, and asseted to talk. in the fame
strain as formerly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the an-
cicnt conflitution and liberties of the empire..

B OOK XI.

As soon as the treaty of Paftan.was fgned, Maurice in con.
sequence of his engagements with Ferdinand,. rarchbed into
Hungary with twenty thousand men [Aug. 3.1 Bt the
great superiority of the Turkifhi armies; the frequent.muti.
nies both of the Spanih and German soldiers, occasioned by
their want of pay, together with the diffetilons between

G 3

Maurice and Caftaldo, who was piqued at being obliged to
resign the chief command to him, prevented his performing
any thing in that country suitable to his former fame, or of
great benefit to the king of the Romans*.

When Maurice set out for Hungary, the prince of Hesse

pirted from him with the forces under his command, and
marched back into his own country, that he might be ready
to receive his father upon his return, and give up to him the
reins of government which he had held during his absence.
But fortune was not yet weary of persecuting the land.
grave. A battalion of mercenary troops, which had been
in the pay of Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg, their
colonel, a soldier of fortune, ready to engage in any enter.
prise, secretly withdrew from the young prince as he was
marching homewards, and joined Albert of Brandenburg,
who fill continued in arms againit the emperor, refuting to
be included in the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily for the
landgrave, an account of this reached the Netherlands, jut
as he was difmiffne from the citadel of Mechlin, where he
bad been confined, but before he had got beyond the frontiers
of that country. The queen of Hungary, who governed
there in her brother's name, incensed at such an open viola-
tion of the treaty to which he owed his liberty, issued or-
tiers to arret him, and committed him again to the cufody
of the fame Spanish captain who had guarded him for five
years with the most severe vigilance. Philip beheld all the
horrors of his imprionment renewed, and his spirits subsid-
ing in the fame proportion as they had rifea during the
{hort interval in which he had enjoyed liberty; he funk into
dtfpair, and believed himself to be doomed to perpetual cap.
tivityt. But the matter being so explained to the emperor,
as fully satisfied him that the revolt of Reifenberg's merce.
naries could be imputed neither to the landgrave nor to
his son, he gave orders for his release; and Philip at las ob.

w Iiuanhaffii Hist. Hungar. 288. Thuan. lib. x. 371.

- t Sleid.573. Belcari Comment. 834.

tained the liberty for which he had so long languilhed.
But though he recovered his freedom, and was reinstated
in his dominions, his sufferings seem to have broken the vi.
gour, and to have extinguished the activity of his mind:
from being the boldest as well as most enterprising prince
in the empire, he became the most timid and cautious, and
passed the remainder of his days in a pacific indolence.

The degraded ele&or of Saxony, likewise, procured his

liberty in consequence of the treaty of Paffau. The em-
peror having been obliged to relinquish all his schemes for
extirpating the protestant religion, had no longer any mo-
tive for detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely so.
licitous, at that junture, to recover the confidence and
good-will of the Germans, whose affifance was essential to
the success of the.enterprife which he meditated against the
king of France, he, among other expedients for that pur-
pose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a prince
whose merit entitled him no less to esteem, than his susser-
ings rendered him the objec of compaflion. John Fre-
derick took pofilffion accordingly of that part of his territo-
ries which had been reserved for him, when Maurice was in.
velfed with the electoral dignity. As in this situation he
continued to display the fame virtuous magnanimity for
which he had been conspicuous in a more prosperous and
splendid state, and which he had retained amidit all his sus-
ferings, he maintained during the remainder of his life that
high reputation to which he had so jutl a title.

The loss of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had made a deep

irpreflion on the emperor. Accustomed to terminate all
his operations against France with advantage to himself, he
thought that it nearly concerned his honour not to allow
Henry the superiority in this war, or to susser his own ad-
miniltration to be Rained with the infamy of having permit-
ed territories of such consequence to be dismembered from
the empire. This was no less a point of interell than of ho-
nuur. As the frontier of Champagne was more naked, and

lay more exposed tha-f that of any province in Frane,
Charles had frequently, during his wars with that kingdom,
made inroads upon that quarter with great success and es.
set; but if Henry were allowed to retain his late conquests,
France would gain such a formidable barrier on that fide,
as to be altogether secure, where formerly {he had been
weakest. On the other hand, the empire had now loR as
much, in point of security, as France had acquired;. and
being stripped of the defence which those cities afforded it,
lay open to be invaded on a quarter, where all the towns
having been hitherto confidered as interior, and remote
from any enemy, were but slightly fortified;. These confi.
derations determined Charles to attempt recovering the three
towns of which Henry had made himself matter; and the
preparations which he had made agalnft Maurice and his as.
fociates, enabled him to carry his resolution into. immediate
execution.

As soon, then, as the'peace was concluded at Paffau; be

left his inglorious retreat at Villach, and advanced to Aug.
iburg, at the head of a considerable body of Germans which
he had levied, together with all the troops which he had
drawn out of Italy and Spain. To these he added several
battalions, which having been in the pay oftlie confederate
entered into his service when difmiffedby them; and he
prevailed likewise on some princes of the empire to join.
him with their vassals. In order to conceal the deftiha.
tion of this formidable army, and: to guard against ala~
ing the Fiench king, so as to put him on preparing for tfi
defence of his late conquests, he gave out that he was to
march forthwith into Hungary,in order to second Maurice
in his operations against the infidels. When he began to
advance towards the Rhine, and' could no lbnger emplot
that pretext, he tried a new artifice, and spread a report,
that he took this rout in order to chafife Albert of Bran
denburg, whose cruel exa&ions in that part of the empire cal
led loudly for hai interposition to check them.

But the French having grown acquainted, at last, with.

arts by which they had been so often deceived, viewed ah
Charles's motions with difiruft. Henry immediately dif.
ccrned the true objec of his vast preparations, and resolved
to defend the important conquers which he had gained
with vigour equal to that with which they were about to be
attacked. As be foresaw that the whole weight of the war
would be turned against Metz, by whose fate that of Toul
and Verdun would be determined, he nominated Francis of
Lorrain, duke of Guise, to take the command in that city
during the siege, the issue of which would equally asset the
honour and interest of his country. His choice could not
have fallen upon any person more worthy of that trust. The
duke of Guise poffefled, in a high degree, all the talents of
courage, sagacity, and presence of mind, which render men
eminent in military command. He was largely endowed
with that magnanimity of foul which delights in bold enter-
prises, and alpires to fame by splendid and extraordinary
acions. He repaired with joy to the dangerous flation as-
signed him, as to a theatre on which he might display his
great qualities under the immediate eye of his countrymen,
all ready to applaud him. The martial genius of the French
nobility in that age, which confidered it as the greatest re-
proach to remain inactive, when there was any opportunity
of signalising their courage, prompted great numbers to fol.
low a leader who was the darling as well as the pattern of
every on>. that courted military fame. Several princes of
the blood, many noblemen of the highest rank, and all the
young officers who could obtain the king's permiion, enter-
ed Metz as volunteers. By their presence they added
spirit to the garrison, and enabled the duke of Guise to em-
ploy, on every emergency, persons eager to distinguish them-
selves, and fit to condu& any service.

But with whatever alacrity the duke of Guise undertook
the defence of Metz, he found every thing upon his arrival
there, in such a situation, as might have induced any perfoa

of less intrepid courage to despair of defending it with fuc..
cess. The city was of great extent, with large suburbs;
the walls were in many places feeble and without ramparts
the ditch narrow; and the old towers, which projeted in.
stead of bastions, were at too great distance from each other
to defend the space between them. For all these defefts he
endeavoured to provide the best remedy which the time
would permit. He ordered the suburbs, without sparing
the monasteries or churches, not even that of St. Arnulph,
in which several kings of France had been buried, to bt
levelled with the ground; but in order to guard against the
imputation of impiety, to which such a violation of so many
faared edifices, as well as of the alhes of the dead, might ex.
pose him, he executed this with much religious ceremony,
Having ordered all the holy vestments and utensils, together
with the bones of the kings, and other persons deposited in
these churches, to be removed, they were carried in solemn
procession to a church within the walls, he himself walking
before them bare-headed, with a torch in his hand. He
then puled down such houses as stood near the walls, clear.
cd and enlarged the ditch, repaired the ruinous fortification,
and ereted new ones. As it was neceflary that all thef
works lhould be finished with the utmost expedition, he hI
boured at them with his own hands: the officers and volun.
teers imitated his example, and the soldiers submitted with
cheerfulness to the most severe and fatiguing service, wlhe
they law that their superiors did not decline to bear a pat
in it. At the fame time he compelled all useless persons to
leave the place; he filled the magazines with provisions ad
military stores; he burnt the mills, and detroyed the corn
and forage for several miles round the town.' Sucl'weE
his popular talents, as well as his 'arts of acquiring an .
fcendant over the minds of men, that the citizens seconded
him with no less ardour than the soldiers; and every othe
passion being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse the enemy,
with which he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their C

states, together with the havock which he made among their
public and private buildings, without any motion of resent-
mcntt.

Meantime the emperor having colleaed all his forces,
continued his march towards Metz. As he passed thro'
the cities on the Rhine, he law the dismal effets of that li-
centious and wasteful war which Albert had carried on in
these parts. Upon his approach, that prince, though at
the head of twenty thousan'd men, withdrew into Lorrain,
as if he had intended to join the French king, whose arms
he had quartered with his own in all his fiandards and en-
signs. Albert was not in a condition to cope with the Im-
perial troops s, which amounted at least to sixty thousand
men, forming one ofthe most numerous and bes appointed
rmies which had been brought into the field during that
ge, in any of the wars among Chrifian princes.
The chief command, under the emperor, was committed
o the duke of Alva, aflifted by the marquis de Marignano,
ogether with the most experienced of the Italian and Spanish
enerals. As it was now towards the end of October,
hefe intelligent officers represented the great danger of be-

imig, at such an advanced season, a siege which could

ot fail to prove very tedious. But Charles adhered to his
wn opinion with his usual obifinacy, and being confi-
ent that he had made such preparations, and taken such
recautions, as would ensure success, he ordered the city to
e inyefted. As soon as the duke of Alva appeared [O&.
9], a large body of the French sallied out and attacked
is van.guard with great vigour, put it in confusion, and
illed or took prisoners a considerable number of men. By
his early specimen which they gave of the condut of their
ficers, as well as the valour of their troops, they ihewed
he Imperialists what an enemy they had to encounter, and
owv dear every advantage muff coRf them. The place,
lowever, was completely invested, the trenches were opened,
i:d the other works begun.

t Tluan. xi. 387. t Natal. Comitis, Hist. 12;.

of less intrepid courage to despair of defending it with sue.
cess. The city was of great extent, with large suburbs;
the walls were in many places feeble and without ramparts;
the ditch narrow; and the old towers, which projected in.
iead of bastions, were at too great distance from each other
to defend the space between them. For all these defeats he
endeavoured to provide the belf remedy which the time
would permit. He ordered the suburbs, without sparing
the monasteries or churches, not even that of St. Arnulph,
in which several kings of France had been buried, to be
levelled with the ground; but in order to guard against the
imputation of impiety, to which such a violation of so many
Lacred edifices, as well as of the ashes of the dead, might ex.
pose him, he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy vestments and utensils, together
with the bones of the kings, and other persons deposited in
these churches, to be removed, they were carried in folema
proceflion to a church within the walls, he himself walking
before them bare-headed, with a torch in his hand. He
then pulled down such houses as flood near the walls, clear-
ed and enlarged the ditch, repaired the ruinous fortifications
and ere&ed new ones. As it was necessary that all these
works should be finilhed with the utmost expedition, he la-
boured at them with his own hands: the officers and volun.
teers imitated his example, and the soldiers submitted with
cheerfulness to the most severe and fatiguing service, when
they saw that their superiors did not decline to bear a part
in it. At the fame time he compelled all useless persons to
leave the place; he filled the magazines with provisions and
military stores; he burnt the mills, and destroyed the com
and forage for several miles round the town.' Such wert
his popular talents, as well as his arts of acquiring an I
icendant over the minds of men, that the citizens seconded
him with no less ardour than the soldiers; and every other
passion being swallowed up in the zeal to repulse the enemy,
with which he inspired them, they beheld the ruin of their t

states, together with the havock which he made among their
public and private buildings, without any motion of resent-
mentt.

Meantime the emperor having collected all his forces,
continued his march towards Metz. As he passed thro'
the cities on the Rhine, he saw the dismal effects of that li-
centious and wasteful war which Albert had carried on in
these parts. Upon his approach, that prince, though at
the head of twenty thoufarnd men, withdrew into Lorrain,
as if he had intended to join the French king, whose arms
he had quartered with his own in all his flandards and en-
fgns. Albert was not in a condition to cope with the Im.
perial troops , which amounted at least to sixty thousand
en, forming one of the most numerous and bet appointed
rmies which had been brought into the field during that
ge, in any of the wars among Christian princes.
The chief command, under the emperor, was committed
o the duke of Alva, afifted by the marquis de Marignano,
ogether withthe most experienced of the Italian and SpaniSh
enerals. As it was now towards the end of Oc6ober,
hefe intelligent officers reprefeated the great danger of be-
innin:g, at such an advanced season, a siege which could
lot fail to prove very tedious. But Charles adhered to his
wn opinion with his usual obstinacy, and being confi-
ent that he had made such preparations, and taken such
recautions, as would ensure success, he ordered the city to
e inyefied. As loon as the duke of Alva appeared [Ot.
9], a large body of the French sallied out and attacked
is van.guard with great vigour, put it in confulion, and
illed or took prisoners a conliderable number of men. By
this early fpecimcn which they gave of the condut of their
officers, as well as the valour of their troops, they Ihewed
the Imperialitls what an enemy they had to encounter, and
how dear every advantage muff cost them. The place,
'owever, was completely invested, the trenches were opened,
i:d the other works legun.

+ Thuan. Xi. 387. 'Natal. Comitis, Hilt. ln;.

The attention both of the besiegers and. besieged. was

turned for some time towards Albert of Brandenburg, and
they firove with emulation which Ihould gain that prince,
who ill hovered in the neighbourhood, fluctuating in all
the uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who, being
swayed by no principle, was allured different ways by con.
trary views of interetL The French tempted him with of.
sers extremely beneficial; the Imperialists scrupled at no
promise which they thought could allure him. After much
hesitation he was gained by the emperor, from whom he ex.
peced to receive advantages which were both more imme.
diate and more permanent. As the French king, who be.
gan to fufpe& his intentions, had appointed a body of troops
under the duke of Aumale, brother to the duke of Guise,
to watch his motions, Albert fell upon them unexpectedly
with such vigour that he routed them entirely [Nov. 4],
killed many of the officers, wounded Aumale himself, and
took him prisoner. Immediately after this vi&ory, he march.
ed in triumph to Metz, and joined his army to that of the
emperor. Charles, in reward for this service, and the great
acceflion of strength which he brought him, granted Albert
a formal pardon of all past offences, and confirmed him in
the polIEffion of the territories which he had violently usurp
ed during the wart.

The duke of Guise, though deeply affeaed with his bro

ther's misfortune, did not remit, in any degree, the vigour
with which he defended the town. He harassed the, be,
fiegers by frequent sallies, in which his officers were so eaga
to diflinguith themselves, that his authority being hardlj
sufficient to restrain the impetuosity of their courage, he vaw
obliged at different times to hut the gates, and to conceal
the keys, in order to prevent the princes of the blood, asd
noblemen of the first rank, from exposing themselves to dan
ger in every sally. He repaired in the night what the en
my's artillery had beat down during the day, or ere&ed be

t Seid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, 391.

hind the ruined works new fortifications of almost equal
strength. The Imperialists, on their part, pushed on the at-
tack with great spirit, and carried forward, at once, approach-
es against different parts of the town. But the art of attack-
ing fortified places was not then arrived at that degree of
perfe&ion to which it was carried towards the close of the
sixteenth century, during the long war in the Netherlands.
The besiegers, after the unwearied labour of many weeks,
found that they had made but little progress; and although
their batteries had made breaches in different places, they
law, to their aftonifhmeft, works suddenly appear, in demo-
lifling which their fatigues and dangers would be renewed.
The emperor, enraged at the obstinate refiltance which his
army met with, left Thionville, where he had been confined
by a violent fit of the gout, and though still so infirm that
he was obliged to be carried in a litter, he repaired to the
camp [Nov. z6]; that, by his presence, he might animate
the soldiers, and urge on the attack with greater spirit.
Upon his arrival, new batteries were ere&ed, and new efforts
were made with redoubled ardour.

But, by this time, winter had set in with great rigour;
the camp was alternately deluged with rain or covered with
snow; at the fame time provisions were become extremely
scarce, as a body of French cavalry which hovered in the
neighbourhood, often interrupted the convoys, or rendered
their arrival difficult and uncertain. Diseases began to spread
among the soldiers, especially among the Italians and Spa-
niards, unaccutfomed to such inclement weather; great num-
bers were disabled from serving, and many died. At length
such breaches were made as seemed pracicable, and Charles
tfolved to hazard a general assault, in spite of all the re-
'tonftrancesof his generals against the imprudence of attack-
ing a numerous garrison, conducted and animated by the
loft gallant of the French nobility, with an army weakened
ty diseases, and disheartened with ill success. The duke of
Guise, fufpecing the emperor's intentions from the extra, r-
Vu'. IV. H

dnary movements which he observed in the enemy's canqp,
ordered all his troops to their refpeftive polls. They ap.
peared immediately on the walls, and behind the breaches,
with such a determined countenance, so eager for the corn.
bat, and so well prepared to give the aflailants a warm recp.
tion, that the Imperialists, instead of advancing to the charge
when the word of command was given, stood motionless in
a timid deje&ed silence. The emperor, perceiving that he
could not trust troops whose spirits were so much broken,
retired abruptly to his quartets, complaining that he.was
now deserted by his loldiers, who deserved no longer ,the
.name of ment.

Deeply as this behaviour of his troops mortified and *i

fetcd Charles, he would. not hear.of abandoning the siege,
though he saw the neceflity of changing the method of at.
tack. He suspended the fury of his batteries, and proposed
to proceed by the more secure but tedious method of sap-
ping. -iAt as t still continued to rain or to snow almost
inceiantly, such as were employed in this fcrvice endured
incredible hardflips: and the duke of Guise, whose industry
was not inferior to his valour, discovering all their 'mine¢
counter-worked them, and prevented their effec&. At lt,
Charles finding it impossible to contend any longer with she
severity of the leafon, and with enemies whom he could nei,
ther overpower by force, nor subdue by art, while at the
fame time a contagious diltemper raged among his troops
and cut off daily great numbers of the officers as well as fol.
Aiers, yielded to -the solicitations of his generals, who ces.
jured him to save the remains of his army by a timely.retrat
,' Fortune," fays he, " I now perceive, resembles other fe.
males, and chufes to confer her favours on .young ame
while fle turns her bac on those who are advanced is
years-"

Upon this, he gave orders immediately to raise the siege
[Dec. 26J, and submitted to the disgrace of abandoning

t huan. 397.

the enterprise, after having continued fifty-fix days before
the town, during which time he'had loft'upwaids of thirty
thousand men, who died of diseases, or were killed by the
enemy. The duke of Guise,' as soon as he perceived the
intention of the Itnperiaifts, fTent out feveral'bodies both of
cavalry and infantry to infest their rear,;to pick up stragglers,
and to seize evey opportunity of attacking them with ad-
vantage. Such was the confusion with' which they made
their retreat, that the French might have harafled them in
the most cruel manner. But wher they sallied out, a spec-
tacle presented Itself to their view; which- extinguifed at
once all hostile rage, and melted them into tenderness and
compaflior - The Imperial tampWas filled. with the sick and
wounded, with the dead and the dying. In all the different
roads by which:the Army retired, numbers werefound, who,
having maade an effort to efcape,'beyond their strength, were
left, when they could go no farther, to pertfh without affill-
ance. This they'received from their enemies, ai&F-were in-
debted' to them for all the kind offices which theifr4ftieds
had notd the powertob perfom - The duke of Guise imme-
diately rdered-propter refreshments for' such as were dying
of hunger, he'-appointed surgeons' to attnd- tiie. flc:and
wounded;: he'rmoved such as could' bear it- to theadjacent
iillages; and- fhofe who would have fuffered-by bqing-carlm-
ed so far, he admitted into the hospitals which lbe ,ad fitted
up in the city for his: own soldiers. As flon as they reco-
wered, he sent -them home-' under an- escort Obffldiersa and
with money to'bear their charges.. By these' adts of huma,
Dity, which were uncommon in that:age,-.whein war was-car-
uied on with greater rancour and ferocity tbhn at present,
the duke of Guise completed the fame which he had acquir-
td by his-gallant and. -fucefsful defence ofMetvz,'and engag-
ed those whom he had vanquihfed to vie with his own coun-
tymen in extolling his namet.
t Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel, Hilt. de

t.ace, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of this: siege is ta-

M 2..

To these calamities in Germany, were added such unfor.

tunate events in Italy as rendered this the most difaftroug
.ear in the emperor's life. During his residence at Villach,
Charles had applied to Cosmo di Medici for the loan of two
hundred thousand crowns. But his credit-at that time was
so low, that in order to obtain this inconsiderable fum, he
was obliged to put him in possession of the principality of
Piombino, and by giving up that, he loft the footing which
he had hitherto maintained in Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo
to assume, for the future, the tone and deportment of a prince
altogether independent. Much about the time that his in.
digence contrained him to part with this valuable territory,
he loft Sienna, which was of till greater consequence, thro'
the ill condut of Don Diego de Mendozat.

Sienna, like most of the great cities in Italy, had long

enjoyed a republican government, under the protetion of
the empire; but being torn in pieces by the dissensions be-
tween the nobility and the people, which divided all the Ita.
lian commonwealths, the fa&ion of the people, which gain.
ed the ascendant, besought the emperor to become the guard
ian of the administration which they had eftablifled, and ad-
mitted into their city a small body of Spanifl soldiers, whom
he had feat to countenance the execution of the laws, and
to preserve tranquillity among them. The command ol
these troops was given to Mendoza, at that time ambaflado
for the emperor at Rome, who persuaded the credulous mula
titude, that it was necessary for their security againt any fa
ture attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a citade
in Sienna; and as he flattered himself that by means of thi
fortress he might render the emperor master of the city, h
pushed on the works with all possible dispatch. But he threo
off the maik too soon. Before the fortifications were corn
pleted, he began to indulge his natural haughtiness and feve

ken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac, who was prefcnt
Natal. Comit. Hist. 129.

t Thuan. Uh. xi. 7,6.

ity of temper, and to treat the citizens with greatinfolence.
At the fame time the soldiers in garrison being'paid as irre-
gularly as the emperor's-troops ufualy were, hved almoR at
discretion upon the inhabitants, and were gbilty of many aAs
of licence and oppression.

These injuries awakened the Siennefe to a-fenfe of their

danger.. As they saw the neceflity of exerting themselves,
while the unfinished fortifications of the citadel left them any
hopes of success, they applied to the French ambaflhdor at
Rome, who -readily promised them his inafrers protecion
and affifance. At the fame time, forgetting their domestic
animofities when such a mortal blow was aimed at the liibe
ty and exifence of the republic, they sent agents to the exil-
ed nobles, and invited'them to concur with them in -saving
their country from the fervitade with which it was threaten-
ed. As there was not a moment to lose measures were con-
certed speedily, but with great prudence; and were execut-
ed with equal vigour; The citizens roe suddenly in arms;
the exilesflocked iot.:the town from different parts with all
their partisans, and what troops they could draw together;
and several bodies-of mercenariesin, the pay of France ap-
peared to support them. The Spaniards, though surprised,.
and much inferior inr number, defended themselves with great
courage; but feeing no profpet of relief, and having no hopes-
of maintaining their station long in ar half-finifhed fortress,
they soon gave it up.. The Siennefe, with the utmost ala-
crity, levelled it with the ground, that no monument mignh
remain. of that odious ftruture, which had been raised in or-
dr to enilave them. At the fame-time renouncing all con-
ne&ion with the emperor, they sent ambafTadors to thank
the king of France as the-reflbrer of their liberty, and to en-
Irat that-he would secure to the n'the perpe tual enjoyhent
f that blewr-.by continuing his protection to; their -kei u-
Nict.

t Pecci Memorie de Sienna, vol. iii. p. 230, 26ar Thuan. 37S,
37,, &c. Parua. Hill. Venet 267. Men. de -Biier, 4l4,&c

1I k3

To thefeimsfortues, oneftill more fatal had alnmoftlfuc.

ceeded. The severe administration of Don Pedro de-Tole.
do, viceroy of Naples, having filled that kingdom with
murmuring and 'ifaffeftion, the prince of Salerno; the head
of the malecobtents, had fled to the court of- France, where
all who bore ll-ill to -the emperor or his minifets were.
sure of finding protection and assistance. That nobleman,
in the usual style of exiles, boasting much -of the number
and power of his partisans, and of his great influence- ith
them, previled on Henry to think of invading Naples
from an expectation of being joined by all those withi hotn
the prince of Salerno held correspondence, or *bho W*ee'dif.
satisfied with Toledo's government. : But, though- the fit
hint of this entcrprife was fuggefted-by the prtiee of'-Sale-.
no, Henry did not chufe that its success ihould entirely de.
pend upon his being able to fulfil the promises whiehihe-had
made. He applied for aid to Solyman, whom he courted,
after his father's example, as his molf vigorous auxiliary a
gainft the emperor, and solicited him to fecoad his opeta
tions, by fending a powerful fleet into the Meditetralean.
It was not difficult to obtain what he requefled of the ful
tan, who, at this time, was highly incensed against the house
of Aufiria, on account of the proceedings in Hungary. He
ordered an hundred and fifty ships to be equipped,that
they might fail towards the coat of Naples, at whatever
time Henry IhouId name, and-might oe peoate, with-.the
French troops in their attempts -upon that kingdom,:i The
command of this fleet was given to the corfait D tguti
officer trained up under Barbarossa, and fearcely inferior to
his matter in eourage, in talents, or in good fort'see.: He
appeared on the toaf of Calabria at the time'-iehhad
been agreed-on, landed at several places,-plundered'Iad
burnt feveral'vilages and at lat, casting anchor in thelbay
of Naples, filled that city with conflernation. - Bt as the
French fleet, detained by some accident, which the contemt
porary hifiorians have not-explained, did not join the Turlk

according to concert, they after witing twenty daps, w ith-
out hearing any tidings.of it, set fail for Cqnftant.iople, and
tllus delivered the viceroy of Naples from, t tterror of an in-
vfion, which he was. not in, a cqnioq ,to; ve, ,r
j efi:ed .

1553.] As the Fruech had never given fgfever a check

to the emperor in any former cagpaign, tlpy ,;exprffie4 i. n
moderate joy atthe fuccef of their,.arms.. ,Charkes himself,
accultomed to a long series of prosperity, felt the calamity
moRs sensibly, and retired from Metz into the Low-Coun-
tries, much deje&ted with the cruel reverse of fortune which
affeced him in bis declining age, when the. vsiolnce of the.
gout had increased to such a pitch, a .entirely, broke the vi-
gour of his coaftitution, andrendered him, peevjfli, difficult
of access, and often incapable of apyplying to bufinef.. !3ut
whenever he enjoyed any interval of.eafe, all his thoughts
were beat on revenge; and he deliberated, with the greatest
solicitude, concerning the moss proper means of annoying
France, and of effacing the slain which had obfcpred the r.
putationand glory of his. arms. All the fchemnes concern-
ing GermanyD which had.engroffed 'im so long, being dif-
concerted by.the peace of Paffau, the .ffai'rs- of the empire
became only secondary objets of attention, and enrnity to
France was the predominant passion which chieflyoF0cupied
his mind. .. . .. .

The turbulent ambition of Albert .of Brapdnburg, ex-

cited violet. comrpotions, which diiturbed t.e ,e, ie dur-
ing this year. That prince's troops having aared, in the
calamities of the siege of Metz, were greatly ,reducead in
number. . But.the emperor, prompted by gratitude for ,is
diilinguifhed services, on that. occasion, or perhaps with a
fccret view. of fomenting divisions among the princes of the
empire, having paiad.up all the money due tq him, he Was
enabled wih4 thit rfum to hire foinmany.,f, the, fT d^ers di;f-
miffed from the Imperial army, that he was foou at .the hlad
of a body of men as numerous as ever. The bifbops of

Thuan. 375 380. Meme de Ribier, ii 40u . G4ianpne.

Balmberg and Wurtzburg having. solicited the. ,Imperij
chamber to annul, by its authority, the iniquitous condj
tions which Albert had compelled them to sign, that court
unanimouu found all thieir, engagements.,with him to,be
void in their own. nature,. because they had been ex0tQrted
by frce;, ejolined Albert to renounc. all claim to the.per,
fbrmance of them; and, if he should. persis i9 fiuch at un,
just demand, exhoroed all the princes of the ,mpire to take
arms againa: him as a disturber of the public. tranquillity.
Tq this degfion, Albert opposed the cons, inati0o, f hs
tranfaiog .with the two ,erelaes, which theemprnor had
granted him a.the reward of, his haing.joined th,- Inpexi.
al army at Metz, apd in order to intimidate his- atgoiils,
as well as to convince them of his resolution not.,toQelin.
quifh his pretenions, he put his. troops in motion, that he
might secure the territory in question. Various endavours
were employed, and manyr expedients proposed, in order to
prevent the kindling a- new war in Germany. But the fame
warmth oftemper which rendered Albert turbulent and en.
terprifing, ipfpiring him with the moil sanguine hopes of fuc-
cess, even in.his. wildel undertakings, he disdainfully rej¢ct
ed all reasonable overtures of accommodation.

Upon this, the Imperial chamber issued its decree against

him, and required the eledor of Saxony, together with fevetal
other prines mentioned by name, to take arms in order to
carry it into eecution. Maurice, and thofi aifociated with
him, were not unwilling to undertake this service. .They
were extremely. folicitous-to maintain public order by support-
ing the authority of the Imperial chamber, and Law the neceffi
ty of giving a. timely check, to the usurpations of an ambitious
prince, who had no principle of ation but regard to.hj
own inter;et, and no motive to dire& him but the impufe
of ungovernable passions, They had good reason to-fuf-
pea, that the emperor encouraged Albert in his extrava-
gant and irregular proceedings and secretly afforded him afiifit
ance that, by raising him up to rivaliMaurice in power, he
might, in any future broil, make use of his afliiance to

counterbalan'ce and controul the authority which the otier
had acquired in the empiret. .

These considerations united' the most powerful princes in
Germany in a league agaiilR Albert, of which Maurice was
declared generahffimo' [April 2]. This formidable con-
federacy, however, wrought no change in Albert's senti-
me:;ts; but as he knew that he could not refill so many
princes, if he should allow them time to assemble their for-
ces, he endeavoured, by his aftivity, to deprive them of all
the advantages which they might derive from their united
power and numbers; and for that reason marched direaly
againit Maurice, the enemy whom he dreaded most. It
was happy for the allies that the condu& of their affairs was
committed to a prince of such abilities. He, by his autho-
rity and example, had inspired them with vigour; and hav-
ing carr'ed on their preparations with a degree of rapidity
of which confederate bodies are seldom capable, he was in
condition to face Albert before he could make any confider-
able progress.

Their armies which were nearly equal in number, each
consisting of twenty-four thousand men, met at Sieverhaufen,
in the dutchy of Lunenburgh; and the violent animosity a-
gainft each other, which possessed the two leaders, did not
susser them to continue long inactive. The troops inflamed
with the fame hostile rage, marched fiercely to the combat
[June 9];' they fought with the greatest obstinacy; and as
both generals were capable of availing themselves of every
favourable occurrence, the battle remained long doubtful
each gaining ground upon the other alternately. At last
victory declared for Maurice, who was superior in cavalry
and Albert's army fled in confusion, leaving four thousand
dead in the field, and their camp, baggage, and artillery in
the hands of the conquerors. The allies bought their vic-
tory dear, their bell troops suffered greatly, two sons of the

tSleid. 585. AMem. de Ribier, ii. 44z. Arnoldi vita Maurit.
'P. Menken. i. 1242.

duke of Brunswick, a duke of Lunenburgh, and maiy otilie
perions of diftintion, were among'the'number of the Iaian5.
Bit all itcfe were fobn forgotten; for 'Maurice hirmelf,' as
he led up to a second charge a body of horse which had
been brolrr, received a wound with a piftol-bullet in the
belly, of which he died two daysa'fter the battle, in-tht
thirty-fecond year of his age, and' in the sixth after his at.
taining the ele~or dignity.

Of al the personages who have appeared in th'e liftotr

ofthis a&ive age, when great occurrences and fudden'"teird
lationscaBed forth extraordinary talents to view, and afford
ed them fill opportunity to display themfelvesr Maurioe'mln
juAfly be confidered asthe mos remarkable. If h-is xorbi-
taut ambition, his profound diflimulation, and'his 'ufiwar
ratible usurpation of his kinsman's -honour and' dominioni
exdude him fiomn being praised as a virtuous man; his pru.
denee in' concerting his measures, his vigour in executing
them, and the uniform fnccefs with whicrlthey were attend.
ed, entitle him to the appellation of a great prince. Atin
age when-impetofity of fpirin comnmonly'predbmifatis over
poliical wisdom, when the highest effort even-of iaetiim
of the firt orde is to'fix- on a bold ftlheie; and'to extciti
it with prwopttude and coufage, he formed 'aid c61tdfiCi
an intricate plan ofpolicy, which deceived& the moft.R'tnfl
monarch in Europe. At the very jun&ure when the. em
peror had attained- to almft 'unlhnited despotism, Maurice,
with power seemingly inadequate to such an. idertakihg
compelled him to relinquiih all his usurpations, and eftablili
ed mot only the religious but civil liberties of Germany ór
fuck foundations as have hitherto remained unihakeni. Al
though, at one period of his life, his condu& exEitei thi
jealousy of the protestants, and at another drew on hitn tL
resentment of'the Rmotan catholics; such was his mafterly'i

Hifloria pugnz infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Thon

Wintzero aulore apud Scard. ii. 559 Sleid. 583. Rufcelli ept
trcs aux Princest 154. Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1z245

dress, that he was the only :prince of the. age who in any
degree possesed the onfidence of ,both, and whom both la.
mented as the motable as well as faithfuL.guardian of the
conffitution and laws of his country. . . .. ,.

The consternation. byich Matrice's. death occafioned.a-
nmong his troops,..prevented. them .from making.-the proper
improvemenet of the vi&ory which they had gained.. Al-
bert whose a&ive courage, and profuse liberality, readered
him the darling of such military adventurea as were little
solicitous about the justice of his cause, soon re-assembled
hli broken forces,. and made freih levies with. fch fuccefa
that he was quickly..at- the head of fifteen.thoufand men,
and renewed,his depredations with. additional fury. But
Henry of Brunswick having taken the command of,the al-
lied troops, defeated irn in, a second battle. Se pt. ia]
scarcely less bloody .than. the former. Even then his cou-
rage did not fink, nor were his resources exhaued. He
made several efforts, and some of them very vigorous, to re-
trieve his affairs: but being laid under the ban of the empire
by the Imperial chamber; being dn'ven by degrees out of all
his hereditary territories,.as well as.thole which he hadu--
furped; being forsaken by many of his officers, and over-
powered.by-the number of his enemies,.he fled-for-efuAge in-
o France. . After having been, for a.confiderable tiar the
terror and scourge of Germany, he lingered out foinef ,years..
i an indigent and dependent state of exile, the. mireries of
hich his reflefs and arrogant Ipirit endured with the,moft
adignant impatience. Upon his death withoqjt issue .CJan.
1, 15773, his territories, which had been seized by the
inces who took arms againit him, were reftore4,by!a- de-
ree of the emperor, to his collateral heirsof tle Iopifeof
raidenburg*.. ..

- .

- .

-

Maurice baving left only one daughter, wha0,was,:after-
ards married to William prince of Orange, by whom Ihe
ad a son who bore his grandfather's name,;iund'inherited.
' Sleid. 592, .94, 599. -truv. Corp.siitl. Gemr. io9i,-.

the grat talents for which e was conspicuous, a viont
dispute. arOe cencemnu the feeefi~ o to hit honou asd
tbin-Mr . Jbn -Frcderik, the-deg~ded ~deeor, claimed
the c ~ora dignity, an that part of his pa~ilmonasi
of whih he had been violnty itppe after te-Smaltl.
di cwar. A ag.fun, Maurice's only.-bethcr, pleaded his
right not only to the herditary poe&fioos of their faily,
buto the tcldera dignity, and to the teritories which
Marice had acquired. As AuguRus was a prince of .
fierla abilities, a wellasof great candour and geatie
ofmannes, the Rates of Suony, forgetting the merite and
fdferings of their former maier, declared warmly inhi fa.
oar. His pretenions were powerfully fuppe d by!
king of Denmark, whoe daughter he had maried,.aod .
louly efpoufd by the king of the Romana,.eutof retgr
to Maurice's memory. The degraded eltor, though .
cretly favoured by his ancient enemy the mperor, was at
lat obliged. to-relinquifh his claim, upon obtaining a fall
addition to the territories which had been allotted to him,
together with a fipulation, securing to his family. the even.
tua.l cceffion, upon a failure.of male heirs in the Albertine
line. That unfortunate, but magnanimous prince, died
net year soo after ratifying this treaty. of agreement; and
the es&oraldignity is ill poffefled by the decendants of
Auguftu*.

Dring these tranfations in Germany, war was caried

on i the Low"vCoutice with coniiderable vigour. Thi
emperor, impatiet to efface the Ilain which his ignomiu
ons repuli at Metz left upon. his military reputation, ha
an army early in the sied, and. laid. fige to. Terouam
The~gh th town was of fuh importance, that. Sap'
uctd to call it one ol: the two pillows on which a king e
France mightsieep with security, the fortifications .w
in bad repair: Henry, trusting to what had happened i
Metz, thought nothing more was necessary to render all t

Sicid. 57. Thuan. 49. Struv. Corp. Hiit. Germ.

efforts of the enemy abortive, than to reinforce the gar-.
son *ith a considerable number of the young nobility. But
d'Efse, a veteran officer who commnded them, being kl-
led, and the Imperialits pulhing the siege with great vigour
and perseverance, the place was taken by afiult ,Joune.t i.]
That it might'not fall again -into the hands of the French,
Charles ordered not only the fortifications but the town it-
self to be razed, and the inhabitants to be dispersed in the
adjacent cities. Elated with this fuccefes, the Imperialifta
inmediatelyinvefted Hefden, which, though defended with
great bravery, ws likewise taken by affault,and fuch:of the
garrison as efeaped the sword, were made prisoners - The
emperor entraied the condu& of this siege to Emanuel
Phillbert of Savoy, prince of Piedmont, who, on that occa-
sion, gave'the firl display of thole great talent& for milita.
ry command, which soon entitled him to be ranked among
the firit generals of the age, and facilitated his re-establish-
ment in his-hereditary dominions, the greatet part of which
having been over run by Francis in his expeditions into Ita-
ly, were till retained by Henry t -

The loss of these towns, together with so many persons
of diPtin&ion, either killed or taken by the enemy, was no
inconsiderable calamity to France, and Henry felt it very
sensibly; but he was fill more mortified at the emnperor'a
Having recovered his wonted superiority in the field so soon
after the blow at Metz, which the French had represented
as fatal to his power. He was alhamed too,-of his own re-
mifTnefs and excessive fecnrity at the opening'of the cam-
paign; and in order to repair that error, he affembled:a nu-
merous *my, and led it into the Low Countries, : .

Roused at the' approach of such a formidable-enemy,
Charles left Buiffels, where he had been shut up so closely
uring seven' fiibnthi,- that it came-to hebeblieved in many
parts of Euirope that he was dead; and thougbhhe was f
much debilitated by the goit that he could hardly-beae the

t Thuan. 4rr. Harei Annales Brabant. 669.
Vul. IV. I

motion of a litter, he hastened to join hs army. The eyes
of all Europe were turned with expetation towards those
mighty and exasperated rivals, between whom a decisive
battle was now thought unavoidable. But Charles having
prudently declined to hazard a general engagement, and
the violence of the autumnal rains rendering it impossible for
the French to undertake any siege, they retired, without
having performed any thing suitable to the great prepara-
tions which they had madet.

The Imperial arms were not attended with the fame fuc.

cetf in Italy. The narrowness of the emperor's finances
seldom allowed him to a& with vigour in two different
places at the fame time; and having exerted himself to the
utmost in order to make a great effort in the Low-Coun.
tries, his operations on the other fide of the Alps were pro.
portionally feeble. The viceroy of Naples, in conjunction
with Cosmo di Medici, who was greatly alarmed at the in.
troduaion of French troops into Sienna, endeavoured to be-
.come master of that city. But, instead of reducing the Si.
ennefe, the Imperialists were obliged to retire abruptly, in
order to defend their own country, upon the appearance of
the Turkish fleet, which threatened the coast of Naples;
and the French not only established themselves more firmly
in Tuscany, but, by the aflltfance of the Turks, conquered
a great part of the island of Corfca, fubjeEt at that time to
the Genoese*-

The affairs of the house of Austria declined no less il

Hungary during the course of this year. As the troop
which Ferdinand kept in Transylvania received their pal
very irregularly, they lived almost at discretion upon the is
habitants; and their insolence and rapaciousness greatly dif
guafed all ranks of men, and alienated them from their nel
iboereign, who instead of protecing, plundered his fubjeis
Their indignation at this, added to their desire of revengiln
Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much upon a turbulent w

* .Ha.-'e , ( 7 . Thuan. 414. 4 Thuan. 417.

biltty impatient of injury, and upon a fierce people prone to
change, that they were ripe for a revolt. At that very
juicture, their late queen Isabella. together with her son,
appeared in Transylvania. ler ambitious mind could rot
bear the solitude and inactivity of a private life; and re-
penting quickly of the cession which she had made of the
crown in the year one thousand five hundred and fifty-oney
lile left the place of her retreat, hoping that the diffatisfac-
tion of the Hungarians with- the Austrian government
would prompt them once more to recognise' her son's right
to the crown. Some noblemen of great eminence declared
immediately in his favour. The bafha of Belgrade, by So-
lulyan's order, efpouetd his cause, in oppoition to Ferdi-
nand; the Spanish and German soldiers, inflead of advanc-
ing againit the enemy, mutinied for want of pay, declar-
ing that they would march back to Vienna; so that Cafal-
do, their general, was obliged to abandon Transylvania to-
Isabella and the Turks, and to place himself at the head of
the mutineers, that by his authority he might relsrain them
firom plundering the Austrian territories through whicl
they passed*.

Ferdinand's attention was turned so entirely towards the
affairs of Germany, and his treasures so much exhausted by
his late efforts in Hungary, that he made no attempt to re-
cover that valuable province, although a favourable oppor-
tunity for that purpose presented itself, as Solyman was
then engaged in a war with Persia, and involved besides in
domestic calamities which engrossed anddillurbed his mind.
Solyman, though distinguished by many- accomplishments
from the other Ottoman princes, had all the passions pecu-
liar to that violent and haughty race. He was jealous of
his authority, sudden as well as furious in his anger, and
susceptible of all that rage of love, which reigns in the
Ealt, and often produces the wildest and most tragical es-
ICtj. His favourite mistress was a Circaflan save of ex-

* huan. 43o.

I

quifite beauty, who bore him a son called Muflapha, whor,
both on ccount of hisbirthright and merit, he destined to
be the heir of his crown. - Roxalana, a Ruffian captive,
loon supplanted the Circfl and gained the sultan's heart.
Having the addrcfs to retain the conquest which (he had
made, she kept polreion of his love without any rival for
many years, during which Ihe brought him fcveral sons and
one daughter. All the happiness, however, which .he de.
rived from the unbounded sway that she had acquired over
the mind of a monarch whom one half of the world revered
or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual reflecions on Mu£.
tapha's acceflion to the throne, and the certain death of
her sons, who, ihe foresaw, would be immediately sacrificed,
according to the barbarous jealousy of Turkish policy, to
the safety of the new emperor. By dwelling continually
on this melancholy idea, she came gradually toview Muf
tapha as the enemy of her children, and to hate him with
more than a Aep-mother's ill-wilL This prompted her to
wiih his defru&ion, in order to secure for one of her'own
sons the throne which was destined for him. Nor did she
want either ambition to attempt such a high enterprise, or
the arts requisite for carrying it into execution. Having
prevailed on the sultan to give her only daughter in marriage
to Ruftan the grand vizier, (he disclosed her scheme to that
crafty minister, who perceiving that it was his own interelt
to co-operate with her, readily promised his affltance to,
wards aggrandizing that branch of the royal line to which he
was so nearly allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her measures with

this able confident, The began to affe& a wonderful zeal for
the Mahometan religion, to which Solyman was fuperfti
tioufly attached, and proposed to found and endow a royal
mosque, a work of great expence, but deemed by the Turks
meritorious if the highest degree. The mufti whom (he
consulted, approved much of her pious intention; but. ba-
ing been gained and inilruated by Ruftan, told her, that {he

being a (lave could derive no benefit herfelfffrm that'holy
deed, for all the merit of it would accrte to'Solyitiah, the
master whose property the was. Upon this lhe Teemed to
be overwhelmed with sorrow, and to fink Snto'e'r-deepeft me-
lancholy, as if she had been difghfted *ih life and al ft*i
ei;joyments. Solyman, who was absent with'tli e aiman, be-
ing informed of this dejea;on of mind, and odf the cauft
from which it proceeded, difeovered aln the solicitude of a
lover to remove it, and by a writing under his hand declar-
ed her a free woman. Roxalana hlaving gained this poirit,
proceeded to build the mosque, and' reahffuirted'her' uial
gaiety of spirit. But when Solyman, on hitretrnm to Con.-
flantinople, sent an einuch, according to the culftn of the' f-
raglio, to bring her to partake of his'bed, she, feemirglywith
deep regret, but in the molf peremptory manner, declind
to follow the eunuch, declaring that what had been an ho.
nour to her while a slave, became a crime as fhe'was now a
free woman, and that ihe would not involve eithl the fill.
tan or herself in the guilt that must be contraited by such
an open violation of the law of their prophet. Solyman,
wihofe paflion this difficulty, as well as the affeaed delicacy
which gave rite to it, heightened and inflamed, had recourse
immediately to the mufti for his direcio.m He replied, a:
greeably to the koran, that Roxalana's scruples wete wtell
foraded; but added, artfilly, in wrds which'Rfanii had
ta,'ght him to use, that it was in the sultan's power to re.
r.ove these difficulties, by efpouling her as his fafaii' ife.
The amorous monarch closed eagerly with the proposal,
and solemnly married her, according to the form ofthe Ma.
hometan ritual; though, by doing so, he disregarded a max
im of policy which the pride of the Ottotna-i bltd-hiad
taught all the sultans since Bajazet L to confider as invio-
lable. From his time, none of theTurkifh mdnarchs had
married,becaufe, when he was vanqunhed and takien brifon-
er by Tamerlane, his wife had been abufel with 6arlaro'rs
ifl!ence by the Tartars. That no fimilarcalamit 'might

13

again fubje the Ottoman family to the fame difgraoe~ the,
felasI a mdmitted nne to their beds but fl&es, whose dio.
owe counot bring ny'foch stain upon their house.. .
. ;

But the Wmr unaommai the Rep was, the moreCt con

vincd Roalana :oftheunbounded influence which she had
acquid over the fulta' hear ad emboldened her to
profecte, with greater hope of success, the scheme that she
had formed i order to deftr Maftaphba. This young
prince having beeen etruftedby his father, according to the
pEtice of the-fultan in that age, with the goverment of
fenal differeot romvine., was at that time i*tvefed with
the adminifration in Diarbeuir, the ancient Mefopot~a
which Solyain had wrested from the Persias,- and added
to his empire. In al these different commands, Muftapha
had conduted himelfwfth such cautious prudence as could
give ogance to his father, though, at the fame time, -e
governed with so much moderation as well as juiice, 'and
difpayed (uch walour and generosity, as rendered bhi
equally the favourite of the people and the darling of the
fadicry.

There was uo room to lay any folly or vice to his charge,

that could impair the high opinion which his- father -.
tertaned of him. Roxalana's malevolence was more refie
ed; fle turned his virtues against him, and made use of thefi
as engines for his defrution. She often mentioned, in So.
~'s'- c presce, the splendid qualities of his son; (he cele
brated his cooaehis liberality, his popula .arts, with nm.
cioms and exaggerated praie. As soon as the perceitd
that the fitan heard these encomiums, which were oftoe
repeated, with oneafinefs; that suspicion of his fen-begant
mingle itss wit his former esteem; and that by degrees
came to view him witbjealoufy and fear, the introducedt
by accident, some difecr fe- concerning the rebelli~ n of i
father-lnm- agaisft Bajaiet his grandfthe: the took nb
tice of the bravt -of the veteran troops under Muftapha'
commsn~ - d of tie anghbourbood of Dairbequir to th

territories of the Persian fophii Solyias mortal enanyr.
By these arts, whatever remained.of patenal tendernefswa
gradually extinguilsed, and fueh paffins were kindled i the
breast of the sultan,- as gave a Roxalana!. malignant:sig-
giefions the colour not only of.probability but of truth;
His suspicions and fear of Muftaphattlettd into deeptrooed
hatred. He appointed spies to pbferve and report-all 'his
words. and a&ions; he watched and flood on his guard a-
gainft him as his mofR dangerous enemy. -.

Having thus. alienated the sultan's heart from MuRlapha5
Roxalana ventured upon another ftep. She entreted. Soly
man to allow-her own sons the liberty of appearing-at Court;
hoping that by gaining access to their father, they might)
by their good qualities and dutiful deportment,, ifiniate
themselves into that place in his affe~ions which MuRfaphi
had formerly held; and, though what she demandedwas con-
trary to the pra~ice of the Ottoman family in that. age, the
uxorious monarch granted her request. To all these female
intrigues Ruftan added an artifice still more subtle, -which
completed the sultan's delusion, and heightened his jealousy
and fear. · He-wrote to the bafliaws of the provinces adja-
cent to Diarbequir, inftru&ing them to fend him regular in,
tlligence of Muflapha's proceedings in his government, and
to each of them he gave a private hint, flowing in appear.
ance from his zeal for their interest that nothing would he
more acceptable to the sultan than to receive favograbe c
counts of a son whom he defined to sustain the glory:of.the
Ottoman name. The bashaws, ignorant of his fraudulent
intention, and eager to pay court to their foveeign at fu(h
an easy price, filled their letters with ltudied but. fatal. pa~e-
gyrics of Muflapha, representing him as a prince.worthy,to
lucceed such an illustrious father, and as endowed.with talents
which might enable him to emulate, perhaps t equal, his
fame. These letters were indufrioufly ihewn to SolywB,
at the seasons when it was known that they. would mke ihe
deepest impression. Every expression in recommncuation,of

his (on wounded him to the heat; he fufpe&ed his pridcipal
officers of being ready to favour the most desperate attempts
of a prince whom they were so fond of praising; and faneq.
ing that he saw them already assaulting his throne with re.
bellious aims, he detemnined, while it was yet in his power,
to anticipate the blow, and to secure his own safety by his
son's death.

For this purpose, though under pretence of renewing the

war against Persia, he ordered Ruttan to march towards
Diarbequir at the head of a numerous army, and to rid him
of a son whose life he deemed inconsistent with his own safe.
ty. But that crafty minister did not chufe to be loaded
with the odium of having executed this cruel order.' As
soon as he arrived in Syria he wrote to Solyman, that the
danger was so imminent as called for his immediate presence;
that the camp was full of Muftapha's emissaries; that many
of the soldiers were corrupted; that the affetions of da
leaned towards him; that he had discovered a negotiation
which had been carried on with the fophi of Persia in order
to marry Muftapha with one of his daughters; that he al.
ready felt his own talents as well as authority to be inade.
quate to the exigencies of such an arduous conjun&ure; that
the sultan alone had sagacity to discern what resolution
should be taken in those circumstances, and power to' arry
that resolution into execution.

This charge of courting the friendship of the fophi, Rox

alana and Ruftan had referred as the last and most envenom
ed of all their calumnies. It operated with the violenct
whichl they expeced from Solyman's inveterate abhorrenoi
of the Persians, and threw him into the wildest transports o
rage. He set out instantly for Syria, and haflened thithe
with all the precipitation and impatience of fear and revenge
As soon as he joined his army near Aleppo, and had con
certed measures with Ruftan, he sent a chiaus, or meffenge
of the court, to his ton, requiring him to repair immediatel]
to his pretence. bMufapha, though no stranger to his tfep

mother's machinations, or to: Ruitan's malice, or to his fa-
ther's violent temper, yet relying on his own innocence, and
hoping to discredit the accusations of his enemies by the
promptitude of his obedience, followed the messenger with-
out delay to Aleppo. .The. moment he arrived in the camp,
he was introduced into the sultan's tent. As he entered it,
he observed nothing that could give him any alarm; no ad-
ditional crowd of attendants, no body of armed guards, but
the fame order and silence which always reign in the sultan's
apartments. In a few minutes, however, several mutes ap.
peared, at the fight of whom Muftapha, knowing what was
his doom, cried with a loud voice, " Lo, my death!" and
attempted to fly. The mutes rushed forward to seize him;
he refilled and struggled, demanding with the utmost ear-
ncftnefs to fee the sultan; and despair, together with the
hope of finding protetion frotn the soldiers, if he could e.
scape out of the tent, animated him with such extraordinary
strength, that, for some time, he baffled all the efforts of the
executioners. Solyman was within hearing of his son's
cries, as well as of the noise which the firuggle occasioned.
Impatient of this delay of his revenge, and itruck with ter-
ror at the thoughts of Muftapha's escaping, he drew afidt
the curtain which divided the tent, and thrusting in his head,
darted a fierce look towards the mutes, and, with wild and
threatening geflures, seemed to condemn their sloth and ti-
midity. At fight of his father's furious and unrelenting
countenance, MuRapha's strength failed, and his courage
forsook him; the mutes fafRened the bow-fitrng about his
neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

The dead body was exposed before the sultan's tent. The
oldiers gathered round it, and contemplating that mournful
objet with aftoni(hment, and sorrow, and indignation, were
eady, if a leader had not been. wanting, to have broke out
nto the wildest excesses of rage. After giving vent to the
rlf expressions of their grief, they retired each man to his
ten, and lhutting themselves up, bewailed in secret the cruel

f:te of their favourite; nor was there one of them who tatled
food, or even watcr, during the remainder of that day. Next
morning the fame solitude and silence reigned in the camp;
and Solyman, being afraid thatfome dreadful form would
follow this fullen calm, in order to apgcafe the enraged fol.
d'ers, deprived Ruftan of the feah, ordered him to leave the
camp, and raised Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved in
the army, to the dignity of vifier. This change, however,
was made in concert with Ruftan himself; that crafty mini.
fter fuggeftiug it as the only expedient which could save
himself or his matter. But within a few months, when the
resentment of the soldiers began to fubtide, and the name of
Muflapha to be forgotten, Achmet was firangled by the ful.
tan's cormmand,and Ruftan re.instated in the office of vifier.
Together with his former power, he re-affumed the plan for
exterminating the race of Muflapha which he had concerted
with Roxalana; and as they were afraid that an only lon
whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to avenge his
death, they redoubled their acivity, and by employing the
fame arts against him which they had pra&ised againlt his
father, they inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and prt.
vailed on him to ifrue orders for patting to death that young
innocent prince. These orders were executed with barba-
rous zeal, by an eunuch, who was dispatched to Bursa, the
place where the prince resided; and no rival was left to dif
pute the Ottoman throne with the sons of Roxalana*.

Such tragical scenes, produaive of so deep distress, seldom

occur but in the history of the great monarchies of the eat,
where the warmth of the climate seems to give every emo
tion of the heart its greatest force, and the absolute power
of sovereigns, accufloms and enables them to gratify alltheir
paflions without controul. While this interesting tranfadioi
in the court of Sol)yman engaged his whole attention, Charlei

* Augerii OGienii Bufbequli Legationis Turcica Epiftola iv

Franc. 161r, p. 37. Thuan. lib. xii. p. . 43. em. de Kibie':
i-. 457. Mauroceni HiP.or. Venet, lib. Mii. p. 60.

Iwas pturfuing, with the utmost ardour, a new scheme for ag-
grandizing his family. About this time, Edward the sixth
of England, after a short reign, in which he displayed such
virtues as filled his fubje& with sanguine hopes of being hap-
py under his government, and made them bear with patience
all that they suffered from the weakness, the dissensions, and
the ambition of the miniflers who assumed the adminiltration
during his minority, was seized with a lingering distemper
which threatened his life. The emperor no sooner received
an account of this, than his ambition, always attentive to seize
every opportunity of acquiring an increase of power, or of
territories, to his son, suggested the thought of adding Eng-
land to his other kingdoms, by the marriage of Philip with
the princess Mary, the heir of Edward's crown. Being ap-
prehenfive, however, that his son, who was then in Spain,
might decline a match with a princess in her thirty-eighth
year, and eleven years older than himfelft; Charles determin-
ed, notwithstanding his own age and infirmities, to make of-
ser ofhimfelf as a husband to his cousin.

But though Mary was so far advanced in years, and de-
ftitute of every charm eitherof person orofmanners that could
win affecion or command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his consent to the match proposed by his father, and
was willing, according to the usual maxim of princes, to fa-
crifice his inclination to his ambition. In order to ensure
the success of his scheme, the emperor, even before Edward's
death, began to take such steps as might facilitate it. Up.
on Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of England;
the pretensions of the lady Jane Grey proving as unfortu-
nate as they were ill-founded*. Charles sent immediately
a pompous embassy to London to congratulate Mary on her
accession to the throne, and to propose the alliance with his
son. The queen, dazzled with the profpet of marrying the
heir of the greatest monarch in Europe; fond of uniting

f Palav. Hist. Concil. Trid. v. ii . . 13. p. X50.

* Carte's Hist. of England, iii. az7.

more lofy with her mother's family, to which The had
been always warmly attached; and eager to secure the pow.
erful aid which (he knew would be necessary towards carry.
ing on her favourite scheme of re-eilablifhing the Romilh
religion in England, lifened in the mod favourable manner
to the proposal. Among her subje&s, it met with a very
different reception. Philip, it was well known, contended
for all the tenets of the church of Rome with a sanguinary
zeal which exceeded the measure even of Spanilh bigotry:
this alarmed all the numerous partisans of the reformation.
The Castilian haughtines and reserve were far from being
acceptable to the Englith, who, having several times seen
their throne otcupied by persons who were born fubjets,
had become accustomed to an unceremonious and familiar
intercourse with their sovereigns. They could not think,
without the utmost uneasiness, of admitting a foreign prince
to that influence in their councils, which the huiband of their
queen would naturally possess. They dreaded, both from
Philip's overbearing temper, and from the maxims of the
Spanish monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would in-
fuse ideas into the queen's mind, dangerous to the liberties
of the nation, and would introduce foreign troops and mo-
ney into the kingdom, to afift her in any attempt again1
them.

Full of these apprehensions, the house of commons, tho'

in that age extremely obsequious to the will of their meo
narchs, presented a warm address against the Spanish match;
many pamphlets were published, representing the dangerous
consequences of the alliance with Spain, and describing Phi.
lip's bigotry and arrogance in the most odious colours. But
MIary, inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard to the
remonstrances of her commons, or- to the sentiments of the
people. The emperor, having secured, by various arts, the
m;nifters whom (he trusted most, they approved warmly i
the match, and large fums were remitted by him in orde
to gain the reft of the council. Cardinal Pole, whom 'h

pope, immediately upon Mary's acceflion, had dispatched as
his legate into England, in order to reconcile his native coun-
try to the fee of Rome, was detained by the emperor's corn.
nhand at Dillinghen in Germany, leit by his presence he
(hould thwart Philip's pretensions, and employ his interest
in favour of his kinsman Courtnay earl of Devonshire, whom
the English ardently wished their sovereign to chufe for a
lufbandt.

As the negotiation did not admit of delay, it was carried
forward with the greatest rapidity, the emperor agreeing,
without hesitation, to every article in favour' of England,
which blary's ministers either represented as necessary to
soothe the people and reconcile them to the match, or that
was fuggeited by their own fears and jealousy of a foreign
mailer. The chief articles were [Jah. 12, 1554], that Phi-
lip, during his marriage with the queen, should bear the ti-
tle of king of England, but the entire adminiCtration of as-
iairs, as well as the sole disposal of all revenues, offices, and
tenefices, should remain with the queen; that the heirs of
the marriage should, together with the crown of England,
ii!erit the dutchy of Burgundy and the Low-Countries;
fiat if prince Charles, Philip's only son by a former marriage,
Ihould die without issue, his children by the queen, whether
male or female, should succeed to the crown of Spain, and
a'1 the emperor's hereditary dominions; that before the con-
furr.nation of the marriage, Philip (hould fwcar solemnly,
that he would retain no domestic who was not a fubjeEt of
the queen, and would bring no foreigners into the kingdom
tiat might give umbrage to the English; that he would
make no alteration in the constitution or laws of England;
that he would not carry the queen, or any of the children
born of this marriage, out of the kingdom; that if the queen
F'ould die before him without issue, he would immediately
kave the crown to the lawful heir, without claiming any
tight of adminiltration whatever; that in co.nsequence of

t Carte, iii. 288.
Vul. IV. K

this marriage, England (hould not be engaged in any war
fubfifling between France and Spain; and that the alliance
between France and England should remain in full force*.

But this treaty, though both the emperor and Mary's

ministers employed their utmost address in framing it so as
to please the Englilh, was far from quieting their fears and
jealonfies. They saw that words and promises were a feeble
security against the encroachments of an ambitious prince,
who, as soon as he got pofleffion of the power and advan.
tages which the queen's husband must necessarily enjoy,
could easily evade any of the articles which either limited
his authority or obftruded his schemes. They were con.
vinced that the more favourable the conditions of the pre.
sent treaty were to England, the more Philip would be
tempted hereafter to violate them. They dreaded that
England, like Naples, Milan, and the other countries an.
nexed to Spain, would soon feel the dominion of that
crown to be intolerably oppressive, and be constrained,
?s these had been, to waite its wealth and vigour in
wars wherein it had no interest, and from which it could de.
rire no advantage. These sentiments prevailed so generally
that every part of the kingdom was filled with discontent at
the match, and with indignation against the advisers of it.
Sir Thomas STyat, a gentleman of some note, and of good
intentions towards the public, took advantage of this, and
roused the inhabitants of Kent to arms, in order to fare
their country from a foreign yoke. Great numbers resort.
ed in a ihort time to his standard; he marched to London
with such rapidity, and the queen was so utterly unprovided
for defence, that the afpeEt of affairs was extremely threat-
ening; and if any nobleman of diftindion had joined the
nialecontents, or had Wyat possessed talents equal, in any
degree, to the boldness of his enterprise, the infurreticon
must have proved fatal to Mary's power. But all Wyat's
measures were concerted with so little prudence, and execut.

* Rymer's Feed. vol. xv. 377, 393. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 498.

ed with such irresolution, that many of his followers forsook
him; the reft were dispersed by a handful of soldiers; and
lie himself was taken prisoner, without having made any
effort worthy of the cause that he had undertaken, or suit-
able to the ardour with which he engaged in it. He susser-
ed the punishment due to his rashness and rebellion. The
queen's authority was confirmed and increased by her fuc-
cess in defeating this inconliderate attempt to abridge it.
The lady Jane Grey, whose title the ambition of her rela-
tions had set up in opposition to that of the queen, was,
notwithflanding her youth and innocence, brought to the
scaffold. The lady Elizabeth, the queen's fitter, was ob-
served with the molt jealous attention. The treaty of mar-
riage was ratified by the parliament.

Philip landed in England with a magnificent retinue, ce-
lebrated his nuptials with great solemnity; and though he
could not lay aside his natural severity and pride, or assume
gracious and popular manners, he endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the Englilh nobility by his extraordinary liber-
ality. Left that ihould fail of acquiring him such influence
in the government of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining,
the emperor kept a body of twelve thousand men on the
coast of Slanders in readiness to embark for England, and
to support his son in all his enterprises.

Emboldened by all these favourable circumflances, Mary

pursued the scheme of extirpating the proteflant religion
out of her dominions, with the most precipitate zeal. The
laws of Edward the Sixth, in favour of the reformation
were repealed; the protestant clergy eje&ed; all the forms
and rights of the popish worship were re-eflablifhed; the na-
tion was solemnly absolved from the guilt which it had con-
traEted during the period of its apostasy, and was publicly
reconciled to the church of Rome by cardinal Pole, who
immediately after the queen's marriage, was permitted to
continue his journey to England, and to exercise his legan-
'i.e functions with the most ample power. Not satisfied with

K2

having overturned the protestant chu ch, and re-establishing
the ancient system on its ruins, Mary insisted that all her
fubjets should conform to the fame mode of worship which
Ihe preferred; (hould profess their faith in the fame creed
which she had approved; and abjure every practice or opi.
nion that was deemed repugnant to either of them. Pow.
ers, altogether unknown in the Englilh constitution, were
vested in certain persons appointed to take cognizance of
heresy, and tley proceeded to exeTcife them with more than
inquiiitorial severity. The profpe& of danger, however, did
not intimidate the principal teachers of the protestant doc.
trines, who believed that they were contending for truths of
the utmolf consequence to the happiness of mankind. They
boldly avowed their sentiments, and were condemned to that
cruel death which the church of Rome reserves for its ene.
mies. This shocking punishment was infliaed with that
barbarity which the rancour of false zeal alone can inspire.
The Englilh who are inferior in humanity to no people it
Europe, and remarkable for the mildness of their public ex
ecutions, beheld with astonishment and horror, persons who
had filled the most refpec&able stations in their church, and
who were venerable on account of their age, their piety
and their literature,- condemned to endure torments to whici
their laws did not fubje& even the most atrocious criminals

This extreme rigour did not accompiflh the cud at which

Mary aimed. The patience and fortitude with which theft
martyrs for the reformation submitted to their sufferings
the heroic contempt of death expressed by persons of every
rAnk, and age, and sex, confirmed many more in the proteRl
ant faith, than the threats of their enraged persecutor
could frighten into apoftafv. The business of such as were
entruRed with trying of heretics multiplied continually, and
appeared to be as endless as it was odious. The queen'
ablest miniiters became sensible how impolitic, as well a
dangerous, it was to irritate the people by the frequen
£peqacle -of public executions, which they detcfted as n

Ifs unjust than cruel. Even Philip was so thoroughly con-
vinced of her having run to an excess of rigour, that on this
occasion he assumed a part to which he was little accuf-
tomed, becoming an advocate for moderation and lenity*.

But notwithstanding this attempt to ingratiate himself
vith the Englilh, they discovered a constant jealousy and
distrust of all his intentions; and when some members, who
had been gained by the court, ventured to move in the
house of commons that the nation ought to assist the empe-
ror, the queen's father-in-law, in his war against France,
the proposal was rejected with general dissatisfaction.
A motion which was made, that the parliament ihould
give its consent that Philip might be publicly crown-
ed as the queen's husband, met with fuech a cold reception
that it was instantly withdrawn t.

The king of France had observed the progress of the
emperor's negotiation in England with much uneasiness.
The great acceflion of territories as well as reputation which
his enemy would acquire by the marriage of his son with
the queen of such a powerful kingdom, was obvious and
formidable. He easily foresaw that the Englilh, notwith-
standing all their fears and precautions, would be soon
drawn in to take part in the quarrels on the continent, and
be compelled to a& in subserviency to the emperor's ambi-
'ious schemes. For this reason, Henry had given it in
charge to his ambassador at the court of London, to employ
all his address in order-to defeat or retard the treaty of mar-
riage; and as there was not, at that time, any prince of the
bilood in France whom he could propose to the queen as a
husband, he initruded him to co-operate with such of the
Eluglifh as wished their sovereign to marry one of her own
fubjets. But the queen's ardour and precipitation in clo-
sing with the first overtures in favour of Philip, having ren-

* Godwin's Annals of Q Mary ap. Kennet, v. ii. p. 3z9. Bur-
,t's Hilt. of Reform. i. z98. 305.
tCarte's Hilt .of England, iii. 314.

K 3

dered all his endeavours ineffecual, Henry was so far fron
thinking it prudent to give any aid to the Engli{h male.
contents, though earnestly solicited by Wyat and their o-
ther leaders, who tempted him to take them under his pro.
tection, by offers of great advantage to France, that he
commanded his ambafiador to congratulate the queen in the
warmr.e. terms upon the suppression of the infurreaion.

N;otw.ithitanding these external profeffioas, Henry dread.

ed so much the consequence of this alliance, which more
than compensated for all the emperor had loft in Germany,
that he determined to carry on his military operations, both
in the Low-Countries and in Italy, with extraordinary vi.
gour, in order that he might compel Charles to accept of an
equitable peace, before his daughter-in-law could surmount
the aversion of her fubitets to a war on the continent, and
prevail on them to assist the emperor either with money or
troops. For this purpose he exerted himself to the utmot
in order to have a numerous army early assembled on the
frontiers of the Netherlands, and while one part of it laid
waste the open country of Artois, the main body, under the
conitable Montmorency, advanced towards the provinces of
Liege and Hainault by the forest of Ardennes.

The campaign was opened with the siege of Mariem.

burgh, a town which the queen of Hungary, the governed
of the Low-Countries, bad fortified at great expence; but,
being destitute of a sufficient garrison, it surrendered in si
days [June 283. Henry, elated with this success, put
luimfclf at the head of his army, and inveling Bouvines,
took it by assault, after a short resistance. With equal fa.
cility he became mailer of Dinant; and then turning to the
left, bent his march towards the province of Artais. The
large fums which the emperor had remitted into England
bad f£ exhau-ted his treasury, as to render his preparationl
at this junture flower and more dilatory than usual. He
had no body of troops to make head against the Frenct
at their £rft entrance into his territories; and though i

drew together all the forces in the country in the utmost
hurry,- and gave the command of them to Emanuel
Plilibert of Savoy, they were in no condition to face
aln enemy so far superior in number. The prince of Sa-
vov, however, by his acivity and good condu&, made up
for his want of troops. By watching all the motions of
the French at a diRfance, and by chuling his own posts
with skill, he put it out of their power either to form any
igte of consequence, or to attack him. Want of subsist-
elce soon obliged them to fall back towards theirown fron-
tiers, after having burnt all the open towns, and having
plundered the country through which they marched with a
cruelty and licence more becoming a body of light troops
than a royal army led by a great monarch.

But Henry, that he might not dismiss his army without
attempting some conquest adequate to the great prepara-
tions, as wellas sanguine hopes, with which he had opened
the campaign, invested Renti, a place deemed in that age of
great importance, as, by its ftuation on the confines of Ar-
tois and the Boulonnois, it covered the former province, and
protected the parties which made incursions into the latter.
The town which was trongly fortified, and provided with a
numerous garrison, made a gallant defence; but being warm.
ly pressed by a powerful army, it must foor have yielded'.
The emperor, who at that time enjoyed a short interval of
cafe from the gout, was so solicitous to save it, that,
although he could bear no other motion but that of a litter,
he initantly put hinifelf at the head of his army, which,
having received fcverll reinforcements, was now strong
enough to approach the enemy. The French Were eager
to decide the fate of Renti by a battle, and expected it
from the emperor's arrival in his camp; but Charles avoided
a general a&ion with great industry, and as he had nothing
in view but to save the town, he hoped to accomplilh that,
without exposing himself to the consequences of such a dan-
gerous and doubtful event.

Notwith.landing all these precautions, a dispute, about a

pofl which both armies endeavoured to seize, brought on an
engagement [Aug. 13.] which proved ahmoft general.
The duke of Guise, who commanded the wing of the French
which flood the brunt of the combat, displayed valour and
condu& worthy of the defender of Metz; the Imperialits
after an obstinate firuggle were repulsed; the French re-
mained maifers of the pofl in dispute, and if the conilable,
either from his natural caution and slowness, or from un.
willingness to support a rival whom he hated, had not de.
layed bringing up the main body to second the imprefflon
which Guise had made, the route of the enemy must have
been complete. The emperor, notwithstanding the loss
which he had sustained, continued in the fame camp; and
the French, being firaitened for provisions, and finding it
impossible to carry on the siege in the face of an hostile ar.
my, quitted their intrenchments. They retired openly,
courting the enemy to approach, rather than shunning an
engagement.

But Charles, having gained his end, suffered them to

march off unmolested. As soon as his troops entered their
own country, Henry threw garrisons into the frontier towns,
and dismissed the reft of the army. This encouraged the
Imperialists to push forward with a considerable body of
troops into Picardy, and by laying waste the country with
fire and sword, they endeavoured to revenge themselves for
the ravages which the French had committed in Hainault
and Artois*. But, as they were not able to reduce any
place of importance, they gained nothing more than the ene-
my had done by this cruel and inglorious method of carry-
ing on the war.

The arms of France were still more unsuccessful in Italy.

The footing which the French had acquired in Sienna occa-
sioned much uneasiness to Cosmo di Medici, the most saga-
cious and enterprising of all the Italian princes. He dread-

*Thuan. 460, &c. Harei Amn. Brab. 674.

cd the neighbourhood of a powerful people, to whom all
who favoured the ancient republican government in Flo.
rtuce would have recourse, as to their natural protedors,
against that absolute authority which the emperor had en-
abled him to usurp; he knew how odious le was to the
Irench, on account of his attachment to the Imperial party,
and he foresaw that, if they were permitted to gather
strength in Sienna, Tuscany would soon feel tile effects of
their resentment. For these reasons, be wished with the
utmost solicitude for the expulsion of the French out of the
Siennefe, before they had time to eltabliih themselves tho-
roughly in the country, or to receive such reinforcements
from France as would render it dangerous to attack them.
As this, however, was properly the emperor's business, who
was called by his intereif as well as honour to dislodge those
formidable intruders into the heart of his dominions, Cosmo
laboured to throw the whole burden of the enterprise on
him; and on that account had given no afliflance during the
former campaign, but by advancing some small fums of mo-
ney towards the payment of the Imperial troops.

But as the defence of the Netherlands engrossed all the
enperor's attention, and his remittances into England had
drained his treasury, it was obvious that his operations in
Italy would be extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly per-
ceived, that if he himself did not take part openly in the
war, and a&t with vigour, the French would scarcely meet
kith any annoyance. As his situation rendered this refolu.
tion necessary and unavoidable, his next care was to execute
it in such a manner, that he might derive from it some o-
ther advantage, betide that of driving the French out of his
nDighbourhood. With this view, he dispatched an envoy
to Charles, offering to declare war against France, and to
reduce Sienna at his own charges, on condition that he lhould
be repaid whatever he should expend in the enterprise, and
Le permitted to retain all his conquefis until his demands
crce fully satisfied. Charles, to whom, at this juncture,

the war againt Sienna was an intolerable burden, and who
had neither expedient nor resource that could enable him
to carry it on with proper vigour, closed gladly with this
overture; and Cosmo, well acquainted with the low state
of the Imperial finances, flattered himself that the emperor,
finding it impossible to reimburse him, would susser him to
keep quiet possession of whatever places he should conquert.

Full of these hopes, he made great preparations for war,

and as the French king had turned the strength of his
arms againlt the Netherlands, he did not despair of affemb.
ling such a body of men as would prove more than a fuffici.
eat match for any force which Henry could bring into the
field in Italy. He endeavoured, by giving one of his daugh-
ters to the pope's nephew, to obtain aflifance from the holy
fee, or at least to secure his remaining neutral. He attempt.
ed to detach the duke of Orsini, whose family had been
long attached to the French party, from his ancient confe.
derates, by bellowing on him another of his daughters; and
what was of greater coofequence than either of these, he en-
gaged John James Medecino, marquis of Marignano, to
take the command of his army*. This officer, from a very
low condition in life, had raised himself, through all the
ranks of service, to high command, and had difplayedta-
lents, and acquired reputation in war, which entitled him to
be placed on a level with the greatest generals in that mar-
tial age. Having attained a station of eminence so difpro-
portionate to his birth, he laboured with a fond solicitude to
conceal his original obscurity, by giving out that he was de-
scended of the family of Medici, to which honour the casual
resemblance of his name was his only pretension. Cosmo,
happy that he could gatify him at such an easy rate, flat-
tered his vanity in this point, acknowledged him as a rela.
tion, and permitted him to assume the arms of his family:
Medecino, eager to serve the head of that family of which

t Adriani Iftoria de fuoi Tempi, vol. i. 662.

Adriani Iftoria, vol. i. p. 663.

he now confidered himself as a branch, applied with won-
derful zeal and afliduity to raise troops; and as, during his
long service, he had acquired great credit with the leaders
of those mercenary bands which formed the flrength of
Italian armies, he engaged the most eminent of them to fol-
low Cosmo's lrandard.

To oppose this able general, and the formidable army
which lie had assembled, the king of France made choice of
Peter Strozzi, a Florentine nobleman, who had resided long
in France as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to
high reputation, as well as command in the army. He
was the son of Philip Strozzi, who, in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-feven, had concurred with such ar-
dour in the attempt to expel the family of Medici out of
Florence, in order to re-establish the ancient republican form
of government; and who had perifled in the undertaking.
The son inherited the implacable aversion to the Medici, as
Bcll as the fame enthusiastic zeal for the liberty of Florence,
w'hich had animated his father, whose death he was impa-
ticnt to revenge. Henry flattered himself that his army
would make rapid progress under a general whose zeal to
promote his interest was roused and seconded by such pow.
trful passions; especially as he had allotted him, for the
fccne of action his native country, in which he had many
powerful partisans, ready to facilitate all his operations.

But how specious soever the motives might appear which

induced Henry to make this choice, it proved fatal to the in-
tereits of France in Italy. Cosmo, as soon as he heard that
the mortal enemy of his family was appointed to take the
command in Tuscany, concluded that the king of France aim-
ed at something more than the protecion of the Siennefe, and
saw the neceflity of making extraordinary efforts, not mere-
ly to reduce Sienna, but to save himself from deltruaiont.
At the fame time, the cardinal of Ferrara, who had the en-
tire direction of the French affairs in Italy, confidered Struz-

t Pecci Memoire di Sienna, vol. iv. p. o10, &c.

the war againtt Sienna was an intolerable burden, and who
had neither expedient nor resource that could enable him
to carry it on with proper vigour, cosed gladly with this
overture; and Cosmo, well acquainted with the low state
of the Imperial finances, flattered himself that the emperor,
finding it impoflible to reimburse him, would susser him to
keep quiet poffeflion of whatever places he should conquert.

Full of these hopes, he made great preparations for war,

and as the French king had turned the strength of his
arms against the Netherlands, he did not despair of affemb.
ling such a body of men as would prove more than a fuffici.
ent match for any force which Henry could bring into the
field in Italy. He endeavoured, by giving one of his daugh-
ters to the pope's nephew, to obtain aliftance from the holy
fee, or at least to secure his remaining neutral. He attempt.
ed to detach the duke of Orsini, whose family had been
long attached to the French party, from his ancient confe-
derates, by bellowing on him another of his daughters; and
what was of greater consequence than either of these, he en-
gaged John James Medecino, marquis of Marignano, to
take the command of his army*. This officer, from a very
low condition in life, had raised himself, through all the
ranks of service, to high command, and had displayed ta-
lents, and acquired reputation in war, which entitled him to
be placed on a level with the greatest generals in that mar-
tial age. Having attained a station of eminence so difpro-
portionate to his birth, he laboured with a fond solicitude to
conceal his original obscurity, by giving out that he was de-
scended of the family of Medici, to which honour the casual
resemblance of his name was his only pretension. Cosmo,
happy that he could gatify him at such an easy rate, flat-
tered his vanity in this point, acknowledged him as a rela-
tion, and permitted him to assume the arms of his family;
Medecino, eager to serve the head of that family of which

t Adriani Iftoria de fuoi Tempi, vol. i. 662.

* Adriani Iftoria, vol. i. p. 663.

lie now confidered himself as a branch, applied with won.
derful zeal and afliduity to raise troops; and as, during his
long service, he had acquired great credit with the leaders
of those mercenary bands which formed the strength of
Italian armies, he engaged the most eminent of them to fol-
low Cosmo's standard.

To oppose this able general, and the formidable army
which he had assembled, the king of France made choice of
Peter Strozzi, a Florentine nobleman, who had resided long
in France as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to
high reputation, as well as command in the army. He
was the son of Philip Strozzi, who, in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-feven, had concurred with such ar-
dour in the attempt to expel the family of Medici out of
Florence, in order to re-establish the ancient republican form
of government; and who had perished in the undertaking.
The son inherited the implacable aversion to the Medici, as
well as the fame enthusiastic zeal for the liberty of Florence,
which had animated his father, whose death he was impa-
tient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that his army
would make rapid progress under a general whose zeal to
promote his interest was roused and seconded by such pow-
trful passions; especially as he had allotted him, for the
cecne of aftion his native country, in which he had many
powerful partisans, ready to facilitate all his operations.

Bu!t how specious soever the motives might appear which

induced Henry to make this choice, it proved fatal to the in-
terests of France in Italy. Cosmo, as soon as he heard that
the mortal enemy of his family was appointed to take the
command in Tuscany, concluded that the king of France aim-
ed at something more than the protecion of the Siennefe, and
saw the necessity of making extraordinary efforts, not mere-
ly to reduce Sienna, but to save himself from deltruftiont.
At the fame time, the cardinal of Ferrara, who had the en-
tire direction of the French affairs in Italy, confidered Stroz-

t Pecci Memoire di Sienna, vol. iv. p. lo3, &c.

zi as a formidable rival il power, and in order to prevent his
acquiring any increase of authority from success, he was
extremely remiss in supplying him either with money to
pay his troops, or with provisions to support them. Stroz.
zi himself, blinded by his resentment against the Medici,
pushed on his operations with the impetuosity of revenge,
rather than with the caution and prudence becoming a great
general.

At first, however, he attacked several towns in the terri.

tory of Florence with such vigour as obliged Medecino, in
order to check his progress, to withdraw the greater part
of his army from Sienna, which he had invested before Stroz.
zi's arrival in Italy. As Cosmo sustained the whole burden
of military'operations, the expence of which must soon have
cxhauited his revenues; as neither the viceroy of Naples nor
governor of Milan were in condition to afford him any es.
fectual aid; as the troops which Medecino had left in the
camp before Sienna could attempt nothing againlt it during
his absence; it was Strozzi's business to have protracted the
war, and to have transferred the feat of it into the territories
of Florence. But the hope of ruining his enemy by one de.
cifive blow, precipitated him into a general engagement
[kAug. 3] not far from Mlarciano. The armies were nearly
equal in ntullber; but a body of Italian cavalry, in which
Strozzi placed great confidence, having fled without mak.
ing any resistance, either through the treachery or coward,
ice of the officers who commanded it, his infantry remain
ed exposed to the attacks of all Medecino's troops. En
couragcd, howver, by Strozzi's presence and example
who, after receiving a dangerous wound in endeavouring tc
rally the cavalry, placed himself at the head of the infantry
and maniftctcd an admirable pretence of mind, as well as ex
traordinary valour, they stood their ground with great firm
ness, and repulsed such of the enemy as ventured to ap
proacll them. But those gallant troops being surroundec
at !.,.t ol cvc y fide, alnd torn in pieces by a battery of car

non which Medecino brought to bear upon them, the Flo-
rentine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a general
route ensued. Strozzi, faint with the loss of blood, and
deeply affeced with the fatal consequences of his own rash.
ness, found the utmost difficulty in making his escape with
a handful of ment.

Medecino returned immediately to the siege of Sienna
with his vitorious forces, and as Strozzi could not, after
the greatest efforts of activity, collec as many men as to
form the appearance of a regular army, he had leisure to
carry on his approaches against the town without molefta-
tion. But the Siennefe, instead of finking into despair upon
this cruel disappointment of their only hope of obtaining re-
lief, prepared to defend themselves to the utmost extremity,
with that undaunted fortitude which the love of liberty
alone can inspire. This generous resolution was warmly
seconded by Monluc, who commanded the French garrison
in the town. The a&ive and enterprising courage which
he had displayed on many occasions, had procured him this
command; and as he had ambition which aspired at the
higleft military dignities, without any pretensions to attain
them but what he could derive from merit, he determined
to distinguish his defence of Sienna by extraordinary efforts
of valour and perseverance. For this purpose, he repaired
and strengthened the fortifications with unwearied industry;
he trained the citizens to the use of arms, and accustomed
them to go through the fatigues and dangers of service in
common with the soldiers; and as the enemy were extreme-
ly firick in guarding all the avenues to the city, he husband-
ed the provisions in the magazines with the most parfimoni.
ous economy, and prevailed on the soldiers, as well as the
citizens, to reftri& themselves to a very moderate daily al-
lowance for their fubfiflence. Medecino, though his army
was not numerous enough to norm the town by open force,
'cntured twice to assault it by surprise; but he was received

t Pecci Memoire della Sienna, vol. iv. p. st7.
Vol. IV. L

each time with so much spirit, and repulsed with such loss,
as discouraged him from repeating the attempt, and left him
no hopes of reducing the town but by famine.

With this view he fortified his own camp with geat care,

occupied all the pofis of strength round the place, and hav.
ing entirely cut off the besieged from any communication
with the adjacent country, he waited patiently until necef.
fity flould compel them to open their gates. But their
enthufiafic zeal for liberty made the citizens despise the di-
fireffes occasioned by the cfarcity ofprovifions, and support.
ed them long under all the miseries of famine: Monluc, by
his example and exhortations, taught his soldiers to vie with
them in patience and abstinence; and it was not until they
had withstood a siege of ten months, until they had eaten
.tp all the horses, dogs, and other animals in the place, and
were reduced almost to their last morsel of bread, that they
proposed a capitulation [55S.5] Even then they demand.
ed honourable terms; and as Cosmo, though no stranger to
the extremity of their condition, was afraid that despair
might prompt them to venture upon some wild enterprise,
he immediately granted them conditions more favourable
than they could have expeEted.

April 22.] The capitulation was made in the emperor's

name, who engaged to take the republic of Sienna under the
protecion of the empire; he promised to maintain the an-
cient liberties of the city, to allow the magistrates the full
exercise of their former authority, to secure the citizens in
the undisturbed possession of their privileges and property;
lie granted an ample and unlimited pardon to all who had
borne arms against him; he reserved to himself the right of
placing a garrison in the town, but engaged not to rebuild
the citadel without the consent of the citizens. Monluc
and his French garrison were allowed to march out with all
the honours of war.

Medecino observed the articles of capitulation, as far a
iepecd:d on him, v. ith great exatnefs. No violence or in

fult whatever was offered to the inhabitants, and the French
garrison was treated with all the refpeA due to their spirit
and bravery. But many of the citizens fufpe&ing, from
the extraordinary facility with which they had obtained
such favourable conditions, that tie emperor, as well as Cos-
mo, would take the firit opportunity of violating them, and
d:fdaining to possess a precarious liberty, which depended
on the will of another, abandoned the place of their nativi-
ty, and accompanied the French to Monte-Alcino, Porto
Ercolc, and other finall towns in the territory of the repu-
blic. They eltabliflled in Monte-Alcino, the fame model
of government to which they had been acuffomed at Sienna,
and appointing magistrates with the fame titles and jurifdic-
tion, solaced themselves with this image of their ancient li-
berty.

The fears of the Siennefe concerning the fate of their
country were not imaginary, or their suspicion of the em-
peror and Cosmo ill-founded; for no sooner had the Impe-
rial troops taken poieflfion of the town, than Cofrno, with-
out regarding the articles of capitulation, not only displaced
the magistrates who were in office, and nominated new ones
devoted to his own interest, but commanded all the citizens
to deliver up their arms to persons whom he appointed to
receive them. They submitted to the former from neceffl-
ty, though with all the relucance and regret which men
accustomed to liberty feel in obeying the first commands of
a matier. They did not yield the fame tame obedience to
the latter; and many persons of diftintion, rather than de-
grade themselves from the rank of freemen to the condition
offlaves by surrendering their arms, fled to their country-
men at Monte-Alcino, and chore to endure all the hard-
lhips and encounter all the dangers which they had reason
to expect in that new fiation, where they had fixed the
ftat of their republic.
Cosmo, not reckoning himself secure while such numbers

L

of implacable and desperate enemies were fettled in his
neighbourhood, and retained any degree of power, solicited
Medecino to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their strength and spirit,
after the many calamities which they had suffered. He pre.
vailed on him, though his army was much weakened by
hard duty during the siege of Sienna, to invef Porto Er.
cole; and the fortifications being both flight and incom.
plete, the besieged were soon compelled to open their gates
[June 13]. An unexpeEed order, which Medecino teceiv.
ed from the emperor to detach the greater part of his troops
into Piedmont, presented farther operations, and permitted
the Siennefe exiles to reside for some time undiftrbed in
Monte-Alcino. But their unhappy countrymeni who re.
mained at Sienna were not yet at the end of their sufferings;
for the emperor, instead of adhering to the articles of capi.
tulation, granted his son Philip the investiture of that city
and all its dependencies; and Francis de Toledo, in the
name of their new mailer, proceeded to fettle the civil and
military government, treated them like a conquered people,
and fubjeaed them to the Spanish yoke, without paying
any regard whatever to their privileges or ancient form of
government *.

The Imperial army in Piedmont had been so feeble for

some time, and its commander so inactive, that the empe-
ror, in order to give vigour to his operations in that quarter,
found it necessary not only to recal Medecino's troops from
Tuscany, while in the career of conquest, but to employ
in Piedmont a general of such reputation and abilities, as
might counterbalance the great military talents of the ma.
rechal Briflac, who was at the head of the French forces in
that country.

He pitched on the duke of Alva for that purpose; but

Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 56, 537. Joan. Camerarii ad

not. rer. przcipuarum ab anno x550 ad I561 ap. Frehetum3v0n
iii. p. 564. Pecci Memorie della Sienna, iv. 64, &c.

that choice was as much the effea of a court intrigue, as of
his opinion with refpe& to the duke's merit. Alva had
long made court to Philip with the utmost afliduity, and
had endeavoured to work himself into his confidence by all
the insinuating arts of which his haughty and inflexible na-
ture was capable. As he nearly resembled that prince in
many features of his chara6ter, he began to gain much of
his good-will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite,
who dreaded the progress which this formidable rival made
in his mailer's affeaions, had the address to prevail with the
emperor to name Alva to this command. The duke, tho'
fctlible that he owed this diffinafton to the malicious arts of
an enemy, who had no other aim than to remove him at a
distance from court, was of such puncilious honour, that
he would not decline a command that appeared dangerous
and difficult, but, at the fame time, was so haughty, that
fe would not accept of it but on his own terms, insisting on
being appointed the emperor's vicar-general in Italy, with
the fipreme military command in all the Imperial and Spa-
nifh territories in that country. Charles granted all his de-
mands; and he took poffeflion of his new dignity with al-
moit unlimited authority.

HIis first operations, however, were neither proportioned
to his former reputation and the extensive powers with which
he was inveRted, nor did they come up-to the emperor's ex-
pcEtations. Briffac had under his command an army whicl,.
though inferior in number to the Imperialists, was composed
of chosen troops, which having grown old in service in 'that
country, where every town was fortified,. and every calUe
capable of being defended, were perfectly acquainted with
the manner of carrying on war there. By their valour, and his
own good cohdutc, Briffac not only defeated all- the attempts
of the Imperialists, but added' new conqefts to the territories
of which he was formerly master. Alva, after having boast-
4d, with his uf.al arrogance, that he would drive the French
"ut of Piedmont, in a few weeks, was obliged to retire into

L3

winter-quarters, with the mortification of being unable to
preserve entire that part of the country of which the em.
peror had hitherto kept possession*.

As the operations of this campaign in Piedmont were

indccifive, those in the Netherlands were inconsiderable,
neither the emperor nor king of France being able to
bring into the field an army strong enough to undertake
any enterprise of moment. But what Charles wanted in
force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold stratagem, the
iuccefs of which would have been equal to that of the moif
vigorous campaign. During the siege of Metz, Leonard,
father guardian of a convent of Francifcana in that city, had
inrinuated himself far into the esteem and favour of the
duke cfGuife, by his attachment to the French. Being a
man of an ative and intriguing spirit, he had been extreme-
ly useful both in animating the inhabitants to sustain with
patience all the hardships of the siege, and in procuring in.
telligence of the enemies designs and motions. The merit
of those important services, together with the warm re.
commendations of the duke of Guise, secured him such
high confidence with VieHevie, who was appointed govern.
or of Metz when Guise left the town, that he was permit.
ted to converse or correspond with whatever persons he
thought fit, and nothing that he did created any suspicion.
This monk, from the levity natural to bold and projeAing
adventurers; or from resentment against the French, who
had not bestowed on him such rewards as he thought due
to his own merit; or tempted by the unlimited confidence
which was placed in him, to imagine that he might carry
en and accomplish any scheme with perfec fecurity,formed
a design of betraying Metz to the Imperialists.

He communicated his intention to the queen-dowager of

Hungary, who governed the Low-Countries in the name of
ber brother She approving without any scruple, an at
of treachery, from which the emperor might derive such

Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenou lilLt de Savoye,.tom. i. 67,l

signal advantage, assisted the father guardian in concerting
the most proper plan for ensuring its success. They agreed,
that the father guardian hould endeavour to gain his monks
to concur in promoting the design; that he should intro-
duce into the convent a certain number of chosen soldiers,
difgtifed in the habit of friars; that when every thing was
ripe for execution, the governor of Thionville should march
towards Metz in the night with a considerable body of
troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts; that while the
garrison was employed in resisting the assailants, the monks
flonld set fire to the town in different places; that the
soldiers who lay concealed should sally out of the con-
vent, and attack those who defended the ramparts in the
rear. Amidst the universal terror and confusion which
events so unexpeted would occasion, it was not doubted
but that the Imperialists might become malters of the town.
As a recompence for this service the father guardian, ftipu-
lated that he hould be appointed bishop of Metz, and am-
ple rewards were promised to such of his monks as ihould
be most ative in co-operating with him.

The farther guardian accomplished what he had under-

taken to perform with great secrecy and dispatch. By his
authority and arguments, as well as by the profped of
wealth or honours which he set before his monks, he pre-
vailed on all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He in-
troduced into the convent, without being fufpe&ed, as ma-
ny soldiers as were thought sufficient. The governor of
Thionville, apprized in due time of the design, had aftem-
bled a proper number of troops for executing it; and the
moment approached, which probably would have wrested.
from Henry the molt important of all his conquells.

But, happily for France, on the very day that was fixed.

for firiking the blow, Vielleville, an able and vigilant officer,
Teceived information from a spy whom he entertained at
Thionville, that certain Franciscan friars resorted frequent-
IY thither and were admitted to many private conferences

with the governor, who was carrying on preparations for
some military enterprise with great dispatch, but with a
mot mnylerious secrecy. This was sufficient to awaken
ViUleville's suspicions. Without communicating these to
any person, he instantly visited the convent of Franciscans;
deteted the soldiers who were concealed there; and forced
them to discover as much as they knew concerning the na-
ture of the enterprise. The father guardian, who had gone
to Thionville that he- might put the last hand to his machi.
nations, was seized at the gate as he returned; and he, in or.
der to save himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
fances of the conspiracy.

Vielleville, not satisfied with having seized the traitors,

and having frufirated their schemes, was solicitous to take
advantage of the discoveries which he had made, so as to
be revenged on the Imperialists. For this purpose he
marched out with the best troops in his garrison, andbplacipg
these in ambush near the road, by which the father guardian
had informed him that the governor of Thionville would
approach Metz, he fell upon the Imperialists with great fu-
ry, as they advanced in perfect security, without fufpefing
any danger to be near. Confounded at this sudden attack,
by an enemy whom they expeced to surprise, they made lit-
tle resistance; and a great part of the troops employed in this
service, among whom were many persons ofditfincion, was
killed or taken prisoners. Before next morning, Viellevilie
returned to Metz in triumph.

No resolution was taken for some time concerning the

fate of the father guardian and his monks, the framers and
conductors of this dangerous conipiracy. Regard for the
honour of a body so numerous and refpe&able as the Fral-
cifcans, and unwillingness to afford a fubje& of triumph to
the enemies of the Rom;fh church by their disgrace, seem
to have occasioned this delay. But at length, the neceflity
of inflicting exemplary punishment upon them, in order to
deter others from venturing to commit the fame crime, bh-

tame so evident, that orders were issued to proceed to their
trial. The guilt was made apparent by the clearest evi-
dence; and sentence of death was passed upon the father
guardian, together with twenty monks. On the evening
previous to the day fixed for their execution, the gaoler
took them out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto
been confined separately, and shut them all up in one great
room, that they might confess their fins to one another, and
join together in preparing for a future state. But as soon
as they were left alone, instead of employing themselves in
the religious exercises suitable to their condition, they be-
gan to reproach the father guardian, and four of the senior
monks who had been most acEive in seducing them, for
their inordinate ambition, which had brought such misery
on them, and such disgrace upon their order. From re-
proaches they proceeded to curses and execrations, and
at last, in a frenzy of rage and despair, they fell upon
them with such violence, that they murdered the father
guardian on the spot, and so disabled the other four, that it
became necessary to carry them next morning in a cart, to-
gether with the dead body of the father guardian, to the
place of execution. Six of the youngest were pardoned,
the reft suffered the punilhment which their crime meritedt.

Though both parties, exhausted by the length of the war,

carried it on in this languishing manner, neither of them
lhewed any disposition to liften to overtures of peace. Car-
dinal Pole indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his
piety and humanity, to re.establish concord among the
princes of Christendom. He had not only persuaded his
mistress, the queen of England, to enter warmly into his
Sentiments, and to offer her mediation to the contending
powers, but had prevailed both on the emperor and -the
king of France to fend their plenipotentiaries to a village

t Thuan. lib xv. p. 522. Belar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 866. Me-
moirs du Marech. Vielleville, par M. Charloix, tom iii. p. 249,
&c. p. 347. Par. 1157.

between Gravelines and Ardres. He himself, together
with Gardiner bishop of Winchester, repaired thither in order
to preside as nmediators in the conferences which were. to be
held for adjusting all the points in difference. But though
each of the monarchs committed this negotiation to some
of their miniaiers, in whom they placed the greatef confi.
dence, it was soon evident that they came together with
no sincere desire of accommodation. [May 2a] Each pro.
pored articles so extravagant that they could have no hopes
of their being accepted. Pole, after exerting in vain all -his
zeal and address, in order to persuade them to rliiquifl
such extravagant demands, and to consent to the fubftitu.
tion of more equal conditions, became sensible of the folly
of waiting time, in attempting to re-establish concord be.
tween those whom their obtinacy rendered irreconcilable,
broke off the conference, and returned into England$.

During these tranfa&ions in other parts of Europe, Ger.

many enjoyed such profound tranquillity, as afforded tht
diet full leisure to deliberate, and to eflablifh proper regular
tions concerning a point of the greatest consequence to the
internal peace of the empire. By the treaty of Paflau ia
one thousand five hundred and fifty-two, it had been refer.
red to the next diet of the empire to confirm and perfec the
plan of religious pacification, which was there agreed upon.
The terror and confusion with which the violent comma
tions excited by Albert of Brandenburg had filled Germa.
ny, as well as the constant attention which Ferdinand was
obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary, had hitherto pre.
vented the holding a diet, though it had been summoned,
soon after the conclusion of the treaty, to meet at Augf
burg.

But as a diet was now necessary on many accounts, Ser,

dinand about the beginning of this year had repaired ta
Augiburg. Though few of the princes were present either
in person or by their deputies, he opened the assembly bj

Thuan. lib. xv. p. 53. Mem. de Ribier, tom. ii. p. 63.

a speech, in which he proposed a termination of the diffen-
sions to which the new tenets and controversies with regard
to religion had given rife, not only as the firlt and great bu.
finess of the diet, but as the point which both the emperor
and he had most at heart. .He represented the innumer-
able obstacles which the emperor had to fulrmount before he
could procure the convocation of a general council, as well
as the fatal accidents which had for rome time retarded,
and had at last suspended the consultations of that assem-
bly. He observcd, that experience had already taught them
how vain it was to expet any remedy for evils which de-
manded immediate redress from a general council, the assem-
bly of which would either be prevented, or its deliberations
be interrupted by the dissensions and hoitilities of the
princes of Christendom: that a national council in Germany,
which, as some imagined, might be called with greater ease,
and deliberate with more perfet security, was an assembly
of an unprecedented nature, the jurifdidion of which was
uncertain in its extent, and the form of its proceedings unde-
fined: that in his opinion there remained but 6ne method
for compofiJg their unhappy differences, which though it
had been often tried without success, might yet prove effec-
tual if it were attempted with a better and more pacific
fpilit than had appeared on former occasions, and that was
to chufe a few men of learning, abilities, and moderation,
v.ho, by discussing the disputed articles, in an amicable con-
ference, might explain them in such a manner as to bring
the contending parties either to unite in sentiment, or to dif-
ser with charity.

This speech being printed in common form, and difperf-
edover the empire, revived the fears and jealousies of the
protellants; Ferdinand, they observed with much surprise,
bad not once mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty
of Paffau, the stipulations which they confidered as the great
security of their religious liberty. The suspicions to which;
this gave rife were confirmed by the accounts which they

daily received of the extreme severity with which Ferdinand
treated their protefiant brethren in his hereditary domi.
nions, and, as it was natural to confider his acions as the
surest indication of his intentions, this diminished their con.
fidence in those pompous professions of moderation or of
zeal for the re-establishment of concord, to which his prac.
tice seemed to be so repugnant.

The arrival of the cardinal Morone, whom the pope had

appointed to attend the diet as his nuncio, completed their
convi&ion, and left them no room to doubt that some dan-
geomus machination was forming againAt the peace or safety
of the protefiant church. Julius, elated with the unexpet-.
ed return of the Engli{h nation from apoltafy, began to flat-
ter himself, that the spirit of mutiny and revolt having now
spent its force, the happy period was come when the church
might resume its ancient authority, and be obeyed by the
people with the fame tame submission as formerly. Full of
these hopes he had sent Morone to Augsburg, with inftruc-
tions to employ his eloquence to excite the Germans to imi-
tate the laudable example of the English, and his political
address in order to prevent any decree of the diet to the de-
triment of the catholic faith. As Morone inherited from
his father, the chancellor of Milam, uncommon talents for
negotiation and intrigue, he could hardly have failed of em
barraffing the measures of the protestants in the diet, or of
defeating whatever they aimed at obtaining in it for their
farther security.

But an unforeseen event delivered them from all the dan-

ger which they had reason to apprehend from Morone's pre-
fence. Julius, by abandoning himself to pleasures and a.
mufements, no less unbecoming his age than his charaater,
having contraced such habits of diflipation, that any feri-
ous occupation, especially if attended with difficulty, became
an intolerable burden to him, had long reftfled the folicita-
tions s

ofs nephew to hold a consistory, because he expeR-
ed there a violent opposition to his fchmies in favour of

that young man. But when all the pretexts which he
could invent for eluding this request were exhausted, and at
the fame time his indolent aversion to bufinef8 continued to
grow upon him, he feigned indilpofition rather than yield to
his nephew's importunity; and that he might give the de.
ceit a greater colour of probability, he not only confined
hinmfelf to his apartment, but changed his usual diet and
manner of life. By persisting too long in asing this ridi-
culous part, he contrated a rear disease, of which he died in
a few days [March 23,] leaving his infamous minion the
cardinal de Moote to bear his name, and to disgrace the dig-
nity which he had conferred upon him*. As soon as Mo-
rone heard of his death, he set out abruptly from Augsburg,
where he had resided only a few days, that he might be pre-
sent at the election of a new pontiff.

One cause of their suspicions and fears being thus remov.

ed, the protestants soon became sensible that their conjec-
tures concerning Ferdinand's intentions, however specious,
were ill-founded, and that he had no thoughts of violating
the articles favourable, to them in the treaty of Paffau.
Charles, from the time that Maurice had defeated all his
fchenies in the empire, and overturned the great system
of religious and civil despotism, which be had almost efta-
blilhed there, gave little attention to the internal govern-
ment of Germany, and permitted his brother to pursue
whatever measures he judged most salutary and expedient.
Ferdinand, less ambitious and enterprising than the emperor,
intlead of resuming a plan which be, with power and re-
sources so far superior had failed of accomplishing, endea-
voured to attach the princes of the empire to his family by
an administration uniformly moderate and equitable. To
this he gave, at present, particular attention, because his si-
tuation at this juncture rendered it necessary to pourt their
favour and support with more than usual afiduity.

* Onurhr. Panvinius de Vilis Pontificum, p. 320o. Thuan.
lib. 5x. 7.

Vol. IV. M

Charles had again resumed his favourite projet of ac-

quiring the Imperial crown for his son Philip, the profecu.
tion of which, the reception it had met with when first pro.
posed had obliged him to suspend, but had not induced
him to relinquiih. This led him warmly to renew his re-
ques to his brother that he would accept of some compenfa.
tion for his prior right of fucceflion, and sacrifice that to
the grandeur of the house of Aufria. Ferdinand, who was
as little disposcd as formerly to give such an. extraordinary
proof of felf-denial, being sensible that, in order to defeat
this scheme, not only the moR inflexible firmnefe on his part,
but a vigorous declaration from the princes of the empire in
behalf of his title, were requisite, was willing to purchase
their favour by gratifying them in every point that they
deemed interesting or essential.

At the fame time he flood in need of immediate and ex.

traordinary aid from the Germanic body, as the Turks, after
having wrested from him great part of his Hungarian terri-
tories, were ready to attack the provinces fill subjea to his
authority with a formidable army, againfl which he could
bring no equal force into the field. For this aid from Ger-
many he could not hope, if the internal peace of the empire
were not established on a foundation solid in itself, and
which Ihould appear, even to the protestants, so secure and
so permanent, as might not only allow them to engage in a
dillant war with safety, but might encourage them to aA in
it with vigour.

A fRep taken by the protestants themselves, a short time

after the opening of the diet, rendered him fill more cau-
tious of giving them any new cause of offence. As soon as
the publication of Ferdinand's speech awakened the. fean
and suspicions which have been mentioned, the eledtors of
Saxony and Brandenburgh, together with the landgrave of
Hesse, met at Naunburgb, and confirming the ancient
treaty of confraternity which had long united their families,
they added to it a new article, by which the contrating

parties bound themselves to adhere to the confession of'
Aug(burg, and to maintain the doqfrine which it contained
in their refpedive dominionst.

Ferdinand, influenced by all these considerations, em-

ployed his utmost address in conduEting the deliberations of
thei diet, so as not to excite the jealousy of a party on whose
friendflip he depended, and whose enmity, as they had not
only taken the alarm, but had begun to prepare for their
defence, he had so much reason to dread. The members
of the diet readily agreed to Ferdinand's propnfal of taking
the ltate of religion into consideration, previous to any o-
ther business. But as soon as they'entered upon it, both'
parties discovered all the zeal and animosity which a subjed'
so interesting naturally engenders, and which the rancour of
controversy, together with the violence of civil war, had in-
flamed to the highest pitch;

The protestants contended, that the security which they
claimed in consequence of the treaty of Paffau should 'ex
tend, without limitation, to all.who had 'hitherto embraced
the doArine of Luther, or who flould hereafter embrace it.
The catholics, having first of all asserted the pope's right
as the supreme and final judge with refpea to all articles of
faith, declared, that though, on account of the present situ-
ation of the empire,. for the fake of peace, they were willing
to confirm the toleration granted by the treaty of Paffau, to-
such as had already adopted the new opinions; they muit
insist that this indulgence should not be extended either to
those cities which had conformed to the Interim, or to such
ecclesiastics as should for the future apostatise from the'
church of Rome. It was no easy matter to reconcile such
opposite pretensions, which were filpported, on each fide,
by the moll elaborate arguments, and-the greatest acrimony
of expression, that the abilities or zeal.of theologians long
exercised in disputation could fugget. Ferdinand, however,
bylhi address and perleverance; by softening some things o.

t Chytraei Saxonia, 4c.

Mz

each fide; by putting a favourable meaning upon others;
by representing incessantly the neceflity as well as the advan.
tages of concord; and by threatening, on rome occasions,
when all other considerations were disregarded, to dissolve
the diet, brought them at length to a conclusion in which
they all agreed.

Conformably to this, a recess was framed, approved of

and published with the usual formalities [Sept. 25.] The
following are the chief articles which it contained: That
such princes and cities as have declared their approbation of
the confession of Augsburg, (hall be permitted to profess the
dotrine and exercise the worship which it authorises, with.
out interruption or molestation from the emperor, the king
of the Romans, or any power or person whatsoever; That
the protestants, on their part, (hall give no disquiet to the
princes and states who adhere to the tenets and rites of the
church of Ro~e; That, for the future, no attempt (hall Be
made towards terminating religious differences, but by the
gentle and pacific methods of persuasion and conference;
That the pop;ih ecclesiastics Ihall claim no fpiritualjurifdic.
tion in such states as receive the confession of Augsburg;
That such as had seized the benefices or revenues of the
church, previous to the treaty of Paflau, (hall retain poP
fe~ion of them, and be liable to no prosecution in the Impe.
rial chamber on that account; That the supreme civil power
in every state shall have right to establish what form of doc-
trine and worship it (hall deem proper, and if any of its sub.
jects refuse to conform to these, (hall permit them to remove
with all their effects whithersoever, they (hall please; That
if any prelate or ecclesiastic shall hereafter abandon the Ro.
nmih religion, he (hall instantly relinquish his diocese or be-
nefice, and it (hall be lawful for those in whom the right of
nomination is vested, to proceed immediately to an ele&ioni
as if the office were vacant by death or translation, and to
appoint a successor of undoubted attachment to the ancient
y ilem-t.

- S:eid. 6z2. F. Paul, 368. Pallay. p. I. x6r.

Such are the capital articles in this famous recess, which'

it the basis of religious peace in Germany, and the bond of
union among its varions states, the sentiments of which are'
so extremely different with refpet to. points the moti inte,
refing as well as important. In our age and nation, to
which the idea of toleration is familiar, and its beneficialt
effess well known, it may seem flrange, that a method of'
terminating their diffenrions, so suitable to the mildand cha-
ritable spirit of the Chriftiaii religion, did not sooner occur,
to the contending parties,. But this expedient, however fa-
lutary, was so repugnant to the sentiments and pratiee of
Chritlians during many ages, that it did not lie obvious to
discovery. Among the ancient- heathens, all whose deitiesc
were local and tutelary, diversity. of sentiment concerning
trie objet or rites of religious worship seems to have been'
no source of animosity, because the acknowledging venera-
tion to be due ro any one God, did not imply denial of the ex-
iitence or the power of any other God; nor were the mode.-
and rites of worihip. eftablihed in one country incompat--
ible with those which other- nations approved of and ob-
staved. Thus the errors in their system of theology were
of such a nature as to be produ&ive of concord; and not-
withfianding-the amazing number of their deities, as well as-
the infinite variety of their ceremonies, a sociable and tole-
rating spirit fublifled almost universally in the pagan world;

But when the Chriflian revelation declared one Supreme
Being to be the sole object of religious veneration, and pre.
cribed the form of worship most acceptable to hlim,- who-
ever admitted the truth of it held, of: consequence, every o-
thcr fyflem of religion, as a deviation from what was efa-
Llihed by divine authority,.to be false and impious. Hence
arose the zeal-of the first converts to the Chrifsian faith in
propagating its doctrines, andr the ardour with which they
!boured to overturn every other form of worflip- They
employed, however, for this purpose, no methods but such

iuited the rnature of religion.. By the force of power.

!I 3

ful argtsteits, they convinced the understandings of men;
by the c'arms of superior virtue, they allured and captivat.
ed :her hearts. At length the civil power declared in fa.
vJur of Chrftianity; and though numbers, imitating the ex.
a Fle of their superiors, crowded into the church, many till
adhered to their ancient fuperititions. Enraged at their
obstinacy, the ministers of religion, whose zeal was still ua.
abated, though their fanAity and virtue were much diminish.
ed, forgot so far the nature of their own minfion, and of the
arguments which they ought to have employed, that they
armed the Imperial power against these unhappy men, and
as they could not persuade, they tried to- compel them to
believe.

At the lame time, controverlies concerning articles of

fatb multiplied, from various causes, among Christians
themselves, and the fame unhallowed weapons which had
first been used against the enemies of their religion, were
turned against each other. Every zealous disputant en.
deavoured to interest the civil magistrate in his cause, and
each in his turn employed the secular arm to crush or to ex.
terminate his opponents. Not long after, the bilhops of
Rome put in their claim to infallibility in explaining article
offaith, and deciding points in controversy; and, bold a
the pretension was, they by their artifices and perfeverancc,
imposed on the credulity of mankind, and brought them to
recognise it. To doubt or to deny any doctrine to whicd
these unerring inftru&ors had given the fan&ion of their ap
probation, was held to be not only a refiring of truth, bu
an aa of rebellion against their sacred authority; and the fc
cular power, of which by various arts they had acquired th
absolute direcion, was instantly employed to avenge both.

Thus Europe had been accustomed, during many centu

ties, to fee speculative opinions propagated or defended b
force; the charity and matual forbearance which. Chriftiani
ty recommends with so much warmth, were forgotten, th
iacrtd rights of conscience and of private j'stlgemeat we;

unheard of, and not only the idea of toleration, but even the
word itself, in th sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A
right to extirpate error by force was universally allowed to
be the prerogative of such as pos¢sed the knowledge of
truth; and as each party of Christians believed that they
had got pofiefflon of this invaluable attainment, they all
claimed and exercised, as far as they were able, the rights
which it was supposed to convey. rThe Roman catholics,
as their system relied on the decisions of an infallible judge,
never doubted that truth was on their fide, and openly cal-
led on the civil power to repel the impious and heretical in-
novators who had risen up againit it. The proteflants, ano
less confident that their dotrine was well founded,required,
with equal ardour, the princes of their party to check such
as presumed to impugn it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer,
Knox, the founders of the reformed church in their refpec.
tive countries, as far as they had power and opportunity, in-
fi&ted the fame punishments upon such as called in quefion
any article in their creeds, which were denounced against
their own disciples by the church of Rome, To their fol-
lowers, and perhaps to their opponents, it would have ap-
peared a fyltem of diffidence in the goodness of their cause,
or an acknowledgment that it was not well founded, if they
had not employed in its defence all those means which it
was supposed truth had a right to employ.

It was towards the close of the fexenteenth century be.

fore toleration, under its present form, was admitted first
into the republic of the United Provinces, and from thence
introduced into England. Long experience of the calami-
ties flowing from mutual persecution, the influence of free
government, the light and humanity acquired by the pro-
grefs of science, together with the prudence and authority
of the civil magistrate, were all requisite in order to elfablifh
a regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all the diffe-
rent feds had adopted, from milfaken conceptions concern.
i; bg the nature of rdeigion and the rights of trth, or whiclh

all of them had derived from the erroneous maxims establish.
ed by the church of Rome.

The recess of Augfurg, it is evident, was founded on

no such liberal and enlarged sentiments concerning freedom.
of religious inquiry, or the nature of toleration. It was no.
thing more than a scheme of pacification, which political
conliderations alone had suggested to the contending parties,.
and regard for their mutual tranquillity and safety had ren.
dered necessary. Of this there can be no stronger proof
than an article in the recess itself, by which the benefits of
the pacification are declared to extend only to the catholics
on the one fide, and to such as adhered to the confession of
Aug(burg on the other. The followers of Zuinglius and
Calvin remained, in cenfequence of that exclusion, without
any protecion- from the rigour of the laws denounced againIt
heretics. Nor did they obtain any legal security,. until the
treaty of Westphalia, near a century after this period, pro-
vided, that they flould be admitted to enjoy, in as ample a
manner as the Lutherans, all the advantages.and protecion
which the recef-of Augsburg affords.

But if the followers of Luther were highly pleased with

the security which they acquired by this recess, such as d.
hered to the ancient system had no less reason to be fatisfie&
with that article in it, which preferred entire to the Roman
catholic church the benefices of such ecclefiafics as laould
hereafter renounce its doctrines. This article, known in
Germany by the name of the EcclefaJflal Rfervation, was
apparently so conformable to the idea and to the rights of
an eiablified church, and it seemed so equitable to prevent
revenues, which had-been originally appropriated for the
maintenance of prfona attached to a certain sysem, from
being alienated to any other purpose, that the proteftantst
though they foresaw its consequences, were obliged to re-
linquifh their opposition to it. As the Roman catholic prin.
ces of the empire have taken care to fee this article ex.
adly observed in every cafe where there was an opportunity

of putting it in execution, it has proved the great barrier
of the Romish church in Germany against the reformation;
ad as, from this period, the fame temptation of interest did
nnt allure ecclesiastics to relinquish the eftablifted system,
there have been few of that order, who have loved truth
with filch difinterefled and ardent affedion, as, for its
fake, to abandon the rich benefices which they had in pof-
feflion.

During the fitting of the diet [April 9.] Marcellus Cer-
vino, cardinal of St. Croce, was eleted pope in the room of
Jul;us. He, in imitation of Adrian, did not change his
name on being exalted to the papal chair. As ,he equalled
that pontiff in purity of intention, while he excelled him'
much in the arts of governmeht, and still more in knowledge
of the tate and genius of the papal court; as he had capa-
city to discern what reformation it needed, as well as what
it could bear; such regulations were expeted from his vir.
tue and wisdom, as would have removed many of its grolffe
and moi flagrant corruptions, and have contributed to-
wards reconciling to the church such as, from indignation at
these enormities, had abandoned its communion. But this
excellent pontiff was .only (hewn to the church, and imme-
diately snatched away. The confinement in the conclave
had impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious ceremo-
nies upon his accession, together with too intense and anxi.
ou0 application of mind to the schemes of improvement
which he meditated, exhausted so entirely the vigour of his
feeble constitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and died
on the twentieth day after his election*.

All the refinements in artifice and intrigue, peculiar to

conclaves, were displayed in that which was held for ele&t
ing a successor to Marcellus; the cardinals of the Imperial
and French facions labouring, with equal ardour,to gain
the necessary number of suffrages for one of their own par-
ty. But, after a firuggle of no long duration, though. on-

' Thuan. sac. F.Paul, 365. Onuph. Panminr. 3i'&c.

duaed with all the warmth and eagerness natural to men
contending for so great an objec, they united in chafing
John Peter Caraffa [May 23,] the eldest member of the fa.
cred college, and the son of count Montorio, a nobleman of
an illuitrious family in the kingdom of Naples. The ad.
dress and influence of cardinal Farnese, who favoured his
pretensions, Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates with the
near profpeft of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing-about
this speedy union of suffrages. In order to teRsify his re.
fpe&tfor the memory of Paul III. by whom he had been
created cardinal, as well as his gratitude to the family of
Farnese, he assumed the name of Paul IV.

The choice of a prelate of such a singular character, and

who had long held a course extremely different from that
which usually led to the dignity now conferred upon him,
filled the Italians, who had nearest acces to observe his man.
ners and deportment, with aftoniliment, and kept them in
suspense and solicitude with regard: to his future condu&.
Paul, though born in a rank of life which, without any o.
ther merit, might have secured to him the highest ecclefiafti.
cal preferments, had, from his early years, applied to
fRudy with all the assiduity of a man who had nothing but*
his personal attainments to render him conspicuous. By
means of this, he not only acquired profound Ikill in fcho-
laftic theology, but added to that a eonfiderable knowledge
of the learned languages and of polite literature, the Rudy
of which had been lately revived'in Italy, and was pursued
at this time with great ardour. His mind, however, natu-
rally gloomy and severe,. was more formed to imbibe the
four spirit of the former, than to receive any tin6ture of ele-
gance or liberality of sentiment from the latter; so that he
acquired rather the qualities and passions of a reclufeeccle-
fiatic, than the talents necessary for the conduc of great
affairs. Accordingly, when he entered into orders, although:
everal rich benefices were beltowed upon-him, and he was

early employed as nuncio in different courts, he soon became
disgusted with that course of life, and languished to be in a
situation more suited to his tafe and temper. With this
viewv, he resigned. at once all. his ecclefiaflical prefer-
ments; and having instituted an order of regular prielts,
whom he denominated Theatines, from the name of the
archbishopric which he had held, he associated himself as a
member of their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
rules to which he had filbjeted them, and preferred the so-
litude of a monaflic life, with the honour of being the
founder of a new order, to all the great obje&s which the
court of Rome presented to his ambition.

In this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul III.

induced by the fame of his fandity and knowledge, called
hlim to Rome, in order to consult with him concerning the
mealfures which might be most proper and cffetual for sup-
pressing heresy, and re-establishing the ancient authority of
the church. Having thus allured him from.his solitude,
the pope, partly by his entreaties, and partly by his autho-
rity, prevailed on him to accept ofa cardinal's hat, to re-af-
fume the benefices which he had resigned, and to return a-
gain into the usual path of ecclesiastical ambition which he
seemed to have relinquilhed. But, during two fucceflive
pontificates, under the first of which the court of Rome was
tie most artful and interested, and under the second the molt
diiffolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monaflic
aultcrity. He wasan avowed and bitter enemy not only of
all innovation in opinion, but of every irregularity in prac-
tice; lie was the chief initrument in eflablilhing the formid-
able and odious tribunal of the inquisition in the papal ter-
ritories; he appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for
the jurifdi&ion and discipline of the church, and a revere
ctnfurer of every measure which seemed to flow from mo-
tives of policy or interest, rather than 'from zeal for the
10onour'of the ecclesiastical order, and the dignity of the
h0ly fee. Under a prelate of such a characcer, the Romah

duped with all the warmth and eagerness natural to men
contending for so great an object, they united in chufing
John Peter Caraffa [May 23,] the eldest member of the fa.
cred college, and the son of count Montorio, a nobleman of
an illurrious family in the kingdom of Naples. The ad.
dress and influence of cardinal Farnese, who favoured his
pretefions, Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates with the
near prosoet of a new vacancy, concurred in bringing-about
this ipeedy union of suffrages. In order to testify his re.
fpet for the memory of Paul III. by whom he had been
created cardinal, as well as his gratitude to the family of
Farnese, he assumed the name of Paul IV.

The choice of a prelate of such a singular character, and

who had long held a course extremely different from that
which usually led to the dignity now conferred upon him,
illed the Italians, who had neared access to observe his man.
ner and deportment, with aftonifliment, and kept them in
suspense and solicitude with regard: to his future condu&.
Paul, though born in a rank of life which, without any o.
ther merit, might have secured to him the highest ecclefialti.
cal preferments, had, from his early years, applied to
study with all the assiduity of a man who had nothing but
his personal attainments to render him conspicuous. By
means of this, he not only acquired profound drill in fcho-
laftic theology, but added to that aeonfiderable knowledge
of the learned languages and of polite literature, the fudy
of which had been lately revived in Italy,. and was puriued
at this time with great ardour. His mind, however, natu-
rally gloomy and severe,. was more formed to imbibe the
four spirit of the former, than to receive any tiniure of ele-
gance or liberality of sentiment from the latter; so that he
acquiied rather the qualities and passions of a Tecluiceccle-
Ialtic, than the talents neceflary for the condua of great
affairs. Accordingly, when he entered into orders, although
kvcal.rich benefices were bellowed upon him, and hewvas

early employed as nuncio in different courts, he soon became
difgu(ted with that course of life, and languilhed to be in a
situation more suited to his tate asnd temper. With this
view, he resigned. at once all. his ecciefiaftical' prefer-
ments; and having inflituted -an order of regular priests,
whom he denominated Theatines, from the name of the
archbishopric which he had held, he associated himself as -a
member of their fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous
lules to which he had fubje&ed them, and preferred the so-
litude of a monadic life, with the honour of being the
founder of a new order, to all the great objets which the
court of Rome presented to his ambition.

In this retreat he remained for many years, until Paul III.
induced by the fame of his fandity and knowledge, called
himt to Rome, in order to consult with him concerning the
measures which might be mos proper and effe&ual for sup-
pressing heresy, and re-establishing the ancient authority of
the church. Having thus allured him from;his solitude,
the pope, partly by his entreaties, and partly by his autho-
rity, prevailed on him to accept of a cardinal's hat, to re-af.
fume the benefices which he had resigned, and to return a-
gain into the usual path of ecclesiastical ambition which he
seemed to have relinquished. But, during two successive
pontificates, under the firRt of which the court of Rome was
the most artful and interested, and under the second the most
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his monatic
austerity. He was an avowed and bitter enemy not only of
all innovation in opinion, but of every irregularity in prac-
tice; he was the chief instrument in eitablilhing the formid-
able and odious tribunal of the inquisition in the papal ter-
ritories; he appeared a violent advocate on all occasions for
the jurifdi&ion and discipline of the church, and a severe-
ccnfurer of every measure which seemed to flow from mo-
tives of policy or interest, rather than 'from zeal for the
honour of the ecclefiatical order, and the dignity of the
uoly fee. Under a prelate of such a charaEer, the Roman

courtier expecd a severe and violent pontificate, during
which the principles offound policy would be sacrificed to
the narrow preiudices of priefily zeal; while the people of
Rome were apprehensive of feeing the fordid and forbidding
rigour of monafic manners substituted in place of the gaiety
or magnificence to which they had long been accustomed in
the papal court. These apprehensions Paul was extremly soli.
citos to remove. At his first entrance upon the adminittra.
tion,he laid aside that austerity which hadhitherto diftinguilh.
ed his person and family, and when the mafterofhis household
inquired in what manner he would chufe to live, he haughti.
ly replied, " As becomes a great prince." He ordered the
ceremony of his coronation to be conduced with more than
usual pomp; and endeavoured to render himself popular by
several acs of liberality and indulgence towards the inhabi.
tants of Romet.

His natural severity of temper, however, would have soon

rturned upon him, and would have justified the conjectures
of the courtiers, as well as the fears of the people, if he had
not, immediately after his eletion, called to Rome two of
his nephews, the sons of his brother the count of Montorio.
The eldest he promoted to be governor of Rome. The
xoungel, who had hitherto served as a soldier of fortune in
the armies of-Spain or France, and whose disposition as well
as manners were still more foreign from the clerical charaEter
than his profession, he created a cardinal, and appointed him
legate of Bologna, the second office in power and dignity
which a pope can bestow. These marks of favour, no less
sudden than extravagant, he accompanied with the mos un.
bounded confidence and attachment, and forgetting allhis
former severe maxims, he seemed to have no other objed
than the aggrandizement of his nephews. Their ambition,
unfortunately for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with
any moderate acquisition. They had seen the family of Me.
dici railed by the interest of the popes of that house to fu
t Platia, p. .
27 Cl-aido Vita di Paoo IV. Rom. 1615, p. 70

preme power in Tuscany; Paul III. had, by his abilities
and address, secured the dutchies of Parma and Placentia
to the family of Farnese. They aimed at some eflablifh-
ment for themselves, no less considerable and independent;
and as they could not expec that the pope would carry his
indulgence towards them so far as to secularize any part of
the patrimony of the church, they had no prospect of at-
taining what they wished, but by dismembering the Im-
perial dominions in Italy, in hopes of seizing some portion
of them. This alone they would have deemed a sufficient
reason for sowing the feeds of discord between their uncle
and the emperor.

But cardinal Caraffa had, besides, private reasons which

filled him with hatred and enmity to the emperor. While
he served in the Spanish troops lhe had not received such
marks of honour and diftiniion as he thought due to his
bilth and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had ab-
ruptly quitted the Imperial service; and entering into that
of France, he had not only met with such a reception as
frothed his vanity, and attached him to the French interest,
but by contra&ing an intimate friendship with Strozzi,
wlio commanded the French army in Tuscany, he had im-
bibed a mortal antipathy to the emperor as the great enemy
to the liberty and independence of the Italian flates. Nor
was the pope himself indisposed to receive impreflions unfa-
vourable to the emperor. The opposition given to his elec-
tion by the cardinals of the Imperial faction, left in his mind
deep resentment, which was heightened by the remem-
brance of ancient injuries from Charles or his minilters.

Of this his nephews took advantage, and employed vari-

ous devices, in order to exasperate him beyond a polfibility
of reconciliation. They aggravated every circumstance
which could be deemed any indication of the emperor's dif-
fatisfafion with his promotion; they read to him an inter-
cepted letter, in which Charles taxed the cardinals of his
party with negligence or incapacity in not having defeated
Vol. IV. N

Paul's eleaionr they pretended, at one time, to have disco.
vcred a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister and Cos.
mo di Medici againff the pope's life; they alarmed him, at
another, with accounts of a plot for assassinating themselves.
By these artifices, they kept his mind, which was naturally
violent, and become suspicious from old age, in such perpe.
tual agitation, as precipitated him into measures which o-
therwife he would have been the £rif person to condemnt.
He seized some of the cardinals who were modt attached to
the emperor, and confined them in the cafle of St. Angelo;
he persecuted the Colonnas and other Roman barons, the
ancient retainers to the Imperial fa&ion, with the utmooft fe-
verity; and discovering on all occasions his distrust, fear, or
hatred of the emperor, he began at last to court the friend.
{hip of the French king, and seemed willing to throw him.
flf abfolutcly upon him for support and protection.

This was the very point to which his nephews wflhed to

bring him, as mos favourable to their ambitious schemes;
and as the accomplishment of these depended on their uncle's
life, whose advanced age did not admit of losing a moment
unnecessarily in negotiations, infead of treating at second.
hand with the French ambassador at Rome, they prevailed
on the pope to dispatch a person of confidence directly to the
court of France, with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be reje&ed. He proposed an alliance of-
fenfive and defensive between Henry and the pope; that they
should attack the dutchy of Tuscany and the kingdom of
Naples with their united forces; and if their arms should
prove successful, that the ancient republican form of goveru-
ment should be re-established in the former, and the invefti-
ture of the latter should be granted to one of the French
king's sons, after reserving a certain territory which hodild
be annexed to the patrimony of the church, together with

Ripimontii Hist. Patrie, lib. iii. 1146. ap. Graev. Thef. vol.
i. Wem. de Ribcr, ;U. 6 5. Adlri.i Iftor. i. -6. .

an independent and princely eflablifhment for each of the
pope's nephews.

The king, allured by these specious projets, gave a most
favourable audience to the envoy. But when the matter
was proposed in council, the conflable AMontmorency, whose
natural caution and aversion to daring enterprises increasecd
with age and experience, remonstrated with great vehemence
againlt the alliance. He put Henry in mind how fatal to
Fiance every ex ition into Italy had been during three
fuicccfive. reigns, and if such an enterprise had proved too
great for the nation even when its ftreogth and finances were
entire, there was no reason to hope for success, if it lhould be
attempted now, when both were exhausted by extraordinary
efforts during wars, which had lased, with little interrup-
tion, almost half a century. He represented the manifelt
imprudence of entering into engagements with a pope of
fourfcorc, as any fyflem which refted on no better founda.
tion than his life, must be extremely precarious, and upon
the event of his-death, which could not be distant, the face
of things, together with the inclination of the Italian fiates,
mull inflantly change, and the whole weight of the war be
left upon the king alone. To these confiderations.he added
the near prospect which they now had of a final accommo.
dation with the emperor, who, having taken the resolution
cf retiring from the world, wished to transmit his kingdoms
il peace to his son; and he concluded with representing the
abfulute certainty of drawing the arms of England upon
France, if it should appear that the re-establishment of tran-
quillity in Europe was prevented by the ambitiou of its mon-
arch.

These arguments, weighty in themselves, and urged by a
mtnitter of great authority, would probably have determined
the king to decline any connection with the pope. But the
duke of Guise, and his brother the cardinal of Lorrain, who
drlighted no less in bold and dangerous undertakings than
MIon(tnicreicy nl unned them, declared warmly for an alliance

Nz

with the pope. The cardinal expe&ed to be entrusted with
the condua of the negotiations in the court of Rome to
which this alliance would give rife; the duke hoped to ob-
tain the command of the army which would be appointed to
invade Naples; and confidering themselves as already in
these rfations, vast projecs opened to their aspiring and un.
bounded ambition. Their credit, together with the influ.
ence of the king's miflrefs, the famous Diana of Poitiers,
who was, at that time, entirely devoted tqe interest of the
farmly of Guile, more than counterbalanced all Montmoren.
cy's prudent remonitrances, and prevailed on an inconfide.
rate prince to liiten to the overtures of the pope's envoy.

The cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected, was imme-

diately sent to Rome with full powers to conclude the treaty,
and to concert measures for carrying it into execution. Be.
fore he could reach that city, the pope, either from relect.
ing on the danger and uncertain' issue of all military opera.
tions, or through the address of the Imperial ambassador,
who had been at great pains to soothe him, had not only be-
gun to lose much of the ardour with which he had corn
menced the negotiation with France, but even discovered
great unwllingnefs to continue it. In order to rouse him
from this fit of despondency, and to rekindle his former
rage, his nephews had recourse to the arts which they had
already pra&ised with so much success. They alarmed him
with new representations of the emperor's holtile intentions,
with fresh accounts which they had received of threats ut-
tered against him by the Imperial ministers, and with new
discoveries which they pretended to have made of confpiraz
cies formed, and juRt ready to take effect against his life.

But these artifices, having been formerly tried, would not

have operated a second time with the fame force, nor have
made the impreflion which they willed, if Paul had not
been excited by an offence of that kind which he was leat
able to bear. He received advice of the recess of the diet
of Augsburg, and of the toleration which was thereby

granted to the protestants; and this threw him at once into
fich transports of passion against the emperor and the king
of the Romans, as carried him headlong into all the violent
measures of his nephews. Full of high ideas with refpet
to the papal prerogative, and animated with the fiercelt zeal
again!l heresy, he confidered the liberty of defiding con-
cerningg religious matters, which had been assumed by an as-
fembly composed chiefly of laymen, as a presumptuous and'
unpardonable encroachment on that jurisdiction which be-
lo,:gred to him alone; and regarded the indulgence which
had been given to the protestants as an impious a& of that
power which the diet had usurped. He complained loudly
of both to the Imperial ambassador. He infiled that the
recess of the diet should immediately be declared illegal and
void. He threatened the emperor and king of the Romans,
;,i cafe they should either reftife or delay to gratify him in
this particular, with the fevered effects of his vengeance.
He talked in a tone of authority and command which

:g-lit have suited a pontiff of the twelfth century,. when a.
papal decree was ffficient to have shaken, or to have over-
turned, the throne of the greatest monarch in Europe; but
wich was altogether improper in that age,,efpecially when
azlreffed to the minister of a prince who had so often made
pontiffs more formidable than Paul feel the weight of his
lower. The ambassador, however, heard all his extrava-
-lnt propositions and menaces with much patienceand en-
diavoured to soothe him, by putting him in mind of the ex-
treme distress to which the emperor had been reduced at In-
spruck, of the engagements which he had come under to
the proteRants, in order to extricate himself, of the necefi-
ty of fulfilling these, and of accommodating his. colrdut to
thi situation of his affairs. But weighty as these confidera.
t',jis were, they made no impreflion on the mind of the
h.!! hty and bigoted pontiff, who idttantly replied that he
\'.:l!d absolve him by his apostolic authority from. those im-
;':I;s cngagem.ents, and even command him not to perform

3

thcd, that-in caryinig on the cause of God and of the
church, no regard ought to be had to the maxims of world.
ly prudence and policy; and that the ill fuccefa of the em.
peror's schemes in Germany might jufly be deemed a mark
of the divine displeasure against him, on account of his hay,
ing paid little attention to the former, while he regulated his
conduc entirely by the latter. Having said this, he turned
from the ambassador abruptly without waiting for a reply.

His nephews took care to applaud and chcrifh these senti.

ments, and ealily wrought up his arrogant mind, fraught
with all the monlkij ideas concerning the extent of the pa-
pal supremacy, to such a pitch of resentment against the
house of Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own
power, that he talked continually of his being the fucceffo0
of those who had deposed kings and emperors; that he was
exalted as head over them all, and would trample such as
opposed him under his feet. In this disposition the cardinal
of Lorrain found the pope, and easily persuaded him to sign
a treaty [Dec. 15,] which had for its objeA the ruin of a
prince, against whom he was so highly exasperated. The
itipulations in this treaty were much the fame as had been
proposed by the pope's envoy at Paris; and it was agreed to
keep the whole tranfa&ion secret until their united forces
lhould be ready to take the fieldt.

During the negotiation of this treaty at Rome and Paris,

an event happened which seemed to render the fears that
had given rife to it vain, and the operations which were to
follow upon it unnecessary. This was the emperor's refig.
nation of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip; to.
gether with his resolution to withdraw entirely from any
concern in business or the affairs of this world, in order that
he might spend the remainder of his days in retirement and
solitude. Though it requires neither deep refleaion nor ex-
traordinary dilcernment to discover that the tate of royal-

+ Pallav. lib. xii. p. I6;. F. Paul, 36&. Thuan.!ib. xv. 5z5.
1ib. ixi. 54C. Mim. de Ribier, ii. 609, &c.

ty is not exempt from cares and diiappointment; though
molt of those who are exalted to a throne find solicitude,
and satiety, and difguf to be their perpetual attendants in.
that envied pre eminence; yet to descend voluntarily from
the ftipreme to a subordinate station, and to relinquish the
poffiffion of power in order to attain the enjoyment of hap.
piness, seems to be an effort too great for the human mind.
Several instances, indeed, occur in history, of monarchs who
have quitted a throne, and have ended their days in re-
tirement. But they were either weak princes who took this
resolution rashly, and repented of it as soon as it was taken;
or unfortunate princes, from whose hands some stronger ri-
val had wrePted their sceptre, and compelled them to descend
with reludance into a private station. Dioclefian is per-
haps the only prince capable of holding the reins of govern-
ment, who ever resigned them from deliberate choice, and
who continued during many years to enjoy the tranquillity
of retirement without fetching one penitent sigh, or calling
back one look of desire, towards the power or dignity

hlich le had abandoned.
No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation should fill all

Europe with astonishment, and give rife, both among his
contemporaries, and among the historians of that period, to
various conjeaures concerning the motives which determined
a prince, whose ruling passion had been uniformly the love
of power, at the age of fifty-fix, when objets of ambition
continue to operate with full force on the mind, and are pur-
sued with the greatest ardour, to take a resolution so fingu-
larand unexpected. But while many authors. have imputed
it to motives so frivolous and fantaltical, as can hardly be
fitppofed to influence any reasonable mind; while others.
have imagined it to be the result of some profound scheme
of policy; historians more intelligent, and better informed,.
neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search for mysterious fecrcts
of itate, where simple and obvious causes will fully account
fur the emperor's condut. Charles had beed attacked ear-

ly in life with the gout, and notwithstanding all the precan.
tions of the most Ikilful physicians, the violence of the dif.
temper increased as he advanced in age, and the fits became
every year more frequent, as well as more severe. Not only
was the vigour cf his constitution broken, but the faculties
of his mind were impaired by the excruciating torments which
he endured. During the continuance of the fits, he was al-
together incapable of applying to business, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals that he could
attend to what was serious, he gave np a great part of his
time to trifling and even child;if occupations, which served
to relieve or to amuse his mind, enfeebled and worn out with
excess of pain. Under these circumstances, the conduct of
such affairs as occurred of course, in governing so many king.
doms, was a burden more than sufficient; but to push for-
ward and complete the vast schemes which the ambition of
his more aftive years had formed, or to keep in view and car-
ry on the fame great system of policy, extending to every na-
tion in Europe, and conneted with the operations of every
different court, were funcions which so far exceeded his
strength, that they oppressed and overwhelmed his mind.
As he had been long accustomed to view the business of e.
very department, whether civil, or military, or ecclesiastical,
with his own eyes, and to decide concerning it according to
hiA own ideas, it gave him the utmolf pain when he felt his
infirmities increase so fast upon him, that he was obliged to
commit the conduct of all affairs to his ministers. He im-
puted every misfortune which besel him, and every mifcar-
Giage that happened, even when the former was unavoidable
and the latter accidental, to- his inability to take the infpec-
tion of business imfelf. He complained of his hard for-
tune, in being opposed, in his declining years, to a rival,
shio was in the full vigour of life, and that while Henry
could take and execute all his resolutions in person, he should
Low be reduced, both in council and in acion, to rely on
the ti-nts and exertions of other men. Having thus

grown old before his times he wifely judged it more decent
to conceal his infirmities in some solitude, than to expose
them any longer to the public eye; and prudently deter-
mined not to forfeit the fame, or lose the acquisitions of his
better years, by itruggling, with a vain obstinacy, to retain
the reins of government, when he'was no longer able to
hold them with steadiness, or to guide them with address*.

But though Charles had revolved this scheme in his mind

for several years, and had communicated it to his sifters the
dowager queens of France and Hungary, who not only ap.
proved of his intention, but offered to accompany him to
whatever place of retreat he should chufe; several things had
hitherto prevented his carrying it into execution. He could
not think of loading his son with the government osso many
kingdoms, until he hould attain such maturity of age, and

Dom Levefque, in his memoirs of cardinal Granvelte, gives a

reason for the emperor's resignation, which, as far as I recolled,
is not mentioned by any other historian. He fays, that the em-
peror having ceded the government of the kingdom of Naples
and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon his marriage with the
queen of England; Philip, notwithfianding the advice and intrca-
ties of his father, removed moif of the miaifters and officers
whom he had employed in those countries, and appointed crea-
tures of his own, to fill the places which they held. That he
a!pired openly, and with little delicacy, to obtain a ihare in the
administration of affairs in the Low-Countries. That he endea-
voured to thwart the emperor's measures, and to limit his autho-
rity, behaving towards him fometines with inattention, and some.
times with haughtiiefs. That Charles finding that he must either
yield on every occasion to his son, or openly contend with him,
in order to avoid either of these, which were both disagreeable
and mortifying to a father, he took the resolution of resigning his
crowns, and of retiring from the world, vol. i. p. a4, &c. Dorn
Levefque derived his information concerning there curious fadts,
which he relates very briefly, from the original papers of cardinal
Granvelle. But as that vail collection of papers, which has beets
preserved and arranged by M. l'abbe Boizot of Befancon, though
one of the most valuable historical monuments of the sixteenth
century, and which cannot fail of throwing much light on the
tranfacions of Charles V. is not published, I cannot determine
what degree of credit should be given to this account of Charles's
resignation. I have thereiore taken no notice of it inrelating this
tVL!t.

of abilities, as would enable him to fullain that weighty
burden. But as Philip had now reached his twenty-eight
year, and had been early accuilomed to bufinefi, for which
he discovered both inclination and capacity, it can hardly
be imputed to the partiality of paternal affe&ion, that his
scruples, with regard to this point, were entirely removed;
and that he thought he might place his son, without further
hesitation or delay, on the throne which he himself was about
to abandon. His mother's situation had been another ob-
firuaion in his way. For although she had continued al.
noft fifty years in confinement, and under the fame disorder
of mind which concern for her husband's death had brought
upon her, yet the government of Spain was ill vested in her
jointly with the emperor; her name was inserted together
with his in all the public intrumenut issued in that kingdom;
and such was the fond attachment of the Spaniards to her,
that they would probably have scrupled to recogaife Philip
as their sovereign, unless lhe had consented to assume him as
her partner on the throne. Her utter incapacity for buii-
tefs rendered it impossible to obtain her consent. But her
death, which happened this year, removed this difculty;
and as Charles, upon that event, became sole monarch of
Spain, it left the fuccelfion open to his son. The war with
France had likewise been a reason for retaining, the admini.
ftration of affairs in his own hand, as he was extremely soli
citou3 to have terminated it, that he might have given up
his kingdoms to his son at peace with all the world. But
as Henry had discovered no disposition to close with any of
his overtures, and had even rejeaed proposals of peace,
which were equaland moderate, in a tone that seemed to in.
dicate a fixed purpose of continuing hostilities, he law that
it was vain to wait longer in expectation of an event, which,
however desirable, was altogether uncertain.

As thi, then, appeared to be the properjunfture for exe-

cuting the scheme which he had long meditated, Charles re-
soletd to refgn his kingdoms to his ofn, with a solemnity

fiitable to the importance of the tranfaaion, and to perform
this lass a&t of sovereignty with such Formal pomp, as might
kave a lasting imprefion txn the minds not only of his sub-
jets but of his successor. With this view he called Philip
out of England, where the peev'fh temper of his queen,
which increased with her despair of having iflue, rendered
him extremely unhappy; and the jealousy of the Englifl
left him no hopes of obtaining the direcion of their affairs.
Having assembled the States of the Low-Countries at Bruf.
fels, on the twenty-fifth of Ocober, Charles feated himself,
for the last time, in the chair of state, on one fide of which
was placed his son, and on the 6ther his filter, the queen of
Hungary, regent of the Netherlands, with a splendid reti-
nrle of the princes of the empire and grandees of Spain
fianding behind him. The president of the council of Flan-
ders, by his command, explained, in a few words, his inten-
tion in calling this extraordinary meeting of the States.
He then read the inflrument of resignation, by which
Charles surrendered to his son Philip all his territories,
ittrifdi&ion, and authority in the Low-Countries, absolving
his fubjeds there from their oath of allegiance to him,
which he required them to transfer to Philip his lawful heir,
and to fetve him with the fame loyalty and zeal which they
had manifeited, during so long a course of years, in support
of his government.

Charles then rose from his feat, and leaning on the should-,

er of the prince of Orange, because he was unable to Rand
without support, he addrefied himself to the audience, and
from a paper which he held in his hand, in order to assist his
nlenory, he recounted, with dignity, but without ofltntatipu,
all the'great things which he had undertaken and performed
since the commencement of his adininiftration. He obferv-
ed, that, from the seventeenth year of his age, he had de-
dicated all his thoughts and attention to public obje&s, re-
fcrving no portion of his time for the indulgence of his ease,
rnd very little for the enjoyment of private pleasure; that

either in a pacific or hostile manner, he had visited Germany
nine times, Spain fix times, France four times, Italy seven
times, the Low-Countries ten times, England twice, Africa
as often, and had made eleven voyages by sea; that while
his health permitted him to discharge his duty, and the vi-
gour of his constitution was equal, in any degree, to the ar-
duous office of governing such extenfrve dominions, he had
never ihunned labour, nor repined under fatigue; that now
when his health was broken, and his vigour exhausted by
the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing infirmities
admonished him to retire, nor was he so fond of reigning, as
to retain the sceptre in an impotent hand, which was no
longer able to protet his subje&s, orto secure to them the
happiness which he wilhed they Ihould enjoy; that initead
of a sovereign worn out with disease, and scarcely half alive,
he gave them one in the prime of life, accustomed already to
govern, and who added to the vigour of youth all the atten-
tion and sagacity of maturer years; that if, during the
course of along administration, he had committed any mate-
rial error in goverument,.or if, under the pressure of so many
and great affairs, and amidst the attention which he had
been obliged to give to them, he had either negleted or
injured any of his fubjeds, he now implored their forgive.
ness; that, for his part, he Ihould ever retain a grateful sense
of their fidelity and attachment, and would carry the re-
membr'race of it along with him to the place of his retreat,
as his sweetest consolation, as well as the befl reward for all
his services, and in his last prayers to Almighty God would
pour forth his moit earnerd petitions for their welfare.

Then turning towards Philip, who fell on his knees and

kilfed his father's hand, " If," fays he, " I had left you
by my death this rich inheritance, to which I have made
such large additions, some regard would have beenjufily due
to my memory on that account; but now, when I volunta-
rily resign to you what I might have till retained, Ijnay
well expect the warmedf expressions of thanks on your part.

With these, however, I dispense, and ffiall confideryour con-
cerir for the welfare of your fubjeas, and your love of
them, as the heft and most acceptable testimony of your gra.
titude to me. It is in your power, by a wife and virtuous-
administration, to justify the extraordinary proof which I,
this day, give of my paternal affetion, and to demonstrate
that you are worthy of the confidence which I repose in
you. Preserve an inviolable regard for religion; maintain -
.the catholic faith in its purity; let the laws of your coun-
try ,be sacred in your.eyes; encroach not on the rights and
-privileges of your people; and if the time thould ever come
when you (hall wish to enjoy the tranquillity of private life,
may you have a son endowed with such qualities, that you
can resign your sceptre to him with as much fatisfaftion as I
give up mine to you."

As soon as Charles had finilhed this long address to his

subje&s and to their new sovereign, he funk into the chair,
exhausted and ready to faint with the fatigue of such an ex-
traordinary effort. During his discourse, the whole audi-
ence melted into tears, some from admiration of his magna-
nimity, others softened by the expreflions of tenderness to-
wards his son, and of love to his people; and all were asset-
ed with the deepest sorrow at losing a sovereign, who, dur-
ing his administration, had dittinguifhed the Netherlands, his
native country, with particular marks of his regard and at-
tachment.

Philip then arose from his knees, and after returning

thanks to his father, with a low and fubmiflive voice, for the
royal gift which his unexampled bounty had bestowed up-
on him, he addressed the assembly of the States, and regret-
ting his inability to speak the Flemilh language with such
facility as to express what he felt on this interefing occa-
lion, as well as-what he owed to his good fubjeas in the
Netherlands, he begged that .they would.permit Granvelle
bishop of Arras to deliver what he had given him-it charge
to speak in his name. Granvelle, in a long discourse, expa-
Vol. V. 0

tiated on the zeal with which Philip was animated for the
good of his subje&s, on his resolution to devote all his time
and talents to the promoting of their happiness, and on his
intention to imitate his father's example in diltingui{hing the
Netherlands with peculiar marks of his regard. Maeis, a
lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in the name of the
States, with large professions of their fidelity and affeation
to their new sovereign.

1556.] Then Mary, queen-dowager of Hungary, resign.

ed the regency with which she had been entrusted by her
brother during the space of twenty-five years. Next day
[Jan. 6.] Philip, in presence of the States, took the usual
oaths to maintain the rights and privileges of his subje&s;
and all the members, in their own name, and in that of their
constituents, swore allegiance to him*.

A few weeks after this tranfa&ion, Charles, in an as.

fembly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally
pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain, with
all the territories depending on them, both in the old
and in the new world. Of all these vast possessions, he
reserved nothing for himself but an annual pension of an
hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges of his
family, and to afford him a small fum for ats of benefi-
cence and charityt.

* Gcdleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldaft. Polit.
Imper. p. ;77. Strada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

t The emperor's resignation is an event not only of such im.

portance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of it, one
would expe&, ihould have been ascertained by historians with
the greatefl accuracy. There is, however, an amazing and an
unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this point.
All agree that the deed by which Charles transferred to his son his
dominions in the Netherlands, bears date at BruiTels the azth of
Ocober. Sandoval fixes on the 28th-of October as the day on
which the ceremony of relignation happened, and he was present
at the tranfaidon,'vo!. ii. p. 592. Godleveus, who publihed a
treatise de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the public ceremony, al
well as the date of the instrument of resignation, on the isth.
Pere Bzrre, I know not upon what authority, fixes it on tht
24th of November, Hilt. d'Alem. viii. 976. Ierrera agrees witt

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hoping that
the dryness of the air and the warmth of the climate in that
country might mitigate the violence of his disease, which had
been much increased by the moisture of the air and the ri.
gour of the winters in the Netherlands, he was extremely im-
patient to embark for that kingdom, and to disengage him-
self entirely from business, which he found to be impoflible
tlhile he remained in Brussels. But his plhyficians remon-
frated so firongly against his venturing to sea at that cold
and boitferous fcafon of the year, that he consented, though
vT ith reluctance, to put off his voyage for some months.

By yielding to their intreaties, he had the fatisfa&ion,

before he left the Low-Countries, of taking a considerable
flep towards a peace with France, which he ardently wished
for, not only on his son's account, but that he might have

Godleveus in his account of this matter, tom. i. ix5. as likewise
does Pallavicini, whose authority with refpecd to dates, and every
thing where a minute accuracy is requisite, is of great weight,
Hilt. lib. xvi.p. z68. Aiitorians differ no eCs with regard to the
day on which Charles refigaed the crown of Spain to his son.
According to M. de Thou, it was a month after his having resign-
td his dominions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the 2ath of No-
vember, Thuan. lib. xvi. p. $7r. According to Sandoval, it was
en the 6th of January, 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio de Vera a-
grees with him, Epitome del Vida del Car. V. p. lo. Accord-
ing to PallavJcini, it was on the 17th, Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168. and
with him Herrera agrees, Vida del D. Felipe, tom. i. p. a33.
But Ferreras fixes it on the first day of January, Hist. Gener. tom.
ix.. p. 37. M. de Beaucaire supposes the resignation of the
crown of Spain to have been executed a few days after the re-
fignation of the Netherlands, Corn. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is
remarkable, that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles, though
Charles had made over all his dominions to his son some weeks
previous to the concluflon of it, all the stipulations are in the em-
plror's name, and Philip is only styled king of England and?
Naples. It is certain Philip was not proclaimed king of Castile,
&c. at Valladolid fooncr than the a4th of March, Sandov. ii. p.
6;6; and previous to that ceremony, he did.Lno chfufe, it fiould
ktrm, to aflume the title of king of any of his S .aniih kingdoms,
or to perform any ad of royal jurifdidcion. In a deed annexed to
the treaty of truce, dated April 19, he assumes the title of king of
Caltilc, &c. in the usual style of the Spauiih monarchs in that age,
Corps Dipl. torm. iv. Append. p. 85.

tiated on the zeal with which Philip was animated for the
good of his fubjets, on his resolution to devote all his time
and talents to the promoting of their happiness, and on his
intention to imitate his father's example in diftinguihfing the
Netherlands with peculiar marks of his regard. Maeis, a
lawyer of great eloquence, replied, in the name of the
States, with large professions of their fidelity and affetion
to their new sovereign.

1556.] Then Mary, queen-dowager of Hungary, resign.

ed the regency with which she had been entrusted by her
brother during the space of twenty-five years. Next day
[Jan. 6.] Philip, in presence of the States, took the usual
oaths to maintain the rights and privileges of his fubjeas;
and all the members, in their own name, and in that of their
conflituents, swore allegiance to him*.

A few weeks after this tranfaetion, Charles, in an as.

fembly no less splendid, and with a ceremonial equally
pompous, resigned to his son the crowns of Spain, with
afl the territories depending on them, both in the old
and in the new world. Of all these vast possessions,' he
reserved nothing for himfclf but an annual pension of an
hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges of his
family, and to afford him a small fum for aas of benefi-
cence and charityt.

* Gcdleveus Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldaft. Pollt.
Imper. p. 377. Srada de Bello Belgico,lib. i. p. 5.

t The emperor's resignation is an event not only of such ii-

portance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of it, one
would expet, Ihould have been ascertained by historians with
the greatefl accuracy. There is, however, an amazing and an
unaccountable diversity among them with regard to this point.
All agree that the deed by which Charles transferred to his son his
dominions in the Netherlands, bears date at Bruffils the i5th of
Ocdober. Sandoval fixes on the 28thdof October as the day on
s-hich the ceremony of resignation happened, and he was present
at the tranfaQion,'vol. ii. p. 592. Godleveus, who published a
treatise de Abdicatione Caroli V. fixes the public ceremony, as
well as the date of the instrument of resignation, on the isth
Pere Bzrre, I know not upon what authority, fixes it on the
24th of November, Hilt. d'Alem. viii. 976. Herera agrees uitl

As he had fixed on a place of retreat in Spain, hoping that
the dryness of the air and the warmth of the climate in that
country might mitigate the violence of his disease, which had
been much increased by the moisture of the air and the ri-
gour of the winters in the Netherlands, he was extremely im-
patient to embark for that kingdom, and to disengage him-
self entirely from business, which he found to be impossible
while he remained in Brussels. But his physicians remon-
ftrated so strongly against his venturing to sea at that cold
and boisterous season of the year, that he consented, though
n ith reluaance, to put off his voyage for some months.

By yielding to their intreaties, he had the fatisfa&ion,

before he left the Low-Countries, of taking a considerable
flep towards a peace with France, which he ardently wilhed
for, not only on his son's account, but that he might have

Godleveus in his account of this matter, tom. i. s15. as likewise
does Pallavicini, whose authority with refpedt to dates, and every
thing where a minute accuracy is requisite, is of great weight,
Hilt. lib. xvi. p. x68, iiftorians differ no leTs with regard to the
(!av on which Charles refigaed the crown of Spain to his son.
According to M. de Thou, it was a month after his having refigll-
td his dominions in the Netherlands, i. e. about the a5th of No-
etmber, Thuan. lib. xvi. p. 571. According to Saudoval, it was
en the i6th of January, 1556, Sand. ii. 603. Antonio de Vera a-
grees with him, Epitome del Vida del Car. V. p. l o. Accord-
ing to Pallavicini, it was on the 17th, Pal. lib. xvi. p. 168. and
with him Herrera agrees, Vida del D. Felipe, torn. i. p. s33.
But Ferreras fixes it on the first day of January, Hist. Gener. tom.
ix. p. 371. M. de Beaucaire supposes the resignation of the
crown of Spain to have been executed a few days after the re-
fignation of the Netherlands, Cor. de Reb. Gall. p. 879. It is
remarkable, that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles, though
Charles had made over all his dominions to his son some weeks
previous to the conclusion of it, all the stipulations are in the em-
peror's name, and Philip is only flyled king of England and
Naples. It is certain Philip was not proclaimed king of Castile,
&c. at Valladolid sooner than the 24th of MarchSandov. ii. p.
6;6; and previous to that ceremony, he did no, chufe, it Thould
ftnm, to assume the title of king of any of hiS' -anifh kingdoms,
or to perform any aA of royal jurifdidion. In a deed annexed to
the treaty of truce, dated April 19, he assumes the title of king of
Caltile, &c. in the usual style of the Spajlif. monarchs in that age.
Corps Dipl. tom. iv. Append. p. 85.

0 2

the merit, when quitting the world, ofre-eftablihing that
tranquillity in Europe, which he had banilhed out of it al.
most from the time that he had assumed the adminiltratibn
of affairs. Previous to his resignation, commissioners had
been appointed by him and by the French king, in order
to treat of an exchange of prisoners. In their conference at
the Abbey of Vaucelles, near Cambray, an expedient was
accidentally proposed for terminating hostilities between the
contending monarchs, by a long truce, during the subsistence
of which, and without discussing their refpe&ive claims, each
ihould retain what was now in his possession. ,Charles, fen.
fible how much his kingdoms were exhausted by the expen.
five and almof continual wars in which his ambition had en-
gaged him, and eager to gain for his son a short interval of
peace, that he might establish himself firmly on his throne,
declared warmly for closing with the overture, though ma.
nifeifly dilhonourable as well as disadvantageous; and such
was the refpe& due to his wisdom and experience, that Phi-
Jip, notwithstanding his unwillingness to purchase peace by
Luch concessions, did not presume to urge his opinion in op.
position to that of his father.

Henry could not have hesitated one moment about giv.

ing his content to a truce on such conditions, as would leave
him in quiet poffflfion of the greater part of the duke of Sa-
voy's dominions, together with the important conquests
which he had made on the German frontier. But it was
no easy matter to reconcile such a Rep with the engage-
ments which he had come under to the pope, in his late
treaty with him. The conitable Montmorency, however,
represented in such a striking light the imprudence of facri-
sicing the true interests of his kingdom to these rash obliga-
tions, and took such advantage of the absence of the cardipal
of Lorrain, who had seduced the king into his alliance with
the Caraffas, that Henry, who was naturally flucuating and
unsteady, and apt to be influenced by the advice last givec
him, authorised his ambassadors [5th Feb.] to sign a

treaty of truce with the emperor for five years, on the terms
which had been proposed. But that he might not seem to
have altogether forgotten his ally the pope, who, he fore-
saw, would be highly exasperated, he, in order to soothe
him, took care that he should be expressly included in the
truce*.

The count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and the admiral
Coligny to Brussels, the former to be present when the king
of France, and the latter when the emperor and his son ra-
titied the treaty and bound themselves by oath to observe it-.

When an account of the conference at Vaucelles, and of
the conditions of truce which had-been proposed there, were
firil carried to Rome, it gave the pope no manner of disquiet.
He trusted so much to the honour of the French monarch,
that he would not allow himfclf to think that Henry could
forget so loon, or violate so shamefully, all the itipulations
in liis league with him. He had such an high opinion of
hie emperor's wisdom, that he made no doubt of his reflf-
ing his content to a truce, on such unequal terms: and on
both these accounts he confidently pronounced that this,
like nany preceding negotiations, would terminate in no-
thing. But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
vinced him that no reasoning in political affairs is more fal-
lacious, than, because an event is improbable, to conclude
that it will not happen. The sudden and unexpeted con-
culion of the truce filled Paul with aitoniihment and terror.
The cardinal of Lorrain durlt not encounter that storm of
indignation, to which he knew that he should be exposed
from the haughty pontiff, who had so good reason. to be in-

* Mem. de Ribier, ii. 6z6. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. App. 8r.
t One of admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote the court
oi France an account of what happened- while they efided at
Bniffels, takes notice, as an inftarce of Philip's unpolitenefs, that
he received the French ambassador in an apartment hungwith tape-
fry', which represented the battle of Pavia, the manner in which
irancis I. was taken prisoner, his- voyage to Spain, with all the
"'ortifying circumflances of his captivity and imprisonment at
Madrid. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 634.

03

cenfed; but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to the
carlinal Tournon the difficult ta{k of attempting to soothe
Paul and his nephews. They were fully sensible of the pe.
rilous fituatiop in which they now flood. By their engage.
ments with France, which were no longer secret, they had
highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of hi
implacable temper. The duke of Alva, a minister fitted,
as well by his abilities as by the severity of his nature, for
executing all Philip's rigorous schemes, had advanced from
Mlilan to Naples, and began to assemble troops on the fron.
tiers of the ecclefiaflical slate: while they, if deserted by
France, muff not only relinquish all the hopes of dominion
and sovereignty to which their ambition aspired, but remain
exposed to the resentment of the Spanish monarch, without
one ally to protea them against an enemy with whom they
were so little able to contend.

Under these circumstances, Paul had recourse to the arts

of negotiation and intrigue, of which the papal court knows
well how to avail itself in order to ward off any calamity
threatened by an enemy superior in power. He asse&ted to
approve highly of the truce, as an happy expedient for put.
ting a flop to the effusion of Christian blood. He expref.
fed his warmefd withes that it might prove the forerunner
of a definitive peace. He exhorted the rival princes to emn.
brace this favourable opportunity of setting on foot a nego.
tiation for that purpose, and offered, as their common father,
to be mediator between them. Under this pretext, he ap.
pointed cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to the court of Brussels,
and his nephew cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The pu,
blic inffructons given to both were the fame; that they
lhould use their utmost endeavours to prevail with the tW
monarchs to accept of the pope's mediation, that, by meana
of it, peace might be re-efRablifhed, and measures might b:
taken for aflembling a general council. But under tbi
specious appearance of zeal for attaining obje&s so defli
able in thcmfelves, and so becoming his sacred charaer t

pursue, Paul concealed very different intentions. Caraffa,
betides his public inftru&ions, received a private eommiffion
to solicit the French king to- renounce the treaty of truce,
and to renew his engagements with the holy fee; and he
was empowered to spare neither entreaties, nor promises, nor
bribes, in order to gain that point. This, both the uncle
and the nephew confidered as the real end of the embassy;
while the other served to amuse the vulgar, or to deceive
the emperor and his son. The cardinal, accordingly, set
out iniRantly for Paris [ 1 Ith March,] and travelled with the
greatest expedition, while Rebiba was detained some weeks
at Rome; and when it became necessary for him to begin
his journey, he received secret orders to protrac it as much
as possible, that the issue of Caraffa's negotiation might be
known before he might reach Brussels, and according to
that, proper directions might be given to him with regard to
the tone which he thould assume, in treating with the em.
peror and his son*.

Caraffa made his entry into Paris with extraordinary

pomp: and having presented a consecrated sword to Henry,
as the prote&or on whose aid the pope relied in the present
exigency, he besought him not to disregard the entreaties
of a parent in dilirefs, but tb employ that weapon which
he gave him in his defence. This he represented not only
as a duty of filial piety, but as an act of jutfice. As the
pope, from confidence in the assistance and support which his
late treaty with France entitled him to expe&, had taken
such tReps as had irritated the king of Spain, he conjured
Henry not to fiffer Paul and his family to be crushed under
the weight of that resentment which they had drawn on
themselves merely by their attachment to France. Toge-
ther with this argument addressed to his generosity, he em-
ployed another which he hoped would work on his ambi-
tion. He affirmed that now was the time, when, with the
mol[ certain profpet of success, he might attack Philip's

' Pallay. lib. xiii. p. x69. Burnet Hill. ol Reform. ii. App. 3c9.

dominions in Italy; that the flower of the veteran Spanili
bands had perished in the wars of Hungary, Germany, and
the Low-Countries; that the emperor had left his ion an
exhausted treasury, and kingdoms drained of men; that he
had no longer to contend with the abilities, the experience,
and good fortune of Charles, but with a monarch fearcely
feated on his throne, unpraEifed in command, odious to ma-
ny of the Italian States, and dreaded by all. He promised
that the pope, who had alrealy levied soldiers, would bring
a considerable army into the field, which, when joined by a
sufficient number of French troops, might, by one brillk and
sudden effort, drive the Spaniards out of Naples, and add
to the crown of France a kingdom, the conquell of which
had been the great objeEt of all his predecessors during half
a century, and the chief jotive of all their expeditions into
Italy.

July 3 i.] Every word Caraffa spoke made a deep impref-

sion on Henry; conscious on the one hand, that the pope
had jugi cause to reproach him with having violated the laws.
not only of generosity but of decency, when he renounced
his league with him, and had agreed to the truce of Vau-
celles, and eager on the other hand, not only to diftinguilh
his reign by a conquest which three former monarchs had at-
tempted without success, but likewise to acquire an establish-
ment ofi'uch dignity and value for one of his sons. Reve-
rence, however, for the oath, by which he had so lately
confirmed the truce of Vaucelles; the extreme old age of the
pope, whose death might occasion an entire revolution in
the po'L.ical system of Italy; together with the reprefenta-
tions of Mlontmorency, who repeated all the arguments he
had used againsl the first league with Paul, and pointed out
the great and immediate advantages which France derived
from the truce; kept Henry for some time in suspense, and
might poffiily have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But
the cardinal was not such a novice in the arts of intrigue and
negotiation, as not to have expedients ready for removing

or surmounting all these obilacles. To obviate the king's
scruple with regard to his oath, he produced powers from
the pope, to absolve him from the obligation of it. By
way of security against any danger which he might appre-
hend from the pope's death, he engaged that his uncle
would make such a nomination of cardinals, as (hould give
Henry the absolute command of the next ele&ion, and en-
able him to place in the papal chair a person entirely devot-
ed to his interest.

In order to counterbalance the effet of the constables o-

pinion and influence, he employed not only the acive ta-
lents of the duke of Guise, and the eloquence of his brother
the cardinal of Lorrain, but the address of the queen, aided
by the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who, unfor-
tunately for France, co-operated with Catherine in this
point, though she took pleasure, on almost every other occa-
sion, to thwart and mortify her. They, by their united soli-
citations, easily swayed the king, who leaned, of his own ac-
cord, to that fide towards which they wilbed him to incline.
All Montmorency's prudeut remonfirances were disregarded;
the nuncio absolved Henry from his oath; and he signed a
new league with the pope, which rekindled the flames of
war both in Italy and in the Low-Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew that there

was a fair profpe& of his succeeding in this negotiation, he
dispatched a messenger after the nuncio Rebiba [July 31,}
with orders to return to Rome, without proceeding to Bruf-
fels. As it was now no longer necessary to preserve that
tone of moderation, which suited the character of a media-
tor, and which he had affeced to assume, or to put any far-
ther refiraint upon his resentment againf Philip, he boldly
threw off the mask, and took such violent steps as rendered
a rupture unavoidable. He seized and imprisoned the Spa-
nilh envoy at his court. He excommunicated the Colon-
nas; and having deprived Mark Antonio, the head of that
family, of the dukedom of Paliano, he granted that dignity,

together with the territory annexed to it, to his nephew the
count of Montorio. He ordered a legal information to be
presented in the consistory of cardinals againlt Philip, set-
ing forth that he, notwithstanding the fidelity and allegi.
ance due by him to the holy fee, of which he held the king.
dom of Naples, had not only afforded a retreat in his do-
mions to the Colonnas, whom the pope had excommunicat.
ed and declared rebels, but had furnished them with arms,
and was ready, in conjuncqion with them, to invade the eccle.
fiaftical state in an ho!tile manner; that such conduc in a
vassal was to be deemed treason againit his liege lord, the
puni'ament of which was the forfeiture of his fief. Upon
this, the confiforial advocate requested the pope to take
cognizance of the cause, and to appoint a day for hearing
of it, when he would make good every article of the charge,
and expect from his justice that sentence which the hei-
nioufnefs of Philip's crimes merited. Paul, whose pride wai
highly flattered with the idea of trying and paling judg.
ment on so great a king, assented to his requef [July 27,]
and as if it had been no less easy to execute than to pro
nounce such a sentence, declared that he would consult with
the cardinals concerning the formalities requisite in condu&
ing the trial*.

But while Paul allowed his pride and resentment to drive

him on with such headlong impetuosity, Philip discovered an
amazing moderation on his part. He had been taught by
the Spanish ecclesiastics, who had the charge of his educa
tion, a profound veneration for the holy fee. This sent
ment, which had been early infused, grew up with him a
he advanced in years, and took full poieffion of his mind
which was naturally thoughtful, serious, and prone to si
perftition. When he foresaw a rupture with the pope ai
proaching, he had such violent scruples with refpea to tl
lawfulness of taking arms against the vicegerent of Chris
and the common father of all Christians, that he confuite

* Pllav. ib. xiii. 7 1.

fume Spani;h divines upon that point. They, with the usual
dexterity of cafuits in accommodating their responses to the
circumfiances of those who apply to them for diretion, as-
fired him that, after employing prayers and remonstrances
in order to bring the pope to reason, he had full right, both
by the laws of nature and of Christianity, not only to defend
itimflf when attacked, but to begin hostilities, if that were
judged the most proper expedient for preventing the effects
of I'aul s violence and injuflice. Philip, nevertheless, con-
tinued to deliberate and delay, confidering it as a most cruel
misfortune, that his administration should open with an at-
tack on a person, whole sacred funtion and characer he Co
highly refpetedt.

At lalt the duke of Alva, who, in compliance with his
master's scruples, had continued to negotiate long after he
should have begun to act, finding Paul inexorable, and that
cvery overture of peace, and every appearance of hesitation
an his part, increased the pontiff's natural arrogance, took
the field [Sept. 5] and entered the ecclesiastical territories.
His army did not exceed twelve thousand men, but it was
coinpofed of veteran soldiers, and commanded chiefly by
those Roman barons, whom Paul's violence had driven into
exile. The valour of the troops, together with the animo-
tity of their leaders, who fought in their own quarrel, and
to recover their own estates, supplied the want of numbers.
As none of the French forces were yet arrived, Alva soon
became master of the Campagna Romana; some cities be-
ing surrendered through the cowardice of the garrisons,
which consisted of raw soldiers, ill difciplited, and worse
commanded; the gates of others being opened by the inha-
bitants, who were eager to receive back their ancient ma-
lters. Alva, that he might not be taxed with impiety in
sizing the patrimony of the church, took poffiefion of the
towns which capitulated, in the name of the college of car-
dinals, to which, or to the pope that should be chosen to

t Ferrer. Hist. de Efpagne, ix. j 73. IIerrera, i. 3cg.

succeed Paul, he declared that he would immediately rellore
them.

The rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose light troops

made excursions even to the gates of Rome, filled that city
with coacrnatio. Paul, though inflexible and m4aunted
himelf, was obliged to give way so far to the fearand soli.
citations of the cardinals, as to fend deputies to Alva in or.
der to propose a celation of arms The pope yielded the
more readily, as he was fenaible of a double advantage which
might be derived from obtaining that point. It would de-
liver the inhabitants of Rome from their present terror, and
would afford time for the arrival of the succours which he
expeced from France. Nor was Alva unwilling to cloe
with the overture, both as he knew how desirous his mailer
was to terminate a war, which he had undertaken with re.
ludance, and as his army was so much weakened by garri.
toning the great number of towns which he had reduced,
that it was hardlyin a condition to keep the field without
fresh recruits. A truce was accordingly concluded [Nov.
19,] fir&t for ten, and afterwards for forty days, during
which, various schemes of peace were proposed, and perpe-
tual negotiations were carried on, but with no sincerity on
the part of the pope. The return of his nephew the cardi-
nal to Rome, the receipt of a considerable fum remitted
by the king of France, the arrival of one body of French
troops, together with the expeaation of others which bad
begun their march, rendered him more arrogant than ever,
and banilhed all thoughts from his mind, but those of war
and revenge--.

tPalav.lib.xiui. 77. Thuan.lib.xvii. 588. Mem. deRibi-
er, iL 664.

# BOOK XII.

BOOK XII.

WVtHLE these operations or intrigues kept the pope
and Philip busy and. attentive, the emperor disentangled
himfilf finally from all the affairs of this world, and set out
for the'place of his-retreat. He had hitherto retained the
Imperial dignity, not from any unwillingness to relinquish
it, for, after having resigned the :real and extensive authori-.
ty that he enjoyed in his hereditary dominions, to part.with
the limited and often ideal jurifdiciion which belongs to
an elective crown, was no great sacrifice. His sole motive
for delay was to gain a few months, for making one trial
more, in order to accomplish his favourite scheme in behalf
of his son. At the very time Charles seemed to be moit
fcniible of the vanity of worldly grandeur, and when he ap-
peared to be quitting it not only with indifference, but with
contempt, the vat schemes of ambition, which had so long
occupied and engrossed his mind, till kept possession of it.
He could not think of leaving his son in a rank inferior to
that which he himself had held among the princes of Eu-
rop. As he had, some years-before, made a fruitless at-
tempt to secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by unit-
ing it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the dominions of the
house of Burgundy, he might put it in his power to prose-
cute, with a better profpe& of success, those great plans,
which his own infirmities had obliged him to abandon, he
was fill unwilling to relinquish this flattering project as chi.
merical or unattainable.

NotwithRianding the repulse which he had formerly met
with from his brother Ferdinand, he renewed his solicitations
with fresh importunity; and during the summer, had tried
every art, and employed every argument, which he t'ought
could induce him to quit the:.Iperial throne to Philip, and
to accept of the invealtire of some rovince, either in Italy,
Vol. IV. P

or in the Low-Countries, as an equi;alent*. But Ferdl
nand, who was so firm and inflexible with regard to thi
point, that he had paid no regard to the solicitations of the
emperor, even when they were enforced with al the weight
authority which accompanies supreme power, received the
overture, that now came from him in the situation to which
,he had defeended, with greater indifference, and would hard.
ly deign to liften to it. Charles, ashamed of his own cre.
lulity in having imagined that he might accomplish that
now, which he attempted formerly without success, defifed
fnally from his scheme. He then resigned the government
of the empire, and having transferred all his claims of obe.
dience and allegiancefrom the Germanic body, to his bro.
ther the king of the Romans, be executed a deed to that
<fseA [Aug. 17,] with all the formalities requisite in such
an important tranfa&ion. The instrument of resignation he
committed to William prince of Orange, and empowered
him to lay it before the college of elecorst.

Nothing now remained to detain Charles from that retreat

for which he languilhed. The preparations for his voyage
having been made for some time, he set out for Zuitburg in
Zealand, where the fleet which was to convoy him had or-
ders to afemble. In his way thither he pafled through
Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to indulge that
tender and pleasing melancholy, which arises in the mind of
everv man in the decline of life, on visiting the place of his
nativity, and viewing the seenes and objeEs familiar to him
in his early youth, he pursued his journey, accompanied by
his son Philip, his daughter the archdutchefs, his fitters the
dowager queens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his
fon-in-law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemilh nobility.
Before he went on board, he difmified them, with marks of his
attenti : or regard, and taking leave of Philip with all the
tendenefs of a father who embraced his son for the last time,

· Ambaflides des Noailles, tom. v. 356.
t Goldaft Confit. Imper. par i. 5 76.

he set fall on the seventeenth of September, under convoy of a
large fleet of Spanilh, Flemilh, and English ihips. He declin-
ed a pressing invitation, from the queen of England, to land in
some part of her dominions, in order to refre/h himself, and
that Ihe.might have the-comfort of feeing him once more.
" It cannot fureiy," said he, " be agreeable to a queen to re-
ceive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now nothing more
than a private gentleman."

His voyage was prosperous, and he arrived at Laredo ia
Biscay on the eleventh day after he left Zealand. As
loon as he landed, he fell prostrate on the ground; and con-
fidering himself now as dead to the world, he kissed the
earth, and said,- " Naked came I out of my mother's womb,
and naked I now return to thee, thou common mother of
mankind." From Laredo he pursued his journey to Bur-
gos, carried sometimes in a chair and sometimes in a horfc
litter, fiffering exquisite pain at every Rep,. and advancing
with the greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanilh no-
bility repaired to Burgos, in order to pay court to him,
but they were so few in number, and their attendance-
was so negligent, that Charles observed it, and felt, for'
the first time, that he was no- longer a monarch. Ac-
eultomed from his early youth to the dutiful and offici.
ous refpet with which those who possess. sovereign power
are attended, he had. received it with the credulity common
to princes, and was sensibly mortiied, when he now disco-
Yered, that he had.been indebted to his rank and power for
much of that obsequious regard which hehad fondly thought
was paid to his personal qualities. But though he might
have soon learned to-view with unconcern- the levity,
of his fubjefts, or to have despised their neglec, he was
more deeply affliced with the ingratitude of his son, who,
£orgetting already how much he owed to his father's boun-
ty, obliged him to remain some weeks at Burgos, before he
paid him the first moiety of that small pension, which was
21 that he had referred of so many kingdoms. ' As without

Pz

this fum, Charles could not dismiss his. domestics with such
rewards as their services merited, or his generosity had de-
lined for them, he could not help expressing both surprise
and diffatisfation*. At lait the money was paid, and
Charles having dismissed a great number of his domeitics,
v-hofe attendance he thought would be superfluous or cum.
berfome in his retirement, he proceeded to Valladolid.
There he took a last and tender leave of his two fiRlers,
whom he would not permit to accompany him to his so-
litude though they requested him with tears, not only that
they might have the consolation of contributing by their
attendance and care to mitigate or to soothe his sufferings,
but that they might reap inltrution and benefit by joining
with him in those pious exercises, to which he had confe.
crated the remainder of his days.

1557.] From Valladolid he continued his journey to Pla.

centia in Estremadura. He had passed through this place a
great many years before, and having been struck at that time
with the delightful situation of the monastery of St. Juftus, be.
longingto theorderof St. Jerome, not many miles distant from
the town, he had then observed to some of his attendants, that
this was a spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with
pleasure. The impreffon had remained so strong on his mind,
that he pitched upon it as the place of his own retreat. It was
feated in a vale of no great extent, watered by a small brook,
and surrounded by rising grounds, covered with lofty trees;
from the nature of the foil, as well as the temperature of the
climate, it was esteemed the most healthful and delicious si.
tuation in Spain. Some months before his resignation he
had sent an architeAt thither to add a new apartment to
the monastery, for his accommodation; but he gave friat
orders that the flyle of the building should be such as suited
his present station, rather than his former dignity. It con-
sised only of fix rooms, four of them in the form of friars cells,
with naked walls; the other two, each twenty feet square,
were hung with brown cloth, and furnished in the moB

Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. 9.

simple manner. They were all on a level with the ground;
with a door on one fide into a garden, of which Charles
himself had given the plan, and had filed it with various
plants, which he intended to cultivate with his own hands.
On the other fide they communicated with the chapel of the
nonaitery, in which he was to perform his devotions. Into
tiUi, humble retreat, hardly sufficient for the comfortable ac-
counmodation of a private gcntleman,. did Charles enter
[Feb. 24,3 with twelve domeflics only, He buried therec
in solitude and silence, his grandeur, his ambition, tog¢--
ther witll all those vail projcas, which,- during almost half
ace.tury, had alarmed and agitated! Europe, filling every
kingdom in it, by turns, with the terror of his arms, and
tile dread of being subdued by his power*.

The contrast between Charles's. condut and that of the

pope at thisjunaure was so obvious, that it tlluck even the
moil careless observers; nor was the comparison which they
made to the advantage of Paul. The former, a conqueror,-
born to reign, long accultomed to the splendour which ac-
companies supreme power, and to those busy and interesting
fceiies in which an adtive ambition. had engaged him, quit-
ted the world at a period of life not far advanced, that he
might close the evening of his days in tranquillity, and fe-
cure some interval for fober thought and serious recollction.
The latter a priest, who had palled the early part of, his
Lfe in tlhe shade of the fcllools, and in the study of the fpe.
culative sciences, who was feem;ngly so detached from-the
world, that he had shut himself up for many years in the so-
litude of a cloiftcr, and. who was not raised to the papal
tl;rone until he had reached the extremity of old age, dif
covered at qnce all the i:npetuofity of youthful ambition,
and for-med extenlire fclemes, in order to accompliih which,
he Icruplcd not to scatter tale feeds of discord, and to.kindle
the flames of war, in every corner of Euroe... But Paul,
regardless of the opinion or censures of mankind, held on

Sandov. ii. 607. & Zuniga, loo. Thuan. lib. xvii. 6&9,

P3

his own course with his wonted arrogance and violence;
These, although they seemed already to have exceeded all
bounds, rose to fill a greater height, upon the arrival of the
duke of Guise in Italy.

That which the two princes of Lorrain foresaw and de.

fired had happened. The duke of Gilfe was entrusted
with the command of the army appointed to march to the
pope's assistance. It confiited of twenty thousand men, of
the best troops in the service of France. So high was the
duke's reputation, and such the general expetation of be-
holding some extraordinary exertion of his courage and abi-
lities in a war into which he had precipitated his country,
chiefly with the design of obtaining a field where he might
display his own talents, that many of the French nobility
who had no command in the troops employed, accompanied
him as volunteers. This army passed the Alps in an incle-
ment season, and advanced towards Rome without any op-
position from the Spaniards, who, as they were not firong
enough to a& in different parts, had colleted all their forces
in one body on the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of
that kingdom.

Emnboldened by the approach of the French, the pope let

loose all the fury of his resentment against Philip, which not-
withstanding the natural violence of his temper, prudential
considerations had hitherto obliged him to keep under some
reitraint. He named commissioners, [Feb. z2,] whom he
empowered to pass judgment in the suit, which the con-
fiflorial advocate had commenced against Philip, in order to
prove that he had forfeited the crown of Naples, by taking
arms against the holy fee, of which he was a vaflal. He re-
called all the nuncios [April 9] residing in the courts of
Charles V. of Philip or any of their allies. This was level-
led cic-efly against cardinal Pole, the papal legate in the
court of England, whose great merit, in having contributed
so successfully to recocile that kingdom to the church of
Rome, together v;wit the expc&ation of farther services,

whichrhe might perform, was not fuflicient to screen him
from the resentment that he had incurred by his zealous en.
deavours to establish peace between the house of Austria and
France. He commanded an addition to be made to the ana-
themas annually denounced against the enemies of the
church on Maunday-Thurfday, whereby he inflisted the cen-
fire of excommunication on the authors of the late invasion
of tle ecdefiaftical territories, whatever their rank or digni-
ty might be; and in consequence of this, the usual prayers
for the emperor were omitted next day in the pope's cha.
pelt.

But while the pope indulged himself in those wild and

childish sallies of rage, either he negleted, or found that it
exceeded his power, to take such measures as would have
rendered his resentment really formidable, and fatal to his ene.
mies. For when the duke of Guise entered Rome, where
he was received with a triumphal pomp, which would have
been more suitable if he had been returning after having ter-
minated the war with glory, than when he was going to be-
gin it with a doubtful chance of success, he found none of
the preparations for war in such forwardness as cardinal Ca.
raffa had promised, or he had expeted. The papal troops
were far inferior in number to the quota stipulated; no ma-
gazines sufficient for their subsistence ivere formed; nor was
money for paying them provided. The Venetians, agree.
ably to that cautious maxim which the misfortunes of their
slate had first led them to adopt, and which was now be-
come a fundamental principle in their policy, declared their
rcfolution to preserve an exad neutrality, without taking
any part in the quarrels of princes, so far superior to them.
flvcs in power. The other Italian Rates were either open-
ly united in league with Philip, or secretly wished ficcefs to
hii arms againit a pontiff, whose inconsiderate ambition had
rendered Italy once more the feat of war.
The duke of Guise perceived that the whole weight of

t Pal. lib. xiii. 18o. Mem. de Ribier,ii.678.

the war would devolve on the French troops under Lis com-
mand; and became sen&ile, though too late, how imprudent
it is to rely, in the execution of great enterprises, on the
aid of fteble allies. Puhied on, however, by the pope's
impatience for action, as well as by his own desire of per.
forming some part of what be had so confidently undertaken,
he marched towards Naples [April. 13], and began his ope.
rations. But the success of there fell far ihort of his for.
mer reputation, of what the world expected, and of what he
himself liad promised. He opened the campaign with the
siege of Civitella, a town of some importance-on the Neapo-
litan frontier. But the obstinacy with which the Spanilh
governor defended it, baffled all the impetuous efforts of the
French valour, and obliged the duke of Guise, after a sieg-
of three weeks, to retire from the town with-difgrace. He
endeavoured to wipe off that slain, by advancing boldly to-
wards the duke of- Alva's camp, and offering him battle.
But that prudent commander, sensible of all the advantages
of standing on the defensive before an invading enemy, de.
dined an engagement, and kept within his intrenchments;
and adhering to his plan with tie steadiness ofa Castilian,.
eluded, with great address, all the duke of Guise's strata-
gems to draw him into actiont. By this time sickness be.
gan to w-ale the French army; violent dissensions had arisen
between the duke of Guise and the commander o the pope's
forces; the Spaniards renewed their incursons into the ec-
cleliallical state; the pope, when he found, inflead of the
conquells and triumphs which he had fondly expeded, that
he could not secure his own territories from depredation,
murmured, complained, and began to talk of peace. The
duke of Guise, mortified to the last degree with having ad
ed such an inglorious part, not only solicited his court either
to reinforce his arnmy, or to recal him, but urged Paul to
fulfil his engagements; and called on cardinal Caraffa, some,
times with reproaches, sometimes with threats, to. make good

t Herrera Vida de Felipe, i U.

those magnificent promises, from a rafi confidence-in which
he had advised his mailer tor renounce the truce of Vaucelles,
and to join in league with the pope.t

But while the French affairs in Italy were in this wretch,

ed situation, an unexpected event happened in the Low-
Countries, which called the duke of Guise from a station
wherein he could acquire no honour, to the most dignified
and important charge which could be committed to a subjet.
As soon as the French had discovered their purpose of vio-
lating the truce of Vaucelles, not only by fending an army
into Italy, but by attempting to surprise some of the fron-
tier towns in Slanders, Philip, though willing to have avoid.
ed a rupture, determined to prosecute the war with such fpi-
rit, as Ihould make his enemies sensible that his father had
not erred, when he judged, him to be so capable of govern-
ment, that he had given up.the reins into his. hands. As
he knew that Henry had been at great expence in fitting
out the army under the duke of Guise, and that his treafu-
ry.was hardly able to.anfwer the exorbitant and endless de-
mands of a distant war, he foresaw that all his operations in
the Low-Countries must, of consequence, prove feeble, and
be confidered only as secondary to those in Italy. For that
reason, he prudently resolved to make his principal effort
in that place where he expeced the French to be weakest,
and to bend his chief force against that quarter where they
would feel a blow most sensibly. With this. view, he assem.
bled in the Low-Countries an army of about fifty. thousand
men, the Flemings serving him on this occasion with that
aftive zeal which fubjeas are wont to exert in obeying the
first commands. of a new fovereiga. But Philip, cautious
and provident,. even at this early period of life, did not reft
all his hopes of success on that formidable force alone.

He had been labouring for some time to engage the Eng-
lifh to espouse his quarrel; and though it was manifestly

f Thuan. lib. xxviii. 614. Pallav. lib. xiii. 81x. Burn. ii App.
31;.

the interest of that kingdom to maintain a fti neutrality
and the people themselves were' fenible of the advantages
which they derived from- it; though he knew how odious
his name was to the Engliih, and how averse they would be
to co-operate with him in any measure, he nevertheless did
not despair of accompllshing his point. He relied on the
affe&ion with which the queen doated on him, which was.
so violent, that even his coldness and negtet had not txtia.
guilied it; he knew her implicit reverence for. his opinion,
and her fond desire of gratifying him in every particular.
That he might work on these with greater facility and.
more certain fuccces, he set out for England. The queen,.
who, during her hulband's absence, had languished in perpc.
tual deje&ion, resumed frelh spirits on his arrival; and..
without paying the least attention either to the interet. or
to the inclinations of her people, entered warmly into all his
fchmes. In vain did her privy-council remonstrate against
the imprudence as well as danger of involving the nation.
in an unneceffry war; in vain did they put her in mind of
the solemn treaties of peace fubifiRing between England and
France,which the condu& of that nation bad afforded.her
so pretext to violate. Mary, soothed by Philip's carefies,
or intimidated by the threats which his ascendant over her
emboldened him at some times to throw out, was deaf to
every thing that could be urged in opposition to. his senti.
ments, and infited with the greatef vehemence on an im.
mediate declaration of war against France. The council,
though all Philip's address and Mary's authority, were em-
ployed to gain or overawe them, after struggling long,
yielded at laRs, not from convicion, but merely from defe-
rence to the will of their sovereign. War was declared a-
gainft France [June 2o,] the only one perhaps againlt that
kingdom into which the Engliih ever entered with reluc-
tance. As Mary knew the aversion of the nation to this
measure, she durtl not call a parliament in order to raise mo-
ey for carrying on the war. She supplied this want, how-

ever, by a ftretdc of royal prerogative, not 'unusual in that
age; and leviedlarge fumson her fubjets by her own au-
thority. This enabled her to assemble a sufficient body of
troops, and to fend eight thousand men under the conduct
of the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's armny-.

Philip, Who was not ambitious of military glory, gave

the command of his army to Emanuel 'Philibert, duke of
Savoy, and fixed his own residence at Cambray, that he
might be at hand to receive the earlief intelligence of his
motions, and to aid him with 'is councils. The duke o-
pened the campaign with a-mafterly stroke of address, which
jilified Philip's choice, and discovered such a superiority of
genius over the French generals, as almost insured success in
his subsequent operations. He appointed the general ren-
dezvous of his troops at a place considerably' difsant from
the country which he defirned to be the scene of ation; and
having kept the enemy in suspense for a good time withre-
gard to his intentions, he at last deceived them so effe&tually
by the variety of his marches and counter-marches, as led
them to conclude that he meant to bend all his force against
the province of Champagne, and would attempt to pene-
trate into the kingdom on that fide. In consequence of this
opinion, they drew all their strength towards that quarter,
and reinforcing the garrisons there, left the towns on other
parts of the frontier destitute of troops sufficient to defend
them.

The duke of Savoy, as roon as he perceived that this

feint had its full fsei&, turned suddenly to the right, ad-
vanced by rapid marches into Picardy, and fending his ca-
Ya!ry, in which he was extremely Rrong, before him, in-
vefled St. Quintin. This was a town deemed in that age
ofconfiderable strength, and of great importance, as there
were few fortified cities between'it and Paris. The forti-
ications, however, had been much negleced; the garrison,
Wcakened by draughts sent towards Champagne, did not a-

t Carte, iii. 337.

mnount to a fifth part of the number requisite for its defenc;
and the governor, though a brave officer, was neither of
rank, nor authority, equal to the command -in a place of f
much consequence, besieged by such a formidable army. A
few days must have put the duke of Savoy- in poffifion of
the town, if the admiral de Colgny, who thought it con-
cerned his honourto attempt saving a place of fueh import-
ance to his country, and which lay within his jurifdiAtion as
governor of Picardy, had not taken the gallant resolution
of throwing himself into it, with such a body of men as he
could colle& on a sudden. This resolution he executed
with great intrepidity, and, if the nature of-the enterprif
be confidered, with no contemptible fuccefa; for though one
half of his small body of troops were cut off, he, with the
other, broke through the enemy, and entered the town.
The unexpe&ed arrival of an officer of such high rank and
reputation, and who had exposed himself to such danger in
order to-join them, inspired the desponding garrison with
courage. Every thing that the admiral's great Ikill and
experience in the art of war could suggest, for annoying the
enemy, or defending the town, was attempted; and the ciri-
zens, as well as the garrison, seconding his zeal with equal
ardour, seemed to be determined that they would hold out to
the lail, and sacrifice themselves in order to fare their coun-
tryt.

The duke of Savoy, whom the Englifi, under the earl of

Pembroke, joined about this time, pushed on the siege with
the greatetr vigour. An army so numerous, and so well sup
plied with every thing requisite, carried on its approache
with great advantage agaiaft a garrifun which was flill f
feeble that it durit flrdom venture to diRturb or retard the
enemy's operations by sallies. The admiral, sensible of the
approaching danger, and unable to avert it, acquainted his
uncle the coni'ab!e Montmorency, who had the commasd
of te French army, with his situation, and pointed outlt

t Thuan. lib. xix 647.

him a method by which he might throw relief into the
town. The conitable, solicitous to save a town, the loss of
which would open a passage for the enemy into the heart of
France; and eager to extricate his nephew out of that peri.
lous situation, in which zeal for the public had engaged
him; resolved, though aware of the danger, to attempt
what he desired. With this view, he marched from La
Fere towards St. Quintin at the head of his army, which
was not by one-half so numerous as that of the enemy, and
having given the command of a body of chosen men to Co-
ligny's brother Dandelot, who was colonel-general of the
French infantry, he ordered him to force his way into the
town by that avenue which the admiral had represented as
most praticable, while he himself, with the main army,
would give the alarm to the enemy's camp on the opposite
fide, and endeavour to draw all their attention towards that
quarter. Dandelot executed his orders with greater intrc-
pidity than condu&. [Aug. lo] He rushed on with such
headlong impetuosity, that, though it broke the first body
of the enemy which flood in their way, it threw his own fol-
iders into the utmof confusion; and as they were attacked
in that situation by frefi troops which closed in upon them
on every fide, the greater part of them were cut in pieces,
I)andelot, with about five hundred of the moRt adventurous
and mote fortunate, making good his entrance into the
town.

Mleanw-hile the conflable, in executing his part of the plan,

advanced so near the camp of the besiegers, as rendered it
impoflible to retreat with safety in the face of an enemy so
c;uch superior in number. The- duke of Savoy inflantly
perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared, with the pre.
fence of mind and abilities of a great general, to avail him-
seif of it. He drew up his army in order of battle, with
the greateit expedition, and watching the moment when
the French began to file off towards La Fere, he detached
ali his cavalry, under the command of the count ufEgmont,
Vul. IV. A_

to fall on their rear, while he himself, at the head of his in.
fantry, advanced to support him. The French at first ret
tired in perfec order, and with a good countenance; but
when they saw Egmont draw near with his formidable body
of cavalry, the shock of which they were conscious that they
could not withRfand, the profpel of imminent danger, add.
ed to difruf of their general, whose imprudence every fol.
dier now perceived, flruck them with general consternation.
They began insensibly to quicken their pace, and those in
the rear pressed so violently on such as were before them,
that in a short time their march resembled a flight rather
than a retreat. Egmont, observing their confusion, charg.
ed them with the greater fury, and in a moment all their men
at arms, the pride and strength of the French troops.in that
age, gave way and fled with precipitation. The infantry,
however, whom the constable, by his pretence and authori.
ty, kept to their colours, flil continued to retreat in good
order, until the enemy brought some pieces of cannon to
bear upon their centre, which threw them into such confau
sion, that the Flemish cavalry, renewing their attack, broke
in, and the rout became universaL About four thousand
of the French fell in the field, and among these the duke of
Anguien, a prince of the blood, together with fix hundred
gentlemen. The conitable, as soon as he perceived the for-
tune of the day to be irretrievable, rulhed into the thickest
of the enemy, with a resolution not to survive the calamity
which his ill-condut had brought upon his country;-but'
having received a dangerous wound, and being wafted with
the lots of blood, he was surrounded by some Flemish of-
ficers, to whom he was known, who proteced him from
the violence of the soldiers, and obliged him to surrender.
Besides the conflable, the dukes of Montpenfier and Lon.
gueville, the marcchal St. Andre, many officers of diftinc-
tion, three hundred gentlemen, and near four thousand pri-
sate soldiers, were taken prisoners. All the colours belong-
ing to the infantry, all the ammunition, and all the cannon,

two pieces ercepted, fell into theenemy's hands. The vic-
torious army did not lose above fourscore men*.

This battle, no less fatal to France than the ancient vic.

tories of Crecy and Agincourt, gained by the English
o; the fame frontier, bore a near resemblance to those dil-
afrous events, in the suddenness of the rout; in the ill-con-
duc of the commander in chief; in the number of persons
of note fain or taken; and in the small loss sustained by the
enemy. It filled France with equal conternation. Many
inhabitants of Paris, with the fame precipitancy and trepi-
dation as if the enemy had been already at their gates, quit-
ted the city, and retired into the interior provinces. The
king, by his presence and exhortations, endeavoured to con-
sole and to animate such as remained, and applying himself
with the greatef diligence to repair the ruinous fortifica-
tions of the city, prepared to defend it against the attack
which he infantly expeAed. But happily for France,
Philip's caution, together with the intrepid firmness of the
admiral de Coligny, not only saved the capital from the dan-
ger to which it was exposed, but gained the nation a (hort
interval, during which the people recovered from the terror
and deje&ion occasioned by a blow no less severe than unex-
pected, and Henry had leisure to take measures for the pu-
blic security, with the spirit which became the sovereign of
apowerful and martial people.

Philip, immediately after the battle, visited the camp at
St. Quintin, where he was received with all the exultation
of military triumph; and such were his transports of joy
on account of an event which threw so much lustre on the
beginning of his reign, that they softened his severe and
haughty temper into an unusual flow of courtesy. When
the duke of Savoy approached, and was kneeling to kifs his
hands, he caught him in his arms, and embracing him with
warmth, 14 It becomes me," fays he, " rather to kist your
'Thuan. 650. laerei Annal. Brabant. ii 69,. Hrrerrag,, a

Q_

hands, which have gained me such a glorious and alnoft
bloodless viaory."

As soon as the rejoicin-s and congratulationson Philip's

arrival were over, a council of war was held, in order to de.
termine how they might improve their vifcory to the bed
advantage. The duke of Savoy, seconded by several ofthe
ablest officers formed under Charles V. insisted that they.
Ohould immediately relinquiLh the siege of St. Quintin, the
reduRion of which was now an obj ec below their attention,
and advance diretly towards Paris; that as there were net-
ther troops to oppose, nor any town of strength to retard
their march, they might reach that capital while under the
full impression of the astonishment and terror occasioned by
the rout of the army, and take possession of it without re-
fiRance. But Philip, less adventurous or more prudent
than his generals, preferred a moderate but certain advan-
tage, to an enterprise of greater splendour, but of more
doubtful success. He represented to the council the infi.
nite resources of a kingdom so powerful as France; the
great number as well as martial spirit of its nobles; their
attachment to their Sovereign; the manifold advantages with
v;hich they could carry on war in their own territories; and
the unavoidable destruction which muit be the consequence
of their penetrating too rashly into the enemy's country, be-
fore they had secured such a communication with their own.
as might render a retreat safe, if, upon any difaflrous event,
that measure should become neccifary. On all these ac-
counts, he advised the continuance of tne fege, and his ge-
nerals acquieiced the more readily in his opinion, as they
made no doubt of being maiters of the town in a few days,
a lots of time of so little consequence in the execution of their
plan, that they might easily repair it by their fubfecuent ac-
tivity*.

The weakness of the fortifications, and the frmall number
of the garrison, which could no longer hope either for rrin-

* Blcar. Commentar. de Reb. GallKc. 90o,

forcement or relief, seemed to authorlfe Ithis calculation of
Philip's generals. But, in making it, they did -not attend
sufficiently to the character of admiral de Colgny, whio
commanded in the town. A courage undismayed, and traii-
quil amidst the greatest dangers, an invention'friiitfui in rev
sources, a genius which roused and seemed to acuire new
force upon every disaster, a falent of governiig the minds of
men, together with a capacity of maintaining -his ascendan't
over them even under circumflances the most adverse and,'dd
ftrcfsful, were qualities which Coligny possessed in ' degee
superior to any general of that age. These qualities were
peculiarly adapted to the ilation in whic he was novw piia
cid; and as he knew the infinite importance to his count'ry
of every hour which he'could gain at this juncture, he exert
ed himself to the utmost in contriving how to protrat the
siege, and to detain the enemy from attempting any enter-
prise more dangerous to France. Such were the perfever.
alce and skill with which he conduced the defence, and
flchi the fortitude as well as patience with which he animat-
ed the garrison, that though the Spaniards, the Flemings,
and the English, carried on the attack with all the ardour
which national emillation inspires, he held out the town fe.
vcuteen days. He was taken prisoner at last CAug' 27,3
on the breach, overpowered by the superior number of the
enemy.

Henry availed himself, with the utmost ativlty, of the

interval which the admiral's well-timed obRfinacy had ass6rd-
ed hirm. He appointed officers to colle& the scattered rc-
niains of the constable's army; he issued orders for levying
fdilers in every part of the kingdom; he commanded the
ban and arriere ban of the frontier provinces instantly to take
the field, and to join the duke of Nevers at Laon in Picar-
dy; he recalled the greater part of the veteran troops which
firved under the maiechal Briffac in Piedmont; lie sent cou-
rier after courier to the duke of Guise, requiring him, toge-
;i.er wvith all his army, to return instantly for thd defence of

QL3

their country; he dispatched one envoy to the grand fignor,
to Golic;t the assistance of his fleet, and the loan of a fum of
money; he feat another- into Scotland, to incite the Scots
to invade the north of England, that, by drawing Mary'a
attention to that quarter, he might prevent her from rein.
forcing her troops which served under Philip. These efforts.
of the king were warmly seconded by the zeal of his fubjeAs.
The city of Paris granted him a free gift of three hundred
tboufand livres. The other great towns imitated the libera-
lity of the capital, and contributed in proportion. Several
noblemen of diftintion engaged, at their own. expence, to,
garrison and defend the towns which lay moit expofedto the
enemy. Nor was the general concern for the public con-
fined to corporate bodies alone, or to those in the higher
iphere of life, but diffuling itself among persons of every.
yank, each individual seemed disposed to at with as much
vigour as if the honour of the king, and the safety of the
fate, had depended solely on his single effortstt.-

Philip, who was no stranger either to the prudent mea-

fures taken by the French monarch for the security of his
dominions, or to the spirit with which his fubjeas prepared
to defend themselves, perceived, when it was too late, that
he had loft an opportunity which could never be recalled, and.
that it was now vain to think of penetrating into the heart
of France. He abandoned, therefore, without much reluc-
tance, a scheme which. was too bold- and hazardous to be
perfe&ly agreeable to his cautiousrtemper; and employed hit
army, during the remainder of the campaign, inthe sieges
of Ham and Catelet. Of these,. he soon became. maiter;
and the reduaion of two such petty towns, together with
the acquisition of St. Quintin,.were all the advantageawhich'
he derived from one of the molt decisive. victories gained in.
that century. Philip himself, however, continued in high
exltation on account of his success; and as all his palfions

r:ze tinged with superstition, he, in memory of the battle

t Mem. de Rihier, ii. 701, 703·..

of St. Q~intin, which had been fought. on the day confe-
crated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a, church, a. mona-
fiery, and a palace, in honour of that faint and martyr. Be-
fore the expiration of the year, he laid the foundation of anr
edifice, in which all these were united, at the Escurial in the
neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame principle which
dictated the vow, direEted tlhebuilding.. For the plan of the
work was so formed as to resemble a. gridiron, which, ac-
cording to the legendary tale, had. been the inllrument of St.
Laurence's martyrdom. Notwitbstanding the great and cx.
pensive schemes in- which his rcftlefs ambition involved him,
Philip continued the building with such perseverance for
twenty-two years, and ceferved such large fums for this mo-
nument of his devotion and vanity, that the monarchs oS
Spain are indebted to him for a royal residence, which, tho'
not the most elegant, is certainly the most sumptuous and
magnificent of any in Europe--.

The first account of that fatal blow which the French had:

received. at St. Quintin was carried to Rome by the:counler
whom Henry had sent to recal the duke of Cuife. As
Paul, even with the afliftance of his French. auxiliaries, had,
hardly been able to check the progress of the Spanilh arms,
he foresaw that, as soon. as he was deprived of their protec-
tion, his territories must be over-run in, a. moment. He re-
monftrated, therefore,. with the greatest violence againl the
departure of the French. army, reproaching the duke of
Guise for his ill-condugt, which had brought him into. such;
an unhappy situation; and complaining of the king for de-
serting him so ungetwerufly under such circumstances. T'ihe
duke of Guise's orders, however, were peremptory.. Paul,
inflexible as he was, found it necessary to. accommodate his
condut to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ the me-
diation of the Venetians, and of Cofme di Medici, in order,
to obtain peace. Philip, who had been forced unwillingly
to a rupture with the pope, and who, even while fuc.ics

t Colmenar Annales d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 1i6,

crowned his arms, doubted so much the justice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of pacification,
listened eagerly to the sirs proposals of this nature from Paul,
and discovered such moderation in his demands, as could
hardly have been expeced from a prince elated with vicory.

The duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and the cardinal

Caraffa in the name of his uncle, met at Cavi, and both be-
ing equally disposed to peace, they, after a short conference,
terminated the war by a treaty on the following terms: That
Paul Ihould renounce his league with France, and maintain
for the future such- a neutrality as became the common fa-
ther of Chriflendom; That Philip Should inftantiy restore all
the towns of the ecclesiastical territory of which he had tak-
en possession; That the claims of the Caraffas to the dutchy
of Paliano, and other demesnes of the Colonnas, should be
referred to the decision of the republic of Venice;- That the
duke of Alva should repair in person to Rome, and after ask-
ing pardon of Paul in his own name, and in that of his maf.
ter, for having invaded the patrimony of the church, Imould
receive the pope's absolution from that crime. Thus Panl,
through Philip's cfrupulous timidity, finifl'el an unprofper-
ous war without any detriment to the papal fee. The con-
queror appeared humble, and acknowledged his error; while
he who had been vanquished retained his usual haughtiness,
and was treated with every mark of fuperiorityt. The duke
of Alva, in terms of the treaty, repaired to Rome, and, in
the posture of a supplicant, kissed the feet, and implored the
forgiveness of that very person whom his arms had reduced
to the last extremity. Such was the superstitious venera-
tion of the Spaniards for the papal chara&er, that Alva,
though perhaps the proudest man of the age, and accuflom-
ed from his infancy to a familiar intercoufe with princes, ac-
knowledged that when he approached the pope, he was so
much overawed, that his voice failed, and his presence of
mind forsook himS.

- Palav. lib. xii. i83. F. Paul, 3o. Herrera, vol. i. 310.
I'aliav. ib. x.ii. 185. Summonte lloria di Napoli, iv. ;86.

But though this war, which at its commencement threat-
ened mighty revolutions, was brought to an end without oc-
cafioning any alteration in those states which were its imme-
diate obje&, it had produced during its progress effeats of
conliderable consequence in other parts of Italy. As Phi-
lip was extrerrely solicitous to terminate his quarrel with
Paul as speedily as possible, he was willing to make any fa-
crifice in order to gain those princes, who, by joining the;r
troops to the papal and French army, might have prolonged
the war. With this view, he entered into a negotiation
with OAavio Farnese, duke of Parma, and in order to fe-
duce him from his alliance with France, he restored to him
the city of Placentia, with the territory depending on it,
which Charles V. had seized in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-feven, had kept from that time in his pof-
session, and had transmitted, together with his other domi-
nions, to Philip.

This ftep made such a discovery of Philip's charaAer
and views to Cosmo di Medici, the most sagacious as well as
provident of all the Italian princes, that he conceived hopes
of accomplishing his favourite scheme of adding Sienna and
its territories to his dominions in Tuscany. As his 'fucctfs
in this attempt depended entirely on the delicacy ofaddrefs
with which it flould be conduced, be employed all the re-
finements of policy in the negotiation which he set on foot
for this purpose. He began with soliciting Philip, whole
treasury he knew to be entirely drained by the expence of
the war, to repay the great fums which he had advanced to
the emperor during the siege of Sienna. When Philip en-
deavoured to elude a demand which he was unable to satis-
fy, Cosmo affeaed to be extremely disquieted, and making
no secret of his disgust, iiltruEted his arnbaffador at Rome
to open a negotiation with the pope which seemed to be the
cTccd of it. The anbaffador executed his commission with
fiucl dexterity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienatcd from the Spauith interell, proposed to him an al-

liance with France which ihould be cemented by the mar-
riage of his eldest son to one of Henry's daughters. Cosmo
received the overture with such apparent fatisfadion, and
with so many professions of gratitude for the high honour
of which he had the profpe&, that not only the pope's mi-
nitters, but the French envoy at Rome, talked confidently,
and with little reserve, of the accefion of that important al-
ly, as a matter certain and decided. The account of this
was quickly carried to Philip; and Cosmo, who foresaw
how much it would alarm him, had dispatched his nephew
Lndovico de Toledo into the Netherlands, that be might
be at hand to observe and take advantage of his conftrnation,
before the sift impression which it made (hould in any de.
gree abate. Cosmo was extremely fortunate in the choice
of the instrument whom he employed. Toledo waited,
with patience, until he discovered with certainty, that Phi.
lip had received such intelligence of his'uncle's negotiations
at Rome, as must have filled his suspicious mind with fear
and jealousy; and then craving an audience, he required-pay-
ment of the money which had been borrowed by the empe-
ror, in the moll earnef and peremptory terms. In urging
that point, he artfully threw out several dark hints and am-
biguous declarations, concerning the extremities to which
Cosmo might be driven by a refusal of this just demand, as
well as by other grievances of which he had good reason to
complain.

Philip, aftonilhed at an address in fach a strain from a

prince so far his inferior as the duke of Tuscany, and com-
paring what he now heard with the information which he
had received from Italy, immediately concluded that Cosmo
had ventured to assume this bold and unusual tone on the
profpeft of his union with France. In order to prevent the
pope and Henry from acquiring an ally, who, by his abili-
ties, as well as the situation of his dominions, would have
added both reputation and strength to their confederacy, he
offered to grant Cgfmo the investiture of Sienna, if he would

content'to :accept of it as an equivalent for the fums due to
him, and engage.to furnish a body of troops towards the de-
fence of Philip's territories in Italy, against any power who
Ihould attack theni. As soon as Cosmo had brought Phi-
lip to mnke this coriceflon, which was the object of all his
artiices.and' intrigues; he did not protrac the negotiation by
any unneeeffarydelay, or any excess of refinement, but clof-
ed eagerly with the proposal, and Philip, in spite of the re-
mouftrances of his ableit counsellors, signed a treaty with
him to that effe&tf. '

As no prince was ever more tenacious of his rights than

Philip, or less willing to relinquish any territory which he
poifefled, by what tenure foevcr he held it, there unusual
conceifions to the dnkes of Parma and Tuscany, by which
he wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or defending
which his father had employed many years, and wafted much
blood and treasure, cannot be accounted for from any mo.
tive, btt his superstitious desire of extricating himself out of
the war which he had been forced to wage against the pope.
By these treaties, however, the balance of power among the
Italian states was poised with greater equality, and rendered
less variable than it had been since it received the firit vio!cnt
{hock from the invasion of Charles VIII. of France. From
this period Italy ceased to be the great theatre, on which
the monarchs of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for
power or for fame. Their dissensions and hostilities, though
as frequent and violent as ever, being excited by new obje&ts
fained other regions of Europe with blood, and rendered
them miserable, in their turn, by the devatfations of war.

The duke of Guise left Rome on the fame day [Sept.
29} that his adversary the duke of Alva made his humiliat-
ing fubmiflion to the pope. He was received in France as
the guardian angel of the kingdom. His late ill success in
Italy seemed to be forgotten, while his former services, par-

t Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Herrera, i, ,63,,275. Pallav. lib.
auil. lao.

ticularly his defence of Metz, were recounted with exagge.
rated praise; and he was welcohned in every city through
which he pafled, as the restorer of public security, who,'af.
ter having set bounds by his conduct and valour to the vie.
torious arms of Charles V. returned now, at the call of his
country, to check the formidable progress of Philip's power.
The reception which he met with from Henry was no less
cordial and honourable. New titles were invented, and new
dignities created, in order to distinguish him. He was ap.
pointed lieutenant-general in chief both within and without
the kingdom, with ajurifdition almost unlimited, and hard.
Iv inferior to that which was possesed by the king himself.
Thus, through the singular felicity which attended the prin.
ces of Lorrain, the miscarriage of their own schemes contri-
buted to aggrandize them. The calamities of his country,
and the ill-condu& of his rival the constable, exalted the
duke of Guise to a height of dignity and power, which he
could not have expected to attain by the most fortunate and
mofl complete success of his own ambitious projec&s.

The duke of Guise, eager to perform something suitable

to the high expetations of his countrymen, and that he
mij-,t juftif- the extraordinary confidence which the king
had reposcd in him, ordered all the troops, which could be
got together, to assemble at Compeigne. Though the win-
ter was well advanced, and had set in with extreme severity,
be placed himfelfat their head, and took the field. By Hen.
ry's activity and the zeal of his fubjests, so many soldiers had
been raised in the kingdom, and such considerable reinforce-
ments had been drawn from Germany and Swiiferland, as
formed an army rcfpetable even in the eyes of a victorious
enemy. Philip, alarmed at feeing it put in motion at such
an uncommon season, began to tremble for his new conquests,
particularly St. Quintin, the fortifications of which were hi-
therto but imperfectly repaired.

But the duike of Cuife meditated a more important enter-
prif-; a.id .fter aru:.,)g the enemy with threatening fuc-

ceffively different towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turn-
ed suddenly to the left, and invested Calais with his whole
army [Jan. i, 1558.] Calais had been taken by the Eng-
lilh under Edward III. and was the fruit of that monarch's
glorious vi&ory at Crecy. Being the only place that they
retained of their ancient and extensive territories in France,
and which opened to them, at all times, an easy and secure
passage into the heart of that kingdom, their keeping posses-
sion of it soothed the pride of the one nation as much as it
mortified the vanity of the other. Its situation was natural-
ly so itrong, and its fortifications deemed so impregnable,
that no monarch of France, how adventurous soever, had
been bold enough to attack it. Even when the domeflic
flrength of England was broken and exhausted by the bloody
wars between the houses of York and Lancaster, and its at-
tention entirely diverted frorb foreign objects, Calais had re-
mained undisturbed and unthreatened. Mary and her coun-
cil, composed chiefly of ecclefaftics, unacquainted with mili-
tary affairs, and whose whole attention was turned towards
extirpating heresy out of the kingdom, had not only negle&-
ed to take any precautions for the safety of this important
place, but seemed to think that the reputation of its strength
was alone sufficient for its security. Full of this opinion,
they ventured, even after the declaration of war, to continue
a practice which the low state of the queen's finances had in-
troduced in times of peace. As the country adjacent to
Calais was overflowed during the winter, and the marflies a-
round it became impassable, except by one avenue, which the
forts of St. Agatha and Newnham-bridge commanded, it
had been the custom of the Englilh to dismiss the greater
part of the garrison towards the end of autumn, and to re-
place it in the spring. In vain did lord Wentworth, the
governor of Calais, remonstrate against this ill-timed parsi-
mony, and represent the possibility of his being attacked
suddenly, while he had not troops sufficient to man the
works. The privy-council treated there remonstrances wit
Vul. IV. K

fcom, as if they had flowed from the timidity or the rapa.
cioufoefs of the governor; and some of them, with that con.
fidence which is the companion of ignorance, boasted that
they would defend Calais with their white rods against any
enemy who should approach it during winters. In vain
did Philip, who had passed through Calais as he returned
from England to the Netherlands, warn the queen of the
danger to which it was exposed; and acquainting her with
what was necessary for its security, in vain did he offer to re-
inforce the garrison during winter with a detachment of his
own troops. Mary's counsellors, though obsequious to her
in all points wherein religion was concerned, distrusted, as
much as the reft of their countrymen, every proposition
that came from her husband; and fufpesing this to be an
artifice of Philip's in order to gain the command of the
town, they negle&ed his intelligence, declined his offer, and
left Calais with less than a fourth part of the garrison requi.
site for its defence.

His knowledge of this encouraged the duke of Guise to

venture on an enterprise, that surprised his own countrymen
no less than his enemies. As he knew that its success de-
pended on conduAing his operations with such rapidity as
would afford the English no time for throwing relief into the
town by lea, and prevent Philip from giving him any inter.
ruption by land, he pulhed the attack with a degree of vi-
gour little known in carrying on sieges during that age.
He drove the English from fort St. Agatha, at the first as;
fault. He obliged them to abandon the fort of Newnham-
bridge after defending it only three days. He took the
cafile which commanded the harbour by storm; and on the
eighth day after he appeared before Calais, compelled the
governor to surrender, as his feeble garrison, which did not
exceed five hundred men, was worn out with the fatigue of
fuf~inin g so many attacks, and defending such extenfiic
works

The duke of Gaife, without allowing the English time

t Carte iii. 345.

to recover from the consternation occasioned by this blow,
immediately invested Guifnes, the garr'fon of which, though
more numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and after
flanding one briik assault, gave up the town. The castle of
Hames was abandoned by the troops posted there, without
waiting the approach of the enemy.

Thus, in a few days, during the depth of winter, and at

a time when the fatal battle of St. Quintin had so depressed
the sanguine spirit of the French, that their utmost aim was
to prote& their own country, without dreaming of making
conquests on the enemy, the enterprising valour of one man
drove the Englifl out of Calais, after they had held it two
hundred and ten years, and deprived them of every foot of
land in a kingdom, where their dominions had been once
very extensive. This exploit, at the fame time that it gave
an high idea of the power and resources of France to all
Europe, set the duke of Guifc, in the opinion of his coun-
trymen, far above all the generals of the age. They cele-
brated his conqueits with immoderate transports of joy;
while the Englilh gave vent to all the passions which animate
a high-fpirited people, when any great national calamity is
manifestly owing to the ill conduc of their rulers. Mary
and her ministers, formerly odious, were now contemptible
in their eyes. All the terrors of her severe and arbitrary
adminiitration could not restrain them from uttering execra-
tions and threats against those, who having wantonly involv.
ed the nation in a quarrel wherein it was noways interested,
had by their negligence or incapacity brought irreparable
disgrace on their country, and luot the most valuable posses-
flon belonging to the English crown.

The king of France imitated the condu& of its former
conqueror, Edward III. with regard to Calais. He com-
manded all the Englilh inhabitants to quit the town, and
giving their houses to his own fubjeds, whom he allured to
fettle there by granting them various immunities, he left a
numerous ganrifon, under an experienced governor, for their

R z

defence. After this, his vicorious army was condu&ed in.
to quarters of refreihment, and the usual inacion of winter
returned.

During these various operations, Ferdinand assembled the

college of electors at Frankfort [Feb. 24,] in order to lay
before them the inhtrument whereby Charles V. had resigned
the Imperial crown, and transferred it to him. This he had
hitherto delayed on account of some difficulties which had
occurred concerning the formalities requisite in supplying
a vacancy occasioned by an event, to which there was no pa.
rallel in the annals of the empire. These being at length
adjnfted, the prince of Orange executed the commission
with which he had been entrusted by Charles; the eletors
accepted of his resignation; declared Ferdinand his lawful fuc.
ceffor; and put him in poffeflion of all the ensigns of the
Imperial dignity.

But when the new emperor sent Gufman his chancellor

to acquaint the pope with this tranfaaion, to testify his re-
verence towards the holy fee, and to signify that, according
to form, he would soon dispatch an ambassador extraordi-
nary to treat with his holiness concerning his coronation;
Paul, whom neither experience nor disappointments could
teach to bring down his lofty ideas of the papal prerogative
to such a moderate standard as suited the genius of the times,
refused to admit the envoy into his presence, and declared
all the proceedings at Frankfort irregular and invalid. He
contended that the pope, as the vicegerent of Christ, was en-
truiled with the keys both of spiritual and of civil govern-
ment; that from him the Imperial jurifdi&ion was derived;
that though his predecessors had authorised the eledors to
chufe an emperor whom the holy fee confirmed, this privi-
lege was confined to those cafes when a vacancy was occa-
sioned by death; that the instrument of Charles's refigna-
tion had been presented in an improper court, as it belonged
to the pope alone to reject or to accept of it, and to nomi-
nate a person to fill the Imperial throne; that, setting aside

all these objeftions, Ferdinand's elecion laboured under
two defets which alone were sufficient to render it void, for
the protestant ele&ors had been admitted to vote, though',
by their apoftacy from the catholic faith, they had forfeited
that and every other privilege of the eletoral office; and
Ferdinand, by ratifying the conceflions of several diets in
favour of heretics, had rendered himself unworthy of the Im.-
pcrial dignity, which was inltituted for the protecion, not
fur the deftru&ion, of the church. But after thundering
out these extravagant maxims, he added, with an appear-
ance of condescension, that if Ferdinand would renounce all
title to the Imperial crown, founded on the eletion at Frank-
fort, make professions of repentance, for his past condu&,
and supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm Charles's
rcfignation, as well as his own assumption to the empire, he
might expe& every mark of favour from his paternal clemen-
cy and goodness. Gufman, though he had foreseen confider-
able difficulties in his negotiation with the pope, little ex-
peded that he would have revived those antiquated and wild
pretensions, which aflonifled him so much that he hardly
knew in what tone he ought to reply. He prudently declinest
entering into any controversy concerning the nature or ex-
tent of the papal jurifdi&tion, and confined himself to the
political considerations, which should determine the pope to
recognize an emperor already in possession, he endeavoured
to place them in such a light, as he imagined could scarcely
fail to strike Paul, if he were not altogether blind to his own
interelt. Philip seconded Gufman's arguments with great
earlcflnefs, by an ambassador whom he sent to Rome on
purpose, and besought the pope to desist from claims so un-
seasonable, as might not only irritate and alarm Ferdinand
and the princes of the empire, but funifhf the enemies of
the holy fee with a new reason for representing its jurifdi&ion
as incompatible with the rights of princes, and fubverftve of
all civil authority. But Paul, who deemed it a crime to at-
hkud to any confidcration suggested by 'human prudence or

R3

policy, when he thought himself called upon to assert the
prerogatives of the papal fee, remained inflexible; and dur-
ing his pontificate, Ferdinand was not acknowledged as em.
peror by the court of Rome*.

While Henry was intent upon his preparations for the ap.

proaching campaign, he received accounts of the issue of his
negotiations in Scotland. Long experience having at last
taught the Scots the imprudence of involving their country
in every quarrel between France and England, neither the
solicitations of the French ambassador, nor the address and
authority of the queen regent, could prevail on them to.
take arms against a kingdom with which they were at peace.
On this occasion, the ardour of a martial nobility and of a
turbulent people was restrained by regard for the public in-
terest and tranquillity, which in former deliberations of this
kind had been seldom attended to by a nation always prone
to rush into every new war. But though the Scots adhered,
with feadinefs to their pacific system, they were extremely.
ready to gratify the French king in another particular which
he had given in charge to his ambassador.

The young queen of Scots had been affianced to the

dauphin in the year one thousand five hundred and forty.
eight, and having been educated since that time in the court
of France, she had grown up to be the molt amiable, and one
of the most accomplished princesses of that age. Henry de-
manded the consent of her fubjeds to the celebration of the
marriage, and a parliament, which was held for that purpose,
appointed eight commissioners to represent the whole body of
the nation at that solemnity, with power to sign such deeds
as might be requisite before it was concluded. In fettling
the articles of the marriage, the Scots took every precaution
that prudence could dictate, in order to preserve the liberty
and independence of their country; while the French used eve-
ry art to secure to the dauphin the condu& of affairs during

Godleveus de Abdicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. Pollt. Imper. 391.
rP!,v. lib. xii. 189. Ribler, ii. 746, 759.

the queen's life, and the succession of the crown on the event
of her demise. [April 14] The marriage was celebrated with-
pomp suitable to the dignity of the parties, and the magni-
ficence of a court at that time the moi splendid in Europe-.
Thus Henry, in the course of a few months, had the glory
ofrecovering an important possession which had anciently be-
longed to the crown of France, and of adding to it the ac-
quifition of a new kingdom. By this event, too, the duke
of Guise acquired new consideration and importance; the
marriage of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown,
railing him so far above the condition of other fubjets, that
the credit which he had gained by his great a&ions, seemed
thereby to be rendered no less permanent than it was exten.
five.

When the campaign openedfoon after the dauphin's mar-
riage, the duke of Guise was placed at the head of the army,
with the fame unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had
received such liberal supplies from his subje&s, that the
troops under his command were both numerous and well ap-
pointed; while Philip, exhausted by the extraordinary efforts
of the preceding year, had been obliged to dismiss so many
of his forces during the winter, that he could not bring an
army into the field capable of making head agaiuft the ene-
my. The duke of Guise did not lose the favourable oppor-
tunity which his fupi-iority afforded him. He invested
Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg, one of the strong-
eft towns on the frontier of the Netherlands, and of great
importance to France by its neighbourhood to Metz;
and, notwithstanding the obRfinate valour with which it
was defended, he forced it to capitulate [June 221 after a-
siege of three weeks*.

But the success of this enterprise, which it was expefted

would lead to other conquets, was more than counterba-

t Keith's History of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps Dip-
lom v. z1.
' Thuan. lib. xx. 69o.

lanced by an event which happened in another part of the
Low-Countries. The marechal de Tennes, governor of
Calais, having penetrated into Slanders without opposition,
invested Dunkirk with an army of fourteen thousand men,
and took it by storm on the fifth day of the siege. Hence
he advanced towards Nieuport, which muf have soon fallen
into his hands, if the approach of the count of Egmont with
a superior army had not made it prudent to retreat. The
French troops were so much encumbered with the booty
which they had got at Dunkirk, or by ravaging the open
country, that they moved slowly; and Egmont, who had
left his heavy baggage and artillery behind him, marched
with such rapidity, that he came up with them near Grave.
lines, and attacked them with the utmost impetuosity. De
Termes, who had the choice of the ground, having pofled
his troops to advantage in the angle formed by the mouth of
the river Aa and the sea, received him with great firmness.
ViAory remained for some time in fufpence, the desperate
valour of the French, who foresaw the unavoidable deRfruc-
tion that muff follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalanced the superior number of the Flemings, when
one of those accidents to which human prudence does not
extend, decided the contest in favour of the latter. A
squadron of Englilh ships of war, which was cruising on the
coaf, being drawn by the noise of the firing towards the
place of the engagement, entered the river Aa, and turned
its great guns against the right wing of the French, with
such effet, as immediately broke that body, and spread ter-
ror and confusion through the whole army. The Flemings,
to whom assistance, so unexpected, and so seasonable, gave
fresh spirit, redoublcd their efforts, that they might not lose
the advantage which fortune had presented them, or give
the enemy time to recover from their conlternation, and the
routof the French soon became universal. Near two thou-
sand were killed on the spot; a greater number fell by the
i.'ds of the pcafants, who, in revenge for the cruelty with

which their country had been plundered, pursued the fugi-
tives, and massacred them without mercy; the reft were tak-
en prisoners, together with De Termes their general, and
many officers ofdiftinfion. *

This signal viftory, for which the count of Egmont was

afterwards so ill requited by Philip, obliged the duke of
Guise to relinquish all other schemes, and to haften towards
the frontier of Picardy, that he might oppose the progress
of the enemy in that province. This difalter, however, re-
fleced new luffre on his reputation, and once more turned
the eyes of his countrymen towards him, as the only general
on whose arms vicory always attended, and in whose con-
dutr, as well as good fortune, they could confide in every
danger. Henry reinforced the duke of Guise's army with
so many troops drawn from the adjacent garrisons, that it
soon amounted to forty thousand men. That of the enemy,
after the junftion of Egmont with the duke of Savoy, was
not inferior in number. They encamped at the diflance of
a few leagues from one another; and each monarch having
joined his refpeaive army, it was expeAed, after the viciffi-
tudes of good and bad success during this and the former
campaign, that a decisive battle would at last determine,
which of the rivals should take the ascendant for the future,
and give law to Europe. But though both had it in their
power, neither of them discovered any inclination to bring
the determination of such an important point to depend up-
on the uncertain issue of a single battle. The fatal engage-
ments at St. Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to be
so soon forgotten, and the profpeft of encountering the fame
troops, commanded by the fame generals who had twice tri-
umphed over his arms, inspired Henry with a degree of cau-
tion which was not common to him. Philip, of a genius a-
verse to bold operations in war, naturally leaned to cautious
measures, and was not disposed to hazard any thing against
a general so fortunate and successful as the duke of Guise.

* Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

Both monarchs, as if by agreement, stood on the defensive,
and fortifying their camps carefully, avoided every fkirmifl or
rencounter that might bring on a general engagement.

While the armies continued in this inaction, peace began

to be mentioned in each camp, and both Henry and Philip
discovered an inclination to liRen to any overture that tend-
ed to re-eflablifh it. The kingdoms of France and Spain had
been engaged during half a century in almost continual wars,
carried on at great expence, and produtive of no confidera.
ble advantage to either. Exhaufed by extraordinary and
unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those to which the na:
tions of Europe had been accuaomed before the rivalfhip
between Charles V. and Francis I. both nations longed so
much for an interval of repose, in order to recruit their
firength, that their sovereigns drew from them with difficul-
ty the supplies necessary for carrying on hostilities. The
private inclinations of both the kings concurred with those
of their people. Philip was prompted to with for peace by
his fond desire of returning to Spain. Accustomed from
his infancy to the climate and manners of that country, he
was attached to it with such extreme predeliaion, that
he never felt himself at cafe in any other part of his domi.
nions. But as he could not quit the Low-Countries, either
with decency or safety, and venture on a voyage to Spain
during the continuance of war, the profpe& of a pacification
which would put it in his power to execute his favourite
fchcme, was highly acceptable. Henry was no less desirous
of being delivered from the burden and occupations of war,
that he might have leisure to turn all his attention, and bend
the whole force of his government, towards suppressing the
opinions of the reformers, which were spreading with such
rapidity in Paris and other great towns of France, that they
began to grow formidable to the efablifhed church.

Betides these public and avowed considerations arising

from the Rate of the two hostile kingdoms, or from the wivh-
es of their respective monarchs, there was a secret intrigue

carried on in the court of France, which contributed as
much as either of the other, to haften and to facilitate the
negotiation of a peace. The conlfable Montmorency, dur-
ing his captivity, beheld the rapid success and growing fa-
vour of the duke of Guise with the envy natural to a rival.
Every advantage gained by the princes of Lorrain he con-
fidered as a fresh wound to his own reputation, and he knew
with what malevolent address it would be improved to dimi-
ni{h his credit with the king, and to augment that of the
dake of Guise. These arts, he was afraid, might, by de-
grees, work on the easy and dutile mind of Henry, so as
to efface all remains of his ancient affe&tion towards himself.
But he could not discover any remedy for this, unless he
were allowed to return home, that he might try whether by
his presence he could defeat the artifices of his enemies, and
revive those warm and tender sentiments which had long at-
tached Henry to him, with a confidence so entire, as refem-
bled rather the cordiality of private friendship, than the cold
and felfi(h connexion between a monarch and one of his
courtiers. While Montmorency was forming schemes and
wishes for his return to France with much anxiety of mind,
but with little hope of success, an unexpeaed incident pre-
pared the way for it. The cardinal of Lorrain, who had
liared with his brother in the king's favour, and participat-
ed of the power which that conferred, did not bear profperi-
ty with the fame discretion as the duke of Guise. Intoxica-
ted with their good fortune, he forgot how much they had
been indebted for their present elevation to their connexions
with the dutchess of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to
the extraordinary merit of their family. This led him not
only to neglet his benefaf&refs, but to thwart her schemes,
and to talk with a sarcastic liberty of her characer and per-
son. That singular woman, who, if we may believe con-
temporary writers, retained the beauty and charms of youth
at the age of threescore, and on whom it is certain that
Henry till doated with all the fondness of love, felt this in-

jury with sensibility, and set herself with eageruefsto inflic
the vengeance which it merited. As there was no method
of fupphnting the princes of Lorrain so effeFualUy as by a
coalition of interests with the constable, (he proposed the
marriage of her grand-daughter with one of his sons, as the
bond of their future union; and Montmorency readily gave
his content to the match. Having thus cemented their al.
liance, the dutchess employed all her influence with the king,
in order to confirm his inclinations towards peace, and in-
duce him to take the steps necefary for attaining it. She
insinuated that any overture of that kind would come with
great propriety from the constable, and if entrusted to the
conduc of his prudence, could hardly fail of success.

Henry, long accustomed to commit all affairs of import.

ance to the management of the constable, and needing only
this encouragement to return to his ancient habits, wrote to
him immediately with his usual familiarity and affe&ion,
empowering him at the fame time to take the first opportuni.
ty of founding Philip and his ministers with regard to peace.
Montmorency made his application to Philip by the mot
proper channel He opened himself to the duke of Savoy,
who, notwithRfanding the high command to which he had
been railed, and the military glory which he had acquired in
the Spanish service, was weary of remaining in exile, and
languihed to return into his paternal dominions. As there
was no profpe& of his recovering poifeffxon of them by force
of arms, he confidered a definitive treaty of peace between
France and Spain, as the only event by which he could
hope to obtain reltitution. Being no stranger to Philip's
private wishes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed on
him not only to discover a disposition on his part towards
accommodation, but to permit Montmorency to return, on
his parole, to France, that he might confirm his own fore-
reign in his pacific sentiments. Henry received the con-
stable with the mos flattering marks of regard; abefncc, in-
fead of having abated or extinguished the monarch's friend-

(hip, seemed to have given it new ardour. Montmorency,
from the moment of his appearance in court, assumed, if pof-
fible, a higher place than ever in his affe&ion, and a more
perfect ascendant over his mind. The cardinal of Lorrain
and the duke of Guise prudently gave way to a tide of fa-
vour too itrong for them to oppose, and confining themselves
to their proper departments, permitted, without any firug-
gle, the confable and dutchess of Valentinois to dire& pu-
blic affairs at their pleasure. They soon prevailed on the
king to nominate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace. Philip
did the fame. The abbey of Cercamp was fixed on as the
place of congress; and all military operations were im-
mediately terminated by a suspension of arms.

While these preliminary steps were taking towards a trea-
ty which restored tranquillity to Europe, Charles V. whole
ambition had so long disturbed it, ended his days in the mon-
aftery of St. Juftus. When Charles entered this retreat,
he formed such a plan of life for himself, as would have
suited the condition of a private gentleman of a moderate
fortune. His table was neat, but plain; his domeflics few;
his intercourse with them familiar; all the cumbersome and
ceremonious forms of attendance on his person were entirely
abolished, as deitruaive of that social ease and tranquillity
which he courted, in order to soothe the remainder of his
days. As the mildness of the climate, together with his de-
liverance from the burdens and cares of government, pro-
cured him, at firit, a considerable remission from the acute
pains with which he had been long tormented; he enjoyed,
perhaps, more complete fatisfation in this humble solitude,
than all his grandeur had ever qielded him. The ambitious
thoughts and proje&s which had so long engrossed and dif.
qieted him, were quite effaced from his mind; far from
taking any part in the political tranfations of the princes o[
lurope, he restrained his curiosity even from any inquiry
concerning them; and he seemed to view the busy scene
Which he had abandoned with all the contempt ard indiff.
Vul. IV. S

rence arising from his thorough experience of its vanity, as
well as from the pleasing refle&ion of having disentangled
himself from its cares.

Other amusements and other objeAs now occupied him.

Sometimes he cultivated the plants in his garden. with his
own hands; sometimes he rode out to the neighbouring
wood on a little horse, the only one that he kept, attended
by a single servant on foot. When his infirmities confined
him to his apartment, which often happened, and deprived
him of these more acive recreations, he either admitted a few
gentlemen who resided near the monastery to visit him, and
entertained them familiarly at his table; or he employed him-
self in fludying mechanical principles, and in forming cu.
rious works of mechanism, of which he had always been re-
r.arkably fond, and to which his genius was peculiarly turn-
ed. With this view he had engaged Turriano, one of the
rmoft ingenious artists of that age, to accompany him in his
retreat. He laboured together with him in framing mo.
dels of the most ufcful machines, as well as in making expe-
riments with regard to their refpeaive powers, and it was
not seldom that the ideas of the monarch afilled or perse.-
ed the inventions of the artist. He relieved his mind, at
intervals, with fighter and more fantastic works of mechan-
ism, in falhioning puppets, which, by the itruaure of inter.
nal springs, mimicked the gestures and acions of men, to
the astonishment of the ignorant monks, who beholding
movements which they could not comprehend, sometimes
distrusted their own senses, and sometimes suspected Charles
and Turriano of being in compac with invisible powers.
He was particularly curious with regard to the con-
flru&ion of clocks and watches; and having found, after re-
peated trials, that he could not bring any two of them to
go exactly alike, he refleted, it is said, with a mixture o0
surprise as well as regret, on his own folly, in having bellow
td so much time and labour on the more vain attempt o0
bringing mankind to a precise uniformity of sentiment con

cerning the profound and mysterious doEtrines of religion.

But in what manner soever Charles disposed of the reft of

his time, he constantly reserved a considerable portion of it
for religious exercises. He regularly attended divine ser-
vice in the chapel of the monastery, every morning and e-
vening; he took great pleasure in reading books of devotion,
par'icularly the works of St. Auguftin, and St. Bernard;
and converted much with his confessor, and the prior of the
ron.lftery, on pious fubjeds. Thus did Charles pass the
firil year of his retreat, in a manner not unbecoming a
man perfectly disengaged from the affairs of the present life,
and Handing on the confines of a future world; either in in-
nocent amusements, which soothed his painr, and relieved a
mind worn out with excessive application to business; or in
devout occupations, which he deemed ncceffary in prepar-
ing for another state.

But about fix months before his death, the gout, after a
longer intermission than usual, returned with a proportional
increase of violence. His shattered conifitution had not vi-
gour enough remaining to withifand such a shock. It en-
feebled his mind as much as his body, and from this period
we hardly discern any traces of that found and masculine un-
derftanding, which diftinguiflled Charles among his contem-
poraries. An illiberal and timid superstition depressed his
spirit. He had no relish for amusements of any kind. He
endeavoured to conform, in his manner of living, to all
the rigour of monastic austerity. He desired no other
society than that of monks, and was almost continually
employed with them in chanting the hymns of the Mif-
fal. As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself the
discipline in secret with such severity, that the whip of
cords which he employed as the Inilrument of his punish-
ment, was found after his decease tinged with his blood.
Ior was he satisfied with these acts of mortification, which,
however severe, were not unexampled. The timorous and
dilruftful solicitude which always accompanies superstition,

S 2

fill continued to disquiet him, and depreciating all the de-
vout exercises in which he had hitherto been engaged,
prompted him to aim at something extraordinary, at some
new and singular act of piety that would display his zeal, and
merit the favour of Heaven. The as on which he fixed
was as wild and uncommon as any that fuperllition ever fug.
gelled to a weak and disordered fancy. He resolved to ce-
lebrate his own obsequies before his death. He ordered his
tomb to be ereted in the chapel of the monastery. His do.
raeftics marched thither in funeral procession, with black ta.
pers in their hands. He himself followed in his shroud.
He was laid in his coffin with much solemnity. The ser.
vice for the dead was chanted, and Charles joined in the
prayers which were offered up for the reft of his foul, ming.
lng his tears with those which his attendants Ihed, as if
they had been celebrating a real funeral. The ceremony
closed with sprinkling holy water on the coffin in the usual
form, and all the assistants retiring, the doors of the chapel
were {hut. Then Charles rose out of the coffin, and with-
drew to his apartment, full of those awful sentiments which
such a singular solemnity was calculated to inspire. But
either the fatiguing length of the ceremony, or the impref.
sion which this image of death left on his mind, affeAed him
so much, that next day he was seized with a fever. His
feeble frame could not long resist its violence, and he ex.
pired on the twenty-firft of September, after a life of fifty-
eight years, fix months, and twenty-five days'.

As Charles was the first prince of the age in rank and dig-

nity, the part which he aBed, whether we confider the
greatness, the variety, or the success of his undertakings,
was the moRl conspicuous. It is from an attentive obferva-
tion of his condua, not from the exaggerated praises of the
Spanish hiltorians, or the undiltinguiihing censure of the
French, that a juR idea of Charles's genius and abilities is to

Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i.p. xI. Thuan. 723. Sandov. ii.

6:9, &c. Miniana Contin. Marianae, vol. iv . 16. era y Ztli-
Ea Vida de Carlos, p. x i .

be colleced. He possessed qualities so peculiar, that they
irongly mark his character, and not only distinguish him
from the princes who were his contemporaries, but account
for that superiority over them which he so long maintained.
Il forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as well as by ha-
bit, cautious and considerate. Born with talents which un-
folded themfclves slowly, and were late in attaining to ma-
turity, he was accustomed to ponder every subjea that de-
manded his consideration, with a careful and deliberate at-
tention. He bent the whole force of his mind towards it,
and dwelling upon it with a serious application, undiverted
by pleasure, and hardly relaxed by any amusement, he re-
volved it, in silence, in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hearing their o-
pinions, took his refulution with a decisive firmness, which fel-
dom follows such flow and seemingly hesitating consultations.
Of consequence, Charles's measures, instead of refembliag
the desultory and irregular sallies of Henry VIII. or Fran-
cis I. had the appearance of a confiltent fyllem, in which all
the parts were arranged, all the effects were foreseen, and even
every accident was provided for. :Iis promptitude in exe-
cution was no less remarkable than his patience in delibera-
tion. He did not discover greater sagacity in his choice es
the measures which it was proper to pursue, than fertility
of genius in finding out the means for rendering- his pursuit
cf them successful. Though he had naturally so little of the
martial turn, that during the moit ardent and butling peri-
od of life, he remained in the cabinet inactive, yet when he
chose at length to appear at the head of his armies, his mind.
was so formed for vigorous exertions in every direcioi that
lie acquired such knowledge in the art of w;lr, and such ta-
ic.its for command, as rendered hiin equal in reputation and
flcccfs to the most able generals of the age. But Charles
poIcffcd in the most eminent degree, the science which is of
tie greatest importance to a monarch, that of knowing men,
ald of adapting their talents to the various departments

s3

which he allotted to them. From the death of Chievres to
the end of his reign, he employed no general in the field, no
minister in the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court, no
governor of a province, whose abilities were inadequate to
the trust which he reposed in them. Though destitute of
that bewitching affability of manners, which gained Francis
the hearts of all who approached his person, he was no ftran-
ger to the virtues which secure fidelity and attachment. He
placed unbounded confidence in his generals; he rewarded
their services with munificence; he neither envied their fame,
nor discovered any jealousy of their power. Almost all the
generals who conducted his armies, may be placed on a level
with those illustrious personages who have attained the high-
eft eminence of military glory; and his advantages over his
rivals are to be ascribed so manifestly tothe superior abilities of
the commanders whom he set in opposition to them, that this
might seem to detraa, in some degree, from his own merit,
if the talent of discovering, and teadinefs in employing such
iaftruments were not the most undoubted proofs of a capaci-
ty for government.

There were, nevertheless, defe&s in his political charac-

ter which must considerably abate the admiration due to his
extranrdinary talents. Charles's ambition was insatiable;
and though there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed the chimerical
project of efablifhing an universal monarchy in Europe, it is
certain that his deiire of being diflinguifhcd as a conqueror
involved him in continual wars, which not only exhausted and
oppressed his fibjecs, but left him little leisure for giving
attention to the interior police and improvement of his
kingdoms, the great objets of every prince who makes the
happiness of his people the end of his government. Charles,
:.t a very early period of life, having added the Imperial
cro-n to the kingdoms of Spain, and to the hereditary do-
mn;ions of the houses of Autria and Burgundy, this-open-
-' to him fich a vail fel! of entcrprife, and engaged him in

schemes so complicated as well as arduous, that feeling his
power to be unequal to the execution of them, he had often
recourse to low artifices, unbecoming his superior talents,
and sometimes ventured on such deviations from integrity,
as were dishonourable in a great prince. His insidious and
fraudulent policy appeared more conspicuous, andwasrender-
ed more odious by a comparison with the open and unde-
signing character of his contemporaries Francis I. and Hen-
ry VIII. This difference, though occasioned chiefly by
the diversity of their tempers, must be ascribed in some de-
gree, to fuich an opposition in the principles of their politi-
cal conduct as affords some excuse for this defeA in Charles's
behaviour, though it cannot serve as a justification of it.
Francis and Henry seldom acted but from the impulse of
their passions, and rushed headlong towards the object in
view. Charles's measures, being the result of cool reflec-
tion, were disposed into a regular system, and carried on upon
a concerted plan. Persons who aa in the former manner,
naturally pursue the end in view, without assuming any dif.
guise, or displaying much address. Such as hold the latter
course, are apt, in forming, as well as in executing their de-
signs, to employ such refinements as always lead to artifice
in conduct, and often degenerate into deceit.

The circumftnnies transmitted to us, with refpeA to

Charles's private deportment and character, are fewer and
less interesting, than might have been expected from the
great number of authors who have undertaken to write an
account of his life. These are not the object of this history,
which aims more at representing the great tranfaaions of
the reign of Charles V. and pointing out the manner in
which they affected the political slate of Europe, than at de.
lineating his private virtues or defects.

The plenipotentiaries of France, Spain, and England,
continued their conferences at Cercamp; and though each
es them, with the usual art of negotiators, made at first
vcry high demands in the name of their refpcive courts,

yet as they were all equally desirous of peace, they would
have consented reciprocally to such abatements and reftric.
tions of their claims, as mutt have removed every obitacle to
an accommodation. The death of Charles V. was a new
motive with Philip to haiten the conclusion of a treaty, as
it increased his impatience for returning into Spain, where
there was now no person greater or more illuttrious than
himself. But in spite of the concurring wishes of all the
parties interested, an event happened which occasioned an
unavoidable delay in their negotiations. About a month
after the opeaing of the conferences at Cercamp, Mary of
England ended her short and inglorious reign [Nov. 17],
and Elizabeth, her rlter, was immediately proclaimed queen
wi:h univeifal joy. As the powers of the English plenipo-
tertiaries expired on the death of their mistress, they could
not proceed until they received a commission and inftruaions
from their new sovereign

Henry and Philip beheld Elizabeth's elevation to the

throne with equal solicitude. As during Mary's jealous ad-
miniilration, under the moit difficult circumstances, and in a
fihuation extremely delicate, that princess had conduaced
herielf with prudence and address far exceeding her years,
thley had conceived an high idea of her abilities, and already
iormed expectations of a reign very different from that of
her filler. Equally sensible of the importance of gaining
her favour, both monarchs eft themselves with emulation to
court it, and employed every art in order to insinuate them-
flves into her confidence. Each of them had something
ne.ritorioui, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his own
Lehali. Iitnry Ld offered her a retreat in his dominions,
i the dread of her fGiler's violence (hould force her to fly for
l-fity out of England. Philip, by his powerful interccliion,
had prevented Mtary from proceeding to the molt fatal ex-
Irtn.iiits against her siser. Each of them endeavoured
r.nw to avail himfclf of the circumfiances in his favour.
.enry wrote to Elizabeth loon after her acceflion, with the

warmest expressions of gratitude and friendship. He repre-
sented the war which had unhappily been kindled between
their kingdoms, not as a national quarrel, but as the effeft
of Mary's blind partiality to her husband, and fond compli-
ance with all his wishes. He entreated her to disengage
herself from an alliance which had proved so unfortunate to
England, and to consent to a separate peace with him, with-
out mingling her interests with those of Spain, from which
they ought now to be altogether disjoined. Philip, on the
other hand, unwilling to lose his connection with England,
the importance of which, during a rupture with France, he
had so recently experienced, not only vied with Henry in
declarations of esteem for Elizabeth, and in professions of his
resolution to cultivate the ftri&eit amity with her, but, in
order to confirm and perpetuate their union, he offered him-
self to her in marriage, and undertook to procure a difpenfa-
tion from the pope for that purpose.

Elizabeth weighed the proposals of the two monarchs at-

tentively, and with that provident discernment of her true
interest, which was conspicuous in all her deliberations. She
gave some encouragement to Henry's overture of a separate
negotiation, because it opened a channel of correspondence
with France, which lie might find to be of great advantage,
if Philip should not discover sufficient zeal and solicitude for
securing to her proper terms in the joint treaty. But she
ventured on this flep with the most cautious reserve, that (he
might not alarm Philip's suspicious temper; and lose an ally
in attempting to gain an enemy t. Henry himself by an un-
pardonable a& of indiscretion, prevented her from carrying
her intercourse with him to such a length as might have of-
fended or alienated Philip. At the very time when he was
courting Elizabeth's friendship with the greatest assiduity,
he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the solicitations
of the princes of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-law
the queen of Scots to assume the title and arms of queen of

-Forbes,i. p. 4.

England. This ill-timed pretenflon, the source of many ca-
lamities to the unfortunate queen of Scots, extinguilhed at
once all the confidence that might have grown between Hen.
rv and Elizabeth, and left in its place distrust, resentment,
and antipathy. Elizabeth soon found that (he must unite
her interests closely with Philip's, 2nd expe& peace only
from negotiations carried on in conjunction with him $.

As the had granted a commfilion, immediately after her

accession, to the fame plenipotentiaries whom her siRset had
employed, he now instructed them to at in every-point in
concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take no
ftep until they had preivoufly consulted with them *. But
though the deemed it prudent to assume this appearance of
confidence in the Spani(h monarch, she knew precisely how
far to carry it; and discovered no inclination to accept of
that extraordinary proposal of marriage which Philip had
made to her. The English had expressed so openly their
detestation of her sifter's choice of him, that it would have
been highly imprudent to have exasperated them by renew-
ing that odious alliance. She was too well acquainted with
Philip's harsh imperious temper, to think of him for a hus-
band. Nor could ihe admit a dispensation from the pope to
be fuficient to authorize her marrying him, without condemn-
ing her father's divorce from Catharine of Aragon, and ac-
knowledging of consequence that her mother's marriage was
null, and her own birth illegitimate. But though the de-
termined not to yield to Philip's addreffls, the situation of
her affairs, rendered it dangerous to rejec them; she return-
ed her answer, therefore, in terms which were evasive, but so
tempered with refpet, that though they gave him no reason
to be secure of success, they did not altogether extinguish
his hopes.

By this artifice, as well as by the prudence with which lhe

S Strpe's Annals of the Reformation, i. aI. Carte's Hist. of
Engl!nd, vol. ii:. p. 3-.

E* orbes's Fuil View,i. p. 37. 4_.

concealed her sentiments and intentions concerning religion,
for some time after her accession, fle so far gained upon Phi-
lip, that he warmly espoused her interest in the conferences
which were renewed at Cercamp, and afterwards removed to
Cateau-Cambrefis [Feb. 6, 1559.] A definitive treaty,
which was to adjust the claims and pretensions of so many
princes, required the examination of fuich a variety of intri-
cate points, and led to such infinite and minute details, as
drew out the negotiations to a great length. But the con-
liable Montmorency exerted himfelfwith such indefatigable
zeal and industry, repairing alternately to the courts of Paris
and BruiTels, in order to obviate or remove every difficulty,
that all points in dispute were adjufled at length in such a
manner, as to give entire fatisfa&ion in every particular to
Henry and Philip; and the last hand was ready to be put to
the treaty between them.

The claims of England remained as the only obRacle to

retard it. Elizabeth demanded the restitution of Calais in the
moit peremptory tone, as an essential condition of her con-
senting to peace; Henry refutied to give up that important
conquest; and both seemed to have taken their resolution
with unalterable firmness. Philip warmly supported Eliza-
beth's pretensions to Calais, not merely from a principle of
equity towards the English nation, that he might appear to
have contributed to their recovering what they had loll by
espousing his cause; nor solely with a view of soothing Eli-
zabeth by this manifestation of zeal for her interest; but in or-
der to render France less formidable, by fecuringto herancient
enemy this easy access into the heart of the kingdom. The
earnestness, however, with which he seconded the arguments
of the English plenipotentiaries, soon began to relax. Dur-
ilg the course of the negotiation, Elizabeth, who now felt
herself firmly feated on her throne, began to take such open
and vigorous measures not only for overturning all that her
fitler had done in favour of popery, but for eilabliihing the
protcilant church on a firm foundation, as convinced Philip

that his hopes of an union with her had been from the be-
ginning vain, and were now desperate. From that period,
his interpositions in her favour became more cold and for-
mal, flowing merely from a regard to decorum, or from the
cornideration of remote political interefs. Elizabeth, hav.
ing reason to expea such an alteration in his condua, quick-
ly perceived it. But as nothing would have been of great.
er detriment to her people, or more inconsistent with her
schemes ofdomeftic administration, than the continuance of
war, (he saw the necessity of submitting to such conditions
as the situation of her affairs imposed, and that the niuft
reckon upon being deserted by an ally who was now united
to her by a very feeble tie, if she did not speedily reduce
her demands to what was moderate and attainable. She ac-
cordingly gave new instructions to her ambassadors; and
Philip's plenipotentiaries acing as mediators beween the
French and them', an expedient was fallen upon which, in
forne degree, justified Elhzabeth's departing from the-rigour
of her firr demand with regard to Calais. All lesser articles
were fettled without much discussion or delay. Philip, that
he might not appear to have abandoned the English, insisted
that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth (hould be
concluded in form, before that between the French monarch
and himself. The one was signed on the second day of A-
pril, the other on the day following.

The treaty of peace between France and England con-

tained no articles of real importance, but that which refpe&-
ed Calais. It was Rtipulated, That the king of France
should retain pofcffion of that town, with all its dependen-
cies, during eight years; That at the expiration of that
term, he (hould reitore it to England; That in cafe of non-
performance, he should forfeit five hundred thousand crowns,
for payment of which fumr, seven or eight wealthy mer-
chants, who were not his fubjecs, should grant security;
That five persons of diftin&ion should be given as hostages

· Sorbes, i. 5 9

until that security were provided; That, although the forfeit
of five hundred thousand crowns should be paid, the right
of England to Calais should still remain entire, in the fame
manner as if the term of eight years were expired; That the
king and queen of Scotland Ihould be included in the treaty;
That if they, or the French king, should violate the peace
by any hostile a&ion, Henry should be obliged instantly to
restore Calais; That on the other hand, if any breach of the
treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then Henry and the king
and queen of Scots were absolved from all the engagements
which they had come under by this treaty.

Notwithfianding the itudied attention with which so ma-

ny precautions were taken, it is evident that Henry did not
intend the restitution of Calais, nor is it probable that Eli-
zabeth expeced it. It was hardly poflible that She could
maintain, during the course of eight years, such perfect con-
cord both with France and Scotland, as not to afford Hen-
ry some pretext for alledging that the had violated the trea-
ty. But even if that term mhould elapse without any ground
for complaint, Henry might then chufe to pay the fum fti-
pulated, and Elizabeth had no method of asserting her right
but by force of arms. However, by throwing the 'articles
in the treaty with regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth
satisfied her fubjets of every denomination; she gave men of
discernment a striking proof of her address, in palliating
what he could not prevent; and amusing the multitude, to
whom the cession of such an important place would have ap-
peared altogether infamous, with the profpea of recovering
in a {hort time that favourite poffeflion.

The expedient which Montmorency employed, in order

to facilitate the conclusion of peace between France and
Spain, was the negotiating two treaties of -marrage, one
between Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip,
who supplanted his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to
whom that princess had been promised in the former confe-
rences at Cercamp; the other between Margaret, Henry's

Vol. IV. T

only sifter, and the duke of Savoy. For however feeble the
ties of blood may often be among princes, or how little so-
ever they mray regard them when pushed on to adt by mo-
tives of ambition, they assume on other occasions the ap-
pearance of being so far influenced by these domeitic as-
sections, as to employ them to jutlify measures and concef.
sions which they find to be necessary, but know to be im.
politic or dishonourable. Such was the use Henry made
of the two marriages to which he gave his conlent. Hav-
ing secured an honourable efablifhmnent for his filter and his
daughter, he, in consideration of these, granted terms both
to Philip and the duke of Savoy, of which he would not,
on any other account, have ventured to approve.

The principal articles in the treaty between France and

Spain were, That sincere and perpetual amity Piould be e-
f abliihed between the two crowns and their refpecive allies;
That the two monarchs should labour in concert to procure
the convocation of a general council, in order to check the
pregrefs of heresy, and retlore unity and concord to the
Chritian church; That all conquePis made by either party,
on this fide of the Alps, since the commencement of the war
in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, ihould be mu-
tually restored; That the dutchy of Savoy, the principality
of Piedmont, the country of Breffe, and all the other terri-
tories formerly fubjcei to the dukes of Savoy, Should be re-
stored to Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the celebra-
tion of his marriage with Margaret of France, the towns of
Turin, Quiers, Pigne-cl, Chivaz, and Villanova excepted,
of which Henry should keep possession until his claims to
these places, in right of his grandmother, Should be tried and
decided in courie of law; That as long as Henry retained
these places in his hands, Philip /hould be at liberty to keep
garrisons in the towns of Varcelli and Asti; That the
French king Should immediately evacuate all the places
which he held in Tuscany and the Siennefe, and renounce
all future pretenfons to them; That he fSould rcftore the

malrquifate of iontferrat to the duke of Mantua; That he
lould receive the Genoese into favour, and give up to them
the towns which he had conquered in the island of Corsica;
That none of the princes or flates, to whom there cefions
were made, should call their subjeCts to -account for any
part of their conduct while under the dominion of their
c.'emnies, but flhuld bury all past tranfastions in oblivion.
'i'ic pope, the emperor, the kings of Denmark, Sweden,
Pui.nd, Portugal, the king anid queen of Scots, and almoit
every prince and state in Chrillendom, were comprehended
in this pacification as the allies either of Henry or of Philipt.

Thus, by this famous treaty, peace was re-eftablilhed irn

Ln rrope. All the caifes of discord which had so long em-
Lrcilcd the powerful monarchs of France and Spain, which.
had tranfrnitted hereditary quarrels and wars from Charles
to Philip, and from Francis to Henry, seemed to be wholly
removed, or finally terminated. The French alone com-
jiained of the unequal conditions of a treaty, into which an
ambitious minitler, in order to recover his liberty, and an
a:tfll mistress, that fne might gratify her resentment, had'
iduced their too easy monarch. They exclaimed loudly
:,i:init the folly of giving up to the enemies of France an
Ihu:dred and eighty-nine fortified places, in the Low-Coun-
tries or in Italy, in return for the three infignificailt towns
cf St. Quintin, Ham, and Catelet. They confidered it as
an indelible itain upon the glory of the nation, to renounce
in one day terrItories so extensive, and so capable of being
defended, that the enemy could not have hoped to wrest
them out of their hands, after many years of victory.

But Henry, without regarding the sentiments of his peo-

ple, or being moved by the rcmonftrances of his council, ra-
:iiicd the treaty, and executed with great fidelity whatever
!le had flipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy repaired
With a numerous retinue to Paris, in order to celebrate his
:.irri:age with Henry's filler. The duke of Alva was font

^ Recuell des Traitez, tom. ii. 287.

T 2

to the fame capital, at the head of a splendid embalfy, to
espouse Elizabeth in the name of his malter. They were re-
ceived with extraordinary magnificence by the French court.
Amidit the rejoicings and festivities on that occasion, Hen-
ry's days were cut (hort by a singular and tragical accident
[July lo.] His son, Francis II. a prince under age, of a
weak constitution, and of a mind still more feeble, succeeded
him. Soon after, Paul ended his violent and imperious
pontificate, at enmity with all the world, and disgusted even
with his own nephews. They, persecuted by Philip, and
deserted by the succeeding pope, whom they had railed by
their influence to the papal throne, were condemned to the
punishment which their crimes and ambition had merited,
and their death was as infamous as their lives had been cri-
minal. Thus most of the personages, who had long sustain-
ed the principal characters on the great theatre of Europe,
disappeared about the fame time. A more known period
ofhiftory opens at this ara; other a&ors enter upon the
Rlage, with different views, as well as different passions; new
contefls arose, and new schemes of ambition occupied and
disquieted mankind.

Upon reviewing the tranfacions of any active period, in

the history ofcivilifed nations, the changes which are accom-
plis1ed appear wonderfully disproportioned to the efforts
which have been exerted. Conqueffs are never very exten-
five or rapid, but among nations whose progress in improve-
ment is extremely unequal. When Alexander the Great,
at the head of a gallant people, of simple manners, and form-
ed to war by admirable military institutions, invaded a fate
funk in luxury, and enervated by excessive refinement; when
Ghtnchizcan and Tamerlane, with their armies of hardy bar-
barians, poured in upon nations, enfeebled by the climate in
which they lived, or by the arts and commerce which they
cultivated, the'e conquerors, like a torrent, swept every thing
before them, subduing kingdoms and provinces in as ihort
a space of time as was requisite to march through them. But

when nations are in a state similar to each other, and keep
equal pace in their advances towards refinement, they are
not exposed to the calamity of sudden conquests. Their
acquliftions of knowledge, their progress in the art of war,
their political sagacity and address, are nearly equal. The
fate of states in this situation, depends not on a single bat--
tie. Their internal resources are many and various, Nor
are they themselves alone intereRted in their own safety, or
active in their own defence. Other flates interpose, and
balance any temporary advantage which either party may
have acquired. After the fiercest and most lengthened con-
test, all the rival nations are exha!'led, none are conquered.
At length they find it necessary to conclude a peace, which
reflores to each almost the fame power and the fame terri-
tories of which they were formerly in' poFefTion.

Such was the state of Europe during the reign of Charles V.
No prince was so much superior to the retl in power, as to ren-
der his efforts irrefiflible, and his conquests easy. No nation.
had made progress in improvement so far beyond its neigh-
hours, as to have acquired a very manifeit pre-eminence.
Each state derived some advantage, or was subjea to some-
inconvenience from its situation or its climate; each was di-
linguifned by something peculiar in the genius of its people,
or the confsitution of its government. But the advantages
possessed by one slate, were counterbalanced by circumnftan-
ces favourable to others; and this prevented any from attain-
i:i fuich superiority as might have been fatal to all. The
;ations of Europe in that age, as in the present, were like
Cie great family; there were some features common to all,.
1hiLh fixed a resemblance; there were certain peculiarities
conspicuous in each which marked a diltintion. But there
".as not among them that wide diversity of character and of
genius which, in almost every period of history, hath exalt-
ci the Europeans above the inhabitants of the other quar-
'ers of the globe, and seems to lave deflined the one t>
lh, and the other to obey.

? 3

'But though the near resemblance and equality in improve.

ment among the different nations of Europe prevented the
reign of Charles V. from being distinguished by such sudden
and extensive conquests as occur in some other periods of
history, yet, during the course ofhis administration, all the
considerable Rates in Europe fdffered a remarkable change in
their political situation, and felt the influence of events, which
have not hitherto spent their force,but fill continue to operate
in a greater orin a less degree. It was duringhis reign, and
in consequence of the perpetual efforts to which his enter-
prifing ambition roured him, that the different kingdoms of
Europe acquired internal vigour; that they diferned the re-
sources of which they were possessed; that they came both
to fed their own strength, and to know how to make it for.
midable to others. It was during his reign, too, that the
different kingdoms of Europe, which in former times seem-
ed frequently to a& as if they had been single and disjoin.
ed, became so thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately
connefted with each other, as to form one great political fy-
ftem, in which each took a station, wherein it has remained
since that time with less variation than could have been ex-
pcted after the events of two ative centuries,

The progress, however, and acquisitions of the house of

Auitria, were not only greater than those of any other
power, but more discernable and conspicuous. I have al.
ready enumerated the extensive territories which defeended
to Charles from his AuPtrian, Burgundian, and Spaniih an-
ceftors *. To these he himself added the Imperial dignity;
and, as if all this had been too little, the bounds of the ha.
bitable globe seemed to be extended, and a new world was
fubjeced to his command. Upon his resignation, the Bur.
gundian provinces, and the Spanish kingdoms with their de.
pendencies, both in the old and new worlds, devolved to
Philip. But Charles transmitted his dominions to his son,
in a condition very different from that in which he himself had

*Vol. II. p.1.

received them. They were augmented by the accelfion of
new provinces; they were habituated to obey an adminittra-
tion no less vigorous than lteady; they were accustomed to
expensive and persevering efforts, which, though necessary
in the contests betww civilized nations, had been little
known in Europe before the sixteenth century. The provin-
ces of Friesland, Utrecht, and Overyffel, which he acquired
by purchase from their former proprietors, and the dutchy
of Gueldres, of which he made himself matter, partly by
force of arms, partly by the arts of negotiation, were addi-
tions of great value to his Burgundian dominions. Ferdi-
nand and Isabella transmitted to him all the provinces of
Spain, from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of
Portugal; but as he maintained a perpetual peace with that
kingdom, amidif the various efforts of his enterprising ambi.
tion, he made no acquisition of territory in that quarter.

Charles had gained, however, a valt acceflion of power in

this part of his dominions. By his success in the war with
the commons of Castile, he exalted the regal prerogative up-
on the ruins of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the Cortes to re-
main, and the formality of holding it to be continued; he
reduced its authority and jurifdiftion almost to nothing, and
modelled it in such a manner, that it became rather a junto
of the servants of the crown, than an assembly of the repre-
fentatives of the people. One member of the conflitution
being thus lopped off, it was impossible but that the other
mult feel the firoke, and susser by it. The fuppreflion of
the popular power rendered the ariftocratical less formidable.
The grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the age,
or allured by the honours which they enjoyed in a court,
exhausted their fortunes in military service, or in attending
on the person of their prince. They did not dread, perhaps
did not observe, the dangerous progress of the royal autho-
rity, which, leaving them the vain diftin&ion of being cover-
ed in presence of their sovereign, firipped them, by degrees,

of that real pawer which they possessed while they formed
one body, and acted in concert with the people. Charles's
f.iccefs in abolishing the privileges of the commons, and in-
breaking the power of the nobles of Castile, encouraged
Phil;p to invade the liberties of Argon, which were flill
more extensive. The Castilians, accustomed to fubje&ion
themselves, allfted in imposing the yoke on their more hap-
pv and independent neighbours. The will of the sovereign
became the supreme law in all the kingdoms of Spain; and
prInces who were not checked in forming their plans by
the jealousy of the people, nor controlled in executing them
by the power of the nobles, could both aim at great objects,
and call forth the whole strength of the monarchy in order
to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the royal prerogative, rendered

the monarchs of Spain matters at home, he added new dig-
nitT and power to their crown by his foreign acquisitions.
He secured to Spain the quiet pofflefion of the kingdotn of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud, and held
with difficulty. He united the dutchy of Milan, one of
the moil fertile and populous Italian provinces, to the Spa-
nilh crown; and left his successors, even without taking
their other territories into the account, the most considerable
princes in Italy, which had been long the theatre of con.
tention to the great powers of Europe, and in which they
bad firoggled with emulation to obtain the fuperior;ty.
When the French, in conformity to the treaty of Chateau-
Carnbrefi-, withdrew their forces out of Italy, and finally re-
linquihled all their schemes of conquest on that fide of the
Alps, the Spanl'h dominions then rose in importance, and
enablcd their kings, as long as the monarchy retained any
cegree of vigour, to preserve the chief sway in all the tranf-
aeions of that country. But whatever accession, either of
interior auth'ority or of foreign dominion, Charles gained for
the monarchs of Spain in Europe, was inconsiderable when
com.parcd with his acqiiiitions in the new world. He add-

cd there, not provinces, but empires to his crown. He
conquered territories of such immense extent; he discovered
such inexhaustible veins of wealth, and opened such bound.
less prospects of every kind, as must have routed his fuccef.
for, and have called him forth to ascion, though his ambi.
tion had been much less ardent than that of Philip, and
mutl have rendered him not only enterprising but formid-
able.

While the elder branch of the Austrian family rose to

such pre-eminence in Spain, the younger, of which Ferdi-
nand was the head, grew to be considerable in Germany;
the ancient hereditary dominions of the house of Austria in
Germany, united to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohe-
mia, which Ferdinand had acquired by marriage, formed a
refpetable power; and when the Imperial dignity was add-
ed to these, Ferdinand possessed territories more extensive
than had belonged to any prince, Charles V. excepted, who
had been at the head of the empire for several ages. For-
tunately for Europe, the disgust which Philip conceived on
account of Ferdinand's refuting to relinquish the Imperial
crown in his favour, not only prevented for some time the
separate members of the house of Aultria from asing in
concert, but occasioned between them a visible alienation
and rivalfnip. By degrees, however, regard to the interest
of their family extinguished this impolitical animosity.
The confidence which was natural returned; the aggrandiz-
ing of the house of Aufiria became the common object of
all their schemes; they gave and received assistance alter-
nately towards the execution of them; and each derived con-
lideration and importance from the other's success. A fa.
mily so great and so aspiring, became the general object of
jealousy and terror. All the power, as well as policy, of
Europe were exerted during a century, in order to check
and humble it. Nothing can give a more striking idea of
the ascendant which it had acquired, and of the terror which
it had inspired, than that after its vigour was spent with

extraordinary excltions of its flrength, after Spain was be-
come on'y tLe shadow of a great name, and its monarchs
vwere funk into debility and dotage, the house of Austria
still continued to be formidable. The nations of Europe
had so often felt its superior power, and had been so con-
flantly employed in guarding against it, that the dread of it
became a kind of political habit, the influence of which re-
mained when the causes which had farmed it ceased to

IW.i.c tie hlouc of Aufiria went on with such success in

enlarging its dominions, France made no considerable acqui-
fition cf new territory. All its schemes of conquest in Ita-
ly had proved abortive; it had hitherto obtained no eftabliih-
ment of conflquence in the new world; and after the con-
tinued and vigorous efforts of four successive reigns, the con-
fnes of the kingdom were much the fame as Louis XI. had
left them. But though France made not such large strides
towards dominion as the house of Austria, it continued to
advance by feps which were more fccure, because they
were gradual and less observed. The conquef of Calais
put it out of the power of the Englif to invade France but
at their utmofr peril, and delivered the French from the
dread of their ancient enemies, who, previous to that event,
could at any time penetrate into the kingdom by that ave.
hue, and thereby retard or defeat the execution of their best
concerted enterprises against any foreign power. The im-
portant acquisition of IMctz covered that part of their fron-
tier which formerly was most feeble, and lay most exposed
to insult. France, from the time of its obtaining these ad-
ditional Securities against external invasion, mull be deemed
the most powerful kingdom in Europe, and is more fortu-
nately situated than any on the continent either for conqueit
or defence. From the confines of Artois to the bottom of
the Pyrenees, and from the Britiih channel to the frontiers
of Savoy and the coalt of the Mediterranean, its territories
'1y compa&t and unmingled with thofi of any other power,

Several of the considerable provinces, which had contracled
a spirit of independence by their having been long subjed
to the great vassals of the crown, who were often at vari-
ance or at war with their mailer, were now accustomed to
recognize and to obey one sovereign. As they became
muembers of the fame monarchy, they assumed the sentiments
of that body into which they were incorporated, and co-
operated with zeal towards promoting its interest and hon-
our. The power and influence wrelted from the nobles
\'ere seized by the crown. The people were not admitted
to share in these spoils; they gained no new privilege; they
acquired no additional weight in the legislature. It was
i!ot for the fake of the people, but in order to extend their
own prerogative, that the monarchs of France had laboured
to humble their great vassals. Satisfied with having brought
them under entire fubjecion to the crown, they difeovered
no solicitude to free the people from their ancient depend-
ence on the nobles whom they held, and by whom they were
often oppressed.

A monarch, at the head of a kingdom thus united at home

and secure from abroad, was entitled to form great designs,
because he felt himfelfin a condition to execute them. The
foreign wars which had continued with little interruption
from the accefion of Charles VIII. had not only cherished
and augmented the martial genius of the nation, but by in-
i:ring the troops during the course of long service to the fa-
tigues of war, and accustoming them to obedience, had add-
td the force of discipline to their natural ardour. A gallant
and astive body of nobles, who confidered themselves as idle
and useless, unless when they were in the field; who were
L.ardly acquainted with any paitime or exercise but what was
nilitary; and who knew no road to power, or fame, or
wealth, but war, would not have suffered their sovereign to
rmnain long in inaftion. The people, little acquainted with
tie arts of peace, and always ready to take arms at the com-
· :and of their fupcriors, were accuflosicd, by the experce of

long wars carried on in distant countries, to bear impositions,
which, however inconsiderable they may seem if estimated
by the exorbitant rate of modern exaAions, appear immense
when compared with the fums levied in France, or in any o.
ther country of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis XI.
As all the members of which the state was composed were
thus impatient for ation, and capable of greatfefforts, the
schemes and operations of France must have been no less for.
midable to Europe than those of Spain. The superior ad-
vantages of its situation, the contiguity and compaAnefs of
its territories, together with the peculiar fate of its politi-
cal constitution at that juncure, mur have rendered its en-
terprifes still more alarming and more decisive. The king
possessed such a degree of power as gave him the entire com.
mand of his fubjees; the people were strangers to those oc-
cupations and habits of life which render men averse to war,
or unfit for it; and the nobles though reduced to the fubor-
dination neceflary in a regular government, itill retained the
high undaunted spirit which was the effe& of their ancient
independence. The vigour of the feudal times remained,
their anarchy was at an end; and the kings of France could
avail themselves of the martial ardour which that singular in-
flitution bad kindled or kept alive, without being exposed to
any of the dangers or inconveniencies which are inseparable
from it when in entire force.-

A kingdom in such a state is, perhaps, capable of greater

military efforts than at any other period in its progrefa. But
how formidable or how fatal soever to the other nations of
Europe the power of such a monarchy might have been, the
civil wars which broke out in France saved than at that
juncture from feeling its effets. Thfe wars, of which re-
ligion was the pretext and ambition the cause, wherein great
abilities were displayed by the leaders of the different sac
tions, and little condut or firmness were manifested by the
crown under a succession of weak'princes, kept France occu-
pied and embroiled for half a century. During there con-

motions the internal strength of the kingdom was much waft-
ed, and such a spirit of anarchy was spread among the no-
bles, to whom rebellion was familiar, and the restraint of
laws unknown, that a considerable interval became requisite
not only for recruiting the internal vigour of the nation, but
for re-establishing the authority of the prince; so that it was
long before France could turn her whole attention towards
foreign tranfations, or a& with her proper force in foreign
wars. It was long before (he rose to that ascendant in Eu-
rope which she has maintained since the administration of
cardinal Richlieu, and which the situation as well as extent
of the kingdom, the nature of her government4 together with
the character of her people, entitle her to maintain.

While the kingdoms on the continent grew into power

and consequence, England likewise made considerable pro-
grefs towards regular government and interior strength.
Henry VIII. probably without intention, and certainly
without any confident plan, of which his nature was inca-
pable, pursued the scheme of depreffiag the nobility, which
the policy of his father Henry VII.had begun. The pride
and caprice of his temper led him to employ chiefly new men
in the administration of affairs, because he found them moot
obsequious, or leaf scrupulous; and he not only conferred
on them such plenitude of power, but exalted them to fuctr
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and degraded the an-
cient nobility, By the alienation or sale of the church lands,
which were dissipated with a profusion not inferior to the ra-
pacioufnefs with which they had been seized, as well as by
the privilege granted to the ancient landholders of felling
their eltates, or disposing of them by will, an inmmenfe pro.
perty, formerly locked up, was brought into circulation.
This put the spirit of industry and commerce in motion, and
gave it some considerable degree of vigour. The, road to
power and to opulence became open to persons ofevery con-
dition. A sudden and exceflive flow of welth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain; a moderate

V1l. IV. U

acceflion in England to the fum in circulation gave life to
commerce, awakened the ingenuity of the nation, and ex-
cited it to useful enterprise. In France, what the nobles
loft the crown gained. In England, the commons were
gainers as well as the king. Power and influence accom.
panied of course the property which they acquired. They
rose to consideration among their fellow-fubje&s; they be-
gan to feel their own importance; and extending their in-
fluence in the legiflativebody gradually, and often when nei-
ther they themselves nor others foresaw all the effeas of their
claims and pretensions, they at las attained that high autho-
rity to which the British ccnflitution is indebted for the ex.
iitence, and mull owe the preservation, of its liberty. At
the fame time that the Englifli constitution advanced to-
wards perfection, several circumstances brought on a change
in the ancient system with refpet to foreign powers, and in.
troduced another more beneficial to the nation. As soon
as Henry disclaimed the supremacy of the papal fee, and
broke off all connexion with the papal court, considerable
fums were saved to the nation, of which it had been annually
drained by temittances to Rome sot dispensations and indul-
gences, by the expence of pilgrimages into foreign coun-
triest, or by payment of annates, first fruits, and a thousand
other taxes which that artful and rapacious court levied on
the credulity of mankind. The exercise of a jurifditlion
different from that of the civil power, and claiming not only
to be independent of it, but superior to it, a wild solecism
:n government, apt not only to perplex and disquiet weak
minds, but tending direcly to disturb society, was finally a-
bcliffed. Government became more simple as well as more

-t he loss which the nation sustained by most of there articles

is I,'- .ous, and must have been great. Even that by pilgrimages
xa5 not inconsiderable. In the year 14a8, licence was obtained
i:v no fewer than 916 persons to visit the 1hrine of St. James of
Compoflela in Spain. Rymer,vol. x. p. . In x434, the num-
ber of Filgrirrs to the fame place was 246:. Ibid. p. . In
144, t!:,; wer- 21:-, vol. xi. p.

*efpecable, when no rank or characer exempted any person
from being amenable to the fame courts as other fubjeEts,
from being tried' by the fame judges, and from being ac-
q:itted or condemned by the fame laws.

By the loss of Calais the English were excluded from the

rii.tinent. All schemes for invading France became of
(curl-l' as chimerical as they had formerly been pernicious.
'Ii'e views of the English were confined, first by neceflity,
sn'l afterwards from choice, within their own island. That
rtce for conquest which had possessed the nation during ma-
;y centuries, and wafted its strength in perpetual and fruit-
:i v.wars, ceased at length. Those active spirits which had
known and followed no profeflion but war, fought for occu-
patioi in the arts .f peace, and their country was benefited
as much by the one as it had suffered by the other. The na-
tion, which had been exhauRfed by frequent expeditions to
the continent, recruited its nuilbers, and acquired new
ltrcngth; and when roused by any extraordinary exigency to
take part in foreign operations, -the vigour of its efforts was
proportionally great, because they were only occasional and
us a (hort continuance.

The fame principle which had led England to adopt ihis

new system with regard to the powers on the continent, oc.
calioned a change in its plan of conduct with refped to Scot-
land, the only foreign state with which, on account of its si-
tuation in the fame illand, the English had such a close con-
ncxion as demanded their perpetual attention. Infead of
prosecuting the ancient scheme of conquering that kingdom,
wvlich the nature of the country, defended by a brave and
hardy people, rendered dangerous if not. impraticable; it
appeared more eligible to endeavour at obtaining such influ-
ence in Scotland as might exempt England from any danger
or d;fquict from that quarter. The national poverty of the
Scots, together with the violence and animosity of their sac-
tions, rendered the execution of this plan easy to a people
ftr fuiprior to them in wealth. The leading men of great-

Uz

eft power and popularity were gained; the ministers and fa-
vourites of the crown were corrupted; and such absolute dim
retion of the Scottilh councils was acquired, as rendered
the operations of the one kingdom dependent, in a great
measure, on the sovereign of the other. Such perse& exterw
nal security, added to the interior advantages which England
now possessed, must soon have raised it to new consideration
and importance; the long reign of Elizabeth, equally con.
fpicuous for wisdom, for steadiness, and for vigour, accelerat.
ed its progress, and carried it with greater rapidity towards
that elevated station which it hath since held among the
powers of Europe.

During the period in which the political state of the great

kingdoms underwent such changes, revolutions ofconfider-
able importance happened in that of the secondary or inseo
rior powers. Those in the papal court are most obvious,
and of most extensive corfequence.

In the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned the rife of

that spiritual jurifdi&ion which the popes claim as vicars of
Jesus Chrifi, and have traced the progress of that authority
which they poflefs as temporal princest. Previous to the
reign of Charles V. there was nothing that tended to circumn
scribe or to moderate their authority, but science and phi-
lfophy, which began to revive and be cultivated. The pro.
grefs of these, however, was still inconsiderable; they always
operate slowly; and it is long before their influence reaches
the people, or can produce any sensible effe& upon them.
They may perhaps gradually, and in a long course of years,
undermine and ihake an established system of false religion,
but there is no intlance of their having overturned one. The
battery is too feeble to demolish those fabrics which super-
fittioa raises on deep foundations, and can itrengthen with
the most consummate art.

Luther had attacked the papal supremacy with other wea-
pons, and with an impetuosity more formidable. The time

VoL . p. I14, &-c.

and manner of his attack concurred .with a multitude. of cr
cumfiances, which have been explained, in giving him irame.
diate success. The charm which. had, bound mankind .for-
so many ages was broken at once. The human mind, which
had continued long as tame and paflive as.if it had:beel
formed to believe whatever was taught, and to be]at-what-
ever was imposed, roused of a sudden and becanme inqtuitive,
mutinous, and disdainful of the yoke to which it ad hither-
to submitted. That wonderful ferment and agitation of
mind, which, at this dtilance of time, appears unaccountable,
or is condemned as extravagant, was so generals that it muff
have been excited by causes which were natural and of pow-
erful.effcacy. The kingdoms of Denmark, Sveden, Eng-
Lind, and Scotland, and almost one-half of Germany, threw
off their allegiance to the pope, abolifed hisjurifdiftioe
within their territories, and gave the fan&ion of law to modes
of discipline and fyllems of docrine which were not only ins
dependent of his power, but hostile to it. Nor-was this fpi-
rit of innovation confined to those countries which openly
revolted from the pope; it fpread.through all Europe, -and
broke out in-every part of it with various degrees of wio-
lklce.. It penetrated early into France, and made a quick
progreEs there. In. that kingdom, the number of converts
to the opinions of the reformers was so great, their zeal so.
ci;terpriiing,-and the abilities of their leaders so ditlinguiflh
rJ, that they soon ventured-to contend for superiority with
ile ellablifhed church, and were sometimes onthe point of:
brtaining it. In all the provinces of Germany.which con-
;i:ued to acknowledge the papal supremacy, as well as in the
Lo)\w-Countries, the protestant doatrines were secretly taught,
ard had gained- so many proselytes, that they were -ipe for
revolt, and were refirain-d merely by the dread..ofthei: rtu,'i
i:::s from imitating the e:xample of their Ieighbonr,-'a!ld
~Idrting their independerce; Even in -pain. ald Italv,
: niptoms to snake off the yoke aippeared. The pretenfionr i
.£ tile pope to iufaiiblie knowledge and fuipre-e i-owrvr were

i' 3

treated by many persons of eminent learning and abilities
with such scorn, or attacked with such vehemence, that the
molt vigilant attention of the civil magifhrate, the highest
strains of pontifical authority, and all the rigour of'inquifi.
tonal jurifdi&ion were requisite to check and extinguish it.

The defetion of so many opulent and powerful king.

doms from the papal fee, was a fatal blow to its grandeur
and power. It abridged the dominions of the popes in ex.
tent, it dim;nifhed their revenues, and left them fewer re-
wards to bestow on the ecclefialtcs of various denomina.
tions, attached to them by vows of obedience as well as by
ties of interest, and whom they employed as instruments to
establish or support their usurpations in every part of Eu-
rope. The countries too which now disclaimed their au-
thority, were those which formerly had been most devoted
to it. The empire of superstition differs from every other
species of dominion; its power is often greateR and most
implicitly obeyed in the provinces moR remote from the feat
of government; while such as are situated nearer to that are
more apt to discern the artifices by which it is upheld, or
the impostures on which it is founded. The personal frail-
ties or vices of the popes, the errors as well as corruption of
their administration, the ambition, venality, and deceit which
reigned in their courts, fell immediately under the obferva-
tion of the Italians, and could not fail of diminishing that
refpeE which begets submission. But in Germany, Eng-
land, and the more remote parts of Europe, these were ei-
ther altogether unknown, or being only known by report,
made a rligter impreflion. Veneration for the papal dig-
nity increased accordingly in these countries in proportion
to their distance from Rome; and that veneration, added
to their gross ignorance, rendered them equally ereddous
and pafive. In tracing the progress of the papal dbomina-
tion, the boldest add most successful instances 6f encroach-
ment are to be found in Germany and other countris 'di-
ftant Trom Italy. In these its impositions were heaviest asid

its exations the mot rapacious; so that in estimating the
diminution of power which the court of Rome suffered in
consequence of the reformation, not only the number but
the character of the people who revolted, not only the
great extent of territory, but the extraordinary obsequious.
ness of the fubjecs which it loft, must be taken into the
account.

Nor was it only by this defetion of so many kingdoms

and states which the reformation occasioned, that it contri-
buted to diminish the power of the Roman, pontiffs. It o-
bliged them to adopt a different system of conduct towards
the'nations which still continued to recognise their jurifdic-
tion, and to govern them by new maxims and with a milder
spirit. The reformation taught them, by a fatal example,
what they seem not before to have apprehended, that the
credulity and patience of mankind might be overburdened
and exhausted. They became afraid of venturing upon any
such exertion of their authority as might alarm or exasperate
their fubjeds, and excite them to a new revolt. They saw
a rival church established in many countries of Europe, the
members of which were on the watch to observe any errors
in their administration, and eager to expose them. They
were sensible that the opinions, adverse to their power and
usurpations, were not adopted by their enemies alone, but
had spread even among the people who still adhered to them.
Upon all these accounts, it was no longer possible to lead or
to govern their flock in the fame manner as in those dark
and quiet ages when faith was implicit, when fibmifion was
unreserved, and all tamely followed and obeyed the voice of
their pallor. From the aera of the reformation, the popes
have ruled rather by address and management than by autho-
rity. Though the style of their decrees be still the fame,
the effec of them is very different. Those bulls and inter-
diits which, before the reformation, made the greatelt prin.
ces tremble, have since that period been disregarded or de-
spifed by the moat inconsiderable. Those bold decifioils

and aas ofjurifdition which, during many ages, not only
passed uncenfured, but were revered as the awards of a fa-
cred tribunal, would, since Luther's appearance, be. treated
by one part of Europe as the effea of folly or arrogance,
and be detefed by the other as impious and uljuft. The
popes, in their adminiflration, have been obliged not only
to accommodate themselves to the notions of their adhe-
rents, but to pay some regard to the prejudices of their ene.
mies. They fcldom venture to claim new powers, or evea
to insist obitinately on their ancient prerogatives, les they
should irritate the former; they carefully avoid every mea.
sure that may either excite the indignation or draw on them
the deriion of the latter. The policy of the court of Rome
has become as cautious, circumfpet, and timid, as it was
once adventurous and violent; and though their pretensions
to infallibility, on which all their authority is founded,. does
not allow them to renounce any jurifdition, which they
have at any time claimed or exercised, they find it. expedi-
ent to susser many of their prerogatives to lie dormant, and
not to expose themselves to the risk of losing that remainder
of power which they fill enjoy, by ill-timed attempts to-
wards reviving obsolete pretensions. Before the sixteenth
century, the popes were the movers and directors in every
considerable enterprise; they were at the head of- every
great alliance; and being confidered as arbiters in the affairs
of Chriitendom, the court of Rome was the centre of poli-
tical nectiation and intrigue. Since that time, the greatest
operation in Europe have been carried ot independent of
them; they have funk almofl to alevel with the other petty
princes of Italy; they continue to claim, though they dare
not exercise, the fame spiritual jurifdicion, but hardly re-
tain any ihadow of the temporal power which they ancient-
ly poffffed.

But how fatal soever the reformation may have been to

the power of the popes, it has contributed to improve the
church of iRome both in science and in morals. The desire

es equalling the reformers in those talents which had pro-
cured them refpe&; the necessity of acquiring the know.
ledge requisite for defending their own tenets; or refuting
the arguments of their opponents, together with the emula-
tion natural between two rival churches, engaged the Roman
catholic clergy to apply themselves to the study of useful
science, which they cultivated with such assiduity and fuc-
cess, that they have gradually become as eminent in litera-
ture, as they were in some periods infamous for ignorance.
The fame principle occasioned a change no less considerable
in the morals of the Romiih clergy. Various causes which
have formerly been enumerated, had concurred in introduc-
ing great irregularity, and even dissolution of manners, a-
mong the popish clergy. Luther and his adherents began
their attack on the church with such vehement invetives
against these, that, in ordef to remove the scandal, and si-
lence their declamations, greater decency of condua became
necessary. The reformers themselves were so eminent not
only for the purity but even auterity of their manners, and
had acquired such reputation among the people on that ac.
count, that the Roman catholic clergy muff have soon loft
all credit, if they had not endeavoured to conform in some
measure to their flandard. They knew that all their ac-
tions fell under the severe infpedion of the protestants,
whom enmity and emulation prompted to observe every
vice, or even impropriety in their condu&; to censure them
without indulgence, and expose them without mercy. This
rendered them, of course, not only cautious to avoid such
enormities as might give offence, but fludious to acquire the
virtues which might merit praise. In Spain and Portugal,
where the tyrannical jurifdiaion of the inquisition crushed
the protestant faith as soon as it appeared, the spirit of
popery continues invariable; science has made small pro-
grefs, and the character of ecclesiastics has undergone little
change. But in those countries where the members of the
two churches have mingled freely with each other, or have

carried on any considerable intercourse, either commercial
or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas, as well
as in the morals of the popish ccclefiaftics, is manifest. In
France, the manners of the dignitaries and secular clergy
have become decent and exemplary in an high degree. Ma.
ny of them have been distinguished for all the accomplish.
ments and virtues which can adorn their profefiion; and
differ greatly froni their predecessors before the reformation,
both in their maxims and in their condu&t.

Nor has the influence of the reformation been felt only

by the inferior members of the Roman catholic church; it
has extended to the fee of Rome, to the sovereign pontiffs
themfclves. Violations of decorum,-and even trespasses a.
gainft morality, which paued without censure in those ages,
when neither the power of popes, nor the veneration of the
people for their character, had any bounds; when there was
no hostile eye to observe the errors in their condu&, and no
adversaries zealous to inveigh against them; would be liable
now to the severest anitnadverfion, and excite general indig.
nation or horror. Instead of rivalling the courts of tempo-
ral princes in gaiety, and furpalling them in licentioufnef,
the popes have fludied to assume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical character. The chair of
St. Peter hath not been polluted during two centuries, by
any pontiff that resembled Alexander VI. or several of his
predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion and to humian
nature. Throughout this long fuccefflon of popes, a won.
derful decorum of conduct, compared with that of preced.
ing ages, is observable. Many of them, efpecialy among
the pontiffs of the present century, have been conspicuous
for all the virtues becoming their high station; and by theii
humanity, their love of literature, and their moderation,
have made some atonement to mankind for the crimes ol
their predecessors. Thus the beneficial influences of the re
formation have been more extensive than they appear on i
superficial view; and this great division in the Chriftias

church hath contributed, in some measure, to increase puri-
ty of manners, to diffuse science, and to inspire humanity.
History recites such a number of Ihocking events occasioned
by religious dissensions, that it must afford peculiar fatisfac.
tion to trace any one salutary or -beneficial effect to that
source from which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

The republic of Venice, which, at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, had appeared so formidable, that almost
all the potentates of Europe united in a confederacy for its
deflru&ion, declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendor. The Venetians not only loft a great part of their
territory in the war excited by the league of Cambray, but the
revenues as well as vigour of the state were exhausted by their
extraordinary and long-continued efforts in their own defence;
and that commerce by which they had acquired their wealth
and power began to decay, without any hopes of its reviving.
All thefatal consequences to their republic whichthefagacity,
of the Venetian senate foresaw on the first discovery of a pas-
fige to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, atual-
vy took place. Their endeavours to prevent the Portuguese,
from establishing themselves in the East Indies, not only by
exciting the Soldans of Egypt, and the Ottoman monarchs,
to turn their arms against such dangerous intruders, but by
affording secret aid to the infidels in order to insure their
fuccefst, proved ineffetual. The activity and valour of
the Portuguese surmounted every obstacle, and obtained such
2 firm footing in that fertile country, as secured to them
large poffefions, together with an influence still more exten.
five. Lisbon, inflead of Venice, became the Raple for the
precious commodities of the East. The Venetians, after
having poffefled for many years, the monopoly of that bene-
ficial commerce, had the mortification to be excluded from
almost any share in it. The discoveries of the Spaniards in
the Wefrern world proved no less fatal to inferior branches
f their commerce. The original defeEs which were for-

t Frcher. Script. Rer. German. vol. .ii. 529.

carried on any considerable intercourse, either commercial
or literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas, as well
as in the morals of the popih eccclefiaftics, is manifest. In
France, the manners of the dignitaries and secular clergy
have become decent and exemplary in an high degree. Ma-
ny of them have been difinguifhed for all the accomplish.
ments and virtues which can adorn their profession; and
differ greatly fron their predecessors before the reformation,
both in their maxims and in their condut.

Nor has the influence of the reformatio; been felt only

by the inferior members of the Roman catholic church; it
has extended to the fee of Rome, to the sovereign pontiffs
themselves. Violations of decorum, -and even trespasses a-
gainft morality, which passed without censure in those ages,
when neither the power of popes, nor the veneration of the
people for their charater, had any bounds; when there was
no hoRfile eye to observe the errors in their conduct, and no
adversaries zealous to inveigh againit them; would-be liable
now to the severest anitnadverfion, and excite general indig.
nation or horror. Instead of rivalling the courts of tempo-
ral princes in gaiety, and surpassing them in licentioufaefs,
the popes have studied to assume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclefaftical characer. The chair of
St. Peter hath not been polluted during two centuries, by
any pontiff that resembled Alexander V I. or several of his
predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion and to human
nature. Throughout this long fuccefflon of popes, a won-
derful decorum of condu&, compared with that of preced.
ing ages, is observable. Many of them, especially among
the pontiffs of the present century, have been conspicuous
for all the virtues becoming their high station; and by their
humanity, their love of literature, and their moderation,
have made some atonement to mankind for the crimes of
their predecessors. Thus the beneficial influences of the re-
formation have been more extensive than they appear on a
fupericial view; and this great division in the Chriftiaa

church hath contributed, in some measure, to increase puri-
ty of manners, to diffuse science, and to inspire humanity.
History recites such a number of Ihocking events occasioned
by religious dissensions, that it must afford peculiar fatisfac-
tion to trace any one salutary or 'beneficial effec to that
source from which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

The republic of Venice, which, at the beginning of the

sixteenth century, had appeared so formidable, that almost
all the potentates of Europe united in a confederacy for its
deftruEtion, declined gradually from its ancient power and
splendor. The Venetians not only loft a great part of their
territory in the war excited by the league of Cambray, but the
revenues as well as vigour of the state were exhausted by their
extraordinary and long-continued efforts in their own defence;
and that commerce by which they had acquired their wealth
and power began to decay, without any hopes of its reviving.
All thefatal consequences to their republic whichthefagacity,
of the Venetian senate foresaw on the firif discovery of a pas-
sage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, actual-
ly took place. Their endeavours to prevent the Portuguese,
from establishing themselves in the East Indies, not only by
exciting the Soldans of Egypt, and the Ottoman monarchs,
to turn their arms against such dangerous intruders, but by
affording secret aid to the infidels in order to insure their
ucceefst-, proved ineffecual. The actirity and valour of
the Portugucfe surmounted every obstacle, and obtained such
a firm footing in that fertile country, as secured to them
large possessions, together with an influence flill more exten-
five. Lilbon, instead of Venice, became the ltaple for the
precious commodities of the East. The Venetians, after
having possessed for many years, the monopoly of that bene-
ficial commerce, had the mortification to be excluded from
almost any /hare in it. The discoveries of the Spaniards in
lthe Western world proved no less fatal to inferior branches
us their commerce. The original defects which were for-

t Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. .i. 529.

merly pointed out in the constitution of the Venetian repub.
lic fil continued, and the disadvantages with which it un.
dertook any great enterprTie increased, rather than diminish.
ed. The sources from which it derived its extraordinary
riches and power being dried up, the interior vigour of the
state declined, and, of course, its external operations became
less formidable. Long before the middle of the sixteenth
century, Venice ceased to be one of the principal powers in
Europe, and dwindled into a secondary and subaltern fate.
But as the senate had the address to conceal the diminution
of its power, under the veil of moderation and caution; as
it made no rah effort that could discover its weakness; as
the symptoms of political decay in states are not soon obferv-
ed, and are seldom so apparent to their neighbours as to
occasion any sudden alteration in their conduc towards
them, Venice continued long to be confidered and refpeaed.
She was treated not according to her present condition, but
according to the rank which (he had formerly held. Charles
V. as well as the kings of France his rivals, courted her assist-
ance with emulation and solicitude in all their enterprises.
Even down to the close of the century, Venice remained not
only an objec of attention, but a considerable feat of political
negotiation and intrigue.

That authority which the first Cosmo di Medici, and

Lawrence, his grandson, had acquired in the republic of
Florence, by their beneficence and abilities, inspired their de.
seendaats with the ambition of usurping the sovereignty in
their country, and paved their way towards it. Charles V.
placed Alexander di Medici at the head of the republic
[A. D. 155o,] and to the natural interest and power oi
the family added the weight as well as credit of the Im.
perial protection. Of these, his successor Cosmo, surnamed
the Great, availed himself; and establishing his supreme an
thority on the ruins of the ancient republican constitution
he transmitted that, together with the title of grand duke o
Tuscany, to his descendants. Their dominions were cor

rofed of the territorics which had belonged to the th ree coin-
monwealths of Florerce, Pisa, and Sienna, and formed one
of the mo{t refpefable of the Italian states.

The dukes of Savoy, during the former part of the fix-

teenth century, poIefrled territories which were not confider-
alle either for extent orvalue; and the French, having feiz-
ed the greater part of them, obliged the reignling duke to
retire for safety to the strong fortress of Nice, where he shut
himfelfup for several years, while his son, the prince of
Piedmont, endearoured to better his fortune, by serving as
an adventurer in the armies of Spain. The peace of Cateau-
Cambrefis restored to him his paternal dominions. As
these are environed on every hand by powerful ncighbourb,
all whose motions the dukes of Savoy must observe with the
greatest attention, in order not only to guard against the
danger of being surprised and overpowercld, but that they
may chufe their fide with difcernrrent in those quarrels
wherein it is impossible for them to avoid taking part, this
lseculiarity in their situation seems to have had no inconri-
lerable influence on their chara&er. By roufiilg them to
perpetual attention, by keeping their ingenuity always on
ith l' retch, and engaging them in almoit continual action,
it hath formed a race of princes more sagacious in difcovcring
their true interest, more decisive in their resolutions, and
more dexterous in availing themselves of every occurrence
which presented itself, than any perhaps that can be singled
out in the history of Europe. By gradual acquisitions the
dl;kes of Savoy have added to their territories, as well as to
their own importance; and aspiring at length to regal dig-
lity, which they obtained about half a century ago, by the
title of kings of Sardinia, they hold now no inconsiderable
rank amonTg the monarchs of Europe.

The territories which form the republic of the United
Netherlands were loft during the first part of the sixteenth
century, among the numerous provinces fubjeEt to the house
':f Auflria; and were then so inconsiderable, that hardly one
Vol. IV. X

pportunity of mentioning them hath occurred in all the bu-
iy period of this hiRory. But soon after the peace of Ca-
teau-Carr.brefis, the violent and bigoted maxims of Philip's
government, being carried into execution with unrelenting ri-
,our by the duke of Alva, exasperated the free people of the
Low Countries to such a degree, that they threw off the
Spaniih yoke, and asserted their ancient liberties and laws.
These they defended with a persevering valour, which gave
employment to the arms of Spain during half a century, ex-
haufted the vigour, ruined the reputation of that monarchy,
and at lalt constrained their ancient mailers to recognise and
to treat with them as a free independent itate. This state,
founded on liberty, and reared by industry and economy,
grew into great reputation, even while itruggling for its ex-
iltence. But when peace and security allowed it to enlarge
its views, and to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of
the raoft refpecable as well as enterprising powers in Eu-
rope.

The transactions of the kingdoms in the North of Europe
have been seldom attended to in the course of this history.

Russia remained buried in that barbarism and obscurity,

from which it was called about the beginning of the present
century, by the creative genius of Peter the Great, who
made his country known and formidable to the reft of Eu-
rope.

In Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of Charles

V. great revolutions happened in their constitutions, civil as
well as ecclesiastical. In the former kingdom, a tyrant
being degraded from the throne, and expelled the coun-
try, a new prince was called by the voice of the people
to assume the reins of government. In the latter, a fierce
people roused to aims by injuries and oppression, ihook
off the Danish yoke, and conferred the regal dignity on
its deliverer Gustavus Ericson, who had all the virtues
<.f a hero and of a patriot. Denmark, exhausted by so-
.;ign wars, or weackned by the dif'icnfions between the

king and the nobles, became incapable of such efforts as
were requisite in order to recover the ascendant which it had
long poffeeffd in the North of.Europe. Sweden, as soon as
it was freed from the dominion of strangers, began to re-
cruit its flrength, and acquired in'a ihort time such internal
vtgour, that it became the first kingdom in the North. Ear-
ly in the fuibfequent century, it rose to such a high rank a-
mong the powers of Europe, that it had the chief merit in
forming, as well as conducting, that powerful league, which
protected not only the proteltant religion, but the liberties
of Germany, against the bigotry and ambition of the houfc
of Austria.

X z

. 'v
.

# INDEX TO THE SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH VOLUMES.

INDEX

TO THE

SECOND, TIIRD, AND FOURTH VOLUMES.
N. . The Roman Numerals diredl to .ie Volume, and the r.i

gures to the Page.

A

BZBcLU7TO.V, the form of that used by father Tetzel in

'- Germany, ii. X\'e. z ,.
.AJ,;5, the faction of, afSils the Imperial general Collona in tile

reol..uAion of Genoa, ii. 139.
Adi iJn, of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. under William

'de Crov, lord of Chievres, ii. z1. His charaCter, i;. Sent
hy Charles with power to assume the regency of Castile on tile
dcat.h of his grandfather, 26. His claim admitted by cardinal
Ximenes, and executed in conjuntion, 27. Authorized by
Ch-ales to hoid the Cortes of Valencia, which refu.es toaffem.
Lie bcfore him, 60. Made viceroy of Caflile on the departure
,-t Charles frr Ge-rmany, 6-. His elecion remonstrated againit
by the Caltilians, it. Is chosen pope, I36. Retrolpe, of his
cc:iduct in Spain during the absence of Charles, 145. Scnds
Runquillo to reduce the Segovians, who repulse him, i,. Sen(Is
Ionlcca to bcfiege the city, who is repulsed by the inhabitalts
cf edina del Campo, 146. Apologizes for Fonseca's conduct
to the peop;e, .47. Recais Fonseca, and difinilfcs his troops,
iz. His authority disclaimed by the holy Junta, I49. Depriv-
ed of povwer hv them, s50. His ill reception on his arrival at
Rlome csl beili chiten to the papacy, 172. Restores the terri-
to._:- acquired by his predecifor, 173. Labours to unite the
c o:.:cudirn p owers f Europe, it. Publiffes a bull for a three
er;. true aor;ong theni, 174. Accedes to the league againit
:iic French king, it. His death, 180. The sentiments and bcha-
vour of the pcople on that occasion, ib. A retrospeCt of his
i nrduct to ards the reforn:crs, 189. His brief to the diet of
iNureTnherg, i/. Rectives a lift of grievances from the diet,
191. iis tonditt to the reformers, how esteemed at RouIc,
193.
Ar.(, the Spanifa troops sent by cardinal Xirr.-nes againfl Bar-

barof'i, defeated there, ii. 35.
tr.;s Mortes, iinterview between the emperor Charles and Fran-
cis ti.ere, iii. I09.

Adix-a-Chbafl., the emperor Charles crowned there, ii. 89. Ferdi-

nand his bro:her crowned king of the Romnans there, iii. 40.
.'AlAJrlc.S, Don cr dinr.an, ira-nc:s I. of France, taken priolner at

t-.i';kthe bL'-tle of Pl .i cc-n;:t t o his cultody. ii. 2o8. Cun-
w' . . * ,

ducls Francis to Spain, zt5. Delivers up Francis in purluance
of the treaty of Madrid, 229. Is sent ambaltador to Francis to
require the fulfilment of his treaty, 242. Pope Clement VII.
taken prisoner by the Imperialits, is committed to his curtody,
259.

.Ibany, John Stuart, duke of, commands the French army sent

by Francis I. to invade Naples, ii. 203.

,.irrt, of Brandenburgh, grand master of the Teutonic order, bc-

rnices a convert to the doctrines of Luther, ii. 23.8. Obtains of
Sigismund king of Poland the investiture of Prussia, ereaed
into a dutchy, ib. Put under the ban of the empire, 239. His
family fixed in the inheritance of Prufila, ii. Commands a
body of troops in behalf of Maurice of Saxony, but endeavours
to assert an independency, iv. 58. Defeats and takes the duke
d'Aumale prilbner, and joins the emperor at Metz, 76. Is con-
demned by the Imperial chamber for his demands on the bi-
shops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg, 84. A league formed a-
gainft him, 85. Is defeated by Maurice, ib. Is again de-
feated by Henry of Brunswick, 87. Is driven out of Germa-
ny, and dies in exile, ib. His territories restored to his collate-
ral heirs ii.

Albert, elector of Mentz, the publication of indulgences in Ger-

many committed to him, ii. 7s.

Alexander VI. pope, remarks on the pontificate of, ii. 96.
Alexander di Medici. See lediri.
Algiers, how it was seized by Barbarossa, iii. 67. Is seized by the

brother of the fame name, on the death of the former, 68. Is
taken under the protection of the Porte; ib. Is governed by
1-afcen Aga in the absence of Barbarofla, 158. Is besieged by
the emperor Charles V. I60. Charles forced to reimbark by
bad weather, Ix6.

Ailajc/id, brother of Muley-Hafcen king of Tunis, solicits the pro-

tedlion of Barbarossa agaiuft him, iii. 69. His treacherous treat-
ment by Barbarofla, 70.
Al,/, duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dispute with

the archduke Philip concerning the regency of Castile, ii. c.
Forces the dauphin to abandon the ftege of Perpignan, iii. 17 t.
Precides at the court-martial which condemns the eledlor of
Saxony to death, 288. Detains the landgrave prilbner by the
emperor's order, 297. Commands under the emperor the
army destined againit France, iv. 75. Is appointed command-
erin chief in Piedmont, 117. linters the ecclesiastical terri-
tories and flizes the Campagna Romana, 159. Concludes a
truce with the pope, I60. Negotiates a peace between Philip
and the pope, with cardinal Caiaffa, o80. Goes to Rome tl
afc pardon of the pope for Ih; hostilities, ii. Is sent to Paris
in the name of Philip to efipoulf the princess Elizabeth, 2tr.

A..,loJrjs a nobleman of HIol!and, aflociated by Charles V. with

cardinal Ximenes, in the regency of Castile, ii. 33.

,jlb.,pri/ft, the origin of that lec deduced, iii. 53. Their prin-
cipal tenets, it. Their settlement at Muniltr, 54. Charater

X3

of tli1r principal leaders, i!. They seize the city of Munfler
;. They eflalhifa a new form of government there, i,
Chfie Bocold king, 7,. Their li-entious practices, 58. A
confederarc of the German princes formed against them, 59.
Are'i...':kalcd in bl-r.ter by the bilhop, i&. The city taken,
and gre-t l-l: i'i:r T.a'.e of them, 61. Their king put to

.c-:l., iD. Ci.a-.::tr of the lcel since that period, 62. See
MIa.tbi and B:,..
A.a, r j, his authority cited in proof of the extortions of the F[e-

ni:n ministers of Charles V. ii. 43.

.4l.j , prince of, avows the opinions of Martin Luther, ii. 189.
A im., to the court of Rome, what, ii. Io6.
;,.d- , how Ferdinand became poffiffed of that kingdom, ii. 4.

The Cortes of, acknowledges the archduke Philip's title to the
rov ni, i.. Ancient enmity hetw et n this kingdom and Castile, 8.
Navarre added to this crovn-i by the arts of Ferdinand, 18.
Arrival of Cha,'es V. . 4. The Corns not allowed to alfemble
in his name, 44. The refractory behaviour of the Aragonians,
, T. Ihey rcfufe restitution of the kingdom of Navarre, ib.
Don John Ianuza appointed regent, on the departure of Charles
i-r Gfcrmanyv, 62. W\ho comnpoes the d(iifurbances there, 170.
Tie moderation of Charles toward the insurgents on his arrival
in Spll, 172. See San.

A- i.,, an interx-iew bet.ven Francis I. and Henry VIII. cf

E]Li and, ii. 7.

..'?r.j, Charles son of Philip and Joanna, acknowledged prince

of, by the Cortes of Castile, ii. I4.
.:. ':arr, a diet called there by Charles V. iii. 35. His public

::rv into that city, ib. The confelion of fairh named from
t:.;s city, drawn tip by I;Lianthon, 35. Resolute behaviour
*.r the protestant princes at, ib. Its form of government vio.
l!;:tlv altered, and rendered submissive to the emperor, .20.
f'!.e d;ct again rTen.bltd there, 302. Is intimidated by being
lurr-.unldd l; tl.c emperor's Spanilh troops, ib. The empe-
ror re-efrtihl'lifs the Romish worship in the churches of, ib.
'l'hi dct, by the nemperor's order, petitions the pope for the
e--::rn ot the council to Trent, 309. A fvftem of theolpgy laid
it. re the diet by The emperor, t x;. The archbishop ofMentz
c'-',ares, without authority, the dict's acceptance of it, 314.
'I ihe diet re-afenbled there, iv. 9. The diet takes part with
*!:e emperor againfl the city of Magdeburg, r . Is seized by
Maurice of Saxony, 49- Another diet at, opened by Ferdi-
r.anhl, gz. Cardinal Moron/ attends the diet as the pope's
rillcio, 124.- oron: departs on the pope's death, 1a5. Re.
cl's of the diet on the subjel of religion, 12z. Remarks on
this recess, 132.
.Av!'a, a convention of the ma.lcontents in Spain held there, ii.

i18. A confederacy termed the holy Junta, formed there, 149.
\Which disclaims the authori:v of Adrian, ib. The holy Junta
rtiovYeld to Tcrdcfiilas, 150. See 7uiRa.
i.?.-;,
1 -. l;..t imeanrs :he llcufc of, b.a:-.. so formidable ir.

Germany, ii. 26i. The extraordinary acquisitions of the houlf
of, in the person of the emperor Charles V. iv. 214, a 6.

B

£E,3arofai, Iloruc, his rife to the kingdom of Algiers and Tunis,

ii. 35. Defeats the Spanilh troops sent against him by cardinal
Ximenes, ib. His parentage, iii. 66. Commences pirate with
his brother Hayradin, it. Ilow he acquired pofieffion of Al-
giers, 67. Infeits the coalt of Spain, ib. Is reduced and killed
by Comares the Spanish governor of Oran, 63.
--_-- Hayradin, brother to the former of the fame name, takes

pofefllion of Algiers on his brother's death, iii. 66. Puts his do-
minions under the protection of the Grand Signior, it. Ob-
tains the command of the Turkilh fleet, it. His treacherous
treatment of Alrafchid, brother to the king of Tunis, 69. Sei-
zes Tunis, 70. Extends his depredations by lea, 71. Prepares
to resist the emperor's armament against him, 72. Goletta and
his fleet taken, 7.. Is defeated by Charles, 74. Tunis taken,
75. Makes a dfcent on Italy, z28. Burns Reggio, 179. Be-
lieges Nice in conjunction with the French, but is forced to re-
tirc, il. Is dismissed by Francis, I89.

SJr/6ary, a summary view of the revolution of, iii. 66. Its divi-

sion into independent kingdoms, it. Rife of the piratical flates,
67. See Bar6rj...
S'ilona.l, the public entry of the emperor Charles V. into that

city as its count, iii. 27. The treaties of Charles with the Ita-
lian states, published there, 29.

L/,-ard, chevalier, his cliarater, ii. I26. His gallant defence of

Mezicrs besieged by the Imperialists, i&. Obliges them to rails
the fr-ge, it. Hlls noble, behaviour at his death, I86. His re-
fpetCtfu funeral, il.

B.iay, M. his erroneous account of the education of Charles V.

corre&ed, ii. 21. Nhote. His account of the difafirous retreat of
the emperor Charles V. from his invasion of Provence, iii.

100.

Bi'le, a translation of, undertaken by Meartin Luther, and its cffeels

in opening the eyes of the people, ii. 188.
B. cca, battle of, between Collona and marefchal Lautrec, ii.

037.

B.-;li or Beukles, John, a journeyman taylor, becomes a leader

rs the anahaptifts at Munfrer, iii. 54. Succeeds Matthias in the
direation of their affairs, 57. IHis entlhufiaiic extravagances, ib.
Is rhofen king, ib. Marries fourteen wives, 59. Beheads one
of them, 6o. Is put to a cruel death at the taking of Munster,
6i. See Anawlapji/?.

B: ,lcn,,, the archduke Ferdinand cliofen king of, ii. 261. Ferdi.

nand encroaches on the liberties of the Bohemians, iii. 30o.
iTle reformation introduced by John Ilufs and Jerome of
I'rague, i/. Raise an army to no purpose, 302.
Bi.,ivr.t admiral of France, appointed to command the invasion
of Milan, ii. 179. his charatcr, iib. Enables Collona to de-

fend the citv of Milan by his imprudent delay, 80o. Forced
to abandon the Milanese, 185. Is wounded, and his army de-
feated by the Imperialists, i86. Stimulates Francis to an Inva.
sion of the Milanese, 199. Advises Francis to besiege Pavia,
201. Advises him to give battle to Bourbon, who advanced
to the relief of Pavia, 205. Is killed at the battle of Pavia, 207.
.~lcra, an interview between the emperor Charles V. and pope
Clement VII. there, iii. 28. Another meeting between them
there, 44.

Bodu;lon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares war against the

emperor Charles, at the instigation of Francis, ii. 125. Is or-
dered by Francis to disband his troops, 1z6. His territories re-
duced by the emperor, ib.
Bouline, besieged by lenry VIII. of England, iii 194. Taken,

2c1.
B3uri6on, Charles duke of, his charadcer, ii. 175. The causes of

his discontent with Francis I. 176. His dutchess dies, ib. Re.
jcats the advances of Louise the king's mother, ib. His estate
i'queflered by her intrigues, 177. Negotiates secretly with
the emperor, i6. Is included in a treaty between the emperor
ard Henry VIII. of England, ib. Is taxed by the king with be.
traying him, which he denies, 173. Escapes to Italy, 179.
Directs the measures of the Imperial army under Lannoy, 184.
Defeats the French on the banks of the Seffia, x18. Instigates
Charles to an invasion of France, 196. Advances to the relief
of Pavia, 2c4. Defeats Francis, and takes him prisoner, 207.
Ilaftens to Madrid to secure his own interests in the interview
between Charles and Francis, S18. His kind reception by
Charles, 22j. Obtains a grant of the dutchy of Milan, and is
made general of the Imperial army, 124. Obliges Sforza to
firrender Milan, 245. Is forced to oppress the Milanese to fa.
tisfv his troops mutinying for pay, 249. Sets Morone at liber-
tv, and makes him his confident, ib. Appoints Leyva, govern-
or of Milan, and advances to invade the pope's territories,
230, 2;5. His dirappointce troops mutiny, it. le determines
to plunder Rome, 254. Arrives at Rome, and afitults it, 256.
Is killed, ,ó.
Brsa.Jiur1, eletor of, avows the opinions of Luther, ii. 183.

A--- lbert of. See Al6bt.

r-';j, a league concluded there between the emperor and Ienry
VIII. of England, against France,ii. 128.

Brr-jfvi:, dluke of, avows the opinions of Luther, ii. 189.
-- elenry, duke of, driven from his dominions by the pro-

teftant princes of the league of Smalkalde, iii. 184. Raises men
for Francis, but employs them to recover his own dominion.,

i1i. Is taken prisoner, ib.
Buda, fiere of, by Ferdinand king of the Romans, iii. 15z6. 1

treacherously fcizcd by Sultan Solyman, iM.

ar al, the pope's legat in Grm , appointed to
C.¢G'us, cardinal, the pope's legate in Germany, appointed to ex

amine the dodtrines of Martin Luther, ii. 83. Requires Luther
peremptorily to retract his errors, 84. Requires the ele&or of
Saxony to surrender or banith Luther, 85. His conduc juftifi-
ed, 87.

Clair, an ineffedual conzrefs there, between tile emperor and

Francis, under the mediation of Henry VIII. ii. 127. The
carele s manner in which it was guarded in the reign of Mary
queen of England, iv r. I

. IeffecRual remon!lrances of Phi-

lip, and lord Wentwortil i!e governor, concerning its defence-
lcfs slate, 186. Is invefred and taken by the duke of Guise,
in. The English inhabitants turned out, 387. Stipulations
concerning, in the treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis, 208.
C.,m/,ray, articles of the peace concluded there between the empe-

ror Charles, and Francis of France, iv. x53. Relmrks on this
treaty, 154.

Ci,,,,, peace of, between Henry VIII. and Francis, iii. 235.
(.impezgio, cardinal, made legate from pope Clement VII. to the

;ccond diet at Nuremberg, ii. I94. Publishes articles for re-
forming the inferior clergy, 195. Adviles Charles to rigor-
ous mcafures against the proteflants, iii. 37.
CjltlfioiS, of the Germanic body, signed by Charles V. and pre-

Ifribed to all his successors, ii. 56.

Caroif:, cardinal, his precipitate election, iv. r36. Is appointed

legate to Bologna, ib. Reasons of his disgust with the empe-
ror, 1i 7. Periuadzs the pope to solicit an alliance with France
:aaillf the emperor, ii. i38, t39. His intidious commission
to the court of France, 155. Hlis public entry into Paris, ib.
kxhorts Henry to break his truce with the emperor, ib. Ab-
Illves Henry from his oath, 157. Negotiates a peace between
tlie pope and Philip, with the duke d'Alva, 180. The fate of
him and his brother on the death of pope Paul, 212.
c.:,., ,,Ju, i;nbibes the opinions of Martin Luther, at Wittem-

ii.

9. . Ilia intemp.rate zeal, 187. Awed by the reproofs

of Luther, ib.

Cai.nJn, bhGfeged by the count d'Fngnlin, and defended by the

marquis de Guallo, iii. 189. Guafto defeated in a pitched bat-
tie, 19r. The town taken, 19 z.

C.iji.l., marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno.
L Jile, how liabella became possessed of that kingdom, ii. 3. The

archduke Philip's title acknowledged by the Cortes of that king-
dom, 4. Ilabella dies, and leaves her huiband Ferdinand of A-
ragon regent, ib. Ferdinand resigns the crown of, 8. Ferdi-
n:lnd ackinowledged regent by the Cortes, ib. Ennity between
this kingdom and Aragon, ib. The particular dislike of the
Castilians to Ferdinand, ii. The regency of, jointly veiled in
Ferdinand, Philip and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, 13.
Declares againit Ferdinand, i/. The regency of, religned by
Ferdinand to Philip, ib. Philip and Joanna acknowledged king
and queen by the Cortes, 14. Death of Philip, ib. The per-
plexity of the Caflilians on Joanna's incapacity for government,
1G. Ferdinand gains the regency and tie good-will of the Caiti-

lians by his prudent adminifiration, I8. Oran and other places
in Barbary annexed to this kingdom by Ximenes, ib. Ximenct
appointed regent by Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles
V. 24. Charles assumes the regal title, 28. Ximenes procu-res
its acknowledgment, i3. The nobility deprffied by Ximenes
29, 3o. The grandees mutiny against Ximenes, 31. The
mutiny fupprefied, ii. Ximenes resumes the grants made by
Ferdinand to the nobles, 32. The bold reply of Ximenes to
the discontented nobles, 33. Other afrociates in the regency
appointed with Ximenes at the inltigation of the Flemish court-
iers, iS. Ximenes dies, 41. Charles acknowledged king by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in favour of his mother
Joanna, ib. The Castilians receive unfavourable impreffcons
of him, 4:. Dilgufled by his partiality to his Flemish ministers,
43. Sauvaze made chancellor, ib. William de Croy, appoint.
ed archbifsop of Toledo, ib. The principal cities confede.
rate, and complain of their grievances, 45. The clergy of,
refuse to levy the tenth of benefices granted by the pope
to Charles V. S5. Interdinted, but the interdict taken off,
by Charles's application, 59. An infurrestion there, I. In.
crease the difaffcdion, ii. Cardinal Adrian appointed regent,
on the departure of Charles for Germany, 62. The views and
pretensions of the commons, in their innurretions, 147. The
confederacv called the holy Junta formed, 149. The proceed.
ings of which are carried on in the name of queen Joanna, 15o.
Receives circulatory letters from Charles for the insurgents to
lay down their arms, with promises of pardon, rSx. The no-
bles undertake to suppress the insurgents, 155. Raise an army
against them under the Conde de Haro, 156. Haro gets pof-
feifion of Joanna, s 8. Expedients by which they raise money
for their troops, 160. Unwilling to proceed to extremities
with the Junta, ii. The army of the Junta routed and Padilla
executed, 163, 164. Dissolution of the Junta, I65. The mo-
deration of Charles towards the insurgents, on his arrival in
Spain, 172. He acquires the love of the Caflilians, id. See
Spair.
Catrlrine, of Aragon, is divorced from Henry VIII. of England,

iii. o5. Dies, 114.

CatLerine a Boria, a nun, flies from her cloister, and marries Martin

Luther, ii. 237.

Catsarine di Medici. See 'feJi;i.
Ca-i, peace concluded there between pope Paul IV. and Philip II.

of Spain, iv. 180.

Cercamp, negotiations for peace entered into there between Philip

II of Spain, and Henry II. of France, iv. 197, 198. Tle
negotiations removed to Cateau-Cambrefis, 207. See Caleatu
Camrj;f.l-
CLaraacer of men, rules for forming a proper estimate of them, iii.

zzr. Applied to the cafe of Luther, ib.
Ccarles IV. emperor of Germany, his observation on the manners

of the clergy, in his letter to the archbilhop of Metz, ii. 98.
,V-tc.

Clarlis V. emperor, his descent and birth, ii. 3. IHow he came

to possess such extensive dominions, ib. Acknowledged prince
of Aftlrias by the Cortes of Castile, 14. HIis father Philip dies,
it. Jealousy and hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand towards
him, 19. Left heir to his dominions, 20. Death of Ferdinand,
it. His education committed to William de Croy, lord of
Ciievres, 2r. Adrian of Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor,
22. The firit opening of his chara&er, i$. Assumes the go-
vernment of Slanders, and attends to bufnefs, 23. Sends car-
dinal Adrian to be regent of Castile, who executes it jointly
with Ximenes, z6. Assumes the regal title, 27. His title ad-
mitted with difficulty by the Castilian nobility, ih. Persuaded
to add aflbciate regents to Ximenes, 32. His Flemish court
corrupted by the avarice of Chievres, ~5. Persuaded by Xi-
menes to visit Spain, but how that journey is retarded, 36.
the present state of his affairs, ib. Concludes a peace at Noyen
with Francis I. of France, and the conditions of the treaty, 37.
Arrives in Spain, 39. His ungrateful treatment of Ximenes, 4c.
His public entry into Valladolid, 41. Is acknowledged king
by the Cortes, who vote him a free gift, 42. The Castilians
receive unfavourable impressions of him, ii. Disgusts them by
his partiality to his Flemish minilters, i;. Sets out for Aragon,
43. Sends his brother Ferdinand to visit their grandfather Max-
imilian, ib. Cannot assemble the Cortes of Aragon in his own
name, 44. The opposition made by that assembly to his de-
fires, it. Refuses the application of Francis I. for the restitution
of the kingdom of Navarre, ib. Neglects the remonstrance:
of the Castilians, 45. Death of the emperor Maximilian, 46.
View of the present state of Europe, 47. How Maximilian was
obltruted from securing the empire to him, ii. Francis I. as-
pires to the Imperial crown, ii. Circurnflances favourable to
the pretenlions of Charles, 48. The Swiss Cantons espouse his
cause, o5. Apprchenftons and conduct of pope Leo X. on the
orcafion, 51, 52. Aflnmbling of the diet at Francfort, 53.
Frederic dulke of Saxony refules the offer of the empire, and
votes for him, 54. And refuses the presents offered by his am-
baffadors, it. Concurring circumstances which favoured his
etletion, 5;. His elction, 56. Signs and confirms tile capi-
tulation of the Germanic body, iS. The election notified to
him, 5 7. Assumes the title of majesty, iS. Accepts the Impe-
rial dignity offered by the count Palatine, ambassador from the
elector, 58. The clergy of Callile refuse the tenth of benefices
granted him by the pope, ib. Procures the interdidt the king-
dom is laid under for refusal, to be taken off, 59. Empowers
cardinal Adrian to hold the Cortes of Valencia, 60. The no-
),lcsrcfufe to aflemble without his prcfence, it. Authorises the
illrgcnits there to continue in arrls, i6. Summons the Cortes
of Castile to meet in Galicia, ib. Narrowly escapes with his
Flcmifil minillers from an insurrection on that account, 61.
Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 62. Prepares to lease
,i'airl, and appoints regctlts, ib. Embarks, 6 . Motives of

this journey, i. Rife of the rivalihip between him and Francis
I. if Courts the favour of Henry VIII. of England, asgd his
minister cardinal Wolfey, 68. Visits Henry at Dover, 7b.
lronifes Wolfey his interefi for the papacy, ib. Has a second
interview with Henry at Gravelines, 71. Offers to submit his
differences with Francis to Henry's arbitration, 72. His mag-
nificent coronation at Aix-la-ChapcUe, i. Calls adietat Worms
to check the reformers, 73. Caufes-which hindered his efpouf-
ing the party of Martin Luther, 113. Grants Luther a safe-
condni to the diet of Worms, x I4. An edi& published againfR
him, 115. His embaraffment at this time, 116. Concludes an
alliance with the pope, a12. The conditions of the treaty,
i22. Death of his minister Chievres, and its advantages to
him, if. 113. Invasion of Navarre by Francis, i. The
French driven out, and their general L'Efparre taken prisoner,
z25. War declared againfi him by Robert de la Marck, lord
of Bouillon, who ravages Luxemburg, it. x26. Reduces Bou-
i;ion, and invades France, i;. His demands at the congress at
Calais, 127. Has an interview with Cardinal Wolfey at Buges,
and concludes a league with Henry VIII. against France, 128.
Pope Leo declares for him agamRn France, 131. The French
driven out of Milan, XI,4, 137. Visits England in his palfage
to Spain, 140. Cultivates the good-will of cardinal Wolfey,
and creates the earl of Surry his high admiral, iA. Grants the
island of Malta to the knights of St John, expelled from
Rhodes b Solyman the magnificent,. 43. Arrives n Spain, ia.
A retrofl;ect of his proceedings in relation to the infurredions
in Spain, 15j. Issues circu!atorv letters for the insurgents to
lay down their arms, with prcomifes of pardon, ib. His pru-
dent moderation towards the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
152. Acquires the love of the Cafilians, 172. Enters into a
league with Charles duke of Bourbon, 177. Why he did not
endeavour to get WVolfey elected pope, 81. Invades Guienne
and Burgundy, but without success, 183. His troops in Milan
mutiny for want of pay, but are pacified by Moroni, 185.
Undertakes an invasion of Provence, 196. Orders Pefeara to
btfiege MarfelUes, it. Pescara obliged to retire, T97. Difcon-
certed by the French over-running the Milanese again, 199.
The revenues of Naples mortgaged to raise -money, 200. isq
troops defeat Francis, and take him prisoner at the battle of
Pavia, 207. His. affced moderation at receiving the news,
.c8, 2C9. Avails himself of a treaty concluded between Lan-
noy and pope Clement, but refuses to ratify it, 213. His army
in Pavia mutiny, and are obliged to be dibanded, if. His de-
lilerations on the proper improvement of his disadvantages, 214.
llis propositions to Francis, 1zS. After many delays grants
Sforza the invefliture of Milan, 217. Moronc's intrigues be-
trayed to him by Pescara, 22I. Orders Pescara to continue
his negotiations with Morone, 221. His rigorous treatment
of Francis, 222. Visits Francis, 223. liis kind reception of
the duke of Bourbon, io. Grants Eourbon the dutchy of Mi-

lan, and appoints him general in chief of the army there, 224.
Fruitlefe negotiations for the delivery of Francis, iB. Treaty
of Madrid with Francis, 226. Delivers up Francis, 229. Mar-
ries Isabella of Portugal, 230. An alliance formed agalnft him
at Cognac, 241. Sends ambassadors to Francis to require the
fulfilment of the treaty of Madrid, '241. Prepares sot war a-
gainflFrancis, 243. The popereduced to anaccommodatiohwith
him, 247. The exhauitd tRate of his finances,:48. His troops
under Bourbon diflrred l ian'd mutinous for want' of pay, iA.
Bourbofiliaultu Rome and is slain, -but'h e city taken, 256.
The prince of Orange, general on B~6b's deith, takes the
castle ofSt. Angelo, and the pope priners zs9'. The empe-
ror's condua on that occasion, -i. His'diffenfons with the
pope, how far favourable to the reformation, 261. His infruc-
tions to the diet at Spires, if. His manifeio againn the pope,
and letterto the cardinals, 26i. 'France and England league
again' h m, iii.3. Is refused supplies by the Cortes of Castile,
8. Delivers the pope for a ransom, 9. His overtures toHen-
ry and Francis, lo. Their declaration of war againt him, xI.
Is challenged by Francis to tinge combat, it. Andrew Doria
revolts from Francis to him, rS. His forces defeat the French
in Italy, 17, zo. His motives for desiring an accommodation, ia.
-Concludes a separate treaty with the pope, 22. Terms of the
peace of Cambray concluded with Francis by the mediation of
Margaret of Aufria, and Louise of France, 23. Remarks on
the advantages.gained by him in this treaty, and on his conduct
of the war, id. Vifits-Italy, 27. His policy on his public en-
try into Barcelona, id. Has an interview with the pope at Bo-
logna, 28. Motives for lis moderation in Italy, z9. 'His trea-
ties with the Rates of, iA. Is crowned king of Lombardy and
emperor-of the Romans, 31. Summons a diet atSpires to con-
fider the fate of religion, 32. His deliberations with the pope,
refpecling the expediency of calling a general council, 34. Ap-
points a diet at Augsburg, 35. Makes a public entry into that
city, i;. His endeavours tb check the reformation, iA. Refo-
lute behaviour of the protestant princes towards him, 36. His
severe decree against the proteflanti, 37.' Propoefs his brother
Ferdinand to be ele&ed king of the Ronians, 38. Is opposed
by the protestants, 39. Obtains his eletion, 40. Is desirous
of an accommodation with the proteffants, 41. Concludes a
treaty with them at Nuremberg, 42. Raises ati army to oppose
the Turks under Solyman, and obliges him to retires 43. Has
another interview with the pope, and presses him to call a ge-
neral council, 44. - Procures a eague of the Italian flates to fe-
cure the peace of Italy, 46. Arrlves'at Barcelona, id. His en-
deavours to prevent the negotiations aid.meeting between The
pope and Francis, 49. Undertakes to expell Barbarofa from
Tunis, and restore Muley-Hafcen, 71. Lands in Africa, and
hefieges Goletta, 7z. Takes Goletta, and *izes Barbarofla's
fleet, 73. Defeats Barbarossa, and takes Tunis, 74. Restores
Muley.Hafcen, and the treaty between them, 76. The glory
Vol. IV. Y

acquired by this enterprise, and the delivery of the Christian
captives, ib. Seizes the dutchy of Milan, on the death of
Francis Sforza, 86. His policy with regard to it, i/. Prepares
for war with Francis, 87. His invective againfi Francis at
Rome before the pope in council, 90. Remarks on this tranf-
acion, 9i. Invades France, 93. Enters Provence and finds
it desolated, 97. Besieges Marseilles and Aries, id. His miser-
able retreat from Provence, 99. His invasion of Picardy de-
feated, JOI. Is accused of poisoning the Dauphin, i;. Impro-
bability of its truth, ica. ConjecAure concerning the dauphin's
death, it. Slanders invaded by Francis, 03. Afufpenfion of
arms in Slanders, how negotiated, c14. A truce in Piedmont,
iJ. lotives to these truces, 10o. Negotiation for peace with
Francis, o.07 Concludes a truce for ten years at Nice, ib. Re-
marks on the war, i. His interview with Francis, 1xc.
Courts the friendship of Henry VIII. of England, 114. Indul-
ges the protestant princes, xx5. Quiets their apprehensions of
the catholic league, x 18. His troops mutiny, izo. Assembles
the Cortes of Cafile, a12. Destroys the ancient contfitution of
the Cortes, z12. Instance of the haughty spirit of the Spanibh
grandees, 123. Defres prmniffion of Francis to pass through
France to the Netherlands, 13o. His reception in France, it.
His rigorous treatment of Ghent, I31. Refuses to fulfil his en-
gagements to Francis, 134. Appoints a friendly conference
between a deputation of catholic and protestant divines before
the diet at Ratitbon, o50. Result of this conference, 151.
Grants a private exemption from oppreflions to the protestants,
151. Undertakes to reduce Algiers, r58. Is near being caR
away by a violent storm, 16o. Lands near Algiers, ib. His
soldiers exposed to a violent tempest and rain, I61. His fleet
fbattered, 162. His fortitude under these disasters, 163. Leaves
his enterprise and embarks again, id. Is diftrefled with an-
other storm at sea, 164. Takes advantage of the French inva-
sion of Spain to obtain fuhfidies from the Cortes, 17x. His
treaty with Portugal, id. Concludes a league with Henry VIII.
173. Particularsof thetreaty, 174. Over-runs Cleves, and his
barbarous treatment of the town tf Duren, 177. His behavi-
our to the duke of Cleves, ia. Besieges Landrecy, 178. Is
joined by an Englilh detachment; is. Is forced to retire, ib.
Courts the favour of the protestants, 184. His negotiations
with the protestants at the diet of Spires, 185. Procures the
concurrence of the diet in a war against Francis, 187. Nego-
tiates a separate peace with the king of Denmark, 188. In-
vades Champagne, and invests St. Defiere, 194. Want of con-
wrt between his operations and those of Henry, who now in-
vades France, i. 'Obtains Defiere by artifice, i95. His dif.
trefles and happy movements, 196. Concludes a separate peace
with Francis, 197. His motives to this peace, 198. His ad-
vantages by this treaty, 199. Obliges himself by a private ar-
ticle to exterminate the protestant heresy, oo. Is cruelly as-
fiiced with the gout, 2:2. Diet at Worms, o04. Arrives a

Worms and alters his conduce toward the proteflants, 206.
His condua on the death of the duke of Orleans, 209. His dif-
simulation to the landgrave of Hefle, als. Concludes a truce
with Solyman, 226. Holds a diet at Ratilbon, 227. His de-
claration to the protestant deputies, 229. His treaty with the
pope, concluded by the cardinal of Trent, 230. His circular
letter to the protestant members ot the Germanic body, 231.
The protestants levy an army against lim, 236. Is unprepared
against them, 238. Puts them under the ban of the empire,
239. The proteltants declare war against him, 240. Marches
to join the troops sent by the pope, 243. Farnese, the pope's
legate, returns in' difgult, 144. His prudent declension of an
action with the protestants, 246. Is joined by his Flemith
troops, 247. Proposals of peace made by the protestants, 254.
Their trmy difperle, 255. His rigorous treatment of the pro-
teftant princes, 156. Dismisses part of his army, 25. The
pope recals his troops, 260. His refledtion on Fiefco's infur-
regtion at Genoa, 272. Is alarmed at the hostile preparations
of Francis, a75. Death of Francis, 277. A parallel drawn be-
tween him and Francis, i. Consequences of Francis's death to
him, a2c. Marches against the eledor of Saxony, 281. PaIf
fes the Elbe, iA. Defeats the Saxon army, 285. Takes the e-
lector prisoner, i. His harih reception of him, 286. Invefls
Wittemberg, iS. Condemns the elector to death by a court-
martial, 288. The elector by treaty surrenders the electorate,
9gc. The harih terms imposed by him on the landgrave of
Hefle, 292. His haughty reception of the landgrave, 296.
Detains him prisoner, 297. Seizes the warlike stores of the
league, 3oo. His cruel exactions, 30r. AfTembles a diet at
Auglburg, 303. Intimidates the diet by his Spanish troops. i1.
Re-cltablithes the Romiih worflip in the churches of Augsburg,
iA. Seizes Placenria, 307. Orders the diet to petition the pope
for the return of the council to Trent, 309. Protests against the
council of Bologna, 31 1. Caules a system of faith to be prepar-
ed for Germany, 312. Lays it before the diet, 313. The I,-
terir oppoled, 35S. And rejected by the Imperial cities, 319.
Reduces the city of Auglburg to fubmiflion, 320. Repeats the
fame violence at Ulm, ai. Carries the elector and landgrave
with him into the Low-Countries, 321. Procures his son Phi-
lip to be recognized by the states of the Netherlands, 323.
Establishes the Interim there, 324. Re-assembles the diet at
Augsburg, under the influence of his Spaniffi troops, iv. 9.
'The city of Magdeburg refules to admit the Interim, and pre-
pares for resistance, 15. Appoints Maurice elecor of Saxony
to reduce it, I6. Promises to protet the protestants at the
council of Trent, 17. Arbitrarily releafts Maurice and the e-
ledtor of Brandenburgh from their engagements to the land-
grave for the recovery of his liberty, i8. Endeavours to fe-
cure the empire for his son Philip, I9. His brother Ferdinand
refuses to relign his pretensions, 22. Besieges Parma, but is re-
pulsed, 25. Proceeds rigorously against the proteflants, 27.

Y 2

Endeavours to support the council of Trent, it. Puts Magde-
burg under the ban of the empire, 28. Absolves the city, 31.
Is involved in disputes between the council and the proteflant
deputies, concerning their fafe-conduct, 34. Begins to fufpe&
Maurice of Saxony, 44. Circumstances which contributed to
deceive him with regard to Maurice, 45. Maurice takes the
field against him, 47. Maurice seconded by Henry II. of France,
48. His distress and consternation, 49. An ineffecaual negoti-
ation with Maurice, 50. Flies from nfpruck, 53. Releafs the
elecdor of Saxony, 54. Is solicited to satisfy the demands of
Maurice, 60. His present difficulties, 6r. Refuses any dired
compliance with the demands of Maurice, 64. Is disposed to
yield bv tle progress of Maurice's operations 6 Makes a
peace with Maurice at Pafhau, 67. Reflections Dn this treaty,
63. Turns his arms against France, 71. Lays siege to Metz,
,5. Is joined by Albert of Brandenburgh, 76. His army dif.
tressed by the vigilance of the duke of Guise, i0. Raises the
siege and retires in a shattered condition, 78. Cosmo di Medic;
afirts his independency aeainft him, 8o. Sienna revolts againit
him, if. Is dcje&ed at his bad success, 81. Takes Terrouane,
a'-r dtmoli hes t, 88. Takes Hefden, 89. Prppofes his fonr
Philip as a huband to Mary queen of England, 99. The ar-
tides of the marriage, o10. Marches to oppsfe the French o-
perations, 1x7. Is defeated by Henry, o18. Invades Picardy,
i,A Grants Sienna, fuhdued by Cosmo di Medici, to his son Phi.
lip, 16. A diet at Augsburg opened by Ferdinand, 122. Leaves
the interior administration of Germany to Ferdinand, a15.
Applies again to Ferdinand to resign his pretensions of fueceli
sion to Philip, hut is refused, 126. Recess of the diet of Augf-
burg on the fubje& of religion, 128. A treaty concluded be-
tween pope Paul IV. and Henry II. of France againit him, 14:.
Refigs his hereditary dominions to his son Philip, i0. His
motives for retirement, 143. Had long meditated this refigna-
tien, 145. The ceremony of this deed, 146. His speech on
this cccafion, 147. Resigns also the dominions of Spain, 15c.
His intended retirement into Spain retarded, 5 1. A truce for
five \yars concluded with France, 15s. Endeavours in vain to
secure the Imperial crown for Philip, 161. Resigns the Impe-
rial crown to Ferdinand, 162. Sets out for Spain, it. His
arrival and reception in Spain, 163. Is distressed by his son's
ungrateful neglect in paying his pension, ib. Fixes his re-
treat in the monastery of St Jultus in Placentia, 164. The fitua-
tion of this monastery, and his apartments, described, il. Con-
trafl between the condu& of Charles, and the pope, 165. His
manner of life in his retreat, 197. His death precipitated by
lnis monafic severities, 199. Celebrates his own funeral, zoe.
Dies, ii. Iis charader, iE. A review of the slate of Europe
during his reign, 21 . HIis acquisitions to the crown of Spain,

215. Cuteau-CGimSrfi, the conferences for peace between Philip II. of
Spain, and Henry 11. of France, removed thither from Cercanip,

iv. 207. The peace retarded by the demand of Elizabeth of
England for reltitution of Calais, i6. Particulars of the treaty
signed there between England and France, zo8. Terms of the
pacification between Philip and Henry, 10o.
Cheregato, nuncio from the pope to the diet at Nuremberg, his in-

ftrucions, ii. I89. Oppofesthe afiembling a general council,
190.

C.iievre, William de Croy, lord of, appointed by Maximilian to

superintend the education of his grandson Charles, ii. zr. A-
drian of Utrecht made preceptor under him, 22. His direc-
tion of the fludies of Charles, 23. His avarice corrupts the
Flemifl court of Charles, 35. Negotiates a peace with France,
37. Endeavours to prevent an interview between Charles
and Ximenes, 38. Attends Charles to Spain, 39. His ascend-
ancy over Charles, 42. His extortions, 43. His death and
the supposed causes of it, 122.
Chrlians, primitive, why averse to the principles of toleration, iv.

"z9.

Clentnt, VII. pope, his election, ii. 8 r. His character, is. Grants,

cardinal Woll'ey alegatine cominiffion in England for life, r8z.
Refuses to accede to the league against Francis, 184. Labours
to accommodate the difference between the contending parties,
ib. Iis proceedings with regard to the reformers, 193. Con-
cludes a treaty of neutrality with Francis, 203. Enters into a
separate treaty with Charles after the battle of Pavia, and the
consequences of it, 213. Joins in an alliance with Francis Sfor-
za and the Venetians, against the emperor, 24T. Abfolvea.
Francis from his oath to observe the treaty of Madrid, i;. Car-
dinal Colonna seizes Rome, and invests him in the castle of St.
Angelo, 247, 248. Is forced to an accommodation with the
Imperiallfts, 248. His revenge against the Colonna family,
a0o. Ihvades Naples, ib. His terrtoriesinvaded by Bourbon,
and his perplexity on the occasion, 252. Concludes a treaty
with Lannoy viceroy of Naples, i&. His consternation on Bour-
bon's motions towards Rome, 254. Rome taken, and himself
besieged in the castle of St. Angelo, 2z6. Surrenders himself
prioner, 259. The Florentines revolt against him, iii. 5.
Pays Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other stipulations,
9. Makes his escape from confinement, iS. Writes a letter of
thanks to Lautrec, Io. Is jealous of the intentions of Francis,
and negotiates with Charles, x5. His motives and steps to-
wards an accommodation, 21. Concludes a separate treaty with
Charles, 22. His interview with the emperor at Bologna, 28.
Crowns Charles king of Lombardy and emperor of the Ro-
mans, 3 r. His representations to the emperor againfi calling a
general council, 34. Has another interview with Charles at
Bologna, and the difficulties raised by him to the calling a gene-
ral council, 44. Agrees to a league of the Italian itates for the
peace of Italy, 46. His interview and treaty with Francis, 49.
Marries Catharine di Medici to the duke of Orleans, it. His
protraAion of the affair of the divorce solicited by Henry VIII.

Y3

id. Reverses Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, So. Henry renounces his supremacy, ,b.
His death, 5 i. Reflecions on his pontificate, .a2.

ClergT, Romilh, remarks on the immoral lives of, and how they

contributed to the progress of the reformation, ii. 97. The fa-
cilitv with which they obtained pardons, 98. Their ufurpa-
tions in Germany, during the disputes concerning investitures,
loo. Their other opportunities of aggrandizing themselves
there, it. Their personal immunities, 1o0. Their encroach-
ments on the laity, ici. The dreadful effets of spiritual cen-
fures, o03. Their devices to secure their usurpations, it. The
united effect of all there circcumftances, xc6. Oppose the ad-
vancement of learning in Germany, 109.
C!rses, invaded and over-run by the emperor Charles V. iii. 177.

Cruel treatment of Duren, ib. Humiliating submission of the
duke, it.
Ctperad.lig, a leader of the anabaptifis at Munfler, an account of,

iil. 4.' See Anabarfl.fii
Cognac, an alliance formed there against Charles V. by the pope,

the Venetians, the duke of Milan, and Francis I. ii. 241.

C/ligy, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends St. QEintin against

the Spanilh general Emanuel Philibert duke of Savoy, iv. 172.
His brother Dandelot defeated in an endeavour to join the gar.
rifon, 173. But Dandelot enters the town, iA. Hischara&er,

;77. The town taken by assault, and himself taken prisoner,

Ji.

Cos,.e, Ferdinand king of Hungary and Bohemia, brother to the

emperor Charles V. eleAed king of the Romans by the college
of elecdor there, iii. 39.
-- .--Herman, count de Wied, archbishop and deleor of, in-

clines to the reformation, and is opposed by his canons, who ap-
peal to the emperor and pope, iii. 207. Is deprived and excom-
municated, 14. Resigns, 158.

Co.!ona, cardinal Pompeo, his charadler, and rivalfhip with pope

Clement VII. ii. 148. Seizes Rome, and invests St. Angelo,
147, 248. Is degraded, and the reft of the family excommuni-
cated by the pope, iso. Is prevailed on by the pope, when
prisoner with the Imperialists, to solicit his delivery, iii. 9.
- --Prosper, the Italian general, his charater, ii. 13r. Ap-
pointed to command the troops in the invasion of Milan, ib.

erives the French out of Milan, 134. His army how weaken-

ed at the death of pppe Leo X. i35. Defeats marefchal de
Iautrec,atBicocca, 137. Reduces Genoa, 139. Thebadfiate
of his troops when the French invade Milan, X 75. Is enabled
to defend the city by the ill-conduct of Bonnivet the French com-
mander, 180. Dies, and is succeeded by Lannoy, 184.
Ccrciillu, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Ferdinand of

Aragon to obtain Joanna's content to his regency of Castile, ii.
to. Thrown into a dungeon by the archduke Philip, id.
/-j.,ti of AuEsburg) dravn up by bMlanthon, iii. 36.

Copance, the privileges of that city taken away by the emperor

Charles V. for disobedience to the Interim, iii. 319.

Corsairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of, iii. 65. See Algiers,

Barbaro/a.

Core. of Aragon, acknowledge the archduke Philip's title to the

crown, ii. 5. Not allowed to assemble in the name of Charles
V. 44. Their opposition to his desires, ib. Is prevailed on by
the emperor to recognize his son Philip as fuccefobr to that king-
dom iii. 172. See Spain.

- of Caflile, acknowledges the archduke Philip's title to the

crown, ii. 5. Is prevailed on to acknowledge Ferdinand regent
according to Isabella's will, 8. Acknowledges Philip and Jo-
anna king and queen of Castile, and their son Charles prince of
Aflurias, 14. Declares Charles king, and votes him a free gift,
41. Summoned by Charles to meet at Compoftella in Galicia,
60. Tumultuaryproceedings thereupon, 6r. A donativevot-
ed, 62. Loses all its influence by the diflolution of the holy
Junta, 167. Its backwardness to grant supplies for the empe-
ror's wars in Italy, z48. Refutes his pressing foicitations for
a supply, iii. 8. Afrembled at Toledo to grant supplies to the
emperor, 121. The rem6nftrances of, Ji. The ancient con-
flitution of, subverted by Charles, a1z. See Spain.

Coarte of Valencia, prevailed on by the emperor Charles V. to ac-

knowledge his son Philip successor to that kingdom, iii. 172.
See Spain.

Cortona, cardinal di, governor of Florence for the pope, expelled

by the Florentines on the pope's captivity, ii. 159.
Coomo di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, annuls the marriage of Henry

VIII. with Catharine of Aragon, which was refused to Henry
by the pope, iii. 50. His sentence reversed by the pope, 5o.
Crepy, peace of, between the emperor and Francis, iii. 197.
Croy, William de, nephew to Chlevres, made archbishop of Tole-
do, by Charles V. ii. 43. Dies, 167.

D

D'Albret, John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre by Ferdi-

nand of Aragon, ii. J8. Invades Navarre, but is defeated by
cardinal Ximenes, 34.
D'Alembert, M. his observation on the order of Jesuits, iii. 144,

NVote.

Dandelot, brother to Coligny, is defeated by the duke of Savoy

in an endeavour to succour St. Quintin, iv. 173. But enters the
town with the fugitives, iA. The town taken by assault,
177.

Da,,pbin, of France, eldest son of Francis I. is delivered up

with the duke of Orleans to the emperor Charles V. in ex-
change for his father, as hostages for the performance of the
treaty of Madrid, ii. 229. His death imputed to poison, iii.
soi. The most probable cause of it, 0oz.

- tel duke of Orleansfecond foa of Francis I. commands

an army. and in oides Spain, iii. 169. Is forced to abandon the
siege of Perpignan, 170. Is dilfatisfied at the peace of Crefpy,
.sz. Makes a iecret protestation against it, ib.

of France, son of Henry 1I. contrasted to Mary the young

queen of Scotland, iii. $c8. Is married to her, iv. I90.
Dnvr-a, a summary view of the revolutions in, during the fix-

teenth century, iv. -34.
- king of, joins the protestant league at Smalkalde, iii. R18.

De Rent, cardinal, writes a history of Fiefco's conspiracy while a.

youth, iii, 271. Nite. '
Diani of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of France, assists the Guises

in peffuading Henry to an alliance with pope Paul IV. a.
gainftthe emperor, iv. 140. Induces Henry to break the trea-
ty of Vaucelles, 1 7. Marries her grand-daughter to one of
Montmorency's sons, I96. Joins Montmorency against the
Guises, 197.

Doria, Andrew, affiRfs Lautrec in subduing Genoa, iii. 7. Con-

quers and kills Moncada in a sea engagement befcre the har-
bour of Naples, 14. His chara&er, it. Is disgusted with the
behaviour of the French, I5. Revolts to the emperor, 16.
Opens to Naples a communication by sea, 17. Rescues Ge-
noa from the French, 18. Reffores the government of, to the
citizens, 19. The refpeA paid to his memory, o2. Attends
the emperor Charles in his difafrons expedition against Algiers,
160. His partial fondness for his kinfrman Giannetino, 26z.
His narrow escape in Lavagno's infurreAion, 269. Returns on
Lavagno's death, and the dispersion of his party, a71. See
Geroa and Lavagnc.
--- Giannetino, his chara&cer, iii. a6z. Is murdered by La.

vlgno's conspirators, 269.

D.Dr, an interview there between Henry VIII. and the emperor

Charles V. ii. 70.

Drag.!, a corsair, commands the Turkilh fleet which ravages the

coast of Naples, iv. 82.
Du Pratt, chancellor of Prance, his character, ii. 1i7. Commen.

ces a law-suit against Charles duke of Bourbon, for his estate,
at the instigation of Louise the king's mother, it.

Duli.g, the custom of, how rendered general, il. x2. Its influ-

ence on manners, 1;.
Duren in Cle-es, taken by the emperor Charles V. the inhabitants

put to the sword and the town burnt, iii. 177.

E
E-'dii, an adversary of Lutlier's, holds a pu'olic difputatiou with

him at Leipfic, on the validity of the papal authority, ii. 8g.
tlc.licf ca censures of the Romifi church, the dreadful effeas of,

1i. 103.

--- -- rferation, in the recess of the diet of Augsburg, re-
marks on, iii. 42.
.firbrgb-, plundered andburnt by the earl of Hertford, iii. X9-.
Edaard VI. of England, his charaaer, iv. 99.

Fg,,,ro,, count of, commands the cavalry at the battle of St. Quin-

tin, and puts Montmorency's toops to flight, iv. 73, 174. En-
gages marlhal de Termes, and defeats him by the casual arrival
of an English squadron, I91.
eyprt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire, ii. 48.
Fbrenterg, the castle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony, iv. 52.
Fignotz, a facion in Geneva so termed, an account of, iii. 85.
Elizabetb, sifter of Mary, her accession to the crown of England, ivr.

204. -Her chara6ter, ib. Is addrefied by Philip of Spain, and
Ienry of France, for marriage, it. Her prudent conducd be-
tween them, zo5. How determined against Henry, ib. Her
motives for rejecting Philip, 206. Returns Philip an evasive
answer, it. Demands restitution of Calais, at the conferences
at Cateau-Cambrefis, 207. Establishes the proteflant religion
in England, iS. Treaty between her and Henry signed at Ca-
teau-Cambrefis, 208.
FImansel Philibert, duke of Savoy. See Savoy.
£r.lnd, by what means that kingdom uas freed from the papal

supremacy, and received the doctrines of the reformation, iii.
0o. Mary queen of, married to prince Philip, son of the em-
peror Charles V. contrary to the sense of the nation, iv. ioo.
The marriage ratified by parliament, 103. Is reluctantly en-
gaged by Philip (now king of Spain) in the war against France,
169. Mary levies money by her prerogative, to carry on the
war, 170. Calais taken hv the duke of Guise, 186. Guifnes
and Hames taken, I87. Death of Mary, and accession of Eli-
zabeth, zC4. The protestant religion established by Elizabeth,
2c7. Treaty with France signed at Cateau-Camhrefis, 2o8.
Its interior strength how increased by the condu&c of Henry
VIII. 221. Its power no longer fruitlessly wafted on the con-
tinent, 222. Alteration of its condua towards Scotland, 223.
z;,uien, the count de, besieges Carignan, iii. 189. Desires of Fran-
cis permiflion to engage Guafto, I90. Defeats Guafto in a
pitched battle, 19r.

Arard de la Mark, ambalador of Charles V. to the diet of Franc-

fort, his private motives for thwarting the pretensions of Fran-
cis I. of France to the Imperial crown, ii. 55. Signs the capi-
tulation of the Germanic body on behalf of Charles, 56.
Erafinus, some account of, ii. iii. Preceded Luther in his cen-

fures against the Romish church, il. Concurs with him in his
intentions of reformation, i5. Motives which checked him in
this, 112.

Ffcuriil, palace of, built by Philip II. in memory of the battle of

St. Quintin, iv. r79.
Europe, a ihort view of the tate of, at the death of the emperor

Maximilian, ii. 46. The contemporary monarchs of all, illu-
firious at the time of Charles V. 72, 73. The method of carry-
ing on war in, how improved beyond the pradcice of earlier
ages, 159. The sentiments of, on Charles's treatment of the
pope, iii. 3. A review of the fate of, during the reign of the
tin;peror Charles V. iv. 213. The remarkable change in, at this

period, 214. How affc&ed by the revolt of Luther against the
church of Rome, 224.

Etcmi, king of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in his service, and is

rmrdered by him, iii. 67.
Exc,~.vunicasto in the Romili church, the original institution of,

and the us- made of it, ii. 103.

F

Far,-rf Alexander, his unanimous elecion to the papacy, iii. .1.

See PauS III.

-- cardinal, accompanies the troops Cent by the pope to the

emperor, against the army of the protcflant league, iii. 243.
Returns diiFuPed, 144. Leads the troops home again by the
pnpe's order, 260. Contributes to the eletion of cardinal di
Monte to the p:pacy, iv. 6.
--- Ocavio, grandson of pope Paul TII. endeavours to surprise

Paima, and enters into treaty with the emperor, iv. 4. Is con,
firmed in Parma hv Julius, a3. Procures an alliance with
France, 14. Is attacked by the Imperialists, but successFully
protec:ed by the French, a$. Placentia restored to him by
Philip II. of Spain, 18r.
--- Peter Lewis, natural son of pope Paul III. obtains of his

father the dutchies of Parnna and Placentia, iii. ao. His cha.
ra(er, 3c6. Is alaffinated, 3C7.

.FJ,,di.d king of Aragon, Lhow he acquired his kingdoms, ii. 4.

Invites his daughter Joanna, and her hvuband, Philip archduke
of Aufitia, to Spain, ,i. Becomes jealous of Philip, 5. Car-
ries on his war with France vigorously, notwithfianding Phi.
lip's treaty with Lewis, 6. His queen Isabella dies, ar:d leaves
him regent of Castile, under reftritions, 7. Resigns the king-
dom of Castile, and is acknowledged regent by the Cortes, 8.
His character, i/. His maxims of government odious to the
Castilians, i,. Required by Philip to resign his regency, 9.
Joanna's letter of consent procured by him, intercepted by Phi-
lip, and herself confined, to. Is deserted by the Castilian no-
bdlitv ii. Determines to exclude his daughter, from the fuccef-
sion by marrying, iE. Marries Germaine de Foix, niece to
Lewis XII. rof France, ii. A treaty between him and Philip
at Salamanca, by which the regency of Castile is jointly veifed
in them and Jonr.a, na. Prevails on lenry VII. of England
to detain Philip for three months, whecn driven on that coafi,
]3. The Caltilian declare againf hiim, ii. Rcfigus the re-
gelney or CaStile by treaty, ib. Interview between him and Phi-
lip,, . Is absent, at Naples, when Philip died, i7. Returns
and gains, withhthe regency of Caflile, the good will of the na-
tives by his prudent adminifration, 18. Acquires by diiho-
laourab'e means the kingdom of Navarre, i. How he deltroy-
ed his ccnltitutio:, 19. Endeavours to diminilh his grandson
Charles's power, by a will in favour of Ferdinand, 20. Alters
his will in favour of Charles, ,a. Dies, iL. Review of his ad-

miniflration, 24. Ximenes appointed, by his will, regent of
Castile until the arrival of Charles V. 24.

Ferdinand second son of Philip archduke of Austria, born, ii. 6.

Left regent of Aragon, by his grandfather Ferdinand, 20. This
revoked by a subsequent will, by which he ob.tains only a pen.
sion, it. Discontented with his disappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of cardinal Ximenes, 27. Sent by
Charles V. to vilit their grandfather Maximilian, 43. Is elec-
ed king of Hungary and Bohemia, 261. Signs a deed called
the Revtrfe, itS. The emperor endeavours to get him elected
king of the Romans, iii. 38. He is opposed by the protestants,
39. Is crowned king of the tomans, 40. Forms a confe-
deracy against the allahaptifls at Munster, 59. Opposes the
refloration of Ulric duke of Wurtemberg, 62. Recognizes his
title, and concludes a treaty with him, 63. His kingdom
of Hungary wrefled from him by John Zapol Scepius, I53.
Besieges the young king Stephen and his mother in Buda, but is
defeated by the Turks, 15 6. His mean offers of fubmiflion to
the Porte, 15 7. Which are rejecded, i/. Courts the favour of the
protestants, 184. Opens the diet at Worms, 204. Requires
it to submit to the decisions of the council of Trent, 205. A-
grees to pay a tribute to Solyman for Hungary, 226. Encroach-
cs on the liberties of Bohemia, 3ol. His rigorous treatment of
Prague, 302. Disarms the Bohemians, 303. Obtains the so-
vereignty of the city of Conflance, 324. Invades Tranflylvania
by invitation of Martinuzzi, iv. 36. Obtains the resignation of
Transylvania from queen Isabella, ib. Orders Martinuzzi to
e aaflaffinated, 39. Enters into negotiation with Maurice on
lehalf of the emperor, 60. His motives for promoting the em-
peror's agreeing with Maurice, 63. Isabella and her son Ste.
phen recover possession of Transylvania, 9r. Opens a diet at
Auglburg, and excites suspicions in the protestants, izz. The
emperor leaves the internal administration of the German as-
fairs to him, 125. Is again applied to by the emperor to re-
sign his pretensions of fucceflion to Philip, but refuses, x16.
Endeavours therefore to gain the friendship of the diet, 227. A-
gain refuses the emperor's solicitations, 16i. Charles resign
the' Imperial crown to him, i62. Assembles the college of e-
ltefors at Francfort, which acknowledges him emperor of Ger-
many, i88. The pope refufesto acknowledge him, b.
Frudal government, a view of, as it existed in Spain, ii. 147.
SjfoC, count of Lavagno. See Lavagna.
- Jerome, engages in his brother's conspiracy, and fails in fe-

curing Andrew Doria, iii. 269. His imprudent vanity on his
brother's death, 27o. Shuts himself up in a fort on his estate,
272. Is reduced and put to death, 276.
,andiers. See N2etlrlands.
Flourece, the inhabitants of, revolt againfi pope Clement VII. on

the news of his captivity, and recover their liberty, iii. 5. Are
redufced to fubjedion to Alexander di Medici by the emperor,
3c. Alexander di Medici, duke of, affaftinated by his kiufinan
Lorenzo, iii. Cofino di Medici advanced to the sovereignty,

112. Colho, supported by the emperor, defeats the partizans
of Lorenzo, 113. Cosmo asserts his independency on the empe-
ror, iv. go.

F.r.a, Antonio de, commander in chief of the forces in Spain, or-

dered by cardinal Adrian to besiege the insurgents in Segovia, ii.
145. Is denied liberty of taking military stores, by the inhabi-
tants of Medina del Campo, I46. Attacks and almost burns the
whole town, ii. Is repulsed, i&. His house at Valladolid burnt,
i.
Fracr, the acquisitions of that kingdom during the reign of the

emperor Charles V. iv. 218. The chara6cer of the people of,
19. The good consequences of the civilwars in that kingdom
to the reft of Europe, 220.

Frari, I. king of France, concludes a peace with Charles V. and

the conditions of the treaty, ii. 7. Sends a fruitless embassy to
Charles for the restitution of Navarre to the young king, 44.
Aspires to the Imperial crown at the death of Maximilian, 47.
Reasons by which he supported his pretensions, ib. Remarks
on the equipages of his ambafladors to the German states, 5c.
His pretesfions adopted by the Venetians, i;. Loses the eledtion,
56 Rife ofthe rivalhip between him andCharles,64. Courts
the favour of cardinal 'olfey, 69. Promises Wolfey his inte-
reft for the papacy, 7o. Has an interview with Henry VIII. of
England 71. Wrreftles with Henry, and throws him, ib. Notr.
His advantages over Charles, at the commencement of hostilities
between them, 119. Concludes an alliance with the pope, IaI.
Invades and reduces Navarre, in the name of Henry d Albret,
son of John, the former king, 123. The French driven out by
the imprudence of l'Efparre their general, who is taken prison-
er by the Spaniards, 124, x25. Retakes Moufon from the Im-
perialifts, 17. Invades the Low-Countries, but loses the oppor-
tunities of success by imprudence, ib. Rejects the demands of
Charles at the congress at Calais, 128. A league concluded be-
tween Charles and Henry VIII. against him, :b. His imprudent
appointment of the marechal de Foix to the government of Mi-
lan, 13o. De Foix attacks Reggio, but is repulsed by the go-
vernor Guicciardini the hifiorian, 131. The pope declares a-
gainft him, ib. His embarrairments on the invasion of Milan,
13z. His mother seizes the money appointed for payment of
the Milanese troops, ib. Milan taken, and the French driven
out, 134. Levies a body of Swiss, I37. Who insist on giving
a precipitate battle to the Imperialists, which is loft, i&. War
declared against him by Henry VIII. 139. His expedients to
supply his treasury, iS. The plan pursued by him to resist the in-
curfions of the Englifn, i40. Picardy invaded by Henry, iS. The
Venetians league with the emperor against him, 174. To which
pope Adrian accedes, id. His expeditious movement against the
Milanese, 175. Disconcerted by the duke of Bourbon's confpira-
cy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his cause, which Bourbon
denies, 178. Bourbon escapes to Italy, and Francis returns, 179.
Appoints the admiral Bounivet to command against the Milan-

efe, i&. Picardy invaded by the duke of Suffolk, who is driven
back, I83. Repultes the invasion of Guienne and Burgundy
by Charles, i;/. Hlis successful close of the campaign, 184. His
prudent care to diiappoint the Imperiallfs in thei:- invasion of
Provence, 197. Assembles an army, which canses the Imperial-
ifs to retire from Marseilles, ib. Determines to invade the Mi-
lanel'e, 198. Appoints his mother Louis- regent during his ab-
fence, 199. Enters Milan, and takes possession of the city, it.
Advised )v Bonnivet to hefiege Pavia, 2cr. Ilis vigorous at-
tacks on Pavia, it. Concludes a treaty of neutrality with pope
Clement, 203. lis imprudent invasion of Nanp!es, i. Resolves,
by Bonnivet's advice, to attack lonrhon's army, advanced to
the relief of Pavia, zo;. Is routed at the battle of Pavia, 2:6.
Is taken priloner, 207. Is sent to the eaflie of Pizzi. hitone un-
de'r the cu!tody of Don lFerdilnnd Alarcnon, 208. Refuses the
Tpropnfition; mnide to him by Charles, 2 T . Is carried to Spain
on his desire of a Iperr nal interview with Charles, 2 r/. Is ri.
i1'roufly treated in Spain, 2z2. ral; dam; eroufil i!l, ih. Is vi-
fited by Charle', ?2;,. Resolves to rr;fin his kingdom, 22S. Is
delivered from h is cautivity l:v the treaty of Madrid, 225. His
fccret-protcflatiois a.gin!t t:e v.-li(litv ns this treaty, ^;28. Mar-
ries the q!ieen of Portugal, 229. R-covirs his liberty, and tihe
dauphin ,nd the duke ,,f O;leans delivered up hoflazes to Charle;
for the cr.--ormance of the treaty of M1adrid, i;o. 'Writes a
letter of acknow!edzment tn HIenry VlI. of England, 239. H-is
reply to the Imperial ambalffad'rs, 'I. Enters into a league with
the pope, the Venetians, and Sfo.za, againfi Charles, 240. Is
a'folv-ed frcirn his cath to observe the treaty of Madrid, 24r.
His behaviour to the emperor's frind emhaflv, 243. Is difpi-
rited hb his former ill fucc.fs, 244. Enters into a treaty with
Henry VlI. of ln:ioand against tihe emperor, iii. 3. Succeffis
of his general L..atr-.c in Italy, 7. J-'s r-'ply to the emperor's
overtures, Io. Decl-res war againlit him, and challenges him
to single combat, it. Treats Andrew Dloria ill, who revolts
fron him to the emperor, i . His army, under Saluccs, dri-
ven out of Italy, 18. His troops in Milan routed, 20. His en-
deavours toward an a.ccr;inmrdation, i. Terms of the peace of
Cambray, concluded by the mediation of his mother Louise and
larjga:: nof Antfria, 2j. Remarks on the faclifices made by
hlii:u in thi treaty, alnd on his conduel of the war, it. Leagues
fecr t',- with tlIe pi-otelar.t princes, 41. Ilis neafures to elude
lie treaty of Camnlbray, 47. His negotiations with the pope, ib.
His interview and treaty with the Ftpe, 49. Gives the duke
of Orleans in marriage to CatP. rine d: Medici, i5. Negotiates
a tre..ty vith Francis Storza, duke of: iil;.n, 7,. His envoy
Mere-;i'de executed at lMilan for murder', 7(. Is difappoillte
in l's enlideA.ours to negotiate alliances agai.!l the emperor, i.
Invites MIelanlhon to Paris, 80. Evidence-s his zeal for the
Romifti religior. 8i. Cals-:s f iis rriar-rel with lthe duke osSa-
voy, 8:. Srizes tie dikie's telrr.ri.,, &,. His pretensions to
the dut.)y of Milan, on the deat: cf Firancis S!brza, 8;. The
Vol. IV. Z

emperor's invective against him before the pope in council, S9.
1. invadcd by Charles, 93. tis prudent plan of defence, 95.
joins the army under Montmorency, 99. Death of the dauphin,
i:r. OC'ains a decree of the parliament of Paris against the
trmperor, Icz. Invades the Low-Countries, oC3. Afifpenfion

as arns in Fianders, and how negotiated, To4. A truce in Pird-

i,.ont, it. Motives to these truces, Io;. Concludes an alliance
wiil Syvrman ti.c Magnificent, i6. Negotiations for a peace
xilth the emperor, 1c7. Concludes a truce for ten years at
'^ice, Io8. Refieions on the war, i6. His interview with
Charles, io9. MIarrits Mary of Guise to James V. of Scot.

.and, 14. Rtfuies the offers of the deputies of Ghent, i2S.
JL-' crms Charles of the offer made by them, it. Grants the
trr.ptror leave to pais through France to the Netherlands,
i.c. lis reception of the emperor, I3I. Is deceived by
ti.e emperor in refpc&t to Milan, I33. Iis ambaiTador to
the Porte, Rincon, murdered hw the Imperial governor of
the Mianefe, 167. Prepares to resent the injury, 168. At-
lacks the emperor with five armies, 169. Iis first attempts ren-
dered abortive by the imprudence of the duke of Orleans, 17:.
Renews his negotiations with ful:an So!yman, 174. -Invades
the Low-Countries, i76. Forces the emperor to raise the siege
('r Landrecv, ;8. I)ilmiffes Barbarolfa, 189. Gives the count
d'Enguien permission to engage Guaflo, 19Z. Relieves Paris,
in danger of being furpriled by the emperor, 197. Agrees to a
lfearate peace with Charles, i6. Henry's haughty return to his
overtures of peace, 20o. Death of the duke of Orleans, 209.
Peace of Campe, 235. Perceives a necessity of checking the em-
peror's ambitious de:.grs, 273. Forms a general league against
him, it. Dies, 277. His life and character summarily compar-
ed with those of Charl'e, il. Confcciiences of his death, 280.
i-as:is 11. his accetfion to the crown of France, and character, iv.

rJnit:fct, the diet of, afer.nbled for the choice of an emperor at the
death of Maximilian, ii. 53. Names and views of the elecors,
i3. The empire offered to Frederick of Saxony, it. Who re-
rejcts it, ith his reasons, it. Chufes Charles V. emperor, 56.
lHis confirmation of the Germ anic privileges required and agreed
to, it. City of, embraces the resorr-ed religion, i88. The col-
lege of elc&ors afrcmbled there by 'erdinand, who is ackno'-
ledged epneror of Germany, iv. i88.
,etrJrci ukLe of Saxonv, afsinmbles with the other clecors at the
diet of Francfort, to chu(l an emperor, ii. 5 . The empire of-
feredto him, *i. PReitcs it, and votes for Charles V. 54. Re-
fuses the presents of the Spaniih ambassadors, 55. This difinte-
rcfted behaviour confirmed by :he tcftimoiyv of hiltorians, 55,
Ncke. Chufes Martin Luther phitlcfphical professor at his uni-
vcrfitv cf nVittemberg, 78. Encourages Luther in his oppeli-
t,in to indulgecces, Sic. Proteets him against Cajetan, 85. Cau-
frs Luther to be fcized at his return from the diet of Worms;
;.4d .onceals him at WVartburg, i6. Dies, 2z3

Fref,, the French ambafiadlor to Venice, murdered by the marquis

del ;uafto, the Imperial governor of the Milanese, iii. x66.

Fro,fpcg, George, a German nobleman, Iome account of, he joins
the army of Charles V. ii. 249.

G

(treal of the Jesuits, an inquiry into his office and despotic au-

thority, iii. I38.

C(;ei.a, an account of its revolt against the duke of Savoy, iii. 84.
(;fnoa, reduced by Lattrcc, the French general, iii 7. The French

endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour of Savona, 16. Is re-
Icued from the French by Andrew Doria, 18. The government
or, fettled by the difintertfteduelts of Doria, 19. The honour
paid to Doria's memory, ac. Is visited by the emperor, 28.
A scheme formed to overturn the constitution of, by Fiefco coune
of Lavagno, 262. He afTembles his adherents, 263. The con-
fpirators sally forth from Lavagno's palace, z68. Deputies sent
to know Lavagno's terms, 269. Lavagno drowned, 270. The
iii'urred;on ruined by the imprudence of his brother Jerome
Fielio, ib. The conspirators dilferfe, 271. Jerome reduced and'
put to death, 276.

G. rnanad.,, an association in Valencia, so termed, on what occasion

formed, ii. I68. Refill to lay down their arms, ib. Their re-
f-iitmint levelled at the nobility, who raise an army againit
them, ,b. Defeat the nobles in ieveral ations, 1i9. But are
routed and tlilieri:d by theem, io.

(:errany, hfate of, at the death of the emperor Maximilian, ii. 46.

Charles V. of Spain, amd Francis I. of France form pretensions
to the Imperia! crown, 47. Their rcepective reasons offered in
favour of their claims, 48. Views and intereits of the other Eu-
ropean Iates in relation to the competitors, 5-. Henry VIII.
tf England advances . eiaim, 5 r. But is discouraged from pro.
flcutilg it, ii. How ihe papacy wa. likely to be aficced in the
choice of an emperor, ii. Advice of pope Leo X to the Ger-
man princes, 2. Opening of the diet at Frankfort, 53. In
whom the election of an emperor is veiled, iL. Views of the c-
Lctors, i. The empire cli'rel to Frederi-k of Saxony, it.
Who rejetts it, and his reafotis, 5. Charles V. chol:rn,.56.
'The capitulation of the Germnanic privileges confirmed by liim,
.'. Charles lfts out for, 63. Charles crowned at Aix-la-Cha-
'cllc, 72. Commincement of the reformation there, by Martin
l.uther, 73. 'Trearment of the bull of excommunication pub.
.:sicd aganifl Iititir, 90. Tile ulurpations of the clergy therc,
'uiring the lifpultes conccrn;iig inv .titires, I o. Thle clergy of,
iolly florci.-crts, 104. The lienefices of, nominated by the
p,)pe, il. 'Ihe expedient of ihe enmperols for rcltrainiiig this
power of the pope., ine-flleCual, o15. The great progress ofLu-
:hcr-'s dolrinrts in, is8. Grievances of the pealants, 231. In-
uiirrgetion i Suaiia, 2 z, 2z3. The memorial of their grievan-
_cs, ib. The irin:'irection quelled, ih. Another insurreCtion in
'ihurinlgia, 34. iow tlie hoiufe of Allria becamrn Jo forno;-

Z 2

emperor's inveclive against him before the pope in council, S9.
is invaded by Charles, 93. His prudent plan of defence, 95.
Joins the army under Montmorency, 99. Death of the dauphin,
Xir'. Obtains a decree of the parliament of Paris againfl the
mnperor, Ict. Invades the Low-Countries, 103. Afufpenfion
of arms in Slanders, and how negotiated, o04. A truce in Pied-
inont, iA. Motives to there truces, Io.5. Concludes an alliance
ai;th Solyman the Magnificent, ib. Negotiations for a peace
with the emperor, 1c7. Concludes a truce for ten years at
Nice, 1o8. Refiecions on the war, il. Ilis interview with
Charles, o09. Marries Mary of Guise to James V. of Scot.
land, 114. Rtfufes the offers of the deputies of Ghent, 12S.
J:forms Charles of the offer made by them, ia. Grants the
emperor leave to pass through France to the Netherlands,
i3o. His reception of the emperor, i3j. Is deceived by
the emperor in refpeet to Milan, 133. His ambassador to
the Porte, Rincon, murdered by the Imperial governor of
the Milanese, 167. Prepares to resent the injury, x68. At-
lacks the emperor with five armies, 169. His first attempts ren-
.!ered abortive by the imprudence of the duke of Orleans, 1 7.
Renews his negotiations with ful:an Solyman, 174. Invades
the Low-Countries, 176. Forces the emperor to raise the siege
cf Landrecy, 178. Difinifies Barbarossa, 189. Gives the count
d'Enguien permission to engage Guafto, 190. Relieves Paris,
in danger of being surprised by the emperor, 197. Agrees to a
separate peace with Charles, it. Henry's haughty return to his
overtures of peace, 201. Death of the duke of Orleans, 209.
Peace of Campe, 235. Perceives a necessity of checking the em-
peror's ambitious designs, 173. Forms a general league against
him, i. Dies, 277. His life and characRer summarily compar-
ed with those of Charles, ib. Consequences of his death, 280.
I,a,;i 11. his accerfion to the crown of France, and characer, iv.

212.
Iran-frt, the diet of, afren;bled for the choice of an emperor at the

death of Maximilian, ii. 53. Names and views of the electors,
ib. The empire offered to Frederick of Saxony, it. Who re-
rejes it, with his reasons, il. Chutes Charles V. enperor, 56.
His confirmation of the Germ anic privileges required and agreed
to, i. City of, embraces the reformed religion, 188. The col-
lege of ele&ors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is acknow'-
ledged emperor of Germany, iv. 188.
eodic.d duke of Saxony, afie;nbles with the other elecors at the
diet of Francfort, to chufc an emperor, ii. 5. The empire of-
feredto him, ,A. Rejeas it, and votes for Charles V. 54. Re-
fuses the presents of the Spaniih ambassadors, 55. This difinte-
rcfted behaviour confirmed by the testimony of historians, 5s,
AN1e. Chufes Martin Luther philosophical professor at his uni-
verfitv of V'ittermerg, 78. Encourages Luther in his oppeli-
tion to indulgences, Sc. ProteCfs him against Cajetan, 85. Cau-
fes Luther to be seized at his return from the diet of Worms,
iad conceals him at Wartburg, 116. Dies, 137

Fregofq, the French ambassador to Venice, murdered by the marquis

del Guaflo, the Imperial governor of the Milanese, iii. x66.

Fronfpecg, George, a German nobleman, some account of, he joins
the army of Charles V. ii. 249.

G

Gene, alof the Jesuits, an inquiry into his office and despotic au-

thority, iii. 138.

Geneva, an account of its revolt against the duke of Savoy, iii. 84.
Genoa, reduced by Lantrec, the French general, iii 7. The French

endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour of Savona, 16. Is re-
fcued from the French by Andrew Doria, x1. The government
of, fettled by the difintereftednels of Doria, 19. The honour
paid to Doria's memory, 2c. Is visited by the emperor, 28.
A scheme formed to overturn the constitution of, by Fiefco count
of Lavagno, 262. He assembles his adherents, 263. The con-
fpirators sally forth from Lavagno's palace, 268. Deputies sent
to know Lavagno's terms, 269. Lavagno drowned, 27o. The
infurrec;on ruined by the imprudence of his brother Jerome
lieio, i6. - The conspirators dilperfe, 271. Jerome reduced and'
put to death, 276.

G-rnianad.t, an association in Valencia, so termed, on what occasion

formed, ii. I68. Refutie to lay down their arms, ib. Their re-
feiitmlcnt levelled at the nobility, who raise an army againlt
them, ,b. Defeat the nobles in several actions, i'9. But are'
routed and dilpetfed by them, ib.
(:ermany, slate of, at the death of the emperor Maximilian, ii. 46.

Charles V. of Spain, and Francis I. of France form pretensions
to the Imperial crown, 47. Their refpeative rearons offered in
favour of their claims, 48. Views and interests of the other Eu-
ropean flates in relation to the competitors, 5,. Ilenry VIII.
0f England advances a eiaim, si. But is difeouraged from pro.
lIcutilig it, it. How the papacy was likely to be affc'ted in the
choice of an emlperor, it. Advice of pope Leo X to the Ger-
man princes, 52. Opening of the diet at Frankfort, 53. In
whom the election of an emperor is vested, ib. Views of the e-
Ic'.ors, i6. The empire offi.red to Frederick of Saxony, ib.
Who rejeAds it, and his reafos, 54. 'Charles V. chosen,.56.
'The capitulation of the Germanic privileges confirmed by him,
i;. Charles sets out for, 63. Charles crowned at Aix-la-Cha-
pelle, 72. Commencement of the reformation there, by Martin
Luther, 73. Treartment of the bull of excommunication pub-
':flied againfi IL.tieir, 90. The ulurpations of the clergy there,
nulingg the difpultes concerning inveltitures, 1oo. The clergy of,
inoftly foreit;uers, 104. The benefices of, nominated by the
pope, ib. The expedient 'of the emperors for reitraining this
power of the pope, ineffledual, Io$. The great progress of Lu-
ther's doctr ins in, I88. Grievances of the pealants, 23r. In-
ur-recllon in Sualia, 2 2, 233. The memorial of their grievan-
'-cs, i,. The iniirrcdtion quelled, ii. Another insurreCtion in
Thuringia, 234. low tile house of Auflria beamnt lI forlni-

Zz

dable in, 26I. Proceedings relating to the reformation there,
ib. Great progiefs of the reformation there, iii. 33. Ferdinand
king of Hungary and Bohemia, brother to Charles V. elected
king of the Romans, 40. The protcftant religion eflablifhed in
Saxony, 119. The proteflant religion eflabliflied in the Palati-
nate, 211. The league of Smalkalde raise an army against the
emperor, 27;. Are put under the ban of the empire, 239.
The prottflant army dispersed, 255. The Interim enforced by
the emperor, ;al. Maurice of Saxony raises an army, and de-
clares in favour of the protestants, iv. 47. Maurice favoured
even by the cat.':3ic princes, and M hy, 6r. Treaty of Paffau,
between the emperor and Maurice of Saxony, 67. Truce be-
tween the emperor ald Henry of France, s15. Charles resigns
th- Imperial crown to his brother Ferdinand, 162.

G;-,~, an infurrecdion there, iii. 124. The pretensions of the citi-

zens, lb. Form a confederacy against the queen-dowager of
Hungary their govcrnefs, 115. Their deputies to the emperor,
how- treaed by him, ;3. Offer to submit to France, 126. Is re-
ducei iby Ci!aries, T3 2.

Gbieiai, fai5ion in I;aly, a view of, ii. 246.
GirTn, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of the army of

the holy Junta, ii. ij;. Resigns his comriffilon, and Padilla re-
placed, 1q9.

6C./,:J in Africa, taken hy the emperor Charles V. iii. 73.
Go,.go, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures cardinal Far-

nefe to be affafinated, and takes pofTeffion of Placentia for the
emperor, iii 307. Prepares to seize Parma, iv. 23. Is repulsed
by the French, 25.

CGie,, sent by Francis I. king of France, to negotiate a peace

with Charles V. ii 37.

(>am-:le, cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the count de Sancerre

to surrender St. Difitre to the emperor, iii. 195. Endeavours
to lull the proteflants into security with regard to the emperor's
(onducl towards them, 27;. Is commissioned by Philip to ad-
drees the assembly at the emperor's resignation of his hereditary
douninions, iv. 149.

Graveiaei an interview there between the emperor Charles V. and

Henry VIII. of Engia:id, ii. 71.

C roppr, canon of Cologne, is appointed a manager of the protest,

ant and catholic coiferences before the diet at Ratisbon, iii. ISo.
Writes a treatiel to conpofe the differences between them, ib.
The fen:iments of both parties on this work, 15 .
C:-.iaJ, Garchbithop of, prttl;nt of the council of Castile, his im-

prudent advice to cardinal Adrian, relating to the infurreaion in
Segovia, ii. 145.

Gisi, ihe marquis dei, appointed governor of Milan, by the empe-

ror, iii. ico. Procures Rincon, the French ainbaffador to the
Porte, to be murdered on his journey thither, 167. Defends
Carignan agzinft the French, 189. Defeated by d'Enguien in
a p.tched battle, 191.
ii.,wi..^,, h.is acccult of the publication of indulgences contra*

dlied, ii. o8, ArNT. Defends Regg;o against the French, r3r.
Repulies an attack upon Parma by the French, 1I q. His senti-
ments of the pope's treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 2 3..

CuGi/, Francis of Lorrain, duke of, is made governor of Metz by

Henry 11. of France, iv. 73. His character, id. Prepares to de-
fend it againjt the emperor, 74. His brother d'Aumale taken
prisoner by the Impricalifts, 76. The emperor raises the siege,
78. His humane treatment of the distressed and sick Germans
left behind, 79. Perfiiades Henry to an alliance with pope Paul
IV. x39. Marches with troops into Italy, i66. Is unable to es-
seA any thing, i67. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat of
St. Quintin, 179. Iis reception in France 183. Takes the
field against Philip, 184. Invefis and takes Calais from the
English, i85. Takes albf Guifnes and Hames, 187. Takes
Thionville in Luxembourg, 191.

GI,,Ie, Mary of, married to James V. of Scotland, iii. ir4. Fruf-

trates the intended marriage between her daughter Mary and
prince Edward of England, iii. 188.
Gvr., cardinal de, why he favoured the election of Charles V. to

the Imperial crown, ii. s5. Signs the capitulation of the Ger-
manic body on behalf of Charles, 56.

GCfiJan, chancellor to the emperor Ferdinand, is sent to pope Paul
1V. to notify the election, who refuses to fee him, iv. i8.

I-I

Hamturfe, city of, embraces the reformed religion, ii 188.
Faro, the Condc de, appointed to command the army of the Ca.

flilian nobles against the holy Junta, ii. I58. Attacks Torde-
fillas, and gets poffeclion of queen Joanna, ib. Routs the army
of the Junta, and takes P'adilla prisoner, who is executed, I63.

I./fcen A'a, deputy governor of Algiers, his piracies against the

Christian Rates, iii. 58. Is besieged in Algiers by the emperor
Charles V. 1s6o. Makes a fuccefsfiil Tally, i6r. The emperor
forced by bad weather to return back again, 163.
H.yrJdi,, a potter's foal of Lelbos, commences pirate, iii. 66.. See

Zth0rr.t.

liealbems, ancient, why the principles of mutual toleration were

generally admitted among them, iv. 129.

I/i-.l, vice-chancellor to Challks V. attends the pope's nuncio to,

Smalkalde, iii. 116. Forms a catholic league in opposition to
the protestant one, 118.

]lei y II. king of France, his motives for declining an alliance with

pope Paul Il1. against the emperor, iii. 3c9. Procures for
Scotland a peace with England, iv. 24. The young queen
Mary contraqed to the dauphin, and tent to France for educa-
tion, i!. Enters into an alliance with Otavia Farnese duke-of
Parma, ib. Protens against the council of Trent, 2S5 Makes
a'Ulance with Maurice elector of Saxony, 40. Seconds the ope-
ratioins of _M:aurice, 48. His army marches and seizes Metz,
5:. Attempts to surprise Strafburg, 57. Is strongly solicited
tu fpiare it, ii. Returns, 58. The emperor prepares for war

3

aainft hir, ,7. Infligates the Turks to invade Naples, 8:.

Terouanne taken and demoliihed by Charles, 88. Ilefden tak-
en, 89. Leads an a. .iv into the Low-Countries againfl Charles,
90. En'earours to ,lftrucA the marriage cf iary of England
with Philip of Spain, Ic$. The progress of his arms against
the emperor, ir6. Engages Charles, IcS. Rctires, ib. Cos-
mo di Medici, duke of Florence, makes war against him, 109.
Appoints Peter Sirozzi commander of his army in Italy, I r.
Strozzi defeated, 112. Sienna taken, I14. Pope Paul IV.
makes overtures to an alliance with him against the emperor,
137. Montmorency's arguments againfl this alliance, 139.
Is persuaded by the Guises to accept it, A. Sends the cardinal
of Lorrain with powers to conclude it, x o. The pope signs
the treaty, 142. A truce for f-e years concluded with the em-
peror, 152. Is exhorted by cardi"nal Caraffa to break the truce,
15S. Is absolved from his oath, and concludes a new treaty
with the pope, 157. Sends the duke of Guise into Italy, 167.
The conflable Mor.tmortncy defeated and taken prisoner at St.
Quintin, 174. IHnry prepares for the defence of Paris, 177.
St. Quintin taken by assault, ib. Collects his troops and nego.
tiates ror affiflance, ió. His kind reception of the duke of Guile,
184. Calais taken by Guise, 186. Empowers Montmorency
to negotiate a peace with Philip, 196. Honours him highly on
his return to France, 197. Writes to queen Elizabeth with
proposals of marriage, 2oS. How he failed in his suit, ió.
Terms of the treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis, zao. His daughter
married to Philip, and his fifler to the duke of Savoy, 2Ia.
The marriage of his fifler and daughter celebrated with great
pomp, 212. His death, ib.
itnr.y VII. of England detains the archduke Philip and his dutch-

ess when driven on his coafl, three months, at the infigation of
Ferdinand, ii. Ii.
.- VII. of England fends an amEralTador to Germany to pro-

pose his claims to the Imperial crovwn, ii. I. Is discouraged from
his p etcnfions, and takes no part with the other competitors,
il. His personal charater and political influence in Europe, 66.
Entirely guided by cardinal V\ oifey, 67. Receives a visit from
the emperor Charles V. 70. Goes over to France to visit
Francis, 7 . .Wrefllts with Francis, and is thrown by him, i.
.3. . Has another interview with Charles at Gravelines, ib.
Charles offers to fiubmit his diiferences with francis to his arbi-
tralion, 72. Publishes a treatise on the Seven Sacraments, a-
gainft Martin Luther, 117. Obtains of the pope the title of
I'feia'rr of the fait, 118. Takes part with Charles agairft
Francis, ir9. Sends Wolfey to negotiate an accommodation
between the emi-eror and Francis, 127. Concludes a league
with Charles against Francis, 128. His avowed reasons for this
treaty, i;. Iis private motives, I29. Declares war against
Francis, I39. Is visited by Charles, 140. Makes dcfcents up-
on the coall of France, ib. Advances with an army into Picar-
dy, it. Obliged to retire by the duke de Vendome, 141. En-

ters into a treaty with the emperor and Charles duke of Bour-
bon, I77. How he raised fipplies for his wars beyond the
grants of his parliament, 83. Sends the duke of Suflolk to in-
vade Picardy, who penetrates alrnoft to Paris, but is driven
back, ;A. Engages to aflift Charles in an invasion of Provence,
196. Causes of his not supporting the Imperialists, 197, 198.
Effects of the battle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis, on him,
210. Particulars of his embassy to Charles, 2a2. Concludes
a defensive alliance with France, 2 16. Is declared protector of
the league of Cognac against the emperor, '41. Ilis motives
for afiiting the pope against the emperor, iii. 4. Enters into
a league with Francis, and renounces the English claim to the
crown of France, 5. Declares war against the emperor, n..
Concludes a truce with the governels ofthe Low-Countries, 15.
Projecs his divorce from Catharine of Aragon, 25. Motives
which withheld the pope from granting it, 26. Acquiefees in
the peace of Cambray, 27. Sends a lupply of money to the
protestant league in Germany, 41. Procures his marriage to
be annulled by Cranmer, archbishop of Canterbury, 0o. The
divorce reveritd by the pope under penalty of excommunica-
tion, ib. Renounces the papal supremacy, it. Refuses to ac-
knowledge any council called by the pope, 64. Opposes James
V. of Scotland marrying Mlary of Guile, 114. His difgufls
with Francis and intercourse with the emperor, i;. Concludes
a league with Charles, 17-. Makes war with Scotland, 174.
Particulars of his treaty with Charles, it. Invades France,,and
invests Boulogne, 194. Refufis the emperor's plan of opera-
tions, 196. Is d(elerrcd by the emperor, 197. Takes Boulogne,
a1r. His haughty proposals to France, it. Peace of Canipe,
235. Is lilcceeded by his lun Edward VI. 274. A review of
his policy, iv. 221.
:ertford, earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, iii. 194. Joins
Henry after, ill his invasions of France, it.

Jlfe, the landgrave of, procures the reiteration of his kinsman,

Ulric duke of Wurtemhnbrg, iii. f6. Ilis views compared with
those of the elector of Sax,,ny, ai6. The emperor's deceitful
professions to him, 222. Quiets the apprehensions of the pro-
teltant league with regard to the emperor, 223. Is appointed
joint comnmander of the army of the league with the ele&or of
Saxonty, -42. Their characters compared, ib. Urges an attack
of the emperor, but is opposed by the eledorl, 245. His letter
to Maurice duke of Saxony, 25 I. The army of the league
ditfptife, 255. Is reduced to accept h?-r' terms from Charles,
293. His humiliating reception by the emperor, 295. Is
detained in confinement, 29,7. Iis offers of fubmiflion fighted
by the emperor, 3 1. Is carried by the emperor with him into
the Netherlands, 321. Renews his endeavours for liberty, iv.
1;. Charles rtleafes arbitrarily the elector of Brandenburgh,
and Maurice, from their engagements to him, i8. Is closely
confined in the citadel of Mechlin, ib. Obtains his liberty by
the treaty of Paffau, 67. Is arrtcied by the queen of Hungary,

but free' by the .mperor, 70. The effects of his confinement
on hi;n, 71.

Het!r,,;, h;is acenont of Lewis XII. shewn to contradict the re.

lations -iven by BclIav, and other French historians, of the edu-
catinn of Charles V. ii. 21, ,'c.

H:l y,7Sa. See 7'--.

oJI.' i;S1, aga:ift the emperor Charles V. formed at Cognac,
umi'er the protetion of llenry VTII. of England, ii. 141.

Io,-:, a po:ter's fIn of Lcfbus, commences pirate, with his bro-

ther Havra En, ili. 65. See B r;r!.

EHlg r is invaded by Solyman the Magnificent, and its king

Leruis II. killed, ii. :6c. Iis fuccei;Ts, and the number of pri-
foners ra.-ried away, lZo. The archduke Ferdinand elected
king of, together with lBohemia, ib. John Zapol Scepius
wrefls it from Fcrdinand, iii. i;3. Stephen succeeds on the
death of his father John, 1:4. Is treaclerouily seized by Soly-
mana r56. Se ijc.i'a and .}lartiAnui.

I

7Jres V. of Scotland levies troops to assist Francis in Provence,.

but his intention frufl-ated, iii i 3. Hiis negotiations for
marriage with Francis's daughter i. Marries Mary of Guise,
114. Dies, and leaves Mary his infant daughter to succeed
him, 174. See M.ry.
7-r/i:, the order of, by whom founded, ii. 124. CharaEter of

that order, ib. Character of lnatio Ioyola their founder, iii.
135. The order confirmed by the pope. 136. An examina-
tion into the constitution of the order, I.,7. Office and power
of their general, 138. The rapid progress of the order, I41.
Engage in trade, and efiahbli an empire in South America, 142.
Bad tendency of the order, i3. Arc responsible for most of
the pernicious effecs of popery since their institution, 143. Ad-
vanrages resulting from their inflitution, I44. Civilize the na-
tives ofParaguay, i4 . Their precautions for the independen-
cy of their empire there, I;4). How the particulars of their
government and institution came to be dlilUufed, 148. Sum-
mary oftheir charater, 14.9.
Injl/cnes, in the Romifi church, the dotrine of, explained, ii. 74.

By whon firt invented, 75. Martin Luther preaches against
them, 77. Writes against them, to Al;ert elclor of hMentz,
79. A bull issued in favour of, 87. The sale of, opposed in
Switzerland by Ziing!ius, 89.
Infantad;, duke of, his haughey resentment of a cafua! blow on his

horse, iii. 123. Is protccdd by the conflable of Caflile, i.
inmeS:., a young domestic of cardinal di Monte, obtains his car-
dinal s hat on hi, eiction to the papacy; iv. 7.
Ia:crim, a fyflem ot t.ieology lo ca.i,;i, prepared by order of the

emperor Charles V. for the use of Germany, iii. 315. Is dif-
approved u;', both by protestants and papists, 316.
I,-rf.-t ,., ufirations of the Romilh clergy in Germany, during

the disputes between the emperors and popes, concerning, ii.
Io0.

-Ja,,na, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother of Charles V. visits

Spain with her hulband Philip archduke of Austria, ii. 4. Is
flighted by her husband, 5. lHer character, ib. Is abruptly
lect in Spain by her husband, ib. Sinks into melancholy on the
occasion, and is delivered of her second son Ferdinand, 6. Her
letter of consent to her father's regency of Castile intercepted,
and herself confined, ic. Made joint regent of Castile with
Ferdinand and Philip, by the treaty of Salamanca, 12. Sets
our for Spain with Philip, are driven on the coast of England,
and detained three monihs by Henry VII. il. Acknowledged
queen by the Cortes, 14. Her tenderness to her hulboand in his
fickncfs, and extraordinary attachment to his body when dead,
15. Is incapable of government, ii. Her ibn Charles assumes
the crown, :7. The Cortes acknowledge her son king, with a
reservation in her favour, 42. Her reception of Padilla the
chief of the Spanish malecontents, 149. The holy Junta re-
moved to Tordefillas, the place of her residence, io5. Relap-
les into her former melancholy, it. The proceedings of the
holy Junta carried on in her name, ib. Is seized by the Conde
de Haro, 158. Dies, after near fifty years confinement, iv.
146.
yot Zapol Scaepius, by the affiflance of sultan Solyman, eftab-

lilhes himself in the kingdom of Hungary, iii. 153. Leaves the
kingdom to his son Stephen, Ij4. See Hungary, fabella and
ALa, ttih,,tsi.

]Sdella, daughter of John II. of Caflile, and wife of Ferdinand king

of Aragon, her hiitory, ii. 3. IHer concern at the archduke
Philip's treatment of her daughter Joanna, 5. Her death and
character, 7. Appoints Ferdinand regent of Castile, under re-
ftridions, ib.

--- daughter to Sigifmond king of Poland, married to John

king of Hungary, ii. 154. Her charaler, i$S. Is treacher-
onl carried, with her infant son, into Tranilvlvania by sultan
Solyrman I 6. The government of this province and the edu-
cation of her son committed to her jointly with Martinuzzi, iv.
36. Is jealous of Martinuzzi's influence, and courts the Turks,
37. Is prevailed on to resign Tranlflvania to Ferdinand, ib.
Retires to Silesia, j8. Recovers poil'ffion of Transylvania,
91.

---- of Portugal, married to the emperor Charles V. ii. 30o.
L,.lcy, consequences of the league between pope Leo X. and the

emperor Charles V. to, ii. I 9. The characters of the Italians,
Spaniards, and French, contrafled, to3. State of, at the accef-
sion of Clement VII. to the papacy, I84. Views of the Italian
States with relpc'f to the emperor and Francis on the expulsion
of the French from Genoa and the Milanese, i95. Their ap-
prchenfions on the battle of Pavia and captivity of Francis, 212.

lThe principal tfates join in the holy league against the emperor,
24c. Are disgusted at the tardinesl of Francis, 246. A view

c.f tle Cl;. e!ine fatcion, il. Sentiments of the states of, en the
peace oi Cmlhra-, iii. 25. Is visited by the emperor Charles,
2 -. The mot.'rS of his moderation towards the states of, 29.
A leazue ar.:orng the states rs, formed by Charles, 46. Placen-
tia granted to Oclavio Farnese b Philip II. of Spain, iv. I8x.
The hnvcft'itUrc f Si-nra given lib Philip to Cofinb di Medici,
i.. The cor.cn uence of thee grants, IX8.
,',ta, hol-, a view of the confederacy in Spain, so termed, ii.
149. The aqithority of Adrian difclxir.ed by, ib. Removed
to TordcfiI'as, where qruen Joanna rr:iled, j^. Their pro-
reedinr-s c-:ri.-! on in the name of Joan;a, ii,. Receives letters
from C' arles t ;lay don thic:r arms, with promifces of pardon,
ir . Ienlcf.irances or grievances drawn up by, is2. The
partuculars of this rer.onftrance, it. Remarks on the spirit of
it, 1 4 Are intimidated from presenting it to Charles,. 156.
Propose to deirive Charls of his royalty during the life of Jo.
anna, ;i. Take the field, I.7. Character of their army, ;b.
The queen seized Fy the Conde de Hare. .

158. How they.ob.

tained money to fiipport thcir armyr, 159. Lose time in nego-
tiating with the noblts, 16o. Propo!e to make their peace with
Charles at the expence of the onbl-s, Ix6. Their irresolute
crndui1, 162. Their army defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken
prisoner, 163. Pad;lia executed, 164. His letters to his wife,
and the city of Toledo, ib. X\str. The ruin of the confederacy,

f167.

f.i./i If. pope, obfrcratior.s on the pontificate of, ii. 96.
- Ill. pope, his character, iv. 6. Beflows his cardlinal's hat

infamoufy, 7. Is averfr to the calling a council, 8. Summons
one at Trent, 9. A;iTrts his supreme authority peremptorily in
the bull for it, 16. Repents confirming Oceavio Farnese in Par-
ma, 2 . Reouires OcRavio to relirquifh his alliance with France,
24. The manner of his death, 124.

L
I ,.'a, a Flemish gentleman, i.ociated by Charles V. with car-

cinal Ximenes in the regency ofCaftile, ii. 3.,.

172 Ts,

t igege of, by the emperor Charles V. iii. 178. Is ahan-

donedr hv him, i.

LaZ,7 r, mortgaEes the revenues of N'ap!ee, to fupplv the exigen-

cies of the emperor, ii. 2co. Francis surrenders himfelfprilbn-
er to him at the battle of Pavia, 207. . His cautious disposal of
L.im, 2cS. Delivers him up in pursuance of the treaty of Ma-
t2ricl, and ereeives the duke'of Orleans and the Dauphin, as
h).otages in exchange, 2 ;c. Is sent ambassador to Francis to re-
c: i-e his fulfilment cf the treaty of, 24i. Concludes a treaty
with the pope, 2 2. Marches to join the Imperialills at Rome,
-.vEtre tSe troops reulre to obey him, iil. 5.
.L-=a, Don John de, made viceroy of Aragon, on the departure

cf Charles V. fur Germany, ii. 62. Composes the disturbances
therc. I170
L£Tjgr, John Lewis Fitef:, count of; his character, iii. 22,.

Meditates subverting the government of Genoa, 263. His pre-
parations, 264. Ilis artful method of assembling his adherents,
266. His exhortation to them, 267. His interview with his
wife, 268. Sallies forth, i. Andrew Doria escapes, 269.
Deputies sent to know his terms, ib. Is drowned, 270. Ilis
brother's vanity ruins their designs, it. See Fificc.
aiutre;, Odet de Foix, marefchal de, the French governor of Mi-
lan, his charalter, ii. 130. Alienates the affections of the Mi-
lanefe from the French, it. Inveefs Reggio, hut is repulsed by
Guicciardini the historian, then governor, 13r. Is exconmu-
nicated by the pope, ib. The money for paying his troops feiz-
ed by Louiie of Savoy, 132. Is left by his Swiss troops, 133.
Is driven out of the Milanese territories, I34. A new body of
Swiss under him insist on giving battle to the Imperialifis, wlho
defeat him, 138. The Sv-ifs leave him, it. Retires into France
with the residue of his troops, i. 'Delivers up the dauphin
and duke of Orleans in exchange for Francis I. as hostages for
the performance of the treaty of Madrid, 230. Is appointed
generaliflimo of the league agahift the emperor, iii. 6. sis filc-
cesses in Italy, 7. 'Motives which withheld him from subduing
the Milanese, it. Obliges the prince of Orange to retire to
Naples, 13. Blockades Naples, 14. Ilis army walted, and
himfelfkilled by the pellilcnce, I8.

I. Lrning, the revival of, favourable to the reformation of religion,

ni. 109.

/.:ip/ic, a public disputation held there by Martin Luther, and Ec-

cius, on the validity of the papal authority, ii. c8.
L.eo X. pone of Rome, his characaer, ii. 5 . Hiis apprehensions on

the el i'.ion of an emperor of Gcri-:any, at the death of Maxi-
milian, 52. His counsel to the German princes, i. Grants
Charles V. a tenth of all ecclefialtical benefices in Caflile, 58.
Lays Castile under an interdict, hut takes it off at the inlfance
of Charles, it. His conduce on the profprcd of war between
Charles and Francis, 65. Situation of tlh papacy at his accef-
lion, and his views of policy, 7. Ilis in.dttcntion to Martin
Luther's controverfl with the )Doninicans, concerning indul-
gences, 81. Is infligated againlt him and furmons him to
Rome, 82. Desires the elietor of Saxony not to protecc him,
i6. Is prevailed on to permnit Luther's dolcrines to be examin-
ed in Germany, 83. Cardinal Cajetan apv.ointed to try him,
ib. Issues a bull in favour of indu!gieices, 87. A filfpetiion of
proceedings against Luther, and why, 88. Publiihcs a bull of
excommunication against him, 90. Thc polirical views of his
condudc between Charles and trancis, izi. Concludes a trea-
ty with Francis, /.b Concludes a treaty also with Charles, ib.
The conditions of the treaty with Charles, 122. Its confcquen-
ces to Italy, I29. Is disappointed in a scheme formed by Mo-
rone, chancellor of Milan, tor attacking that dtlchy, I3o. Ex-
communicates mareefhai tie loix for his attack of Reggio, and
declares against France, s l. Takes ; body vs Swili into pay,

iA. The French driven out of the Milanese, 134. He dies, 35.
The spirit of the confederacy broken by his death, i.
L'E/parrr, Foix de, commands the French troops in Navarre for

lHenry d'Alhret, ii. 123. Reduces that kingdom, ib. His im-
prudent progress into Castile, 124. Is taken prisoner by the
Spaniards and the French driven out of Navarre, la3.
Leo-arc, Father, forms a scheme of betraying Metz to the Impe-

rialifts, iv. us8. Introduces soldiers clad like friars, x19. Is
detectd, i;. Is murdered by his monks, z12.

Ivrfqur, Don, his account of the motives which induced the em.

peror Charles V. to resign his hereditary dominions, iv. 145,
Nte.
/rrr II. king of Hlungary and Bohemia, his chara&cer, 260.

Is invaded and killed by Solyman the Manmificent, ib.
- XII. king of France, receives homage of the archduke Phi-

i p, for the earldomr of Slanders, ii. 4. Concludes a treaty with
him, while at war with Ferdinand of Aragon, 6. Bestows his
niece, Germain de Foix, on Ferdinand, and concludes a peace
with him, ir. Lofts the confidence of Philip on that occasion,
2 1, Nrtr. Bestows his eldest daughter, already betrothed to
Charles V. on the count of Angouleme, ii.
Zn., .Antonio de, defends Pavia for the emperor against Fran-

ci-, ii. :zc. His vigorous defence, o02. Sallies out at the bat-
t:e of Pavia, and contributes to the defeat of Francis, 206. Is
left governor of Milan bh the duke of Bourbon, 249. Defeats
the forces there, iii. 2C. Is appointed generalifimo of the Ita-
lian league, 46. Direas the operations of the invasion of
France, under the emperor, 9-. Dies, 99.

I.:seratsre, its obligations to the order of Jesuits, iii. 144.
Lcre[v, .i .Iedici. See Medici.
L-si' of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of France, her charaCler,

i:. r2z. Her motives for fcizing the money appointed for pay-
ment of marechal Lautrec's troops, ib. Cause of her averrfon
to the house of Bourbon, 1;6. Her advances towards a mar-
riage with Charles duke of Bourbon, rejected by him, iM. 177.
Determines to ruin him, i.' I'nffigates a law-fiit againfi him
fior his eflates, i5. GOec to difluade Francis from his intended
ilvafion of the Milancfe, A ho will not wat ,fcr her, 199. Is
appointed regent during bis ablence, it. Her prudent conduc
on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of her son Francis, 2C9.
Concludes a defensive alliance with Henry VIII. 217. Ratifies
the treaty of Madrid for the recover) of her son's liberty, 2?9.
Undertakes with Margaret of Savoy to accommodate the differ-
ences between the emperor and Francis, iii. 21. Articles of the
peace of Cambray, 23.
L£^-i. Ignatio, commands the caItle of Panmpeluna, in Navarre,

and is wounded in its defente, ii. 114. His enthusiastic turn
of mind, id. The founder of the society of Jesuits, ii. Prevails
on the pope to eftablilh the order, iii. 136. An examination
into the conflitution of the crder, 137. Office and power oi

tie general, 138. The rapid progress of the order, 141. See
Jefuiti.
Lorrain, cardinal of, persuades Henry II. of France, to accept the

offered alliance with pope Paul lV. and is fentto Rroe to ne-
gotiate it, iv. 140. His imprudent behaviour towardsthe dutch-
ess of Valentinois, 195.

Lunenbatrgl, duke of, avows the opinions of Luther, ii. 89..
Lutbl, Martin, the happy consequences of the opinions propagat-

ed by him, ii. 73. Attacks indulgences, 77. His birth and e-
ducation it. Chosen philosophical professor at the university of
Wittemberg, 78. Inveighs against the publishers of indulgen-
ces, id. Writes to Albert eledtor of Mentz against them, 79.
Composes theses against indulgences, it. Is supported by the
Augustinians, and encouraged by Frederick eleEor of Saxony,
80. Is fumnoned to Rome by pope Leo, a8. Obtains of the
pope leave to have his dotrines examined in Germany, 83. Ap-
pears before cardinal Cajetan at Augsburg, iJ. His resolute re-
ply to the peremptory order of Cajetan, to retracd his principles,
i;. Witlhdraws from Augsburg, and appeals from the pope ill-
informed, to the pope when better informed, concerning him,
85. Appeals to a general council, 87. The death of Maximi-
lian, how, of service to him, i;. Questions the papal authority
in a public disputation, 88. His opinions condemned by the
universities of Cologne and Louvain, 89. A bull of excommu-
nication published againit him, 90. Pronounces the pope to be
antichrist, and burns the bull,- 91. Reflections on the condut
of the court of Rome toward him, 92. Reflecions on his con-
dudt, 93. Causes which contributed to favour his opposition to
the church of Rome, 95. Particularly the art of printing, Io8.
And the revival of learning, lo. He is summoned to appear
at the diet of Worms, 114. A fafe-conduda granted him thither,
i;. His reception-there, IIS. Refuses to retrat his opinions,
it. Departs, ib. An edia published against him, ib. He is
leized and concealed at Wartburg, 1 6. Progress of his doc-
trines, id. The university of Paris publishes a decree against
him, IX7. Wrote against by Henry VIII. of England, i&. An-
fwers both, 118. Withdraws from his retreat to check the in-
considerate zeal of Carloftadius, 187. Undertakes a translation
of the Bible, 188. His doctrines avowed by several of the Ger-
man princes, is. His moderate and prudent condut, 237. Mar-
ries Catharine a Boria, a nun, it. The great progress of his doc-
trines among the Germanic States, iii. 31. Encourages the pro-
teftants, dispirited by the emperor's decree against him, 37. His
concern at the practices of tbe'anabaptifls at Munter, 59. Is
invited to Leipfic, by Henry duke of Saxony, 120. His opinion
of Gropper's treatise to unite the protestants and catholics, 51.
Dies, 18. Summary of his character, id. 219. Extra& from
his lafl will, 22 1, yote. See Protfmti. A view of the extraor-
dinary effects of his revolt from the church of Rome, on that
court, and on Europe in general, iv. 224.
7 .'xenm.urg, invaded by Robert de la Mlarck, lord of Bouillon, ii.

Vul. IV. A a

J z5. Invaded and over-run by the duke of Orleans, iii. 170.
Is again invaded by Francis, 177.

M

Mdsr.d, treaty of, between the emperor Charles V. and his prison-

er Francis L king of France, ii. 226, »27. Sentiments of the
public with regard to this treaty, 128.
Magdrde , the city of, refuses to admit the Interim enforced by

Charles V. and prepares for defence, iv. xI. Maurice eleaor of
Saxony appointed to reduce it, ib. Is put under the ban of the
empire, 2g. The territories of, invaded by George of Meck-
lcnburgh, i/. The inhabitants defeated in a faUy, ib. Maurice
of Saxony arrives and besieges the city, 29. Surrenders, 30.
The senate elects Maurice their hurgrave, 31.

Mat-ed, king of Tunis, hifory of his sons, iii. 69.
Majjrca, an infurredion there, ii. i 70. Which is quelled with dif-

ficulty, ib. The moderation of Charles towards the insurgents,
on his arrival in Spain, 1 7 1.

.M.je/, the appellation of, assumed hy Charles V. on his election

to the Imperial crown, and taken by all the other monarchs of
Europe, i. 57.

.lfalines, council of, an account of, iii. z25.
.Mana, the island of, granted by the emperor Charles V. to the

knights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes by the Turks, ii. 143.

Mamalue.t, extirpated by sultan Selim II. ii.48.
.^ammels,,i,, a faclion in Geneva, so termed, some account of, iii.

85.

Mlanul, Don John, Ferdinand's ambalfador at the Imperial court,

pays his court to the archduke Philip on queen Isabella's death,
ii. 9. Intercepts Joanna's letter of consent to Ferdinand's regen-
cy of Caltile, io. Negotiates a treaty between Ferdinand and
Philip, 1 . Declares for Maximilian's regency on Philip's
death, 16. Is made Imperial ambassador at Rome, and concludes
an alliance between Charles V. and Leo X. al. The condi-
tions of the treaty, 122. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to be e-
leded pope, 136.
iar.diur 11 pope, his character, iv. 133. Dies, is.
.laraci,, battle of, between Peter Strozzi and the marquis de Ma-

rignano, iv. 112.
airgar4, of Austria, and dowager of Savoy, aunt to Charles V.
undertakes with Louise, mother of Francis I. of France, to ac-
commodate the differences between those two monarchs, iii. zt.
Articles of the peace of Cambray, 23.
alfargaw, marquis of, appointed commander of the Florentine

army, adcing againfi the French, iv. 1 o. Defeats the French
army under Peter Strozzi, z12. Lays siege to Sienna, i.
Converts the siege into a blockade, 113. Sienna surrenders,
114. Reduces Porto Ercole, 115. His troops ordered into
Piedmont by the emperor, iA.
arIrd, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon, declares war againit the
emperor Charles V. ii. s 25. Ravages Luxembourg with French

troops, ib. Is commanded to disband his troops by Francis,
126. His territories reduced by the emperor, i&.
Marfeile, besieged by the Imperialists, ii. 197. Rescued by Fran-

cis, i. Interview and treaty there between the pope and Fran-
cis, iii. 49.
Martinuxzzi, biflhop of Waradin, is appointed guardian to Stephen

Iing of Hungary, iii. 154. His character, rS$. Solicits the as-
fiftance of sultan Solyman againfi Ferdinand, 1i. Solyman feiz-
es the kingdom, 156. Is appointed to the government of Tran-
fylvania and the education of the young king, jointly with the
queen, iv. 35. Negotiates with Ferdinand, id. Prevails with
the queen to rcfign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 36. Is appoint-
ed governor of Transylvania, and made a cardinal, it. Is affaf-
finated by Ferdinand s order, 39.

Mnatyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the extortions of the

Flemish ministers of Charles V. ii. 43.
M,,yr of Butgundy, contracted to Lewis XII. of France, but mar-

ied to the emperor Maximilian, ii. 3.

.fary of England, her acceiflon, iv. 99. Receives proposals fiom

the emperor Charles V. of marrying his son Philip, i6. The
Englilh averse to this union, too. The house of commons re-
monfirates against the match, it. The articles of marriage,
lot. The marriage ratified by parliament and completed, ib.
Re-establishes the Romiih religion, ro2. Persecutes the reform-
ers, 103. Invites Charles to England on his resignation and
paffaige to Spain, which he declines, 162. Is engaged by Phi-
lip toaffift him in his war againf France, 170. Levies-money
by her prerogative to carry on the war, 171? Her neglect in-
the security of Calais, 85. Calais invefied and-taken by the
duke of Guire,i87. Dies, 204.

Mary, daughter of James V. of Scotland, succeeds to the crown

an infant,. iii. 174. Is contracted to the dauphin of France,
308. Is educated at the court of France, iv. 24. The mar-
riage completed, ib. Assumes the title and arms of England on
the death of Mary, zo5.
Mattbias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the anabaptists at

Munfler, iii. 54. Seizes the city, and eftablilhes a new form of
government there, 55. Repulses the bishop of Munfler, 56.
Is killed, ib. See Bxcold, and Anabaptdsi.
lrjuriee, duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceding to the pro-
teltant league of Smalkalde, iii. Marches to the affifiance of
Ferdinand in' Hungary, ib. His difference with his cousin the
cledor, i82. Iis conduct at the diet of Worms, 2c7. Joins
the emperor against the protestants, 237. His motives, 249.
1 is.infidious conduCt toward the elector, 2 o. Seizes the elec-
torate of Saxony, 253. Saxony recovered by bhe eledtor, 258.
His ineffectual endeavours to reduce Wittemberg for the em-
peror, 187. Obtains pofleflion of the electorate, 291. Is for-
mally invested at the diet of Augsburg, 315. Becomes diffatis-
fled with the emperor, iv. 9. His motives for discontent explain-
ed, Io. His address and caution in his conduCt, 1x. Make,,

Aa z

neyerthelefs, profelfions of his attachment to the reformation,
i!. Undertakes to reduce Magdeburg to submit to the Interim,
13. Protests againfi the council of Trent, 14. Is commis-
sioned by the emperor to reduce Magdeburg, 16. Joins
George of Mecklenburg before Magdeburg, 28. The city ca-
pitulates, 30o. Begins to intrigue with count Mansfeld, i. Is
eltied hurgrave of Magdeburg, 31. Dismisses his troops, 32.
His addrcfs in amusing the emperor, 33. Makes an alliance
.ith Henry II. of France, to make war on the emperor, 40.
Makes a formal requisition of the landgrave's liberty, 42. Joins
ris troops and publilhes a manifesto, 47. Takes possession of
Au4fburg and other cities, 49. An ineffedual negotiation
wi,:h Charles, 50 Defeats a body of the emperor's troops, 5S.
'Tkes the castle of Ehrenherg, 53. Is retarded by a mutiny
in his troops, is. Enters Infpruck, and narrowly m'ffes taking
Charles, 54. A negotiation between him and Ferdinand, 60.
B-fieges Frankfort on the Maine, 65. His inducements to an
accommodation, 67. Signs a treaty with the emperor at Pas-
tau, 65. Rifl;dions on his conduct in this war 69. Marches
into Hungary to oppose the Turks, 7o. Is placed at the head
of the league againit Albert of Brandenhurgh, 85. Defeats Al-
bert, but is killed in the battle, 86. His character, i. Is fuc-
ceeded by his brother Augustus. 88.
.1aximnlian, emperor of Germany, claims the regency of Caflile on

his son Philip's death, ii. s6. Is supported in his claim by
Don John Manuel, i6. Lofesit, 17. Obtains the government
of the Low-Countries by the death of Philip, at. Appoints
William de Croy, lord of Chievres, to superintend the educa-
tion of his grandson Charles, ik. Concludes a peace with
France and Venice, 37. Dies, 46. State of Europe at this pe-
riod, ir. His endeavours to secure the Imperial crown to his
grandson Charles, 47. How obftruded, ib.
.i;,,,nórg', George of, invades the territories of Magdeburg for
the emperor, iv. 28. Defeats the Magdeburgers, who sally
c'ut en him, 3-. Isjoined by Maurice of Saxony, who assumes
the filpreme command, is.

/Aedeiii, John James. See MarinrZao.
.mei;i, Alexander, reflored to the dominions of Florence, by the
emperor Charles, ii. 30. Is aflaffinated, i i.

cardinal de, elected pope, and assumes the title of Clement

V\l. ii. I8t. See Clement 1VI.

-- - Catarilne di, is married to the duke of Orleans, iii. 49.

Is conjedured, by the emperor Charles V. to have poisoned
the d::uphin, 102.

Cofrno de, made duke of Florence, iii. xi2. Is Supported

bv the emnperor, and defeats the partisans of Lorenzo, 1r3.
AlsTerts his independency agrinft the emperor, iv. 8o. Offers to
reduce Sier.a for the emperor, I09. Enters into a war with
France, i*. See MIarini.c. His address in procuring the in-
vtfti:ure of Sienna from Philip II. of Spain, i8S. It is granted
to iaim, x8z.

Me&ici, Lorenzo de, affafinates his kinsman Alexander, iii. IIr.

Flies, i. Attempts to oppose Cosmo, but is defeated, 112.
lredina del Campo, the inhabitants of, refuse to let Fonseca take

the military flores there for the siege of the insurgents in Sego-
via, ii. I46. The town almost burnt by Fonseca, ;. The in-
habitants repulle him, it. Surrenders after the battle of Villa-
lar, and difoblution of the holy Junta, 165.

ilMelalabon, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther, ii, 92. 1I

employed to draw up a confession of faith by the protestant
princes at the dietof Augiburg, iii. 35. Isdejedled by the
emperor's decree against the protestants. but comforted by Lu-
ther, 37. Is invited to Paris by Francis, o8. His conference
with Eccius, I.o. Is prevailed upon to favour the Interim eln-
forced by the emperpr, iv. I2.

Melito, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia. on the der . ture of

Charles V. for Germany, ii. 62. Appointed to command the
troops of the nobles against the Germanada, 169. Defeated
by them in several actions, ib. Destroys the albociation, i6.

Menlz, archbishop of, artfully declares before the emperor, the

diet of Augsburg's acceptance of the Interim, without being au-
tlorifed by it, iii. 3r4.
Vderveille, a Milanese gentleman, employed as envoy from Francis

I. to Francis Sforza, duke of Milan, his fate, iii. '9.

Metz, seized by Montmorency the French general, iv. 50. The

duke of Guile made governor of, 73. Is besieged by the em-
peror, 75. The emperor defifis, and retires in a diltrefled con-
dition, 78. A flheme formed by father Leonard to betray the
city to the Imperialilts, 118. The conspiracy detected by the
governor, 119. Leonard murdered by his monks, and his al-
lociates executed, 21r.

Mcziers, in France, besieged by the Imperialists, ii. t26. Gal-

lant defence of, by the chevalier Bayard, ib. The liege railed,
ib.

Jlilan, marechal de Foix, appointed to he the French governor

of, ii. 130. lSis character, it. The Milanese alienated from
the French by his oppressions, if. Invaded by the eclefiallical
troop6 under Prolper Colonna, 13 .. The French driven out,
134. Oppressed by the Imperial troops, 174. Invaded by the
French, 80o. Who are driven out by Colonna, ib. The Im-
perial troops there mutiny for pay, but are appeased by MoronS,
185. Abandoned by the French, x86. Over-run again by
Francis, who seizes the city, 199. The French retire on news
of tie battle of Pavia, 207. The invefliture of, granted to
Sforza, 217. Taken from him and granted to the duke of
Bourbon, 225. Disorders committed by the Imperial troops
there, 240. Opprefive measures of Bourbon to fipply his mu-
tinous troops, 249. The French forces there defeated by An-
tonio de Leyva, iii. 20. Is again granted by the emperor to
tforza, 29. Death of Sforza, 86. 'Ihe pretensions of Francis
to that dutchy, 87. Is seized by the emperor, 93, The mar-
quis dl Guaflo appointed governor, lco.

Aa3

J.^t.i , battle of, between Solyman the Magnificent and the

Iungarians, ii. 260.
Mn'foai orders, inquiry into the fundamental principles of, iii.

3-,. Peculiar confitution of the order of Jesuits, 138.
Jl1omrad,, Don Hugo de, the Imperial amhaffador at Rome, his in-

trigues with cardinal Colonna, againfl pope Clement, ii. 246.
Reduces the pope to an accommodation, ib. Is defeated and
killed by Andrew Doria in a naval engagement before the har-
bour of Naples, iii. 14.
toCse, is sent by the count d'Enguien to Francis for permission
to give battle to the marquis del Guaflo, iii. 190. Obtains his
silt by hisfpirited arguments, 191. Commands in Sienna, when
besieged by the marquis de Marignano, iv. i13. His vigorous
delence, r 4. Is reduced by famine, and capitulates, i/.
MIontte; -ino, numbers of the citizens of Sienna retire thither after

the reduction of that city by the Florentines, and eftablilh a
free government there, iv. iS.
.tc;,tre:uil, count of, accused and tortured for poisoning the dau-

phin, charges the emperor with infligating it, iii. sor.
Mt,,owrns, marefchal, his charaEter, iii. 96. Francis adopts his

plan for refitling the emperor, and commits the execution to
him, it. His precautions, id. His troops despise his conduct,
98. Observations on his operations, 99. Is disgraced, 169.
ConducAs the army of Henry 1I. to join Maurice of Saxony,
and seizes Metz, iv. So. Dissuades Henry from accepting the
offered alliance with pope Paul IV. 139. Commands the French
army against the duke of Savoy, 173. Detaches Dandelot to
relieve St. Quintin, il. Expofts himifelf imprudently to an ac-
tion, and is defeated, 174. Is taken prisoner, i. Negotiates
a peace between Philip and Henry, 196. Returns to France,
and is highly honoured by Henry, ib. His assiduity in forward-
ing the negotiations, 203. His expedient for promoting the
treaty of Cateau-Cambrefis, 207.
lsItrt;:,r, a fruitless conference held there for the restitution of
the kingdom of Navarre, ii. 45.
'tfrs-,, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his character, ii. 130. Re-
tires from the French exacrions in Milan to Francis Sforza, it.
tIis intrigues, how rendered abortive, 13 r. Qiets the mutiny
of the Imperial troops in Milan, 185. Is difgulled with the be-
haviour of Charles, 217. Intriguts aganfl the emperor with
Pescara, ai8. Is betrayed to the emperor by Pelcara, 220.
Is arrested at his visit to Pescara, 22I. -Is set at liberty by the
duke of Bourbon, and becomes his confident, 249.

M,. fsr. in France, taken by the Imperialists, ii. 126. Retaken by

Francis, X17.
.f.ll-vjfte, battle of, between the emperor Charles V. and the e-

lector of Saxony, iii. 284.

Mr.ee-Hafcen, king of Tunis, his inhuman treatment of his fa-

ther and brothers, iii. 69. Is expelled by Barbarossa, i;. En-
gages the emperor to restore hrm, 71. Is established again by
vtc Lrrender of Tunis, 76. His treaty with Charles, il.

Muncer, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, opposes him with fanatical

notions, ii. 235. Heads the inulrredtion of the peasants in Thu-
ringia, 236. His extravagant schemes, ii. Is defeated and
put to death, 237

Munster, the first settlement of the anabaptists in that city, iii. 53.

The city seized by them, 54. They establish a new form of
government there, i;. Is called Mount Sion, 56. The bilhop
of, repulsed by them, ii. Is blockaded by the bilhop, 59. The
city taken, 61. See Anaa,,itps.
Murder, the prices of composition for, by the Romilh clergy, iL

199.

Mujfapha, the declared heir to sultan Solyman the Magnificent, is

invested with the administration of Diarbequir, iv. 95. His
father rendered jealous of his popularity, by the arts of Roxa-
lana, 96. Is strangled by his father's order, 97. His only Ion
murdered, i.

N

Naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to supply the em-

peror in his exigencies, ii. 2oo. Invaded by the French under
the duke of Albany, 203. Invaded by pope Clement VII. 25o.
Treaty between the popeand Lannoy viceroy of, 252. The
prince of Orange retreats thither before Lautrec, iii. 13. Is
blockaded by Lautrec, 14. Sea-engagement in the harbour of,
between Andrew Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which difap-
pointed the French operations against, 15. Doria revolts, and
opens the communication by sea again, 17. Oppressed by the
Spanifi viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, becomes difaffe&ed to
the emperor Charles V. iv. 82. Is harassed by a Turkifl fleet,
it.

NOiau, count of, invades Bouillon at the head of the Imperialists,

ii. z16. Invades France, takes Moufon, and besieges Mezieres,
but is repulsed, ib.
Navarre, the kingdom of, unjufily acquired by Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, ii. 18. D'Albret's invasion of, defeated by cardinal Xime-
nes, 34. Its cabtles difinantled, except Pampeluna, which Xi-
menes flrengthens, 35. Invaded by Francis I. in the name of
Henry d'Albert, 123. Reduced by l'Efparre, the French gene-
ral, ib. The French driven out by the Spaniards, and l'Es-
parre taken prisoner, 24.
N2ebrlands, the government of, first assumed by Charles V. ii. 2..

The Flemings averse to Charles's going to Spain, 39. Invaded
by Francis I. king of France, iz7. A truce concluded with,
by Henry VIII. of England, iii. s1. Invaded by Francis a-
gain, 103. A suspension of arms there, 104. An infurredcion
at Ghent, i26. See Obent. Is once more invaded by Francis,
176. Resigned by the' emperor to his son Philip, iv. 147. A
review of the alterations in, during the sixteenth century, 233,
234.
Nicr, a truce for ten years concluded there between the emperor

and Francis, iii. 1og. Besieged by the French and Turlk,.
179.

,ofsyn, treaty of, between Charles V. and Francis I. of France, ii;

37. The terms of, negledced by Charles, 64.

yrXe.'trf,. the city of, embraces the reformed religion, ii. 188.

Diet of, particulars of pope Adrian's brief to, respecting the re-
formers, 189. The reply to, eIo. Propolfs a general council,
ii. Prefentsa lit of grievances to the pope, 191. The recess,
or ediA of, 19z. This diet of great advantage to the reformers,
is. Proceedings of a second diet there, 194. Recess of the
diet, ih. An accommodation agreed to there, between the em-
peror Charles V. and the protelants, ii. 42.

0

Ora7, and other places in Barbary, annexed to the-crown of Caf-

tile, by Ximenes, ii. i 8.

Oran, Phililert de Chalons, prince of, general of the Imperial ar-

my on the death of the duke of Bourbon, takes the cafle of St.
Angelo, and pope Clement VII. prisoners ii. 259. Retires to
Naples on the approach of Lautrec, iii. 13. Takes his fuccef-
for, the marquis de Saluces, prisoner at Averfa, 18.

Orlean., duke of, delivered up to the emperor Charles V. with the

dauphin, as hostages for the performance of the treaty of Ma-
drid, ii. : 0o. Is married to Catharine di Medici, iii. 49. Be-
comes dauphin by the death of his brother, Io;. See Dauphin.

-- duke of, brother to the former, commands the army ap-

pointed by Francis I. for the invasion of Luxembourg, iii. 70..
Is prompted by envy to abandon his conquefis, and join his bro-
ther the dauphin in Roussillon, i6. Dies, zg9.

P-

.Pjle:, Donna Maria, tife to Don John de Padilla, her artful

fcLeme to raise sloney to supply the arrr of the holy Junta, ii.
159. Her husband taken prionctr and executed, 164. His let-
ter to her, ib. ¥ot. Raises forces to revenge his death, 166.
Is reduced, and retires to Portugal, 167.

padii, Don John de, his family and chara&er, ii. 143. Heads

the infurreciion at Toledo, it. Routs the troops under Ron-
quillo, 145. Calls a convention of the malecontents at Avila,
148. Forms the confederacy called Tie Hovy Junta, 149. Dil-
claims Adrian's authcrity, ib. Gtts ponfeffion of queen Joanna,.
ia. Removes the huly Junta to Tordefilas, the place of her
rcfidence, 1 _. Sent with troops to Valladolid, and deprives
Adrian of all power of government, i6. Is superseded in the
command of the army of the Junta, by Don Pedro de Giron,
1 .. Is appointed commander at the resignation of Giron, 159.
His army l'ppiied with money by an expedient of his wife, ,b.
Besieges Torrelobaton, i62. Takes and plunders it, ih. Con-
cludes a truce with the nobles, ii. Is wounded and taken pri-
soner in an z;.ion with the C-Lnde d. Haro, 163. Is put to

r

death, 164. His letter to his wife, ii. Note. His letter to the
city of Toledo, il. Note.

Palatina!e, the reformation eftablilhed there by the elelcor Fre-

derick, iii. 2 r.

Palatine, count, ambassador from the diet at Francfort, brings

Charles V. the offer of the Imperial crown, which he accepts,
ii. 58.

Pampeluea, castle of, in Navarre, its fortifications strengthened by

cardinal Ximenes, ii 35. Taken by l'Efparre, the French ge-
neral, for Henry d'Albret, 124. Retaken from the French,
12S.

Popacvb how liable to be afifeed by the disposal of the Imperial

crown, ii. 52.

Paraguay, a sovereignty ellablifhed there by the order of Jcfuits,

iii. 145. The inhabitants of, civilised by them, 146. Precau-
tions used by the Jesuits to preserve the independency of their
empire there, id.

Paris, a decree published by the university of, against Martin Lu-

ther the reformer, ii. r 17. A decree of the parliament of, pub-
lifhed against the emperor Charles V. iii. o13.
Parma, the dutchy of, confirmed to O6tavio Farnese, by pope Ju-

lius III. iv. 24. Is attacked by the Imperialists, and successful-
ly protected by the French, 25.

Pajmu, a treaty concluded there between the emperor Charles V.

and Maurice of Saxony, iv. 67. Reflecions on this peace, and
the conduct of Maurice, 68.

Pavia, besieged by Francis I of France, ii. .o0. Vigorously de-

fended by Antonio de Leyva, ib. Battle of, between Francis
and the duke of Bourbon, 1o6. The Imperial troops in that
city mutiny, 213.

P.ul II. pope, eleled, iii. 5r. His characer, (2. Proposes a

general council to be held at Mantua, 64. Negotiates person-
ally between the emperor and Francis, o18. Ifrues a bull for a
council at Mantua, z 5. Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza,
117. A partial reformation of abuses by, ib. Summons the
council of Trent, i8. Prorogues it, ib. Summons it again,
203. Grants the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to his illegi-
timate son, zlo. Deprives and excommunicates the electoral
bilhop of Cologne, 2z4. Presses the emperor to declare war
againit the protestants, 225. Concludes an alliance with him
against the protetants, 2i8. Indiscreetly publiimes this treaty,
232. His troops join the emperor, 243. Rccals them, 26o.
Removes the council from Trent to Bologna, 305. Refilfes the
emperor's request to carry the council back to Trent, ii His
resentment against the emperor for the murder of his son car-
dinal Farnese, 308. Is petitioned by the diet of Augiburg for
the return of the council to Trent, 309. Eludes the complying
with this request, 311. His sentiments of the Interim, publiihed
by Charles, 316. Dismisses the council of Bologna, 322. An-
nexes Parma and Placentia to the holy fee, iv. 4. Dies, :b.
The manner of his death inquired into, 5.

Pau. IV. pope, eleted, iv. 135. His character and history, 134.

Founds the order of Theatines, 135. Is the principal occa-
sion of eftallifhing the inquisition in the papal territories,
iJ. Lays aside his austerity on his eledion, 136. His partiali-
ty to his nephews, ib. Is alienated from the emperor by his
nephews, 137. Makes overtures to an alliance with France,
i. Is enraged by the recess of the diet of Augiburg, 140.
Signs a treaty with France, 141. Is included in the truce
for five years, concluded between the emperor and Henry,
153. His iufidious artifices to defeat this truce, 154. Absolves
Henry from his oath, and concludes a new treaty with him, Is 7.
1Iis violent proceedings against Philip, now king of Spain, tS18.
The Compagna Romana seized by the duke d'Alva, 59. Con-
cludes a truce with Al-a, ib. Contrait between his conducl and.
that of Ch-eles, 165. Renews his hofilities againf Philip, x66.
Is unprovided for miiatary operations, 167. Is reduced to make
peace with Philip, by the recal of the duke of Guise after the
defeat of St. Quintin, 179. Receives an ambassador from the
emperor Ferdinand to notify his elel.ion, but refuses to fee him,
or to acknowledge the emperor, i80. Dies, A22.

Plix, a French officer, fLnt ambaflador from Francis I. to sultan

Solyman, jiL i 75. His successful negotiations at the Porte, 76.

.Pembrae, earl of, sent by queen Mary of England with a body of

men to join the Spanish army in the Low-Countries, iv. 171.

-1erpignas the capital of Roufillon, besieged 6y the dauphin of

France, iii. 170.. The siege raised i.

Pefi'r,, marquis de, takes Milan by assault, ii. 134. Drives Bon-

nivet back to France, 8 . His generous. care of the chevalier
Bayard, s86. Commanuds in the invasion of Provence, 196.
Besieges larfeilles, 197. His army retires toward Italy, on the
appearance of the French troops, ib. Resigns Milan to the
French,z o. Prevails on the Spanih troops not to murmur at
present for their pay, i. - Contributes to the defeat of Francis
at the battle of Pavia, 206. Is disgusted at Francis being taken
to Spain without his concurrence, zat. His resentment inflam-
ed by Morone, 119. Betrays Moron&'s designs to the emperor,
220.. Arrests Moroni, zlI. Dies, 214.

P.,lir, archduke of Austria, and father of Charles V. visits Spain,

with his wife Joanna, ii. 4. Docs homage by the way to Lewis
Xll. of France for the earldom of Slanders, ,6. His title to the
crown acknowledged by the Cortes, 5. Is difguited with the
formality of the Spanilh court, ib. Ferdinand becomes jealous
of his power, i. Slights his wife, it. His abrupt departure
from Spain, 6. PIafcs through France, and enters into a treaty
Mith Lewis, id. His sentiments on Ferdinand's obtaining the
regency of Castile, 7. Requires Ferdinand to retire to Aragon,
and resign his regency of Castile, 9. The regency of Castile
veiled jointly in him, Ferdinand, and Joanna, by the treaty of
Salamanca, 12. Sets out for Spain, and is driven on the coast
of England, where he is detained three months by Henry VII. ib.
Arrives at Corunna, 13. The Cafhtiian nobility declare openly
ftr him, i. eiirdlan.i resigns the regency of Castile to him, ib.

Interview between them, iL. Acknowledged king of Castile by
the Cortes, 14. Dies, it. Joanna's extraordinary condut in
regard to his body, 15. See yoanna.

Philip, prince, son to the emperor Charles V. his right of fuccef-

sion recognized by the Cortes of Aragon and Valencia, iii. 172.
Is acknowledged by the states of the Netherlands, 3 2a. His de-
portment disgusts the Flemings, 323. His charaaer, iv. 2r.
Is married to Mary queen of England, rot, ro3. The English
parliament jealous of him, 104. His father resigns his heredi-
tary dominions to him, 142. Is called by his father out of Eng-
land, 147. The ceremony of investing him, i&. His father's
address to him, 148, 149. Commifflons cardinal Granvelle to
address the assembly in his name, 149. Mary queen-dowager
of Hungary resigns her regency, x5o. The dominions of Spain
resigned to him, ib. His unpolitenefs to the French ambaffa-
dor Coligny, 1s3, Note. The pope's violent proceedings against
him, 157. His scruples concerning commencing hoftilines a-
gainit the pope, 158. His ungrateful negle& in paying his fa-
ther's pension, x64. The pope renews hbftilities against him,
167. Assembles an army in the Low-Countries against France,
169. Goes over to England to engage that kingdom in the war,
70. Visits the camp at St. Quintin, after the victory, 176.
Opposes the scheme of penetrating to Paris, and orders the siege
of St. Quintin to he prosecuted, ib. St. Quintin taken by as-
fault, ib. The fmaU advantages he reaped by these successes,
178. Builds the Escurial in memory of the battle of St. Quin-
tin, 1 79. Concludes a peace with the pope, 180. Restores Pla-
centia to Odavio Farnese, 181. Grants the investiture of Sien-
na to Cosmo di Medici, t82. Enters into negotiations for peace
with his.prifoner Montmorency, 196. Death of queen Mary,
204. Addrefles her fuccelobr Elizabeth for marriage, ib. Eli-
zabeth's motives for reje&ing-him, 205. Her evasive answer to
him, 2o6. Supplants his son Don Carlos, and marries Henry's
daughterElizabeth, so9. Articles of the treaty of Cateau-Cam-
brefis, o28.

Philibirt, Emanuel, duke of Savoy. See Savoy.
Philipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats Moncada in a sea-en-

gagement before the harbour of Naples, iii. 14.

Piadena, marquis de, invades Transylvania for Ferdinand, iv. 36.

Misrepresents cardinal Martinuzzi to Ferdinand, and obtains a
commiflion to aflafinate him, 39. Is forced to abandon Tran-
fylvania, 91.

Picardy, invaded by Henry VIII. ii. 140. Henry forced by the

duke de Vendome to retire, 14Y. Invaded again under the
duke of Suffolk, 183. Penetrates almost to Paris, but is driven
back, ib. IneffeEtual invasion by the Imperialifis, iii. loo.
.Placentio, the dutchy of, granted together with that of Parma by

pope Paul II1. to his natural son, cardinal Farnese, iii. 21o.
Farnese affaflinated there, 307. Is taken pofleflion of by the
Imperial troops, if. Restored to O&avio Farnese, by Philip
L..os Spain, iv. 18X.

PIe, cardinal, arives in England with a legantine.eommiffion, iv.

103. Endeavours to mediate a peace between the emperor and
the king of France, without success, iit. Is recalled from the
court of England by pope Paul IV. 167.

prr.itig, its effets on the progress of the reformation, ii. 1o8.
PrOgue, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand king of Bohemia, iii.

303. Prceffaalt, the derivation of the name, iii. 33. Of whom they
originally ccrfifted, i;. A severe decree published againfi them
by the emperor, 37. They enter into a league, 38; See Snal-
aldt. Renew their league, and apply to Francis king of France,
and Henry VIII. of England, for protection, 40. Are secretly
encouraged by Francis, ii. Receive a supply of money from
Henry, 4. Terms of the pacification agreed to between them
and the emperor at Nuremberg, 42 Aift the emperor against
the Turks, 43. Their negotiations with the pope, relative to
a general council, 44. Renew the league of Smalkatde for ten
years, 64. The motives for refiuing to aift the king of France
againf the emperor, S8. Reuse to acknowledge the council
summoned by the pope atMantua, i6. Aconferencebetween
their principal divines and a deputation of catholics, at Ratil-
bon, 150. This conference how rendered fruitlef; Is 1. Ob-
tain a private grant from Charles in their favour, 153. Drive
the duke of Brunswick from his dominions, iii. 84. All ri-
orous edic against them suspended by a recess of the diet of
Spires, 187. Their remonstrances to Ferdinand at the diet of
W orms, ac6. Their inflexible adherence to the recefs'of Spires,
it. Disclaim all connction with the council of Trent, i6. Are
ftrengthered by the acceflion of Frederick elector palatine, 2 1.
Are alarmed at the proceedings of the emperor, ib. 228. The em-
peror leagues with the pope against them, 214. Prepare to re-
sift the emperor, 233. Levy an army, 236.- The operations
of the army difira&ted by the joint commanders, i42. The ar-
my difperled, 255. The eleor ofSaxonyreduced, z85. The
landgrave deceived by treaty, and confihed, 296, 297. The
errperor's cruel treatment of him, 3co. The nierinw a fyflem
of theology reconmmended by the emperor to the diet at Augf-
burg, 313 Are promised protedion by the emperor at the
council of Trent, iv. 17. The emperor proceeds rigorously a-

- gainft thenr, 26. Their deputies obtain a faJe-conduct from

the emperor, but are refused by the council, 34. Maurice of
&axonv raises an army in tetircaufe, 47. See Mfriu. Trea-
tv oflaaiiu, 67. The protestant princes again unite to flrength-
en the proteflant interest, 126. Recess of the diet of Augsburg
on the fiuje&t of religion, 1zg. Why originally averse to the
principes of toleration, 131. -

Pr,i,eGe, is laid waste by the marefchal- Montiorency on the ap-

proach of the emperor Charles V. iii 96. Is entered by the
emperor, 97. The difaflrous retreat of the emperorfrom, 99.
Pr,.ia, w htn ccnquered by the Ttutonic order, ii . 38. s eretd

into a dutchy, and finally into a kingdom, and enjoyed by the
house of Brandenburg, ib.

R

Rat/ae, a conference between a deputation of proteltant and ca.

thoUc divines, before the emperor and diet there, iii. ISo.
This conference how rendered fruitlefi, xsr. A diet opened
there by the emperor, »Z7. The catholic members of, assert
.the authority of the council of Trent, z2a. The protefiant
present a memorial agaiilt it, i;. The protestant deputies re-
tire, 130.
Reformation in religion, the rife of, explained, . 73. The diet at

Worms called by Charles V. to check the progress of, i&. Ac-
count of Martin Luther, the reformer, 77. Beginning of, in
Switzerland by Zuinglius, $9. State of, in Germany, at the
arrival of Charles V. 91. Refleaions on the conduct of the
court of Rome toward Luther, 91. And on Luther's condua,
93. Inquiry into the causes which contributed to the progress
of, 95. Observations on the pontificate of lexander VI. and Juli.
us II. 96. The immoral lives of the Romilh clergy, 97. The pro-
grefs of, favoured by the invention of printing, 108. And the
revival of learning, 109. The great progress of, in Germany,
88. Advantages derived to, from the diet at Nuremberg, 19.
Its tendency in -favour of civil liberty, 23:. The dissensions
between the emperor and the pope, favourable to, a26. The
great spread of, among the German princes, iii. 3 . The consef-
sion ofAugfburg drawn up by Melhndhon, 35. Causes which
led to that of England 49. The exceTfes it gave rife to, 5 .
See Protfants, Matrinc, and S $n.-'Uc. Is eflabliied in Saxony,
19. The great alteration occasioned by, in the court of Rome,
iv. 214. Contributed to improve both the morals and learn-
ing of the Romfla church, 219.
Reggi, invested by the French, who are repulled by the governor

G uicciardini, the hiforian, ii. 131.
Remorance of grievances drawn up by the holy Junta, the parti-

cular of, ii. 152, 153. Remarks on, I14.
S.eerfr, a deed so called, signed by the archduke Ferdinand on be-

ing elected king of Bohemia, ii. 261.

.Reggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, iii. 79.
RAdts, the island of, besieged by Solynmn the Magnificent, ii. 14t.

Taken by him, 142. The island of Malta granted to the
knights of, by the emperor Charles V. 143.
icblus, cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's h;ifory of Fiefco's
conspiracy, iii. 271. Note.

Ribco, the French ambassador at the Porte, the motives of his

return to France, iii. 166. Is murdered in his journey back to
Confiantinople, by order of the Imperial governor of the Mila-
nefe, I67.

.Rmoe, refiediona on the conadut of the court of, respecting the

proceedings against Martin Luther, ii. 9I. The exorbitant
Vol. IV. B b

wealth of the church of, previous to the reformation, ro3. Ve.
nality of, Ic6. How it drained other countries of their wealth,
it. The city seized by cardinal Colonna, and pope Clemdht
VII. besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo, 247 The city tak-
en by the Imperialists, and Bourbon killed, 256. Is plunder-
ed, 257. The great revolution in the court of, during the
sixteenth century, iv. 214. How affected by the revolt of Lu-
ther, 226. The spirit of its government changed by, 227.
Rs?,i'b, sent by cardinal Adrian with. troops to suppress the in-

furredion in Segovia, ii. 145. Is routed by the insurgents, i.
R veri, Francesco Maria de, restored to his dutchy of Urbino by

pope Adrian, ii. 1 3.
Ro/xaaa, a Ruffian captive, becomes the favourite miflrefs of ful-

tan Solyman the Magnificent, iv. 91. Her only daughter mar-
ried to Ruftan the grand vizier, i/. Procures herself to be de-
clared a free woman bythe sultan, 93. Is formally married to
him, ib. Renders Solyman jealous of the virtues of his son
Mluftapha, 94. Muftapha firangled, 97.
Ru.fan, grand vizier to Solyman the Magnificent, is married to his

daughter by Roxalana, iv. 92. Enters into Roxalana's fchenme
to ruin Solyman's son Mufapha, ii. Is tent with an army to
destroy him, 96. Draws Solyman to the army by false reports,
ib.

S

SjLtam.a, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon, and his son-

in-law Philip, ii. 12.
Salerws, prince of, heads the difaffeted Neapolitans, againfl the

oppressions of the viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, iv. 82. So-
licits aid from Henry II. of France, who infligates the Turks
to invade Naples, ib.
Salwe , marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in the command of the

French army before Naples, iii. x8. Retires to Averfa, where
he is taken prisoner by the prince of Orange, ib. Betrays his
charge in Piedmont, 94.
Sancsrre, count de, defends St. Defiere against the emperor Charles,

iii. 93. Is deceivedinto afurrenderbythecardinalGranvelle, 249.
Sawgag:, a Fleming, made chancellor of Castile by Charles, on the

dea:h of Ximenes, ii. 43. His extortions, i.
S-.,ona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by the French, to fa-

vour its rivallhip with Genoa, iii. x6.
S;-z., Charles duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal, sifter to the

emperor Charles.V. iii. 82. The cause of Francis's displeasure
against him, ii. His territories over-run by the French troops,
k4. Geneva recovers its liberty, 85. His situation by the
truce at Nice, between the emperor and Francis, 109. Is be-
fiegec at Nice, by the French and Turks, 179.
azc, Emanuel Philibert, duke of, appointed by Philip of Spain
to command his army in the Low-Countries, iv. 171. Invefis
5:. Q:intin, it. Defeats Dandelot in an endeavour to join the

garrison, 173. But does not hinder him from entering the
town, ib. Defeats the conflahle Montmorency, and takes him
prisoner, 174. Is gracioufty visited in the camp by Philip, 175.
Takes St. Quintin by aflault, 76. Assists Montmorency in ne-
gotiating peace between Philip and Henry, 196. Marries Hen-
ry's filter Elizabeth, 2z9, x0o.

Saxony, elector of, appointed joint commander of the army of the

protestant league, with the landgrave of Hefie, iii. a42. Their
characters compared, ió. Opposes the landgrave's intention of
giving battle to the emperor, 245. His eleclorate seized by
Maurice, 2. 3. The army of the league disperse, 255. Reco-
vers Saxony, 258. Is amiufed by Maurice with a negotiation,
ii'. Raises an armv to defend him{flf against the emperor, 28 i.
Is irrefolite in his nieafr.es, ih. Charles passes the Elbe 2SZ.
IT attacked by the Imperialists, 214. Is taken prisoner and
harshly received by the emperor, 28.. Is conldemned to death
bv a court martial 28q. His rrojlution on the occasion, 289.
Is induced by regard to his family to surrender his electorate,
ib. Refuses the emperor's desire of his approving the Interim,
317. The rigour of his confinement increased, 318. Is carri-
ed by the emperor with him into the Netherlands, 3t.L Is re-
Itafed by the emperor on Maurice's taking arms against him,
but chufes to continue with the emperor, iv. 54. Obtains his
liberty after the treaty of Paflau, 7 r.
·---- George, duke of, an enemy to the reformation, iii. 119.

His death an advantage to the reformation, i&. The protestant
religion eftahlifhed there by Henry duke of, st. Henry is fuc-
ceeded by his son Maurice, 18I. His motives for not acceding
to the league of Smalkalde, ib. Marches to the aififtance of
Ferdinand in Hungary, i. Joins the emperor against the pro-
teftants, 27?, 250. See M2aurice.

Stertel, Sebaflian, a commander in the army of the protestant

league, his vigorous commencement of hostilities, iii. 241. Is
iniudicioufly recalled, ib. Is expelled from Augsburg on the
dispersion of the protestant army, 256.

b':otland, James V. of, married to Mary of Guise, duchefs-dowa-

ger of Longueville, iii. 114. Death of James and accession of
his infant daughter Mary, 174. Mary contracted to the dau-
phin of France, 308. The marriage celebrated, iv. Irg. Ma-
ry assumes the title and arms of England on the death of Mary
of England, 2 I5. Included in the trcaty of Cateau Cambrefi-,
209. Alteration in the conduct of England toward, a,3.

Scf in religion, reflections on the origin of, iii. 5z.
SRgovia, an infurrecoion there, on account of their representative

Tordelillas voting for the donative to Charles V. ii. 144. Is
killed by the populace, ib. The insurgents there defeat Ron-
quillo, sent to suppress them by cardinal Adrian, I45. Surren-
ders after the battle of Villalar, i 65.
: i,, 11. Sutall, extirpates the Manalukes, and adds Egypt and,

1 b z

Syria to his empire, ii 48. Cozfidered as formidable to the

uropean powers, is.
Jforra, obtains of Charles V. the investiture of Milan, ii. e17.

Forfeits the dutchy, by his intrigues with Morone, ztr. Joins
in a league against Charles for the recovery of Milan, 240. Is
forced to surrender Milan to the Imperialits, 245. Obtains
again of the emperor the investiture of Milan, iii. 19. Enters
into a private treaty with Francis, 78. Merveille, Prancis's en-
voy, execuerd for murder, 79. Dies, 86.

S;,r.a, the inhabitants of, implore the assistance of the emperor

Charles V. to defend them against their nobles, iv. 81. The
Imperial troops endeavour to enslave them, ib. Regain pof-
session of their city, ii. Repulse an attack of the Gemans, 9o.
Are besieged by the marquis de Marignano, xIz. The com-
mander Mcnluc repulses the aflaults vigorously, y3. The
town reduced by famine, 114. Numbers of the citizens retire,
and eflablilh a free government at Monte Alcino, x r. The
remaining citizens opprefld, Ir6. And flockto MonteAlcino,
i. Is granted by the emperor to his son Philip, i. The in-
tftitnre given by Philip to Cosmo di Medici, 182.

titerbfen, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony and Albert of

Bandenbnrg, iv. 89.
M~n, cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French army in

the Milanese, ii. 13 . Leaves the Imperial arny to attend the
conclave on the death of Leo X. 135.

/SldMre, the protestants enter into a feague there for their mutu-

al fppos, ii. 38. The league renewed at a second meeting
there, 40. The league of, renewed for ten years, 64. A mani-
fefto, refusing to acknowledge a council called by the pope,
16. The king of Denmark joins the league, 118. The pnn-
res of, protest againfi the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and the recefa of the diet at Nuremberg, 184. Publifl a mani-
fefto against the proceedings of the council at Trent, 214. Are
alarmed at the proceedings of the emperor, i. A want of uni-
ty among the members, 2 r5. The views of the eleor of Sax-
cny, and the landgrave, explained, ib. Appear at the diet of
Ratisbon by deputies, 227. Their deputies protest against the
council of Trent, 228. Their deputies, alarmed at the empe-
ror's proceedings and declarations, leave the diet, 229. The
emperor keagues with the pope againfi them. 23o. Prepare to
resist the emperor, 2 r. Are disappointed in their application
to the Venetians and Swis, 234. As also with Henry VIII.
and Francis, 23 <. Assemble a large army, 236. Are put un-
der the ban of 'he empire, 239. Declare war against the em-
peror, 240. Hostilities begun by Schertel, 24r. They recal
hm, i;. The eleor of Saxony and landgrave of Hesse appoint-
ed joint commanders of their army, 241. The characters of
the two commanders compared, it. Their operations diftral-
ed by this joint command, 145. Cannonade the emperor's
camp, 246. Make overtures of peace to the emperor, 254.

Their army disperse z5." The elefor of Saxony reduced, 285.
TLe landgrave deceived and confined, 296. Their warlike stores
seized by the emperor, 300. See Manrice.
SelyOa- the Magnificent ascends the Ottoman throne, ii. 72. -n-

vades Hungary and takes Belgrade, 141. Takes the island of
Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hungarians at Mnhacz, 260. ,His
fuccefles, and the number of prisoners he carried away, iE. Be-
sieges Vienna, iii. 29. Enters Hungary again with a vast armrny
but is forced to retire by the emperor Charles, 43. Takes
Barbarossa the pirate under -lis protection, 68. Concludes an
alliance with Francisking of France, tos. Prepares to invrel(
Naples, Io6. Protects Stephen king of lIungary, and defeats
Ferdinand, 1I5. Seizes Hungary for hinfelf, I56. Over-runto
Hungary again, in fulfilment of his treaty with Francis, 178.
Concludes a truce with the emperor, 225. Loses Tranfvl-
vania, iv. 37. Ravages the coalts of Italy, 63, 8z. Carriet
a mighty army into Hungary, 63. Re-eftablifes Isabella and
her fou in Transylvania, 91. His violent attachment to hi-
concubine Roxalana, 92. Is prevailed on to declare her a
free woman, 93. Formally marries her, i. Is rendered jea-
lous of the virtues of his son Muftapha, by the arts of Rloxalaia,
95. Orders him to be firangled, 97. Orders the murder o!
Muflapha's son, 98.
Spain, the state of, a; the death of Ferdinand of Aragon, ii. 2i.

Charles king of, afpircs to the Imperial crown on the death of
Maximilian, 47. Is eletedl emperor, 56. ReflecLions of the
Spaniards on that event, 58. Charles appoints viceroys, and
departs for Germany, 6z. Infurrecitions there, 143. A view
(f the feudal system in, 147. An account of the con'edcracy
termed the holy Junta, 148. Causes which prevented an luni-
on of the malecontents in the respective provinces, 171. The
moderation of Charles toward them on his arrival, ib. In.
fiance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, iii. i23. Is invad-
ed by the dauphin, 17C. The dominions of, resigned by
Charles to his son Philip, iv. 1sO. The arrival of Charles, andl
his reception there, 163. The place of his retreat described,
I64. The regal pnwer in, how enlarged by Charles, 216.
The foreign acquifitins added to, ii,. See At-raon Cafdilt, Ga-
lici,, Valcnta, Cortre, Gemnanlai, and Holy J.u:na.

.Spis', diet of, its proceedings relative to the reformation, ii. 26T.

Another diet called there by the emperor, iii. 32. Another
diet at, 183. Recess of, in favour of the proteflants, 187.
Spirituau censures of the onifih church, the dreadful effics of, ii.

103.
S;. DJl.ere, in.Champagne, invefledl y the emperor, iii. x93. IF

obtained by the artifice of cardinal Granvelle, 195.
St. 7Jufiu, monafiery of, in Placentia, is chosen by the emperor

Charles V. for his retreat after hisreCgnation, iv. 164. His si-
tuation dcfcribed, i&. His apartments, i6.
-St. Zuiintn inuvefted by the Spaniih troops, and defeuded by-ad-

b 3

Syria to his empire, ii 48. Cofidered as formidable to the

uropean powers, ib.
Jfra, obtains of Charles V. the investiture of Milan, ii. 1r7.

Forfeits the dutchy, by his intrigues with MoronS, 2zr. Joins
in a league against Charles for the recovery of Milan, 240. Is
forced to surrender Milan to the Imperialists, 245. Obtains
again of the emperor the investiture of Milan, iii. 29. Enters
into a private treaty with Francis, 78. Merveille, Prancis's en-
voy, executed for murder, 79. Dies, 86.

S;'ina, the inhaitants of, impore the assistance of the emperor

Charles V. to defend them against their nobles, iv. 8x. The
Imperial troops endeavour to enslave them, i;. Regain pof-
session of their city, i. Repulse an attack of the Germans, 90.
Are befirged by the marquis de Marignano, itz. The com-
mander Menlu repulses the assaults vigorously, r13. The
town reduced by famine, t r4. Numbers of the citizens retire,
and eftabllfh a free government at Monte Alcino, i s. The
remaining citizens opprefed, I 6. And flockto Monte Alcino,
if. Is granted by the emperor to his son Philip, iS. The in-
eftiture given by Philip to Cosmo di Mledici, 182.

6i~w. sfni,, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony and Albert of

Brandenburg, iv. 8s.
iEu, cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French army in
the Milanese, ii. 13 . Leaves the Imperial army to attend the
conclave on the death of Leo X. 135.
,Slier, the proteflants enter into a league there for their mutu-
al fsppon, ni. 38. The league renewed at a second meeting
there, 40. The league of, renewed for ten years, 64. A mani.
fefto, refuting to acknowledge a council called by the pope,
i16. The king of Denmar joins the league, 18. The prin-
res of, protft againfl the authority of the Imperial chamber,
and the recess of the diet at Nuremberg, 184. Publilh a mani-
fefo against the proceedings of the council at Trent, 1A4. Are
alarmed at the proceedings of the emperor, it. A want of uni-
tyamong the members, 2i1. The views of the eleaor of Sax-
ony, and the landgrave, explained, ib. Appear at the diet of
Ratisbon b deputies, 227. Their deputies protest againit the
council of Trent, 228. Their deputies, alarmed at the empe-
ror's proceedings and declarations, leave the diet, 219. The
emperor leagues with the pope against them, 20o. Pre'are to
resist the emperor, 23r. Are disappointed in their application
to the Venetians and Swiss, 234. As also with Henry VIII.
and Francis, 135. Aftemble a large army, 236. Are put un-
der the ban of the empire, 239. Declare war againfi the em-
peror, 240. Hostilities begun by Schertel, 24r. They recal
h ;m, i. The eleAorof Saxony ard landgrave of Hesse appoint-
ed joint commanders of their army, 242. The charadlers of
the two commanders compared, ib. Their operations diftraEt-
ed by this joint command, 245. Cannonade the emperor's
camp, 246. bake overtures of peace to the emperor, 254.

Their army disperse z25. The eledor of Saxony reduced, 285.
TLe landgrave deceived and confined, 296. Their warlike stores
seized by the emperor, 300. See Maurice.
Selynma the Magnificent ascends the Ottoman throne, ii. 72. - In-

vades Hungary and takes Belgrade, 141. Takes the iiland of
Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hungarians at Mohacz, 26o. His
successes, and the number of prisoners he carried away, ib. ' Be-
sieges Vienna, iii. 29. Enters Hungary again with a vail army,
but is forced to retire by the emperor Charles, 43. Takes
Barbarossa the pirate under lhis protection, 68. Concludes an
alliance with Francis king of France, Ios. Prepares to iinvi(e
X'aples, o06. ProteUs Stephen king of [Iungary, and defcats
Ferdinand, l 5. Seizes Hungary for himself, 156. Over-runs
Hlungary again, in fulfilment of his treaty with Francis, 178.
Concludes a truce with the emperor, 225. Loses Tranfvl-
vania, iv. 37. Ravages the coalts of Italy, 63, 82. Carrie-
a mighty army into H'ngary, 63. Re-eftablihes Isabella and
her fou in Tranl'ylvania, 91. His violent attachment to hi;
concubine Roxalana, 92. Is prevailed on to declare her a
free woman, 93. Formally marries her, i. Is rendered jea-
lous of the virtues of his bon Muftapha,by the arts of Roxalamii,
95. Orders him to be firangled, 97. Orders the murder o'
Muflapha's son, 9S.
Stain, the state of, a; the death of Ferdinand of Aragon, ii. 2?.

Charles king of, afpircs to the Imperial crown on the death of
Ma.ximilian,47. Is eleRel emperor, 56. Reflcctions of the
Spaniards on that event, 58. Charles appoints viceroys, and
departs for Germany, 6z. Infurredtions there, 143. A view
if the feudal system in, I47. An account of the con,-idcracy
termed the holy Junta, r48. Causes which prevented an lni-
on of the malecontents in the refpedive provinces, 171. T1e
moderation of Charles toward them on his arrival, i6. In.
stance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, iii. IZ3. Is invad-
ed by the dauphin, 170. The dominions of, resigned by
Charles to his son Philip, iv. 15o. The arrival of Charles, and;
his reception there, x16. The place of his retreat deferibed,
I64. The regal p',wer in, how enlarged by Charles, 216.
The foreign acquisitions added to, ib,. See /Aragon, C/ajilt, Ga.
licia, 'atlent a, Cor!eJ, Gemnanalj, and iloy 7,ni.'a.
SVpi,.-, diet of, its proceedings relative to the reformation, ii. 26.

Another diet called there by the emperor, iii. 3z. Another
diet at, 183. Recels of, in favour of the protefiants, 187.
Spiritual censures of the lomiiih church, the dreadful cfficts of, ii.

103.
S:. D1f.Jre, in.Champagne, inveftedlby the remperor, iii. x93. Is

obtained by the artifice of cardinal aranvelle, 195.

S t. 57fsu, monaflery of, in Placentia, is chosen by the emperor-

Charles V. for his retreat after hisrefignation, iv. 164. . ti si-
tuation dcfcribed, i . His apartments,-i.
& t. .yintin, invested by the Spaniha troops, .and defceuded by ad-

13b3

miral CotigI., iv. X71 Dandelot defeated in an endeavour-to
join the garrison, 173. But enters the town, i. Montmoren-
cy defeated by the dure of Savoy, I74. The town taken by
afJault, 177.

Stroz=i Peter, some account of, iv. irt. Is entrusted with the

command of the French army in Italy, is defeated by the mar-
quis de Marignano, Iia.
Suljia, an infurrecion of the peasants against the nobles there, ii.

;2i. They publish a memorial of their grievances, 2.3. The
insurgents dilperfed, i. The protestant religion suppressed
there by the emperor Charles V. iv. 27.
Sfili, duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates almost to Paris, but

is driven back, ii. 8;.
S.rro, earl of, created high admiral to the emperor Charles V.

ii. 4o. Obliged to retire out of Picardy by the duke de Ven-
dome, 14r.

Sedej., a summary view of the revolutions in, during the sixteenth

century, IT. 234.

Swit:,rLts J, the Cantons of, espouse the pretensions of Charles V.

to the Imperial crown, ii. 5 . Commencement of the refor-
mation there by Zuinglius, $9. The regulation under which
they hire out their troops, x13. The precipitate battle, infit-
ed on by their troops under Lautrec, loft, 138.
Sjria, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire, ii. 49.

T

T7ru,m arefcha! de, governor of Calais takes Dunkirk by florm,

iv. i9i. Engages the count of Egmont, and is defeated by the
accidental arrival of an English squadron on the coast, ih. Is
taken prifcner, 193.

Tr~^ , taken and demolified by the emperor Charles V. iv. 88.
'rzd, a Dominican friar, his shameful condu& in the sale of in-

dulgences in Germany, ii. 75. His form of absolution, and
recommendation of the virtues of indulgences, iA. Nfte. His
debauched course of life, 77. Publishes theses againfi Luther,
^8-
Tewao.d order, a chara&er of, ii. z38. Conquer the province of

Prussia, it. Their grand-mafler Albert made duke of Prussia,
ih.

Teatines, the order of, by whom founded, iv. 135.
7liauievt, in Luxembourg, taken by the duke of Guise, iv. 191.

.~tsrisia, an infurreAion of the peasants there, against the nobi-
lity, ii. 23. The fanatical notions inspired into them by Tho-
mu Muncer, 234. Their disorderly arym defeated, 236.
7Te, inifrreAion in, at the departure of Charles V. for Gerna-

vy, ii. 63, 143. The cathedral of, stripped of its riches to sup-
port the army of the holy Junta, I6c. Padilla's letter to, at
his xecntion, 164. Nodt. Is instigated to continue in arms
by Padilla's wife, 166. Is reduced, 167.
- Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Medc', sent by his uncle

to negotiate with Philip II. of Spain, for the investiture of Si-
enna, iv. 182.

- Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, opprefles the Neapolitans,

iv. 82. And occasions the Turks to ravage the coasts 6f
Naples, i.

Tolerarion, reflections on the progress of, in Germany, iv. i28.

Why mutually allowed among the ancient Heathens, 129. How
the primiti.e Christians became averse to, ib.

Tomor, i, Paul, a Franciscan monk, archbishop of Golocza, is made

general of the Hungarian army against Solyman the Mag-
nificent, and is defeated by him, li. 220.

Tordef/ilas, the residence of queen Joanna, the confederacy of

malecontents called the Holy Ju:ita removed thither, ii. iro.
The queen taken thereby the Conde de Haro, 158.
---- one of the representatives of Segovia, killed by the po-

pulace for voting the donative to Charles V. at the Cortes as-
rembled in Galicia, ii. 144.

Transylvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand king of the Romans, by

queen Isabella, iv. 37.

Trmouitie, La, drives the English under the duke of Suffolk out of

Picardy, ii. 183.

Trent, thecouncil of, summoned, iii. x83. Prorogued, i5. Again

summoned, So3. Is opened, 212 The council, on rumours
of an infe6tion in the ity, is translated to Bologna, 305. Hen-
ry 1I. of France protests againfl the council, iv. 26. The coun-
cil breaks up on the approach of Maurice of Saxony, 55. Hi-
llorical remarks on this council, it. Characers of its hiftori-
ans, 5 6.
- cardinal of, sent by the emperor Charles V. to conclude
an alliance with the pope, iiL 228. The nature of this treaty,
330.

Tunis, the means of its coming under the power of Barbarofa,

traced, iii. 68. The emperor and other Christian powers unite
to expel Barbarossa, and reflore Muley-Hafeen, 71. Is taken
by the emperor, 75. Muley-Hafcen restored, and his treaty
with Charles, 76.

Turany, a review of the slate of, during the sixteenth century, iv.
aj8.

V

Valenc;a, an insurrection in, ii. 59. The people there ereatlf op-

Freffed by the nobles, ib. The nobles refuse to assemble the
Cortes except the king is present, 60. Charles authorises the
people to continue in arms, iA. They expel the nobles, 60.
Associate under the Germanada, and appoint theiW orn' magii
firates, iS. Don Diego de Mendoza, Conde de Melito, ap-
pointed regent, on the departure of Charles for Germanf,'dz.
The Germanada refuse to lay down their arms, r68. Defeat
the nobles in several actions, 169. Are at len'gth routed by

the Conde de Melito, ;A. The moderation of Charles toward
the insurgents on his arrival, 7 t

rYPanti.uu, dutchess of. See Diana of Pciiierr.
:laIdoe.iJ, the first public entry of Charles V. to that city, ii. 41.
The inhabitants rife, bur; Fonseca's house, and fortify the
town, 146. Surrenders after the battle of Villalar, and diffo-
lution of the holy Junta, r6j.

VJsetles, treaty of, between Charles V. and Henry II. of France,

iv. 15z.
-e.dtome, duke of, his plan of operations in opposing the progress
of the invasion of Picardy by Henry VIII. ii. 141. Obliges
him to retire, l6.

FViec, the republic of, incline in favour of the pretensions of Fran-

cis I. of France, to the Imperial crown, ii. 53. Their views
and apprehenfons on the approaching rupture between the em-
peror Charles V. and Francis, 4.4. Leagues with the emperor
against Francis, z1g. A final accommodation between, and the
emperor, iii. 29. Refifes to enter into the league of the Italian
Srates, f'rmed by the emperor, 46. A review of the slate of
that republic during the sixteenth century, iv. 21 2.

r'eri-/a, the confident of the count of Lavagna, encourages him

in his fheme of overturning the g .vernment of Genoa, iii. 263.
Is proteted by Francis on the ruin of that conspiracy, 276.
'ek-uil:-, 'the French governor of MAetz, detets father Leonard's
conrfiracy to betray the city to the Imperialists, iv. X19. Exe-
cutes the confpirwtors, Izc.
-ir.aJ, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the Magnificent, iii. 28.
'illalar, battle of, between Padila and the Conde de Haro, ii. 6;.
,/ti-.l, marquis de, his spirited reply to the request of the empe-
ror tn lodge Bourbon in his palace, ii. 2:4.
'i-, the governmrent of that city violently altered and its re-
forer.d rr.inifters carried away in chains, by the emperor Charles
V. iii. 320.
.iteJ provinces of the Netherlands, a brief view of their revolt
against the dominion of Spain, iv. 233.

t'rinos, restored by pope Adrian to Francesco Maria de Rovere,
ii.I73.

x.V

Wallop, fir John, joins the emperor Charles V. at the siege of I.an-

drec-, with a bodv of English troops, iii. 178.

;Vzr, the method of carrying on, in Europe, how improved at

this period from the pracice of earlier ages, ii. 18. General
refleRions on the vicissitudes of, iv. 212.

Ifartb.lr, Martin Luther concealed there by the elector of Saxony,

ii. 116.

I'ev.'rtb, lord, governor of Calais, remenftrates in vain with the

Englifhprivv-council to provide for its security, iv. x85. Is at-
tacked by the duke of Guise, and forced to capitulate, 8.6.

Wifemerg, inverted by the emperor Charles V. and defended by

Sybilla of Cleves, wife to the deftor of Saxony, iii. a87.

W'olfy, cardinal, his rife, character, and influence over Henry VIII.

of England, ii. 67. Receives a pension from Francis I. of France,
68. And from the emperor Charles V. 70. Detached from
the French interest by the latter, i. Inclines Henry to join the
emperor against Francis, 119. Sent by Henry to Calais, to ne-
gotiate an accommodation between the emperor and Francis,
i17. Has an interview with Charles at Bruges, and concludes
a league with him on the part of Henry, againf France, 127.
Meditates-revenge against Charles on his second disappointment
of the papacy by the eledlion of Clement VII. 18i. Obtains of
Clement a legatine commission in England for life, i82. Ne-
gotiates a league with Francis against the emperor, iii. 4.

WorM,, a diet called there by Charles V. to check the progress of

the reformers, ii. 73. Proceedings of, 13. Martin Luther cit-
ed before it, 114. Refuses to retrad his opinions, xIs. An e-
did published against him, 116. Diet at, opened, iii. o07.

1WurIeiwurg, Ulric duke of, why expelled his dominions, iii. 62.

Recovers his dominions by the affifance of Francis king of
France, and receives the protestant religion, 63.

Wyai, fir Thomas, raises an infurredion in Kent against queen

Mary of England, on account of the Spanikh match, iv. toz.
Is subdued and puniahed, Io3.

X

Xij'ner, arcbbilhop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon,

in his dispute with the archduke Philip concerning the regency
of Castile, ii. Io. Espouses Ferdinand's claim to the regency
of Castile on Philip's death, 17. Conquers Oran, and other
places in Barbary, for the crown of Castile, 8. Appointed re-
gent of Castile, by Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles
V. in Spain, 24. His rife and charaócer, it. Admits the claim
to the regency of cardinal Adrian sent with that commifilon by
Charles, and executes it jointly with him, 27. Takes the in-
f.nt Don Ferdinand to Madrid under his own eye, ib. Procures
Charles, who assumed the regal title, to be acknowledged by the
Castilian nobility, 28. Schemes to extend the regal prerogative,
a9. Deprefies the nobility, ib. Frees the king from the feudal
limitations, and eftablfihes a regal army to check the barons,
30. Suppresses a mutiny headed by the grandees, 31. Resumes
the grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, ib. His prudent applica-
tion of the revenue, 3z. His bold assertion of his authority to
the discontented nobles, i. Other associates in the regency ap-
pointed at the infigation of the Flemish courtiers, t. Retains
the superior management, 33. Defeats John d'Albret's inva-
sion of Navarre, 34. Dismantles all the castles there, except
Pampeluna, which he strengthens, 35. The troops sent by him
against Barbarofla defeated, and his equanimity on that occasion,
ib. Alarmed at the corruption of the Fleminh court, he per.

fuades Charles to visit Spain, 36. Falls sick on his journey to
meet Charles at his arrival, 40. His letter of counsel to Charles,
i;. Requests an interview, i,. The ingratitude of Charles to
him, 41. His death, ib. His charaAer, i. Reverence paid
to his memory by the Spaniards, i0.

Z.
Zewra, bilhop of, raises a regiment of priests to defend Tordefil-

las, for the holy Junta, which is forced by the Conde de Haro,
ii. 158.

Zi,il,,i attacks the faie of indulgences at Zurich in Switzerlandy

ii. 89.
PlINTED 1B CHAPMAN & LANSC.7

TKOSGATE, GLASGOvW.

k^*s,
