FRONTISPIECE.

YI~~~~~~,.

_ --- ;-L--11V

4

_ 4
ExrJ.4Jv'a TIO~1A"

c~~~~~~-/? - *;YI
a~··:~,~:·;·~

Sr ; , _. ,.-
DR. ROBERTSON's

HIS TORT

F
A M E R I C As

ABRIDGED.

FROM
THE EARLIEST ACCOUNTS,

TO TH X
MEMORABLE PERIOD

F
ITS INDEPENDENCE, 1783.

WITH ADDITIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS.

lLonbon:

PRINTED FOR THE PROPRIETORS,
And Sold by all Booksellers in Town and Country.

17)5.

# CONTENTS.

[ ;ii 3

C O NT E NT S.
PR E FA CE. Page 9

C H A P. I.
The Voyages of Coluinbu.-.W'zYovery of the WefJi

India Ilands-Of the Cotinent of America-
Conque/i of Mexico and Peru-Conjecures on
the Origin of the Amerzcans-Their CufJoms
and Manners-General De/cription of the In
dian Nations. , Page 5

C H A P. II.
Cabot's Difcovery-New-England; it's Climate-

Newfoundland and Nova-Scotia, &c..Jettled-
Charter Government-The Foundation ofBoJfon .
--Union of the four Governments-Quakers-
Affirs tf' New-Englani. Page 48

C H A P. III.
New-York--New- 7erfey--Canada-- Dfputes of

the French and Englijh-Capture of the Alcide
and Lys-Rupture between the two Nations.

Page 7a

C H A P. IV.
ReJ7leions on the Cau/es of Enmity between the

French and Englih Calonifls-Temper of. the

A 2 neighbouring

neighbouring Indians-Slate of Vzirginia, Caro.
lina, anri Georgia-A concie Defcr ption of the
WrJt -lndia I/lands-Firfl Campaign in Noith-
. Americra. -Page 97

C H A P. V,

sirs Campaign in America-The French baffled-
Their various Succejfes-Braddock defeated-
Consequences of his Miscarriage. - Page 116

C H A P. VI.
Progress of the War in America-Forts Q/w ego,

Ontario, and William Henry, taken by Ihe
Frernch under Montcalm--ape Breton jurren-
dered to the Englzj-De/cription ofLouvfbourg
-.Fort FrFontnac furrendered-Various Suc-
ces of tke War--iconderago and Crown'
Point taken-General Wolfe arrives in the
Neighbourhood of Quebec. Page 123

C H A P. VII.
General Wolfe's Success and Death-Quebec fur.

rendered to the Englih-.-Defrription of that
Capital-Again beJieged by the French-Murray
defeated-The Enemy rai/e the Siege-Succe es
of he Engi/h in the Wei-lndies-G uadaloupe,
Martinico, and the Havannah, taken-Affairs
of Europe-Canada ceded to the English b) the
Treaty of Paris. Page 129

C H A P. VIII.
Rgfletions--Orig-' of the pref/nt Conte.f-Stamp.

4ipfafded a.e. caled-frtcJh Dujies-New Ds-

p ute

V -
j

putes-Provincial CongrefS-General Congrei.
-Conduel of Government--Of the Coldnifis--.
Deflru2ion of the Tea--Bofon_ Port-Bill--
Battle of Bunker's-Hill-State of Afairs in
Canada-Refle8ions on the American AddreJs
to the People of England. Page ,5,

C H A P. IX.
General WafhingtonappointedCommander-.Sketchke

of his Life.and Charatier-Inva/ion of Canada
-Forts taken--uebec bejiged by Montgomery
-His Defeat and Death-Gen. Carleton.s Con-
dud-Further Attempts' of the -Provincials--.
Succours arrive jfroh England-The 'Siege
raifed-Canada entirely recovered by the Royal
Army-Blockade of Bojon continued-- An Ord.
:ance Ship Seized-Bombardment of th Trown. .
-General Howe evacuates BofJon: and with.
draws. to Halifax. Page i69;

C H A P. X.
Diflurbances in Virginia and the Carolinas-Lord.

Dunmore's Condult andDi/freAf-General Clin-
ton and Sir Peter Parker arrive before Charles.
Town-The Ships p.a/ the Bar-Unfuccefcful
Attack on Sullivan's I/land--The Fleet and
Tran/borts return. Page 181

C H A P. XL
Commi/loners appointed. o treat with the Rebels-.-

.General Howe leaves Halifax, and arrives at
Staten-flsand, where he is joined by his Bro-^
ther wits the Fleet and Reinforcement from

A A3, England
* . \ *

.. En.gnd~-Fruitlefs Overtures towards a Re-

conclitiron -Americans defeated at Long.
Ijland-ConCferent with a Congress Committee-
MNw-YorR tutien--Lord Cornwallis advances
info the Terfiys- The Britih Troops take Pof-
-fiwn as Rhod-Jland. Page 188

C H A P. XII.
Cornwallis's Succefs-General Lee taken--Surpriy_

at Trenton--.Netj Meafures-Colonl Mawhood
attached at Prince-Town -Americans over-run
the JerfJys-Loyal Provincials embodied under
General Tryon - Shirmifhes - Wahington re-
gains hisfrong Camp--WFoofler killed-General
· Prfot carried offji'om Rhode- fland-General
Rvowe leaves New-York-Battle of Brandywine
--Philadelphia taken - Obflrulions removed
',ith Difculty-Battle of German-Town-Fur-
ther Tranfafaions of the Northern Army.

-*~ -~

. ~Page 195

C H A P. XIII.
The Troops pass the North-River-Battle'near

Still-Water-The Americans flrengthen their
Camp-Another Engagement, in whach General
Burgoyne is defeated-General Frazer slain-
Attack on Ticonderago--Difreffes of the Army
-Convention of Saratoga- Expedition up the
North-River-Sketches of General Burgoyne's
Chlarater. Page 208

C H A P. XIV.
State cf Affairs in England-American Pirates

infeyz the Seas--General Burgoyne's Fate made

known

known-Lord North's Bill-French Declaration
-Burgoyne's Arrival in Lngland-Proceedings
of Parliament-mMr. Dean, with the French
Treaties, pases over to North-Amierica--Sir
Henry Clinton, Commander in chief and the new
Commit/toners, arrive there- Fruitleys Overtures
--Philadelphia evacuated-MarcA of the Brit4j/
Troops through the JerJeys-Battle of Mon-
mouth-Arrival of the Armyat New-York--
-General Lee fuJbended-.-Lord Howe blocked
up at Sandy-Hook- he French fJil away for
_Rhode-IJland-.Lord Howe, being reinforced,
follows them.-The Fleets eparated on the Point
of engaging- The Americans quit their istended
Atack on the Ifland-Lord Howe departs for
England. Page 218

C HAP. XV.
Admiral Byron arrives off Boioth-s: dripen

to Sea by a Storm Gains , Rhode-. ',I
D'Elaign fleers for the Wef-Indies, whiaer
Commo ore Hotham lihkewze fails with an Eng.
li/l Squadron, and 4000 Troops-St. Lucia
Jurrenders-Colonel Campbell and General Pre.
vof/ reduce Georgia-General Lincoln defeated
-Charles-Town besieged by Prevof-- Ie retires
-D'EJfaign appeArs at Savannah, and fends
a Summons to the Commander, to Surrender to
the Arms of the French King-The Engtijh
Jland on their Defence-The Enemy attempts to
form the Place, but are repulsed with great
Slaughter-Charles-Town attached and taken'by
Sir Henry Clinton-Str, Gcorge Brydges Rodney

defeats

d/feats the Spanijh Fleet of St.

i incent's, and
afterwards M. de Guichen in the Wefi-Indies.

Page 228

C H A P. XVI.
MI. Ternay fails for the American CoaJo-Mr.

Laurens embarks for Holland, and is taken by
an English Frigate; his Charader, and that of
Dr. Franklin---Negociation with Brigadier-
General Arnold dffcovered-The General e/capes;
but MajorAndre is taken and executed as a Spy-
Particulars relative to that unfortunate Gentle.
man, and to General Arnold. Page 242

C H A P. XVII.
Brigadier-General Arnold's Address to the Ame-

ricans-Shetches of his Life-SeceJion of Part
of General Wajhington's Airmy-Sir Henry C'in.
ton's unfucceJsul Attempts to treat with them-
Hurricanes in the [Wef-Indies. Page 254

C H A P. XVIII.
General Gates defeated-Sumpter's Party dz/perfid

by Colonel Tarleton-He receives a Check from
General Morgan-Sketches of the Lives of both
iheJe Commanders-The l ar continued-St.
EuJtatius taken-Penfacola taken-Short De-
scription of that Capital, St. Augujfine, and Flo.
rida in general-The Dutch Fleet defeated--
Present Slate of the War in America. Page 262

143Y60(

PREFAC Es

# PREFACE.

*s s S .
_ ,:8

. ..

-

. ,. ,'

:-'
' P R- E. F A CG E

: _ - ' '

. . ;

.. . . "

-

* /; '

.

THE. Origin, Rife, and Independency of America are
well worthy the Knowledge and Attention of every;Hif-
torian. America in its infancy affords'much /iterefing-
Infoimation, and in its maturity is equally inflruive ;
thdugh many pens have been employed on thii entertain.
ing fubje&, yet the preference has been with Pr9priety
given to Dr. Robert:on's History of Amierica, thatt-. G
tliman having made many enquiries, as he himself afluirs
us, and adhered moIt firiitly to every information' which
was known-to be authentic' An Abridgement of this His-
tory it was thought would be a high gratitcation to many:
who could not spare time to read it at large, or had not:
sufficient retention for a long detail; but more particu-.
larly for young .itut,.ts, h' fe narrow, capacities will;
notadmit of voluminous defcripiions. To reduce there-
fore a Work of this momentous nature to such -a narrow
coi.pafs as to answer the purpose of an Abridgements-
required much study and deliberation. The Aufihorities
which Dr. Robertson occasionally quotes are therei-ce,
totally omitted a entirely useless, and feeing w'e haveifo
referred to t.e fime Authoritiesj we have in manj cafes

-%.... . .-, im3pravCd

... ' ' '

* * *

*
,; - .

-." **.' '- '

* . '* *

.

improved the accounts, and gien. theni fometmes in the
-' wosto oseuiitt yeya: . ; ..ai-
-:-.-We

bayi likevif. endeavoured to preserve such regularity.
throughout that all our Readers may b able to ascertain
the dates ofs ery imotble lrenwitl4recon, and we
-a- e anot o.i y enlarged upon the Difcoyery of America,
but likewise subjoined 'the whole Hilory of that Country's
: nd&enpidece, ini as a

fu' :a= to-ory a manner as our
-limiteied Volume would admit of: in fiiort, this- Work,

-sliusnhass'Abteiea^ whit

>' tfi^8pt&lktasIIt UoastWo Htg asteIi sW time it
'-iBSI ijfo is sit3n$dr to *in
bienids DrEO.-

,e . .'-t ..t

. .'
.. .

ll->teIW. 3il7 IdBI t ridrr-gdueit &'ir- er' dsu( ctm-
:.::: .>-" nt]"ti3i:- llr *:te hgil aGeepts[i¢e io all

:;F- a".;' :.':'"

,'

'- ".- , ;- ;. ,; ,** . . -.ii-

.-. -;J:

+ ,

.;:!; - t- . '. . -

, -

. *

.

-

-.*^-:t,<5:* ~ "' [I':-. ; ;..^; ---' -

,~ . -*,*<*I. ,

"'"- -: : -

* J;' -

'

. '-

'

'

! '

.' . *

;

"

. -

.

.

. s ' ^ '^

'-.

.. . ..· .- .

.. . Y-

;

. 1'2' ' i -

..''-

" ':"'-,

"'

' :

, ,

, .. -.-'

, '-

.. . . . '"' **li '.-

, .. ,

: Y i' 1 -............

' ' : - '-. ;

- :' '
.

+" v . .<*.- - 5

. '' ,*

_ '

.. , -

: , . -. .. - .

- .

. ; .

' -,

'_-.-_~

t s.i'. ..--.£

t

:..- ,.

- "i

-

_'

G' "-'...

- ':.

.

". ".^,'

».*4/,-!I' .

. : .:.- '*;.

.

.

, * ", '.

-
. -

., ^:..

. . . . . *....

.

i s 3 - · - ,-

,' ' .. . - ' . v .

·' .

- ..

":

. 1

.

.

.
. .

# CHAP. I.

- tA

NEW ANP COMPLETE
HIS TORY

O F

A M E R I C A,
From the earliest authentic Accounts to

the present Time.

C H A P. I.
The Voyages of Columbus-Di/covery of the W[fefl

India I/lands-Of the Continent of America-
Conquei .of Mexico and Peru-Conjecfures on
the Origin of the Americans-Their Cu/Ioms
and Manners-General DeScription of the In-
dian Nations.
T HE vafi continent of America, bounded on

the east by the Atlantic, on the weft by

the great South-Sea, extending as far as lat. 582
S. it's northern boundaries unknown; was firfi
discovered by Columbus, who called it Paria,
,but it received it's present name from Americus
lVefputius, a Florentine, at a later period.

B Chriitopher

Christopher Columbus was a Genoese by

birth, a person of great judgment and penetra-
tion; having applied himself to geography,
he had conceived an opinion that the vast por-
tion of the sea, generally supposed to be spread
over so great a part of the terraqueous globe,
could not well subsist without a certain portion
of land to counterbalance it; .a supposition quite
contrary to the opinion of the geographers of
those days.

Possessed with this idea, he naturally enough

conceived, that from the rotundity of the earth,
it might be possible to.find a passage to the Eafs-
Indies, by failing weltward; and having 'pro-
jeaed a design of this nature, he was eager to
put it in execution. After having, in vain, ap-
plied to his countrymen, he offered his services
to Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen of
Spain; but they were at firfi difiegarded, these
princes being at this time intent upon their pro-
jeE of expelling the Moors from their do-
minions.

Columbus therefore sent his brother Bartlo-
6lmew over to England, where Henry VII.
then reigned, to make proposals of the like
nature; but Bartholomew fell into the hands of
pirates, loft his credentials, and the king not
being very willing to liflen to him, no progress
-was made in the matter. His brother, lhowevcr,
'fill continued soliciting the Spanish monarch
to Jiflen to his proposals; but he placed his
chief reliance on the queen, who ,was more
ready thant any of the court to hearken to his
reasons, and' in part to adopt his sentiments.
Numberlefswere the arguments used against his en-
terprife; he was called a projector of new worlds,

a madman,

a madman; nay, rome were absurd enough to
argue, that granting him to be right in point. of
geography, yet if the vessels which were to go
upon this expedition {hould descend in the weft,
they would never be able to rife again on the
eastern fide of the globe. From hence may be
gathered the wretched slate of mathematical
learning in Spain, and the violent prejudices of
men against any new projeced improvement.

Columbus, at last, by the means of Isabella,

brought his scheme to bear, after having agreed
to certain conditions, which were signed in the
camp before Granada, which was then in pof-
session of the Moors, and besieged by the-Spanifh
forces. He was much encouraged to this under-
taking by thd accounts of several mariners, who,
having been forced out of their course by con-
trary winds, declared that they had observed evi-
dent tokens of land at many leagues diflance
from the weftcrn islands. Comparing this with
the reports of a new discovered country, far to
the westward, mentioned both in ancient flories
and more modern traditions, this able mariner
set out upon his voyage, not doubting of accom-
plifhing his purpose, being appointed admiral of,
a small fleet of three Ihips, and viceroy of
countries which nobody believed he would ever be
able to discover. The first was the Santa Maria,
which he commanded in person; the second the
Pinta, under Martin Alonfo Pinzon; and the
third was the Ninna, of which viscount Yannez
Pinzon was commander: only the filft of these
was a decked vessel.

This enterprising man failed from Palos, in

the month of August, fleering his course weRt-
ward, in the height of expeEcation to fall in

B 2 with

with' the western part of the Eat-Indies, after a;
fhortvoyage. At the first blaf of a foul wind,
the crews. of all the vessels began to murmur.
Signs of land were said frequently to be seen,
and as frequently they were deceived. At last
they aaually entered into a conspiracy against
their admiral, and be was obliged to promise to
return, in cafe he did not make the land within
three days. The wind proved so favourable,
that he soon fell in with St. Salvador, one of the
Lucayas islands. The inhabitants there wearing
ornaments of gold, gave the Spaniards to under-
fland, that the precious metal, of which they
seemed so desirous, came from a southern coun-
try. The admiral therefore diretEed his course
towards Hispaniola; Martin Alonfo Pinzon had
first gone thither, being allured by the hopes of
gold. Here his commander found him, and
received some apologies for his condut. Co-
lumbus endeavoured to eflabliih a colony here;
after which he set fail for Spain, with two vef-
fels only. He again loft the Curavel Pinta in a
tempest, at which time he wrote an account of
his discoveries on parchment; and putting it into
a barrel, threw it out into the sea, with a view
that it might be-found if he and his crew should
perilh. However the form abated, and Colum-
bus proceeding on his voyage, touched at the
Azores, where he met with much ill treatment
from the Portuguese inhabitants; yet departing
from thence, and coming to Lisbon, lie was ap-
parentlv well received by their faithful majesties,
some of whose fubjeds were likewise employed
on :dilcoveries in another quarter of the world.
At his return he was received with admiration
and applause. On the 25th of September 1493,

he

he failed on another expedition with 17 ships,
having 1500 men on board; bulls having been ob-
tained from the pope, confirming the poffeflion
of the countries already discovered, and of those
which might be discovered in future. The ad-
miral took in wood, water, and cattle, at Go-
mera, in his course, and then proceeded on his
voyage; during which, he took poffeffioni of
Guadaloupe, and some other isles. Holding on
his course to Hispaniola, on his arrival there, he
found the colony he had left at that place totally
destroyed. When he enquired into the cause of
this unexpeEted disaster, he was informed by a
friendly Cacique; who added, that they had at
first quarrelled among themselves about gold and
women; and afterwards another Cacique, to
whose dominions some of them retorted, had
murdered them: and of this he gave undoubted
proofs, some wounds which he had received be.
ing ifliAed by the weapons of the savages.
Columbus failed from thence to Cuba. and Ja,
maica, and held on his course through various
storms towards Europe. In his voyage,'lle met
with his brother Bartholomew, whom- he ap
pointed his lieutenant of the illcs, a measure
which, however, proved disagreeable to the
Spanish court.

A war breaking out with the savages, Co-

lumbus was obliged to engage them, and, with a
force far inferior to theirs, utterly routed and
fubj-eed them for ever to the dominions of their
catholic majesties. In the course of this voyage,
he had discovered the Caribbee islands, and was
in almost every refpe& successful; yet there
were not wanting those who misrepresented all his
a/tions to the Spanish court, and, chiefly atthe

13 initance

instance of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, this
great man was not. only divefled of his com-
mand, but also sent home like a criminal in
irons.

On his arrival in his native country, he jufli-

sied himself at court, and was again received
into favour by a prince who was'aihamed of
the treatment he received. He was, however,
only in part restored to his naval command;
never to his government; and was afterwards, in
tempefluous weather, denied entrance into the
port of an island which he had fabjieted to the
Spanish dominiens. .

A period of four years epfe(d before Colum-

bus was again fitted out; and once more re-
fum;ed his plan of difcoverv. It was now that
he first saw the main land of America, falling in
with it at fix degrees distance from the equator.
Here, however, he made no settlement; but
being informed that there was a sea on the,
other fide, he found his mitfake in supposing
that those islands, which he had before difIcover-
ed, belonged to Asia; nevertheless, they still re.
tained the name of the Weft-Indies. This able
navigator likewise concluded, that the western-
and southern oceans communicated together..
He fought for this communication in the bay of
Panama, but was disappointed ; though it is not at
all unlikely that earthquakes or inundations will
effed such a passage in a future age.

After all his voyages and discoveries, Colunm-

bus found himself negleAed at court: he died
at Valladolid in 1506, ordering his irons, which
he had long kept in his chamber, to be buried
with him, as proofs of the reward he had re-

ceived

ceived for the services which he had rendered to
his king and country.

Ten years afterwards, Hernando Cortes and

Francis Pizarro, two Spanish adventurers, form-
ed a design of trying their fortunes on the conti-
nent of Paria, which, before this time, had re-
ceived the name of America, as has been already
noticed. Six hundred soldiers, and a few pieces.
of cannon, conflituted the whole of the force of
Cortes,- who failed from the island of Cuba in
the year 1519; a Spaniard, who had been a.
prisoner in the country, serving for his inter-
prefer; and all American lady, whom he after-
wards met with, and caused to be baptised by
the name of Marina, awing as a guide, and do-
ing great services in the course of his expedi-
tion.

Arriving in the country now called New:

Spain, he reached Tlafcala, where he was soon.
given to understand, that a monarch called Mon-.
tezuma (or Mutezuma), was the most powerful.
prince in those parts; that he possessed a wide
extended empire, ruled over a number of Ca-
ciques or princes, was served in gold, and had a,
vaif army under his command.

Cortes being resolved to advance, and the'

Tlafcalans opposing him, he engaged and defeat-
ed them; but afterwards rearing that they were,
Montezuma's eiemies, and confidering the small.
force he had brought with him, he entered into an
alliance with a republic that might prove ser-
viceable to him in those designs of conqueit whichl
he had already conceived, and only waited a
proper opportunity to put in execution.

Having assured himself of the afliflance of
those people, he afilrned the character of am-

B 4r baffador

baffador from Charles V. then king of Spain,
to the emperor of Mexico, of whom he demand-
ed an audience. Frequent messages pafged be-
tween the Spaniards ard this prince; the former
advancing with all convenient expedition, while
the latter used every artifice to dissuade him,
and even laid snares for him, which, however,
were timely discovered by Marina and the Tlaf-
calans.

At length he advanced to Montezuma's capi-

tal, which was built upon a lake, and joined by
causeways to the surrounding country. Here he
found spacious squares and buildings well form-
ed, though confrueed without tools of iron.
Montezuma, who lived in great slate, received
him with apparent complaisance; but some Ikir-
mifhes, which had happened between the Mexi-
Cans and the Spaniards, furnished proof sufficient
-of their mutual enmity; and the head of one of
the latter was secretly presented to the monarch,
who contemplated it with great fatisfaAion, as
he was well pleased swith a circumflance that
might tend to contradit a notion entertained by
tome of his fubjeEs, who had denominated
those firangers the children of the fun, and had
supposed them to be immortal.

The Spaniih commander, observing that mat-

ters were drawing towards a crisis, resolved at
once upon hazarding a bold attempt; he seized
the emperor in his own palace, obliged that
prince to acknowledge himself a vassal of Charles
V. and made use of him to promote his designs
against the Mexicans.

But in the midIt of this tide of success, an

event happened which had nearly put an end to
all the hopes of Cortes. Velasquez, the gover-

nor

nor of Cuba, had encouraged Pamphilo de
Naroaez to undertake an expedition against him.
But Cortes being timely informed of this design,
suddenly quitted the city of Mexico, surprised
and routed his rival, and, having incorporated
the vanquished soldiers with his own army,
marched back in triumph to the capital, where
he found his presence was much wanted, as the
small force he had left to guard Montezuma,
had, by this time, been greatly distressed, and
were now besieged by the Americans. But
when Cortes advanced, he obliged.the. enemy to
give way on all fides; and at lait Montezuma was
killed by a flone, which one of his subje&s threw
at him, while he was endeavouririg to appease a
tumult, which the insolence of the Spaniards, and
his own submission to a foreign power, had occa-
sioned. Guatimozin succeeded, who vigorouily
opposed Cortes, but was obliged at last to submit
to the fortune of that successful commander.
This Guatimozin was the monarch who was laid
on burning coals, in order to make him discover
forne treasures, which, it was supposed, he had
hidden. A subjet of his who fuflered the fame
torment, and was exclaiming aloud, " Dolt thoa
" think then, said the emperor (who exhibited
"the greatest composure) that thy maifer is laid
"on a bed of roses ?" This monarch fell a fa-
crifice to Spanish avarice and ambition, as did
likewise a number of his fubjeiEs. Even the
Tlafcalatss were brought into slavery, notwith-
standing their alliance with the Spaniards; and
thus ended the Mexican empire.

In order to fubvcrt that-of Peru, Francis PY-

zarro, a needy adventurer, undertook an expedi.
tion of a similar nature by way of the South.

-B 5 Seas

Seas. At Lima, called by the natives Rimac, or
the City of the Kings, the emperor, or inlca, was
then at the head of no lets than 40,oo0 men: thus
.attended, he came, in answer to a meflage of Pi.
garro's, to meet the Spaniards at Quito. Being
so. well guarded, he thought he had nothing to fear;
but he knew not whom he had to deal with. The
Spaniards, though few in number, yet well aimed
and provided with horses and ordnance which
they purposely concealed, waited impatiently for
the arrival of the Peruvians, whom at firit they
received as friends; and in their kindnefs-pre-
tended to infirut them in the rudiments of the
Chriflian religion, while some of their people
were plundering a temple, in order to enrich
themselves with it's golden ornaments. A Spanish
priest made a set speech in favour of Christianity,
which the interpreter engaged to make the inca
acquainted with: at the fame time a copy of the
gospel was put into his hands; being told that it
was the " word of God," he put it to his ear, and
finding no found to issue from it, he call it upon
the ground: at the fame time, some c'onfulion
being occasioned by the party that had plundered
the temple, the Spaniards rose in a tumult; the
preeiltce of which was religion, but which had far
other motives. Affifled by the horses and the
artillery which was now produced, the Spaniards
easily slaughtered the Peruvians; some of whom,
notwithstanding, most obflinately defend-ed their
" monarch, till Pizarro himself crew him from

his litter and made him prifoncr.

Athabalipa was for some time treated with an

apparent refpea. In the mean time his captors
expeled an enormous ransom for this prince who
had dethroned his brother; for whose death they

fu ffred

suffered him to give orders, even while he was.
under confinement. And of this very crime they
afterwards accused him, and he was put to death
by command of Pizarro the conqueror; a man
who, though thus loaded with the favours of. for-
tune, was so ignorant, that he could neither write
nor read. The deceased inca was succeeded by
Copac. who feetned to have an opportunity of
recovering the liberties of Peru, had he taken.
care to improve it. Almagro, another Spanish
adventurer, formerly Pizarro's lieutenant,, entered:
into a contest with his general, which was finally
decided by a battle fought under the walls. of
Cusco, which he loft,' and was executed; but-
the inca disbanded his army, and the Peruvians,
acknowledged their fubjeaion. Pizarro was after-
wards Ilabbed at noon-day in his palace, by fomen
of the adherents of Almagro the deceased..

Thus fell the two great empires of the western,

world;. fibverted by a few vagrant Spaniards,.
whose arms and discipline overmatched their
numbers, and whose very persons feemned to over-
awe them into compliance. Their conquerors.
made a most inhuman ife of their power; Private:
adventurers at first, and afterwards governors ap-
pointed by the court, opprelied the natives beyond
meafire. Many thousands, some fay hundreds of
thousands of them, were slain; some on account
of religion as it was pretended, and others on va-
rious pretences. Sometimes a. dozen. of them,
were hanged up in honour of the twelv.e apostles;;
sometimes they were worried by dogs;. to whom
also their infants were thrown to be devoured..
The survivors were condemned to work in their
own mines,. to gratify the avarice of their rapacious
mealersc

B.; 6 The

The rigours of this slavery were somewhat

softened, indeed, by the interference of a worthy
Spanish prelate; but {ill the situation of the
people, except where they are intermixed with
the Spaniards, muff be corifidered as truly unhappy;
and the moll hardy tribes among them are always
in readiness to revolt againit their conquerors.

At the first appearance of things one would be

led to imagine, that there was an equality between
all the sons and daughters of Adam; yet on a
close review of the fats before us, we (hall be led
to conclude, that America is indeed the younger
fitter of Europe: and their own history, so far as
we are able to gather it from their own traditions,
seems to confirm us in this opinion.

The inhabitants of Mexico had indeed formed

themselves into civil societies; but theirimprove-
ments were of an early date. Athabalipa's father
was only the twelfth inca of Peru; so that it was
only during the space of thirteen reigns (not
400oo years) that the Peruvians had been civilized
by their princes ;who pretending themfeives to be
descended- from the great luminary, and asserting
that they possessed a divine authority, had drawn
them from their woods and caves, and introduced
a regular form of government among them. As to
the North-Americans, thev fill continue wild, and
therefore may be concluded to be of a later origin.

These people, of whom we shall have frequent

occasion to discourse hereafter, appear in their
manners much to resemble the Tartars; from
whom some suppose them to be derived. It is
well known that the Ruffians generally fuppoted
America to be joined to the main land of Europe,
or separated from it by a very narrow fraigl;t in the
nortl.eaftern quarter. It has been affirmed, that

our

our lafi voyagers fawa firaight of this kind, but that
it was so closely blocked up with ice, that the ihip-
ping could not hope to pass it at any season of the
year. If this be the cafe, (hall we suppose those
daring adventurers of the Tartar race to have
paifed this cruft of ice, as some of their Scythian
ancestors formerly did the Thracian Bosphorus,
by which means they made incurfons into the
Roman empire-? Or shall we rather suppose, that
some of thele wanderers, embarking in such vefels
as they had, and being ignorant of the art of na-
vigation, were thrown by chance upon this foreign
shore ? There are great difficulties attending these
conjectures; yet the resemblance above mentioned
is certainly very firiking. It was easy for such
men who had. no records, nay it might be easy
for any set of people living in woods and caves, to
forget their origin, and become just what we now
fee them in North-America.

Towards the south-west of the continent, the

people bear some resemblance to those at the ex-
tremity of the eaflern world, and might not im-
probably, wafted over by summer seas and favour-
ing breezes, have come thither from Japan. I
flall here subjoin an extrad from the account of
an old Indian, belonging to the tribe called the
Jazons, who gave M. Le Paye du Pratz the fol-
lowing account, on an expedition to trace the ori-
gin of the American natives; and conclude with
tome remarks upon the Indian nations in general.

"This old man took his way (as he fays) by the

high grounds on the eastern banks of the river
St. Louis; which river having passed, he came to
the country of the Missouris, whom he describes
as a people living almost entirely upon flesh, and
seldom cultivating corn. Among this tribe he spent

the

the winter, which was so severe, that the snow
lay fix feet deep upon the ground.

From thence he was directed westward to the

nation of the Loutres, or Otters; where he was
told, that he would be likely to gain fomen informa-
tion concerning the circumilanceswhlich he wanted
to enquire into. Having procured a proper re-
commendation, he departed from thence, and came
to a finall settlement on the banks of a river;
whose chief demanding who he was, and what he
did there, he replied, that his name was Moneacht
Ape; that he came from the Loutres, and was
recommended by the Sachem Salt Zear to the
Great Roebuck. This Great Roebuck, being the
father of the chief in question, received him with
the greateli hospitality, and ordered him to make
use of his name amongit the nations to which ie
direted him, and amongit whom he arrived with-
out encountering any accident.

". The last of these nations (continues-

Moneacht Ape) is fettled a day's journey from the
[eaflern] sea, and about a league from the river.
They live concealed in woods for fear of the
bearded men. I was received by them as if I had
been one of their own countrymen. They are
continually upon their guard against these bearded
men, who do all they can to carry off young
people, doubtless to make slaves of them. They
informed me that these men were whites; that
they had long 'black beards falling down to the
breast; that their bodies were thick and short,
their heads large, and covered, with fluffs; that
they were always clothed; and that their upper
garmnents reached to the middle of their legs,
which, as well as their feet, were also covered with,
red or yellow susss.; their weapons made a great:

* no'lfe,.

noise, and a great flaflh: but, when they saw the na-
tives were too numerous, they 'retired to a great
canoe [a fnall ship] which contained thirty of
them. They added, that these firangers came from
the Wetl [which must necessarily be the extre-
mity of the opposite Asiatic fhorej in search of a
soft wood, which dyes a beautiful yellow colour:
for which reafoh the natives had come to a refo-
lution to destroy these trees; since which they had
not been so much troubled with those vifiters;
but fill they infested two neighbouring nations
who had not pursued the fame policy : but all the
neighbouring Indians had now agreed to arm and
join together the succeeding summer, in order to
defiroy the invaders.

" As I had seen fire-arms, and was not afraid

of them (added the traveller) and as the route
they purposed to take was the way to the nation I
was in quest of, I readily agreed to go with the
warriors of this nation, as soon as summer came, to
the general rendezvous. The bearded men came
later this year than usual. While we waited for
them, the natives ihewed me the place where these
people laid their great.canoe. It was between two
high rocks which inclosed the mouth ot a {ihallow
river, whose banks were covered with yellow
wood. An aoreement was made to lie in ambush
for the invaders, in order to surround and cut them.
off while-they were buffed in their usual employ-
ment'. In the space of seventeen days, two great
canoes came to their usual place. The first thing
the bearded men did, was to fill certain. wooden
vessels with water. On the fourth day, they armed
and loaded, and went to cut wood. They were
then immediately attacked on all fides: but, not-
withfanding our utmpft efforts, we could kill but

eleven;

eleven; all the remainder of them getting on
board their little canoes, from whence they soon
gained their large ones; and then launching into
the great water they presently disappeared.

When I examined the dead, I found them

to be less than we are, and very white; their bo-
dies were thick, and their heads large; about the
middle of the head the hair was long: they do not
wear hats as you do, but round their heads was
bound a quantity of fluff. Their clothes were
neither of wool nor bark, but something like your
old shirts, very soft, fine, and of various colours.
[This must have been. silk, as it was declared to
be neither bark, wool, nor linen.] The covering
of their legs and feet was all of a piece. I endea-
voured to put on one of their hose, but my feet
being too large fruitrated the attempt. Out-of the
eleven whom we killed only two had fire-arms,
powder and ball. On trying their pieces, I found
they did not carry so far as yours. Their powder
was mixed of the larger, middling, and finer
grain; but the large made up the greater part.

4 These were the remarks which I made upon

the bearded men. Afterwards, leaving the war-
riors with whom I came, to return home, I joined
the nations that were fettled on the coast farther
to the westward; and we followed the course of
the.coaft which was direEtly between the north
and the weft. When we came to their fettle-
ments, I observed that the days were nuch
longer than with us, and the nights very flort.
I asked them the reason of this, but they would
not tell me. Their old men, hearing of my de.
sign, told me it was in vain for me to proceed any
farther: at the fame time they said, the coast ex-
tended itself a great way between the north and

wef ;

weft; that it afterwards turned ihort to the weft,
and after running for a considerable distance in
that direction, it was cut by the lea direftly from
north to south. One of them added, that at low
water were to be seen rocks and shallows in the
channel, which once had been dry land. In the
end, they all joined in persuading me not to travel
any farther; assuring me that the country was
cold and desert, deflitute of animals and inhabi-
tants; and advised me to return to my own
country. I accordingly took their advice, and re-
turned by the way that I came."

M. Le Paye du Pratz hesitated not to believe-

every article of this account, which indeed fecnms
probable enough: and he teemed to be of opi-
nion, that the bearded men above mentioned came
from some of the isles of Japan. The diflance
of the Jazons from the farthest nation visited by
Moneacht Ape, if measured in a straight line, ap.
pears to be about 300 leagues.

Having already spoken of the natives of the

southern continent, we {hall now proceed to fay
something of the North-American natives. $Sa-
vage in their manners, they are generally found
equally fierce and faithless; pofleffing many of
the vices and few of the virtues of wild nature; and
also apt enough to adopt the crimes and excesses
of civilized nations, as has been often found by
experience whenever an opportunity offered.

The fiercefl of all these tribes are the Efqui-
maux, so called from Iheir living upon new fiefh.

They are untraeable, mischievous, and shock-

ing to behold; yet their skin is white, probably
because they are always clothed; their shirts being
made of bladders, or the intestines of fish, and
their coats generally of a bear'3 skin: the men

wear

wear likewise breeches made of skins, having the
hair inwards, and faced with fur or ermine on the
outside. They have also ffioes made of ikins, and
boots of the fame over then ; and are often
doubly and trebly shod in this manner : they
carry arrows pointed with the teeth of a fea-cow
when they cannot get iron: thley live 'in the
open air during the summer month,:, and reside
in caverns in the winter leafon.

In the weflern part of Canada there is a vafr

track of countries, some of which are unknown,
and some uninhabited; but the French were ac-
quainted with the Mlatalfois. the MeIlonis, the
Chrifinlaux, and the Afiindaoils. T'lhe thil;e firit
of these speak what is called the Algonquin lan-
guage. As to the Chriffinaux, they live to the
northward of lake Superior. It is said that the
Indians on the river Bourbon, and those on the
river South Teresa, differ in their language. We
are told, that at the diflance of a hundred leagues
from this river, it is not navigable for fifty more:
but a paflage is found by !neans.of rivers and lakes
that disgorge themselves into it; and afterwards
it holds it's course h: ough a fertile country, which
continues as far as the lake of the Affnaboils.

These Indians,.as wecl! as thofc of Canada, enter-

tain a number of fiuperflitious opinions. They
believe in a good and an evil genils, but acknow-
ledge the fun as their great divinity. All there
tribes go under the general appellation of the Sa.
vannois, on account of the Savannoks or low
grounds which surround their country.- Tlefe
people, neglecting culture, are so deflitute of
provisions when the huntingl-eafon is expired,
that they have been known to prey upon their
own species; and, when a man grows old, it is a

custom

custom for his beft-beloved son to strangle him.
An excellent refutation of those modern philofo-
phers, who have affe6ed to prefer a state of un-
cultivated nature to the refinements of civil so-
ciety ! If this needs a further illnfiration, let the
reader attend to some other cuflorns which we ihall
have occasion to relate in the course of this hiilory.

Amorngfl all the northern nations inhabiting
about Canada, the Sioux, Algonquin, and-Huron
languages are tlhe only radical ones. The Sioux
have no fettled dwellings, but, like the Tartars,
wvander from place to place; sometimes lodging
under a wigwam on one 'pot, fometinies on ano-
ther. They have a cullom of' cutting off the tips
of their notes, and some part of the skin on the
tops of their hpads: and rome people have ftip-
posed that they bear a resemblance to the Chinese
in their manners and language.

The people called the Affinaboils inhabit on the

borders of a lake of that name, embosomed in hills;
and of which many wonders are recounted by cre-
dulous Europeans. They are a reserved people,
very unlike their neighbours the Chriltinaux; and
are well calculated for bearing toils and hardships.

The country to the north'of the island of Mon-
treal is but thinly peopled; however, some vil-
lages belonging to the old inhabitants yet remain.
The Nipiliings, in particular, are so called from a
lake of that name, and are the descendants of the
ancient Algorquins. Of the Outawas, though
formerlys a populous nation, few are now to be-
seen. The barbarity, in Ihort, of these Indians,.
their manner of living, their bloody wars, their'
killing their old men, and often deferring their,
children, together with their, total ignorance o.
medicine in cafe of disease, have contributed to

decrease

decrease their numbers; insomuch that many of
their nations do not contain above two thousand,
fcarcelv any of them fix thousand persons.

The Algonquins were once reckoned the

greatest hunters, and consequently the greatest
warriors in there parts. The Iroquois, who at
first acknowledged their superiority, at length
put in their claim, and a war ensued, in which
a third nation, called the Hurons, afifed the
Algonquins, and the contest was carried on
with a diabolical fury: this was the slate of the
Indians when their country was first discovered.

But here it is proper to take notice of another

tribe, who called themselves Ilinois, signifying,
as it seems, MEN, by way of diftinlion from the
surrounding savages. Of these we have the fold
lowing description:

The Ilinois keep several wives, and yet

they are exceedingly jealous; and ii they find
them defeaive in chaflity, they cut their noses and
ears: many of their women carry upon their faces
there great marks of their infidelity.

" These Indians are well shaped and dexterous;

they are excellent marksmen, a circumfiance
which renders them formidable to their nigh-
bours, especially to those inhabiting the western
quarter, who are equally ignorant of fire-arms,
and of tools made of iron. When the Ilinois
set out upon an expedition, they give the whole
village notice of it, by making an outcry the
evening before they go, and on the morning he-
fore they depart. Their captains are diftinguilhed
from the private soldiers, by certain scarves of
ikins, wrought with curious workmanship. They
have abundance of game; they f6w beans and
melons, which are excellent, and their Indian

corn

eorn seldom fails them. The cabins in which
they live, are large and commodious. They are
covered and paved with mats of rushes; their
dishes are made of wood, their spoons of bones,
taken from the ikulls of wild oxen; their
clothes are the skins of beafis, yet, in some re-
fpeEts, they appear to be more civilized than
their neighbours. There is, however, a firange
infatuation prevailing among them; some of the
Ilinois take the habits of women in their
youth, which they are not allowed to throw off
in maturer years. These men consort with the
females, yet they are allowed to go to war, pro-
vided they fight only with clubs; and they al.
ways aflift in the council.

" The Calumet is what the Indians greatly
reverence. These savages seem to look upon it
as the arbritrator of peace and war, the determi-
ner of life and death. The calumet, or pipe, of
peace, however, is different from that of war.
The former is used to confirm their alliances;
the latter to declare hoflilities. It is made of a
red flone, the head is like that of our common
tobatco-pipes, but larger, and it is fixed to a
hollow reed, in order to hold it for finoking.
The. ornament it with feathers of various
colours, and they call it the Calumet of the Sun,
to whom they present it: they dare not wash
themselves in rivers in the beginning of the
summer, nor taste the ,new fruits of the trees
till they have danced to the calumet. This is a
very solemn ceremony; used often to confirm
alliances, and rometimes to entertain a visiting
nation.

In summer they perform it in the fields, in
winter in their cabins. In the former cafe, they

chufe

chufe a (hady spot, in the midst of which they
spread a large mat, setting on it the god of their
chief, or him who gives the dance; for here every
one has his particular idol or monitoa, notwith-
flanding they generally confess a power far above
t-hese secondary deities, which are often birds,
serpents, or'any thing else to which they take a
fancy. To the right of their monitoa the cali.
met is placed, and a fort of trophy is made
round it with their arms.

All things being thus disposed, those who

are to sing take the most honourable feats; then
all the reit place themselves round in order as
they come in, hav;ing first saluted the monitoa,
which they do by blowing the smoke of their
tobacco upon it; every one in his turn dancing
with it in his hands, and following the cadence
of the songs. After this, he who is to begin tlhe
dances, takes the calumet and prcfents it to the
fun ; then he moves it in various direEcions,
sometimes lowering it near the ground, at others
advancing it, as if he would make it fly, and
then he presents it to the fpeaators, wlio flmokc
with it one after another, dancing all the while,
and thus theyr conclude the first scene of this
savage ball: the second scene is a fight, acconm-
panied with vocal and inflrumental mrufic; for
they make use of a drum upon there occasions.
One of the warriors, on a signal given, takes up
a bow and arrows, with an ax, and is encoun-
tered by the dancer, who defends himself with
the calumet alone, each of them dancing all the
while. After this, he who held the calumet
makes a speech, in which he gives an account of
his warlike atchievements, and accepts of a pre-
sent from the chief. He then gives the calumet

·*~~~~~~~ ~~~to

to another, who, having ased his part, gives it
to a third, and thus it passes from the hands of
one to another, till it is returned to the chief,
who presents it to the nation invited to the feast,
in token of friendship and confirmation of al-
liances."

Supil is the general [ketch of the manners of

a variety of Indian nations, with whom the
reader will be better acquainted in the course of
the work; and though differing in language, and
certain peculiar manners, he must always ex-
pet to find the fame leading features charade-
rife the North-American savages. A love of war
and hunting, an aversion to labour, and the
cultivation of lands, and a strong propensity to
lull and cruelty, may, with some few excep-
tions, be tiaced through all their tribes. Such
wrere the nations whom the firtl settlers had
to deal with, barbarous in war, and faithless in
peace; they gave them more trouble-than all
ihe woods and wilds they had to clear, or all
hde other difficllties which they were obliged to
encounter. Yet, endued with fortitude, and a
spirit of perseverance, they surmounted there
obifacles, and, with unremitting toil and labour,
laid the foundation of a large and flourishing
empire.

CHAP.

# CHAP. II.

C H A P. II.
Cabot's Dicovery-New-England; it's Climate-

Newfoundland and Nova-Scotia, &c. fettled-
Charter Govetnment-The Foundation of BofJ
ton- Union of the four Governments-Quakers
Witchcrafts-DeluJions-Affairs of New-Eng.
land.
T HE Italian adventurer, Cabot, was the first,

who, failing under a commission of king

Henry VII. made a discovery of the North-Ame-
rican continent, touching at that part of it since
called Canada, or New France; but he made no
regular settlement there; and even the discovery
itself seemed to be either forgot or disregarded.

The state of England in the reigns of Henry

VIII. Edward VI. and his filler Mary, were
unfavourable to colonization. But in Elizabeth's
reign, about the year 1584, near a century after
Cabot's expedition, the famous Sir Walter
Raleigh fitted out certain ships under the com-
mand of the captains Amidas and Barlow, who
went on shore on an island near the main land
of North-America. And some time afterwards,
poffefiion was taken of the continent to which
the general name of Virginia was given, in ho-
nour of the maiden queen.

In the month of April 1585, Sir Richard

Gren undertook an expedition with seven (hips,
under the direation of him who planned
the former. He first arrived at an island
called Wokokon: he passed over from thence
to the continent, but plundering an Indian town,

was

Was obliged to reimbark his people: he theo
went to aRoanoak, where Amidas and Barlow h.ad
first landed; and having left a finall colony there,
he returned to his native country.

Captain lIane, who was at the head of this co-

lony, proceeding to the continent, resolved with
his handful of men to make discoveries in a flrange
and savage country. He was particularly encou-
raged by an Indian chief, named Wingina, who
pretended to dire& him where he might find great
treasures. The idea of discovering mines of gold
and silver at that time poffefling all the European
nations, Lane followed his advice: his faithless
friend deserted him; and though the Indians did
not fall upon him at that time in a hostile manner,
)yet, as they took care not to supply him with pro-
visions, and it was afterwards found that he, had
entered into a conspiracy to destroy the English,
they were glad to abandon their enterprise on the
appearance of Sir Francis Drake's fleet upon tlhe
coafi, and to set fail for England. Scarcely were
they departed, before Sir Richard Grenyille ar-
rived with three (hips at Roanoak; where, though
he found no traces of the old colonists, yet he
ventured to leave fifteen men behind him.

Sir Walter Raleigh, in the year 1587, equip-

ped these three (hips, having 1So persons on board;
who were incorporated under the name of the
Borough of Raleigh in Virginia. When these
arrived at Roanoak, they found nothing but, the
skeleton of a man who had been killed by the
Indians; to whose fury seven others had fallen a
prey, and the remainder it appeared had gone over
to Cape Hatteras: yet this account did not deter
the new colonists from entering into hostilities
with the Indians. At length, they were so much

C distressed,

diftrelfred, that it was judged necessary to fend
their governor to England, in order to fblicit
supplies. He frucceeded; but on his return,
mnet with a terrible tempest, and contrary winds,
which obliged him to put back. In the mean
time, his colbnifts, unsupported by their country4
mezn, all perished by the sword and famine: such
-was the unfavourable aspea of affairs in these
parts, and so little encouragement had the Eng-
lifli to colonize North-America.

Nor did the captains Gilbert and Gefnold,

who failed from Plytnouth in the year 1602, to
that part of New-England called Virginia,
though they erected a little fort there, meet
with any success, further than what might be ex.
pected from a trading voyage; they quarrelled
with the Indians, and their attempt was fruftra.
ted. The fame was the fate of two subsequent
undertakings, the one set on foot by Mr. Hacluyt,
prebendary of Bristol; the other by the lords
Southampton and Arundel, in the year 1605.

Yet, nriotwithftanding these repeated difap.

zointments, a company of gentlemen and mer-
chants, in the year 1606, raised a fund for the
eflablifhment of new colonies in North-Ame-
-rica; Sir Walter Raleigh's grant being for.
feited in consequence of his attainder, and sub-
fequint execution in the reign of king James I.
Theft associates were incorporated under the
names of the London and Bristol companies.
After a profperods voyage, the fleets came to
ancihor off the bay of Chefapeak, in. the month of
AIpril, and immediately turned their attention to-
wards their new eftablifeimient.

PIowers were vested in them to eret a govern.
ment, which they accordingly did; but corn

mencing

mencing holtilities against the Indians;, and'
quarrelling with' themselves,' they had determined
to forsake their new settlement, called James-
Town; when, at a critical time, lord Delaware, '
with a considerable reinforcement, -and extensive
powers, arrived from England.

He caused the colonifls to remain quiet in

their old dwellings; he established. many good
regulations, and well supported the cthara6ter
with which he was invested. By his means the
settlement flourified; tobacco was cultivated;
proper laws were enacted; and the conflitution
of the infant colony was, by degrees, modelled in
such a manner, as to resemble that of England.
This great man having returned to his native
country, for the benefit of his health, died on
his passage back to Virginia, in the year i618;
and was succeeded by Sir George Yardley tin the
government. This may properly be called the first
rife of the Britiih settlements in North-America.

The foil and climate of New-England, where

the colonifis afterwards so amazingly multiplied,
are various; but the climate is in general health-
ful, and the land fertile; though the summers
are short and the winters long and severe, which
latter circumstance is generally accounted for,
by the large frelh water lakes which lie behind this
province. The land in many places towards the
sea, is low and marfy ; but in the interior parts
of the country swells into hills, and rifes into
mountains. The following is a just description
of the country:

' New-England, lying in the temperate zone,

is jualy efleemed happy and healthy. Around
Maffachufet's-Bay the foil is black and rich,-
though not so fertile in the northern diRtrias.

C 2 Few

Few countries are better watered than this,
which abounds in rivers and. lakes of fresh wa-
ter. Of the former, seven are navigable, and
all of them abound in variety of filh. Connec-
ticut river, in particular, is navigable a great way
for the largest vefels; it arises in the northern
frontier of the province, and runs diretly south
for the space of 200 miles, till it discharges it-
self between the towns of Saybrook and Line.
Tbe-coaft likewise abounds with cod, and the
country is fruitful in all kinds of excellent puire
or corn, especially Maize or Indian corn, the
ear of which is about a span long, composed of
eight or more rows of grain, and about 30 grains
in each row, so that each ear is likely to pro.
duce about 240 grains upon an average. In
many. of the North-American provinces, the
-lalk grows to the height of seven or eight feet,
and is proportionably firong and thick. This
Bfalk is jointed like a cane, and like that it is
supplied with a saccharine juice; but from ex-
periments made, it has proved not at all capable
of being reduced into sugars. Each joint is
marked with a long leaf or flag; and a branch
of flowers, resembling rye blossoms, {hoots out
at the top. The Indians boiling this corn till it
is tender, eat it with fish, flelh, or fowl, as
bread. They sometimes buife it in mortars be-
fore they boil it; but the more usual method is
to dry it high, and then sift and beat it in mor-
tars into fine meal, which the Indians either eat
dry or mixed with water. The Englifl gene-
rally make bread of it by baking it in the lame
manner as they do flour; but the best food
made from it, which is called Sanfi, is procured
by the corn being steeped in water for about

half

half an hour, and' beat in a mortar till it is
quite cleared of the hulk, then sifted, boiled,
and eaten with milk or butter and sugar. Strong
beer may be brewed from this corn without
malting it like barley.

6.' A great variety of fowls and game, such as

hens, geese, ducks, turkies, swans, herons, pi-
geons, wigeons, heathcocks, partridges, &c.
are found in New-England. European cattle,
in general, multiply there; and the horses,
though small, are found and serviceable. Elks,
bears, wolves, ounces, fables, monkeys,' ra-
coons, rabbits, hares, squirrels, and a variety of
other quadrupeds, wild and tame, are found
here;. lome of the former of which are imported
into England as curiosities."

[The author whom I have cited, men.

lions also a fort of deer twelve feet high, called
the Moose; but as the very exiflence of such an
allinal is doubted, and tome are inclined to
class it with the griffons and unicorns of an-
tiquity, I lhall not trouble the reader with a
description of this wonderful quadruped.]

This province abounds in excellent timber,

both such as is necessary for ship-building, and,
fich as we use in dying, or tanning leather.
Yet such was the defiruation made in the-forefts
by those who cleared the country, that it was
thought neceifary to pass a law for, preventing
the waste of woods, by inflicting certain penal-
ties upon any persons who cut down trees be.
fore they were arrived at a certain age specified.
The pines here are said to be equal to those of
Norway; but the oaks are reckoned inferior in
quality to those of Englilh growth. ;$hip-
building, however, was always reckoned a prin-

C 3, cipal

cipar employment at Boflon, where veftels were
sometimes built by the New-England merchants
on their .own account; and fonmetimes on com-
mission. Since the present unhappy troubles,
they have employed themselves in building pri.
vateers or small vessels of war, as the Americans
call them.

* While the first planted colony continued in-

creasing, other settlements had been established
on various parts of the sea-coast of the vast
western continent. A.4.ong these was New-
foundland, which Cabot .had' discovered, be-
ing between the 46th and ift degrees of north
latitude, in the year 1497. The summers here
are- ht; the winters very cold. The ground is
in general barren of molt vegetable produaions,
timber excepted. Deer, hares, and beavers, are
found in abundance; but the cod-fishing, on the
Banks, conflitutes the chief worth of that pof-
eflion. The natives are a mild people, but
much given to pilfering; they paint their bo-
dies, which are generally ill-fhaped, as their
features are: they appear to be beardless,
which seems to arise from a custom, adopted in
youth, of pulling out the hairs by the root.
This settlement has always been looked upon by
the French with a jealous eye.

The island called Newfoundland, .was first

taken possession of by the English, in the reign
of queen Elizabeth. Sir Francis Bacon, in con-
jilnljion with several others, afterwards obtained a
grant: a 6inds froip Bonavifta to St. Mary's;
whither one Mr. Guy condufted a colony. In
the year 1715, a colony was planted at Cambriel,
as were several others afterwards in various parts

of

of Newfoundland: in the mean while, the French
fettled themselves at Placentia.

Bordering on Newfoundland is Nova-Scotia,
which, comprehending Acadia (under which name
many disturbances have arisen between us aand our
Gallic neighbours) is bounded by the ocean on the
south, and on the east by the rivert St. Laurence,
and by Canada and New-England on hle weft and
fouth.wefl; extending from the 43d to the, 5 it de-
gree of north latitude.

Frequent quarrels now took place btetweentlhe

rival nations; the.French claiming a right to the
territories which the Englih aITerted belonged to
them.

Annapolis, Canso, and Halifax, are the prin.

cipal towns in this province; the former has an
harbour .said to be capable of containing i tlou-.
sand vessels. Canso to the eastward is remarkable
for it's fishery: Halifax has likevife a fine har.
bour, and is commodiously situated ; but the
country round it is not fruitful. In the year
1743, three thousand families were transported
to this new settlement; but the place is Iubjectto
frequent visits from the Ind:ans. The Cape Sable
coalt is also famous for filhing; and the island of
Sables lies in the neighbourhood. Cape Breton,
situated from 45° to 47* of north latitude, is the
largest island in the gulph of St. Laurence. The
fort of Louifbourg here was demolished, when the
place was taken by the Englifh.-But, to return.

If the colony at James-Town succeeded, there

were other settlements which deserved the atten-
tion of the English. Some adventurers failing
from Plymouth, in-thereign of king James I. fettled
in that part of the country called New-Jerfey,

C i where

where they founded New-Plymouth; and by de-
grees spread themselves in the adjacent country.
This colony'continued increasing, but not without
frequent dissensions arising among them. In the
imean time captain Worlafton came over to fettle
at Maffachuffet's-Bay; but his men mutinied and
chose one Morton for their chief: but he, having
committed the crime of dancing, with some of his
people, round a. maypole, in derision of the Puri-
tans, was secured by a party lent from New-Ply-
mouth for this fault, not for his mutiny. The
government dismissed the accusation, but the de-
sign miscarried.

After this, Sir Henry Rofwel, Sir John Young,

ahd others, got a patent for incorporating them-
selves, under the name of The Governor and
Coimpny of Maffachufet's-Bay in New-England.
These colonifis bad the power of elefting their
governor and other magistrates, and that of
eiat&ing laws not contrary to the laws of England.
The new settlers, afterwards divided; one part
eflablifhing themselves at Dorchefer, while the
other resorted to a different spot; but, soon after-
wards removing themselves, they founded Boston,
now the capital of the New-England province.
The Dutch had by this time fettled themselves in
New-York, as the French had done at Canada.

Nor were those adventurers, whose lot was cafr

to the southward, at all unsuccessful. Penfylvania
was fettled by the famous William Penn, son of Sir
William Penn; who obtained an extensive charter
for this purpose from king Charles I. bearing d te
March 4th, 1680. The genius of this government,
as it fiands at present, will be bet seen by the char-
ter delivered by Mr. Penn, in lieu of the for.
mer one, which was fuvrendered to him as in some

rejlpey s

refpeEts inconvenient. The clauses in this new
charter are the following:

,' First, No persons who believe in one

Almighty God, and live peaceably under the
civil government, shall be molested in their
religious peifuafions, nor be compelled to frequent
or maintain any religious worship contrary to their
mind.. Secondly, That all persons who profess.
to believe in Jesus Christ, and are capable of
serving the government in any capacity, mull so.
lemnly promise, when required,- allegiance to the
crown, and fidelity to the province and governor.
Thirdly, That annually, on the first day of Oetober
for ever, there ihall be an assembly chosen to fit
on the fourteenth day of the fame month, viz..
four persons out of each county, or a greater
number, as the governoi and alfembly may from:
time to time agree, with all the powers and privi,
leges of an assembly, as is usual in any of the
king's plantations in America; two-thirds of the
whole number that ought to meet fiall be a quorum,
to fit upon their own adjournment. Fourthly,
The freemen, at their meeting for elefting repre--
fentatives, are to chule sheriffs and coroners. The
juflices in the refpeEtive counties to nominate
clerks of the peace. The laws of government
shall be in this flyle: By the Governor, with the:
Con/ent and Approbation of the Freemen in Gene¢
ral A/fembly nmet. Fifthly, No person to be. licen-
fed by the governor to keep an ordinary, o tavern,.
but such as are recommended by the jiflices ofthe-
county. Sixthly, No alteration to be. made in the.
charter, without the content of the governor. and.
fix -out of seven of the afenmbly met. [Signed,.
William Penn, at Philadelphia, in Pen-tvtaaia,

C 5 Oaobes

O&ober 28, 1701; the first year of my goverrr
ment.]" And then comes the following addition:
" Notwithflanding any thing formerly alleging
the provinces and territories to join together in
legislation, Mr. Penn hereby declares, that if at
any time hereafter, within three years, their re-
fpeaive assemblies (hall not agree to join in legi.
flation, and shall signify the fame to him: in such
cafe, the inhabitants of the three counties, and of
the province, (hall not have less than eight repre-
fentatives; and the town of Philadelphia, when
incorporated, shall have two representatives. Thl
inhabitants of each county in the territories ihall
have as many persons to represent them, in a
diflinA assembly for those territories, as {hall be by
them requested; and the province and territories
shall enjoy the fame charters and privileges."

Such were the outlines of a government

which might juitly be denominated free, though
theexecutive power was in tome measure lodged
in the proprietor. William Pennmade a pur-
chafe of the lands from the natives. His towns
were as towns of refuge; and men of all nations
and religions had it in their power to live happy
in this Trans-Atlantic settlement: except in one
inflance of a versatile man, named Keith, we have
not found any kind of persecution in this fettle-
ment; a circumflance which does honour to the
head of William Penn, and to the hearts of the
Quakers; who also have in general chosen rather
to susser violence in their persons and eflates,
than to mingle in those troubles which of late have
so much diftratled their unhappy country.

The province of Penfylvania boasts of many
· fine towns. The city-of'Philadelphia, which be-

fore

fore the late commotions contained I3,ooo inha-
bi!ants, is particularly worthy of notice. This
beautiful city is situated on a-point of land at the
confluence of the Delaware and the Schulkyl,
rivers of great note in America. It was origi-
nally intended to comprise eight parallel streets
two miles long, interfeEted at right angles by fix.
teen others, each a mile in length. There is a
square of ten acres in the centre; and the two
principal fireets which are finished are 100 feet
wide. Most of the public buildings are disposed
round the square. The houses in general have
gardens and orchards behind them. They have
here fine quays, commodious warehouses, and
good docks for flip-building; and there are about
two thousand houses, moflly well built of brick
or [lone, in this capital; which, though unfiniihed,
exhibit a beautiful appearance.

Maryland, of which we shall next speak, was

founded by lord Baltimore; who, though a Ca-
tholic, retiring from England on account of the
disputes raised here by religionilis,.founded this
colony; on principles of a nature similar to those
adopted by Mr. Penn. His brother, with about
2oo persons, went over thither upon this arduous'
undertaking, which succeeded beyond expecation;
even the Indians generally living with them as
friends; a circumfiance of great consequence to
al infant colony. And though the envy of the
Virginians at length armed these savages agaiift
them; yet the fleadinefs they Ihewed in their de-
fence, joined to the good usage which the natives
received from them, secured the people of Mary.,
land from the threatened evil.

As no feet was refused entrance, the colony na-
tutally increased the founders of it felt indeed

C 6 but

but one inconvenience, which was, that the Ca-
tholics being out-numbered by the other fels, after
the revolution, the latter used all means to wrest the
government out of their hands,, and would ha-e
ungratefully deprived them of all their rights; but
that the English government would not permit
such an abuse. Certainly it is a most charming
profpet, to behold men of all religions, inflead of
persecuting each other, living together as the chil-
dren of Israel, worthiping one gracious Almighty
Being whom they profess to serve. Penfylvania
and Maryland were both founded on these prin-
ciples, and their illufirious legislators cannot be too
much commended.

There is no very considerable town in Mary-

land: butAnnapolis, situated on the banks of the
Severn, is the feat of government in this province.

We left off our narrative of the rife and pro-

grefs of the New-England provinces at the foun-
dation of Boflon, which forms a remarkable period
in the North-American hiflory; where Mr. .\in-
throp, filcceeding to the government, much pro-
motedthe interests of the province. Yet a certain
set of rioters being imprisoned, and this magi-
firate being accused of having violated the rights of
the people, .he descended from his feat, and vindi-
cated himself to the fatisrlafion of all present.

The four provinces of New-England- united.

tliemfelves in a general confederacy, and turned
their thoughts towards the conversion of the In-
dians; in which, for some time however, they
niatfe buit little progress, though they made a con-
vert ofd an Indian king. After this, the North-
American colonists were engaged in a desperate
war with Philip, king of the Womphanags; who,

being

being a politic Indian, was not subdued till much
'bloo- had been flied upon. the occasion.

The inhabitants of the New-England provinces

were thus successful, and began to think themselves
happy; till under the adininiftration of Andros,
in the reign of king James II they thought. they
had abundant cause of complaint. From some
mifcondut of this governor, they asserted that
he had attacked their liberties, infringed their
charter, and had negleEted to chaflife, if not abfo.
lutely held a correspondence with, their French and
Indian enemies. As soon as the New-England
men heard of the revolution in England, they
displaced this governor so obnoxious to their cen-
fures; and, by the charter which William granted,
had reason to believe their liberties were secured
to them.

Sir William Phipps, whom king James had

offered to make (heriff of the count), ficceeded
to the government on the acceflion of king
William. He -was a man of mean original, who
owed his fortune to accident; he was the son of
a blacksmith born in America, and afterwards
followed the trade of a fhip-carpenter. With rome
difficulty he obtained a patent for fishing upon a
Spanish wreck, where he fiihed up a great quan-,
tity of plate; and, by degrees, obtained the honour
we have mentioned; which in the end he did not
shew himnfelf well capable of supporting.

During his adminiflration happened anr event

which well deserves notice in the ,American
hiflory, The Quakers had long been the obje&t.f
hatred to the people of New-England; who, from
being perfecuttd in their mothei".country, now
became persecutors themselves.

-The

The Anabaptifs and the Quakers,. especially

the latter, became the objeat of their bigoted rage.
They enaled many penar laws against these
people; among which the following were re-
markable:

" A Quaker (as all of that feE are to be ba.
nifhed) returning to New-England, is to have

" one of his ears cut off, and is to be kept to hard
" labour in the house of correEtion. For the fe-
"cond fault, he is to lose the other ear. If the
" offender should be a woman, {he is to be whip.
: ped, and to be kept in the fame manner.
" [What is still more terrible] Whether men or
" women, for the third offence, they are to have
"their tongues bored with a red hot iron; and
" then they are to be detained in the house of
" corredtion till they can be shipped off at their
( own charges." This happened while Endicot
was governor.

The Quakers, like all other feds, thriving under

persecution, made a merit of their sufferings; and
in their turn had an opportunity of triumphing
over their intolerant brethren'

During the government of Sir William Phipps

already mentioned, a strange fancy possessed the
faints of Bufton, that numbers of them were under
the. power of witchcraft:-A person named Paris,
the minifier of Salem, having two daughters-who
were troubled with convulsions, concluded that
they were bewitched; and seizing on a female
servant of his own, caused her to be beaten till
she acknowledged that the was concerned in this
execrable deed; and was for a long time imprisoned
upon the occasion. But now the flame began to
spread; the ill health of some, and the malice of
others, occasioned many to be accifed. Mr.

Burrougls,

lm

Burroughs, formerly minister of Salem, was ac-
cufed, and, together with two other gentlemen of
irreproachable charaEer, was executed on this
occasion.

The tragedy thus begun, other-vitims were
feleEted. " The flame (fays my author) spread with
,' rage into every part of the country." A man
refusing to plead to such inconsistent charges as
were exhibited against him, was pressed to death.

Nor could the tenderness of youth, the infir-

mity of age, nor the sacred idea of their own
miniftrv, nor the honour of the female sex, afford
the least protection. Even children of eleven
years of age were apprehended as witches and
wizards: and women of all ages and degrees were
fripped flark naked, to be searched for magical
teats. If any one had a scorbutic slain upon him,
it was the Devil's pinch; and consequently was
confidered as indisputable evidence. They also
admitted flories of ghols and visions, supposed
to be delivered in idep, to which they gave a name
unknown in our law-books, that of SpEtral Evi-
dence.

Persons tortured under this extraordinary corn

miflion confessed extraordinary things, sinh as they
had not and could not have been guilty of: one
woman declared that she had lain with the Devil;; a.
conferlion which was received with great fatisfac-
tion by the people. And now an universal con.
flernation pervaded the colony. Some, hoping
soar mercy, charged themselves with witchcraft.
in order to prevent the dreaded effe&s of a forimal
accusation. The prisons were crouded, and
people were 'daily executed; yet the number of
the witches, and of those bewitcheld, feeried con-
tinually to increase. - A magistrate, who had corn-

mitted

mitted forty persons for this supposed crime, refu.
sing to grant any more warrants upon such an ac.
count, was himself accused of sorcery4 and was
glad to efcapewith life out of the province. On
the other hand, a woman being brought before a
jury, who were firuck with her folenln affevera.
tions, and the rational proofs of her innocence,
brought in their verdict, Not guilty ; but the judge
sent them out, and the people favouring the ac-
cufer, she was at lail brought in guilty, sentenced
to death, and executed accordingly. Sir William
Phipps, whom a concurrence of lucky accidents,
rather than his own merit, had raised to the honour
of knighthood, and the station which he now oc.
cupied, wasas b'usy as any one upon this occasion;
though as governor, it was certainly his duty to
use his utmofl endeavours for checking the mad.
ness of the people. The two doEors, - Increase
Maiher and Cotton Mather, who were refpeeted
as the apostles of the New-England church, also
gave their countenances to these measures. Plipps
received an address of thanks from the preachers
for his cruelty and folly; and was earnefily. peti?
tioned to proceed in so laudable an undertaking.
Thus encouraged, malice,, bigotry, and prejudice,
urged the accusers to proceed: they had already
passed the bounds of reason, and there was no
probability of- afoertaining what point they would
flop at. Judges and juries had been.threatened,
browbeat,, and fufpe.ted of sorcery. The gover.
nor's relations, and those of Mr. Increase Mather,
were now charged with this supposed crime,. and
the mischief was carried to it's greatest excess.

The higher powers now first became sensible of

their error; when it asseted themselves, thev gave
things another turn, and resolved,. though late,

to Rop the prosecutions. In consequence of this
determination, an hundred and fifty persons then
in confinement, were released; and the charges
against two hundred more that had been accured
vere passed over. Such as had received sentence
of death were pardoned, and the whole of the
proceedings ended; but not without giving occa-
lion of exultation to the Quakers. These people,
as we have seen, had been hardly used by the colo,
nifis; and, according to the nature of mankind,
began to assert that this delusion was a judgment
which heaven had prepared against their enemies.
The faints of Boston now humbled themselves in
the dufl; and, willing to remove the charge from
themselves to the evil principle, appointed age,
neral fast; and prayed " That God would pardon
" the errors of his people, in a late tragedy occa.

sioned by Satan and his instruments."
How much soever of the politics of the Puri.
tans are till maintained among the colonists, their
religious zeal has certainly declined since this ex-
traordinary paroxifm: this remedy, "which fqueez-

ed from the very heart, was the befl remedy
" for filch as were tainted with it's poison." The
evil brought it's cure with it; and, mad as the
people in North-America may be for war, we have
recent inflances of their paving little regard to the
Puritanical principles of their ancient religion.

ConneEticut and Rhode-Ifland are two eharter-
governments, and, together with- the colony of
Maffachufet's-Bay, are united in one common
league, and t)yled, The Four New-England Pro-
vinces; of which Boiton was generally reckoned
the capital. This city is situated on a peninsula
at the bottom of a fine harbour, and is to be en-
tered only by one safe palfage. There is. a noble

pier

pier 2ooo feet in length; also a town-house and a
commodious exchange; round which are a number
of bookseller's {hops. In the town are ten
churches; and in 1779 was supposed to contain
near 2o,ooo inhabitants.

In the year 1684, the charter of Maflachufet's.

Bay being fubje&ed to a few warrants, as were
many others of the American governments, in
the reign of king James II. and judgment pasing
by default in the courts of justice, they were for.
feited, while some appearing to. submit to the king
preserved their charters intire, merely by not en.
tering into the contest. However, the govern.
mepts of Maffachufet's-Bay and of New-York
obtained such charters as were in force at the com-
mencement of the present American war.

On the 7th of QOober 1761, a charter was ex.

pedited to New-England; which, after reciting all
former grants, continued in the following manner:

"Whereas, the governor and company of

Maffachufet's-Bay in New-England are become
very populous and well fettled, and whereas the
former charter was vacated by a judgment in
chancery in Trinity-term, in the year 1684, the
agents of that colony have petitioned to be re-in-
corporated by anew charter. And also to the end
that our colony of New-Plymouth may be brought
under such a form of government, as may put
them in a better condition of defence; we do
therefore, by there presents, incorporate into one
real province, by the name of the Province of
Maffachuffets-Bay in New-England ; viz. the
former colony of Maffachulet's-Bay, the pro.
vince of Main, the territory of Acadia or Nova.
Scotia, and the traft lying between Nova-Scotia
and theprjvince of Main, the north half of the

iiles

isles Shoals, the isles of Capawock and Nantucket,
sear Cape Cod, and all islands within ten leagues
opposite to the main land within the said bounds,
[saving the claims of particular persons, whose
names are mentioned, confirming former grants].-
The governor, lieutenant-governor, and secretary,7
to be in the king's nomination. Twenty-eight
counsellors, whereof seven at leaf Ihall make a
board. A general court or assembly to be con.
vened the lalt Wednesday in May yearly; con-
silting of the governor, council, and reprefenta-
tives of the towns or places, not exceeding two
forone place. Qualification for an eleEor forty
ihillings freehold, or s50o personal estate. The
general assembly to ele. twenty-eight counsel-
lors; eighteen of them from the old colony of
Maffachufet's-Bay, four from Plymouth colony,
three from the province of Main, one for the ter.
ritory of Sagadaliock, and two at large. The go-
vernor, with consent of the council, to appoint
the officers in the courts of justice. All born in
the province, or in the passage to and from it, to
bedeemed natural.born fubjeas of England. Li.
berty of conscience to all Chriltians except Papifis.
The general assembly to conltitute judicatories for
allcaufes, criminal or civil, capital or not'capital.
Probate of wills, and granting of adminilfrations,
to be in the governor and council. In personal
afions, exceeding the value of f 300 flerling, an
appeal lies to the king and council, if such appeal
be made within fourteen days after judgment; but
execution is not to be flayed. The general assembly
tomake laws, if not repugnant to those of Eng.
land; to appoint all civil officers, except the offi.
cers of the courts of justice; to impose taxes, to
be disposed of by the governor and council. The

c.onverfioa

conversion of the Indians to be endeavoured. The
governor to have a negative in all ads and elec.
tions. All ats of assembly to be sent home by
the first opportunity, to the king in council, for
approbation; if not disallowed in three years after
their being presented, to continue in force until
repealed by the assembly. The general assembly
may grant any lands in the Maffachufet's-Bay and
Plymouth colonies, and in the province of Main;
but no grant of lands from Sagadahock river to
St. Laurence's river shall be valid without the
royal approbation. The governor to command
the militia to use the law-martial in timeof adual
war; and to-erea forts, and demolish the fame at
pleasure. No persons to be transported out of the
province without their own consent, or that of the
general assembly. The law-martial not tobe exe
cuted without the content of the council. When
there is no governor, the lieutenant-governor is to
a&; when both are wanting, the majority of the
council to have the power. The adiniralty.jurif
diaion is reserved to the king or lords of the ad.
miralty. No subjea of England to be debarred
from fishing on the sea-coast, or salt-water creeks;
and they may erea lodges and flages in any lands
not in poffefion of particular proprietors. All
trees fit for masts of twenty-four inches diameter
and upwards, twelve inches from the ground grow.
ing upon land not heretofore granted to any pri.
vate person, are reserved for the ulfe of the king
The penalty for cutting any such reserved tree
is ltoo for each tree." Such was the charterof
MaIfachufet's.Bay. The province of New-York
had one, which was indeed perfeElly exclusive;
but, not being fatisficdwith this, they demanded and
obtained a royal grant to the folloyinj purport :.

* They

s They are to be incorporated by the name of

mayor and aldermen of New-York. The city to
be divided into seven wards. The corporation to
consist of a mayor, a recorder, and seven alder-
men, seven afliftants, one sheriss, one coroner, one
common clerk, one chamberlain or measurer, one
high conflable, seven alfeffors, seven collecors,
sixteen confables, and one marshal. The gover-
nor yearly to appoint the mayor, sheriss, and co.
roner; and the freeholders and freemen in their
refpeaive wards to chufe the other officers, ex.
cept the chamberlain, who is to be appointed in
council by the mayor, four or more aldermen, and
four or more assistants. The mayor to appoint the
high constable. All the officers to take the proper
oaths, and to continue in office till others have
been chosen in their room. When any officer
dies, the ward is to chufe one: upon refusal to
serve in office, the common-council may impose
a fine, not exceeding fifteen pounds, for the use
of the corporation. The mayor, or recorder,
and tour or more aldermen, with four or more
assistants, to be a common-council; to make bye-
laws to regulate the freemen, to lease lands and
tenements, &c. and to do nothing inconsistent
with the laws of Great-Britain, or of this pro-
vince. Such laws and orders not to continue in
force mnore than twelve months, unless confirmed
by the governor and council. They may punish
by disfranchising, or fines for the use of the cor-
poration. The common-council shall decide in
any controverted eleEtions of officers. The com-
mon.council may be called by the mayor, or, in
his absence, by the recorder; the fine of a member
for non-attendance, not exceedingtwenty shillings,
for the use of the corporation. The corporation

may

may eflablifli as many fines as they think fit; and
may let the fame. A market to be holden at five
or more different places on every day except Sun.
days,- to fix the assize of bread, wine, &c. The
mayor, with four or more aldermen, may make
freemen, the fees not to exceed five pounds.
-None but freemen {hall retale goods, or exercise
any trade, under the penalty of five pounds:
aliens to be made free. The magiflrates are to
commit common vagabonds, to eret work-houses,
prisons, arid alms-houses. The mayor is to ap.
point the clerk of the market and the water.
bailiff; to license carmen, porters, criers, and the
like; also to grant licenses to tavern.keepers, and
retailers of firong 4rink, for one year, not exceed.
ing thirteen Shillings per license: felling without
Jicenfe, five pounds current money, tories quoties.
The mayor, deputy-mayor, recorder, and alder.
men, for the time being, to be juflices of the
peace. The mayor, deputy-mayor, and recorder,
or any of them, with three or more of the alder.
men, (hall hold quarter-feffions, not to fit more
than four days. Moreover, the recorder and
'aldermen to be named in all commissions of oyer
and terminer, and of gaol-delivery. The mayor,
deputy-mayor, recorder, or any one of them,
with three or more of the aldermen, may, and
shall, hold every Tuesday a court of record, to
try all divers cafes, real, perfonal/or mixed, within
the city and county; and the mayor's court may
·adjourn to any time, not exceeding twenty-eight
.days. The. corporation to have a common clerk,
who ihall be also clerk of the court of record and
sessions of the peace; to be appointed. during his
good behaviour by the governor. Eight attor,
neys in the beginning; but, as they drop, only

fiN

si to be allowed during their good behaviour, for
the mayor's court; which court is to have the direc.
tion and cognizance ds the'ittornieys; who, upon a
vacancy, ihall recommend one to the governor
for his approbation. The mayor, recorder, or
any alderman, may, with or without a jury, de.
termine in cafes not exceeding forty shillings.
No freeman inhabitant fllall be obliged to serve in
offices out of the city. A grant and confirmation
to all the inhabitants of their hereditaments, &c.
paying the quit-rent reserved by their grants.
The corporation may purchase and hold heredita-
ments, &c. so as the clear yearly value exceed
not three thousand pounds sterling, and the fame
to be disposed of at pleasure. To pay a quit-reit
of thirty hillings proclamation-money a year,
besides the beaver-flin, and five thillings current
money in former charters required. No aftion to
be allowed against the corporation for any matter
or cause whatsoever prior to this charter."

The French were not backward in pushing their
interests in North-America. They had projected,
and by degrees conftruted, a chain of forts, which
at once over-awed the Indians, and confined the
English colonists. Some of these forts were
eredted at all hazards; some in their own terri-
tories, but more by the deceptions which they
praaifed upon the simple natives. Sir William
Phipps opposed them, and even besieged Quebec;
but his measures were so ill taken, that the attempt
was intirely defeated.

CHAP.

# CHAP. III.

C H A P. III.
New-York-New.Jerfiy-Canada-- Dtiputes of

the French and Eng-ch-Capture of ihe Alcide
and Lys-Rupture between the two Nations.

HOUGH different nations had fettled on the

T continent of North-America, yet the interest
of the English generally rose superior to that of
any other colonizing people in Europe.

The Dutch, indeed, had made a settlement

at New-York, and they promised themselves
much from this settlement; but they were difpof.
sessed by the Englifih in the year £664, and Cub.
initted to the Englifl government.

New-York, which the Hollanders called New.

Amrnferdam, seens to be an illand, but is con.
neEed with the continent, by that important
post called Kingfbridge: it has, betides, many
dependencies, among which the city of Albany,
Long-Ifland, and Staten-Ifland, are to be con.
fidered. This soon became a flourifhi'g colony,
and what is called a crown government.

The city of New-York is well situated for

trade, and, before the present troubles, was sup.
posed to contain about two thousand houses, the
inhabitants of the province amounting to near
1ooooo persons. Hudson's river, on which it
is situate, is navigable for upwards of 150 miles.
It was formerly called New-Amfierdam, but de.
rived it's former name by it's having been
granted to James, Duke of York, by his brother
King Charles the second. Albany lies in the
northern part of this province, about 150 miles

from

fromY6rk-Iflai. ?! The 1so of N'ew-Yo r1 is ex.'
tremely' fertile - it's trade :con[fits:' i'n wheat,
Ikins, furs, poil of thales and fea-.ctves, irton,
and copper. It is' nnofily carried on by water,
on account of the convenience of Hudf6n's
river, which is navigable as f.ar as Albany. ;'

New.Jerfey comes next under our confidera-
tion; Perth-Amboy is the principal town 'of
Eaft.-erfey; Bridlington is the provincial town
(f Weft-Jerfey; Elizabeth-Town, however, is the
most ancient of all: in the province. The inha.
hitants of New-Jerfey carried on a great 'trader-
in corn, flax, and hemp, and had once become
a flourishing colony before the present troubles
commenced. This province, though first fettled
by the Swedes, was afterwards planted'by the
Dutch, and consequently under the fame govern-
ment as New-York, and with that province also
reverted to the Englilh; it was divided into East
and Weft-Jerfey. This government was long
divided by factions, at.the fame time that king-
James's iJl-condut had thrown all things into
confusion athome; but, at'the revolution, the
affairs of' this colony began to wear a more pro.-
mifing afpe6. -

New-Jerfey is bounded on- the south-east by:
Delaware-Bay, and on the south and the weft by
that river; on the north by New-York, and un.
known counties; and on the east by the Atlantic
ocean. It' lies between 35° 41' and 39° 0to
of north latitude. It's length is aboutl 140 miles,
it's greatest breadth about 8o. Weft-Jerfey was
intended, by Dr. Cox, to have been laid out in
seven counties.! It has a communication by
means of the river A3Efopus with New-York;
with Maryland by another river, which comes

*- D within

iUhi; furHrtnijo. .f Ce g aks ay- It's: pro

vimci4,. twn; i. *rWidingon, iThfr.¢. Were five
corpqraoti;- witb <ourtst irin the province of
New,.Jerfy i bqt only ? PcrthiAboy, and Brid.
lington, sets eprefetatives to the general-

It -may b. proper to obfe.ve here, that the

road fro N .w-Yo¥k. to Philadelphia. pafles
throogth the Jerkeys.; is fromi Ne.w.York to
Elizabeth-To/Mn,i 17 wiles.; from thence to
Trent-Town (or TrentonQ) 30 miles; cdoffing
the river, you proceed to Phila4elphia, the dif.
tance of which.city from: New-York is com-
puted to be 1o4 miles.

Having thus diafcriIed New-England and it's

dependencies, as well as the foufthrn colonies,
the principal feat of the American war, we shall
now come to speak of Canada, formerly in
possession of the French, but ceded to. Great.
Britain by the treaty of Paris, in the year
1.763;

This extensive country was doubtless first ditf

coMered by Gabot, already mentioned; in behalf
of the lcnglifh; but being n.egleEted by. them,
the French afterwards fettled in it: so early as
the year 1:5o8, one Aubert, of Dieppe, had made
a. voyage-to: Canada, and had brought over some
of the natives from thence to his own country.

An expeditiorn to this, part of America was

undertaker ii the 'reign. of Francis I. under the
condt- of Qn .e&sania ,.a FlQrentiue; whd, how-
ever, returimd? tQ Fr.am:e wiutho'U avirg iieff Iced
any thing. H uj-43rteok:.a. second voyge, but
met with . a:ter-ibl tenmpefl in the. coupEo of it;
and embarkirg on aj third, was: never heard of
mpre. HwQ.yeverT,' a settlement -was:made. in Ca-

nada

dada during the reign of the monarch above.
menti6ned, whose valour, wars, and captivity,
are fifficiently recorded in European history.

The new established colony at firfi met with

amazing dificulties, occcafioned by internal dif.
putes and differences with the furrouhding In-
dians.

But in Henry the IVth's time, the marqhis
de ia Roche obtained a patent for colonizing
Canada and all Acadia, what is called Newfound.
land included. He was far from being success.
ful, having made attempts to fettle colonies
where they were not likely to succeed. Chau-
vin next obtained the patent, and he put himself
under the direEtion of one Pontgrave, a mer-
chant of St. Malo's, who, in the charaEter of a
private adventurer, had made several voyages to
the continent of North-America. De Chatte
succeeded to Chauvin; and, at this time, a
squadron was equipped, commanded by M. Pont-
grave, above mentioned, who had full power to
extend his difeoveries up the river St. Laurence.
It was in the year 1603 that the commodore set
fail, having in his company the famous Cham-
plain, afterwards the founder of Quebec. They
proceeded as far as the Falls of St. Louis, and
then returned to France.

After De Chatte, De Monts succeeded; but,

like his predecefflrs, made many unavailing.
attempts refpecing the settlements he wished to
efablilh. In the mean time, Champlain, who.
had more extensive views, after examining Ca-
nada, and all that part of America then called
Acadia, chose at last to fix a colony at Quebec.
Finding the foil favourable for the culture of
corn, he left a number of his countrymen be-

Ds hind

hind him, and returned to France; but in the
year' i6io, he again visited his colony, and
found it in a prosperous situation. A war, how.
ever, taged between the Iroquois and the Al-
gonquins and Hurons; in the course of which,
the two latter nations were likely (as is often the
cafe in these savage conflicls) to be totally ex.
tirpated.-Champlain joining with the weaker
party, made the Englilh his enemies; and fiom
this circumfiance chiefly arose the bloody-dir-
putes so long carried on between the two nations
in that quarter of the world.

Champlain, at firfl, with his allies, gained a

great viAory over the Iroquois, himself killing
two of their chiefs, and wounding a third with
his own hand, The vitors afterwards intending
to torture a captive, .according to the savage cuf-
toms, the French commander prevented them;
but all the favour he could obtain for the wretch
was, that he himself should be permitted to foot
him, after which his dead body was torn and
mangled to pieces by the Indians.

The Englilh and the natives alike obftru6ted

Champlain s views, and he was obliged to fur-
render Quebec, which he had the glory of found-
ing, to the former, who, however, reflored it
with all Acadia to the French, by the treaty of
St. Germain's, in the year 1632.

The Jesuits had, by this time, formed miflions

to Canada, and the Ursuline nuns had eflablifhed
themselves at Quebec. The sufferings of the
fathers, who preached the gospel in thole remote
parts, and the charity of the fillers, may well de-
serve the praise and admiration of persons of all re-
ligions. FatherHennepin and father Le Moyne
were deservedly refpe6ted by all the French in

North-

North-America. In the year 1659, a French biflhop
was sent to reside in Canada; which, at that time,
was visited by most extraordinary appearances
of fiery meteors, tempets, earthquakes, such
as never before had been seen or felt, threatening
to overturn that part of ihe new world. Philo-
fophers ascribed these matters to natural causes;
but the religious took occasion to preach to the
inhabitants lessons of piety and morality; and
these were not without their effect. The ideas
of a particular providence and judgment, which
they inculcated, though apparently contrary to
reason, were really serviceable, as 'hey persuaded-
many to turn from their evil ways; and thus
promoted the good of the community upon this
occasion.

To Champlain succeeded many governors,

who still found the colony embroiled. At length
count Frontenac took upon him the government
of Quebec, and promised to retrieve the affairs
of France in Canada.

But this chief was of a haughty and fufpiclous

temper, and, according to the New-England his
torians, aimed at the utter extinaion of the
colony of Mafachufet's-Bay and it's dependen-
cies. But these were views which he could not
accornplih; the Iroquoi-s, 'vho were of tlhe Eng-
li(h party, were perpetually at war with the
Hurons, Algonquins, and Outawas, while the Ag-
niers and Onondagans were often neuter, some-
tines espousing one party, and sometimes the
other; while the count was desperately, though
perhaps not very judicioiufy, oppressed by Dun.
gan, then governor of New-England, who dif-
poffefned the French of their settlement at Hud-
fon's-Bay.

D3 Yet,

Yet, at this time, Garakonthie, an Indian

*hief, who became a convert to the Catholic re.
ligion, prevailed on the neighbouring ravages to
break off some treaties which they had-begun
with the people of New-York. A fort was built
at Niagara, and the Tfaononthouans, enemies to
the Canadian intereit, were every where dif.
perfed or defeated.

The expedition afterwards undertaken by Phipps
against Quebec, of which we have already given
the reader some idea, at first greatly alarmed the
inhabitants of Canada. Sir Williamn having re.
duced some inferior places, resolved that his
forces should appear before this capital. The
following is an account of the event of this ill-
concerted expedition:

*. The English fleet, confifing of 34 fail, and

having 30oo land forces on board, coming to an
anchor bout ten in the morning, the comman.
der sent a long-boat ashore with a trumpet, hav-
ing been informed that the garrison was not
capable of making any refinance; and he was
even so confident of success, that he scrupled
not to assert, he should that night sleep in the
governor of Quebec's palace."

When Frontenac heard of the embafly, he

sent a Frenchman to meet.the trumpet, who, first
blindfolding him, led him round the fortifica-
tions, where his ears convinced him, even with-
out the use of his eyes, that the French were
well provided. After this, being brought to the
great hall, he there saw a numerous and refpec-
table assembly, headed by the governor, and trem-
bled when he delivered the summons, which
was couched in terms whici raised such indigna-
tion among the French, that they cried out,

;i,~~ 'i, TlThe

,, The perron wli had aclrffed 'hem oiht ib
-' be treated as a pirare, aid a etl1 against his
,* own sovereign," (kitig Jatri- 11. IL hb had, be..
fore this time, abdicated she throne). Fronte..
nac said, " He' would ahtwer 'the fuirnmons
" by his cannon;" iand caused tht trumpet :to be
conducted back to the fhofe in safety, but pre-
pared for his defence'with eoolnefs and intre-
pidity.

The boats, sent by the Efglihf tiade good

their landitg, but loft 150 men, and retreaied
before an inconsiderable nuiiber of French and
Canadians.

The place was afterwards tairioriaded; but

the fire from the batteries of Quebec proved
too hot for the assailants, who drew off, the fol.
diers being impatient for a close enigagement.
Being therefore drawn out in battle array, they
marched towards the towi;, and were met by
M. S. Helene, a Canadian, who repulsed thei,
but was mortally wounded in the fight; while
Frontenac, coriing up with a fresh reinfoirc-
rment, obtained the honout of the vif!ory.-

Yet the beciegers were unwilling tofgive oveti

their en'terprize : having received iome pieces ds
ordnance from the fleet, they renewed their at-
tempt, and, endeavouring to make a; breach,
laid several ambulcades, into which some of the
enemy fell; nevertheless, the latter hav inhg found
means to unite all their parties, fell upon the
Ehglifh with fuich fury, that,. after a (hort resist-
ance, they were obliged to tetire, leaviig their
artillery and. ammunition behind them.. At the
fame time, a, body of provintial troops, being
ent to besiege Montreal; together with fonre fa-
vages, thle small-pox breaking out among the

D 4 colonists,

coQonifls, communicated itself ,to the Indians,
among. whom it generally proves fatal; and this
diitemper, by the dreadful havock which it now
made, intirely defeated the intended expedition.

The tidings of this difafler, joined to the mif-

fortunes which have been here related, occa:
sioned Sir William to relinquifi the objedt of his
expedition. He railed the siege of Quebec (if
it might be called a siege) in the molt shameful
manner, and retreated with precipitation, hav-
ing loft numbers of men, and nine hfips, in this
inauspicious undertaking.

The city and province were thus delivered

from the evils which immediately threatened them;
but the Indian war still continued with the usual
cruelties on all fides, and Canada w.as invaded
by. the savages. Another- expedition againlf
Montreal was projeced by the English, but meeting
with several disappointments, they were obliged
to abandon the thoughts of it for the present:
yet he still continued. his designs, encouraged
the Indians, fitted out their armaments, and
though by no means equal to the enterprizes he
undertook, kept New-France, which was then
but in a weak condition, in perpetual alarm.
The count, however, rebuilt fort Coturaway,
which had been ruined in the course of. the war;
and after Phipps's death, continued his hoflilities
against the Iroquois: but these were a people
.not to be thoroughly vanquished without being
intirely extirpated. He had a just sense of the
.interest of the colonists; but he was not always
permitted to proceed as he thought proper, and
when he dared to transgress his orders, he was
generally right. His opinion, delivered under a

critical

^ '
»~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~U

critical situation, may serve as a specimen of his
political knowledge.

,' I was pressed (said he) to attack Onondago

with all our troops, our inhabitants, and allies;
but I did not think it was proper. In the firt'
place, I really thought I had not a force fufi-
cient; and had I followed this counsel, I should-
have left this province open to the English in,-
roads; while the undertaking, which was merely
ridiculous, would only have ended in the burn-
ing a few huts, as the savages, if they were not
alfilled by the English, would certainly have
escaped into the woods. We have had experi.
ence from expeditions against the Ifnonmon-
thonans, that the burning of one or two villages
cannot secure us from incursions. The only way
to humble the Indians, is, by continuing to
alarm and harrafs them with small parties, so
that they dare not fir abroad, which we shall be
enabled to do by the establishment of fort Fron-
tenac (Caracouy). If the king shall think pro-
per to make an attack upon Pemaquid next year,
it will give great encouragement to our friendly
Indians. It is even to be wished that the ex-
pedition might be extended to the bombardment
of Boston and New-York, which I think not at
all impracicable, ard which, by one blow,
would finish the war in that country."

Such being the views of Frontenac, he wanted

not fpitit toprofecute them; but the rerniffnefs of
the French court, his own haughtiness, and the re.
fraslory disposition of the Indians, prevented him
from subduing the whole North-American empire.

A plan indeed was laid to drive the English out
of Newfoundland, as also to attack Boston, as
Froltcrac had mentioned; and to deltroy all the

D 5 Britilh

Briti(h settlements from thence to Pifcataqtar.
The governor was empowered to substitute Vau.
4reuil in his place, and the latter in this cafe was
to be fibjeEt t Nefmond, who had tbl command
of -tet.'flipsaffigned him; but if Fron ienac corn
matided in person, he was to be independent.

It was towards the latter end of July that Nef.

m6nd arrived at Placentia; a council of war being
then called to determine, Whether it was proper
to attack Bolton ? the question was carried in the
negative. St. John's was then attacked; but the
enemy miffed of taking thirty-four {hips there,
which they thought of furprif'ng and returned
disappointed to their own country. St. John'S
was afterwards taken; but the conquest proved of
little consequence to the captors.

Thus the war proceeded in America with va.

Zious success, till Frontenac was succeeded by
Callieres, who still kept up the animosity with
the Engliih and the Iroquois, who were not at
all backward in harraffing and difireffing the
French colonists; who, politic and insinuating as
they were, yet were not capable either of extir.
pating these savages, or bringing them over to
their interefis; neither could they always manage
their own Indian allies, who had by this time
united the European vices (especially that of
drunkenness) with their own barbarous manners;
and thus formed the mofl monfirous compound
that ever existed in human nature ! Fickle in their
tempers, their friends could seldom depend upo:
them;-and the cruel manner in which both parties
carried on their wars was of such a nature, as
seemed to indicate, that they rather fought tl:e
total extirpation of their enemies, than the ac-
quifition of any advantages that might be reape

fro m

From viaory. They massacred individuals whea:
they could surprise them; they- burned and de-
flroyed whole difri&s, and generally put their
prisoners 4of.:war to death by the molt cruel tor-
tures. As'a specimen at once of their barbarity
and caprice, we shall present our readers with
the following narration, extracted from undoubted
authority

" A certain Iroquois chief being taken pri.
soner, it was decreed by an assembly of the ancient
HuIrons, before whom he was brought, that he
fhQuld be presented to one of their chiefs, to re-
place the nephew of the latter, who had been
killed iq war (a whimsical custom of theirs), or
to be otherwise disposed of as he {hall think pro.
per. This being determined, he was crowned
with a fort of diadem, and surrounded by a troop
of warriors. At this time, one Brebcetf, a Jesuit,
undertook to make a proselyte of him; he fu-.
ceeded, and the new convert was chrifiened by
the name of.Jpfeph. Thus far all weht well-;
the captive was honourably treated,.and had a Huc-
ron woman assigned him for a wife.

" But while he remained with Brebceuf, it was
perceived, that, previous to the determination of
the Sachems, or elders, he had been tortured.
One of his hands had been crushed between two
flints, and was .deprived of a finger; his other
hand had loft two by the flroke of a hatchet; thie
joints of his arms had, likewise been burnt, and
a great gash appeared on one of them; those pores.
became putrid- and. full of worms, which much,
increased his misery: yet in this situation he was
carried from.viage to village

to lage, and was, often

obliged to sing till his voice entirely failed bim.. At
las, being brought before his supposed uncle, the

D. 6 Huron

Huron thus addressed him: " You cannot conceive,
* nephew;thejoy I felt when I understood that you
' were to supply the place of him whom l have loft.
1 I had already prepared a mat for you in my own
' cabin, and had, with the utmost fatisfation, re-
': solved to pals the remainder of my days with you

in peace; but the condition which I fee you are
in forces me to alter my resolution. It is plain,

" that the tortures you susser must render your life
" unsupportable to yourself, and you must think
-" that I do you a service in Ihortening it: but they
"s who have thus mangled you have caused your
' death. Take courage, therefore, my dear ne-
*' phew; prepare yourself this evening to shew
" that you are a man, and that you are superior to
' the force of torments." The Iroquois chief
heard this discourse with indifference; and only
answered that it was very well. The siser of the
deceased then brought him viatuals, and molt as.
feaionately carefled him; while the Huron, who
.was -tdhave adopted him for a nephew, put his
own pipe in his mouth, and wiped the sweat from
his brow, with all the tenderness of parental love,

The farewell-feaf was made by the captive about

noon,at the expeice of hisfuppofed uncle; then re
addressed the assembled gucf s tothis purpose: " Bre-
' thren, I am about todie; divert yourselves boldly
"' round me. Be convinced that I am a man, and
,l neither fear death nor any torments that you can
v infliEt." He then fling a song; and when the feast
was over, he was conveyed to the cabin of headh,
or-place of execution: then the young men who
-were to be ators in this tragedy, were exhorted
by the elders to behave well; meaning to put their
viaim to the most excruciating torture. The
-prisoner- being feated on a mat, atfirft arose from
,. . it,

a

it, danced, and fang his death song; after which
he replaced himself on the inat, his hands being
tied behind him. One of the elders then took off
his robe,- naming the chief who was 'to have it;
at the fame time observing, that the people of
such a village was to cut off his head, which, to-
gether with an arm, was to be given to another
village; all which he heard calmly, attending to
the Christian exhortations of father Breheuf, and
talking of the affairs of the country as if he had
been perfeAly at ease, though eleven fires were
lighted to torment him. It was declared necessary
that his tortures ihould last till sun-rise; and then,
left he Ihould expire without a stroke infliaed by
iron, he had a foot and a hand, as well as his head,
cat off, and his body was thrown into a cauldron."

Yet with savages like these have rome of the

Europeans lived by choice. We have accounts
of Tome Englishmen who fled to the Iroquois;
and many French captives, being adopted or natu-
ralized by the Nortti-American natives, refuted to
leave theni, though presTed with the most earnefl
solicitations. This, however, only serves to prove
the depravity of tafle, and even of nature, in cer-
tain individuals: for though it is allowed that re-
finemeilt has it's vices and inconveniences,' yet
the former are generally more monstrous, and the
latter harder to be endured, in a slate of iavage
nalure; for though we might be content with the
life of a ruflic, f:tch as we fee it in Europe,
yet- is' it a small matter for a man to be exposed
every. day to war, disease, and falnirte; either
to have no habitations, or none that are secure;
not to know, it the hunting-feafon fhoutl fair,
where to get a ftibfiterice; and to have no afiu-
rance of safety for those that are molt dear to us?'

If

If these things are of any consequence, then sense
and reason must recoil at the very thought of
leading a life like that of the natives of North..
America, whose conversion to 'Chriflianity did.
not divest them of their brutal: and savage ferocity.
The Jesuits, who seemed most afliduous in the
work, attended more to the ceremonial than the
moral law. Even the English pastors dealt in:
myfleries more than in morals;. and they fuc-
ceeded accordingly.

But, to return to our hiftory.-Though before

this time the peace of Ryswick hadbeen concluded,
hoflilities had scarcely ceased in America ; it was
no wonder therefore if they rekindled with fresh
ardour when war was renewed in Europe. The
Indian nations in Frontenac's time had made a
fort of general fubmiflion to king William III.
and, in the year 17 o1,, five of the chiefs of the
friendly Indians were sent over to England; where
they addrefTed queen Anne (whose minifiry had:
planned the conquest of Quebec), in. the follow-
ing manner:.

" GREAT QUEEN,
" ' tE have accomplished a long voyage,

which none of our predecessors could

be prevailed upon to undertake, in order. to fee
our great queen, and to relate to her those things
which we thought for her good, and for the good
of us her allies on the other fide. of the great
water. \We doubt: not but that our great queen
has been acquainted with. our long and tedious
war, in conjuntion with her children, againhl
her enemies the French; and that we have been
as a strong wall for their security, even w.ith the

loss

loss of our beRl men. Ve were greatly rejoiced(:
when we heard that our great queen designed to
reduce Canada; and immediately, in token of
friendship, we hung up the kettle, and took up
the hatchet, and with one consent assisted colonel
Nicholson in making preparations on this fide the
lake: but, at length, we were told that our queen
was prevented, by some important affairs, from
engaging in that design at prelent, which made
us sorrowful; apprehending that the French, who
had hitherto dreaded us, might now think us
unable to make war upon them. The reduAtion
of Canada is of great consequence to our free
hunting; so if our great queen should not be
mindful of us, we mist with our families forsake
the country, or stand neuter; either of which will
be against our inclinations. In token of the since-
rity of these nations, we do, in their names, pre-
sent our great queen with there belts of Wampunm;
and, in hopes of our great queen's favour, leave
it to her molt gracious consideration."

It has been thought proper to inrert this speech

at full length, both in order to give the reader arn
idea of the Indian manner of addrefling an Euro.
pean sovereign, and because it might be supposed
to lead to that expedition against Canada, of
which we are about to speak.

As the first intended expedition had given

cause of difgufl both at home and on the other
fide of the Atlantic, every body expeAted that.
this succeeding one would have been planned.
and executed with such wifdorn and valour, as.
that there could remain little fear of a mifcar-
riae; especially as it was supposed that matters

had

had been previously concerted, both in England
anrd Anierica.

A very refpeEtable armament' set fail from

Plymouth in May, andd arrived at Boflon on the
4th of June 1711. But it appeared that the de-
sign had been kept so much a secret, that the
New-England men in these parts were by no
means prepared to receive them; nay, they at
firlt fuippofed the fleetto belong to the enemy.
in consequence of this, provisions were not in
readiness; and therefore the men were landed on
Noddle-Ifland, near Boston, till these could be
procured, and a force, which they demanded,
raised to join them: a delay which certainly- was
very detrimental to the expedition.

However, on the goth of July, the fleet failed

again, having taken on- board two regiments of
New-York and New-England men. The whole
naval force confifed of twelve men of war and
fix ftove-fhips, besides fire-fhips, bomb-ketches,
lenders, and transports; and provided with a fire
train of artillery.

Arriving at Gafpe-Bay, in their way to Quebec,

as the wind blew hard from the noith-welt, they
anchored, fearing that the transports ihould be
driven to leeward. Having burned aFrench fish-
'ing-vefel here, they held on their course; but
the succeeding days proving foggy, and the wind
.shifting to the north-east, the fleet was focn pier
reived to be in danger. The vessels were then:
brought to, with their heads to the southward;
but, notwithstanding this precaution, they loft
eight tranfporls, which had about goafoldiers and
seamen on board and it was with difficulty that
the men of war escaped deflruntion After ho.
vering some days upon the coast, two councils of

war

war being called&, it'Wasat'length- determined, asl
supplies were likely to fail them, :to Teturn home:
and accordingly they set fail for -England,' nothing
having -been: effecte-d; and- they- arrived in -the
month of O&tober. ; '

Some violent Whigs in a succeeding reigh werie,

or pretended to be, of opinion, that'there was '
double design in this expedition, and that the mi-
nifiry really never intended; that it mfould fuc-
ceed; and they even made it one of the articles
of impeachment against the earl of Oxford; yet
all sensible per ons thought otherwise; and Sir
Horenden \Valker, Who commanded, gave evi.
dent proofs that he was not privy to any such ini.
tentions. He used to fay that it was indeed un'-
fortunate, but that it would have been much more
so if the fleet had advanced up the river St. Lau-
rence, according to their deflination, " Our
men's provisions would then (said he) have failed
us, and been reduced to eight or nine, perhaps
to fix weeks' allowance; no relief could possibly
have been expe&ed in less than ten months: the
Fevertham, and three other flore-hips, laden
with the provisions. deigned for their supply,
being cast away in the pafflge.;. so that if
we had escaped shipwreck (which would hawe
'been a very great chance), near twelve thousand
men must have periihed with hunger, and the
Ihips would have become the prey of the return-
ing enemy. On the other hand, had our adver.
saries held out till we had expended all our pro-.
visions, we must have laid down our arms, and
have surrendered atdifcretion, to avoid death in
it's mofi frightful (hape-that of famine.: or even
if they had taken the place either by form or
capitulation, the remaining provisions of a small

garrison

garifon would not have gone, far towards. fibfift.
Ing so large a numnber; non could they at that
leafon of the year have marched through the
.ountry;ia-fearchof more; and the cafe would
have been similar, had they afterwards attempted
Placentia." The governor also apologized, for the
- colonifis,. in a speech which had some propriety

in it; as there was no ground to charge the
Americans with the failure of this expedition,
who believed the government to be in earnest, as
they themselves were through the whole of the
undertaking; which, partly fiom mifnianagement,
and partly from accidents which no human fore.
fight could be armed against, had thus unexpec.
tedly miscarried.

Port-Royal had however been taken from the

French, and the name of it changed to Annapolis.
Royal, in compliment to the queen of England.

In the year 1712, the merchants of Quebec

raired no less a um of money than 5o,ooo crowns,
to be applied towards completing the fortifications
of that capital. The Iroquois, perceiving the
miscarriages of the Engliih, now' made their sub.
miflion to the French. But the Outagam having
ereted a fort near that of the French, called
Detroit, being attacked, most resolutely defended
it; but were at laftobliged to quit it in.the night:
they were afterwards pursued; and the intrench-
ments they had made being forced by the enemy,
they- were obliged to surrender at discretion to the
arms of Du Buiffon, who commanded at Detroit,

The Englilh at this time observing the Abena,

quais spread t~lnfelves over the province of
New-England, used all pofible means to bring
them over; but they failed in this on account Of
their attachment to the mtiffonary. that had been

sent

sent among them. They were, however per.
mitted to proceed and ere& flore-houfes; and a
free-fchool was ereEted for inltrutitng their youth.
But after all this, the settlers told thefe.favages,
that, by the late treaty of Utrecht, their whole
country had been ceded to England. The latter
complained to Vaudreuil, who, asseting to treat
them as independent, -told them that no mention
had been made either of them or their lands, in
the treaty in question. In the mean time, Rasse,
the French Jesuit, was particularly busy in flir-
ing up his proselytes among the Abenaquais
againf the English, who demanded that he
might be sent back to France; but this was re-
fused: they then endeavoured to seize his per-
son, but failed in the attempt. This.fo far en.
couraged the Abenaquais, that they sent deputies
to several other Indian nations to meet them at
Narrantfonak, and immediately after began to
demolish the nearest settlements of the Englifb.
But the latter, in return, broke into Narrantfo,
nak, shot the French miffionar), burned all the
cabins, and plundered the church, as well as all
the inhabitants of that ditridt, who durst oppose
them; molt of the Indians fled, and thus peace
was once more restored to the settlers.

Notwitlhtanding the deleat of the Outagamis,
these people joining with the Siorx, had again
the courage to break with the French, which f
exasperated Vaudreuil, that he threatened totally
to extirpate them, and seemed resolved, at lea f, to
drive them out of Canada. . These savages being
much alarmed at hearing this, f'eltered them-
selves, to the number of 30oo, me.a and women,
in a pa!lifaded fortification, which Louvigny,
who had been sent againti them, formally at-.

tacked,.

tacked, bringing up two field-pieces and a mtor.
tar. After some messages having passed between
the parties, the Outagamis offered to capitulate,
just as the French commander was aboutto spring
a mine; their proposals were reje6ted: but
others, more favourable to their besiegers, being
produced and agreed to, a treaty was concluded,
and the Indians bound themselves to fend fix
hostages to Montreal, for the performance of the
tfipulated articles. It is said, that this treaty be.
ing ingroffed, contained an entire surrender of
this country to the French government, a cir-
cumftance of which it is probable the unlettered
savages were ignorant.
! Three of the hostages died of the small-pox;
as also Pemouffa, the chief of the Outagamis,
before the treaty was ratified at Montreal. To
bring about this event, Louvigny travelled over
the ice with one of the surviving hoflages, who
bearing testimony of the good usage which he
and the reft had received, the Outagamis gave
many tokens of gratitude; but said, they could
*ot wait on their father Ononthio (so they called
the French governor) till the next year, when
they certainly would come, and in the rneanf
time had resolved upon a peace, which was to
continue as long as the fun and moon should en.
dure. But the hoflage being suffered to return
to his people, in order, as he said, to remind
them of their promise; he was never heard of
more, and no deputation from the Indians ever
arrived. These afterwards, as an apology for
their breach of treaty, declared it was their
qpinion, that ~a enemy, who was provoked be-
yond a certain degree, could never be Inade a
friend again. They were afterwards defeated in

several

several encounters; yet they succeeded in fore
cing the Illinois to abandon their settlements on
the river, where they themselves afterwards
formed a plantation.

Vaudreuil dying in 1745, his death proved a

great loss to the French colony. In the year
1746, the incroachments made upon the British
settlements occasioned the king of England to
require all his fubjeat, in those parts, to eflab-
lilh magazines, and also to raise forces, which
were to be joined by a powerful armament from
the mother-country, in order to reduce Canada,
that favourite objet which had twice before
miscarried, as has been already noticed. As the ;'
yellow fever was then rife at Albany, the place, -
of rendezvous was fixed at Saratoga, since lo far--
mous for the convention of general Burgoyne.
For this service Maffachufet's-Bay ra ied 20 com-
panies, Conneticut o1, Rhode-ifland three, and
New-Hampfhire two, which force being united,
was to attack the capital of Canada, under the
cominand of general Sinclair, while brigadier-
general Gooch, the governor of Virginia, who
commanded the bodies railed by New-York and
the fouthern-colonies, was to proceed against'
Montreal. Admiral Leslie was likewise to com-
mand the fleet, and the expetations of the pub-
lic were railed to the highest pitch, but were
too soon frustrated; the whole of the mighty
preparations ending in an unsuccessful attempt
upon Port L'OIient, on the coast of France.

The Canadians having received inteligence of
the designs of the English, M. Ramezay, came
to Minas at the head of 1600 men. This body
was intended to at in concert with an arma-
ment then fitting out at Brest, under the condua

of the duke of D'Anvire, who commanded ele.
ven ships of the line, some frigates, transports,
fireifhrps, &c. He was ordered to attack and
dismantle Cape-Breton, which the English had
by this time taken. He was then to proceed to
Annapolis in Acadia; and these projeEts being
effeaed, he was to defiroy Boston; and after
ranging along the coasts of America, he was to
pay a visit to the British islands in the WeftR
Indies. After detaching three large {hips and a
frigate to Hispaniola, with the trade under his
convoy, he arrived at ChebuEto in Nova-Scotia,
his squadron having, in their course, been much
diamaged by a violent tempet. Here this com-
m ander died. In the mean time, Ramezay laid
siege to Annapolis; as had been concerted; but
the Chefler man of war, a frigate, and. a fchoo.
ner, belonging to the Egliifh, lying in the har-
bot,- and the French fleet having gone off, per-
haps, 'because they knew that admiral Townshend
was then lying with a British fleet in the harbour
of Louifbourgh, though he had not offered to
molest them, Ramezay, who had encamped near
Annapolis, returned to Minas; he designed to
winter in the last mentioned place, in order to
he ready to join the fleet expected from Old
France. The English colonists, in tle mean
time, sent reinforcements to the garrison; but
these encaimping in a' loose manner; were nosily
slain by the French, and the reft surrendered on
terms of capitulation.

While these things were passing in America,

the Brest and R-ochfort squadrons. formed a junc-
tibn at Rochelle. They were intended for Canada
and for the Weft-Indies:' thus both the ealtern
and western empire of Britain were at once

threatened.

threatened A: diirumftatc so alarming, occa.
sioned& thse mithiiftry' t eiet therifelvsfs; 'anda
Anson, the:faidous circumnaigatar,; together
with Warren,: were sent out with a powerful
fleet to oppose' them. -

Departing from-Plymouth, -and fleering through
the Bay of Biscay towards Cape Finiterre, in
the month of May, they encountered the ene-
mj, wlhb immediately formed a lirre of battle,
their lhrger fhi ps cotvering the smaller, and the tra rif-
ports thereby meaning t-oefcape;- which Warren
perceivirg, advised Anson to hang ot ttie signal
for a general chace. A conflif ensued, in which,
at lafl, the English proving viatorious, the French'
retreated, having loft fix of their men of war
and all their India ships. When Rhamezayr heard, .T'a:
of this defeat, he abandoned all thoughts of at- ':' -:
tacking any part of Nova-Scotia, and returnec[!
much dejeaed' to Canada. The French, how-'.
ever, had, by this time, ereaed the fortress of
Crown-Point, in .the province of New-York,
which afterwards proved another source of con-
test between the two nations.

The treaty of Aix la Chapelle, which gave
peace to Europe, was not, however, sufficiently
regarded, either by the French or the Englifi, to
prevent frequent bickerings between them in the
wellern worM. In Nova-Scotia especially, and at
the back of the New-York settlements, France was
perpetually fiirring up the savage nations against
her rival; Vwhofe growing powerthe could by no
means endure. The Canadian government pro-
jeEted to build such a chain of forts as might at
once overawe the Indians, and give them an
Opportunity of. making irruptions into the English
settlements. The fame was done in Virginia;

where

jnix) vs tfeit ..l remqnirate wlthfthe French,
biut. , ,no p:.urp.. Thus ev.¢^ western wind
wafted frfe comiplaints to Engla d. The claims
as each nation were disputed at Paris; but, in the
meat,, time, th4;.French proceeded on the other
fle of the Atlantic. A fleet failed from Brest;
another was ordered to fail from England to watch
tie former;. bothRleered for Ameerica, Borcawen,.
w'ith theiBritih force, confifing of twelve {hips,,
arrived off Cape Rae. M, Bois de, la Mothe came
thither soon ,after. The English admirial, who
was superior to the French, could not dilcern their
squadron, on account of a thick fog which had
arisen; but the Alcide and the Lys, being fepa-
i: rpted from the reft, were taken by the, captains
:" ;1 owe and Andres.: in return for which, the

lrench commenced hostilities in Europe; and
thus a new war began between the two nations.

ot .

' CHAP

: - S. S 'C H A

P'

-

»~~ ~~~~~~ ~
, , .,,. .- . , ,

# CHAP. IV.

C H A P. IV.
Reflelions on the Causes of Enmity between the

French and Englhj Colonifs--Temper of the
lneighbouring Indzans-State of Virgznia, .aro-
lina, and Georgia-A concise Debrziption of the
Wte/f-lndia Illands-Firfl Campaign in North-
America.
IT has been already observed, that as the Spa-

niards had found mines of gold and silver in

the western world, so the other European nations
set out upon the fame principle, but ieeT gene-
rally disappointed. td '-i

Among all these later dilcovtt^ngifh
and French were the most powerful: a: .'beco-
ming neighbours here, were no foonedr fetId than
they also became enemies; though some of their
earliest contests were carried .on for trafls of lands
which were originally little better than barren;
and though there was an extent of ground lying
;ound them to be cultivated, or bought of the
Indians, sufficient for them, and perhaps for all
thecommercial powers of Europe, that were dif-
posed to fend colonies to those remote regions.
But the natives of France and England, having
been rivals at home, carried abroad with them
their inimical dispositions; and their boundaries
being seldom agreed on between the colonifs in
America, or properly fettled by Europeans, it was
not wonderful that either party should be perpe-
tually reproaching the other with incroachments:
the consequence of which was, that however
pacifically the refpeftive mother countries might

E be

be disposed, a lasting peace could hardly fubfifl in
that quarter of the world.

We have seen that, from the first settlement

of the. Englilh, the French always viewed them
with a jealous eye. They insinuated themselves
into the favour of the savages; they laid claims
to lands which belonged not to them; and con.
tinued, notwithstanding various treaties of peace,
to build forts upon these lands; which so hemmed
in some of our eftablithments, that they com.
plained their enemies had drawn such lines round,
them, that in fat they held them besieged, and
were intent upon reducing them in the end to
fubjeaion, or driving them into the vast Atlantic
ocean.

WVe will not pretend to fay, that there might

not be some exaggeration in there accounts; how.
ever, it is certain that the French were ready to
take all advantages; and it is as certain, that the
remonstrances of our colonifls gave rife to that
war which was commenced by the capture of the
Alcide and the Lys, as before related; the various
success of which we shall here recite, in a manner
as concise and intelligible as possible; according
to the plan we have laid down to ourselves, and
which we mean steadily to adhere to.

But, before we proceed with this narration, it

may not be improper to give the reader some idea
of the slate of America and it's islands, at the
time when this war broke out; as this must natu.
rally have a connection with that chain of confe-
quences which produced the reduction of Canada,
and the expulsion of the French from the vaR
traa of land which they possessed on the continent
of North-America.

Of New-England enough has been said, to
(hewit's condition at this time; the biftory of
Canada was involved in the narration; but we
shall now speak fimething farther of the other
colonies.

Virginia was the ancient name for all the con-
tinent of North-America, as discovered in Eliza-
beth's reign; but that province which is now so
called, together with the two Carolinas and Mary-
land, was termed South-Virginia. It's present
boundaries are, the river Potomac upon the
north, the bay of Chefapeak upon the east, Ca-
rolina upon the south, and it extends westward
as far as the Pacific ocean. But, as our planta-
tions extend only to the Allegary mountains, this
difriEt may be reckoned in length 240 miles, in
breadth about 2oo. Tobacco is it's staple comr
modity.

From the time of Sir George Yardley's fettling

here, the colony, notwithstanding various inter-
ruptions and fations among themselves, became
populous, and well worthy of the attention of
fucceflive monarchs. This province for some
time held out against Cromwell, but was reduced.
After the Revolution, the Virginians met with
great encouragement from England; though it
was thought a little extraordinary, as it was a royal
government, that king William should appoint
Sir Edmund Andros, who had been deposed in
Boflon after James's abdication, for their gover.
nor. Nevertheless he here proved himself a
worthy magistrate. Williamsburg was built du-
ring this reign; and, out of a filly concerted com-
pliment, laid out in the form of a W; since that
time James-Town began to be neglected, and is
now but an unimportant village. The French and

E 2 Indians

Indians continued from time tO time to harrafs
this province, till the war, in 1755, broke out
between France and England; at. which time
Virginia might be called a flourishing colony.

The Carolinas, which had long bleen deserted

by the firlt Englilh settlers, by it's foil and climate,
at last attracing the notice of government, were
proteAed, ami grew into importance. South-
Carolina (the key of which is Cbarles-Town\,
nmot commldiQuluy situated, though with a barred
harbour, yields scarcely to any province in Ame.
rica for fertility. North-Carolina, whose chief
haibour is Port-Royal, though not so wealthy as
the former, is vet'defirably situated. There are
ten navigable rivers in the Carolinas; Indigo is
their flaple commodity. The inhabitants were
in a situation to excite the envy of their enemies,
when hostilities began between the two nations.

Georgia, in regard to it's situation and pro.

duce, in many refpe&s resembles the Carolinas;
in whose neighbourhood it is situated. It was
chiefly intended as a barrier to our settlements,
againit the incursions of the foulhern Indians;
and, for this purpose, a tray of land in thole
parts was veiled in trustees, in June 1732, for
twenty-one years; at the expiration ol which
tern the property was to return to the crowsl.
This diftrit extends,.from north to south, 60
miles, near the sea; but widens to above 15o in
the inland parts. It is near ioo leagues from the
sea to the Apalachian mountains. The firll town
built by the settlers was called Savannah, after
the name of the river upon which itwas founded.
The new colonifls received mtich a(fitance fiom
the Carolinians, as also many good offices from
an Indian chief, called Tombo Chicki, chief of

the

the people called Yamacraws. The lower creek
nation also sent a deputation of Sachems and wan.
riors, in order to treat with the Georgians, ceding
certain lands (which, however, they afterted as
their property) to the English; thanking them for
their'kindnefs to Tombo Chicki, and confirming
the league in the molt folenn form, according to
the American manner.

This friendly Inlian chief, together with his
wife, his son, and five warriors, we, e brought over
to England, and presented to queen Anne; to
whonm he made a solemn fpeec, in presence
of a number ot Englilh nobleien. Many regu.
lations were made relative to tie trade with the
Indians, while this chief resided in England; who
returned in peace to his own country, with a high
idea of the splendour and liberality of our nation.

The infant colony was soon afterwards threa-
tened with an invaion from the Spaniff colony of
St. AuguRtine; betids, certain quit-rents, and other
circumnfances, rendered it . not so eligible a fitua.
tion as the Carolinas: in consequence of which,
the government wifely annulled all the particulars
of the charter in which Georgia differed fronm
those provinces; and, from that time, this pro-
vince assumed fresh flrength and vigour.
- Penfylvania and Maryland, of which we have
already treated, had continued increasing in popu-
ldtion, from their firfl planting till the time of
the rupture in 1759; and were enabled to give
afifilance to their fellow-fubjeas on the western
continent in the course of the war; though the
Quakers would by no means take up arms against
the common enemy.

It now remains to mention fiuch of those islands,
which are generally called American or Weift

E 3 Indian,

Indian, as have fallen under the Britilh govern.
.ment, and for a series of years together contri.
buted to furnilh many necessaries of life to the
colonifis, and several articles of luxury to the
mother country.

JAMAICA, one of the Great Antilles, is the

principal of these. The famous Chriflopher
Columbus, in the course of his voyage, was
forced in hither by a florm. That cautiCus corn
mander, finding his vefnels had been so much
Iflattered by the tempest as that they could not be
repaired in any reasonable time, persuaded tome
of his people to pass over in a canoe to Hifpani.
ola, in order to represent his situation to the go.
vernor there; but, as eight months had expired,
and the inhabitants were very backward in fur.
nifhing supplies of provisions, the seamen beco-
ming mutinous, the admiral hit upon an expedi-
ent which (hewed his presence of mind; though
it was a fort of deceit, which certainly nothing
but his situation could be supposed to jufify. Ha-
ving calculated an eclipse, he called together a
number of the natives, and told them by his in-
terpreter, " That the God of the Christians,
whom he worshipped, being angry at their not
yielding a proper support to his servants, would
darken the great luminary; which (he said) was
intended by the Deity as a token of their ap.
proaching deftru6tion." The event happening as
he had 'orefeen, exceedingly terrified the fa-
vages, who implored him to use his supplications,
in order to avert the threatened judgment; pio-
mifing to be compliant for the future. The ad.
venturer, withdrawing, pretended to pray to
God; and, when he knew the darkners was going
off, told them that he had prevailed with heaven

to

to with-hold it's judgments, on the conditions
agreedupon. He was immediately accommodated
with provisions, which relieved him from his
present distress. This however was but a tempo-
rary alifrance. He was disappointed of his pas-
sage in a ship which arrived from Hilpaniola. He
was obliged to fend his brother to engage the
Mutineers; and, after all, might have been ob-
liged to remain on the island for the remainder of
his life, had not a private person fitted out a
vessel, to convey him to the desired fettleinelmt,
from whence he failed for Spain; but died soon
afterwards, as has been already related.

The government and property of Jamaica were
granted to the family of this great and much
abused man, and his son was the first governor.
He himself is said to have founded Melilla; and
his successors built St. Jago de la Vega, as well as
some other towns, which yielded to the last men-
tioned, on account of it's convenient situation.
These however thought little of such poffiefions
as produced neither gold nor silver, and were
guilty of the greatest barbarities to the natives.

The town of St. Jago was taken and plundered,
in 1596, by Sir Anthony Shirley. In the year
1635, the fame town was afterwards taken by
colonel Jackson, who consented to ransom it for
a considerable fum of money.

But an armament fitted out, during the ufurpa-
tion of Cromwell, for the purpose of reducing
Hilpaniola, from whence they were ihamefully
repulsed, firit conquered this island, which origi-
nally they had no design of attempting; but,
being afraid and ashamed to return to England
without effcding any thing, the commanders of

E 4 the

the expedition rcfolved on this expedient, in
order to atone for their former failure.

It was in the beginning of May that the troops

Jaid siege to St. Jago, which, not being in a proper
condition for refiiance, would soon have lurren.
dered hut for the delays of the English. In the
end, it was however given up, but not till after
the inhabitants had found means to remove their
molt valuable effests. As numbers of the old
pofTefiors had fled to the woods, the Spaniards
had thoughts of retaking the place; there was
alSo a dangerous mutiny on the ifand, but the
insurgents were reduced; the English were mailers
at sea, and the island in consequence still remained
with the captors.

To Jamaica, the Buccaneers or American pi.

rates, composed of different nations, frequently
resorted. Henry Morgan, a Welch commander
among these, was here well known. Morgan was
however 'knighted for some services he had
done his country, but was afterwards sent home to
England as a pirate, where he languiflied long in
confinement, without being brought to a trial.

This illand, which lies in the track of Hurri.

canes, is allo frequently visited by tlofe more ter-
rible scourges ot heaven, earthquakes. The fi'fl
Englilh inhabitants of this island, having neg-
leted those methods of building which the
Spaniards had pradifed, exposed themselves the
more to there dreadful calamities. It was during
the government of the duke of Albemar'e, the
fo:i of general Monk, on Sunday the 19th
of February, that a concussion of the earth
happened, which was felt through the whole
island, and did vafi damage in many parts of
it; ruining the fugar-works, and deltroying the

richest

richess plantations. In 1692, another more dreads
ful earthquake happened; by which Port-Royal;
at that time the finest town in Jamaica, was in-
tirely deflroyed. The wharfs suddenly funk down ;
and the places where the streets formerly to6d.
were filled with water. The earth opening.
swallowed up houses and their inhabitants; and
some of the persons who had been ingulphed at
one place, were difgorged at another with no ma.
terial injury, and lived many years after. Onl
the whole, there were about 2000 people Ioft.
Many of the [hips in the harbour were defRroyed,
while the Swan frigate rode over the tops of
houses without being overset.

All the island suffered in proportion; and to

this calamity another succeeded: either the foul.
ness of the attnofphere, or the vapours issuing
from the bowels of the earth, produced a pefti.
lence, of which 30oo died; so that the whole
settlement was for a long time only a fpeEtacle of-
horror. An invasion was at this time attempted
by the French ; but their shipping were burnt,
and the design consequently defeated. In com-
memoration of there awful judgments, an annual
f}t was inflituted in the island.

The mutinies of the Negroes, as well as the

fear of foreign enemies, still continued through
iucceflive years. In the mean time, the people
of Jamaica made an alliance with the Mufquito
Indians; a nation on the continent, inhabiting a
sandy bay between MexiHo and Honduras; whither
they had been driven by the Spaniards, to whom
they bore a molt implacable hatred, It was with
a view to defend this, and the other Well India
islands, that admiral Bembow engaged M. de Calfe,
whom he defeated; but could not detlroy the

E 5 Crcnch

French squadron, on account of the ill behaviour
of the captains Kirby and Wade; who were after.
wards liot for cowardice in England. The ad.
mniral was mortally wounded in the engagement.

Mr. Ayfcough, who was twice governor of

Jamaica, attacked and dispersed the Negroes in
the mountains; yet other infurreEtions were
raised, but these were generally defeated; and the
idanders increasing in wealth and prosperity, were
in a refpeaable situation in the year 1755. The
island is situate between 17 and 19 degrees of
north latitude. It's length is about 140, it's
breadth about 60 miles. It has no rivers properly
called navigable; but canoes pass along the fireams
here. The heat is excessive, but tempered by
the fea-bteeze. The foil is in general fertile.
Besides the sugar.cane, so common to the Weft-
India islands, here grow the Pimento or All-Spice,
the wild cinnamon, the cedar, the cabbage-tree,
the white wood, the foap-tree, whose berries are
used in washing, and the Monchineal, the fiuit
and juice of which are poison, but it's wood molt
useful for cabinet-makers. To those may be added
guaiacum, sarsaparilla, china-root, cassia, and ta-
marinds, the iron-wood, and the maflic-tree.

Barbadoes is the next ifand that falls under our

consideration. It lies in 13° north latitude. It
is probable that the Portuguese were originally it's
discoverers; but the firlt Englishmen who landed
on it were some tailors, belonging to the fleet of
Sir William Courteen, cruising against the Spa.
niards, towards the end of king James's reign.
The reports of those people, on their return to
England, induced some attempts; but the iflind
being desert, woody, and producing no other qua-
drupeds than hogs, the first attempts proved un-

fucccf ful

successful. However, the earl of Carlisle received
agrant of the island from king Charles I. It
does not appear that he tried to fettle it on his own
account, but had disposed of several of his {hares
to others, who attended to the culture of tobacco,
but to little purpose; cotton and indigo succeeded
better: but it was not till 1647 that they proceeded
to cultivate sugar, which is now the staple commo-
dity: and it was about this time that many of the
royal party fled to this place as an asylum, and
population began to increase; which advanced so
rapidly, that, in the year 1650, thirty thousand
white men, and double the number of negroes,
were found upon the island. At that time the
trade was moffly in the hands of the Hollanders;
but a navigation-a&, passed in the time of Crom-
well, confined it to the mother country. In the
year 1676, amazing to relate! the amount of the
inhabitants was 50,000 whites, and too,ooo slaves;
so that in twenty-fix years they had increased two-
thirds in their number; a conlideration sufficient
to make their future interefls an obje6t of concern
to Great-Britain: 1,50o0 hips, of ,50 tons each,
being employed in their trade; and their exports
were reckoned to amount to f 35o,ooo fierling.

Since this period, however, the increase of the

French islands in that neighbourhood, and other
circumfrances, have contributed much to reduce
the number of it's inhabitants : besides a conta-
gious distemper, probably brouight from Africa,
raged here for many years, and occalioned a most
cruel havock among the people. There remain
however about 25,000 whites, and 75,000 blacks,
yet upon the island; tho' it may properly be said
to have been for some time past in a declining fatae.
The militia -of the place amount to near 5000.

E 6 The

The falaty of the governor (his perquisites in.
cluded) is efimated at £ 50o00 ferling. The
church of England worlhip is eftabli(hed here, as
in the other islands, and the clergy are well pro.
vided for.

The air is moflly healthful, and the foil fertile;

but it is fubje& to frequent hurricanes; and Bridge.
Town, it's capital, has often been consumed by
dreadful fires: to prevent which accidents in fu-
ture, the houses are to be built of brick-work,
Barbadoes,fuffered greatly in the late violent hur.
ricane, which extended through most of the Weft.
Indies.

St. Christopher's (or St. Kitt's, as it is corn.

monly called) was the island next fettled. The
English under Sir Thomas Warner, and the
French under M. Defnabue, arrived on the fame
day, in the year 1625; and amicably divided the
island between them three years; afterwards they
were difpofeffed of it by the Spaniards: but,
after their departure, the colonists of both nations
returned, and lived in harmony together till the
rime of queen Anne's wars; when the English
conquered the Fiench division of it, and, by the
treaty of Utrecht, the whole was ceded to Great.
Britain.

The air of St. Kitt's is accounted more whole-

fom than that of Jamaica, being better cooled by
the fea-breezes; but the landing here is very dif-
-ficult, on account of a high surf generally beat-
ing upon the thore. The ifl;nd is about 75 miles
in circumference, and the inhabitants about 7000
whites and 20,000 negroes. It produces annually
near io,ooo hogsheads of sugar, and rum in pro-
portion.

Nevis,

Nevis,. a small iflanc in the neighbouihood,

planted by the first English settlers at St. Chrifto-
pher's, is about fix miles in length; and has the
appearance of one continued mountain. It pro-
duces 6000oo hogsheads of sugar yearly, and a pro-
ptrtionate quantity of rum. It once contained
io,ooo whites and so,ooo blacks; but the inha-
bitants, in 1755, were reduced to half that
number.

Montserrat lies in the 7th degree of north la-

titude, is nine miles in length, and about tie fame
in breadth, being nearly circular. It was fettled
by Sir Thomas Warner; and most of the inhabi-
tants are Irish, or the descendants of Irishmen.
It's inhabitants and produce are much the fame
with those of Nevis.

Antigua lies in the 17th degree of north lati-
tude; it is twenty miles in length and breadth,
and in circumference about sixty. This island
received the name it bears from the Spaniards,.
on account of the defea of springs or rivulets
here; the inhabitants having no other water than
such as falls from the heavens, which they catch
and preserve in cilterns; so that a dry season is
terrible to them. The climate is not so wholesome
as that of Barbadoes, and it is subjeE to dreadful
hun icanes; however, it's fine harbours render it
a valuable acquisition. An attempt was made to
fettle Antigua by Sir Thomas Warner; Charles
II. granted it to lord Willoughby, when that
nobleman was governor of Barbadoes: it after.
wards became public property. 16,000 hogfleads
of sugar are raised here. That commodity was
at first but very indifferent, but has been much
improved by the planters.

Antigua,

Antigua, St. Chrilopher's, Nevis, and Mont.

ferrat, are all under the government of one cap.
tain-general; whose place is worth about C 3500
a year. Yet each of the islands has it's respective
governor, whose salary is about 200o a year; and
each has it's separate council and assembly. -The
two islands called Berbuda and Anguilla are like.
wife under this jurifdidion; but there latter
raise their own flock, traffic with their neigh.
bours, and have no immediate connexion with
England.

The Virgin Islands, as they are called, lie to

the windward of Porto-Rico. They are divided
between the Englilhand the Danes. The former
are in pofeffion of the principal of these, which
is named Tortola: it's chief production is cotton,
and that of an inferior quality. The climate
here is very unhealthful, and the fitation alto.
gether not desirable.

Grenada, and the islands called the Grenadines,

(which were first in the hands of the French, and
have since been taken and retaken) were reckoned
well worth a contest between the two nations.
The largest island, called Grenada, lies in latitude
11° 131 north, only 30 leagues diflant from the
Spanish main, and is the fouthermofi of all the
Antilles. It's length is thirty miles, it's breadth
about sixteen. It's climate is generally hot, but
tempered by the fea-breeze; and the rainy. seasons
here are generally very regular. It has some high
mountains, but many more fertile; river and tea
fish, turtle-and wild fowl, are here in abundance.
It Las good anchorage all along, the coast, and
the island is out of the track of hurricanes.

The
,

The Grenadilloes are a clufler of small islands,
which lie between Grenada and St. Vincent.
Many of these are Scarcely to be denominated
any thing better than rocks: but twenty-three of.
them, as it is asserted, are capable of cultivation.
The principal of this clutter is called Curiacou:
It is seven miles in length, and the fame in
breadth; being of a circular figure; The island of
Bequia, which is also reckoned among the Grena-
dilloes, and indeed is the largelt of them all, as it is
twelve leagues in circumference, and is efleemed
a fertile spot. It lies only two leagues to the
south. weft of St. Vincent.

After Grenada had been conquered, the
French, remaining on the island, had some disputes
with the English. It must be conteffed, that some
of the. latter, under cover of religion, fought to
deprive the others entirely of their right of voting;
but, when the matter came to be agitated here,
the government adopted conciliatory measures ;
and two French fubjeEts were permitted to take
their feats in the council, and three in the assem-
bly, without subscribing the test which their op-
posers wished to infifl upon.

We {hall now {peak of the Bermudas.

These are a cluster of islands, situate in the 32d
degree of north latitude. They lie at the distance
of 200 leagues from any land whatever; and are
situate in the midst of an ocean .so tempefluous
and terrible, as often to affright the most experi-
enced mariners; and some ancient voyagers were
lo panic-isruck at the violence of the, storms they
encountered, that they set down there isles for
habitations of evil spirits, who delighted as they
said to put the elements into such commotion.

Mariners
44·

Mariners reckon about 4oo of these isles; but

far the greater part of them are barren. The
principal of them is called, St. George, and is
about sixteen miles long and three broad, and
well fortified both by nature and art. The num-
ber of the English settlers here is about lo,ooo,
There are fewer negroes in the Bermudas than in
the other Wefl-India islands; however, being as
it were naturalized and better uwfed, they are more
faithful, serviceable, and intelligent.

It is moRt probable, that these isles received the

name of Bermudas from a Spaniard so called, who
was shipwrecked upon one of them. From an
accident of the fame nature which. happened to
Sir George Summer, they have also been called
the Summer Ifands. This geiltleman was one of
the first settlers of Virginia ; and it was owing to
the report he made of them to the Virginia com.
pany that they were first attended to by the Eng-
lifh. Though surrounded by such seas as we have
described, yet the climate is generally healthful,
the weather pleasant, and the principal islands
fertile.

Sloops and small brigantines are here conftruted

of a most durable cedar wood; which is in one
refpeE always preferable to other timber, efpe.
cially in these parts; namely, the quality of never
being touched by the worms. Their founds, and
the sea which firrounds them, abound with fish.
A number of whales are seen in these latitudes,
which occasioned some persons to project a whale-
fifbery here; but it did not meet with the expeted
success.

Ambergris, that odoriferous drug which is so
highly valued in Europe, and the original of which

is

is intirely unknown, is here frequently found in
lumps, scattered among the rocks. It is said that
three seamen, who were once loft by accident on
fllore at the Bermudas, found, among many lumps
of that commodity, one that weighed above eighty
pounds.

The foil is favourable to the mulberry-tree;
and raw silk 'might be made a considerable ar.
tide here, but that the dearness of labou'r is a
considerable obilacle. There has been an at-
tempt made for raifiig cochineal, but the scheme
miscarried.

On the island of St. George abovementioned
stands the capital town, which bears the fame
name; and it contains above a thousand houses,
built of a fort of free-fione, like that of Bath;
of which there are considerable quarries found in
thele parts. The place is strong and well fortified;
and the harbour, which it is always dangerous to
enter, is defended by seven forts, upon which
seventy great guns are mounted..

The Bahama or Lucavos Ifes were the first
land discovered by Columbus. Some years after
this discovery, the harmless natives were totally
exterminated by the Spaniards; who seemed at
the fame time to entertain no ideas of making any
settlement upon them. The English were the
firlt who made the attempt; and, in the reign of
king Charles II. the proprietors of Cardlina sent
out several governors, and built the town of
Naflau, on the island of New-Providence; which
is the feat of government. The new colonies
were at times, however, expelled by the French
and Spaniards, in the year 1708; and were ob.
liged intirely to abandon the settlement. But,
alter the conclusion of the peace of Utrecht, a

great

great number of seamen out of employment,
turning pirates, fitted out veflels for the purpose
of robbing, indiscriminately, all whomn they fbould
meet on the ocean; and there people, entering
the harbour of Providence, made it their principal
rendezvous, and defended it with strong fortifi.
cations. Captain Woods Rogers, the circumna.
vigator, being sent out with three men of war
from England to dislodge them, effeated his pur-
pose; and, having eflablifhed a government here,
publithed a general pardon; which molt taking
the benefit of, came in and submitted to legal au.
thority. As a great part of the present inhabitants
are their descendants, so it seems that they are
aauated by a spirit somewhat similar; the chief
of their occupation being that of privateering,
in which they are very expert; and have been
known somewhat too forward in seizing neutral
vessels, and getting them condemned. Like the
people inhabiting fomre of the sea-coasts of Eng.
land, they keep a watchful eye upon Shipwrecks;
even fitting out small vessels, to look for such
ships as may have been caR away upon the Flo.
rida ihore.

The Bahama-Iflands have been always acknow.

ledged to belong to the English, since the expe-
dition of captain Woods Rogers. Their situation
is to the northward of Cuba, and to the eaft-fouth.
east of Eaft-Florida, between the 21 t and 26th
degrees of north latitude. They are supposed to
be some hundreds in number; but a great part of
them are only small hillocks, (as it were) just
emerging from the water, The principal of
them all is the island called Bahama, from which
the reit now take their names. It lies in latitude
s6° 45' north, about 20 leagues diflant from the

Peninsula

Peninsula of Florida. It's length is fifty miles,
and it's greatest breadth about sixty. It is a fertile
and pleasant place, but is uninhabited. Lucayos
is the next in consideration. This, as well as
Andros and Long-lfland, runs out more in length
than in breadth.

Of all these islands (mofi of which are long
flips of land) there are but three fettled; namely,
Providence, Harbour-Ifland, and Eleuthera: all
of which are efteetned very healthful. Provi-
dence is remarkable for a dry, hard, and rocky
foil, and seems calculated for little else betides
the raising of cotton, and the culture of limes,
with which it abounds; and great quantities
whereof were usually exported to North-America,
as are also pine-apples, which are mostly raised in
Eleuthera and Harbour-Ifland. The dying woods,
lignum-vita, and mahogany of an inferior qua-
lity, are cut here on their own islands, and the
Florida keys; and green turtle are caught on the
Bahama banks; numbers of which are sent to
England.

Having thus described the situation of Ame-

rica and the islands, we shall now return to the
thread of our biflory.

C H A P.

* -
.

# CHAP. V.

C H A P. V.
firfi Campaign in America-The French bqffled.

Their various Succeffes-Braddock defeated-
Con/equences of his Mi/farriage.
A S hostilities had already been carried on with

a degreeof ardour in North:America, where

major Lawrence, as well as Washington, (now
the Congress general) had been very acive in op.
posing the French, with various furcefi; so when
the tidings of admiral Bofcawen's capture arri.
ved, the two parties renewed their contest with
double fury; and the campaign in 1755 wea
opened by the Fiench, in this quarter of the
world, with the highest expectations of success.

In the mean time the French ambassador had

been recalled ; and, after a firies of hoflilitie,
war was declared in Iorm between the two rival
nations.

As all thoughts of reconciliation were now at

an end, both the French and English resumed
their favourite fchenes; the former, those ol
engaging all the Indians againfi their enemies,
and driving them out of il1e New-York and New.
England provinces; the laIter, the plan of taking
Louiibourg, Montreal, and Quebec, and punilh.
ing those nations which had dealt perfidioully
with ihem.

In :he month of May, this year, lieutenant-

colonel Monckton set out with a large detach.
ment by land; %shile captain Rous, with three
frigates and a sloop of war, failed up the bay of
Fundy, in order to assisi him in hi) operations.

Monckton

Monckton proceeded without opposition, till he
arrived on the .banks of the river; when he
found a body of French and Acadians drawn up
in readiness to dispute his passage: of these, 450
had taken post in a blockhouse, fortified with
cannon, situated on the opposite fide of the river;
the reft, who were to defend it's banks on the fide
where he approached, had intrenched themselves
behind a breast-work of timber, raised as an out-
work, to prevent the paflage of the English army.
Lieutenant-colonel Monckton having carried the
breast-work after a (harp dispute, those who were
poR0ed in the blockhouse abandoned it, and the
passage was left clear to the vitors, who continued
their march towards the French fort called Beau
Sejour; which, after a four days siege, furreni
dered on terms-of capitulation. He changed the
name of Sejpur, calling it Fort Cumberland; and,
leaving a garrison there, proceeded to another
fortress on the banks of the river Gafpereau;
which was almofl immediately delivered up to
him, with a quantity of armis and ammunition.
In the mean time, Captain Rous threatening an
attack upon a fort at the mouth of the river St.
John, those who should have defended the place
abandoned it, after having spiked tup their cannon,
and destroying as much as poflible of the works;
to prevent their enemies from making a lodge-
ment there. A great number of the. Acadians,
who were disarmed by the Engliih, were some
tine after thefe'fucceffes obliged by their conque-
rors to quit their habitations, and dispersed over
the various diftriEls of English America, where
they were fettled during the war; but when peace
was concluded, liberty being granted them if they
thought proper to retire to any part of the

French

French dominions, they also, mindful of the vio.
lence that had been offered them, in thus forcing
them from their old settlements, forsook the
English, and were carried to Cape Francois, in
the island of Hispaniola.

Thus far success attended on the British arms;

and -the French had not a place of consequence
in Nova-Scotia that could any way annoy us.
In the mean time, preparations had also been
made for attacking them upon the Ohio; and an
army collected, which was to be put under the
command of major-general Braddock, who was
appointed commander in chief-of all the troops
then assembled in, or afterwards to be sent over
to, Britiff America. This general, arriving in
Virginia before the end of February, issued fum.
mnones for the different governors to meet him,
in order to consult on the measures which it would
be proper to pursue in the campaign projetded for
the ensuing spring. It was agreed at this council,
that for the preservation of Ofwego, and the
reduction of Niagara, Pepperel's and Shirley's
regiments should be sent to lake Ontario, where
two armed vessels ihould be built and stationed;
the execution of which was to be intrusted to
Mr. Shirley, while fort Du Quefne (a fort lately
ereoed) was to be attackedhb\ general Braddock
himself; and Crown-Point, on the frontiers of
New-York, was to be invefied by general
Johnson.

The general marched accordingly at the head of
0oo men, against fort Du Quefne, and arrived

at fort Cumberland in his way thither; but ill
flipplied with carriages and provisions. He had
frill 140 miles to march, and could not -but meet
with many difficulties in his route through rugged

and

and pathless ways in unknown countries: yet he
proceeded, though he was frequently obliged to
make the roads he was to pass through; and being
eager to rout the enemy, before they had re-
ceived some reinforcements, which he was in-
formed they expeaed, formed his little army
intotwo divisions. The general himself was at
the head of the firfi, which consisted of 14oo
men; and he had with him the greater part of
the artillery and ammunition. At the head of
the second division, confifing of about 800 men,
was colonel Dunbar, who had the provisions and
heavy baggage under his convoy; with which he
was ordered to advance with all convenient expe-
dition.

Sir Peter Halket, who was Braddock's lieu-
tenant, advised him to reconnoitre the woods as
he passed along, and to proceed with caution;
an advice, which one would have thought, any
officer who had the smallest idea of the American
service, and of the country he was to pass through,
would readily have followed : but this infatuated
man absolutely rejected it; and proceeded as care-
lefsly as if he had been on his march through one
of the counties of England. - He found his error
when he came within about ten miles of fort Du
Quefne; towards which his rapid march had
been dircEted. Here he was attacked by. the
French and Indians, who poured a heavy fire
upon the vanguard of his army, which was con-
ducled by general Gage, at the fame time that his
left flank also was severely handled by a body of
savages that lay sheltered behind the bushes.
The main body now advancing, the van fell back
upon it, which occasioned great confusion; vet
the officers rallied their men, and formed them

again;

again; but the contest was so unequal that they
again gave way. It was certainly now time to
retreat, and not madly to advance against an un.
seen enemy. Braddock might have drawn off
his men, till by means of his artillery he lad
cleared the woods ; but he was impetuous, he
was desperate. In this extremity, he fiill gave
orders to such as had the intrepidity to fiand by
him, to form and advance; an order which rash.
ness only could dictate, and the most determined
valour obey. The consequence was such as might
well be expeted; a dreadful carnage, in which
the officers fuflered molt; the Indians knowing
them by their dress, and according to their cufloni
leisurely taking aim at them, while the fire of the
English was uncertain, and most probably did very
little execution. Five horses were killed under
general Braddock; who, continuing fixed on the
spot, was.at last (hot through the lungs; and with
difficulty carried off the scene of ation, by lieu.
tenant-colonel Gage, and other brave Englifhmcn;
but died four days after. The son of general
Shirley, Sir Peter Halket, colonel of the 44th
regiment, and many officers of rank and diF'
tintion, as well as about 700 private foldiels,
were killed in this enagerent. All the artillery
and ammunition, the general's private cabinet,
and mofi of the baggage, fell into the hands of
the enemy ; the remainder of the Englifl arimy
retreating with precipitation, though the enleriv
never appeared, nor had any idea of quittilng
their advantageous position to pursue them.

This defeat furnished great matter of triumph

to the French and their Indians, at the fame time
that it laid Virginia, Penfylvania, and Maryland,
open to their attacks: which, added to the mif-

fortune,

fortune, was, the disputes prevailing amongst the
aflemblies of those provinces, concerning the
railing of supplies for their own defence; which
subsisted, till necessity at last obliged them to
make a proper provision.

The province of New-York, however, mind-

ful of former successes, were more aative at this
time than their southern brethren. They voted
45000 for the defence of their frontier; and,
having received some affifance from. the east-
ward, two expeditions were planned; one against
Crown-Point, situate about ioo miles from Al-
banyl; and the other againfl Niagara, situated be-
tween the lakes Erie and Ontario: which secured
the communication between Canada and Louifi-
ana. The firfl expedition was commanded by
general Johnson, an officer well known to the
Indians; and the latter by general Shirley.

The army fixed their rendezvousat Albany; from

whence, all things being got in readiness, Johnson
proceeded towards the carrying-place; wlhe:e, by
this time, that fortress had been built,on the eat fide
of Hudson's river, which is called Fort-Edward.
'Thie general advanced about fifteen miles further
northward; but soon received news that the ene-
my were on their march to attack the fort. On
this he detached tooo men torelieve it, or bring
off their countrymen; but these retreated in
confusion; and it was thought proper to fend
another detachment to secure the flying parties.

The French under baron Delkiau appeared

soon after; and, had they made an inflantaneous
attack, it is probable that they wouldi have lfc-
ceeded; but, waflilgr their time in platoonlfiring
againtl an intrencihed* enemy, the latter mounted

i F their

their cannon ;'and, when a nearer attack was
given, repulsed the assailants on every fide; and
leap1ing over their breast works when they gave

' a'w, put them to total rout and confiufon, with
th!. loss ol 80oo flain-and 300 taken prisoners:
ztnnon(g lhe foirmer was M. S. Pierre, oneof lhe
ir!ofl ufeiul ;oficers that the French Iiad in that
(cl:arter (ct lie wol ld. Among the latter was the
bv;'oon, Defkiau himself, who was molt dangeroully
wgou.indcd.

\Ve have already obftrved, that the aim of this

expe(ition swas the reduaijon of Crown-Pint,
i-Ut it was now too late ill the season to make al
.!!c;-p;t upon that fortrcfs; so that the enemy not
1;c(,in pu lit(l in fich a n:anner as to render the
.S1io.n decifice, little more than lionour was gained
ux this l eniarkable vi6tor)y.

General Shirlcy, who commanded the expedi.
tlion. a",aif1t Niagara, arrived at Ofwego on the

bitl of Atigu f; Iut it was the 3 ft1 before all his

0 roops, wiith fitchl flon sand provisions as tl ey had,

ccuLd -re ach him. Or\wego is situate on the south'-
Cast fide of lake Onta.io, about 300 miles to tle
vefltward of Albany. The way to it from thence
is lor.g and tedious, but is'.moclly p; formied ycl a
fIit of liat-lbottoined boats, called bdtteaux;
whlich, liowever, are in foine places hawled ove:
j]nd on fltdges, bef)ire tl:ey can complete lhe
i avigatioii. 'i he fort above-rntcnioned(, though
it. lad long been in poflflion of the Englilh,
was in a pocr slate of defence when reneral
,ll.I!v .entered it. IHaving sent deputaiions to
the fixs Ilnian nations, whose aid he expeLled, he
iad th:e rnolti.cation to find, that as tlhey had
honc<ce ved the idea tl!:lt thi ccu;ttry hereabouts
swas fac:ed to trai.c, thcv rcf!fed to co.operate

withul

# CHAP. VI.

with him. The season was now far advanced,;
Shirley's provisions were exhaufled,, aid the finall
supply of provisions which he received in Sep.
tember,' was not more than sufficient to subsist
his troops for twelve days; he therefore returned
to Albany. The French and their Indians ra-
vaged the defenceless part of the provinces; arid
thus ended the campaign for 17,55, very little to
tie advantage of either nation; but' marked by
tie barbarity of the savages, who were let loose
upon the unarmed and peaceable planters.

C H A P. V[.
Prosre' of / the l War in _.-Amrica--l or/s OfI/'zo,

Ontario, and ilfl'zitam itlenry, iak/en by t/
i

-French ztnder Montealm7-Cap1 e 3BreoOn /i r ren-
dlered l to he Enq'/jlh -Def/ri/pion o f'Loiil)boutr
-Fort i rontelnac ,rrendered-lVarious Sutc-
cr/',s of the sar-L-Tirondera-go and Crown-
Poil)t tak4en--General ljb'oe arrives in the
Neisrhbourhood oJ OQuebec.
' ENERAL Alercrolmbie succeeded Shirley

ill command. In June 1756, he assembled

the Englifli army at Albany. It was now again dc-
ligned to rcduiceNiagara,Ticonderago, and Crown-
Poilt, while Quebec was to be alarmed by a body
of troops, detached for that puipofe up the river

F a Kennebec,

Kennebec. These were extensive views; but the
measures for their execution were delayed till the
arrival of lord Loudon, who had been appointed
commander in chief of all his majefly's American
forces. The provincial officers were divided in
their opinions, Whether his lordship's authority
was necessary for bringing the troops into aation?
'That nobleman did not arrive till the season was
too far advanced; and thus another year was
spent to no puipofe; while the English provinces
were left exposed to the incursions of an exaf.
perated enemy.

Fort Ofwego was now threatened; a party

sent to convey supplies thither had been cut off,
but for the courage and condual of colonel
Bradftreet. But this and fort Ontario afterwards
fell into the hands of M. Montcaln. one of the
best generals the French had ever sent over to
North-America. The Indians in the Fiench in.
terest continued their depredations, and the Eng.
iifh sometimes revenged themselves; but nothing
further, except a French man of war and a flore.
ihip being taken by the Englilh, diflinguifhes the
campaign of this year.

As all thoughts of attacking Crown-Point were

laid aside for the present, it was now determined
to make an attempt on Cape Breton. The earl
of Loudon was put at the head of an army for this
purpose; with whom admiral Holbourn was to co-
operate. But, on his departure, M. Montcalm
met with such success in taking fort William-
Henry, and some other fortunate events, that he
was elevated to the very pinnacle of hope. In
the mean time, our forces by land and tia exe-
cuted nothing: the former, who knew the fiic-

cesses

cesses of the French, laid aside their design;
the latter cruised before Louifbourg, till they
were driven thence, with loss, by a terrible
tempest.

Lord Loudon was now recalled, and general
Abercrombie was appointed to command the land-
forces. Twelve thourand were deflined for the
attack upon Lotiibourg, under major-general.
Amherst; and 6000 were reserved to march
under the condu&t of the commander in chief for
the redution of Crown-Point; and 8000oo were-
allotted for the conquest of fort Du Queene,.
under the direEtion of brigadier-general Sorbes.
This expedition was well concerted, and succeeded
accordingly. After a smart attack, and vigorous-
defence, the island of Cape Breton, and the town,
of Louifbourg, surrendered, upon terms of capi-
tulation.

Louifbourg is situate in 45° 50' north latitude..

It was at that time of a middling size; the houses.
in general were built of wood, but raised upon
flone foundations. The town was walled and welli
fortified, except in one quarter where it could,
not be approached, even in small barks, for the
space of one hundred yards; and there a pallifado
was deemed a sufficient security; especially as
two bastions very advantageously flaked this.
quarter. There was a flrong buildtig in the
centre of one of the chief baitions, with: a moat'
on the fide towards the town; which was called,
the Citadel, tho' it mounted no artillery. Within
this edifice were the governor's apartments, the
barracks for the garrison, and the arsenal: and
there was a magazine under the platform of the
redoubt. The parifh-church also flood withiir the

F 3 Citadel

Citadel. The harbour is Cafe and large; but the en-
trance of it is very narrow : however there is but
one rock which lies under water; tlle sands near
which are very dangerous for [hipping in winter,
however, the who.e harbour is frozen over from
Oftober, or November, till the latter end of the
tfioIth of May. A great quantity of timber,
iuch as oaks, pines, cedar, ash, plane-trees, and
dFpiies, may be found here; and the country
abounds with coal.mines. The principal occupa.
tion of the inhabitants, when the season permits,
is that of fihing on the coafis. The ifiand of
St. John, in the gulph of St. Laurence, submitted,
as ooon as it was known that Louifbourg was
taken.

In the mean time, general Abercrombie ad.

vanced towards Ticonderago; but, attacking the
French in their lines, was defeated with the loss
of 18oo men. He had before loft lord Howe in
a fkirmiih with the enemy. In order to repair
thiis misfortune, the general detached colonel
Bradftreet to make an attempt on fort Frontenac,
which was taken and demolifbed; nine sloops and
a magazine of provisions were at the fame time
deltroyed.

General Sorbes, advancing againrt fort Dtt

-Queefne, was at first defeated, and baffled in his
ittempts; but the garrison finding no hopes
of succour, at length abandoned the place,
where the Biitifh flag was planted by the vic-
torious commander; and the place received the
name of Pittsburgh, in honour of the Englilh
minil tier.

Many of the Indian nations being now brought
over to the Englilh fide, as success is with them

the

the best of all arguments, and the provinces Secei.
red from 'lhe incursions of tile French, c.epedi.
tions were planned tile next ) ear for tihe redut ion.
of Crown-Point, Niagara, QOiebec, and thliri de-
petn'dencies. Generacl \VuW e, fecorided by a ii:,; ,
Engifh fquadrou, was to besiege (i.bee. Ge-
neral Amnhefl was to endeavour the recdudlio.n oi
Ticoiderago and CIown- loint ;and if he f cceed .f' ,
WdS to join that commander. At the sLime tirme
general Pridedauix aflilled ty a body ot I n:liualv
under Sir William Johnson, was to ait.itk i)e
French fort, near tlie fall of Niagara ; and iliiri
being carried, was to proceed dovn thi liver
St. Iaurcnce to Molntreal, in order to iT:i'.
himself mailer of that place; and iheh to join
general Amherll: while general Skirven, with
a chosen party, was to reduce the forts on
the (Ohio, and to scour the banks of lake On-
tario.

These different expeditions were accordingly
set on foot. General Ambnerft, pasting lale
George, presented himfell before Ticondera2,o;.
which, after a (hew ot defence, was deserted by
the garrison. He then advanced toward.s Crowtln-
Point, whI!ch ldlta the Fieiich also ab3ntlloneed,
after h.iving set it on si e.; thus flill retreat-

tin to lhe centre of their opertilons, Que-
bec, which lhey 1had reforlved mnof refoitiiy to
defenld. He also meditated an a!tackS upon 3,j(o
French, that had retired to the itle Au Noix, at.
the noirthl-dflt extremiitv of .1tke Chalmplall ; but,
though- his veflels were Iupej.or to tlhe einemy,
yet the elmternts fighting agdinft him, lie was
obliged to abaddon his projett, though! wiih mruch
'elu tarnce. . ,

F 4 :' General

. .

General Prideaux and Sir William Johnl on

advanced against fort Niagara; the former being
killed by the burfing of a cohorn, brigadier
Gage was sent to assume the command; who
found that Sir William had disposed all things
with judgment. The French resolved to exert
thernfelves in the relief of this place. The
Engliih determined to become mailers of it. A
battle was fought, in which the latter proved vic.
torious; the enemy being defeated, and their
general, with all his principal officers, made
prisoners. The fort was in consequence fur.
rendered to the British arms, without farther
opposition.

The expedition against Quebec under Wolfe

now proceeding, he arrived at the isle of Orleans
in the latter end of June; and, having in a man.
ner possessed himself of the river St. Laurence,
publilhed a manifeflo among the inhabitants,
exhorting thein to observe a ftrit neutrality ; in
which cafe they might enjoy all the bleflings of
peace, amidit the horrors of war: laid before
them the weakness of France, and the flrength of
England; and concluded by observing, that he
should adhere to firic juflice, and regulate his
condut by their resolutions.

But the Canadians had been too much preju.

diced against the British fubjeafs, to liften to his
counsel, or to trust his promises. For the most
part, they were content to quit their dwellings;
and, whenever opportunity offered, to aa in a
hoflile manner against our forces every where.
They joined the scalping parties of the savages, and
murdered any stragglers they found with the
greatest barbarity; so that nothing but retaliation
remained; which Wolfe was in some cafes

almost

# CHAP. VII.

almost necessitated to allow, though the per-
mitting. it was contrary to his natural difpo.
filion.

C H A- P. VII.
General Wo/e's Stccce/s and Death--abec fur.-

rendered to the EnglFh-DeJcription of that
Capital-Again beieged by the French-Murray.
defeated-The Enemy rai/ the Sige-Succeffs
of the Engl nth in the WefJi-Indies-Guadaloupe,
Martinico, and the Havannak, taken-Affazrs
of Europe-Canada ceded to the Engl/4 by thee
Treaty of Paris.
TrHE. city of Quebec, against which the ge-.

neral pointed his attack, was firongly Ibrti..

sied;. had a numerous garrison, and was well.
provided with provisions and ammunition. Five:
regular battalions, fornned of- the inhabitants, had.
reinforced the troops of the colony. TheCana-.
dians and Indians were raised and disciplined;.-
and Montcaln took the field, at the head of an.
army more numerous than the English.; yet this.
wary commander had resolved, if possible, to.
decline coming to a battle ;.the event of which,
might at one firoke decide the fate of Canada,
He prudently encamped his forces along the shoe -
of.Beaufort, between the river St. Charles-and an,

yF'~ 5~ eaten five-

extensive sand-bank, which prevents any large
vessel from approaching; thus securing his frbot,
while his rear was covered with impenetralle
woods. Thus flationed, he had it in his choice
whether to fight or not, and could throw fuc-
.cour' into the city at plealurc.

The difficulties which must attend the siege of

a place, thus covered and defended, appeared
almost insurmountable : they did not escape the
penetration of Wolfe, he saw them in their ut-
mofl extent; but, at the fame time, he saw the
season wafting apace; he confidered the necessity
there was to attempt something in the present
poflure of affairs; and he knew also, that it was
always practicable to retreat to'the Englilh fqua-
dron, as long as they remained in the river.
He likewise expeEed to be joined by Amherfl ;
and, upon tle whole, resolved to proceed in his
iindertaking. Having received advice, that a
detachment of the French had pofled themselves
at. Point-Levi, on the southern shore, opposite
the city of Quebec, he sent general Monaton
to dislodge them: which service being effcled,
noiwithflanding some interruption from the ene-
myv, the upper town, being exposed to the fire of
'ihe English batteries eretled there, was soon
greatly damaged ; thlough, if Montcalm's advice
had been followed, that poll would have been so
mnch ftrergthened, that the attempt muit have
failed; but Vaudreuil the governor over ruled
him.

While there things were pafring. the Engli(h

fleet, which was in two divifi,;ns, suffered much
ilom a tempefl; some es the transports ran foul
of each other, while others were driven on fliore.
''he French, oblerving their difrefs, sent dow\h

tadtS

tafts and fire-ihips to dellroy them; but there
were towed aground by the sailors, where they
burned without doing the least damage. A second
attempt of the fame kind was made, which was
greatly unfuccefstul; and general Wolfe 1lill ad-
vanced towards the city, by way of Montmorency;
fromn whence an effort was now made to attack
the French army: but, notwithlfandigll the
greatelL exertions, it miscarried.

By this time, news was received that Niagra,

Crown-Point, and Ticonderago, were already in
the hands of the Englilh ; and that general Am-
Lerfl was proposing to pals lake Clhamplain.

At tlils time general Wolte feli sick, but flill

turped his attenrtion towards the service. Ail
attacks from the qtiarter of Montmorcncv were
found to be ineffeL:ual; the city of Quelec was
reconnoitred, with a view to prepare for a general
alfiult; but this was declared to be an undertaking
not at alllikely to be crowned with fruccefs. The
camp at Montmoretcy) was !low therefore broken
ip, and the troops v ere encamped at Point
Levi ; while the flqadron under the conmmand of
admiral Holmes nidde various movemnents "I' the
river, with a view of diverting tlie enemy's at-
tention.

The Englifl general embarked his forces on

the 5th and 6(h of Septelmbc.r ; but the weather
l)cing bad, and the traniiports crowdled, half the
troops were lardedl in the louthern ihore for re-
frclhinent. Adnil at Saunders was now infil-uc-
ted to make a feint of attacking lie French in
thlir intrenchnents, while \Volfe embarked his
men about one o'clock in the mornling: aldmiral
Holrnies having failed nine miles farther up the
river than the place wher e Lil laUndin:g was in-

F 6 tended

tended. The transports fell silently down with
the tide, and were carried rather beyond the.
the place of attack. The [hips however followed
them; and all being in readiness, the troops were
disembarked without being perceived by the
enemy: which extraordinary success was greatly
owing to two French deserters, having given in-
formation that a convoy was expeted by the
garrison, under the condut of M. Bougainville;
by which means the boats being hailed by the
Sentinels, as an answer was returned in French,
suited to the purpose, the besiegers' boats were
- suffered to pass as part of the expeEted convoy;

nor was the mistake discovered till it was pal. a
remedy.

But it proving impossible for the English to

land at the place where they intended, when they
firfl gained the shore, they saw nothing before
them but precipices, so sleep, that they appeared
almof perpendicular; except a narrow path that
winded up the ascent; and even there a captain's
guard was placed. But this unpromising appear-
ance was neither sufficient to deter the general,
nor to cadl any damp upon the spirits of his troops.
The light-infantry, by means of flumps and
boughs of trees, pulled themselves up; drove the
enemy from their flation ; and, clearing the path,
gained the summit of the hill; where they formed
themselves as fail as they arrived; and were so ex-
peditious, that by day-break they were all in order
of battle.

When the tidings first reached M. Montcalm,

that the English had gained the heights of Abra-
ham (for so there precipices were called) he be.
lieved it was only a feint, in order to draw him'
from the strong poll which he then occupied;:

but

but when he was convinced of the report, as he
knew- that the enemy could from their post corn-
mand the weaker part of the city of Quebec, he
at once resolved to hazard a battle. He accord-
ingly quitted his camp, drew together all his
force, and marched against the Englith, whom.
he found prepared for his reception.

The force of the latter consisted of fix bat.
talions, and the Louilbourg grenadiers: brigadier
MonEton commanded the right, and brigadier
Murray the left; in the rear of which colonel
Howe was pofled. The French general, having
crossed the river St. Charles with his whole army,
now formed in order of battle, by his movements
indicating a design to fall upon our left flank, bri-
gadier Townihend was ordered .to repair thither
with Anherft's regiment, which he formed in such
a manner as to present a double front. He was
reinforced afterwards with two battalions; and the
releive, fornied in eight subdivisions with large
intervals,- was pofled behind the right. The ene-
my's right wing was composed of half their colony
troops, two battalions of regulars, and a body of
Canadians and savages. Two other regular bat-
talions formed their centre; and their left con-
fiRed of one battalion, with the rdft- of the colony
troops. They had lined the bushes and corn-
fields with tome of their best marksmen, who
much galled the English as they advanced.

The French advanced to the charge about ten.

o'clock in the morning; beginning their fire
from the distance of 140 yards, whilftour's was
reserved till they came within 40 yards: then
they received a severe discharge; which, toge-
tller with the grape-shot from two field-pieces
%hich the sailors had with difficulty hauled up,

the

the height., obliged the enemy to give way.
Conspicuous in the front of the line, the brave
WVolfe was flationed. He had been aimed at by
the molt expert markfnien when the engagement
began; and had received a wound in the wriit,
round which he bound his handkerchief, without
regarding it; and advanced at the head of his
grenadiers with their bayonets fixed, when a ball
entered his breafl, just at the moment that the
enemy gave ground, and vi-tory began to incline
to the fide of the Englilh. He was now carried
off to the rear of the front-linec; where being
asked, Whether lie would have a surgeon? lie
replied, " That is needlers it is all over with
me." Soon zfter, an officer who attended him
exclaimed, " They run !" * XVho run ?" said
the dying hero: the officer answered, " The

French, Sir; they give way every where."

( \hat ! do the cowards run already !" rejoined
Wolfe: " Go one of you to colonel Burton,
" and tell him to march. Webb's regiment with

all speed down to Charles-river, to cut off the

" retreat of the fugitives." 'lhen turning on his
fide, "' God be praised ! (said he) I die in peace;"
and inflanily expired. Thus fell the intrepid
Wolfe, in the flower of his age; and, like another
Epaminondas, in the hour ol' vitory : but his
fame will survive to ages, while his name will be
alwass dear to every Briton! May he prove a
palttern ol firmnnes to fiucceeding comnantlers.
If their lives are as glorious; they cannot wifl for
a death more honourable.

General .Monlon, the next in. command, fell
nifmedliaely after; while the right and centre of
the front-lirfe, and the highlanders with their
broad swords, supportcd by the 5tlh regiment,

improved

improved the advantages gained before, and oc-
cafioned the flight jufti now mentioned; while
the right wing of the French army, who had a
profpeat of better success, were prevented by
colonel Howe from cutting off our light-infantry;
and a body of Indians dilappointed of their in.
tention of falling upon the rear of the4Ehglifh
army. General Townlhend, upon whom the
command was devolved, haflened to the centre;
and once more formed our troops, whom the
purfiuit had disordered. At this very moment he
received advice that NM. Bougainville, with a
body of 2ooo men, having marc'hed from C3pe
Rouge as soon as he heard the Englifli had gained
the heights of Abraham, though he came too late
for a fllare in the principal atlion, was now ad.
vancing fast upon our rear; in order that his
countrymen, if they had not been totally routed,
might be encouraged to renew the contest. Two
battalions, with two pieces of cannon, were sent
against him; but, when he found all was loft,
lie retired to the woods: and general Toswnhernd
very prudently declined the pursuit, in which he
iniglit have hazarded much, and could have gained
but little; and mult have interrupted in some
micafire the executing of the grand design of
this expedition ; as, though we had gained a clear
vio)ry, Quebec was not yet taken.

Death had been very brfy in the field that day;

for, besides general \Volfe, and tie officers killed
on our fide, MI. Montcalm was' also mortally
wounded; and M. de Serefergue, and M. de
St. Ours, the two next in command, were slain:
about 800 fell in the aution, and loo)o were
taken prisoners. Of only sixty men fliin on
the fide of the English, 9 were officers. Borth

nations

nations seemed to confider themselves as having
fuflained an irreparable loss in the death of their
generals. Wolte was the darling of the soldiery;
and promised fair, had he lived, to have rivalled
the greatest heroes of Greece or Rome. Montcalm
was the very aaing spirit of the French in those
parts-,ghere, when they were deprived of him,
they seemed to deem themselves devoid of all re-
sources: and it is probable, that to the confterna-
tion which that single event occasioned, more
than to any other circumstance attending the vic-
tory, the Englith owed the intire conquest of
Canadian France.

The conquering general now secured his camp;

and contrived a road to be made up the heights
for bringing forward his heavy ordnance; whilst
admiral Saunders, who had all along given, every
assistance in his power to the army, immediately
proceeded up the river with his whole fleet, in.
order to attack the lower town at the fame time
that the upper town was to be tformed by the ge-
nerdl, at the head of the land-forces.

Yet, notwithstanding these vigorous dispositions,

it is poflible that the garrison of Quebec, had
they recovered themselves from their surprise,
might have defended, and even saved, their capi.
tal. The Englifi had indeed obtained a glorious
victory; but it was very poflible, that glory might
have been all the fruit they had reaped from it.
Their numbers were finall; andl, though the town
was damaged on the land-side, it was not in.
vetled, yet the walls and parapets were intire;
and the garrison had been reinforced by the fhat-
tered army on it's reireat. A body of troops was
assembling in the neighbourhood ; and the season
was fall advancing, in which the besiegers could

have

have little to expea: andtheir fleet muff have
been withdrawn, or frozen up in the river
St. Laurence.

However, the besieged either weighed not there

difficulties, or conceived the valour and perfeve-
rance of their enemies sufficient to furmoupt
them all. Before a battery could be finit*d to
play upon the city, a flag of truce was sent from
thence, with proposals for a capitulation; which
were deliberated upon; and the terms.being agreed"
to, the place was the next day surrendered to the
Britifl arms.

By the articles of this capitulation it was

agreed, " That the garrison should march out.
" with all the honours of war,'and should be em-.
' barked as soon as possible for France. That the
" inhabitants, on laying down their arms, should,
( be maintained in the possession of their houses,
I effeats, and privileges; and should not be mo.
" lefIed, on account of their having borne arms
,' in defence of the town, because they had been
, forced so to do: and it had been customary, for

the inhabitants of the colonies of both crowns,
to serve as' militia. That the effeEts belonging to

: officers absent hould not be touched. That the'
" said inhabitants ihould not be compelled to quit
" their houses, till their condition {hould be fettled

by a treaty of peace between their most ChriRlian

" andBi itannic majefies. That the exercise of the
" Roman Catholic religion lhould be allowed:
" and safeguards granted to all religious houses
" and persons, as well as to the bishop; who
" hould be permitted to exercise freely, and with
"decency, all the funtions (f his office, where-
' ever he should think proper; till the poffeflion
" of Canada Ihould be determined between

the

the rcepeacive sovereigns. That the artillery
and warlike flores Ihould be delivered up, bona
,fide, and an inventory of them taken. That

the sick aid wounded, t!e commiffaries, chap.
lains, phvficians, furgeoris, and apothecaries,
as well as other persons employed in the iofpii.
tals, should be treated according to the cartel
fettled betiseen the belligerent powers on thle
6th of February 1759. That before delivering
up the gate, and entrance of the town, to tle
English forces, their general fhotlld fend iomne
soldiers to be placed for safeguards (as above.
mentioned) at the doors of tile churches, con.
vents, and the principal habitations. That the

* governor of the City should be permitted to
' fend advice to the marquis de Vaudreuil of the

reduction of the place; and also to write to the
' French minifiry, to inform'them of the fame.
" Lastly, That this capitulation should be duly
' ands pinOa ually executed, wi hout being liable to
" objections, under pretence of reprisals, or the

non-execution of any preceding capitulation."
It was in this manner that, by the abilities of

general Wolle, and the zeal of tlle admiral for
the service, the capital of Canadd was at lads re-
dulced under the B]ritinl dominion. The ternms
granted were indeed very advantageous ; but they
were 'such as, confidering the situation of thiigs,
might well be accorded. to a numerous garrison. In
faRC, thie event proved, that the measure was,
fight; for thle enemy, having rallied, were rein-,
forced behind Cape Rouse, under M. Levy; who,
was come thither from Mlonireal, with two bat-,
talions of regulars, and Mh. dle Bougainville was,
on his march, at the head of 8oo men, withl a,
convoy of provisions; in order to throw himrnlf

into

ijto the city (which had yet a communication with
t e country) on tile very morning when it fur-
rendered.

Quebec was taken polfefion of, and guards.

potted )n the land-side, and, according to the
terms of capitulation, in diflfrent quarttels. of the.
toiwn; in order to preserve regularity, and pre-
vent ally ads of violence. Captain P4!ifer, en.
tering the lower town with a body of seamen,
ased in the fame manner; and the prisoners
were the next day embarked for France. Seven
thousand men were left in garrison, under
general Mlurray, with a good flore of provisions
and ammunition; and the admjral set. fail for
England, after'having left all things apparently
safe, and seen numbers of the inhabitants come
in froni tle adjacent country, and lake the oaths
to the British government; of which they now
began to entertain a more favourable opinion.

Ot Quebec, so often the obje& of mortal con-
tention between the two nations, we have the
following description, as it appear ed in the. year
1760. ' This capital of Canada is divided: into
two difirics, call the Upper and the Lower Town.
These are separated from each. other by a Reep
cliff, which forms a fort of natural fortification,.
to near two-tlirds of the upper town,, while it
serves as a shelter to,the lower, ,;tro-m the N. xV.-
winds. Mouf of the buildingsmnade -agood ap-
pearance; but a great part of them wereldellroyed
or damaged by the artillery of the besiegers. Be.
fides dwelling houses, they consisted of many
churches, ,colleges, convents, and other public
edifices; wlich were in general built of a ltone
of a gfrey car, extremely durable; a great quan-.
tily of which is found in this province. In the

higher

higher town the fireets are broad, but uneven;
running on a declivity from the south to the
north. Those of the lower town are narrow,
flanding on a confined spot of ground, which is
commonly overflowed by the tide to the foot of
the precipice; and, by the retreat of the waters,
pointed out a place, at the head'of a spacious and
most delightful bafon, for merchants to build on,
for the convenience of trade. The principal
public edifices were, the cathedral, of which the
walls only remained; the bishop's palace; the
colleges of the Jesuits and Recollets; the con.
vents of the Ursulines, of whom we have already
made mention; and the Hotel Dieu; wlth their
churches; the Intendant's palace, a seminary
f6r the education of youth (which however was
rmuch damaged); and the church of Notre Dame
in the lower town, which was intirely ruined du-
ring the siege; which proved fatal to many other
buildings within the reach of the cannon. It is
said, that thi's church was built to commemorate
the retreat of Sir William Phipps, from before
the city oh which he had made an unfucccfsful
attempt, in the year 1694 (as has been already
noticed in our hiltory). There was alto a paint-
ing in the city, representing a town in flames;
with an inscription to the following purport:
"-That, in the year 1711, when Quebec was
threatened with a siege, a pious woman, who
affirmed that -he was inspired, prophesied, that
this very- church, together with the lower town,
would be defiroyed by the English in a conflagra-
tron, before the year 1760: which made futh an
impression on all ranks of people, that they dedi.
cated two days every year to fasting and prayer;
and implored the intercession of their patroness

with

HISTORY OF AMERICA. 14l

with the Almighty, to prote& that church and
the city from fire and sword."

[Preditions of this kind are often communi.

cated by impostors or etmhuifiafts ; they are gene.
rally swallowed by the vulgar; and, as circum-
flances sometimes may in the common course of
things appear really to fulfil them, they are in
such cafes regarded as divine oracles. People
are willing even to add something to the pro-
phecy, left it should feerp to fail; and then marvel
greatly at the wonders which they ihave helped to
make. But however these things may be, an his-
torian is warranted to set down what he finds
on record in cafes like these; this is all that can
be expeced from him: as to the reft, the candid
reader is left tojudge for hilnfelf.]

"In the lower houles of the fireets were

niches in the walls, with flatues, as large as life,
of St. Joseph and St. Ursula, St. Augultine, and
other faints; and figures of the fame Tort are seen
in the fronts of their churches and religious
houses. The Citadel, which is the residence of
the governor, situated on the grand parade, a spa-
cious square, surrounded with fine buildings; is
curiously ereEted on the summit of a precipice,
to the southward of the episcopal palace, and
overlooks the town and baron; whence there is a
mofi delightful profpea of the city downward,
and of the country on both fides. There is also
another citadel on the summit of Cape Diamond,
with a few guins mounted on it; but, except it's
commanding an extensive view of the circumja-
cent country, and of the upper and lower river,
is in-bther refpeas but contemptible. Most of
the other public buildings make a firiking appear.
ance; particularly the Intendant's palace, the

Jeluit's
S.,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jesuit's college, the Ursuline convent, and tliat
of the Hotel de Dieu and the biflop's palace;
which, as well as the citadel, being built of brick,
and situated on the top of the precipice, between
the higher and lower towns, suffered confider.
ably from our batteries during the siege. On the
right of the descent leading to the lower town
flands a flately bid house, said to be the firfl built
in this city; and over the front-door is carved a
dog, gnawing a large fleshy bone; with a whim.
lical inscription in French, to the following pur.
port: I am the dog that gnaws the bone, zuitlioul
le/iig a Jcrap of it's meat. The time zill arrite,
though it has not come yet, when I Jiall bite him
who has bit me. [My author feenms in doubt;
whether this infciiption was meant to a'lude to
the rife of the tradesman who formerly kept the
house, and made a fortune by his induflry; or
whether it alluded to the disputes between the
Fiench and English colonies. We should rather
adopt the latter opinion; and that by the bone
was meant Canada, which hiad so long been (as
the phrase is) a bone of contention between the
two nations.]

In the lower town is also the cuflom-houfe,

where the colleclor used to reside; which, by it's
patticular situation, escaped being damaged by the
shells from the English batterics. Near a mile
diflant from the town, on the W. N. W. fide,
flands the general hoflital, wllich is a spacious
building. It is agreeably situated on the south
fide of the river Charles, which meanders under
it's walls; and confins of a spacious dome, with
two gleat x ings, ole Ironting the noIllh, the
other the south. In this house is a convent of
Ai;gufine nun:s, who have lands appropriated slr

their

their maintenance. Thee riflers, from religious
motives, afligned the principal parts of this dwell-
ing for the reception of tick and wounded officers
and soldiers, whom they attended with the greatest
humanity and tenderncfs. This hospital was en-
dowed by the French kilg, with a han(forne fa-
lary, for the fipport of physician, surgeon, and
other necetfary officers. The nuins perform
every menial office about the tick with the fame
indifference that one man would attend another;
making it a point of conscience to do so. Each
patient has his bed, with curtains allotted to him,
and a man to attend him. The beds are ranged
ni galleries on either fide, with a fuficient space
between each for a person to pass. These galle-
2ies are scraped and fwcpt every morning, and
afterwards sprinkled with 'vinegar that firangers
are not sensible of the least difigreeable finell,
even in the heiglit of summer. The patients are
allowed a fort of fan to cool thenmelves in filtry
weather, and to keep) off the gnats which are often
very troublefoine. Every officer las an apart-
mnent to lIimfellf The nuns, thotugh rigidly re-
Jerved,. irc yet courteous and refpettf'ul. Their
(rcfs confifls of a black gown, with a bib and
apron.; they wear a close cap, with a forehcad-
cloth downl to their eve-brows ; their breafis in-
tirely covered; their fneeves are Inade so longt as
to reach almtofl to their xwaifts; and their cloaths
Iweep 'the ground : on the top of their lleals
they wear a fquale piece of black flalloon, which
feives as a.clout, flows carclefsly over tlhe floul-
ders, and descends quite to the wailt. 'lihey ve
also a silver crucifix, about three inches long
which hangs by a black ribbon ftom the neck jio
thegirdle. In the fcitih wing of the edifice is a

fri) b

superb church, and in the other wing a neat
chapel; in both are several images and scripture
paintings, as large as life. The altar-cloths and
hangings are of curious needle-work, wrought on
silk, by the nuns, in different colours. The walls
are wainfcotted with oak to half their height; and
the pannels painted in dark-fhaded landscapes, re.
presenting the adjacent country. On the south
fide of the chancel are two large grated folding
doors, where the nuns fit, on benches iaired one
above another, when they attend divine service.
WVeftward of these are two confessional boxes;
and there is a very neat music gallery over the
weft door. On the north fide of the church is a
saloon, with a curious monument, and an altar
over it, elegantly arched and ornamented with
small waxen figures, representing our Saviour and
the Virgin Mary: on each fide are two images,
one of St. Augustine, which is a venerable figure,
clothed in purple and white, bareheaded, with
a long grey beard; holding a flaming heart in his
right hand, and a book in his left. The other re.
presents Charles, bishop of Milan, who liberally
endowed this church and hospital. He {lands up-
right, with his hands across, and an open book
laid upon them, which he appears reading very
attentively; he is arrayed in scarlet and white,
and his ilver locks flow carelessly down his
shoulders.

There is a monument here in the memory of

John, second bilhop of Canada, the proper
founder of this charity: and here reft the remains
of general Montralm; to-whofe memory, his ge-
nerous enemies allowed a monument to he erefted,
,with a Latin inscription; of which we lhall give
the reader a free translation.

Here

Here lieth,

In either Hemisphere, to live for ever,
LOUIS JOSEPH DE'MONTCALM rGOZON,

Marquis of St. Veran, Baron of Gdbriar,.
Commendatoty of the Order of St. Louis,
Lieutenant-General of the Armies of France;
As good a Citizen as he was an excellent Soldier;

Who knew no Desire but thatof true Glory:
Happy in a natural Genius improved by Literature:

Having gone through the several Steps of

Military Honours

With uninterrupted Lufire;

Skilled in every Branch of Military Science,
The JunEture of Times, and the Crisis of Danger,

In Italy, in Bohemia, in Germany.

An indefatigable General;

He so discharged his important Trusts,
That he appeared always equal to greater:

At length, grown glorious in Perils,

Sent to secure Canada

With an Handful of Men,
He more than once repulsed the Enemy's Forces;

And made himself Mailer of their Forts,

Replete with Troops and Ammunition.
Inured to Cold, Hunger, Watchings, and Labour;

Unmindful of himself,

He had no Sensation but for his Soldiers:
An Enemy, with the fiercest Impetuosity;

A Vi6tor, with the tendereft Humanity.
Adverse Fortune he compensated with Valour;

The Want of Force.with Skill and A&tivity:

And, by his Counsel and Support,

For four Years protraEted
The impending Fall of the Colony.

Having by various Artifices

Long baffled a great Army,

G JHeadec

Headed by an expert and intrepid Commander,

And a Fleet furnilhed with all warlike Stores;

Compelled at length to an engagement,
He fell in the first Rank, at the firif Onset,

With those religious Hopes

Which he had always cherished,
To the inexpressible Grief of his own Army,

And not without the Regret of the Enemy.
September xiv. A. D. M.DCC.LIX. iEtatis xlviii.

His weeping Countrymen
Deposited the Remains of their excellent General

In a Grave,
Which a fallen Bomb in burfling

Had evacuated for him;
Recommending them to the generous Faith of

Their Enemies.

A, The chapel is small and extremely neat, free

from all fuperflitious pageantry. But if-there is
any deficiency in point of ornament in this, it is
amply made up in that of the Ursulines within
the city. That convent is dedicated to a female
faint, whose descent the nuns have traced to
Scotland; and who, they fay, was killed by the
Indians while the was labouring for their conver-
sion. Her flatue is eresed againfi-the wall, with
an arrow fixed in her breafl.

:' The Hotel de Dieu is a fpacious'building,

with an attic story ; and seems as if intended to
be enlarged in the form of a square; though at
.present it consists only of two wings. It appears,
by an inscription, that it was con'fruaed at the
sole expence of Mary de Vignet, dutchess of
Aiguillon: of whom there is a flatue, as kneeling
at her prayers. This house is dedicated to St.
Joseph, the patron of Canada.

" The

"The principal flrength of Quebec consists in

it's situation, as ship guns cannot have sufficient
elevation to do the city any considerable damage;
and it is too hazardous an undertaking for bomb.
ketches to attempt to destroy it, as they are liable
to be exposed to a furious fire from the several
batteries ere6ted above each other, and extending
to the water's edge; so that any flips brought
against it muff run up with the flood, fland off
and on bill the tide ebbs, and then retire,"

While the British arms were thus successful on

the continent of North-America, the war. was
carried on with vigour in Europe. The miniflry
having permitted troops to be lent to Germany,
where the king of Prussia aaed in alliance with us,
the arms of the allies were in general fiuccefsful:
and it was asserted, that America was to be con-
quered in Germany; as the French would not be
able to spare troops to assist their colonifls, while
they were so vigorously opposed in that quarter,
In Africa, they loft Senegal. In the Eaft-Indies,
Ciive and Coote were fuccefsfiil, notwithstanding
the efforts of M. Lally; .and Pondicherry fel
into the hands of the English.; and the Eaft-India
Company became poflefled of a vast territory in
Indoflan.

Nor had the government in the leaf withdrawn

it's attention from the Wet-Indies. Being ren-
dered mafters.at sea by repeated v.ictories, we had
it in our power as it were to chufe what places
we would attack; and our attacks were executed
with valour, as they were direaed by judgment.
A squadron of ships failed for there parts, under
the condut of commodore Hughes, properly pro.
vided with ftore-Ihips and transports: their first
objea was, the redu&cion of Martinico; but,

G a failing

failing in this, they failed for Guadaloupe,. where
-they took Basseterre, and the whole island was
afterwards conquered; surrendering, upon capi.
tulation, to his majefly's arms.

In the mean time, the French, in the absence

of our fleet, made a vigorous attempt to retake
:Quebec, which was defended by general Murray,
whom they defeated in the field; but failed in an
attempt to get between his army and the town,
which held out till the arrival of a British fqua-
dron putting an end to their hopes, they raised
the siege, and retreated with the greatest preci-
pitation. Montreal was afterwards reduced, and
the French loft all footing in Canada4 the posses-
sion of which had so long enabled them to annoy
the Englilh colonists.

' The next year, 1762, the island of Dominica
(geherally efleemed neutral, but t-hen fettled by
the French) was taken by lord Rollo: but Mar-
tinico was-a place, the capture of which fill en-
grossed the thoughts of government; and it was
no,w resolved to make another attempt upon that
.isla'nd.

'Accordingly the English fleet, which then con-
ifted of nine ships of the line, besides frigates,
-bomb-ketches, &c. having been reinforced by the

effeils on the Barbadoes flation, anchored in St.
Anne's Bay oh the 8th of January, after having
silenced some batteries which the enemy had
.ereLed onthe eaflern part of the coast. A {hip
Js the line was loft here on a reef of rocks; but
the men and guns were saved. The English
fnade good'their landing, and driving the French
from Monte Torterfen and Monte Garnier, two
tonifiderable eminences, prepared to attack St.

Pierre;

Pierre; which, together with the whole island,.
surrendered on capitulation.

As the Spaniards, as well as the French, hadi

now involved themselves in a war with Great-
Britain, an eye was alto had .to their pgQffTefio.ns
in the Weft-Indies: a British force was .sent to-
reduce the island of Cuba, of which St. Jago is:
the capital; hut the Havannah is reckoned the..
first in wealth and extent, and has one of the beit;r
harbours in the world. After lfbe feints, they
arrived in the month of June 1762: the Britilh-
force, having soon made good their landing, ad--
vanced up the country under general Elliot, while
commodore l-eppel brought his ihips towards the'
Moro castle. Our troqps encountered incon-
ceivable difficulties in carrying on the liege of this;
fortress; but such was their refolutipn, that they
rose superior to them all: batteries were ereaed,.
and the approaches carried. qn with vigour. A-
sally was mnide on the 29th by the besieged,1, b.
they were repulsed: their killed and wounded .
amounted to two hundred men.

The admiral now detached three ships of the.

line, with orders, to lie as close in as possible, and-
batter the castle; but the Moro being situate on a
high and sleep iock ha-l little to fear from this at-.-
tack: whillt on the other hand, the men of war
were so much damaged from thence, and from;
Fort Puntal on the opposite fide, that commodore
Hervey, who commanded this divifian, was obli-
ged to withdraw. While this contest lasted, the
English, who had by this time opened their. bat-
teries on the land-lide, poured in an incessant fire-
upon the cafile; but, as soon as the (hips retired,.
the Spaniards answered it brilkly : and it was
plain that they were resolved on a vigorous de--

G 3 fence.

fence.- While matters were in this situation, the
principal battery of the Englilh blew up; a cir.
cumflance very unfortunate, as -the leafon ad-
vanced, and fatigue and sickness preyed both upon
the soldiers and seamen, while the fleet lay expo.
fed to hurricanes upon an hostile coast. Yet the
..commanders resolved to persevere; and, by their

example, so much animated their men, that new
batteries were ereEted; and they began to gain
some advantages over the enemy, whose cannon
by degrees were silenced: and at length the Eng.
lifh miners, with incredible indufiry and hazard,
made a'lodgment under the walls of the castle,
from whence the Spaniards found it impossible to
drive them. An attemptswas also made to take
the place by escalade; but the party that had
mounted the walls, being discovered before they
could be supported, were obliged to return with
precipitation. After this, the besiegers were at.
tacked by three bodies of men, under a heavy fire
from the forts; but these were repulsed with great
slaughter; the former losing but fifty men in the
aaion. At length, two mines were sprung with
such success, that a breach was made in the bar-
tion; which being deemed praaicable, orders
were issued for the assault. The English troops
accordingly mounted; and, after a- iharp dispute,
made good their footing: the Spaniards being
driven off with the loss of 150 men. Don Louis
de Velafer, who was governor of the fort (the
rnarquis de Gonfalez being blown up when the
mines were sprung) being a man of a mofi intre-
pidfpirit, resolved not to submit nor survive the
surrender oT.the castle: he fell, defending the
col6urs of Spain, after having given signal proofs
of the most aitonifhing bravery. About 400oo of

the

the garrison were made prisoners; the reft were
either slain in fight, or drowned in attempting to
escape to the town. The loss of the E-nglish in,
storming was only two lieutenants and twelve men
killed; one lieutenant, four serjeants, and twenty.-
four men wounded. After a faint resistance,
the town surrendered; of which the English took
poffeflion on the 14th of August, after a siege of
above. two months; having loft by sickness 700
men, including 39 officers, and 5 men, compre-
hending 15 officers bythe sword.

The treasures and merchandise which fell into

the hands of the English, with the Havannah, are
computed to amount to near £3oo,0oo sterling.
Of twelve fine ships of war lying in the harbour,
three had been funk by the Spaniards; the other
nine, all line of battle (hips, were taken: so that
this was a capital stroke, from which the enemy
had but little hopes to recover. - <

This year, M. de Tiernay, having gotLtoef

Brest in a fog, failed, for Newfouitnr!tiN" :.
he took two small settlements, defit6yed'tie'-fi s
for curing filh, and, at last, niade:himlelf iaffer
of St. John's. But, even before an armament
could be fitted out from England on this-occafion,
general Amherst, then commanding in North.
America, having advice of this temporary success
of the French, detached colonel Amherfl with a
body of land forces, and lord Colville, who com-
manded the English :fqadron there, to recover
there settlements. The troops landed, after a Ihort
resistance in) Torbay, about seven miles to the
northward of St. John's. T;he fl-ong polt, called
Kitty-Vitty, was firt taken, :sword n handt as
were afterwards two heights thai had been forti-
sied by the enemy. The forces encamped in the

^- G 4 neighbourhood

neighbourhood of the, fort on the i6th of Sep.
tember; and a mortar.battery, was completed the
next day. Some (hallops had been funk in the
harbour, which was commanded by a breast-work,
and a battery as yet unfinished. The channel
however being opened by the. English, colonel
AmherIt received artillery and itores by water.
The French governor had refused to surrender on
the firfl fumnmols; but, observing the works of the
besiegers still to advance, on the loth of Otober
he sent to demand a capitulation; and at length
surrendered himself and a fine body of troops, as
numerous as the .inglih forces, prisoners of war,
on condition of being conveyed to Brest with the
firIt opportunity that offered. Lord Colville ha.
ving been driven off the coast by contrary winds,
yIr. Tiernay, once more favoured by a fog, put
off to Cea, and thus saved his little armament.
Thus St. John's, and in consequence all the. fettle.
meit?, on the coast, were recovered, with the
iofs of two -fficers, gnd about twenty: private
men; the French being every where defeated.

It would be foreign to our purpose, to mention

the successes in Europe, which brought about a
peace. The king of Prussia, supported by this
country, was enabled to make a fland against all
his-enemies, and often to conquer them. The
Britifi arms were successful, as we have seen in
the Weft-Indies. Pondicherry and other places
were fubdtiedin the eastern wor.d. Every one
lnows thei; successes of Bofcawen and our other
gallant admirals. But above all, the defeat of
M.: Conflans by Sir Edward Hawke, and, the de-
itruaien of; so many fine ships of war, appalled
the French, and difpofe(l them at last to peace.
The finances of England were indeed reduced;

-

. »~
,.~ .. .vbut

# CHAP. VIII.

but those of France were utterly exhaufied; and'
Spain was in no condition to supply her old ally.
A treaty was therefore set on foot, and, after.
some delays, signed at Paris, in 1763. In this
there were some articles favourable to the Prufianr
monarch: the Prench consented to return Mi..
iorca; Guadaloupe and Martinico were refitdred
to them, and the Havannah to Spain; but Ca.-
nada was ceded to the Britifi crown for ever.
Refleaions-Origin of the prefnt Coneft--Stamp

AS paffed-Repealed-Fre/ l Duties.-New Dif/
putes-Provincial - Congrejs-General CongreJfs
-Condu17 of Government-Of the Coloni/s-
Deifruition of the Tea--Bofton Port-Bill-
Battle of Bunker's-Iilt-State of Afairs in
Canada- ReJletions on the American Address
to the People of England.,.

-'ANADA being ceded to Great-Britain by-
. the treaty of Paris, while the in return gave
up Martinico and other conquests, all things were
supposed by men of commercialunderftanding to,
be fettled upon a permanent foundation : but
there were some politicians who affei'ted'that-they.
few deeper into these matters. They said, that.
the North-Americans, moR .of .them originating
from. a republican, lock,, would endeavour to: be
independent, as soon as the enemy were removed
from their frontiers. These men, though they ad,

G .. duced:

duced Come proofs of the spirit of the colonifls
from the American history, were only treated as
vifionaries; but unhappily we have lived to fee
their prophecies fulfilled in their utmost extent.

The earl of Bute, a minister who, with good

designs, was possessed of slender political abilities,
being removed from his place, Mr. Grenville was
placed at the head of the treasury. This gentle-
man, who had formerly prelided at the board of
trade, turned his attention towards the in.
crease of the revenue, and the prevention ot
tmtiggling. Thy American colonists were, of all
the people in the world, most addited to contra.
band trade; of which they would-admit of no
reftrition. They carried on an illicit commerce
with the French and Spaniards ; and they averred,
that it was necessary to their very existence.
While the English adminiflration attended to
f:riijufti'ce, and the cotonifls only to conveni-
ence, it was impossible that they should agree in
circumfiances of this nature. The minister we
have mentioned, also planned'the flamp-aEf. The
colonifis opposed it, by an agreement not to import
goods from Great-Britain. The obnoxious a6t,
however, having raised many disturbances in. the
colonies, especially that of Maffachufet's-Bay,
wasfirft postponed, and at length repealed; but
the repeal was accompanied-with a declaration of
the right of Great-Britain to tax the people of
North-America. The at was repealed by the
Rockingham adminiflration. Modern men of all
parties seemed rather inclined to think the flamp.
aft oppressive; and most people at home thought,
that the repeal of this aet would put the Ameri-
cans into good humour, and restore all things to
their former situation. But the declaration with

which

which it was .cl.oged, :nd the subsequent pori-
duties onr tea, 'paper, painter's colours, and glass,
till kep.t up the ferment. Afociations were en-,
tered into; circular l'ttcrs' wveie enti fiom'one
province to another; and the colonists prepared
to wbrk therrifelves p to that' pitch of enthufiafr
which has since proved so injurious to themselves,'
and't the tmoher-country ..

Gdverori'Bernaird at this timie gave offence- to

the Bboffonians, by his. endeavours to preserve tie1'
power with which he was intrufed. Cotfihptants
were made in England; the colonifis were're.
minded of their duty, but they answered, "'That
* they were only'afliduous in asserting their liber-

ties;" and were deaf to all further remonstrances.

Some violent repiblicans seized a schooner, fta-
tioned off Providence in Rhode-flland; and the
behaviour of the Boflonians tended to {et the
whole colony of North.America in a flame. In
order to widen the breach, some letters were pro-
duced, which involved the governor, and the
lieutenant-governor of Maffachufet's;Bay, in a
charge of having made an unfavourable represent.
ation of affairs in that settlement. A very melan-
choly representation had indeed been made, but
it did not exceed the truth; and the reflections
were pertinent and just: but such letters were
not at this time proper for the public eye. They
were pilfered from the polftoffice, to answer a
particular purpore. The consequence was, that
the letter being acknowledged, a petition was sent
over, requ'efing his majelty to remove the gover-
nor and.lieutenant-governor fron their places.

In the mean time, -a bill passed the two houses,

for enabling the Eaft-lndia company to export
their teas, duty free, to all places; and, among

G 6 the

tQ refi, to the colpntes, .hlere a. tax was to be
palddn the commodities be$?glanded .at td e port.

In the present fituatoion of affaiis, the company
ad lttlle to promise themselves from this indul.
gence. The design was no sooner known in
Norith.America, than all possible means were used.
to prevent it from taking effe&. Hand-bills were
itpe'rTed 'among the people, and eveiry me'asure
use4. to preyent it's taking place. Three fiips,

ihoyever,. laden with tea, or the Eaft-India com-

p a,ny'¥ ccount, at lass arrived at BofRon. Had
their loading been fetters to enthral, or the most
deadly' poison to. delroy, the inhabitants, they
could not have been looked upon with a greater
degree of horror. The captains promised, that if
they had'the concurrence of the consignees, the
board of cufloms, and the fort of Cafle-William,
they would return with their cargoes; but, as these
conditions could hot be complied with, they were
obiiged to abide the fury of an incensed people;
thich was discharged upon them in the following
manner:-As soon as the Bostonians were assured
that the tea must be landed (forgetting that the
matter was of little consequence, if they were all
firmly resolved, according to agreement, not to
purchafe,it) they sent a number of armed men on
board the veflels to effet it's deftruaion. These
people came in the disguise of Mohawk Indians,
(a sure proof that the whole. was the result of de-
liberation) and.within a few hours discharged the
cargoes of the .vessels into the sea; th, royal
powuer not .daring, and the civil not cbufing, to
refifl them.

This outrage upon private property, an4 resist-

ance to all legal government, occasioned. vhat was
called the Boson Port-Billto be afterwards passed

in

in England, as well as another a6, entitled, Fqr
ith better rejulating tkeG overnm t of Mag-.
chufe'sC-B.a; in which some alterations of tihe
charter, as granted by king Willigm, were made:
and this was succeeded by a thnird, 'entited,4 A Bill
for the impartial Admninifration of Juafiice, in the
Cafes of Persons quetlioned for any' Aazs done y"
tein iz thie Execution of the Laws, or fbr the
Suppre/ion of Riots and Tnuiults tn the Province
of Ma/ ac4tiet's-Bay in NewvEngtland. This last
bill, .h ich passed on the 6th of May, provides,
' That in'ca'e ae y person is indie.d in that pro-
' vince for murder, or any other capital offence,
", ad t.hati.t shall appear to the governor- thata
", fair trial cannot be, had in the province;- then
" he shall fend die person so indiEed to any other
"colony, or to Great-Britain, to be tried: the

charges on both fides to be borne out of the
" cufloms." This aW was to continue for four
years.

Towards the close of this fefion was also passed,
the Quebec Hl&, for the relief of his majefly's
Roman catholic fubjEts in Canada; by which,.
persons of that persuasion were entitled to a feat
in the council; and all the catholic clergy, except
the regulars, were confirmed in their estates and
claims to tythes, from their refpeEtive parishes.

These aas, however juit in themselves, as
they were not supported by any considerable force,
tended only fill more to increase the disturbances
of the Americans; who were, or pretended to
be, alartned at every idle report. At one time.
they were told that their whole, constitution was
to be subverted, and their resentment rose. ac-.
cordingly; at another, that the New-England.
capital was to be laid in ashes; and a mad.mul-

titude

titude- prepared to marchi to the relief of the city '
which 'was not intended to be iijured. , A riot,
which had prevailed there, wherein rtome rfh per.
ions were slaih, for which a captain was tried for
bis life, but acquitted, was afterwards denominated
7he Massacre of Boson.

At a time so critical as this, it, was not to be

fnppofed that general Gage, who succeeded the
late governor, could- find himself at all at cafe.
The aa of paliament having apppointtd a new
council to be fumrnoned by mrandamuius, the mem.
bers were for the in6ft part ierrified from attend.
ing. 'The juries refused to be sworn in under the
new judges; the cufRom-houfe officers fled fron
Salem (the port appropriated by government)
to. Boflon f safety ; as some of them, as well as
others, had' been seized, carted,' tarred and
feathered; and their lives threatened by the po.
pulace.

.General Gage, observing that the populace,
apprehensive of a surprise, were ready to rife on.
every occasion, had caused cannon to be planted
on Bofton-Neck. This was construed into a de.
sign of deflroying innocent people, a'nd some re-
monstrances were presented so his excellency on
the occasion; who answered, that he had no such
ideas, but that the guns which were placed there
were planted only for security, and would annoy
none that passed peaceably to and fro upon their
lawful business.

But this was of little consequence; the people,

who had before met at Liberty-tree, now entered
into a solemn league and covenant, and held more
frequent meetings in different parts of the pro.
vince; and in the midst of the confusion another
circumstance happened which greatly deranged the

meafurea

measures of-the governor. After having diflolved.
the general assembly, he had issued writs for con-
vening a new one; but on second thoughts coun-.
termanded it by proclamation. This assembly,,
however, met according to his firIt precept at Sa-
lem, where having waited a day for the governor,
and as he did not appear, nor any one to adminifler
the oaths, they therefore now voted themselves
a Provincial Congress, and adjourned to the town
of Concord, from whence they sent a remon-
ftrance to the governor, concerning the breaches
of the American charter, who in his turn remon-
firated to them on the unconflitutional manner in
which they had met, as not having the fanaion
of legal authority.

In the winter, barracks were eretfed for- the

troops; but it was with the greatell difficulty, as
few workmen durfi accept of employment, and
few of the American natives were found willing
and hardy enough to furnish materials for shelter-
ing a body of men that were looked upon as ene.
mies to the country.

The proyincial congrers breaking up, recom-
mended many things to the people, which they,
meant should militate against the interefs of Great-
Britain; not doubting but their advice and recom-
mendation would be confidered to be more bind-
ing than any law which could be enaEted at such
a time. The governor issued his proclamation
against these proceedings; but it tended only to
increase the confusion. A general congress was
appointed by the Americans, and many moderate
persons hoped that such an assembly might be
competent to the redress of all grievances, and,
the re-eflablifhment of harmony with the mother,
country.

.. .... ~The

The deputies of the twelve colonies, who sent

members to the congress, were differently in.
lruated by their constituents, as some were more
Violent, others more moderate; but these seemed
to agree in two maxims: the one was, to assert
the right of the Americans to hold their own
charter, and to tax themselves; the other, toac.
knowledge their dependence upon the crown of
Great-Britain, and their natural connexion with
the parent-fiate: but on the whole, each separate
colony charged it's delegates toacquiefcewith what
should be determined by the majority.

The first aa of the congrefs'was, to declare

their approbation of the proceedings of the colony
ds' Mafiuchufet's-Bay; a fufficieit earnest of what
was to be expecEed from them in future. They
then went on to conflitute some further regula-
tions, as if all government had been dissolved, or
already solely veiled in themselves. They issued
orders which the people in general obeyed; even
those who were otherwise inclined, not daring to
dispute them, left they hould be publicly decla-
red enemies to their country, as they well knew
what would be the consequence of such a decla.
ration.
-'In the mean time, the power of Great-Britain
extended not further than the limits of Bofion,,
which contained also many thousands of refrafto-
ryinhabitants, whom, though one would 'at first'
be led to imagine, the governor would have been
glad to get rid of; yet it is generally supposed that.
he was inclined to keep them there, while by de-
grees he fortified the place, that they might serve
as hostages, for his better security from any adls of
violence that might be offered in the adjacent
country.

Notwilthfanding

Notwithanding the Americans fiill professed,
that they meant to demean themselves as peaceable
and loyal fubjeats of the crown of Great-Britain;
yet as the governor perceived they were difpoq
red every where to arm themselves, he therefore
endeavoured to seize upon the arms and ammuni.
tiol of the province, where he could find an op,
portunity.

A party havipg been sent out for this purpose tQ
a spot distant from Boston, came to a place where
they were interrupted by a stream, over which
there was a bridge.; but the inhabitapts had drawn
it up on their approach,. insisting that this was a
private road, along which they had no right tQ
pass. The governor's people asserted the conl
irary, and were preparjng to fend for boats; nay,
some leaped into the water, on this pccafion, with
the most undaunted resolution; for the soldiers
had by this time received so mapy. insults froln
the.people in the execution of their duty, tha:t
they began to conceive a hatred against them onr
that account; while the native Americans had
in their turn been taught to confider the troops as
mere ruffians, and the yile ,inltruments, in the
hands of ministers, to reduce them and their ppf.
terity to the molt abjeCt slavery. But, while this
dispute was in it s height, the country people col.
lefting around, and all things verging towards ex-
tremes, .a worthy clergyman desired a conference
with the officer who commanded the British de,
tachment, In the Course of teir conversation,.
the formrne discerned that tiJe latter rather infiflte
on passing. this river, as a: point of honour and.
obedience of orders, than with a view of execu-
ting a commiflion w.hich it was now too late foc
him toQ attempt. . In consequence of this, the

country

country people were perfuaded'to let down the
draw-bridge, over which the troops passed, ad.
vanced a little way, effeced nothing, and returned
without interruption.

Thus was this dispute ended without bloodshed,

but not at all to the governor's advantage, whose
design was frufrated; and who began now to fee,
that the flame of discord was not only kindled
amrngfl a few, but had spread itself far and wide,
and muR indeed be very difficult to extinguish.
What fill further convinced him of this melan.
choly truth, was, his receiving advice that the
people of Rhode-Ifland had seized the ordnance
and royal flores there; and that the southern co.
lonies were every day more and more in commo.
tion; declaring, that they looked upon it as their
duty to affit,'and to Rand or tall by their brethren
of Maffachufet's-Bay. It was well known, like.
wife, that the provincials were continually enter.
ing into private associations among themselves;
and were projeeing manutaaories of salt-petre,
and founderies for the calling of cannon, where
they had' not an opportunity of seizing on thoe'
belonging to government.

-Inh 1775, the provincial congress was held at

the town of Concord; where a considerable
quantity of military flores was colleted. Gene.
ral Gage being apprized of this circumflance, sent
a detacthmeit;iof goo9 men from Boston, to seize
upon thole flores, which he conceived to be col
leaed for the sole pur/ofe of opposing govern.

erint.; The detachment-h arched accoidingly;
guns; were fired, and alarm-bells were rung;
while the troops advanced towards Lexington;
where, finding a body of militia assembled, 'they
ordered them to disperse. This seems to have

been

been as it were a signal for an engagement. It is
uncertain which of the parties fired first; but, as
things were brought to such a crisis, we cannot
wonder that such an event took place on either.
fide. Several of the militia however were killed
and wounded; and the royal forces proceeded to
Concord, in order to destroy some canndo and
tores, which in part they effeAed: but the dif-
pute was afterwards renewed at a bridge, of which
the light-infantry had possessed themselves when
they first advanced, but where they now again en.
gaged the militia, and seem to have suffered some
lols in their retreat. The detachment was now
attacked on all fides; not only openly, but from
meeting-houses and dwelling-houfes, from behind
walls and other coverts. Fortunately, lord Percy
bad been sent to re-inforce them; who, arriving at
this juncture, with his fresh troops and two field
pieces, kept the Americans at fonme ditlance, tilt
the king's forces had made good their retreat
through Charles-Town to Boston.

This was in effee the cominencemt of hofli-
lities between Great-Britain and her colonies. Iii
the mean time, the colonifis petition being re.
je&ed at home, drove them to the extreme otf
phrenzy. The next a&ion which deserves re.'
ncnibrance, was that of Bunker's-Hill; which,'as
acertain popular gentleman has said, was neari
deciding at one blow the fate of the British .eni-
pire in America. '

lt is to be oblferved, that on the one hand the
provincials had contrived to surprise Crown-Point
and Ticonderago, the frontiers of Canada; whilst,
on the other hand, 'a reinforcement of troops, un.
der the generals Howe, Burgoyne, and Clinton,
arrived at Bofion, which was at this time block-

aded

aded by a vast body of the Americans, which, it
is probable, they would at firit have attempted to
' florm, had it not been for the excellent train of
artillery in the place, and the number of ihips of
war and armed veflels which almolf surrounded
the peninfila. About the fame tine, the general
congress resolved, that the compaEt between the
colonies and the British government was. broken
by the tyranny of the latter, and the government
had declared the insurgents Rebels; offering, how.
ever, a pardon to all that fhmuld submit, John
Hancock and Sarnuel Adams excepted; an ex.
(eption certainly most imprudent, as it mutl natu.
rally drive those men to despair, and render them
particularly active in enflamning the minds of an
already enraged people.

It was in this situation of things that the battle

of Bunker's -ill was fought; of which the fol.
lowing description wiltgive the reader a just idea,

In i775, the provincials, who had not as yet

occupied Charles-Town, beginning now to think
this a plaqe of consequence, tent under covert of
the night, a body of men thither, with orders to
throw up works upon Bunker's-Hill, an high
ground, that lies jufi within the isthmus or neck
of land, that joins the peninsula to the continent.
This peninsula is similar to that on which Boflon
flands, only that the isthmus is wider, and that
Bunker's-Hill is much higher than any hill in
the latter; Charles-River only separates the towns,
and is, there about the lame breadth as the Thames
between London apd Southwark; so that Charles.
Town had much the fame connexion with Bolton,
as'the borough here has with the city.

The works were carried on with silence; so
ibit no discovery was made during the night,

though

'tihogh the ships of war surrounded them. This
party had used such dispatch, that they had nearly
finihed a redoubt, intrenchments, and a breast-
work, that was in some parts cannon proof, by
break of day. The fight of those, first fi;uck the
officers and crew of the king's Ihip, the Lively,
whose guns called the town, camp, and fleet, to
behold a fight so extraordinary. Immediately a
[mart fire from the town, the ships, and the floating
batteries, was begun upon those new-raifed works,
which the provincials flood better than could
have been expeEted: but about noon, general
Gage ordered a considerable body of troops to be
embarked, under the command of major general
Howe, and brigadier general Pigot, to drive the
provincials from their works. But the'generals
soon after found the enemy so numerous, that
they sent for a reinforcement, which accordingly
arrived before they proceeded to the attack, which
was a revere discharge of cannon and howitzers,
chiefly intended to ruin the American works. In
the mean time, the provincials threw a body into
Charles-Town, which much disconcerted the ad-
vancing army; but, just at a critical moment,
some carcases, as it was generally supposed, set that
town on fire. The provincials, now in the heat-
of their zeal, and firit hurry of their spirit, behaved
with greatcourage and refolution,much more than
they have in general displayed in their aiflons
since, during the course of the American war, in-
fomuch that it's said, general Howe was for
some seconds loft. At this instant, general Clinton
came up, and encouraged the troops to charge;
the consequence was, that they advanced with
their bayonets fixed, drove the Americans from

their

their works, and gained a complete, though a
bloody and dear-bought vitory.

The British troops, after this ation, encamped

on the spot where Charles-Town food, the very
motherof Boston; once containing 400 house$,
but now become a heap of ruins. One lieutenant.
colonel, two majors, seven captains, and seventy
other officers were wounded; · lieutenant-colonel
Abercrombie, and the brave major Pitcairne pe.
rifhedhere; and the whole loss in killed and wound.
ed on the royal fide, amounted to 1054. The pro.
vincials fay, they loft not one-third of the num.
ber; but it appears that they were severely han.
died. TheBritifh officers signalized themselves
remarkably upon this occasion. About thirty
prisoners were taken, and five pieces of cannon
out of fix which the provincials had brought t
this post, were taken. How many were killed
on their fide is uncertain. They fay their whole
loss amounted only to 450 men.

Several skirmishes then followed, chiefly origi.

nating from the want of forage, while the troops
were cooped up in Boston. In one of these, the
guard-house; in another, the light-house was de
stroyed. The contest in there cafes was unequal!
The king's troops were well disciplined; but the
Americans had the advantage of numbers, and
the command of the open country. A partial prx.
datory war commenced, and many of the finall
towns suffered in the contest.

In the mean time, the indulgences granted to

the Canadians by theQuebec aEt already mention.
ed, did notoperate in such a manner as might have
been expeEted. General Carleton, who conm
manded in Canada, supposed that he could easily
have raised a formidable force in that country

with

withlwhich he might have over-awed, and at proper
opportunities penetrated into, the New-England
provinces; but the provincials there, answered
only, that they would defend the country if at.
tacked, but were unwilling to march out of it.
This was the general opinion; but the noblefie
iere inclined to favour the British cause.

An application was made to the Indians, but
they had already been addressed by the agents of
the congress; so that not knowing what part-to
take, they at this time seemed resolved to Rand
neuter, exprefling themselves in terms very re-
fpelful to the British nation; but observing, that
though they were sorry, that parents and children
should dispute, and they being no judges, it was
not proper for them to take an aative part in the
quarrel.

Though the congress at this time reprobated the
idea of independence; yet they gave hints of as.
lifiance from foreign powers, and treated with
the greatest contempt the plan formed by govern.
ment for reconciling matters; while they thougllt
proper, at the fame time, to fend an address tothe
people of England at large, whom they wished in
a manner, somewhat extarordinary, to interest in
their favour.

But it was too late for addresses, or remon-
firances; the sword was drawn, and that alone
could now decide the contest: perhaps the Ame-
ricans thought so; but they were disposed at this
late period, to give the world an idea of their
candour and moderation. However, they met
with no success in their attempt, as they might
easily have foreseen; yet, perhaps, it answered the
purpose of attempting to justify their proceedings
to the world, and in that refpeE might be looked
upon as a manifeflo, calculated for the informa.

tion

tion of foreign, nations, more than an address to
the people of England. They had alro addrefled
the Canadians, and though they exclaimed against
the bill, commonly call the Quebec AFt, which
tolerated the catholic religion; yet in this pl'blic.
infirument of theirs; they asseted to '%dt them
as brethren, and exhorted them to join in the
common cause, without attending to religious
diftinEtions. This the Americans termed policy;
But their adversaries gave it another name; they
called it duplicity.

As to the people of England, the generality of

them judged as party led them. Those who gloried
in the name of Whigs, having already declared
against adminifiration, were inclined to favour
the colonies; while those who were diflinguifhed
by the appellation ofTories, were equally sanguine
againfl them. There were not wanting able poli-
ticians to drawthepen on either fide, and the press
g,oaned with publications of this fort. In the
mean time, government was greatly erhbarraffed,
and moderate thinking persons looked forward
with apprehensions for the events of the unhap.
,py contest.

C H A P

# CHAP. IX.

C H A P. IX.
General WaJhington appointedCommander--Sketckes

of kis Life and Charatter-Invafion of Canada
-Forts taken-Quebec besieged by Montsomery
--His Defeat and Death-G en. Carleton s Con.
dul- Further Attempts of the Provincials---
Succours rrive from England-The Siege
rafied-Canada entirely recoverd by tke Royal
Army-Blockade of Boflon continued-An Or-
dnance Skip eized--Bombardment of the Town
-General Howe evacuates Bodfon, and with-
draws to Halifax.
T KHE congress now declared, that as the sword'

was drawn, they would not sheath it till they

had made the firongeft efforts to recover those rights
which, they said, the British ministry had been so
intent upon wresting from them. As they had
been for some time busied in military arrange-
ments, so they had not been wanting in appoint.
ing generals to head their troops. Israel Putnam.
had commanded in the action at Bunker's-Hill.;
but the principal dependence of the colonists was
upon major-general Walhington, of whose name
the reader may remember we have made mention
in our account of the war with thejFrench in
Canada.

This gentleman's family was originally de-
fcendents from Lincolnshire, but removed to Co.
ventry, where Mr. Washington was born, the 3d
of September, in the year 1727. His mother
was descended from the famous gentl Monk,
afterwards created duke of Albemarle, by king
Charles I. who was much obliged to him for his

H retoration.

refloration. Mr. Washington was. a private vo.
lunteer in Wade's regiment in 1746: he served
against the rebels, and afterwards travelled into
e!ign countries but when the war broke out
in 1755, he crossed the Atlantic, and became a
Xnajor of the provincial forces raised against the
Fiench in America. He at length obtained a re-
giment there; but when peace was concluded, re-
,~ tired to cultivate an estate which hhead purchased

id' Virginia. For this province he was chosen
as one of the delegates to the congress, it being
well known that he was well affected to the Ame.
rican cause. That assembly afterwards appointed
him commander in chief; but there appears fonc.
what indicating their jealousy of power in whonim
soever it might be vetted, when we observe, tiat
in their address to him, on conferring this higl,
office upon him, they tell him, they trust that.
when those ends are obtained for which they took
up arms, he will return to the flation of a private
citizen again. They have, indeed, now altered
the object which they first declared they had
in view. Should they ever obtain the end Ior
which now they wage war, it remains only for
time to determine whether their, general will conm
ply with their withes, and adhere to what he him.
self has promised.

This commander, together with general Lee,

of whom we ihall have occasion to speak more at
large hereafter, arrived on the 6th of July at
the camp before BofRon, where, by this time, about

8.o000 men were assembled; and there were in-
rolled upon paper upwards of 200,00oo men in the
different ]c9vinces, which, as Georgia acceded to
the league, :were now Rtiled the Thirteen United
StatesofAmerica,and shortly after changed their red

flag

which has' ever: fincd been regarded'as thitr'badge-
of :diftliaion. '

.

-. Fbr'the present, these generals, who were re.
ceived with ihe highest degree of refpet; could do
nothing more than continue the blockade of
Boston, 1775, which lasted through the remainder
of this, and a part of the succeeding year: :both'
the besiegers and the besieged suffering greatly on
the occasion; the former, as men not inured to
the hardships of war; the latter, as being cut off
from all communication with the open country,
endeavouring in vain to draw subsistence from the
neighbouring colonies and from the Weft-Indies,
and depending for all their supplies of food and
every thing else from England, where the transports
intended to relieve them were detained by con-
trary winds, great part of the live Rock defiroyed,
and the vegetables corrupted, before the veflels
could reach the desired haven.

In the midst of these distresses, the commanders

endeavoured to keep up the spirits of the people.
A patrole was appointed to scour the fireets
nightly. The fortifications. raised on the ruins of
Charles-Town were so much firengthened, that
they were deemed impregnable; and in the midst
of this scene, an old meeting-house: being con-
verted into a playhouse, several comic pieces-
were reprefented-there, and, among the reft, one
that was called, The blockade of Bo/ton, which was
calculated indeed to ridicule the enemy ; but-
upon the whole, might be confidercd as an extra-.
ordinary mode that people had adopted of 'porting
with their own misfortunes.

In the mean time, the congress having been
successful in the redustion of Ticonderago and

H 2 Crown-

Crow.n&-Point, ,efolved to pursue their design of
penetrating into the very heart of. Canada; and
thus at once to change the ground upon which
they hadttaken up arms, when they declared they
fought not for Conqueflbqt for Liberty; however,
they reconciled this contradiEion by urging, that
Should they not adopt ,uch a measure, thpy might
perhaps soon fee an army of Canadians and In-
dians carrying all the horrors of war into New.
England. Whatever were their motives, the
generals Schuyler and Montgomery, with two re.
giments of New-York militia, and other forces,
set out upon this expedition. Montgomery passed
the Lakes, published a proclamation, inviting the
Canadians to join him, and pulied for St. John's
fland, of which, however, they could not make
themselves matiers at that time for want of a pro-
per supply of ordnance and ammunition. In the
mean while, as the provincial parties were dif.
perfed over the country, Ethan Alien, who,
though he had no commission from the congress,
had been concerned in the expedition across the
Lakes, endeavoured to surprise the town of Mon-
treal, which he meant to plunder, but was attacked
by the militia, defeated, and sent prisoner to
England.

Schuyler had returned to Albany upon the

retreat from Fort St. John's; and Montgomery
found it so well defended, that he turned his
thoughts to attack the smaller fort of Chamble,
which being soon surrendered to him, furnished
him with the very articles which he wanted: he
then resumed his former situation before St.
John's, which was furrende"ed to him after an ob-
linate defence. Here he, received news that
general Carleton had been defeated at Longueville,

and

and that colonel M'Lean, with a regiment called
ihe Highland Enigrants, had failed in his attempts
to join him. After the reduation of St. John's,
Montgomery marched to Montreal, which fur.
rehdered on terrss of capitulation. In the mean
time, Arnold proceeded with' all expedition to.
wards Quebec, from another quarter, towards
which general Carleton had retired, where-the
force aflnibled was by no means adequate to the
defence of a place of such consequence.

The appearance of Arnold before this capital

firuck many with dread, and all with aflonifhment;
discontents prevailed in the city; few offered to
defend it, and fill fewer were to be depended
upon; nor weie there any troops in the place till
M'Leah's' highland emigrants made good their
retreat thither.

Arnold summoned the town; but the people

being recovered from their surprise, no answer.
was given: he retreated to his camp just as Carle-
ton arrived, and matters began to wear a serious
afpe&. Soon after, Montgomery having quitted
Montreal, joined the provincials; but general
Carleton feeing the slate of affairs, ordered all who
had refused to defend the place to quit it, and
embodied about 1500 men, scarcely any of whom
could be called regulars, except one company of
the 7th regiment, and these were mostly new re.
cruits. The most serviceable of all included in.
this number, were 450 seamen drawn from the
king's frigates and merchantmen lying in the har-
bours; yet with this force the general was re-
solved to defend the city, refused to receie. any
furnmons or message, and baffled the attempts oft
the enemy.

Hd b Montgomery

I

Montgomery intended to take therplace by es.

calade; but in this he was disappointed. At length
a general attack was resolved on, which took
place during a snow form; advancingj through
a narrow defile, he forced a barrier that appeared
well guarded; advancing to a second, where feve-
ral pieces loaden with grape-{hot were planted, he
was slain, and numbers of his followers cut off
Arnold attacking another quarter, was wounded,
the greater part of his soldiers were taken pri-
loners, and the reft retreated in confusion; though
Carleton deemed it improper in these circum-
stances to hazard any thing by pursuing them.

The prisoners were treated by general Carleton

with the greatest tenderness, which ihewed, that
notwithlanding his severity, he was sensible to
the feelings of humanity.

Arnold however continued the siege, and Carle.

ton continued his defence with equal -obstinacy,
and all supplies were hindered from entering the
town. They now attempted with ihells and red
hot balls to destroy the city; but in this they
failed: the small-pox broke out among them, and
their number was reduced to leTs than 700 men:
at this junEture, however, a party headed by M.
Beaulieu, with a design of raising the siege, was
encountered and dispersed by the rebels.

But this was their last success.. The long ex-

peeted succours from England arrived. The Isis
man of war and two frigates broke through the
ice with difficulty, at a time when the passage was
deemed impraaicable. Some troops were landed,
and on the fight of there the Americans abandoned
their camp,, artillery,- and military stores, and
retired with the utmost precipitation.

No

-No praise could be superior to that which Carle-
ton deserved for his fortitude: with a spirit which
might have done honour to an old Roman, he de.
fended'a city ill-fortified, and worse supplied; and
after an inevitable defeat in the field, ibewed that
he was determined to defend his sacred charge.
and proved himself alike superior to the; open
force, and the insidious wiles of the enemy, who
sometimes attempted to storm, and often, by their
arts, to win the city. But when all these were
evaded by this determined chief, they were obli.
ged to be content with turning the flege into a fort
of blockade, whereby they might straiten and
incommode the garrison and the citizens' at this
inclement season.

General Carleton knowing what fort of ene.

mies he had to deal with, and- not depending on
the fidelity of the inhabitants, was resolved to re.:
ceive no mnefages. He had even fired upon a
flag of truce; but in this conduc he was juftied.
by his critical situation.

The 17th of March being St. Patrick's day, it

was generally supposed that M'Lean's corps would'
spend it in mirth and fefiivity. This the enemy'
expected ; but the governor refolved-to guard
against the danger. He publilhed a proclamation
which some people laughed at, and said it was'
truly Irish; but it certainly had a good Englilh'
meaning. By this proclamation St. Patrck's day'
was deferred till the middle of, May, by which'
time succours might be reasonably expected from'
England. The Irish people were not difp'keaed;'
and the Americans, who were already fatigued,
and had been so often baffled, met with a freflh
disappointment.

H 4 At
* -c

At length, towards the close of the year 1776,

the Iis, together with two frigates, arrived with
reinforcements from England. They made their
way through the ice, which still partly covered St.
Laurence's river; and a small reinforcement was
immediately thrown into the town) with a promise
of an immediate more powerful succour: thus
encouraged, the garrison assumed fresh spirits, and
the governor resolved not to lose the advantage.
A sally was made; the enemy were found already
retreating, and retired so precipitately that they
left their artillery, flores, and baggage, behind
them; but were too expeditious in their retreat
for any execution to be done among them: they
left, however, numbers of their sick behind them.
At the fame time, general Carleton, who, though
revere as a soldier, was humane as a man, issued
the following proclamation on the occasion:

i' Whereas I am informed that many of his

' Majesty's deluded fubjeas of the neighbouring
' provinces, labouring under wounds and divers
" disorders, are dispersed in the adjacent woods
" and parishes, and in great danger of perishing
' for want of proper affifance; all captains and
I other officers of militia are hereby commanded
" to make diligent search for all such difireffed
i' persons, and afford them all necessary relief,
" and convey them to the general hospital, where
" proper care flall be taken of them; all reason-
' able expences which may be incurred, by corn.
" plying with this order, mhall be repaid by the
*, receiver-general.
- " And left a consciousness of past offences
'" ihould deter such miserable wretches from re-
* ceiving that assistance which their distressed

'" situation
A

"' ffuation may require, I hereby make known to,
"them, that as soon as their health. is restored,
,: they shall havre free liberty to return to 'their
° refpetive prdvinces. 'i

Given under my hand and fealdof arms, at the

castle of St. Louis, and city of Quebec, this.
"i oth day of May 1776. '

" GUY CARLETON.'

The promise given in the above declaiation;
was flriily adhered to, and all who claimed ftle
benefit of it, were received into6the hospital; and
fich of them as were cured,were sent back as sooad
as they chose, to return to their families and friends.

The siege of Quebec thus raised, the provin-

cials continued their retreat till they came to the
banks of the river Sorel. In the mean time,.
general Carleton, being reinforced by Eng.lish
and Brunfwickers, found himself at the head of
1L,ooo men, with which force he was resolved to
pursue his good fortune, and endeavour to clear-
Canada entirely of the enemy. The general ren;
dezvous of the royal army was at Trois-Rivieres,
a place which lies in. the mid-way between -Que-
bec and Montleal, being ninety miles from eac,..
Here the provincials laid a plan for surprising die
British forces; but it mifcarriedd and the aflailants
retired quite disheartened by that circumflance.
General Burgoyne,who had arrivedwith the forces
from England, marched forward, towards Mon.
treal, which he found the enemy Had abandoned,
and from thence proceeded to St. Johi's, where
the reit of the army was to'j.in him. When
he arrived there, he found the buildings in flames,
and every thing that could not be carried off, de-

H ', ihroyed

flroyed by the provincials, who, aEed in the fame
manner at Chamble, and then continued their
retreat or flight toLake Champlain, on which they
embarked thelr men, and bore away immediately
for Crown Point. Thus was all Canada recovered
'from the Americans, who met with nothing but loss,
misfortunes, and disgrace, from the hour that they
rose from before Quebec, till they totally evacu.
ated the province.

We have given the detail of this expedition

entire, without breaking in upon the narrative with
the relation of what passed in. other parts of A-
merica; -but we shall now return to the affairs of
New England, where we left BoRon closely bloc.
kaded by the rebels, whose privateers and whale-
boats were very troublesome, in annoying and
Sometimes taking the Rdre-ihips, in the very fight
of our people. Among the reft, they captured
one vessel which had on board a large mortar and
several pieces of brass cannon, together with a
quantity of arms and ammunition, and all fdrts
of implements and materials proper for camps
and artillery; all this was directly what they want-
ed. And as general Washington had jut received
orders to push the siege with vigour, he deter-
mined to alter the plan of operations; and in the
beginning of March 1776, began to think of
bombarding the city. Accordingly, in the night
of the 2d of March, a battery was opened at a
place called Phipps's-Farm, near the water-side,
which did considerable damage to the quarter
against which, it was direaed. And on the 5th
of the fame month, while their attention was
yet called to this recent misfortune, they found
that other works were also raised upon the heights
of Dorchelter.point, on the other fide of the

town,

town, from whence a twenty-four pound bomb
battery soon afterwards discharged it's fury.

Thus attacked on all fides, in want of provision,

and almost every necessary, and having received
no advices from England since the month of Oc-
tober, the commander in chief began to think
himself deserted; he resolved, however, in this
perilous situation, to make one effort to avert the
present danger. That very evening, he made pre-
parations for the embarkation of five regiments,
with the light infantry and grenadiers, in order
to dislodge the enemy from those heights. In all
probability this would have brought on a general
engagement, which, confidering the situation of
our troops, might have terminated in the favour
of their enemies; but a violent storm prevented
this measure from taking place, till this work
was ftiengthened by others, and the fortifications
so well disposed, that it muff have been the height
of madness to have attempted an aifault in- that
quarter.

In the mean time, the fire of the enemy in.

creased, and their Ihells sometimes reached dtlie
very centre of Boston; their friends and enemies
were alike exposed to the danger, and matters
became so desperate, nothing remained for the
general but to quit the place, and retreat to the
ihipping in the harbour, in as good order as
poflible. Accordingly, preparations were maride
for this purpose, with all convenient expedition,
while the enemy continued in their works, with-
out giving the Britfh army the leaf moleflation
while they were embarking;- a circumflance which
has occasioned some to afert, that there was an
agreement for this purpofe;'made between the
two commanders; but this the ministry absolutely

H 6 denioU.

denied. Perhaps there was no such atual agree.
ment; but probably it might be whispered to the fe-
lea men, that if the troops were annoyed, Boflon
would inevitably be laid in ashes: whereas, if
they were permitted t6 depart quietly, they would
do no damage to the perfbns or private property
of any body; and the felet being permitted
to acquaint Washington of this, it might well be
supposed to produce the desired effect.

However, though general Howe was not mo.

lefted by the enemy, he was greatly incumbered by
his friends. It would have been cruel to leave
those behind him who bad taken shelter under
his power : so that these crowded the transports,
and at the fame time they appeared as men com.
pelled to quit their native country, and to wan-
der in search of new habitations; while the tick,
wounded, infirm perfons,and women,were at once
the objeas of pity and attention. Cares fuc-
ceeded to cares; and the general, though he ap-
peared to bear all with firmness, could not but be
under great vexation and embarrassment of mind,
when he refleced on his situation, and the voy-
age he had to make, Halifax being the desired
port; and the seas in these parts, at this sea.
Ion of the year, being generally tempeltuous;
besides; when all was done, he was going just so
m:Iucih out of his way, as he designed for New-
York, and from thence to endeavour penetrating
into the more southern colonies.

Before his departure, having called in his out-

jpofts, he demolished Cafile-William, in the vici-
nity; left the enemy, by taking pofeffion of that
fcrtrefs, fbould annoy the shipping.

As soon as the English had embarked, general
Washington marched into the town, with drums

beating

# CHAP. X.

beating and colours flying; and was received by
the people as their deliverer. Every, thing affu.
med a new aspet ; and the place was afterwards
fortified in such a manner, that the provincials
asset now to deem it impregnable.

It has already been observed, that the flame

kindled at Bolton had quickly spread itself to the
more southern colonies. New-York at sirs
seemed to favour -government; but some Connec-
ticut men inflaming the people with an exag-
gerated account of the affair of Lexington, and as
the place had been left almost -without defence,
(though it would have been more prudent to have
secured that city, than make an attempt to keep
Boftorl) the discontented party rose, and seized
the arms; and all regular government was soon
at an end. New-York had at first disapproved
the measure of appointing a congress.

C H A P. X.
Di#urbances in Virginia and the Carolinas-Lord

Dunmore's Conduzc and Di/lre/--General Clin-
ton and Sir Peter Pdrker arrive be/for: Charles-
Town-The Ships pass the Bar-Unfa-cceffu!t
Attack on Sullivan's I/land--The Flet and
'Iranfports return.
T HOUGH the Virginians were not actually

affeated by those grievances, which the

New-England men stated in such glaring colours,
yet they had been as forward in fending delegates

to

to the general congress. \ Order had, however, for
some time prevailed in the internal affairs of the
province; but, on a prorogation of their assembly
by lord Dunmore, their governor, without re.
newing the militia laws, a provincial congress was
held, wherein it was resolved to array the militia
by their own authority. This interference alarm.
ing his lordflip, he caused most of the gun.
powder, then in the magazine at Williamsburg,
to be removed on ship-board under covert of the
night. The people took fire at this necessary pre.
caution ; armed, and sent to demand of their go.
vernor why he had removed the powder; he gave
them several plausible reasons: they dispersed;
but armed again, under pretence that parties were
marching from the vessels to attack the town.
From this time they kept up strong night-patroles,
as they said, to proteEt the magazine from any
future insults.

Incensed at the behaviour of the people, and

suspicious of their designs, the governor threat.
ened to set up the royal standard, to disfranchise
the province; and dropped several expressions
in his anger, which were never forgotten by the
fubjeas of his government.

Lord Dunmore now called a general assembly;

but, entertaining apprehensions for the fafetv of
his person, retired on board his fiip,--whither he
had before sent his family, and from whence he
refused to return toWilliamfburg to give his aflent
to the bills which they had passed: this, they said,
was a high breach of the conflitution-they
would not attend him on board a v¢ffel of war.
Both parties were resolute; every day widened the
breach, till, at length, the assembly broke up; and,
a convention of delegates being appointed, the

people
it.~~~~~~~~'

people were armed on one fide, whilst, on the
other, lord Dunmore declared the negroes free,
and assembled what force he could; and it was not
long before hostilities commenced.

The town of New-Hampfhire was attacked

by the royalists, but they were repulsed by a body
of provincials from the neighbouring country :
various skirmishes ensued ; till, at length, the go.
vernor landed, and took post at Norfolk, the most
loyal town, and one of the finest in the province.
Here the people in general were loyal; and here
his lordlhip fortified a poll on a buidge. An Ameri-
can force appeared; soon after the royaliftsattacked
them, but were defeated; the negroes doing them
more harm than good: and the place was immedi-
ately abandoned, together with a few pieces-of
cannon, and a small quantity of provisions, to the
conquering enemy.

Again the governor retired on- board his ship:
but the town being now in possession of the rebels,
they refused to supply him withprovifions, and-
fired on the vefTels. Impatient ot this treatment,
a body of sailors landed, and set fire to such houses
as were. nearest to the water-side; either the
rebels themselves fired the reft, or the flames
spread of themselves, in such a manner, as to re-
duce the whole town to ahies.

In the mean time, a scheme had been set on

foot for raising the Indiansand back settlers, but
it miscarried: and one Conolly,who was employed
in the scheme, being taken in Maryland, his pa.
pers were publiffied by the congress.

From this time, success attended the provin.

cials in Virginia; and after some fruitless overtures
towards a reconciliation, their governor prepared
toabandonthe province; and, alter meeting with a

flori,

florm, his people's ehduringa pestilential fever, and
some other disagreeable incidents, at last pro.
ceeded on his voyage, and arrived safe in England.

In South-Carolina, there had arifena set ofpeo.

pie called Regulators, who were formerly declared
enemies to legal authority, and had been chafli.
fed by governor Tryon. Lord William Campbell,
the present governor, at this time was supposed to
hold a correspondence with those people, and with
the Indians; which the fubjeEts of his govern-
ment declared to be of a dangerous nature.
Whether the information was true or false, it ex.
cited a great ferment among the people, and
occasioned the governor to retire on board a ship
of war, while the provincials fortified Charles.
Town; on which they expeced an attack would
be made, as soon as forces could be lent over from
England.

The transports and victuallers, and indeed onr

fleet in general, sent out to America, had met
with such delays on the one hand, and such bad
weather on the other,, that they £farcely ever
arrived in due time. Though the parliament, in
spite of all the supporters of the Americans on
this fide the water, had declared them rebels, and
passed a vote to support his majesty in reducing
them to obedience; though forces were every-
where in 'England ordered to be raised, and
Hessians and Brunfwickers had been hired; yet,
at firt (as is generally the cafe in mixed govern-
iments) things went on but slowly; at least as far
as refpeeed the principal objecEs of operation. Sir
Peter Parker's squadron, which had failed at the
close of the last year, did not arrive off Cape Fear
till the beginning of May; where .they were de-
tained till the end of the month. Here they

found

found general Clinton, who had visited New-
York, and had proceeded from thence to Vir-
ginia, where he saw lord Dunmore: but, finding
his forces too small to effea any thing at either of
these places, had come thither, in order to wait
for them. General Howe had before this time
evacuated Boston, as has been already mentioned.

The fleet proceeded towards Charles-Town, and
passed the bar of that harbour; there they found
general Lee was the commander; and directed
their attack agairnf a fort, as yet unfinilhed, on
the south-west point of Sullivan's Island.

General Clinton, lord Cornwallis, and general
Vaughan, commanded the army, which was landed
upon Long-Ifland, separated from Sullivan's Island,
as it was said, only by shoals,. and a finall creek
which was fordable, it's depth being only eighteen
inches at low.water.

In the mean time, Moultrie,who had the charge
of the -fort, and Lee, who commanded in the
open country, took measures proper for the occa-
sion. Works were raised nearly opposite to the
place where the British troops meant to effect
their passage; and an army was kept up on the
continent, from whence they might continually
be reinforced.

The attack began by the thunder of our bombs
and great guns; the Americans returned a heavy
discharge, and fired many red-hot balls, which
failed not of doing execution. Our fea-officers
behaved most gallantly, and our ships suffered
greatly in the conflic. The brave-captain Morris,
having his arm shattered by a ball, fubinitted to
an amputation; after which he infitied on being
brought on deck, where he was shot through.the
body: dying, he recommended his wife and fa-

mily

mily to his king and country; and his sovereign
executed the charge as became a Britifl monarch,

The guns of the fort were at one time fiIenced,

as it has since appeared, for want of powder; but
no troops appeared -to take poffeflion of the
place. The firing recommenced, and- our ships
were much shattered, while the low confiruEtion
of the fort was fachl, that :nofl of our shot went
over it. Three trieites, the Sphynx, Syren, and
Aaeon, intended to be rationed to prevent any
attempts of fire-fhius to incommode us during the
attack, were unkilfuillv\ piloted, in such amanner
as to be near up): ':h- shoals: the two former
were got off with diiculcvl, while the latter was
burnt, to prevent her beinll seized by the enemy.
In this situation, having looked in vain to the east-
-ward, from which quarter the admiral expected
to fee the land-forces commence their operations;
at length, night coming on, and the tide of ebb
being almost wafted, he retired front the scene of
disappointment; having had 175 men killed, and
170 wounded, in this engagement.

Various have been the conjectures concerning

the inaEtivity of our troops on this occasion, We
have been told, that inflead of the creek being
fordable, it was not poflible to pass it but in
boats; a sufficient number of which could not be
furnished: but, as the generals remained eight or
nine days upon this island, it would be a strange
supposition to imagine they were so totally unin-
formed. On the whole, it seems more reasonable
to conclude, that the works raised to prevent
their landing, were such as rendered it imprudent
for them to make any attempt of this nature.
However that was, general Clinton has severely
ielt the sarcasm thrown out on this occasion; nor

can

can we conceive him, as a generous man, to have
been insensible to the loss sustained by our brave
seamen in this dreadful conili6L- -

In the mean time, the ill-grounded suspicions
of the people on the one hand; and Mr..Martin's
difiruft of them on the other, had occasioned him,
after issuing a proclamation, which was burnt by
the hands of the common hangman, to remove
onboard' , ship lying in Cape-Fearriver. He
likewise applied to the Regulators,-and also to the
highlanders; they accepted commissions from him,
and fought in his cause, but werqedefeated; and
thus his power was at an end in that province.

While these things were passing, the congress
having fitted out five privateers (or {hips of war,
as they .called them under command of Mr.
Hopkins, failed for the BahamaTIflands; where
hey stripped the principal one, calledProvidence,
of all it's. artillery and flores, but ;were difap-
pointed of the powder, which was,.the -article
they were most in want of; the.governorhaving.
sent away i50 barrels of this commodity the.
evening before they landed.,

.'~~:
. , .*; H A P

CHAP,

# CHAP. XI.

C H A P. XI.
CommEfioners appointed to treat with the Rebels-.

General Howe leaves Halifax, and arrives al
Staten-I/land, where he is joined by his Bro-
ther with the Fleet and Reinforcement from
England-Fruitle/s Overtures towards a Re.
conciliaion-Americans defeated at Long.
bfland-Conference with a Congress Committee-
- New-York taken-Lord Cornwallis advances
into the 'Jrfeys- The British Troops tae po
Js/lion of Rhode-I/land.
IN the midit of these troubles, bill after bill had

been passed in England againlt the provincials;

but there was one called a Coikiiattory Bill, that
appeared rather favourable to them, as suspending
the taxation which had been formerly enforced,
Of this last, the congress took little notice; but
they made sufficient observations upon the others,
to detach the people of America from their obe-
dience, and indeed from all regard to the mother-
country.

Having thus prepared them for every future

impreflion, a circular letter, penned as a mani
fefto, was sent through all the colonies, flating
their grievances, with the little likelihood there
was of obtaining redress; and exhorting themn to
concur in the establishment of a new form of go.
vernment, as the old was virtually (they said) and
ought a&ually to be, dissolved, on account of it's
imperfeaion, and the various oppressions at.
tempted to Le put in practice under it's fanaion.

It

It has been i matter of wonder to many, how
the North-American colonies, having each a fepa
rate intereitcould all; so cordially unite againf the
mother-country: but, if we believe those politi-
cians who have asserted, that our colonists aimed
for a longtime at shaking off the Britifl govern.
ment, tle matter will be easily accounted for; and,
when th eilckerings broke out between them and
the parent-Rate, it is reasonable to suppose, that,
entertaining such ideas, they all joined hand
and heart, looking upon Great-Britain not as a
nurfing-mother, but as a common enemy.

However that might be, the congress resolved
in general to ihake off all dependence. They
were aware perhaps of meeting with some oppo-
fition in executing; this their favourite scheme;
but they were resolved to pursue it.

In, Penfylvania the Quakers had declared against
resistance, and were much oppressed on that ac-
count; and, though the then assembly talked of a
redress of grievances, they did not entertain an
idea of a reparation. In Maryland, the delegates
were inflruAed, by a majority of seven counties to
four, to declare againit independence: but both
these provinces at last thought fit to acquiesce with
whatever the general congress might determine,
rather than they would be separated from the reft
of their brethren. The congress at laftdetermi-
ned for INDEPENDENCE; and thus took a flep
which served to double the horrors of a civil war.
This event happened in the year 1776; it's confe- '
quences may perhaps be felt during the whole
century.

We lhall now return to the affairs of Canada,
where we left the provincials flying on all fides,

and

and the brave Carleton intent or purfiifng them.
But, for this puirpofe, a little fleet was to be built,
and about thiity fighting ' veflels were :o be con.
firualed. '" To this (fays the 'anthor before me)
" was added the transporting over land, and after.
"wards dragging up the rapids of the rivers

Therefe and St. John's, thirty longboats, a
t number of flat-bottomed boats :of cofifiderable

burthen, a gondola weighing 30ootons, and

"above 40o batteaux, conflru'ted for this ser.
" vice; a work of labour and difficulty, sufficient
" even to appal Britons." Yet this arduous talk
was effeIted, while two inland seas were to be
passed; the unknown force of the enemy to be
encountered; and Crown-Point and Ticonderago
to-be attacked,perhaps in the depth of a Canadian
winter!

The spirit of Carleton rose superior to all these

difficulties. The armament was equipped under
the command of captain Prinigle; it set forward
upon the Lake Champlain; and the provincial
veflels, under the command of Arnold, were met
with between the island Valicour and the wefiern
main. A warm action ensued: the provincials
were forced at length to fly; but they were fol.
lowed, and brought to an engagement again at
Crown-Point the next day. During this second
fight, the headmost vessels made the belt of their
way to Ticonderago: but Arnold, with two gal.
leys and five gondolas, which remained with
him, made a desperate refiflance. The Walh.
ington, which had a brigadier-general on board,
firuck; and Arnold being overpowered, and not
well supported, the Congress, his own vessel,
and the five gondolas that remained with him,
drove on shore in such a manner that be landed

his

his men, and blew up the'veffels, to prevent them:
from falling into the hands of the;enemy. Crown-
Point being evacuated, the British forces encamp..
ed on the ruins, and the enemy retired to Ticon-
derago. It was evident that general Carleton had
some idea of attacking them there; but, as the
season was far advanced, he returned to Canada,
and put his troops into winter-quarters of. canton-
ment. .

The hopes of government had been raised by the
successes in Canada, as they were depressed by the
miscarriage in South-Carolina; where, besides
our ships being shattered, and our armies return-
ing without effecing any thing, the parties who
wished to espouse our cause were defeated,
and some suffered for the attempt.

The plan laid in England, was, firfI to relieve
Quebec, recover Canada, and penetrate into New-
England, by way of the Lakes; secondly, to en-
deavour at cutting off all communication between
the northern and southern colonies; and la fly,
to recover New-York, and, if poflible, to pene-
trate from thence into Philadelphia. The first
part of this plan had in a degree succeeded; the,
second was, for the present, totally fruRrated:
we come now to speak of the third, which to
mine people appeared more plausible than either
of the former.

Besides the national troops, about 13,000 Hes-
ians and Waldeckers were engaged to support
his enterprise; the whole folre amounting to
5,00ooo men, abundantly provided with flores, ar-
illery, and warlike ma:erials; and those were
trended by a numerous fleet, fucl as hdl, niothing
ofear at that time from any opio'iion. 1But be-
ides this military force, general Howe, and his

bro-

brother, the admiral, who was to join him, had
commissions for granting the royal pardon to all
such provinces, or individuals, as ihould chule to
accept it, and for refloring peace to the colonies,

As the situation of the army at Halifax was

not the mot agreeable, the summer season being
far advanced; though, as it was reasonable to sup.
pose, the general was well acquainted with all the
designed operations, yet he resolved to leave
Halifax before his brother, the admiral, arrived
with the expeced reinforcements; and according-
ly embarked on the loth of June. About theend
of the fame month, he arrived off Sandy-Hook,
near New-York; having been joined on his pas.
sage by fix transports, that had highland troops
on board, which were separated from their com-
panions on the voyage. Some of the miffing Ihips,
with about 450 soldiers, and some officers, as it
appeared afterwards, were taken on their passage
by the Americans.

1776. On their arrival in the Sound,they found

New-York and Lbng-Ifland fortified by the ene-
my; but Staten-Ifland, being reckoned of less
consequence, was rather negle-ted. Here the
royalists, not only landed without opposition;
but met with a number of persons well affefted
to their cause: and here affairs were represent.
ed in such a pleating light, that, by the assistance
of friends, it was thought that a happy issue might
soon be put to the American troubles.

At last lord Howe, after touching at Halifax,

failed for New-York, and joined his brother at
Staten-Iland. A circular letter was now sent to
the late governors of the colonies and others,
acquainting them with those powers he possessed,
and in which his brother was joined. Franklin,

now

now the American ambassador to France, was
likewise addressed, but in vain. And a meflage
being sent to the American commander, with a
letter directed to George Washington, Efq; he
refused it because his assumed title was not fpe-
cified: but m length accepted of another, direated
to George WValhington, &c. &c. &c. Adjutant
Paterson, the bearer of this letter, was received
in slate by Walhington; but all overtures were
reje6ted, and the recent declaration of indepen-
dence, on which he most infifed, was published
in form throughall the provinces, as were articles
of confederacy, perpetual unity, &c. Many estates
were confiscated, and fomne persons suffered for
the royal cause. Sir Peter Parker, and general
Clinton, by this time arrived at Staten-Ifand.

All conferences that were held being in vain,
it was resolved to effeEt a landing on LongIfland,
which was performed without opposition; the
Arferican troops having resolved not to spend their
time in defendingthe shore, in order to collea
all into one point. Hbwever, they disposed mat.
ters so ill, that they were totally defeated, with
great flaulghter: many were drowned, and Come
perished in the mudof amarth into which they had
thrown themselves. They left about 3000 men,
including 1ooo prisoners. The remainder gained
their lines, which the English were eager to
florin; but general Howe determined to march
by regular approaches: which we do not scruple
to pronounce, a capital error, when we confider
the dercription and ardour of his army, the distress
of the enemy, the late attack, and the confusion
of a first defeat, to a body of men, such as the
American commander had brought into afion
against him,

I The

The consequence was, that general Walhing.

ton crossing over to the island, and feeing the
wretched situation of his troops, after expressing
his sorrow and aftonilhment, took advantage of
this circumstance, and advitcd- a hasty retreat,
which was accomplished in the silence of the
night, unobserved by all the vigilance of the
British commander.

Three of the provincial commanders, and the

brigadier-g"nerals lord Stirling and Udell, were
taken on Long Island. Sullivan was sent on his
parole to congress by lord Howe, to inform that
affemblv, that though he had it not in order to
treat with them as a Congres ; yet he would con.
ser with any of their members as Private Gentle.
men, on the subjea of American affairs. Accord.
ingly Dr. Franklin, Mr. Adams, and Mr. Rut-
ledge, waited on lord Howe, upon this occasion;
but the conference came tonothing. Franklin, by
his representation of matters, had a great flare in
reminding the congress, of their declaration cf
independence, and other circumflances, not.
withflanding their late defeat, to rejec all terms
of reconciliation.

The reduction of Long-Ifland, was followed by

that of New-York, which being attacked ina re-
gular manner, was soon abandoned by the ene-
my. A design was afterwards made by some in.
cendiary rebels, to fire the town, and a vail numn
ber of houses were burnt; but such of them as
were taken, suffered exemplary, and some imme-
diate punishment.

To improve those advantages, the retreating

rebels were pursued; but though they often ap.
peared to make a fland, they only skirmished, and
could not be forced, or, at least were not brought,

to

# CHAP. XII.

to a general engagement, till they gained such a
position near the White-Plains, that general
Howe abandoned the design; and returning, at-
tacked Fort-Wafhington, in which a garrison had
been left, though it would have been more pru-
dent to have withdrawn them.

The fort was surrendered just as it was on the

point of being stormed by the Hessians. Fort-
Lee was also taken soon after, and the greater
part of Jersey was over-run by the royal troops.
In the mean-time, Rhode-Ifand was taken by
general Clinton, with the aflilfance of a squadron
of ships of war, under the command of Sir Peter
Parker; and all things seemed to promise fair for
the re.establishment of the British conflitutional
government in America.

C H A P. XII.
Cornwallis's Succe/2s-General Lee taken-Surprife

at Trenton-New Meafures-Colonel Mawhood
attacked at Prince-Town-Americans over-run
the Jer/eys-Loyal Provincials embodied under
General Tryon- Skirmifies - lWajhington re-
gains his flrong Camp-Woofter killed-General
Prefcot carried off iom Rhode-Ijland-General
Howe leaves New-York-Battle of Brandywine
-Philadelphia taken - Obflrudions removed
with Difculty-Battle of German- Town-Fur-
ther Tranjadiions of the Northern Army.
LORD Cornwallis now advanced faif into ih.-

Jerseys, and the royal army penet --:. . a,
far as to the banks of the Delaware, in tiheir way

I 2 to

to Philadelphia. It was said, that not 3000 Ame.
ricans now remained embodied under their gene.
ral: that 30,000 men, at leafl, was the amount of
his army when general Howe firfi landed at Staten.
Island; and tlat commander said, that even there
mufl have beencut to pieces could he have obtained
boats to follow them over the river. About this
time, general Lee, on his march to joii Washing-
ton, being flighlly guarded, was taken prisoner
bv.colonel Harcourt. It is well known that Lee
had served in our army; and. the loss of such a ve.
teran, at fich a junclure, greatly hurt the rebels,
and furnished matter of triumph to all who fa-
voured the British government.

But this triumph was of short duration; for

soon after, an event happened which firuck all
who were informed of it with surprise. General
Howe had greatly extended his posts, and in his
security covered too large a traEt of ground.
Colonel Rail, a Hessian, was encamped with
three regiments at Trenton. \aflington know-
ing the danger to which' Philadelphia would be
exposed, soutld the Blltifl and foreign troops find
an opportunity of palting the river when it was
frozen, collected about 25oo troops, and with these
fell upon this corps in three divisions. Rail, in-
ilead of falling back to the next pofi, railily en-
gaged the enemy with inferior force: the flaugh-
ter was not great on either fide, but their colonel
.was mortally w ounded; 918 fur endced, and the
remaining few found their safety in a precipitate
flight. All.the Americans did not come up, or
perhaps some other polls might have suffered.

Tlis advantage was, however, a great one, and

douhtlefs contributed much to the buifiriefs of re-
cruiting, which wa6 then going on in other pro-

vinces;

vinces; yet, lord Cornwallis turning upon gene-
ral Washington, the latter thought proper to de.
fert Trenton in the night, and continually to shift
his quarters, in order to prevent coming to a gene-
ral engagement. In his retreat, he Imet colonel
Mawhood marching from Princes-Town with a
detachment to join the royal army. This officer
was attacked, and after a grievous conflict, forced his
way through the enemy, who loft more than he
did, though it was a fuirprife on their fide, and on
his a fbrt of desperate dtflence.

The two posts of Brunswick and Amboy were

now all that the royal army retained, the rebels
having again recovered the Jerseys, where.the in-
habitants were much displeased with some irregu-
Iarities formerly committed by the Heflians; and
Washington taking care to secure himself so as
n-t to be forced to a battle. An Indian war to
the south was now encouraged by the British
commander; but it ended in nothing decisive.

A corps of loyal provincials was at this time

embodied under general Tryon, who afterwards
did some service; and the most of these were pro-
perly allotted to the defence of New-York and the
adjacent islands, in order that the regular troops
might be otherwise employed. This was a judi-
cious arrangement, had the regulars been employed
to any advantageous purpose: but upon the
whole, this does not teem to have been the.cafe.
Some expeditions were indeed undertaken, such
as those to Peek's-Hill, and to Danbury, which
ended in the detruelion of a few rebel magazines
and the loss of many of our men; the B;itifh
troops being in such cafe. obliged to retreat before
the provincials. In one of these skirmishes
Woofler fell, and Arnold would have met the

I3 fame

fame fate,- his horse being killed under him, had
he not had the good fortune to (hoot with his pistol
a soldier who was ready to dispatch him with his
bayonet. In return for these predatory expe-
ditions, the enemy destroyed some provisions, and
carried off about ninety prisoners from a place
called Sagg-Harbour.

The general scheme for the campaign, as it

seems, was for general Howe to bring Washing-
ton to an engagement if possible, and if he defeat-
ed him, of which scarcely a doubt was entertained,
then to pass by the first intended route immedi-
ately to Philadelphia: but if the Americans could
not be brought to an engagement, then to embark
for the fame purpose by sea, and turn at any rate
to take poffeflion of that place, which the general
declared to be the principal objeat of the
campaign.

By his accounts, we are told, that he used feve-

ral feints to draw the wary provincial commander
from his lines, and that in one of these he had
nearly succeeded; but his enemy having suffered
some loss in pursuing those who soon turned upon
him, penetrated the design, and retreated again to
that firong camp which the British general durst
not attempt to force, and which he chose not to
leave in his rear, when he had a tract of country
to pass through that was rendered inimical to us by
the former behaviour of a body of foreigners, over
whom some people thought he might have had
some controul.

However that was, abandoning all other

schemes, general Howe prepared to embark for
the Chefapeak, just at' the time that alfifiance was
most wanted in another quarter, namely, while
Burgoyne, surrounded with dangers, was too rashly

pufhini

pushing for Albany. It is true that general Clin-
ton was ordered to advance to succour him, but
he was too late; and the scheme was so ill laid,
that the northern general knew not of his advance,
though he was within little more than a day's
march of him when the disgraceful convention at
Saratoga was concluded.

IF winning a battle, without reaping any solid

advantage from the viEtory; if taking a town,
without being able to hold it; are exploits of any
consequence, then Sir William Howe's expedition
was crowned with success: after a tedious voyage,
in which the Englith minifiry declared they knew
not what was become of him, he passed the Che-
fapeak, and was landed with his forces, by his
brother the admiral, at the head of Elk's Ferry.
Washington followed him by land, and now for
the sirss time, was disposed to come to an engage-
ment. By the valour of lord Cornwallis, it came
to a fortunate issue. The provincials were de-
feated, but the acion was no otherwise decilive
than that the Americans retreating, and wishing to
keep the open country rather than to be blocked
up, the royal army consequently took poffeftion
of Philadelphia. The Marquis de la Fayette, a
Frenchman, who made himself busy in these
troubles from their firit breaking out, while there
was peace between the two nations, received a
small chaltifement, by being wounded in this
aftion.

Lord Cornwallis was the perf6n who took pof-

feflion of Philadelphia, whilst general Wayne was
defeated by the royalifis. However, notwith.
standing these successes, the rebel frigate, called the
Delaware, had the assurance to fire upon the royal
· batteries while unfinished; but she was taken: nor

4 would

would this have happened, but that tie passage
of the river had been rendered impracticable to
our fleet by booms, funken velfels, and other de.
vices of the enemy.

Before these obftruaions could be removed,

another battle was fought at German-Town, in the
neighbourhood of Philadelphia, which was begun
by the rebels surprising our troops; it:ended, in.
deed, in our favour, but it gave the Americans a
high opinion of the commander, who could be
worfled and recover himself so as t 'be able to
hazard a battle to soon after his defeat.

-In tle mean time, there were two places fiom
which it was neceffarv to dislodge tle enemy
before the navigation of the Delaware could be
jerfc&ly secured. These were Mud-lfland and
.Red-Bank., It was intended.that the .teffIan co.
lonel Donop should attack the former, while the
ships endeavoured to reduce the latter of thele
*places, and all things were prepared accordingly:
but for want of proper information of the ftrengch
of the American works, the Hessians were repulsed
with.lofs, and colonel Donop was slain; nor did
the attack of the shipping on the other hand fuc-
ceed better; the obflru6tions in the Tiver pre-
vented them from bringing their fire to bear: the
Augufline man of war was burnt by accident
during the engagement, and moR of the principal
officers were saved; yet, the second lieutenant,
chaplain, and gunner, with a number of sailors
periifed : and the Merlin sloop was evacUlated
and defiroved. However, both Mud-Ifland and
Red-Bank were soon afterwards taken, measures
more proper having been adopted: the provincials
now burned their own vessels, as these could' not
hope for proteEtion in their present fituatiop.

Yet,

Yet, from all these successes, no advantage'was
reaped; the enemy encamped as usual, in a strong
place; and general Howe having examined their
position, returned to Philadelphia, where he re.
solved to winter. T'he American army was hutted
at a place called Valley-Forge; the Britifh.troops
remained rather firaitened in the city. In the
end, the latter thought proper to quit their pofi.
tion,-atld march back through the Jerseys to
New-York; of which expedition we Ihall take
notice hereafter.

In the midst of there wars and commotions a

new fate was founded in that difiria of America
known by the name of the Hampfhire-Grants ; so
called from governor Wentworth's having made
a grant of a parcel of lands in New.H Iampfhire,
to persons of New.Hampfhire, Maffachufet's-Bay,
Connecicut, and New-York, molt of whom had
been formerly deterred from fettling in the back
countries by their fears of the French, and the
neighbouring Indians.

'The inhabitants ot New-York claimed a part of
these lands, and about thirteen years ago there
was tome blood spilt on the occafi.n; vet the
dispute was not then, nor has it ever yet been de-
cided; and those who fettled there being a body
of hardy adventurers, entered into a compaEt to
fland by each other: and thus to put the matter
of right out of the question, Ethan Allen, of
whom we have already spoken, diltinguifhed him-
self among them. They were the men wio,
under a brigadier-general Starke, cut off Bur-
goyne's people at Bennington; and, indeed, the
people of that country had the greatest ihare in
all the aaions, till the fiurrender of the Britifbrand
German troops at Saratoga. As for Ethan Allen,

I 5 who

who had been conveyed a prisoner to England,
he was sent back again to America, and remained
for some time upon his parole on Long-lfland,
where he is said to have behaved very insolently.
Escaping from thence, he returned to the Hamp.
Thire-Grants, where he was always the favourite
of the people; and there, in concert with some of
his friends, continued to bring this new settlement
into the form of a regular slate, which proved
highly disagreeable to the congress, who, on the
sad of June 1780, voted the ereaion of the
fate of Vermont highly unwarrantable, and or.
dered the officers of this new government to re-
frain from all aAs of authority until the congress
ihould determine the interests of the particular
Rdtes claiming a right in those grants. This
edia has been treated with contumacy. The
people have shewn their flrength, and the new
government is more firmly established than ever;
and Ethan Allen alike invites thither those who
have ihaken off fuibjefion to Great-Britain, and
such as complain of the oppression of the congress.

That general Carleton had conduEted the affairs

of Canada with unexampled bravery, not even
his enemies could dispute; yet government had
thought proper to commit the future care of them
to lieutenant-general Burgoyne, a circumflance
not very agreeable to the former, as a fort of mi-
litary pride will always exist among military men.

However that might be, the latter was intrufled

with the command of a body of Engli{h Cana-
dians and Indians, with which he was (as we have
already hinted) to pass the Lakes, and penetrate
into the New-England provinces. He undertook
the expedition with chearfulnefs, nay, even with
eagerness. About lo,ooo men were all that he

demanded

demanded of government (Canadians supposed
to be included); of Britilh forces and regulars, not
7200 ever joined him. He had, however, with
him some brave and experienced officers, which
were the generals Frazer, Powel, Hamilton, and
major-general Phillips of the artillery, who had
gained much honour in Germany. An attack was
also planned on Fort Stanwix, near the Mohawk
river, under colonel St. Leger, who, besides the
Englilh troops, was to be assisted by a body of In-
dians. About 3700 men were sent for. the de-
fence of Canada on general Burgoyne's departure.

The Indians were met on the river Bouquet

to the north of Crown-Point, and were treated
with a war seas after their own manner;. during.
which, the British general inflruaed them in the
part which they were expected to aEt, and at the
fame time endeavoured to restrain them from aEts
of barbarity, infilting that none should be scalped
but such as were fain, and that none should be-
slain but in open fight, and offering a compenfa-
tion for prisoners.

Yet, white he thus endeavoured to repress

the cruelty of the savages, he every where pub-
bliThed his own strength, and used every means to
make the enemy dread their approach: circum,
fances which for some time tended rather tot
throw a blemish upon his character amongst- the
colonifls, and rather hurt than forwarded the cause-
in which he appeared so heartily engaged.

After the army had made a short Itay at Crown-

Point, they advanced to. Ticonderago, where
firong works had been conftruAted by the Ame.-
ricans with their usual induflry; but these were
evacuated on their approach, and a pursuit after-
wards cost the garrison more than a regular de-

1 46 fence

fence might have done; many were slain and
taken prisoners; and the American commander,
Sinclair, retreated. General Burgoyrie proceeded
to Skenefborough, and entered, as in triumph, the
New-England provinces, Fort-Edward being taken,
and those who should have defended it retiring
before the royal army.

Thus far all was well; but future difficulties

were to be encountered. A country not the most
fruitful,diverfified with woods and mountains, was
to be passed, where almost every man might be
supposed an enemy: these certainly were great
obfracles; but they were not attended to in the
elevation of- hope, and the full career of vislory.
The British commander pushed forward with ar-
dour, and doubted not but that he fiould soon ar-
rive, crowned with conquef, at Albany, wheie he
was to wait for intrtlEtions and reinforcements
from general Howe. who was by this time set out
for Philadelphia.

The loss of Ticonderago, and the return of the

provincial army, struck the New-England men
with dread and aflonifhment. Sinclair was ftfpend-
ed from his command, and a new body of troops,
fich as time and circumflances would permit, was
begun to be assembled, in order to reinforce
their shattered army, which had retired towards
Saratoga. In the mean time; the Indians had.
been guilty of some barbarities, in spite of the
British general's orders and exhortations; amongst
which, one was, the murder of Miss M'Crea,
a lady of beauty and virtue, and who it seems was
so far from having any conneEtion with the pro-
vincials, that her father was interested inthe royal
cause; on the very day on hlich (he was maf-
sacred, she was to have been married to a Britiflh
officer; but by some means or other, the savages,

had

had already conceived, something of a dislike 'to
general Burgoyne, and this'was not a titme, by'
infliinmg puniflhents, to: hazard the increasing
of such a dangerous disgust.

It was now that this too sanguine. commander

firil b'egan to encounter, in'this country, some 6f
those inconvenielncies which it was not to be
expeAed that courage could remove. Those
increased upon him daily. He could not get
horses foi the service; while the roads were sleep.
and troublesome, and no more than fifty teams of
oxen were to be procured in the country. Heavy
rains added to those difficulties; his supplies were
to be drawn a'moit entirely from Canada, which
la) behind him;. and so far was it from being
poflible for him to eltablilh proper magazinest-here
in the fpaceofa fortnight, that there werelnot more
than ten batteaux in Hudfon's-River, nor above
four days provision provided for his army.

At this critical junctuie, tidings arrived that
colonel St. Lcger had begun his operations against
Fort-Stanwix. For this reason, general Burgoyne,
in the midst of all those difficulties, moved for-
ward, in hopes that the enemy muff either draw
off to fuecour that place, or else, by leaving it to
it's fate, give the armies an opportunity of join.
ing after it was taken. It seems, however, that
he forgot the possibility there was that such an
attempt might miscarry.

Having thus determined his line of afion, the
British army was ordered to proceed with all
pofible celerity; and some time afterwards, hear-
ing that there was a magazine of provisions
at Bennington, about twenty miles to the east-
wi-d of Hudfon's-Rivcr, which was but slightly'
guarded, he formed a scheme to surprise it, the

exe.

execution of which was intrulted to lieutenant.
colonel Beaume, a German, at the head of about
500 men: but his advance was so tedious, that
before he arrived at the place of deflination, the
enemy had gathered too itrong for him to pre.
tend to attack them; he therefore returned to
a poll which he deemed advantageous for his
finall numbers, and sent an account of his fitua-
tion to the general.

Colonel Breyman was dispatched to reinforce

him; he also either marching slowly, or meeting
with fomedelays, came too late for the intended
purpose. Before he arrived, the provincials had
attacked Beaume in his pofl; and even, while they
were preparing to surround him, some of the loyal
Americans, in his army, persuaded him that they
were friends. When he found his mistake, he
defended himself as well as he could; but the
trifling works he had raised were Coon carried.
Many Engliihmen, who were with him, fell; the
Indians and marksmen retired into the woods; and
the colonel, with his Germans, engaged the enemy
fword-inl.hand, but they were all lain or taken pri.
foners; among the number of the latter, was this
unfortunate officer, juRl at the time that a detach.
ment was advancing to support him.

But the commander of the party in question

knew nothing of this engagement: he no soon-
er arrived at the spot, than he was attacked on all
fides; yet he repulsed the Americans twice, and
at last retreated under favour of the night, but was
obliged to leave two field-pieces behind him,
which, besides two others taken before from colo.
nel Beaume, were trophies of viEtory to the ene-
any.

Neat

Near 500 men were left in killed, wounded, and
prisoners, in these two engagements; but this
loss was little to that of the reputation of our arms:
it happened here as at Trenton; every misfor-
tune of ours elevated the-provincials, as our fuc-
cesses had depressed them. Besides, there were
other consequences: the objea of the attempt
not attained, the present diflreffes of the troops,
and the future fatigues they were likely to susser in
a quarter where all were arming againfl them.
The troops that had attacked Fort-Stanwix, un-
der St. Leger, had by this time been obliged to
raise the siege, thro' the impatience of their Indian
allies, who were equal to sudden attacks, but by
no means calculated for any thing that bore
a resemblance to the regular works of war. Tired
out with what they supposed needless delay, and
being disappointed of having their full revenge
for several of their people who fell in a skirmish
with a body of provincials, whom, however, they
had fully defeated, they grew fullen and un-
traaable. Neither threats nor promises of favour
and proteEtion could induce the American com.
mander to surrender. St. Leger's artillery was
not equal to an attack which he had proje&ted,
and into which he was endeavouring to bring his
savage allies, when report was spread, that gene-
ral Burgoyne's forces were totally defeated, and
that a very firong detachment was in full march
to raise the siege. It was now no longer poflible
to keep there extraordinary allies together: they
dispersed themselves; the siege was raised; and
being disappointed of plunder from the enemy,
which was their principal object ir this, as in
every other expedition, they are said to have
seized on the effets of some of the officers, and

even

# CHAP. XIII.

even to have robbed and murdered some firagglers
while the army was retiring, It has been said, that
Arnold was really preparing to relieve Fort-Stan.
wix; yet deficient as the British troops were in
point of ordnance, the appearance ot a well con.
certed general attack might have terrified the ap.
parently obstinate governor into a surrender, be.
tore he could have received any affiflance.

C H A P. XIII.
The Troops pass the North-River-Battle near

Still- Water-7ie Americans Jirengthen their
Camp-Another Engagement, in whzch General
Burgoyne is defeated-General Frazer Jlain-
Altaca on Ticonderago- Djtreffes of the Army
-Convention of Saratoga-Expedition up the
North-River-Sketches of General Burgoyne's
Charater.
G Eneral Burgoyne received the very uncom.

sortable intelligence of this furiender, by

some fugitives, just after the aflAir of Bennington;
yet he resolved notwithstanding this damp, and
all other disadvantages, to pass Hudfon's-River,
and proceed to Saratoga, where by this time Ho.
ratio Gates had taken the command of the Ame-
rican army raised in that neighbourhood.

One would have thought that little was to be

hoped for in such a situation; but there is a cer-
tain fort of perseverance in some minds border-

ing

iangclofely upon rafhners, that leads them to at-
tempt things of a desperate nature. As people
are too apt to judge of all things by the event, if
such undertakings should chance to succeed, those
who are engaged in them acquire an immortal
fame: but if they fail, on the contrary, are gene.
rally loaded with all the weight of censure. Whe-
ther the general pondered those tlings in his
mind, we pretend not to fay; hut he caused his
army to advance towards the posts the enemy oc-
cutiied, with all convenient expedition, whom
they engaged about three o'clock in the after-
noon of the 1ith of September 1777.

Thle provincials issued form a deep wood,. and

firit made an attempt to turn the rigtlt wving, and
.take the Britilh army in flank; but the firong po-
.fition of general Frazer, who covered it on that
fide, prevented them from putting their design
into execution. They.then turned their attention
to the left, advancing briskly to the charge,
.though received by a heavy and well diredted fire
from the artillery: they were continually supplied
*with fresh troops, and much encouraged by Ar-
.nold, to whole efforts was chiefly owing the fore
tune of the day.

The British troops in general behaved most

gallantly; and major Phi!lips, with captain Jones
of the artillery, did great service. After an en-
gagement of four'hours, which was sustained with
great vigour by both parties, the Americans, at
last, retired to camp as night drew on, and left
the royal army indeed malters of the field: but
it was apparent. enough, .as Pyrrhus once said,
after he had vanquifled the Roman army, ,' such
"another vidory mult undo them."

The

The Britiih troops lay that night upon their

arms, and the next day advancing, took position
within cannon {hot of the enemy, fortifying them.
selves in the belt manner they were able; and
from the twentieth of September to the seventh
of Ocober, scarcely a night passed without firing,
and many officers were taken off by single ihots;
among the reft, captain Green, aide de camp to
captain Phillips, was killed as he was delivering
a mefage to general Burgoyne, who was after.
wards informed, that it was intended for him.

While tle armies lay thus opposite each other,

a letter written in a cypher was received from
Sir Henry Clinton, advising, that he intended
to attack Fort-Montgomery, and other places
on the North-River; but as it was impossible to
know what success such an expedition might be
attended with, this intelligence afforded but a faint
dawning of hope; and in the mean time, pro.
visions grew to scarce, that the soldiers portions
were obliged to be lessened. The enemy fiill in.
creasing, that part of their camp which could be re.
connoitred, was situated on a hill, too strongly
defended to be attacked: to increase those mif-
fortunes, the English general understood that some
of the New-Hampfhire militia had got between
him and Ticonderago, which they aEtually be-
fieged, though in the end they were obliged to
abandon their design.

At last, when all hopes of assistance from Sir

Henry Clinton were at an end (though indeed
he was successfully making his way towards Al.
bany) a movement was made with a detachment
of 1500 men, and eight pieces of cannon, in
order to cover a forage, and allo to try whether it
was polfible, in any quarter, to force a passage

through

through the enemy, or to dislodge them, if such
a measure should be neceflary, in order to favour
a retreat. Genelal Burgoyne had with him ma-
jors-general Phillips and Reidefdale, and brigadier-
general Frazer. The camp on the heights was
left to the charge of brigadiers Hamilton and
Specht; the redoubts and the plain to brigadier-
general Goll. As the rebels in the front were
more than double their number, it was not pra&i.
cable to augment the corps that marched above
1500. General Burgoyne found the troops with-
in about a quarter of a mile of the enemy's left.
It was at first determined by general Gates to a-
wait the attack in his camp, but Arnold had pre.
fuaded him to alter his resolution, and measures
were taken for an engagement.

The Britilh general had ordered captain Fraser

with his Rangers, together with the Indians and pro.
vincials, to go by secret paths through the woods,
and gain the enemy's rear, if possible, where, by
appearing, they might overawe them. But a fud-
den attack made by Arnold on the left, where the
British grenadiers were posted, prevented farther
operations: major Ackland sustained the assault
bravely, but the enemy's numbers enabling them
to extend their fire along the front of the Ger-
mans, who were on the right of the grenadiers,
no part of that body could be removed to make
a second line to support the flank, where the
itrefs of the fire lay, before which the Brunf-
wickers gave way, and quitted their ground in no
very honourable manner. The light infantry
and the 24th regiment were at this time engaged,
and the provincials and the Americans were push-
ing a large body of men around their flank, to cut
off their retreat, At this crisis, Sir Francis Clarke,

cart

carrying orders to bring offthe artillery, and for
the whole detachment to return to the camp, was
mortally wounded; a circumllance which produced
the lots of the artillery, and had contributed to re.
duce the army, at lal,; to a molt ruinous condition.
The light-infantry and the 2qth on the right were
now ordered to form a second line for securing a
retreat. While this was doing, the provincials
Cent a firong reinforcement to renew the aatio.n on
the left, which was obliged to give way ; and the
light-infantry aud the 25th making a quick move-
ment to prevent that point from being carried, ye.
neral Frazer was moi tally wounded. As nothing
now could be expected on lthe field, general Bur.
goyne turned his attention towards the camp, and
began to take macfures for it's defence, leaving
to generals Phillips and Reidefdale the care of
bringing back the detachment. Six pieces of
cannon were lonl, all the horseg, and most part of
-the artillery-meui under major Williatns, were
*killed. The major himself, and the few that were
with him, remained in their duty till they were
taken.

An attack was soon after made upon the camp,

when, colonel Breyman being killed, the German
post was carried; and general Burgoyne endea-
.oured in vain to recover it, who, on his retreat,
received a shot through his hat, and another torc
his waistcoat. But Arnold was wounded, and his
party repulsed with loss, while they were endea-
*vouring to storm the Britifl trenches, which were
defended by lord Balcarras. The consequence
of the attack was, however, such, that the British
general thought it necessary to retreat during the
silence of the night, and to take a new position
near the river.

On

On the third of Otober general Fraser expired,
and desired to be buried in a private manner under
the great redoubt. His will was complied with;
but the proceifion was continually fired upon (be.
ing exposed, as they p'assed, to the fire of both ar-
mies) by their ungenerous enemies; nevertheless,
the chaplain did his duty, and the remains of
that brave officer were interred with becoming
solemnity.

Nothing but cares and toils now succeeded. On
the ninth the army withdrew through a heavy
rain to Saratoga; here they received every hour
fiefh tidings of the enemy occupying divers passes
around them. The general sent to repair two
broken bridges, in order to secure a retreat to Fort.
Edward; but the provincial guard abandoning the
protection of the workmen, on receiving a faun-
tering fire from some of the Americans, this de-
sign was rendered abortive. It was next proposed
to abandon the remaining artillery and heavy bag.
gage, and to endeavour to force the fords of the
river; but on examination it was found that those
fords were guarded by the enemy: so that all hopes
of returning that way were impoffblle.

Thus situated, worn out with toil and fatigue,

with scarcely three days provisions in their camp,
exposed to the file of the enemy, who knew their
diltrefs, whole balls fell often within their lines,
and sometimes even flew over to the council.
board, it was highly necessary to concert what was
to be done for the relief of the embarrassed army.
At length, therefore, on the i3th of Ot-ober, ge-
neral Burgoyne summoned a general council of
war, at which not only the generals and field-of.
ficers, but all the captains were present. The

reiuk

result of this council was, a determination to enter
into a treaty with general Gates immediately.

The consequence was, that after several letters

had passed between the commanders, the well.
known convention was agreed upon ; the chief
Ilipulations of which were favourable enough in
such circumfiances, had the congress thought fit to
fulfil the engagements entered into by their gene.
ral. They were to surrender their artillery and
military stores, to pile their arms at the command
of their own officers, and were to be allowed a
free embarkation from Bolton to Europe, on con.
dition of not serving against the Americans: the
army was not to be separated; roll-calling and
other duties of regularity were to be admitted;
all private property was to be secured, and that
which was public to be delivered upon honour.
The Canadians were to be returned to their own
country under the conditions of this convention.
Five thousand seven hundred and fifty-two men,
including Canadians, provincials, regulars, and
irregulars, surrendered at Saratoga; and the ene.
my took poffeflion of about 75 pieces of brass
ordnance of different forts and sizes.
, While these things were tranfaaing in the
neighbourhood of Fort-Edward, Still-Water, and
Saratoga; general Clinton with 3000 men had
met with great success in his expedition up the
North-River. The forts Montgomery and Con-
ftitution, and other pofls were taken. General
Tryon also, at the head of a detachment, burned
a place called Continental-Village, which con.
tained barracks for 500o men; 67 pieces of ord.
nance were taken, and a boom and chain ,which
coil 70,000oool. was in part taken away and in part
deflroyed by the royalifls. Sir William Wallace
with a fcuadron of light frigates, and general

Vaughanl,

Vaughan, with a detachment of troops, continued
their excursion up the river; in the course of
which, the town of fEfopus was consumed to
afhcs. The Americans were great sufferers in all
this quarter; but Gates being now at liberty to
turn his attention that way, having intelligence
of his approach, they returned with all convenient
expedition to New-York.

Thus ended the northern campaign, of which

great hopes were at firfi formed; but which served
only to invite the colonifis in all parts to arms,
and, as by a flrokeof inchantment, to conjure up
new enemies in arms againlt us. We cannot
more properly conclude this chapter than with a
sketch of the character and conduA of the gene-
ral that commanded our troops at Saratoga. Ge-
neral Burgoyne was appointed a lieutenant-colo-
nel-commandant of a regiment of light-dragoons
in the year 1759: the present colonel Luttrel was
then the youngest captain in that regiment. This
regiment served at Bellifle in the year 1761:
colonel Burgoyne served as a brigadier general in
1762, where he greatly diftinguilhed hinmfelf by
an attack on Valentine D'Alcantura, as appears by
the orders of the day issued on the 29th of Au-
gust that year, by the Count de la Lippe Burke-
banny. * The field.marfhal thinks it his duty to
"' acquaint the army with the glorious condut of
' brigadier Burgoyne, who, after having marched
" fifteen leagues without halting, had taken Va.
"lentia D'Alcantura sword in hand made the
*" general who was to have invaded Alentigo, pri-
" soner, destroyed the Spanish regimenl .:t Se.
" ille, taken three flandaids, a colonre, .':,ny
"officers of diflintion, and a grea, t. r:;- ,i

soldiers. The marshal makes no do, *..

%i
, * ' * . ~~~~~~4- ·

i

"* whole army will rejoice at this event, aind that
" every one will in proportion to his rank, strive
*" to imitate so glorious an example."-General
Burgoyne ihewed as much generosity, as he did
courage, and as much of discipline as of either,
in his successful enterprise. He was made a
major-general in 1772, and a lieutenant-geneial
in the year 1777.

In 1773, he was chairman of the committee for

enquiring into the slate of affairs in the East-
Indies: his speech upon that occasion was then
looked upon as a finished pattern of elocution;
as was also a ftibfequent one in the House of Com.
mons relative to American affairs, before he em.
barked for Bofion.

The remainder of this commander's military

exploits, the reader has been acquainted witli,
from the blockade of Boflon to the fatal conven-
tion at Saratoga, which tarnished the glory of the
British arms, and furnished different parties with
so much matter of ipeculation.

'We cannot entertain a doubt of the general's

valour: he was certainly reduced to such straits as
might well juflify him in signing that capitulation:
the only queltion remaining will be, how he came
to be brought into such a perilous situation ? And
in this, the commander and the miniflry have mofl
cruelly accused each other. Government allert,
it was owing to his own rashness; while he, on
the other hand, fays, he ated by their absolute
order. In cafes of this kind it generally happens
that some blame belongs to either party. We
will here briefly and candidly examine the matter
in dispute, as far as we are enabled by the lights
since thrown upon that tranfadion.

In

In the first place it appears, that general Bur-

goyne, eager to acquire military glory, resolved
with to,ooo men to undertake an expedition
which a veteran officer (whom we have had oc-
cafion to mention with honour) declared could
never be brought to an issue without double that
number. The truth of this assertion appeared too
late. Pofis taken mull be secured and garrisoned:
fatigue and sickness as well as the sword, were
likely to weaken the army: so that at the engage-
ment at Saratoga, only about 9ooo effedive men
remained. Had the British commander been ac-
cominodated with Io,ooo more, as the veteran
advised, how easily might he have put to flight the
motley American army! But after the mif-
carriage at Bennington, and the account of
the failure of the detachment sent under St.
Leger againit Fort-Stanwix, lurely it was notpruit
dent, though it was intrepid, to proceed. An
abfolute,order was pleaded for his proceeding to
Albany; but had a council of war been called at
this period, it is highly probable they would have
determined againlt adopting the prosecution of this
meafiire, on the ground that impossibilities cannot
be effeEed; and thus a retreat might have been
made in time, the army secured, and the general
iully exculpated. At present we feel much for
his situation, and wish he may be more cautious
in the choice of his friends, than he was in en-
gaging his enemies.

K C H A

# CHAP. XIV.

C H A P. XIV.
State of Affairs in England-American Pirates

inse/f the Seas-General Burgoyne's Fate made
known Lord North's Bill-French Declaration
-Burgoyne's Arrival in England-Proceedings
of Parliament-Mr. Dean, with the French
Trecaties, paJ/es over to North-America-Sir
Henry Clinton, commander in chief, and the new
Comrnfnioners, arrive there- Fr itle/s Overtures
-Philadelphia evacuated-March ofthe Britijh
Troops through the JerSeys-Baitle of MAn-
mouth-Arrival of the Army at New-Yorh--
-General Lee fu/pended-Lord Howe, blocked
itt at Sandy-Hook- The French /ail away for
Rhode-. Iand--Lord Howe, being rein/frced,
follows them.-The Fleets cparated on the Point
of engaging- The Americans quit their intended
Attack on the Jland-Lord Iowe departs. for
England.
%W HILE the war had been carried on with

various fuccers in North-America, the

warmth of parties had by no means subsided in
Great-Britain. From a kind of pique, perhaps, at
some real or supposed insults, there was a fort of
animosity between the Englilh and Scotch, W-hich
first broke out violently during lord Bute's admi-
nifiration. The troubles in the colonies had in-
created disputes and heart-burnings. It now ap-
peared, that the Scotchmen in general were in-
clined to reprobate the American claims, while
many good English fubjeEts appeared to support

them,

them, chiefly, perhaps, because they thought it
necessary to oppose what they constantly termed
Scotch measures; though the foundation of these
troubles had been laid by Mr. Grenville, and
lord North was now at the head of the Treasury;
lord Sandwich presided at the Admiralty-Board;
and lord George Germaine (formerly'Sackville)
was Secretary for the American department.

Besides, the marquis of Rockingham, lord Shel-

burne, and some other noblemen, were at the
head of difline parties, who, though they dif-
agreed in many material parts of their refpedive
political creeds; yet seemed generally agreed in
censuring the measures of admininiration, and
particularly in blaming them for continuing the
American war.

These ill humours were by no means sweetened

by the consideration that a number of petty prig
vateers, fitted out by the colonifls, infested the
coafs. However, numbers of their vessels were
taken in return, though at that time the balance
in this cafe seemed rather against us.

But if there matters were thought worthy of so

much concern, what must be the ferment raised
when intelligence was received of the capture of
the whole northern army ? The opposition could
scarcely find terms in which to express their afto-
nifhmentand their indignation again flthe minifi-yi
thev had now a new field to go upon,

: and "W'o:,i

furniflred with matter almost inexhauflible. .4 :
fides the earl of Chatham, the lords on that-fide
already mentioned, two noble dukes in the'upper,
Mr. Burke, Mr. Fox, and other patriots in the
lower house, signalized themselves upon this oc-
cafion; ,end while these debates were carried on
within doors, the people without, who had beconme,

K 2

in some measure reconciled to this war, began
once more loudly to exclaim against it. On the
other hand, the ministers acknowledged to the
house and to the public, that they had been un-
fortunate; but denied that they had been criminal,
negligent, or unjust.

In the mean time, France, who had all along

temporised, had secretly encouraged American
»yeffels,with their prizes, to enter her harbours, and
had already lupplied the rebels with arms, aminu-
nition, and stores, for which various frivolous ex-
cufes were'given, began to throw off the mask;
and at last, when it was thought that the cata-
firophe at Saratoga had pretty nearly ruined our
affairs in the weflern world, the French monarch
took an opportunity of declaring himself.

As it had been thought that some difficulty would
?rife in procuring men for the present campaign;
some of those persons and corporations who had
been most forward in approving the America war,
and in offering their affiflance, were applied to.
This measure, which was adopted with a degree of
caution, left it flould raise an alarm, as having an
unconstitutional appearance, met with some fuc-
cess, and the towns of Manchester and Liverpool
each offered to raise a regiment for the royal
service..

1778. And now lord North brought in his bill

" For declaring the intentions of the parliament of
*: Great-Britain, concerning the exercise of the
" right of imposing taxes within his majefly's co-
'i lonies of North-America." And a bill " To
'- enable his majefly to appoint comminioners
I' with fuflicient powers, to treat, consult, and
* agree, upon the means of quieting the disorders

*' now

" now fubrifting in certain of the colonies, plan.
"tations, and provinces of America."

As by this bill the commissioners were em-

powered to treat with the committees,from con-
grefs as a legal body, or with general Washington,
which before had been refutfed; and as, in effeEt,
the right of taxation seemed relinquished, so that
of dependence might be at length acknowledged;
few of either party e:emed really satisfied with}
it: but the minitfer declared, " This was no more
" than the result of his conflant secret determi-

nation, even in the hour of vitory, to grant

" there concessions." Some tartly observed, that
this was giving up the matter in contest, and fpil-
ling the blood of Britons for nothing: whilst
others, deeper in fpeculatibn, imagined it was the
result of something more fatal than the affair of
Saratoga, which had not yet been communicated.
However, the bill, with alterations, passed both
houses, and commissioners were appointed under
it': fandion.

The next affair that claimed the attention of

parliament, was a total breach with the French
king, who had entered into what he called a treaty
of commerce with the Americans, acknowledging
them as Independent States; and which being no-
tified to Great-Britain, lord Stormont, our am-
baffador, had orders to withdraw himself fiom the
court of Versailles,. as a prelude to hostilities; in
consequence of which, the parliamentwiere nowx
applied to for their constitutional support and
assistance. An amendment was proposed, adding
a clause for the removal of the present ministry;
but this was rejeded, and the bill paired by a ma-
jority of 263 to 113.

K 3 , The

The arrival of general Burgoyne in England

on his parole, revived the recent disputes. The
general complained that he had not access to his
sovereign. Some thought him a prironer in es.
fe&, and not yet justified in his condut. The
motion made in parliament, was, to confider the
slate and condition of the army that surrendered
themselves prisoners at Saratoga in America; and
also by what mneans lieutenant-general Burgoyne,
who commanded that army,and was included in that
convention, was now in England? Mr.Wilkes,who
had long been the flanding patriot of the nation,
seconded the motion: Mr. Fox, a fort of rival in
patriotic merit, moved an amendment, by the fol-
lowing insertion after the word confider, viz.
"Of the tranfafEions of the northern army under

general Burgoyne, and, &c." This was de-

signed to be referred to a committee of the whole
house. The, general, from the supposed indig-
nity he received, entered on a justification of him-
felt when the matter in queflion was not yet pro.
perly before the house. However, the amend-
ment was first rejeaed; and, after some warm
altercation, the main queflion was at length set
by at a late hour; the previous question being
called for, and carried without a division.

Such was the situation of affairs at home, while

the unfortunate army that had been left in Ame-
rica, under the terms of the convention, met
with various difficulties to delay their return
to Europe, and underwent many vexations
and insults in the quarters where they were 1ita
tioned in the neighbourhood of Boflon. General
Burgoyne had complained of the ill-treatment of
the loldiers: congress denied the charge, recrimina-
ted,and-pretended the convention was iniringed by

some

some paltry accoutrements being retained. They
likewise went further, and said, that the geneial's
letters indicated his design, to break the terms
agreed to, and was therefore of an alarming na-
ture: such. were their excuses for an aA of injultice,
and the captive troops could not obtain any re-
medy : perhaps the councils of France had an
influence upon the condlu of these American
governors.

It was in the course of this year that Mr.

Dean arrived express from Paris, at York-town,
where the congress had fat since the lots of Phila-
delphia, in a royal frigate of twenty-eight guns,
with two treaties, the one of commerce, the other
of alliance, for the ratification of congress. The
commercial treaty had been signed on the 3oth of
January, the treaty of alliance on the 3d of Fe-
bruary; and these, as well as their bearer, were
received with joy and exultation.

As by something that the fiperflitious world

call Fatality, our mealures were generally ta-
ken too late; so it happened that the new coin-
miifion, consisting of Sir Henry Clinton, now
appointed commander in chief, lord Carlisle,
and William Eden, Efq; did not arrive till
these treaties were received, and at a tine when it
was become necessary to evacuate Philadelphia;
circumrtances which could not fail to prove real
obflacles to the intentions of government.

The aa of parliament, copy of the commis-

sion, &c. were -immediately dispatched by Sir
Henry Clinton, to congress. There were con-
fiidered by that afaiebly, but not till they had been
reiufed 'to be receive in a public way by Dr.
Ferguson, to whom a paifport was refused : they
were therefore sent by a common conveyance;

1K 4 but

but all terms were rejeted. It was answered, that
there wasindeed atimewhen such terms might have
been received, but that now they were inadmissible.

1778. The royal troops, as had been determi-

ned, quitted and passed the Delaware on the 18th
of June, dispositions for that purpose having been
made by lord Howe, and now proceeded on their
march through the Jerseys.

Washington resolved to obflruat them; he first

ordered general Lee, with his brigade, to rein-
force the Jerseys militia; but this was of no ma.
terial consequence, as they could only break down
a bridge, being obliged to abandon an advantage-
ous post on the approach of the British army.

Washington resolved tofollow with his whole

force. The British troops had an extensive
country, moflly heights, to pass, and were incum.
bered with an enormous load of baggage and pro.
visions; the heat of the weather was excessive,
and the enemy hourly expected either to hurry on
the rear, or, if possible, to possess themselves of
some advantageous pofitidn in the front, whereby
they might effeEtually prevent all hopes of the
English ever reaching New-York, the place of
their deflination.

It was expected that they would have passed the

Rariton; but as general Clinton expeAced that
Gates would intercept him there, he took the
other road, and marched for Sandy-Hook. Gene-
ral Washington had passed the Delaware, far above
Philadelphia; perhaps he thought they would
pass theRariton; but when he found they followed
the contrary course, he sent some detatchments of
ch'iosen troops, under the condut of the marquis
de la Fayette, to harass the royalists, he him-
self following at a convenient diflance; whilst,

on

,on the other hand, Sir Henry Clinton, who ob-
served the numbers that hovered on his rear, dif-
encumbered that part of his army, and put the
baggage under the condua- of general Knyphau.
fen, wh'o led the fi'rst column: the enemy how-
ever. prefled on. An aAion ensued at Freehold's
Farm near Monmouth Court-House, in which the
marquis de la Fayette was defeated, thoughWafh-
ington was in the neigbourhood with an army of
near 20,000 men; -but he could not come up,
through certain defiles; and the British spirit over-
came all obftruEtions, though fifty-feven soldiers
died with fatigue on their march during this me-
morable retreat; and general Lee being sent a-
gainft them, observing the position which by this
time they had taken, returned without effeting
any thing.

General Clinton pursuing his march to Nave-.

fink near Sandy-Hook,- the troops were received
on board by lord Howe, who.had arrived there
the day before, and were conduAed in safety to
New-York.

General Wa(hington was so much offended-

with Lee for his retreat, that when he met him
returning from an impossible attack, he used
some reproachful words to him at the head of the
army; there the latter returned, and demanded a
court-martial, which was held upon him, and in
consequence of which he was suspended for the
space of twelve months. He has ever since been
the enemy of Walhington, and of Henry Laurens,
then president of the congress, and now prisoner
in tie Tower of London.

The Frencli having resolved to take an afive

part in these troubles, had sent out count D'Eflaign
with; a fleet, which had arrived off Virginia

K _5 on

on the very day the British army passed the
bridge at Sandy-Hook. Had he arrived a little
fboner on the coaft,-and bent his attention towards
them, a part of the transports must inevitably
have fallen into his hands; had he pursued them,
they must have been much embarrassed: but his
obje& was, that of blocking up the fleet in the
Delaware, and inclosing the army at Philadelphia,
in which design, by' winds and other delays, he
was h:,ppily disappointed.

D'Efiaign, however, afterwards appeared in

fight of the English fleet, which he kept in a man-
ner blocked up at Sandy-Hook, but did not think
fit to attack them. -Admiral Byron was all this
while expeated on the coaf ; he did not arrive; but
D'Eftaign chore not to undertake any thing: on the
contrary, just when itr was thought he meant to
pass the bar, the spring tide being at the highelt,
he bore away for'Rhode-Ifland, after having cap.
tured some .Englifh-veffels, whose commanders
being ignorant of his arrival, had by chance been
thrown in his way, at a time when tie -admi-
ral colli(t not afford them any proteation. -Thts,
a fchleme well laid miscarried, partly by mifcon-
dut, and partly by unavoidable accidents; and
wiihin a few davs after the count's depalture, four
Ihips of Byi on's squadron, that had been dlfperled
by tempeftuoiis weather, arrived feparaely -at
Sandy-Hook, to the great joy of the Engliih.

In the mean time, D'Eftaign by sea., and ge-

neral Stillivan by arnd, according to a plan con-
certed, irvpefed Rhode-lflard, where fix friga'es
were funk to prevent the navyat operations. Lord
H^Ie now reinforced, set fail to relieve this place,
where- rome 'thousands of imen, together with a
great qiantity of-arms and military llores, hadc it

fallen,

fallen, mult have been destroyed, or sacrificed to
the enemy. On the English admiral's approach,
D'Eftaign lood, out to sea, and a superior num-
ber of velfels fronted the English on the ill of
August. The two fleets spent fnme time in ma-
nceuvres, to gain and preserve the weather gage.
At last lord Howe had resolved to engage, and
had made the proper difpofitiois for that purpose,
when a violent Itorm arose which separated him
from his adversary, and did great damage to mne
of his vessel., but fill more so to D'Eitaign's
squadron: his own, ship, the Languedoc, was seen
afterwards, by captain Dawson, difrnafled, who
attacked her, but was prevented by the storm,
and the darkness of the night, from doing her
much damage. He lay as clole to her, however,
as he could; but when he thought to have renew-
ed his attempt in the morning, fix fail of French
men of war bore down pponi him, and obliged
him to defifl from his enterp:ize.

The Englifl fleet went to New-York to refit.

D'Efiaign returned to Rhode-lfland, before which
he anchored a second time, on the 2d of August.
General Sullivan with his Americans had landed
on Long. Ifldnd, and eagerly expeiced his a fiftance,
but he did not enter the harbour. Lord Howe ap-
peared again; the count failed for Boston; and
the American at last wihdrew their forces, loud-
ly complaining of the expence and'trouble they
had been put to, in carrying on this fruitless ex-
pedition.

Tle Britifl fleet purfiued the Frencl;, but found

them so well secured in Newfoundland-Road, as to
render. an attack impraaicable. And loon after,
lord Howe let fail for Englanfd.

K 6 CHAP.

# CHAP. XV.

C H A P. XV.
Admiral Byron arrives of Bof/on-Is driven

to Sea by a Storm-Gains Rhode-IJland-
D'Eftaign fleers for the Tcefl-Indies, whither
Commodore Hotham likewise /iils with an Eng.
iih Squadron, and 4000 Troops-St. Lucia
Jrrrenders-Colonel Campbell and General Pre-
vojt reduce Georgia-General Lincoln defeated
-Charles-Town be/eged by Prevof/lIHe retires
-D'Eftaign appears at Savannah, and fends
a summons to the Commander, to Jurrender to
the Arms of the French King-The Englijf
fiandon their Defence-The Enemy attempts ta
f/orm the Place, but are repul!ed with great
Slaughter-Charles-Town attacked and taken by
Sir Henry Clinton-Sir Georac Brydges Rodney
defeats the Spanlbh Fleet off St. Vincents, and
afterwards M. de Guicken in the Weft-Indies.
A Dmiral Byron, the famous circumnavigator,

at length appeared before Boston; but'

winds and seas, which so frequently fought against
this commander,drove him off the coast; on which,
however, a feventy-four gun ship, a fixty-four,
and a sloop, were beat to pieces, most of the crews
perilhed, and those that escaped the waves, were
made prisoners by the Americans. Before this
florm had subsided, countD'Eflaign left Boston, and
went with his fleet for the \Vef-Indies: he was
descried on his paftage by the Culloden, one of

our
-**-;

our squadron, which made a prize of one of the
flore ihips, and sent her for New-York; but the
captain of the Culloden having for a long time
in vain endeavoured to regain the American
coast, at last fleered for Britain, and anchored- in
Milford-Haven, on the 13th of December, hav-
ing 200 of his crew sick in their hammocks, and
the reft in a wretched condition. As for admiral
Byron, he made Rhode-Ifland, whence commo-
dore Hotham failed for the Weft-Indies with about
4000 troops on board. He arrived on the loth
of December at Barbadoes, where he was joined
by a small squadron under the command of admi.
ral Barrington. They now failed for St. Lucia,
where they landed the troops near the Carenage;
but before they could make themfelv&s mailers
of the island, D'Eftaign appeared, and landed 5000
men; but was repulsed with great slaughter to his
ihips, against which Barrington's small force had
fully defended the harbour.

About this time, two bodies of forces, one un-

der the command of colonel Campbell, and the
other from St. Augustine in Florida, were or-
dered for the reduCtion of Georgia, in which
they succeeded after a few ations that did ho.
nour to the courage and fleadinefs of the British
troops. The inhabitants in general submitted,
and were received into the king's protection; and
twenty companies of militia were formed for the
defence of the country against the incursions of
the Carolina rebels. A predatory expedition
was undertaken by general Matthews to Virginia,
who t9o'k Portsmouth, where he would willingly
have remained, but it was not thought expedient;
he therefore returned, after having destroyed fe-

veral

veral privateers, and taken on board a quantity of
military flores.

Sir Henry Clinton marked out an attack upon

the pofis'ofStonv-Point and Verplanks, the moR
diree communication between the provinces on
either fide of Hudfon's-River. These were taken
and garrisoned; but the enemy found means again
to possess themselves of Stony-Point, from whence
they commanded Verplanks. Sir Henry Clinton
then moved to Dobb's-Ferry, to overcome the
enemy, while brigadier-general Stirling em-
barked with three regiments for the relief of
Verplanks, or the recoverv of Stony-Ferry. On
his arrival within fight of the latter, the enemy
abandoned it with precipitation.

An expedition was undertaken up the Penob-

fcot-River, where a fort was built; a force was
sent to attack it: and though the place wvas refo-
lutely defended, it must have fallen, had not Sir
George Collier with fix frigates arrived there, on
which the enemy fled. Sir George having thus
relieved the fort, proceeded to burn all the Ame.
rican vessels he could find in the rivers, which
proved a terrible loss to the rebels.

General Lincoln having marched with a design

to penetrate into Georgia, general Presoft made
a forced march through swamps deemed imnpene-
trable, and appeared before Charles-Town, the
key 'of South-Carolina, after having lorced Tome
pofls in his way; and the place had nearly fallen
into his hands, when general Lincoln returned
with superior force to it's defence, which obliged
Prevoft to relinquish the unde, taking, haviig
previouflyreje&ed an offer from the ilhabiltants,
of -remaining neutral during the war in Ainrica.
The English commander returned to the island of

St. John1',

St. John's, where the enemy attacked him, but
were repulsed; and then leaving colonel Maitland
behind him, he returned to Savannah in Georgia.

In the month of September, D'Eftaign, who-

had conquered the Grenades and St. Vincent's,
molt unexpeaedly appeared on the coast, and
after having dispatched two ships of the line and-
three frigates to Charles-Town, to give notice, of
his coming, and to prepare the i'ebels to join him,
came to an anchor, landed his men, and fiim-
moned the place to surrender to the arms of his
Most Christian Majesty. The garrison having
demanded 24 hours to confider on this proposal,
at the expiration of that time returned an abfo.
lute refusal, and having procured rome cannon
and ammunition from the Fowey and Rose ships
of war, molt of whole seamen also joined the
garrison, they prepared for a vigorous defence,
raising batteries and obftruting the channel as
much as the lhortnefs of the time would permit.

The French, after having male some regular

approaches, at length resolved to storm the place,
alter their batteries had played upon our works
with little effeEt. Count D'Eflaign led the attack
in person; but the attempt proved fatal to the
alfailants. The 'attack commenced on the 9th of
December at day-break; but about 300 m'en, with
the help of the grape-thot from the batteries, re-
pulsed 'the French and Americans- with great
slaughter, and the count himself was severely
wounded in the action.

The count Pulawfky, who had thrown himself

into Charles-Town while it was attacked by Pre-
'vo.ft, was mortally wounded, and there were a.
hut.1200o Americans and French slain out-right.
Their joint force amounted to between 7 and
; . 8600

8000 men. The loss of the British forces was!
only one captain and fifteen rank and file killed,
tree subalterns and thirty-five wounded. Imme-
dlatly after this defeat, the French began to la-
bourXat getting off their cannon, and by the
night quitted their works, retreated to their boats,
and embarked under cover of their gallies.

Thus was an attempt frufirated, in which the

enemy had assured themselves of success'; during
the course of which they had denied a request
made by general Prevoft, of taking the women
and children on board the veflels; but after their
repulse, before they thought the English were
apprised of their departure, they apologized for
this, laying the fault, as count O'Duin said, upon
" the American general, that scoundrel Lincoln."
However, the offer was rejected for obvious rea.
sons, though many civilities passed between the
English and French, during the ihort time the
latter yet remained before Savannah.

The consequence of the French King's con-

duct, as every one knows; had occasioned hoftili-
ties to commence. The attacking of the French
fleet, and taking the Licorne; the memorable
aftion of the 27th of July, and the no leis re-
markable parade of the combined fleets failing up
the channel, after Spain had acceded to a treaty
with France and America, are matters too well
known, and too little conlneEed, to be here re-
lated at large. All parties seemed determined to
make the Weftern-World the feat of- war by sea
and land. We have seen the event of the attack
on the capital of Georgia; after it's miscarriage,
the French met with florms and other misfortunes,
while the Engliih affairs began to wear a more
promising face in that quarter. Things were put

upon

upon a better eflablifhment than ever in that'
province, and loyalists daily flocked to general
Prevoff, while Lincoln was content to withdraw
towards Carolina.

How inaEtive soever Sir Henry Clinton might

have appeared, while general Prevoft with a
handful of men was doing such wonders in
Georgia and South-Carolina; yet, when he found
tile coast was-clear of the French, and Savannah
flill in our hands, lie prepared himlelf to embark
on an expedition to Charles-Town; and after
encountering some difficulties, landed on the Neck
on the 29th of March 1780, passed Afhby-Ri-
ver, and in the night of the ift of April broke
ground within 8oo yards of the place.

As the English general had been foiled in a

former attempt, he was now the more resolute
in prosecuting his purpose; and the navy under
admiral Arbuthnot co.operated cordially with
the military force upon this occasion.

The communication with the country was al-
most every where cut off. Lieutenant-colonel
Tarleton defeated a part of the enemy's cavalry,
while the shipping began to invest the town by
sea. Of his dispositions in order to attain this
end, the following is an account, which we have
thought proper to copy, with a view to give the
reader a just idea of the strength of Charles-Town
and it's dependencies, before which two Britilh
armies had already been baffled.

" Preparations," fays the admiral, " were

"made for passing the bar, where at high-water
" spring-tide there are only 19 feet water. The
"guns, provisions, and.water, were taken out of
"the Renown and Romulus to lighten them,
" and we lay in that situation on the open coast,

" il

" in tie winter-fearon, exposed to the insults of
" the enemy, for 16 days, before an opportunity
" offered of going into the harbour, which, how-

ever, was effe&ed without any accident, not.
wilhftanding the enemies gallies continually at.

"tempted to prevent our boats from founding
" the channel.

' Every thing being in readiness for the alrm's

" crossing Afhby-River, the boats of the 'fleet,
" with the flat-boats under the command of cap.
" tain Elphinflon, and captain Evans, of the
" Raifonable, the whole army, with the artillery
'" and flores necessary for the siege, were landed
' (as has been already mentioned) under cover
' of the gallies on the town fide, with aftonilh-
" ing expedition.

As soon as the army began to erel their
" batteries againfl the town, I took the firfi fa.

vourable opportunity of pafling Sullivan's-

" Island,. upon which there was a strong fort and
' batteries, the chief defence of the harbour.
"Accordingly, I weighed at one o'clock, on the
" qth of April, with the Roebuck, Richmond,
' Romulus, Blonde, Virginia, Raleigh, and Sand.

wich armed.fhip, the Renown bringing up the
" rear; and palling through a severe fire, an-

chored in about two hours under James-Ifland,

' with the loTs of 27 seamen killed and wounded.
"The Richmond's fore-top-mafl was shot away,

and the ships in general suffered damage ill

"their rigging, however not materially in their
" hulls; but the Acetus tranrport, having on

board a few naval flores, grounded within gun-

' shot of Sullivan's-Ifand, and received so much
'* damage, that she was obliged to be abandoned
" and burnt.

" Having

Having fiationed ships and armed-veffels off

" the different inlets upon the coast, and the
' town being now nearly invefled, attempts were
'" made to pass a naval force into Cooper's-Ri-
" ver by Hogg's-Ifland, the main channel being
" rendered imnpraEticable; and finall vessels to

carry heavy guns were fitted for thatfervice. But
"it being found that tie enemy had already funk

vessels in that channel, whilit it's entrance was

" defended by the works on Sullivan's-Illand and
"Mount-Pleafant, it was resolved to dispossess
(' them of. the latter by means of- our seamen,
i and in the mean time to arm certain finall vef-
' fels which had been taken by lord Cornwallis
( in the Wando-River.

" For this purpose, a brigade of seamen and

; marines was formed from the squadron, and
: under the condu6t of the captains Hudson,
' Ord, and Gambier, landed on the 28th at day-
;, break at Mount-Pleafant, where receiving in-
:' formation that the enemy was abandoning the
" redoubts at Lanipry's-Point, an advantageous

post on Cooper's-River, they marched with
a view of cutting off their rear; but on a near
' approach found that they had escaped in vessels
* too Charles-Town. However, the sudden ap-
( pearance of this body prevented the rebels fromn
" carrying off their cannon and llores, and from

deflroying their works. About the fame time,
a major, a captain, and some other commiflion-
ed and non-commissioned officers, with 80 pri-
" ,ates, were made prisoners by the guard boats

of the fleet, in retiring to town.

Captain Hudson being relieved in his post

' by colonel Ferguson, returned to the fort at
"Mount-Pleafant, which being in the neigh.

*" bouthood

" bourhood of Fort Sullivan, brought us in de.
"ferters daily, from whom I learned accounts

very favourable to us of it's garrison. I there.
fore formed such a plan to attack it as should
not interfere with the important operations
which the army were carrying on, and which

" now became every day more and more cri.
"tical.

4' The attention of the rebels I found had been
" direced to the south-east fides of the fort,

which were most open to attack; but the well

" face and north-west batlion, I found had been
. neglected. I therefore determined to attempt
, the fort by florm, under cover of the fire from
" the flips of the squadron. The whole being
' ready, and the ships only waiting for the tide
_ to begin the attack, the fort was summoned by
" captain Hudson, when, after a little confidera.

tion, the garrison surrendered themselves pri.
" foners of war."

The reduation of this fort, while the cannons

and bombs threatened desolation to all the dwell.
ings in Charles-Town, inclined Lincoln, who
commanded there, to think of capitulating, though
he had answered the first summons with disdain;
yet when he was desired to propose articles, he
framed such as from their nature could not be ra-
tified, and exceptions being made to them, he
declared the answer inadmissible. He then pro.
posed other articles, which in their turn were
rejected by Sir Henry Clinton; but on the tith
of May he sent to the British commander a letter
to the following purport.

" Sir, the fame motive of humanity which

" inclined you to propose articles of capitulati-
" on to this garrison, induced me to offer those

" which

" which I had the honour of fending you on tthe
" 8th inflant: they then appeaied to me such as
"I might proffer, and you receive, with honour
, to both parties. Your exceptions to. them, as
, they principally concerned the militia and ci-
" tizens, I then conceived were fucli as could
" not be concurred with: but a recent appljca-
"L tion from those people, wherein they express a
, willingness to comply with them; and a with

on my part, to lessen as much as may be the
(, diltrels of war to individuals, leads me now to

offer an acceptance of them."
Sir Henry Clinton answered, " That though
after the refusal of the former terms, he had
at firfi intended to accept of nothing but a fur-
" render at discretion; yet the former benevo.

lent reasons still prevailing in his mind, he was
ready'to embrace the proposal." Accordingly,

hostilities- ceased on the'capitulation being rati.
sied, which upon the whole was favourable to the
besieged: the general entered Charles-Town in
triumph, from whence he had been compelled to
retire two years before. Five vessels, French
and American built, mounting from 44 to 20
guns, and a polacre of 16, were taken in the har-
bour. The place was given up four days after .-
the surrender of Fort-Sullivan. Various were the
opinions relative to this fo-much-defired conquest.
Somne said that this blow alone secured us the Ca-
rolinas, and led to the reduEtion of the Southern
Colonies, which when we had secured, the war
must languifl on the fide of the rebels for want
of supplies generally drawn from those parts, and
the ultimate consequence mluft be, the submission
of America to the parent slate. Others treated
the matter as the trifling acquisition of a single.

town,
< . . . »

town, in which we should probably only be block.
ed up, as had been the cafe at Philadelphia; and,
however the royalifls might flatter themselves,
asserted, that new armies would be conflantly
raised, and that we fiould not find any friends in
the country. Neither party realbned exattlv right
in this cafe, as will shortly appear in the sequel,

When Sir Henry Clinton had fettled all things

in Charles-Town, at his departure for New-York,
he left there the lords Cornwallis and Rawdon,
with no considerable force; as it seems he thought
proper to take far the greater part of the army
back, left the Americans, who expeeled to be join.
ed by the French auxiliaries, should attempt any
things againfi New-York in his absence; but du.
ring'a severe winter nothing of that kind had taken
place: on the contrary, several rebel posts had
been surprised, owing to the vigilance of the
commander, and the loyalty of several of the in.
habitants, who formed themselves into companies
for the protetion of the coafis, and the annoy.
ance of the enemy.

Little more of any consequence had been done

during admiral Byron's flay in the Weft-Indies,
except his having, in company with Barrington,
engaged the French off St. Vincent's, with 1ome
loss, both parties claiming the vitory: hut
all the solid advantages remained with the enemy,
who kept their conquests, and feenied to have a
superiority over us in these parts; which, how-
ever, D'Eflaign's unfuccefi!ul expedition to the
Havannah lessened; that commander being obli-
ged to return to France, hllecre he was jeceived
with rejoicings, and his coach covered with laurels,
being treated as if, indeed, he had expelled the
English from all their settlements in America and

the

the Weft.lndies. The Spaniards having laid
siege to Gibraltar, admiral Rodney failed with a
fleet, with orders to throw succours into the
place, and from thence to proceed to theWeft.In-
dia-Iflands: he not only accomplilhed the firflipart
of the design, but also defeated a Spanish fqua-
dr6n under Don Juan de Langara,- and made
the commander prisoner.

Afterwards, he proceeded to Barbadoes and St.

Lucia, and took upon him the command of the
{hips on that flation;, and soon had intelligence
that the French fleet under the command. of M.
Guichen had for several days appeared before
St. Lucia, waiting for an opportunity to surprise
the island; but upon the arrival of the British
force, they retired into Port-Royal Bay. But
these having put to sea on the 15th, admiral Rod-
ney followed them, and after several manceuvres
on both fides, brought them to an engagement on
the 17th in the morning. The following is his
account of that alion, which proved by no means
decisive.

T; The different movements of the enemy (fays

Sir George) obliged me to be very cautious,
and watch every: opportunity that offered of at-
" tacking themi.to aldvantage.

At eleven in thie morning I made the signals

" for battle, to convince the whole fleet that I
"was determined' toibring the enemy to an en-
"gagement. At fTty minutes paR eleven, I
"made the signal f'or every fllip to bear down,
( and leer for her opposite in the enemy's line,
"agreeable to the ilafl, article of the fighting in-

lructions ; five triimtils afte rwards the signal
was made for battle-;} ,a few minutes aiter
" that, it was my intention to engage close, and

" consequently

(' consequently the admiral's ship to be the ex.
" ample; a few minutes before one in the after.
' noon, one of the head-mof: ships began the
' aEtion; at one in the afternoon, the Sandwich
·'. in-the centre, after having received several fires

from the enemy, began to engage. Perceiving

46 several of our lhips at a distance, I repeated the
" signal for a close ation. The Action in the
· centre continued till fifteen minutes pall four
-c in the afternoon, when M. Guichen in the
$ Couronne, in which they had mounted ninety
" guns, the Triumphant, and Fendant, after en-
6, gaging the Sandwich an hour and a half, bore

away. The superiority of the Sandwich's fire,

c" and the gallant behaviour of her officers and
(' men, enabled her to sustain so unequal a com-
"I bat; though, before attacked by them, (he had
"' beaten three ships out of the line of battle, had
" entirely broken it, and was to leeward of the
· wake of the French admiral."

Sir George Brydges Rodney purfied the enemy

for three days; they endeavoured to get into
Port-Royal, Martinico, but were prevented;
after which, they took shelter under Guadaloupe,
where they remained with several of the (hips that
had formed the van, greatly disabled; but the
king's ships not being in a condition to follow
them, got off Port-Royal to wait for the enemy,
the admiral having dispatched frigates to different
quarters, to give him notice in cafe of their
approach.

In the month following, the enemy were again

discerned; but they kept such a dliiance that it
was rmpoflible for admiral Rodney to bring them
to an engagement; their rear, however, after two
attempts of this kind, were much damaged by a

heavy

heavy fire from the English. In the mean time,
M. Ternay had failed from Fraice; but the place
of his destination was kept a secret.

While such were the tranfaaions in the Weft.

Indian seas, a plan that had been formed for
an expedition from Jamaica to the river St.
Juan, was crowned with success, by taking the
fort of that name, though great difficulties at-
tended the expedition, and numbers of the Eng.
lith died after their landing in that unhealthy cli-
mate. It was thought that a rebellion againit the
Spaniards in the further parts of South-America,
might favour such an undertaking; but these re.
bels were too remote; and the only assistance our
foes received, was from the Mosquito Indians
inhabiting near the Bay.

L CHAP.

# CHAP. XVI.

C HA P. XVI.
M. Ternay Jails for the American coa/fltMr.

laurens embarksfor Holland, and is taken by an
EriglJh Frigate; his CharaTer, and that of Dr.
Franklin's-Negociation with Brigadier.Gene.
ral Arnold di/covered-The Genera eScapes; but
Major Andre is taken and executed as a Spy-.
Particulars relative to that unfortunate Gentle.
man, and to General Arnold.
IT appeared at length, that M. Ternay's defti.

nation was for Rhode-Ifland, which had been

evacuated by the Englilh; thither admiral Ar.
buthnot followed him. A plan being laid for at-
tacking Ternay by sea and land, Sir Henjy Clin.
ton actually failed upon the expedition; but
through some delays, all things were not in readi-
ness, till the French general, with the affiflance
of the Americans, had so well fortified the har-
bour, that an attack muff have been desperate;
and New-York being threatened in Sir Henry's
absence, he returned without effecting any thing.
The two commanders did not seem well-fatisfied
with each other upon this occasion.

In the mean time, the Dutch having conflantly

affifled the enemies of England, besides refuting
the assistance flipulated by treaties, and taking
great pains to procure what they called an armed
neutrality of the northern powers, much coolness
fubfifled between Great-Britain and the United-
States. At this critical jupnture, while the fa-
mous Dr. Franklin, plenipotentiary from the
congress, remained laying plans at Paris, Mr.

Laurens,

Laurens, formerly president of the continental
congress, was taken by his majesty's frigate the
Vestal, as he was pasing over to Holland. A
bag of papers which he had thrown overboard,
being taken up, on examination proved that he
was employed on a negociation with the Dutch.
RemonfRrances were made; the States-General
denied their knowledge of any treaty; they reft.
ed it with Amsterdam, and some merchants there
were named: it was insisted by the English, that
justice Ihould be done; and then the matter was
bandied about till government gave orders for
seizing the Dutch vessels, and thus hostilities
commenced between the two nations,

Mr. Laurens, after his examination, was cornm

mitted to the Tower. We shall here present the
reader with some account of Dr. Franklin, so
often mentioned; and of this intended ambassador
in secret to the States of Holland.

The celebrated Benjamin Franklin, who is

now in the feventy-fifth year of his age, was the
son of a tallow-chandler in the province of Massa.
chufetes-Bay, and served his apprenticeship to a
printer in Bofion. During his servitude, he con.
traaed a taste for letters, and appeared to be of a
Ifudious disposition.

He was but just out of his time when he made an

attack upon the conduA of the general court,
which gave so much offence, that he was obliged'
to withdraw himself from the province, and to
fettle in Philadelphia, where he followed his oc-
cupation as a printer, and managed a newspaper in
that city. Here also he meddled in politics,
though in a different line from that which he has
thought fit since to adopt; for he, who was at that
time in league witB Mr. Gal, endeavoured to

L 2 overthrow

/

overthrow the proprietary government of Pen;
fylvania, and to introduce-a royal one in its fiead.
In this however he did not succeed; but he had
better fortune in his new regulations for mana-
gingthe poft.offices in America, as he got hinmfelf
the appointment of joint pot-nmafter.general for
America; the profits of which place were near
3001ool. a year. Though he had greatly inveighed
against the flamp. at, yet he procured the place
of ftamp-mafer for one of his friends. When the
aa was repealed, he got the fame person a place
in the cufloms, which was fold, by his advice, to
the highest bidder before matters came to a crisis
between Great-Britain and America.

As this gentleman, who was by this time ho-

noured with the degree of DocEor of Laws, grew
every day warmer in what he was pleased to call
the cause of American freedom, so he was inde-
fatigable in his endeavours to keep alive the flame
which had been kindled in the colonies. His
letters for this purpose were often read by Mr.
Samuel Adams at the Boston town-meetings;
however, though their fubflance and the author
of them were well known in England, yet he kept
his place of poft-mafter-general, till he avowed
having transmitted those letters taken from Mr.
WVhately, which made such a noise both at home
and abroad. It is remarkable, however, that Mr.
Franklin did not make this declaration till a chal-
lange had pafled, and a duel was fought on the
occasion-; and after all, he never thought proper
to let the world know how he came by them;
though it is at present pretty well understood, that
he got them by means of one Hubbard, a relation
of his, whom he had put into the poft-office at
Boston.

Every

Every one knows the part that the doEor has

taken during the prelent troubles; his examina;
tion at the bar of the House of Commons, and'
his embaff, to France, we have already mentioned.
It haialways appeared from his condud, that he
was ever a friend to America, even before the
beginning of these troubles. He is now more
confirmed in his sentiments than ever; and it is
the opinion of politicians, that he will ever prove
the greatest obltacle to her reconciliation with the
mother-country.

As opposite parties are apt to fee things throughb

different mediums, objeas are generally present-
ed discoloured to their view. Some look lupo.i
the doaor, in his public characer, as the patrot.
of liberty; in his private life, as a man of mo-
deration, affability, and wisdom: whilst others?'
will not allow him one good quality, but set firm
down as a fly incendiary in his political character.
and a deceitful cunning pretender to that wifdiorr
and to those virtues which, in reality, never en-
tered his conpofition.

We may with safety pronounce, that whatever

Dr. Franklin thinks, he airs as a moll enthu.
fiaflic republican ; and it appears evident, what.
soever were his motives, that he has greatly con-
tributed to keep the breach openbetween Great-
Britain and her colonies. He is a person of
winning address, though he possesses great gravity
as well as a reservedness of temper, which few,
but thole who well know him, can perceive, and
much lels can they be supposed to penetrate it.
If we regard him as a politician, he is deep and.
designing: he is certainly a man of letters, and an
inveltigator of the principles of nature, though,
be has sometimes deviated, perhaps, into the ex-

L 3 travagances

travagances of philosophy. We do not find that
the dotor was ever married; but he has a son,
the loyal governor of the Jerseys, who was a pri-
soner with the rebels for near two years. It is
said, the governor's mother died in the silts of
Philadelphia.

Mr. Henry Laurens was the son of a French

proteflant, a fadler, in Charles-Toy n, to which
business the youth was bound; but disliking it, he
came over to London, where for some time he
adEed as a merchant's clerk, and at length became
himself a merchant; the foundation of his fortune
being laid by a lucky stroke in the insurance way.
He was generally reckoned an honest trader, but
extremely sharp and fitit in all his dealings, and
was indefatigably induRrious. He returned to
Charles-Town in good circumfiances, where he
continued increasing his wealth; and made some
progress in literature, to which, in his early life,
he had not time to pay much attention.

He was a lieutenant-colonel in a regiment of

militia commanded by colonel, since, general
Grant, in the last war, and was with him on an
expedition againit the Cherokees; but we do not
hear any thing of his military prowess.

When the American itamp-at was first passed,

Mr. Laurens said, that all opposition to it was ille.
gal, and declared himself much displeased with the
behaviour of the populace, and the general difpo-
fition of the Americans upon this occasion: and
he either was or seemed so sincere in his profef-
sions, as to draw upon him the threats of the
people of Charles-Town, though it appears that
they were by some means dissuaded from putting
those threats in Execution.

But

But when the ftamp-a&t was repealed, and one

triumph followed another, this gentleman began
to change what were generally supposed to be
his sentiments, and to adopt others which
^ere tgAe agreeable to those who called them.
selves ihe patriotic party, in that country.
It is remarkable; that before things had come to an
extremity, Mr Laurens had a {hip seized by one
of his majefy's cruizers, which was condemned
by Sir Egerton Leigh, a moltupright judge, who
had married the owner's niece. This was a piece
of impartial juflice in Sir Egerton; but his wife's
uncle libelled him ii public and private, and never
forgave himn; and probably, as great effeEts are
often produced by little causes, this incident might
have contributed to give a turn to his wavering
political opinions.

While the flame was yet spreading in America,.

Mr. Laurens came over to Europe, where he re-
mained for three years, the greatelt part of which'
time he spent in England; from whence he re-
turned to Charles-Town in the year 1775, where
he was received as a welcome guelt, and as
able to affit his country, even in the plans then.
forming, by the additional knowledge he had ac.
quired of the nature of affairs, and especially of
the disposition 'of the people of this country,
Here he appeared a warm advocate for the cause
of the colonists, though in England he had; put
on the appearance of much candour and
moderation.

He had by this time so much recommended

himself to the people, that he was sent as a dele-
gate to the general congress. It was in the year
1777 that he was elecded president of that as-
fembly; and he was in that Rlation when the Sa.

L 4 ratoga

ratoga convention was concluded, and it was
chiefly owing to him that this treaty was so shame-
fully broken on the part of the Americans; a
circumflance which he attempted to juflify, as
has been already observed, by the molt f;folous'
pretences. It is generally supposed that ie will
be.detained a prisoner during the American war.

While Sir Henry Clinton and general Wash.

ington lay both pretty quiet in their quarters, at
a tune when the difirelles which the circulation
of continental currency funk to-its lowell ebb
the bad pay and clothing of the army, and many
other circumfiances had introduced a mutinous
spirit among the continental troops; brigadier Ar.
nold, who never approved of the French alliance,
had for some time held a correspondence with the
English general, which was principally carried on
by means of major Andre, adjutapt-general to
the British army in America. This young officer
undertook to give Arnold a meeting at a place
appointed, whither he was conducted in the Vul.
ture sloop of .war, and converted with that com-
mander; but was advised to disguise himself, and,
under the feigned name of John Anderson, to
take another route to New-York: but at Ferry.
Town he was taken by three militia-men, after.
wards brought before general Washington, and in
the end:.executed as a spy; while. general Arnold
hearing that Washington had visited his quarters
during his absence, and that a John Anderson
was taken, made his escape with ail possible expe-
dition, without being able to bring over any of
the soldiery, though he expeEted to have brought
over near sooo men.

The fortune of the unhappy major Andre was
so singular, and has been so much the fubjcE of

,-:
. . . ~conversation,

conversation, that some particulars of his life, as
well as the relation of the manner in which he
encountred his fate, may not be here improperly
presented to the reader.

The major's father, Mr. Andre, was a native

of Geneva, and a very considerable merchant in.
the Levant trade. This his sot was educated
under Mr. Newcomnbe, at Hackney; from whence
he was Cent for some years to Geneva. On his.
return, he attended his father's compting-hloufe ;.
after whose death, disliking that occupation, lie
first entered into the army in the month of
January 1771. The next year he went over to.
Germany, and visited several courts of Europe:.
he returned to England. at the end of that year,,
and in 1774 embarked to join his regiment, the
Royal English Fuzileers,in which he was a lieute-
nant, then lying in America: in. 1775, he was.
taken prisoner at St. John's, by the rebels under
Montgomery, but was exchanged soon after ge.-
neral HIowe took possession of New-York, andl
was appointed a captain in the 26th regiment:
he was taken great notice of by this commlander,
and was afterwards made aide-de-camp to major-
general Grey, by his recommendation, in which.
fiation he was present at the principal engage.
merits in the Jerseys and Penfylvania, during the:
campaigns in 1777 and 1778. The generals..
Howe and Grey leaving New-York, general Clin-
ton, who succeeded the former,, now appointed.
this young gentleman one of his aides-de-camp,.
who Coon gained his confidence and efleem, by
his valour,, prudence,. and amiable deportment..
Every thing that was thought would render'his.
situation agreeable was done by his new patron,
to oblige him ; he was firfl made a major of pro-
vincials, and afterwards, through the faie interest,,
was constituted a major on the eftabliflnrment, and'

L 5. received

received from his majesty, in 1780, the appoint.
ment of adjutant-gederal of the British army in
America. It was just after this that he was in.
volved in the fatal misfortune that put an end to
all his hopes, and brought him to what his ene.
mies meant fould be an ignominious death.

We have already mentioned, that he was taken

in disguise, and pafiing under a feigned name
through the rebel lines. The circumstance was
as follows: being infirulded to treat with general
Arnold, he embarked accordingly, and landed
from the Vulturefloop of war in the night of the
2ift of September 1780, under the Haverfllaw
mountain. The boat which brought him on
Ihore canied no flag. He had on his regimentals,
with a ftrtout coat over them. He had an inter-
view with general Arnold; and it was unde flood,
when he left the Vulture sloop, that he was to
return that night, but it was then dolbtful; how-
ever. if ihat was not poflible, he was promised
that he flould be concealed on shore in a place of
iaetv till the next night : but on the preceding
i)y., when he madc inquiries how he should gct
Lack, he was informed that lie could not return
as he came, bit mult take a different route. On
the evening of the 22d of September, he passed
King's.Fen:i, between the American posts of
Stoney and Vcri-;laik's Points, in another dress,
unhappily. as lie lad been advised, and under the
namie of John Anderson, and was taken at Ferry.
Town, as he was making the best of his way to
New-York, by tome of the country militia.

Major Andit, on being taken, had written to ge.

neral Walhington, acknowledging his real name
arit( fitulation, adid (ifclaiming all design of coming
disguised within the American lines.

Several

Several letters were sent from Sir Henry Clin-

ton, Arnold, and others, in his favour, as soon as
the misfortune was known at New-York; but all
would not avail; Wafhingtdn only answered, that
he frould refer the affair to a board of officers,
who met- accordingly, to determine the fate of the
prisoner, whose openness of behaviour, which de-
served admiration, according to their own account,
only saved them the trouble of producing so much
evidence against him, as would otherwise have
been indispensably necessary to convia him. His
own letters being lhewn in the court, were ac-
knowledged; and being asked whether he had any
thing to fay relative to the faEs in question (in the
course of which he had been of opinion that he
did not come under the denomination of a spy) he
answered, that he left them to operate with the
board. Their report was unfavourable; their fen.
tence death; and that with all the ignominy that
attends the execution of a felon.

Though major Andre feared not to resign his

breath for the cause which he had espoused; yet
the disgrace that awaited him, could not but give
him some concern, and this.produced the follow-
ing address to the American general.

$ Sir, buoyed above the terrors of death by
the consciousness of a life devoted to honour-

" able pursuits, and Rained with no aftion which
"( can give me remorse, I trust that the request I
°i make to your Excellency, at this serious period,
" and which is to soften my last moments, will
"not be rejeLted.

(4 Sympathy towards a soldier will surely in.
" duce your Excellency and a military tribunal,

to adapt the mode of my death to the feelings
of a man of honour.

L 6 " Let

Let me hope, Sir, that if aught in my cha-

"' rafer impresses you with esteem towards me; if
', aught in my misfortunes marks me as the vic-
"tim of policy, not of resentment, I (hall ex.

perience the operations of there feelings in
" your breat by being informed that I am not to
" die on a gibbet. I have the honour to be your
"Excellency's most obedient humble servant,

"JOHN ANDRE"

But this moderate request was rejeEed; it was

resolved that the unfortunate gentleman ihould be
executed according to his sentence. The Ame-
ricans themselves give testimony to the undaunted
courage and fortitude with which he suffered;
for the following is their account of his death.

- When he was led to the place of execution,,he
bowed familiarly to all those with whom he had
been acquainted during his confinement. A smile
of complacency expressed the serene fortitude of
his mind: being arrived at the fatal spot, he asked
with some emotion, " Must I then die in this
' manner ?" He was told, it was unavoidable,
* I am reconciled to my fate, said he, but not to
" the mode." However, soon recollecing him-
self, he added, " It will be but a single pain,.'
and springing upon the cart,. performed the.lafl
offices to himself with a composur.e that excited
the admiration and melted the hearts of the be-
holders. Being told the final moment was at
hand, and asked whether he had any thing to fay.,
he answered, " Nothing but to request you will
" witness to the world that 1 die like a brave
* man." Among the extraordinary circumfiances
that attended him in the midfr of his enemies, he
died universally eteemed anduniverfally regretted.

Major

Major Andre at the time of his death was,

31 years of age: he was well made, but rather
slender, about five feet nine inches high, and very
nimble and ative : he was of a dark conm
plexion, but had an agreeable though rather a fe.
rious countenance: he excelled in drawing, paint-
ing, dancing, and other polite accomplifbments;
and was well {killed in the modern languages.
The troops at New-York were scarcely with.held
from ruffing to immediate action as soon as. they
heard of the execution of this unfortunate young
gentleman.

When Sir Henry Clinton found. that all his

solicitations for the life of his friend were i-y vain,
though he had promised any exchange reivre.lx
or indulgence to any friend of Washington"s thai
might fall into his hands, sent a flag of trucato
request that major Andre's body might be carried
to his quarters. This.being refused, on the idea
that burying the prisoner under the gibbet was.
part of his sentence; the general yet humbled-
hirmfelf once more,. so far as to desire that it might
afterwards be tiaAen up, in order to be interred at
New;York with military honours; but this also
was refused : a circumstance which candour itself
mulf own can do no honour to Waslington's
feelings as a soldier, and. is really a.difgrace to his.
humanity.

CHAP.

# CHAP. XVII.

C H A P. XVII.
Brigadier-general Arnold's Addrecs to the Ame.

ricans-Sketches of his L£fe-SecefJon of Part
of General Wa/hington's Army-Sir Henry Clin-
ton's unfJiccefsful Attempts to treat with them-
Hurricanes in the [ejf Indies.
B'Rigadier-general Arnold, being now at New-

). York, having sent a formal renunciation of

his commiflion, and assigned some reasons of his
tonduEt, afterwards published the following ad.
dress to the Americans.

Having reason to believe that the principles

"' I avowed in my address of the 7th initant ani-
" mated the greatest part of this continent, I re-

joice in the opportunity I have of inviting you
to join his majefly's arms.
" His Excellency Sir Henry Clinton has autho.

" rifed me,to raise a corps of cavalry and infan-
'- try, who aie to be clothed, subsisted, and
°' paid, as the other troops are in the British ser.
" vice: and those who bring in horfcs, arms, or

accoutrements, are to be paid their value, or to

" have liberty to fell them: to every non-com-
a' missioned officer and private, a bounty of three
"guineas will be given: and as the commander
" in chief is pleated to allow me to nominate the
, officers, I shall, with infinite fatisfaftion, em.
" brace the opportunity of advancing men whose
* valour I have witnessed, and whose principles
S- are favourable to.our union with Britain and
*' true American liberty." [Here follows a fpe.

cification

cifcation of the 'namber of men that each officer
in this cafe is expeted, to bring with him.]'
- "Great as these encouragements must appear;

(continues Mr. Arnold) to such as have suffered
"' every distress of want, of pay, of hunger, and

nakedness, from' the neglet, contempt, and cor.

" ruption of congress; there are nothing to the
" motives that I expet will influence the brave
"; and generous minds, that I hope to have the
". honour to command.

4' I wish to lead a chosen band of Americans

" to the attainments of peace, liberty, and safety,
( the first objects of takiong the field ; and with

them to {hare in the glory of regaining our na.
tive country from the grasping hand of France,

" as well as from the ambitious and interested
4 views of a desperate party amongst ourselves,
4 who in listening to French overtures, and re-
( jeding those from Great-Britain, have brought
"* the colonies to the very brink of deftrution.

" Friends, fellow-foldiers, and citizens, rouse

" and judge for yourselves: reflet on .what you
"s have loft; confider to what vou ai-eeducd,

and by your courage repel the rliiri'tlhatftLiU1
" threatens you.

"l Your country once was happy, and had the
t promised terms been embraced, your last two

years of milery had been spent in peace and
happiness, and repairing the desolations of a
( quarrel that would have set the interest of

Great-Britain and America in a true light, and

"cemented their fiiendfbips; whereas you are
' now the prey of avarice, the scorn of your

enemies, and the pity of your fiiends.
:" You were promised liberty by the leaders of
" your affairs; but is there an individual in the

" enjoy-

" enjoyment of it, except your oppressors ? Who

a among you dares to speak or write what he

" thinks against the tyranny, which has robbed
" you of your property, imprisons your perforts,
' rags you to the field of battle, and is daily de.
" uging your country with your blood ?

-" You are flattered with Independency as pre.
', ferable to a redress of grievances; and for that

l Ihadow, instead of real felicity, are funk into.
U all the wretchedness of poverty by the rapaci-
' ty of your own rulers. Already you are difqua-

lified to support the pride of charater they

" taught you to aim at, and must inevitably shortly-
' belong to one or other of the great powers

their folly and wickedness have drawn into

- conflit& Happy for you, that you may become
"the fubjeAs of Great-Britain, if you nobly dif-
s' dain to wear the shackles of France!

" What is America now, but a land of widows,.
' orphans, and beggars ? And should the parent
" nation cease her exertions to deliver you, what
' feecurity remains to you, even for the enjoy-
" ment f, the consolation of that- religion, for
' whicbhyour fathers braved the ocean, the hea-
· then, and the wilderness ? Do you know that
" the eye which guides this pen, lately saw your
" mean and profligate congress, at mafi for the
'- foul. of a. Roman Catholic in purgatory, and
: participating the rights of a church, againlt
' whose antichriftian corruptions.your pious an.
" ceRors would have witnessed with their blood.

'< As to you who have been foldiers-in the conti-

" nental army., can you at this day want evidence.
" that the funds of your country are exhausted,
" or that the managers have applied them to their

own private use ? In either cafe, you surely. can.

continue

', continue no longer in their service with honour
" or advantage; yet you have hitherto been their
" supporters in that cruelty, which with an equal
' indifference to yours, as well as the labour and
"blood of others, is devouring a country that,
"the moment you quit their colours, will be

redeemed from their tyranny.
" But what need of arguments, to such as feel
"infinitely-more misery than tongue can expres ?
, I therefore only add my promise of the most
' affetionate welcome,- and attention to all
'" who are disposed to join me, in the measures

necessary to close the scene of our afflictions,

" which, intolerable as they are, muff continue
" to increase, until we have the wisdom (shewn
" of late by Ireland) of being contented with
"the liberality of the parent country, who fill
"offers proteaion with the immediate refo-
" ration of our ancient privileges,- civil and fa-
" cred, and a perpetual exemption from all
" taxes, but such as we {hall think fit to impose
" on ourselves.

B. ARNOLD."

General Arnold has since been put at the head.

of a body of troops, and, landing in Virginia, has
made great deftrudion of the rebel stores there ;
his last letters are dated from Peterfburgh, about
70 miles distance from the royal army. His wife
and family were sent back to New-York, at his
desire; but he is branded by congress as the worit
of traitors.

Mr. Arnold was born at Norwich in Connec.

ticut. His father was both a shoemaker and car.
penter: he afterwards became a shopkeeper; but
failed in business, and died in prison. Dr. Lo-

thorp,

thorp, who was a physician, apothecary, surgeon,
and likewise a merchant, took the youth ap.
prentice after his father's decease; and when he
was out of his time, as a token that he was fa.
tisfied with his conduct, made him a present of
511. flerl. and on his departure for England, gave
him letters of recommendation to his correfpon-
dent in London. When he arrived in London,
he lodged in Holborn, and during his residence
here, succeeded so far as to purchase apothecaries
wares, and other goods to a considerable amount.
He then returned to'America, where he set up in
business, and appeared in a flourishing way,
keeping ten servants and.as many horses; but at
length he failed, and was thrown into a jail,
from whence he was released by a bankrupt a&.
Soon after his release, he had an amour with the
high-fheriff Mansfield's daughter. The sheriff
threatened him with death; but he married his
daughter by flealth,and was afterwards reconciled to
his father-in-law; in conjuntiion with whom he
carried on a very extensive trade, and made voy-
ages up Hudson's River, and to the Weft-Indies;
which qualified him afterwards to ad as an expert
seamen on the Lakes.

A report having been spread, that Mr. Arnold

had suffered considerably from an amour in the
islands; he brought a suit against the mafier of a
vessel, who was the propagator of the scandal;
and sent a young lawyer to the Weft-Indies, in.
order to procure proper evidence; which was
accordingly brought, but it could not be received,
because the affidavits were not fealed according to
the cuflom of ConnefAicut. As Mr. Arnold re-
sued. to pay the lawyer's bill on this account, a
new law-suit mutl have ensued, but that the

parties

parties chore rather to submit the matter to arbi.
tratlon.

A decision was given against Arnold, whereby

it was adjudged, in a manner rather extraordinary,
that he ihould pay all expences, and -28 fees:
but Mr. Arnold, either on account of his finances
being then low, or from an idea of the injustice
of the award, refused to abide by this judgment.
He was at this time busied in building a fine house
at New-Haven, which he was for the present
obliged to leave incomplete: but it has since been
finished, furnished, and inhabited, by his sifter.
His taking part in the commotions which now
began, sufficiently sheltered him from all creditors,
at the fame time that it entirely changed the plan
of his future life and ceconomy.

It was at New-Haven above mentioned that this
gentlemen firit distinguished himself, in an attack
upon the Sandimonians, in September 1774.
The loyalty of that feEt, rather than' any religious
prejudice, had caused them to be persecuted;
their horses were aflaulted, and their persons
treated with great indignity, for refusing to sign
tile solemn league and covenant. Colonel
Wooster, who had taken an a6live part among
the rebels, sent a mefage to the reverend Mr.
Peters; the purport of which was: " That they
"would pay the churchmen a vifit,as soon as they
" had done with the damnable Sandinonians."
Most of the clergy left the town; but Mr. Peters,
who had been barbarously used by the mob before,
with one church of England minister, and a ser.
vant, food upon their defence. When Arnold
arrived, Peters told him at the door, that he had
already been in the power of two mobs, but
never would be in the hands of a third. The

people

people urged their chief to lead; but he prudently
declined the undertaking. " I know Peters (said
" he) to be a man of his word; let them lead
".that please:" and Wooster and Mansfield re-
ceived the fame answers from the clergyman.

The assembly of the colony soon after appointed

Mr. Arnold a colonel; and he thought himself
happy in the service. In the summer of 1775, he
scoured Lake Champlain' with a chosen party,
took a king's ship at St.John's, and a schooner at
Skeenfborough. On his return from the Lakes, he
joined the rebel army, then blockading Boflon;
and afterwards made an irruption into Canada;
the event of which we have already related.
Various are the judgments formed upon his pre-
sent conduA; but his reasons for changing fides
have tome cogency in them, if, in his address, he
has indeed spoken the sincere language of the
heart.

After Arnold's feceflion, .a considerable body

of the soldiery separated from the main army; and,
having drawn up a lift. of grievances, proposed
certain terms to congress; but food aloof from
their countrymen till they heard the effeEt of
their conduet. They had appointed a board of
fejeants: with these Sir Henry Clinton endea-
voured to treat; promising them their arrears,
and leave to depart, to all such as chose to go
home; as well as encouragement to such as
would join the royal fiandard : but, as they were
now in treaty with Washington, who had
watched them with a jealous eye, they delivered
up the British ieffenger. Sir Henry's design
came to nothing, and rrmtters were made up on
their demands being grrnited. Do(ubtless, those
were fome'of the men wlomn Arnold, by his ad-

dress,

trefs, had promised himself to bring over with
him; and who perhaps might have been led into
such a design, if-the discovery of-)the private
correspondence with that general, and his flight,
had not totally altered the face of affairs.

In the month of February this year, cam/e on the

trial of George Gordon, Efq; formerly called
lord George Gordon, head of the Protestant Affo-
ciation; whose meeting occasioned those dreadful
riots in June 17o0, by which the metropolis was
ruined. His lordship was acquitted, and the Pro-
teflant Association (Iome of whom had interefled
themselves in the affairs of America) declared
innocent; but several of the rioters suffered cone
'dign punishment.

Advices were about this time received, of a

most tremendous hurricane in the Weft-Indies;
which nearly ruined Barbadoes and Jamaica, da.
maged St. Kitt's, and was severely felt by most
of the Weft-India islands. The fleets of both
nations, but chiefly the French, suffered greatly
on this occasion; which oceafioned them for
some time to be inaAive. All possible succours
were sent from England, as soon as time would
permit, to those settlements: but it will be long
indeed before they recover their former apd
pearance.

C HA P.

# CHAP. XVIII.

C H A P. XVIII.
General Gates defeated-Sumpter's Party difperfid

by Colonel Tarleton-He receives a Check from
General Morgan--Setches of the Lives of both
these Commanders-The War continued-St.
Eujlatius taken-Prefent State of Affairs in
America and the We9f-Indies.
N E W forces were daily colleEing in the

Carolinas, as well as in Virginia: some of

these had frequent skirmishes with the parties of
the king's troops and the loyaliits, who armed to
aflift them. As lord Cornwallis's army was but
small, he found himself much incommoded, in his
endeavours at once to maintain the pofls he was
to occupy, and to succour his friends in other
quarters; both of which appeared almost equally
necessary. At this time his lordship was ac-
quainted by lord Rawdon, that the enemy, to the
amount of 6ooo men, commanded by the famous
Horatio Gates, was advancing fast upon him;
whose operations were to be seconded by iooo
more, under the rebel general Sumpter. The
main body of the army moved immediately; and
Camden (towards which lord Rawdon had con-
tra&ed his posts) being left for the defence of some
provincials, and a detatchment of the fixty-third
regiment, the commander in chief resolved not to
wait for the enemy in a place where he might be
firaitened: but, though he had not in all above
1400 men, to seek them, and offer them battle, at
a time when there were between five and fix

thousand

thousand ready to oppose him; and, if all parties
joined, he would have almost 7000 to oppose in
the open field of battle.

This spirited resolution was accordingly pure

sued, in a manner that did. equal honour to the
courage and military skill of lord Cornwallis.'
He set out at ten o'clock at night on this expe-
dition; and the following is the account of it's
fuci ess:

I had proceeded nine miles (fays his lordship)

when, at about half an hour pall'two in the
morning, my advanced guard feH in with the
enemy. By the weight of the fire,. I. was con-
vinced they were in considerable force; and was
soon assured, by some deserters and prisoners,
that it was the whole rebel army in full march to
attack us at Camden. I immediately halted and
formed; and, the enemy doing the fame, the
firing soon ceased. Confiding in the disciplined
courage of his majesty's troops, and well informed
by several intelligent inhabitants, that the ground
on which both armies flood, being narrowed by
swamps on the right and left,, was extremely fai
vourable to my numbers, I did not chute to ha-
zard the great flake for which I was going t.i-
fight, on the uncertainty and. confusion to whizdi
an attack in the dark is so peculiarly liable: but,
having taken measures, that the enemy should not
have it in their power to avoid an engagement on
that ground, I resolved to defer the attack till day.
At the dawn, I made my last disposition; and
formed the troops in the following order: The
division of the right, confiting of a small troop
of light-infantry, the twenty-third and thirty.
third regiment, under the command of colonel
Weblter; the division of the left, consisting of

the

the volunteers of Ireland, infantry of the legion.
and part of lieutenant-colonel Hamilton's North.
Carolina regiment, under the command of lord
Rawdon; with a fix and two three pounders:
the feventy-firft regiment, with a fix pounder,
was formed as a reserve; one battalion in the
rear of the division of the right, the other of
that of the left; and the cavalry of the legion in
the rear, and, the country being woody, close to
the feventy-firft-regiment, with orders to seize
any opportunity that might offer, to break the
enemy's lines, and to be readyto protet their own,
in cafe any corps should meet with a check.

" This disposition was just made, when I per.

ceived that the enemy, having also persisted in
their resolution to fight, were formed in two
lines opposite and near to us; and, observing a
movement on their left, which 1 supposed to be
with an intention to make some alteration on their
order, I direaed lieutenant-colonel WebRer to
begin the attack; which was done with great
vigour, and in a few minutes the aation was
general along the whole front. It was at this
time a dead calm, with a little haziness in the
air, which, preventing the smoke from rising,
occasioned so thick a darkness, that it was diffi.
cult to fee the effea of a very heavy and well.
supported fire on both fides. Our line conti-
nued to advance in good order, and with the cool
intrepidity of experienced British soldiers, keep-
ing up a conflant fire, or making use of bayonets,
as opportunity offered: and, after an obfliiate
refiflance duringthree quarters of an hour, threw
the enemy into total confusion, and forced them
to give way in all quarters. At this instant, I
ordered the cavalry to complete [the rout, which

was

was performed with their usual -promptness'
and. gallantry: and after doing great execution
in the field of battle, they continued the pur.
suit to Hanging-Rock, distant twenty-two miles
from the place where the ation happened ; d
ring which, many of the' enemy were lain, a
number' of prisoners, and near 130 waggons, in
one of which was a damaged brass cannon, a c;n-;
fiderable quantity of military flores, and, all the
baggage and camp equipage of the enemy, fell
into our hands.

"The loss of the enemy was very considerable;

a number of colours, and seven pieces of brass
cannon, being all the artillery that was in the ac-
tion, and all their ammunition waggons, were
taken: between 8 and 900 were killed;" among
whom, was brigadier-general Gregory; and looo
were made prironers, many of whom were
wounded; among the latter were major-general
Baron de Kalbe, since dead, and brigadier-gene-
ral Rutherford. The loss of the royal army was
not above 70 killed, and about 255 wounded and
miffing, upon this occalion."

After the battle was over, lieutenant-colonel

Tarleton was dispatched with orders to seek out
general Sumpter, who was then at the head of a
separate body. He came up with him at the
Catabaw.River, and with less than 400 men
routed his 700 rebels, killing 250, dispersing the
whole camp, taking 300 prisoners, and making
himself malter of two pieces of brass cannon
and 44 waggons. He also retook loo of our
men, and released 150 militia that had been made
captives by the enemy. As on both these occa-
sions several persons were found in arms against
us, who before had received the- king's puadon,

-M which

which they had in their pockets, fomie of them
were executed at head-quarters: yet, the war.
was inot extinguished; parties were again gathered
together, and the provinfce was fill in disorder.

Lord Cioriwallis being now again in motion,

the'rebels endeavoiired to make a diversion at
Ninety-Six; to cover which,genetal Morgan, with
a b;dy of c0ntinentals and militia, and also a
bodvy of horse iunder colonel Washington, had
taken pofl on the banks of the Pacolet. To dislodge
them lomn thence, to favour the march of the
a'rny, and to relieve Ninety-Six, lieutenant.colo.
nel Taileton was detached with a body of cavalry
and infantry to the weflward of Broad-River,
and byi continuing forced marches with unremit-
ring ardour, about eight o'clock in the morning
of the 17th of February he came up with the
enemy, whom he found drawn up under cover
of a wood.

The vigorous attack of the royalifls dispersed

the militia, and disordered the continentals; but
in the eagerness of their pursuit, receiving an un-
expeEted fire, they were thrown into great difor-
der; the rebels now followed their blow, and the
whole of this little army must have been deflroyed
or surrendered themfelves,but that the braveTarle-
ton, recovering from the astonishment that at first
seized him,to fee a veteran corps so suddenly give
ground, which was originally owing to Morgan's
riflemen, immediately attacked colonel Washing-
ton's horse, and forcing them from their position,
afterwards faced the infantry till he was enabled
to bring off such of his men as had been rallied;
after which he found it necessary to retreat, hav-
ing retaken a part of his baggage that had fallen
into the hands of the enemy, and marched to

Hammond's-

Hammond's-Ford, leaving his killed and wounded
on the field.

Such is the true relation of an aEtion which

was looked upon at New-York as a drawn battle,
whilR at Philadelphia it was represented as a total
defeat. Certainly the rebels were the vi&ors; but
even in this unfortunate circumstance the gallant
Tarleton Ihewed his wonted vigour, vigilance, and
ability; and has since continued to be the delight
of his friends and a terror to the enemy.

This officer is not above twenty-five years of

age. He was the ton of a Liverpool merchant,
but being not at all attached to the commercial
line, he obtained a parent's periifflion to,change
it for a more afive sphere of life. At firfi he
was a cornet of dragoons, about the time when the
rebellion began in America. He was always re.
markable for his vivacity, being humourons,
whirfical, and amorous. As he chose to be in
aEtion, he was happy in embarking f&r America,
whither he went in the character of a volunteer;
and being distinguished soon after his arrival by
his ativity,, Sir William Erskine, general of
the cavalry, made him his brigadier-major. This
was in the year 1777; but as the cavalry of
general Howe was not often brought ipt9
ation, Tarleton had little opportunity at firit of
displaying his c[iarader at this time. In an in.
terval of inaEtion with the enemy, he employed
him-self in roving and in intrigues, and was abfo-
lutely caught in one of the lair with a brother of-
ficer's mistress. He was (as well as major Andre)
one of the knights of the famous Mifchiorza,in-
flituted on the-return of a certain knight from
America. It is remarkable on this occalion, that
the name of Tarleton*s Squire, his device, and his

M a motto,

motto, were such as marked his claraater. The
name of his Squire was heart; his device a light
'dragoon; his motto, swift, vigilant, and bold.
Wlien the Britilh army quitted Philadelphia and
retlirned to New-York, in the year 1778, captain
Sutherland obtained leave of Sir Henry Clinton
to-raife a corps which-was to be called, the Cale-
donian Volunteers. This body being raised, Su-
therland, now a provincial major, quitted the coin.
nland in favour of lord Cathcart: it was new
modelled, and called, the British Legion; at which
time Mr. Tarleton was appointed colonel of it.

In the fumier of i779, he acquired great cre-

dit in his expedition from King's-Bridge ;'and in
the spring of the following year he was the person
who fbrprifed and defeated the American cavalry
during the siege of Charles-Town, near Biggin's-
Bridge, by which means all communication was
cut off between the besieged and the open coun-
try; nor had he met with any material check or
misfortune, till the affair above related.

Brigadier-general Morgan, who commanded in

that aation, was originally a waggoner, and in
this employ attended the baggage with general
Braddock's army. For some mfibehaviour, the
quarter-master ordered him a severe lathing. -He
afterwards fettled at Skenardo, where he followed
the business of deer-hunting. In this trade he
learned to be a good mufket-man, and also be-
came accustomed to traverse the woods; and on
this account he was chosen to command a com-
pany of riflemen, at whose head he marched to
Bbofon in 1775; and was afterwards sent to ac-
company general Arnold in his Canadian expedi-
tion. He is said to have lignalized himself in the
uifuccefsful attack upon Quebec, insomuch that

he

lie was promoted to the rank 9f colonel. and
served under Gates and Arnold against general
Burgoyne. This latter commander declared,
Morgan's corps had become o' formidable to the
Indians, that he could not bring them within the
found of'one of his rifle-nlot. Leaving Gates
again, he joined Waflington; but we liear np
more of tim till about a twelvemonth ago he
was appointed to command in Virginia, which
was his native country, and from whence he came
with his men to oppbfe the progress of the Bri-
tifh arms in the neighbouring provinces.

While things were in this situation, an attack

which had for some time before been concerted
in England, was made upon the island of
St. Eufatius, before which place Sir George
Brydges Rodney and general Vaughan appared
on the 3d of February, demanding i fpurren-
der of the island to tlie arms of his Britannic
majefly, and allowing the governor only onte
hour for deliberation. This summons, which
was very concise, produced the following answer
from the Dutch commandant.

*' Governor De Graaff not having it in his
power to make any defence against the Britifi
* forces which have ilivefled the iflgnd of St.
( Euftatius, surrenders the fame and allits depen-
, dencies to Sir George Brydges Rodney and ge.
"neral Vaughan: well knowing the honour and
' humanity of there commanders in chief, tie
"governor recommends the town and it's inham
" bitants to their clemency."

There were found 78 pieces of cannon from

18 to 3 pounders, 1569 pounds weight of gun-
powder, belrdes muskets, balls, carituch-boxe,
cutlasses, &c. And the quantity of merchaindiCe

Ma3

'in the ifand was so great, that the warehoures
'could: not contain it. The islands of St. Martin
and'Saba surrendered likewise; and the blow was
'feverly felt'by the Dutch. The (hips in the har-
bour were seized; and a valuable convoy of
thirty fail, which had left Euftatius the day before,
were pursued and taken by captain Reynolds.
-The Dutch admiral fell in the aaion. A great
part of the vessels have been since retaken, on
their passage home, by the French fleet, which
captured twenty-two (hips; but none of the pro-
perty so taken was restored to the fubjets of their
high-mightineffes, or the other claimants.

To counterbalance in some measure these fuc-

cesses, the Spaniards, who had foreseen the design
of the Eriglifh to penetrate into the rich province
of Guatimala (and who had polfeffed themselves
of Fort St.Juan, which however they were after-
wards obliged to evacuate) laid siege to Pensacola;
which they took after an obstinate refitance : the
blowing up of a magazine, by accident, princi-
pally contributing to the besiegers fuccers. The
garrison obtained honourable terms, being con-
veyed to New-York.
- FLORIDA is divided into two diflriss, east and
'wefl; of the former, St. Augufline is the capital:
Pentacola is the chief town of the latter. It is
'itiuate on the weft fide of a fine harbour, the best
upon tie coast; and, on the earfward of it, a fine
river enters the bay of Mexico, which comes about
'thirty-three leagues out of the country, and is
formed by the junation of two other rivers. The
'foil is sandy, but produces pine.trees, fit for mails.
'Pensacola lies about forty miles to the eastward of
;Fort'Louis and Mobille. St. Augufline, the capi-
tal of EafR-Florida, is situate near Fort St. Mark's (so

called

called from a river of that name) and opposite
to an island called Anaftoria. This town is about
half a inile in length, fortified with bastions,
demi-baflions, and a ditch; and has besides an
abbatis, which renders the fortifications very re-
fpeaable. The town is well conftrutted ;but the
fireets are purposely built narrow, for the conve-
nience of affording shade. Eaft-Florida is the
most southern colony on the continent of Britifi-
America. It is in general thought not unhealthy;
is hot, fubjeat to heavy rains, andi not very' fruit-
ful however, it abounds in foreft-trees, plants,
and shrubs. Fruit-trees transplanted hither thrive
well; and the foil is adapted to produce indigo.
But the chief advantage arising from the poffeflion
of Florida was, it's serving as a barrier to our
southern colonies. The lots of Pensacola is likely
therefore to be dreaded as to it's consequences;
as it is likely that the Spaniards will next attack
St. Augufline's, of which, if they should become
nmaiers, they may proceed. to penetrate into
Georgia and the Carolinas.

Since the capture of the Euftatia fhips,the English

fleet under admiral Parker, engaged the Dutch un-
der admiral Zoutman, off the Dogger-Bank; the
contest was long and bloody: the Dutch had the
superiority of one hip of the line, and some large
frigates. After an obstinate dispute, which cost
imany lives on both fides, the enemy was obliged to
bear away for the Texel, in a [hattered condition,
their ships being icarce able to keep above the
water; and one of them, of feventy-four guns,
funk before they entered the river. The British
admiral was not in a condition to follow them.
Thefleets had each a convoy with them: our's
failed away with a fair wind, on a signal given;

but

but thole of the Dutch, after awaiting the issue
of the engagement, were constrained to put back
to the Texel.

To return to America.-Though the royal

troops in South-Carolina had so repeatedly
baffled the rebels, yet, as they found resources
in the neighbouring provinces, they were lill
able to make head occasionally, and to turn
.upon their pursuers. While lord Cornwallis
was intent on prosecuting his plan, of regularly
reducing the country, and penetrating into North-
Carolina, a body of troops, assembled under gene-
ral Greene, with an intent of joining general
Morgan, drew his lordship's attention. Accord-
ingly, he marched in quest of the provincials;
who chore, by every poflible means, to avoid him:
but, after various movements, and having de-
feated several of their parties, coming up with
them at lat at Guildford on the i5th, they were
brought to a general engagement in a woody
country.

The first battalion of guards, and the regiment

of Bose, beginning the attack, were soon warnly
engaged with the enemy. The feventy-firft regi-
ment anl grenadiers, with the second battalion of
guards, hearing the fire advance on their left,
continued to move forward; the artillery keeping
pace with them, and the cavalry following. 'hs
second battalion first gained the clear ground near
Guildford-Court-Houfe; where they found a
corps of continental infantry, much superior to
them in number, formed in the open field on the
left of the road. Being impatient to signalize
themselves, they attacked, and presently defeated
them, taking two fix-pounders: but, pursuing
them into the woods with too much ardour, were

thrown

thrown into cohntfion by a heavy fire; and im-
mediately charged, and driven back into the field
by colonel Wafllington's dragoons, with the loss
of the two fix-pounders which they had taken.
But the enemy's cavalry was soon repulsed, by a
well-dire&ed fire from two three-pounders, just
brought up by lieutenant M'Leodl; and by the ap-
pearance of the grenadiers, of the guards, and
of the fevcnty-firlt regiment, which were now
coming out of the wood, opposite to the court-
house. By the spirited exertions of general
O'Hara, though wounded, the second battalion
of guards was soon rallied, and, supported by the
grenadiers, returned to the charge. At the-fame
time, the twenty-third regiment arriving from the
left, and lieutenant-colonel Tarleton advancing
with.part of the cavalry, the enemy were put to
flight, and the two fix-pounders once again taken.
The thirty-third regiment, and the light-infantry,
completely routed the corps with which they en-
gaged; and so put an end to the aEtion in that
quarter. While a part of the army were ordered
to pursue, lieutenant-colonel Tarleton was de-
tached with his cavalry to the right; where a
heavy fire had for some time continued: he
was successful; and, being well supported, soon
determined the battle: the militia dispersing in
the woods, and the continentals drawing off by
the way of Ready-Fork. The action lasted half an
hour, and the retiring enemy did not flop till they
had got eighteen miles from the field of battle.
In this engagement the royalists had ninety-three
killed, and about 107 wounded; the loss of the
enemy was uncertain.

General Greene however, after being thus de-
feated, marched to Wilmington; whence getting

Oibnlc

.frme fplplies, and recruiting his scattered forces,
bhe et out for Camden, which he thought to have
found ill defended: but lord Rawdon, who was
left there, did not wait for the enemy's attack.
On the contrary, he, with about 8oo men,
marched out to meet Greene; encountered and
defeated him at Hobkirk-Hill, and -would have
taken their artillery, but that it lay concealed
in a hollow way, and was brought off by their
numerous cavalry. The pursuit continued for
above three miles.

Lord Rawdon, whom we have before had occa-

sion to mention, is the eldest son of the present
-earl of Moirfe, and is only in the twenty-feventh
year of his age. If he should survive his father
and his uncle, he will be one of the ricbeft earls
in Great-Britain or Ireland. He has two brothers
in the army, one of whom is the honbe'John Raw-
don, late a captain in the fourth regiment, who loft
a leg at the battle of Brandywine, and who was
promoted to a government in the Isle of Wight.
The title is drawn front a place called Rawdon in
Yorkshire, a grant from William the Conqueror
to the family; which however is now fettled in
Ireland. Lord Rawdon went with his regiment
to Boston on the breaking out of the present re-
bellion; and arrived there just before the battle of
Bunker's-Hill: he removed to Halifax; but did
not accompany Sir William Howe on his expe-
dition up the Chefapeak-River. Sir Henry
Clinton made him his aide-de-camp; and he aEted
in that capacity, when Sir Henry failed up the
North-River towards Albany: he was afterwards
appointed adjutant-general to the Britilh army,
promoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel, and
a new corps was raised for him in Ireland, and

was

was in great favour with the general till-the :aut.' '
tumn of 1779, when his lordlhip, together !wjthSir :
Henry's old, friend col. Innis, loft their influent'"
with him. Some imputed this to lord Rawdoqn's
having been made a provincial colonel through
the interest of the officer last mentioned, when
at home in 1779, which was done without the
participation of the commander in chief, and
which he deemed to be an improper ifep with re-
gard to the other regular officers -however that was,
his lordship was soon after displaced; and major
Andre was appointea adjutant-general in his room.

The little army under lord Rawdoi was ex-
peted soon to be increased to double it's number.

M. De Graffe, with 23 ships of the line, having

conducted a convoy safe into Fort-Royal, flood
out to facethe Englifhfleet (consisting but of 17)
then in those seas; a fmall-part of which immedi-
ately engaged him; the remainder, not being able
to come up, had no ihare in the a6lion. The
enemy having the weather-gage at this time, and
both fleets standing to the S. E. the engagement
began at about half an hour pall eleven in the
morning, and continued till past three in the as-
ternoon, when the van of the enemy made fail,
hauling their wind, and would not be brought to
aaion again, though Sir Samuel Hood followed
them, and used every effort for that purpose.

As to the present state of the war in America:

In New-York, it seems to be rather at a fiand; Sir
Henry Clinton appearing to lie inactive at New-
York, though in fadt he is ready to fend succours,
as from a common centre, to any part which may
be attacked. Washington, though le has for tome
time threatened an attack upon York.lfland, seems

contented

c^Qntentet'too t'-iai within his lines; as knowing,
t'hat: tbe;-itilh troops, and loyal Americans
ttere:(pBtiod he make such an attempt) are well
* jepear'or hhis reception. St. Juan being evacu.

tel on our part, has put an end to our hopes of
penetrating into South-America: on the other
band, as has been observed, we may rather appre.
.-hend their paying us a visit in Georgia; of which,
however, as the commanders cannot but have been
apprised before thi# time, it is to be supposed that
they will be upon their guard, and adt accordingly.
In the mean time, Arnold has made Tome progress
in Virginia. In South-Carolina, lord Rawdon,
though at first obliged to retreat, has advanced
again, on receiving a reinforcement; and has
driven general Greene out of the province; while
lord Cornwallis presses hard upon the marquis La
Fayette and his American allies; and bids fair to
reflore the southern provinces to the king's peace,
and to their dependence on the crown of Great-
Britain.

Our late naval engagements in the Weft-Indies

have by no'means been decisive; yet we have
kept the seas: and, as there is reason to think,
that by this time we have a superiority in that
quarter, and have no where been baffled by our
enemies, there yet remains the expeEtation 'of
such events as may maintain the dignity of Great-
Britain; restore what has been rent from us; and
at length be produetive of an honourable peace on
all fides.

14 JY I S
F INIS.
