T H-E
HIS-TORY

OF THE

OP THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VO L. III.

1 J i

.· i.: ~ ~ -7
5-/~:

I,~~~~~~~~
7-~;

~~~1~~~~~3/

--- ~~~~~~~~~~~~ /7--=

= l==--- -------
--=-~~~~~~~-;I~,, 4'"

i~_._~________~. '-7

* 7'~~~~~~~~~~~~~~:

THE
HISTO R Y

OF THE

E M P E R O R CHARLES V.
EMPEROR CHARLES V.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, AND
HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME III.
The SEVENTH EDITION, Cbrretted.

LONDON:
Printed for A. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

M DCC XCII.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK V.

TH E
H I S TO RY

OF THE
RE I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.
"TB-~- HE account of the cruel manner in B o o K

which the Pope had been treated, filled V.
all Europe with astonishment or horror. 1517.

Ceneral in-

To fee a Chriltian Emperor, who, by poffeflng dignation
that dignity, ought to have been the prote&or ganldthe
and advocate of the holy fee, lay violent hands on E],peror.
him who represented Christ on earth, and detain
his sacred person in a rigorous captivity, was
confidered as an impiety that merited the severest
vengeance, and which called for the immediate
interposition of every dutiful son of the church.
Francis and Henry, alarmed at the progress of
the Imperial arms in Italy, had, even before the
taking of Rome, entered into a closer alliance;

VOL. 1II. B and,

B 0 0 K and, in order to give some check to the Empe-

V. --j-- ror's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous
5sZ7. diversion in the Low Countries. The force of

every motive, which had influenced them at that
time, was now increased; and to there were
added the desire of rescuing the Pope out of the
Emperor's hands, a measure no less politic, than
it appeared to be pious. This, however, ren-
dered it necessary to abandon their hostile intentions
against the Low Countries, and to make Italy the
feat of war, as it was by vigorous operations there
they might contribute most effeEtually towards de-
livering Rome, and setting Clement at liberty.
Francis being now sensible, that, in his system with
regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of refine-
ment had carried him too far; and that, by an
excess of remissness, he had allowed Charles to
attain advantages which he might easily have pre-
vented, was eager to make reparation for an error,
of which he was not often guilty, by an activity
more suitable to his temper. Henry thought
his interposition necessary, in order to hinder the
Emperor from becoming master of all Italy, and
acquiring by that means such superiority of power,
as would enable him, for. the future, to dictate
without controul to the other princes of Europe.
Wolfey, whom Francis had taken care to secure
by flattery and prefcnts, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, neglected nothing that could
incense his master againfl the Emperor. Betides
all there public considerations, Henry was in-
fluenced by one of a more private nature; having

7 begun,

begun, about this time, to form his great scheme of B o°0 K
divorcing Catherine of Aragon, towards the ex- ----
ecution of which he knew that the fantion of '527.
papal authority would be necessary, he was de-
firous to acquire as much merit as poflible with
Clement, by appearing to be the chief instrument
of his deliverance.

THE negociation, between princes thus dif- Confederacy

againa him.

posed, was not tedious. Wolfey himself con- July 1i.
dueted it, on the part of his sovereign, with un-
bounded powers. Francis treated with him in
person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared,
and was received with royal magnificence. A
marriage between the duke of Orleans and the
princess Mary was agreed to as the bafls of the
confederacy; it was resolved that Italy should be
the theatre of war; the strength of the army which
Ihould take the field, as well as the contingent of
troops or of money, which each prince Ihould
furnish, were fettled; and if the Emperor did not
accept of the proposals which they were jointly to
make him, they bound themselves immediately to
declare war, and to begin hofsilities. Henry, who Aug. I'
took every resolution with impetuosity, entered so
eagerly into this new alliance, that, in order to
give Francis the strongest proof of his friendship
and refpe&, he formally renounced the ancient claim
of the English monarchs to the crown of France,
which had long been the pride and ruin of
the nation; as a full compensation for which
he accepted a pension of fifty thousand crowns,

B a to

B 0o o to be paid annually to himself and his fuccef-

fors a

1517.

TheFloren- THE Pope, being unable to fulfil the condi-
vhte ire tions of his, capitulation, still remained a prisoner
reeuo.n. under the severe custody of Alarcon. The Floren-

tines no sooner heard of what had happened. at.
Rome, than they ran to arms in a tumultuous
manner; expelled the Cardinal d:i Cortoqpa, who
governed their city in the Pope's name,; defaced-
the arms of the Medici; broke in, pieces the
statues of Leo and Clement; and declaring them-
selves a free state, re-established their ancient po-
pular government. The Venetians, taking ad-
vantage of the calamity of their ally the Pope,.
seized Ravenna, and other places belonging to. the
church, under pretext of keeping tehem in de-
pofite. The dukes of Ur-binp ;aad'Ferrara laid.
hold likewise on part of the spoils of the unfortu-
nate Pontiff, whom they confidered as irretrievably.
ruined b

rh. ,,.e- LANNOY, on tle other hband, laboured to de-
'il'ttP'v' rive lo ic solid benel-it fronp that unforeseen event,

which gave iuch Iplendour and ftperioricy to his,
master's arms.' For this purpose he marched to
Rome, together with Moncada, and the mnar-
quis del Guafto, at the head of all the troops
whicl they could aleirmble in the kingdom of

A lerbert, 83, &c. Rym. Feed. xiv. 203.
b uic. I. xviii. 453.

Naples.
S.

Naples'.' The arrival' tof this reiiiforce:ne:nt B 0.° o
brought neW td:lamities on the uanhaSpy citizens -'
of Rome;. for the soldiers envying. the wealth of il.
their com:paniosis, imitated their licence, and with
the utmost rapacity gathered the gleanings, which
had escaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Ger-
mans. There Was not now any army in Italy
capable of mraking head against the;. mperialits
and nothing more was requisite to reduce Bologna,
and the other towns in the ecclefiafical state, than
to have appeared before them. But the soldiers
having been so long accuflomed, under Bourbon,
to an entire relaxation of difciplinel and having
tafted the sweets of living at discretion in a great
city, almost without the controul of a superior,
were become so impatient of military fubordina-
tion, and so averse to service, that they refused
to leave Rome unless all their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to be impossible.
At the fame time, they declared, that they would
not obey any other person than the prince of
Orange, whom the army had chosen general.
Lannoy, finding that it was no longer safe for him
to remain among licentious troops, who despised
his dignity, and hated his person, returned to
Naples; soon after the marquis del Guafto and
Moncada thought it prudent to quit Rome for the
fame reason. The prince of Orange, a general
only in name, and by the most precarious of all
tenures, the good-will of soldiers, whom success
and licence had rendered capricious, was obliged

B 3 to

B o°v K to pay more attention to their humours, than

A--_-- they did to his commands. Thus the Emperor,
15 7. instead of reaping any of the advantages which

he might have expeted from the reduction of
Rome, had the mortification to fee the most
formidable body of troops that he had ever
brought into the field, continue in a state of in-
ativity from which it was impossible to rouse
them '.

TheFrench THIS gave the King of France and the Vene-
rmyhes tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter
into Italy, into new engagements for delivering the Pope,

and preserving the liberties of Italy. The newly-
restored republic of Florence very imprudently
joined with them, and Lautrec, of whose abi-
lities the Italians entertained a much more fa-
vourable opinion than his own master, was, in
order to gratify them, appointed generalissimo of
the league. It was with the utmost reluctance
he undertook that office, being unwilling to ex-
pose himself a second time to the difficulties
and disgraces, which the negligence of the King,
or the malice of his favourites, might bring
upon him. The best troops in France marched
under his command; and the King of England,
though he had not yet declared war against the
Emperor, advanced a considerable fum towards
carrying on the expedition. Lautrec's first ope-

C Guic. 1. xviii. 454.

rations

rations were prudent, vigorous, and successful. B O o K
By the afliflance of Andrew Doria, the ablest sea- _-v-
officer of that age, he rendered himself master Hisp7era
of Genoa, and re-established in that republic the tions.
fa&ion of the Fregofi, together with the domi-
nion of France. He obliged Alexandria to fur-
render after a short liege, and reduced all the
country on that fide of the Tefino. He took
Pavia, which had so long refilled the arms of his
sovereign, by assault, and plundered it with that
cruelty, which the memory of the fatal disaster
that had befallen the French nation before its
walls naturally inspired. All the Milanese, which
Antonio de Leyva defended with a small body
of troops, kept together, and supported by his
own address and industry, muff have soon sub-
mitted to his power, if he had continued to bend
the force of his arms againit that country. But
Lautrec durst not complete a conquest which would
have been so honourable to himself, and of such
advantage to the league. Francis knew his con-
federates to be more desirous of circumscribing
the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new
territories for him; and was afraid, that if Sforza
were once re-established in Milan, they would fe-
cond but coldly the attack which he intended to
make on the kingdom of Naples. For this reason
he inftruted Lautrec not to pufll his operations
with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily
the importunities of the Pope, and the folicita-
tions of the Florentines, the one for relief, and
the other for proteation, were so urgent as to

B 4 furpilh

B o0 K furnish him with a decent pretext for marching
i- --i forward, without yielding to the intreaties of the
'527' Venetians and Sforza, who insisted on his laying

siege to Milan d.

The Empe- WINILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome,
Pope fat the Emperor had time to deliberate concerning
libczty. the disposal of the Pope's person, who fRill re-

mained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
Notwithftandiog the specious veil of religion,
with which he usually endeavoured to cover his
actions, Charles, in many instances, appears to
have been but little under the influence of reli-
gious considerations, and had frequently, on this
occafiQn, expressed an inclination to transport the
Pope into Spain, that he might indulge his am-
bition with the fpe&acle of the two most illuftri
ous personages in Europe successively prisoners
in his court. But the fear of giving new offence
to all Christendom, and of filling his own sub-
jets with horror, obliged him to forego that fa-
tisfa&ion . The progress of the confederates
made it now necessary, either to set the Pope at
liberty, or to remove him to some place of con-
finement more secure than the castle of St. An-
gelo. Many considerations induced him to pre-
ser the former, particularly his want of the mo-
ney, requisite as well for recruiting his army,
as for paying off the vast arrears due to it. In

X GCtic. 1. xviii. 461. Bellay, 107, &c. Mauroc. Hifl.
Venec. lib. iii. 238. G(uic. 1. xviii. 457.

order

order to obtain this, he had assembled the Cortes B 0 ° K
of Castile at Valladolid about the beginning of the
year, and having laid before them the state of his Fe,7'.
affairs, and represented the necefficy of making
great preparations to resist the enemies, whom
envy at the success which had crowned his arms
would unite against him, he demanded a large sup-
ply in the most pressing terms; but the Cortes, as
the nation was already exhausted by extraordinary
donatives, refused to load it with any new burden,
and in spite of all his endeavours to gain or to inti-
midate the members, persisted in this resolution .
No resource, therefore, remained, but the extorting
from Clement, by way of ransom, a fum sufficient
for discharging what was due to his troops, without
which it was vain to mention to them their leaving
Rome.

NOR was the Pope inactive on his part, or his

intrigues unsuccessful towards hastening such a
treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of un-
bounded confidence, he disarmed the resentment
of Cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his va-
nity, which made him desirous of Ihewing the
world, that as his power had at first depressed
the Pope, it could now raise him to his former
dignity. By favours and promises he gained
Morone, who, by one of those whimsical revo-

f Sandov. i. p. 814.

lutions

B o OK lutions which occur so often in his life, and which

V.

Ar^ _so f trongly display his character, had now recover-
s517. ed his credit and authority with the Imperialists.

The address and influence of two such men easily
removed all the obstacles which retarded an ac-
commodation, and brought the treaty for Clement's
liberty to a conclusion, upon conditions hard in-
deed, but not more severe than a prince in his
situation had reason to expe6t. He was obliged to
advance, in ready money, an hundred thousand
crowns for the use of the army; to pay the fame
fum at the distance of a fortnight; and, at the end
of three months, an hundred and fifty thousand
more. He engaged not to take part in the war
against Charles, either in Lombardy or in Naples;
he granted him a bull of cruzado, and the tenth of
ecclesiastical revenues in Spain; and- he not only
gave hostages, but put the Emperor in poffeflion
of several towns, as a security for the performance
of there articles g. Having raised the first moiety
by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and benefices,
and other expedients equally uncanonical, a day
was fixed for delivering him from imprisonment.
Dec. 6. But Clement, impatient to be free, after a tedious

confinement of fix months, as well as full of the
suspicion and distrust natural- to the unfortunate,
was so much afraid that the Imperialists might
still throw in obstacles to put off his deliverance,
that he disguised himself, on the night preceding

G Guic. 1. xvili. 467, &c.

the

the day when he was to be set free, in the habit of a B °O, K
merchant, and Alarcon having remitted somewhat _._
of his vigilance upon the conclusion of the treaty, x5s7'
he made his escape undiscovered. He arrived be-
fore next morning at Orvietto, without any attend-
ants but a tingle officer; and from thence wrote a
letter of thanks to Lautrec, as the chief instrument
of procuring him liberty h.

DURING there tranfaEtions, the ambassadors of verturesof

theEmperor
France and England repaired to Spain, in confe- to Francis

aCd
a dnry.

quence of the treaty which Wolfey had concluded a
with the French King. The Emperor, unwilling
to draw on himself the united forces of the two
monarchs, discovered an inclination to relax some-
what the rigour of the treaty of Madrid, to which,
hitherto, he had adhered inflexibly. He offered to
accept of the two millions of crowns, which Fran-
cis had proposed to pay as an equivalent for the
dutchy of Burgundy, and to set his sons at liberty,
on condition that he would recall his army out of
Italy, and restore Genoa, together with the other
conquests which he had made in that country.
With regard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate
Ihould be determined by the judges appointed to
inquire into his crimes. These propositions being
made to Henry, he transmitted them to his ally
the French King, whom it more nearly concerned

h Guic. i. xviii. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc.
Hill. Venet. lib. iii. zSz,

to

*B o0 K to examine and to answer them; and if Francis

A had been sincerely solicitous, either to conclude

peace or preserve consistency in his own condu&t,
he ought instantly to have closed with overtures
which differed but little from the propositions
which he himself had formerly made'. But his
views were now much changed; his alliance with
Henry, Lautrec's progress in Italy, and the fupe.
riority of his army there above that of the Empe-
ror, hardly left him room to doubt of the success
of his enterprize against Naples. Full of those
sanguine hopes, he was at no loss to find pretexts
for rejeting or evading what the Emperor had
proposed. Under the appearance offympathy with
Sforza, for whose interests he had not hitherto dif-
covered much solicitude, he again demanded the
full and unconditional re-establishment of that un-
fortunate prince in his dominions. Under colour
of its being imprudent to rely on the Emperor's
sincerity, he insisted that his sons should be, set at
liberty before the French troops left Italy, or fur-
rendered Genoa. The unreasonableness of there
demands, as well as the reproachful insinuation with
which they were accompanied, irritated Charles to
such a degree, that he could hardly liften to them
with patience; and repenting of his moderation,
which had made so little impreflion on his ene-
mies, declared that he would not depart in the
smallest article from the conditions which he had

i Recueil des TraiLcz, li. 24z.

now

now offered. Upon this the French and Engifh n °o° K
ambassadors (for Henry had been drawn unac- ----'

x157.

countably to concur with Francis in these strange,
propositions) demanded and obtained their audi-
ence of. leave: k

NEXT day, .two.heralds, who had accompanied 512s.

the ambassadors on purpose, though they had hi- J
therto concealed their character, having assumed
the ensigns of their office, appeared in the Empe-
ror's court, and being admitted into his presence,
they, in the name of their refpeetive masters, and
with all the folemnities customary on such occa-
sions., denounced war againft-him. Charles re- They de-
ceived both with a dignity suitable to his own rank,' againt the
but spoke to each in a tone adapted to the senti- En"peror
ments which he entertained of their iovereigns.
He accepted the defiance of the Engliih monarch
with a firmness tempered by some degree of de-
cency and refpe&E. His reply to the French King
abounded with that acrimony of expression, which
personal rivalfhip, exasperated by the memory of
many injuries infliced as well as suffered, naturally,
suggests. He desired the French herald to ac-.
quaint his sovereign, that he would henceforth con-
fider him not only as a base violator of public faith,
but as a stranger to the honour and integrity be-
coming a gentleman. Francis, too high-fpirited-
to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an

' Rym. xiv. zoo. Herbert, 85. Guic. 1. xviii. 471.

uncommon

B 0 0 K uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his cha-

V.

t-i- rafter. He instantly sent back the herald with a
Frani82 cartel of defiance, in which he gave the Emperor
challenges the lie in form, challenged him to single combat,
theEmperor
tofingk requiring him to name the time and place of the
combt.

encounter, and the weapons with which he chose to
fight. Charles, as he was not inferior to his rival
in spirit or bravery, readily accepted the challenge;
but, after several messages concerning the arrange-
ment of all the circumstances relative to the com-
bat, accompanied with mutual reproaches, border-
ing on the most indecent scurrility, all thoughts of
this duel, more becoming the heroes of romance
than the two greatest monarchs of their age, were
entirely laid aside'.

The cff.a THE example of two personages so illustrious
prooting drew such general attention, and carried with it so
thecuftom much authority, that it had considerable influence
of duelling.

in producing an important change in manners all
over Europe. Duels, as has already been obferv-
ed, had long been permitted by the laws of all the
European nations, and forming a part of theirjurif-
prudence, were authorised by the magistrate, on
many occasions, as the most proper method of ter-
minating questions with regard to property, or of
deciding those which relpefted crimes. But single
combats being confidered as solemn appeals to the

A Recucil des Trait z, z. Mem. de Bellay, 103, &c. San-
dov. Hilt. i. 837.

omniscience

omniscience and justice of the Supreme Being, BO Ov K
they were allowed only in public causes, according-
to the prescription of law, and carried on in a judi- ,s2'.
cial form. Men accustomed to this manner of
decisions in courts of justice, were naturally led to
apply it to personal and private quarrels. Duels,
which at first could be appointed by the civil judge
alone, were fought without the interposition of his
authority, and in cafes to which the laws did not
extend. The tranfation between Charles and
Francis itrongly countenanced this practice. Upon
every affront, or injury, which seemed to touch his
honour, a gentleman thought himself entitled to
draw his sword, and to call on his adversary to give
him fatisfadion. Such an opinion becoming pre-
valent among men of fierce courage, of high spirit,
and of rude manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced most
fatal consequences. Much of the best blood in
Christendom was shed; many useful lives were fa-
crificed; and, at some periods, war itfelfhath hardly
been more deftrutive than these private contests of
honour. So powerful, however, is the dominion
of fashion, that neither the terror of penal laws,
nor reverence for religion, have been able entirely
to abolilh a practice unknown among the ancients,
and not justifiable by any principle of reafbn;
though at the fame time it must be admitted, that,
to this absurd custom, we must ascribe in some de-
gree the extraordinary gentleness and complaisance
of modern manners, and that .repeetful attention of
one man to another, which, at present, render the

locial

B 0 0 K social intercourses of life far more agreeable and

V.
* - decent, than among the most civilized nations of
1s28. antiquity.

Retreat of WHILE the two monarchs feerned so eager to ter-
the Impc-
rialiis trom rninate their quarrel by a personal combat, Lautrec
Rome. February. continued his operations, which promised to be

more decisive. His army, .which was now increaf-
ed to thirty-five thousand men, advanced by great
marches towards Naples. The terror of their ap-
proach, as well as the remonstrances and the en-
treaties of the prince of Orange, prevailed at last on
the Imperial troops, though with difficulty, to quit
Rome, of which they had kept possession during
ten months. But of that flourishing army which
had entered the city, scarcely one half remain-
ed; the reft, cut off by the plague, or wafted
by diseases, the effets of their inactivity, intem-
perance, and debauchery, fell victims to their own
crimes". Lautrec made the greatest efforts to at-
tack them in their retreat towards the Neapolitan
territories,. which would rhave finished the war at'
one blow., But the prudence of their leaders dif-4
appointed all his measures, and conduced them with
little loss to Naples. The people of that kingdom,
extremely impatient to shake off the Spanish yoke,
received the French with open arms, wherever
they appeared to take possession; and Gaeta and
Naples excepted, hardly any place of importance

m Guic. 1. xviii. 478.

remained

remained in the hands of the Imperialists. The B 00 o
preservation of the former was owing to the -
strength of its fortifications, that of the latter to x5a'S
the presence of the Imperial army. Lautrec, French be-
however, fat down before Naples; but finding it ige Nples.
vain to think of reducing a city by force while
defended by a whole army, he was obliged to em-
ploy the flower, but less dangerous method of
blockade; and having taken measures which ap-
peared to him effetual, he confidently assured his
mailer, that famine would soon compel the be-
fieged to capitulate. These hopes were ifrongly
confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous attempt
made by the enemy in order to recover the com-
mand of the sea. The gallies of Andrew Doriad
under the command of his nephew Philippino,
guarded the mouth of the harbour. Moncada,
who had succeeded Lannoy in the vice-royalty, rig-
ged out a number of gallies superior to Doria's,
manned them with a chosen body of Spanish ve-
terans, and going on board himself, together with
the marquis del Guafto, attacked Philippino be-
fore the arrival of the Venetian and French fleets.
But the Genoese admiral, by his superior ikill in
naval operations, easily triumphed over the va-
lour and number of the Spaniards. The viceroy
was killed, molt of his fleet destroyed, and Guaffo,
with many officers of diffin6-ion, being taken pri-
Ibner's, were put on board the captive .allics, and
lent by Philippino as trophies of his viEtory to
his uncle ".

" Guic. 1. xix. 487. P. IJcnter. lib. x. c. z. p. 231.
YOLr. 1 . C NOT-

B O O K NOTWITHSTANDING this flattering profpeft of

V.
_ -'- success, many circumstances concurred to frustrate
1,s53. Lautrec's expectations. Clement, though he al-

'iecu m-
fiances ways acknowledged his being indebted to Francis for
tard the the recovery of his liberty, and often complained
.por, f of the cruel treatment which he had met with

from the Emperor, was not influenced at. this
junture by principles of gratitude, nor, which is
more extraordinary, was he swayed by the desire
of revenge. His past misfortunes rendered him
more cautious than ever, and his recollection of
the errors which he had committed, increased the
natural irresolution of his mind. While he amused
Francis with promises, he secretly negociated with
Charles; and being solicitous, above all things,
to re-establish his family in Florence with its
ancient authority, which he could not expect from
Francis, who had entered into ftrift alliance with
the new republic, he leaned rather to the fide of
his enemy than to that of his benefactor, and gave
Lautrec no alfiftance towards carrying on his ope-
rations. The Venetians, viewing with jealousy
the progress of the French arms, were intent only
upon recovering such maritime towns in the Nea-
polican dominions as were to be possessed by their
republic, while they were altogether careless
about the reduction of Naples, on which the fuc-
cess of the common cause depended °. The King
of England, inttead of being able, as had been
projected, to embarrass the Emperor by attack-

o Guic. lib. xix. I 91.

ing

ing his territories in the Low-Countries, found B 0°o K
his subje&s so averse to an unnecessary war, --_
which would have ruined the trade of the nation, '538
that in order to silence their clamours, and put a
stop to the infurreftions ready to break out among
them, he was compelled to conclude a truce for
eight months with the governess of the Nether-
lands P. Francis himself, with the fame unpar-
donable inattention of which he had formerly been
guilty, and for which he had suffered so severely,
negleeed to make proper remittances to Lautrec
for the support of his army q

THESE unexpected events retarded the progress Revolt of

of the French, discouraging both the general and Doria firom
his troops; but the revolt of Andrew Doria Ftaocc.
proved a fatal blow to all their measures. That
gallant officer, the citizen of a republic, and
trained up from his infancy in the fea-fervice,
retained the spirit of independence natural to the
former, together with the plain liberal manners
peculiar to the latter. A firanger to the arts
of submission or flattery necessary in courts, but
conscious at the fame time bs his own merit and
importance, he always offered his advice with
freedom, and often preferred his complaints and
remonflrances with boldness. The French mi-
niflers, unaccustomed to such liberties, deter-
mined to ruin a man who treated them with so

P Herbert, go. Rymer, 14. 258..

Guic. . . xviii. 478.

C 2 little

B °0 K little deference; and though Francis himself had

'- ' a just sense of Doria's services, as well as an
'58' high esteem for his chara&er, the courtiers, by

continually representing him as a man haughty,
intratable, and more solicitous to aggrandize
himself, than to promote the interest of France,
gradually undermined the foundations of his cre-
dit, and filled the King's mind with futpicion
and difirufr. From thence proceeded several as-
fronts and indignities put upon Doria.' His ap-
pointments were not regularly paid; his advice,
even in naval affairs, was often flighted; an at-
tempt was made to seize the prisoners taken by his
nephew in the fea-fight off Naples; all which
he bore with abundance of ill-humour. But an
injury offered to his country, transported him
beyond all bounds of patience. The French be-
gan to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour, and
removing thither some branches of trade carried
on at Genoa, plainly ihewed that they intended to
render that town, which had been long the object
of jealousy and hatred to the Genoese, their rival
in wealth and commerce. Doria, animated with a
patriotic zeal for the honour and interest of his
country, remonfirated againfi- this in the highest
tone, not without threats, if the meaflire were not
inflantly abandoned. This bold acion, aggra-
vated by the malice of the courtiers, and placed
in the most odious light, irritated Francis to flich
a degree, that he commanded Barbelicux, whom
he appointed admiral of the LLevant, to fail directly
to Genoa with the French fleet, to arrest Doria,

I ani1l

and to seize his gallies. This rash order, the B °o° K
execution of which could have been secured only -,
by the moil profound secrecy, was concealed with 'i2s8
bs little care, that Doria got timely intelligence
of it, and retired with all his gallies to a place
of safety. Guafto, his prisoner, who had long
observed and fomented his growing discontent,
and had often allured him by magnificent pro-
miles to enter into the Emperor's service, laid
hold on this favourable opportunity. While his
indignation and resentment were at their height,
he prevailed on him to dispatch one of his officers
to the Imperial court with his overtures and de-
mands. The negociation was not long; Charles,
fully sensible of the importance of such an ac-
quifition, granted him whatever terms he re-
quired. Doria lent back his commifnion, to-
gether with the collar of St. Michael, to Francis,
and hoisting the Imperial colours, failed with
all his gallies towards Naples, not to block up
the harbour of that unhappy city, as he had
formerly engaged, but to bring them protection
and deliverance. ;

His arrival opened the communication with Wroetche'
the Tea, and restored plenty in Naples, which th French

,army before

was now reduced to the last extremity; and the Naict.
French having loft their superiority at Tea, were
soon reduced to great straits for want of provi-
sions. The prince of Orange, who succeeded the
viceroy in the command of the Imperial army,

C 3 ihewed

*

B o0 K. flewed himself by his prudent conduat worthy of

V.
A'-v -' that honour which his good fortune and the death
- 5'S of his generals had twice acquired him. Beloved

by the troops, who remembering the prosperity
which they had enjoyed under his command,
served him with the utmost alacrity, he let flip
no opportunity of harassing the enemy, and by
continual alarms or rallies fatigued and weakened
them r. As an addition to all these misfortunes,
the diseases common in that country during the
lulry months, began to break out among the
French troops. The prisoners communicated to
them the pestilence which the Imperial army had
brought to Naples from Rome, and it raged with
such violence, that few, either officers or soldiers,
escaped the infection. Of the whole army, not
four thousand men, a number hardly sufficient to
defend the camp, were capable of doing duty';
and being now besieged in their turn, they suffered
all the miseries from which the Imperialists were
delivered, Lautrec, after struggling long with so
many disappointments and calamities, which preyed
on his mind at the fame time that the pestilence
"ug. s5. wafted his body, died, lamenting the negligence of

his sovereign, and the infidelity of his allies, to
which so many brave men had fallen victimst.
By his death, and the indisposition of the other

r Jovii !ilt. lib. xxxvi. p. 3j, &c. Sigonii Vita Dorix,
} 3. 1 .:)9. Bellav, 114, ac.

' clIlay, 117, &c.

'. Ileuter, Rerum Auftr. lib. x. c. a. 231,

generals,

generals, the command devolved on the marquis B O V K
de Saluces, an officer altogether unequal to such a - ·
trust. He, with troops 'no less dispirited than re- Ras8e
duced, retreated in disorder to Averfa; which liege.
town being inverted by the prince of Orange,
Saluces was under the neceftity of consenting, that
he hinfelf should remain a prisoner of war, that
his troops should lay down their arms and colours,
give up their baggage, and march under a guard
to the frontiers of France. By this ignominious
capitulation, the wretched remains of the French
army were saved; and the Emperor, by his own
perseverance and the good conduct of his ge-
nerals, acquired once more the superiority in
Italy".

THE . loss of Genoa followed immediately upon Genoa re-

the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his .lib.'rt
country from the dominion of foreigners was Do-
ria's highest ambition, and had been his prin-
cipal inducement to quit the service of France,
and enter into that of the Emperor. A moit
favourable opportunity for executing this honour-
able enterprise now presented itself. The city of
Genoa, afflited by the peltilence, was almost de-
ferted by its inhabitants; the French garrison
being neither regularly paid nor recruited, was
reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's
emissaries found that such of the citizens as re-
mained, being weary alike of the French and

u Bcllay, 117, &c. Jovii Ilill. lib. xxv, xxvi.

C 4 Imperial

B VO K Imperial yoke, the rigour of which they had al-
_-- ternately felt, were ready to welcome him as their
,5zS. deliverer, and to second all his measures. Things

wearing this promising aspe2t, he failed towards
the coast of Genoa; on his approach the French
gallies retired; a small body of men which he
landed, furprized one of the gates of Genoa in
the night-time; Trivulci, the French governor,
with his feeble garrison, (hut himflif up in the
Sept. 12. citadel, and Doria took poflTflion of the town

without bloodshed or resistance. Want of pro-
visions quickly obliged Trivulci to capitulate;
the people, eager to abolish such an odious monu-
ment of their servitude, ran together with a tumul-
tuous violence, and levelled the citadel with the
ground.

Disinterest- IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered
ed condu c *
ofDoria. himself the sovereign of his country, which he

had so happily delivered from oppreflion. The
fame of his former actions, the ficcefs of his pre-
sent attempt, the attachment of his friends, the
gratitude of his countrymen, together with the
support of the Emperor, all conspired to facilitate
his attaining the fuprerne authority, and invited
him to lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity
of which there re few examples, he sacrificed all
thoughts of aggrandizing himself to the virtuous
fatisfadtion of elablifliing liberty in his country,
the highell object at which ambition can aim.
I I:;vina afienbled the whole body of the people
in the court bcfUri his palace, he af;lired then,

that

that the happiness of feeing them once more in B o00 K
possession of freedom, was to him a full reward for --,--
all his services; that, more delighted with the name 52
of citizen than of sovereign, he claimed no pre-
eminence or power above his equals; but remitted
entirely to them the right of fettling what form of
government they would now chute to be established
among them. The people lifkened to him with tears
of admiration and of joy. Twelve persons were
eleted to new-model the constitution of the repub-
lic. The influence of Doria's virtue and example
communicated itfelfto his countrymen ; the factions
which had long torn and ruined the state, seemed
to be forgotten prudent precautions were taken to
prevent their reviving; and the form of govern-
ment which has subsisted with little variation
since that time in Genoa, was established with uni-
versal applause. Doria lived to a great age, be-
loved, refpeded, and honoured by his country-
men; and adhering uniformly to his professions of
moderation, without arrogating any thing unbe-
coming a private citizen, he preserved a great as-
cendant over the councils of the republic, which
owed its being to his generosity. The authority
which he possessed was more flattering, as well as
more satisfactory, than that derived from fove-
reignty; a dominion founded in love and in gra-
titude; and upheld by veneration for his virtues,
not by thedread of his power. His memory is
still reverenced by the Genoese, and he is diftin-
guilled in their public monuments, and celebrated

in

B 0 0 K in the works of their historians, by the most honour-

V.
<_s able of all appellations, THE FATHER OF
5s. HIS COUNTRY, AND THE RESTORER

OF ITS LIBERTY.

5219. FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of

Operat ions
in the 'i- his arms, discredited by so many losses, made new
ianfe. efforts in the Milanese. But the count of St. Pol,

a rath and unexperienced officer, to whom he gave
the command, was no match for Antonio de Ley-
va, the ablest of the Imperial generals. He, by
his superior skill in war, checked, with a handful of
men, the brisk, but ill-concerted motions of the
French; and though so infirm himfelf-that he was
carried constantly in a litter, he surpassed them,
when occasion required, no less in activity than in
prudence. By an unexpected march, he surprised,
defeated, and took prisoner the count of St. Pol,
ruining the French army in the Milanese as entirely
as the Prince of Orange had ruined that which be-
fieged Naples .

Negocia- AMIDST these vigorous operations in the field,
t'ennbe"- each party discovered an impatient desire of peace,
hariles and and continual negociations were carried on for that

purpose. The French King, discouraged, and al-

x Guic. 1. xix. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doria', p. 1146.
Jovii Hilt. lib. xxvi. p. 36, &c.

y Guic. 1. xix. 520. P. -Ieuter. Rer. Aulr. lib. x. c. 3.
p. 233. Mem. de Bellay, lz .

molE

most exhausted by so many unsuccessful enterprizes, B o°° o
was reduced now to think of obtaining the release _---. -
of his sons by concessions, notby the terror of his s5Z9'
arms. The Pope hoped to recover by a treaty
whatever he had loft in'the war. The Emperor,
notwithstanding the advantages which he had gained,
had many reasons to make him wish for an ac-
commodation. Solyman, having over-run Hun-
gary, was ready to break in upon the Austrian ter-
ritories with the whole force of the East. The Re-
formation gaining ground daily in Germany, the
princes who favoured it had entered into a confede-
racy which Charles thought dangerous to the tran-
quillity of the Empire. The Spaniards murmured
at a war of such unusual length, the weigh.of
which refted chiefly on them. The variety and ex-
tent of the Emperor's operations far exceeded what
his revenues could support; his success hitherto had
been owing chiefly to his own good fortune and to
the abilities of his generals, nor could he flatter
himself that they, with troops destitute of every thing
necessary, would always triumph over enemies still
in a condition to renew their attacks. All parties,
however, were at equal pains to conceal or to dif-
femble their real sentiments. The Emperor, that
his inability to carry on the war might not be sus-
peded, infifled on high terms in the tone of a con-
queror. The Pope, solicitous not to lose his pre-
sent allies before he came to any agreement with
Charles, continued to make a thousand protefta-
tions of fidelity to the former, while he privately

negociated

B O 0 K negociated with the latter. Francis, afraid that
v_>,_s his confederates might prevent him by treating for

3529. themselves with the Emperor, had recourse to

many dishonourable artifices, in order to turn their
attention from the measures which he was taking to
adjust all differences with his rival.

IN this ficuation of affairs, when all the contend-

ing powers wished for peace, but durst not venture
too hastily on the steps necessary for attaining it,
two ladies undertook to procure this blefling so
May. much desired by all Europe. These were Margaret

of Austria, dutchess dowager of Savoy, the Empe-
ror's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mother. They
agreed on an interview at Cambray, and being
lodged in two adjoining houses, between which a
communication was opened, met together without
ceremony or observation, and held daily confer-
ences, to which no person whatever was admitted.
As both were profoundly skilled in business, tho-
roughly acquainted with the secrets of their refpec-
tive courts, and poieffed with perfect confidence in
each other, they soon made great progress towards
a final accommodation; and the ambassadors of all
the confederates waited in anxious suspense to know
their fate, the determination of which was intirely
in the hands of those illustrious negociators '.

s P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x. c. 3. 133, Mem. do
Bellay, p. 1Z2.

Bwr

BUT whatever diligence they used to haften for- B OO K

ward a general peace, the Pope had the address and. ---
industry to get the start of his allies, by concluding Sep't59.
at Barcelona a particular treaty for himself. The traty be-
Emperor, impatient to visit Italy in his way to Ger- Pope and

Charles.

many; and desirous of re-establishing tranquillity in June, o.
the one country, before he attempted to compose
the disorders which abounded in the other, found it
necessary to secure at least one alliance among the
Italian states, on which he might depend. That
with Clement, who courted it with unwearied im-
porrunity, seemed more proper than any other.
Charles being extremely solicitous to make some
reparation for the insults which he had offered to
the sacred character of the Pope, and to redeem palt
offences by new merit, granted Clement, notwith-
Ifanding all his misfortunes, terms more favourable
than he could have expected after a continued series
of success. Among other articles, he engaged to
reitore all the territories belonging to the ecclesias-
tical state; to re-establish the dominion of the Me-
dici in Florence.; to give his natural daughter in
marriage to Alexander the head of that family;
and to put it in the Pope's power to decide con-
cerning the fate of Sforza, and the possession of the
Milanese. In return for these ample concessions,
Clement gave the Emperor the investiture of Naples
without the reserve of any tribute, but the present
of a white steed, in acknowledgment of his fove-
reignty; absolved all who had been concerned in
alitulting and plundering Rome, and permitted
Charles and his brother Ferdinand to levy the fourth

of

B 0 0 K of the ecclesiastical revenues throughout their do-

V.

.----» minionsa.

1S*9.

August 5. THE account of this tranfadion quickened the
Cambray negociations at Cambray, and brought Margaret
besteen and Louise to an immediate agreement. The
Charles and Ck
Francis. treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that which

they concluded; the latter being intended to miti-
gate the rigour of the former. The chief articles
were, That the Emperor should not, for the pre-
sent, demand the restitution of Burgundy, referv-
ing, however, in full force, his rights and preten-
sions to that dutchy; That Francis should pay two
millions of crowns as the ransom of his sons, and,
before they were set at liberty, ihould restore such
towns as he still held in the Milanese; That he Should
resign his pretensions to the sovereignty of Slanders
and of Artois; That he should renounce all his
pretensions to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every
other place beyond the Alps; That he should im-
mediately consummate the marriage concluded be-
tween him and the Emperor's fitter Eleanora b.

Advantage- THUS Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
usp forthe procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing

which had at first prompted him to take arms,
or which had induced him, by continuing hof-
tilities during nine fuccelfive campaigns, to

Guic. 1. xix. 5zz.

h P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x. C. 3. p. 234. Sandov.
Hill. dell Empcr. Car. V. ii, 28.

protraLt

protrat the war to a length hardly known in B O°° K
Europe before the establishment of standing ar-
mies, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes, be- 1529.
came universal. The Emperor, by this treaty,
was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy;
he delivered his territories in the Netherlands
from an unpleasant badge of fubjeaion; and
after having baffled his rival in the field, he pre-
fcribed to him the conditions of peace. The dif-
ferent conduot and spirit with which the two mo-
narchs carried on the operations of war, led na-
turally to such an issue of it. Charles, inclined
by temper, as well as obliged by his Iituation, con-
certed all his schemes with caution, pursued them
with perseverance, and observing circumstances
and events with attention, let none escape that
could be improved to advantage. Francis, more
enterprizing than steady, undertook great designs
with warmth, but often executed them with re-
miffnefs; and diverted by his pleasures, or de-
ceived by his favourites, he loft on several occa-
sions the most promising opportunities of fuc-
cels. Nor had the character of the two rivals
themselves greater influence on the operations of
war, than the opposite qualities of the generals
whom they employed. Among the Imperialists,
valour tempered with pr.udence; fertility of in-
vention aided by experience; difcernnent to pe-
netrate the designs of their enemies; a provident
sagacity in conducting their own measures; in a
word, all the talents, which form great com-
manders and ensure victory, were conspicuous.

2 Among

B 0 0 K Among the French, these qualities were either

V.
v - wanting, or the very reverse of them abounded;
'5Z9. nor could they boast of one man (unless we ex-

cept Lautrec, who was always unfortunate) that
equalled the merit of Pescara, Leyva, Guafto,
the prince of Orange, and other leaders, whom
Charles had to set in opposition to them. Bour-
bon, Morone, Doria, who by their abilities and
conduc might have been capable of balancing
the superiority which the Imperialists had ac-
quired, were induced to abandon the service of
France, by the carelessness of the King, and the
malice or injustice of his counsellors; and the most
fatal blows given to France during the progreis
9f the war, proceeded from the despair and resent-
ment of these three persons.
Dishonour- THE hard conditions to which Francis was

jFrans. obliged to fubmir were not the most afflicting

circumstances to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for
adjufling their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them must have been purchased
by farther conceflions on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; ?nd without the least pro-
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with
such of.the Neapolitan barons as had joined his
army, to the mercy of the Emperor. They ex-
claimed loudly against this base and perfidious

action,

ation, of which Francis himself was so much B oo Kr
ashamed, that, in order to avoid the pain of hear- A
ing from their ambassadors the reproaches which *529.
he justly merited, it was some time before he would
content to allow them an audience. Charles, on
the other hand, was attentive to the interest of every
person who had adhered to him; the rights of some
of his'Flemifl subjects, who had estates or preten-
sions in France, were secured; one article was in-
ferted, obliging Francis to restore the blood and
memory of the Constable Bourbon; and to grant
his heirs the possession of his lands which had been
forfeited; another, by which indemnification was
flipulated for those French gentlemen who had ac-
companied Bourbon in his exile c. This conduc&,
laudable in itself, and placed in the most striking
light by a comparison with that of Francis, gained
Charles as much esteem as the success of his arms
had acquired him glory.

FRANCIS did not treat the king of England with Henryac.

the fame neglect as his other allies. He commu- qu"ccein
cated to him all the fleps of his negociation at
Cambray, and luckily found that monarch in a situ-
ation which left him no choice, but to approve im-
plicitly of his measures, and to concur with them.
Henry had been soliciting the Pope for some time, I;i rchme
in order to obtain a divorce from Catharine ofAra- of being di-

vorced (rurm
his Quen.

Guic. 1. xix. p. 525. P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. x. c. 4.
P. 235.

VOL. III. D gon

B 0o0 K gon his Queen. Several motives combined in

C---- prompting the King to urge his suit. As he was
i529' powerfully influenced at some seasons by religi-

ous considerations, he entertained many scruples
concerning the legitimacy of his marriage with
his brother's widow; his affections had long
been estranged from the Queen, who was older than
himself, and had loft all the charms which she pof-
lffed in the earlier part of her life; he was passion-
ately desirous of having male issue: Wolfey artfully
fortified his scruples, and encouraged his hopes,
that he might widen the breach.between him and
the Emperor, Catharine's nephew; and, what was
more forcible perhaps in its operation than all these
united, the King had conceived a violent love for
the celebrated Anne Boleyn, a young lady of great
beauty, and of greater accomplishments, whom, as
he found it impossible to gain her on other terms,
he determined to raise to the throne. The Papal
authority had often been interposed to grant divor-
ces for reasons less specious than those which Henry
produced. When the matter was first propored
to Clement, during his imprisonment in the castle
of Sc. Angelo, as his hopes of recovering liberty
depended entirely on the King of England, and his
ally of France, he expressed the warmest inclination
to gratify him. But no sooner was he set free, than
he discovered other tfntiments. Charles, who
clpouftcd the protection of his aunt with zeal inflam-
ed by refentmnent, alarmed the Pope on the one
hlnnd with threats, which made a deep imprel/ion

on

on his timid mind; and allured him on the other B O O K
with those promises in favour of his family, which v
he afterwards accomplished. Upon the profpet of 'Is9.
there, Clement not only forgot all his obligations
to Henry, but ventured to endanger the interest
of the Romish religion in England, and to
run the rifque of alienating that kingdom for ever
from the obedience of the Papal fee. After amuf.
ing Henry during two years, with all the subtleties
and chicane which the court of Rome can so dex-
troufly employ to protra& or defeat any cause; after
displaying the whole extent of his ambiguous and
deceitful policy, the intricacies of which the English
historians, to whom it properly belongs, have found
it no easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at last,
recalled the powers of the delegates, whom he had
appointed to judge in the point, avocated the cause
to Rome, leaving the King no other hope of ob-
taining a divorce, but from the personal decision of
the Pope himself. As Clement was now in ftrift
alliance with the Emperor, who had purchased his
friendship by the exorbitant concessions which have
been mentioned, Henry despaired of procuring
any sentence from the former but what was dictated
by the latter. His honour, however, and passions
concurred in preventing him from relinquishing his
scheme of a divorce, which he determined to ac-
complifh by other means, and at any rate; and the
continuance of Francis's friendship being necessary
to counterbalance the Emperor's power, he, in

D 2 order

B 0 0 K order to secure that, not only offered no remon.

V.
a_- p1firances against the total negleEt of their allies, in

the treaty of Cambray, but made Francis the pre-
sent of a large fum, as a brotherly contribution to-
wards the payment of the ransom for his sons d.

Atg. T2- SOON afrer the treaty of peace was concluded, the
ror viRfi Emperor landed in Italy with a numerous train
lca.ly of the Spanifl nobility, and a considerable body

of troops. He left the government of Spain
during his absence, to the Empress Isabella. By
his long residence in that country, he had ac-
quired such thorough knowledge of the character
of the people, that he could perfescly accommodate
the maxims of his government to their genius. He
could even assume, upon forre occasions, such po-
pular manners, as gained wonderfully upon the Spa-
niards. A firiking initance of his disposition to
gratify them had occurred a few days before he em-
barked for Italy: He was to make his public entry
into the city of Barcelona; and some doubts hav-
ing arisen among the inhabitants, whether they
fnould receive him as Emperor, or as Count of
Barcelona; Charles instantly decided in favour of
the latter, declaring that he was more proud of that
ancient title, than of his Imperial crown. Soothed
with this flattering exprefflon of his regard, the ci-
tizens welcomed him with acclamations ofjoy, and
the flates of the province swore allegiance to his son

l' Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. Iz2.

7 Philip,

Philip, as heir of the county of Barcelona. A B ° 0° I
similar oath had been taken in all the kingdoms of '_---
Spain, with equal fatisfadion '. s59.

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp

and power of a conqueror. Ambassadors from all
the princes and states of that country attended his
court, waiting to receive his decision with regard to
their fate. At Genoa, where he first landed, he was
received with the acclamations due to the protector
of their liberties. Having honoured Doria with
many marks of diftintion, and bestowed on the re-
public several new privileges, he proceeded to Bo-
logna, the place fixed upon for his interview with
the Pope. He affeced to unite in his public entry N. 5
into that city the state and majefly that suited an
Emperor, with the humility becoming an obedient
son of the church; and while at the head of twenty
thousand veteran soldiers, able to give law to all
Italy, he kneeled down to kifs the feet of that very
Pope whom he had so lately detained a prisoner.
The Italians, after suffering so much from the fe.
rocity and licentiousness of his armies, and after hav-
ing been long accustomed to form in their imagi-
nation a pieture of Charles, which bore some re-
semblance to that of the barbarous monarchs of the
Goths or Huns, who had formerly afflicted their
country with like calamities, were surprised to lee a

Sandov. ii. p. 50. Ferrer. ix. 116.

D 3 prince

B O O K prince of a graceful appearance, affable and cour-
'-u-- teous in his deportment, of regular manners, and of

S2z9' exemplary attention to all the offices of religion f.

They were tfill more astonished when he fettled all
the concerns of the princes and fiates which now
depended on him, with a degree of moderation
and equity much beyond what they had ex-
peted.

His mode- CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain,
ration and
themotives far from intending to give any such extraordinary

of I proof of his felf-denial, seems to have been refolv-

ed to avail himself to the utmost of the superiority
which he had acquired in Italy. But various cir-
cumifances concurred in pointing out the necessity
of pursuing a very different course. The progress
of the Turkish Sultan, who, after over-running
Sept. 3. Hungary, had penetrated into Austria, and laid

siege to Vienna with an army of an hundred and
fifty thousand men, loudly called upon him to col-
let his whole force to oppose that torrent; and
though the valour of the Germans, the prudent
Oa. 16. condut of Ferdinand, together with the treachery

of the Vizier, soon obliged Solyman to abandon
that enterprize with disgrace and loss, the religious
disorders still growing in Germany rendered the
pretence of the Emperor highly necessary there g:
The Florentines, instead of giving their consent to

f Sandov. I-ift. del Emp. Carl. V. ii. 5o. 53, &c.
g Sleidan, 121. Guic. 1. xx. 550.

the

the re-establishment of the Medici, which, by the B °o° K
treaty of Barcelona, the Emperor had bound him- -
self to procure, were preparing to defend their li- 1s29.
berty by force of arms; the preparations for his
journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and on this, as well as many other occasions, the
multiplicity of his affairs, together with the narrow-
ness of his revenues, obliged him to contract the
schemes which his boundless ambition was apt to
form, and to forego present and certain advantages,
that he might guard against more remote but un-
avoidable dangers. Charles, from all these confi-
derations, finding it necessary to aufume an air of
moderation, aaed his part with a good grace. He
admitted Sforza into his presence, and not only gave
him a full pardon of all part offences, but granted
him the investiture of the dutchy, together with
his niece the King of Denmark's daughter, in
marriage. He allowed the duke of Ferrara to keep
poflffion of all his dominions, adjusting the points
in dispute between him and the Pope with an in-.
partiality not very agreeable to the latter. He
came to a final accommodation with the Venetians,
upon the reasonable condition of their reftoriifg
whatever they had usurped during the late war,
either in the Neapolitan or Papal territories. In
return for to many concessions, he exacted confider-
able finms fiom each of the powers with whom he
treated, which they paid without reluctance, and
which afforded him the means of proceeding on his

D 4 journey

B OV. K journey towards Germany with a magnificence suit-

Vt_ able to his dignity h.

1530.

Re eila- THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to
blifhes the
autho:lty of Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which
thFioenc had chiefly affected that country, were published at

Bologna with great solemnity on the first day of the
year one thousand five huudred and thirty, amidst
the universal acclamations of the people, applaud-
ing the Emperor, to whose moderation and gene-
rofity they ascribed the blessings of peace which
they had so long desired. The Florentines alone
did not partake of this general joy. Animated with
a zeal for liberty more laudable than prudent, they
determined to oppose the restoration of the Medici.
The Imperial army had already entered their ter-
ritories, and formed the siege of their capital.
But though deferred by all their allies, and left
without any hope of succour, they defended them-
selves many months with an obstinate valour wor-
thy of better success ; and even when they furren.
dered, they obtained a capitulation which gave them
hopes of securing some remains of their liberty.
But the Emperor, from his desire to gratify the
Pope, frustrated all their expectations, and abolish-
ed their ancient form of government, raised Alex-
ander di Medici to the fame absolute dominion
over that ifate, which his family have retained to
the prefcnt times. Philibert de Chalons, prince

h Sandov. ii. 55, &c.

of

of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed during B O o K
this siege. His estate and titles decfended to his A
lifter Claude de Chalons, who was married to '530.
Rene, count of Nassau, and she tranfmnitted to her
pottcrity of the house of Naflau the title of Princes
of Orange, which, by their superior talents and
valour, they have rendered so illustrious'.

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna, Stateofaf-

fairs, c;vil

and the ceremony of his coronation as King of and reiei-
Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, whi.ch m". in Ger-
the Pope performed with the accustomed formali- F'db. 4
ties, nothing detained Charles in Italy"; and he
began to prepare for his journey to Germany.
His presence became every day, more necessary in
that country, and was solicited with equal impor-
tunity by the catholics and by the favourers of
the new doctrines. During that long interval of
tranquillity, which the absence of the Emperor,
the contests between him and the Pope, and his
attention to the war with France, afforded them,
the latter had gained much ground. Most of the
princes who had embraced Luther's opinions,
had not only established in their territories that
form of worship which he approved, but had en-
tirely fuppreired the rites of the Romilh church.
Many of the free cities had imitated their conduct.
Almost one half the Germanick body had revolted

Guic. 1. xx. p. 341, &c. P. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib.
ii. c. 4. p. 236.

'1 H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici coronatione Car. V. ap.
Scard. ii. z66.

from

B 0 0 K from the Papal fee, and its authority, even in
L,- ... those provinces which had not hitherto shaken

530' 0off the yoke, was considerably weakened, partly

by the example of revolt in the neighbouring
states, partly by the secret progress of the re-
formed doarine even in those countries where it
was not openly embraced. Whatever satisfaction
the Emperor, while he was at open enmity with
the fee of Rome, might have felt in those events
which tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope,
he could not help perceiving now, that the re-
ligious divisions in Germany would, in the end,
prove extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority.
The weakness of former Emperors had suffered
the great vassals of the Empire to make such
successful encroachments upon their power and
prerogative, that during the whole course of a
war, which had often required the exertion of his
utmost strength, Charles hardly drew any. effec-
tual aid from Germany, and found that magni-
ficent titles or obsolete pretensions were almoff the
only advantages which he had gained by swaying
the Imperial sceptre. He became fully sensible,
that if he did not recover in some degree the pre-
rogatives which his predecessors had loft, and
acquire the authority, as well as possess the name,
of head of the Empire, his high dignity would
contribute more to obftruQ than to promote his
ambitious schemes. Nothing, he saw, was more
essential towards attaining this, than to fuppref5
opinions which might form new bonds of con-
fc.de:acy among the princes of the Empire, and

unite

unite them by ties stronger and more sacred n o 'K
than any political conneEion. Nothing seemed *
to lead more certainly to the accomplishment s53, .
of his design, than to employ zeal for the established
religion, of which he was the natural protector,
as the initrument of extending his civil au-
thority.

ACCORDING.LY, a profpet no sooner opened of Proceedinga

coming to an accommodation with the Pope, at Spires,
than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of March s.

1529-

the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take
into consideration the state of religion. The de-
cree of the diet assembled there in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft of
Christendom. The greatest delicacy of address,
however, was requisite in proceeding to any de-
cifion more rigorous. The minds of men, kept
in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on, during twelve years, without intermiflion. of
debate, or abatement of zeal, were now inflamed
to an high degree. They were accustomed to
innovations, and saw the boldest of them fuc-
cefsful. Having not only abolished old rites,
but substituted new forms in their place, they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
fyltem which they had embraced, as by aversion to
that which they had abandoned. Luther him-
self, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to be-

come

B o0o K come remiss upon success, continued the attacl

V.
-v_- with as much vigour as he had begun it. Hi,

530. disciples, of whom many equalled him in zeal,

and some surpassed him in learning, were no les,
capable than their mast-er to conduct the con-
troverfy in the propereft manner. Many of the
laity, some even of the princes, trained up amidst
these incefrant dilputations, and in the habit of
listening to the arguments of the contending
parties, who alternately appealed to them as
judges, came to be profoundly skilled in all the
questions which were agitated, and, upon occa-
lion, could flew themselves not inexpert in any
of the arts with which these theological en-
counters were managed. It was obvious from
all there circumstances, that any violent decision
of the diet must have immediately precipitated
matters into confusion, and have kindled in Ger-
many the flames of a religious war. All, there-
fore, that the Archduke, and the other commis-
fioners appointed by the Emperor, demanded of
the diet, was, to enjoin those states of the Empire
which had hitherto obeyed the decree issued against
Luther at Worms in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-four, to persevere in the ob-
servation of it, and to prohibit the other states from
attempting any farther innovation in religion, par-
ticularly from abolishing the Mass, before the
:neeting of a general council. After much dif-
pute, a decree to that effct was approved of by a
majority of voices'.

A Sleid. -lilt. 117.

THR

THE Elecor of Saxony, the marquis of Bran- E 0 K
cdnburgh, the Landgrave of Hesse, the dukes of V.
Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together with Th t3o,,ow
the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free cities", ersof Lu-

t her proiefte
entered a solemn protest against this decrees as un- aCainit

them.

just and impious. On that account they were April 1g.
diftinguinled by the name of PROTESTANTS ",
an appellation which hath since become better
known, and more honourable, by its being applied
indi!criminately to all the feEts, of whatever de-
nomination, which have revolted from the Roman
fee. Not satisfied with this declaration of their
dilient from the decree of the diet, the Protestants
sent ambassadors into Italy, to lay their grievances
before the Emperor, from whom they met with
the most discouraging reception. Charles was at De:ibera-

tions of the

that time in close union with the Pope, and soli- Pop and
citous to attach him inviolably to his interest. En,,or.
During their long residence at Bologna, they held
many consultations concerning the most effe&tual
means of extirpating the herefies which had sprung
up in Germany. Clement, whose cautious and
timid mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond what Popes, the con-
itant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel, em-
ployed every argument to dissuade the Emperor
from consenting to that measure. He repre-

"' The fourteen cities were, Strnfburgh, Nurernburgh, Ulm,
Coillance, Rcutlingen, Windlicim, Meinengen, Lindaw,

en'pten, Hailbron, Ilna, Weinlmbuirgh, Noidlingen, and
St. Ga.

eid.
cit l. IIil . F. . Paul. HIil. p. 1 5. Seckend. i. 127.

fenced

B oo K sented general councils as factious, ungovern.

--. able, presumptuous, formidable to civil .authority:
530-' and too flow in their operations to remedy disorder!

which required an immediate cure. Experience,
he said, had now taught both tie Emperor and
himself, that forbearance and lenity, intfead of
soothing the spirit of innovation, had rendered it
more enterprizing and presumptuous; it was ne-
ceffary, therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous
methods which such a desperate cafe required;
Leo's sentence of excommunication, together with
the decree of the diet at Worms, should be car-
ried into execution, and it was incumbent on the
Emperor to employ his whole power, in order to
overawe those, on whom the reverence due either
to ecclefiatlical or civil authority had no longer
any influence. Charles, whose views were, very
different from the Pope's, and who became daily
more sensible how obstinate and deep-rooted the
evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, and confidered the con-
vocation of a council as no improper expedient for
that purpose; but promised, if gentler arts failed
of success, that then he would exert himself with
rigour to reduce to the obedience of the holy fee
those stubborn enemies of the Catholic faith °.

Emperot SUCH were the sentiments with which the Em-
present at
the Diet of peror set out for Germany, having already ap-
^aruh, , pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf-

3530.

o F. Paul, xlvii. Seck. 1. ii. 142. illi. de Confefl d'Aux-
bourgh, par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

I burg.

burg. In his journey towards that city, he had B 00 K
many opportunities of observing the disposition A-.
of the Germans with regard to the points in con- J530'
troverfy, and found their minds every where so
much irritated and inflamed, as convinced him,
that nothing tending to severity or rigour ought
to be attempted, until all other measures proved
ineffectual. He made his public entry into Augf- June 1s.
burg with extraordinary pomp; and found there
such a full assembly of the members of the diet,
as was suitable both to the importance of the
affairs which were to come under their con-
fideration, and to the honour of an Emperor, who,
after a long absence, returned to them crowned
with reputation and success. His presence seems
to have communicated to all parties an unusual
spirit of moderation and desire of peace. The
Eletor of Saxony would not permit Luther to
accompany him to the diet, left he ihould offend
the Emperor by bringing into his presence a per-
son excommunicated by the Pope, and who had
been the author of all those dissensions which
it now appeared so difficult to compose. At the
Emperor's desire, all the Protestant princes for-
bad the divines who accompanied them, to preach
in public during their residence at Augsburg.
For the fame reason they employed Melanethon,
the man of the greatest learning, as well as of
the most pacific and gentle spirit among the
Reformers, to draw up a confession of their faith,
expressed in terms as little offensive to the Roman

Catholics,

B °0 K Catholics, as a regard for truth would permit,

V.
v-- Melan&hon, who seldom suffered the rancour

'The cn of controversy to envenom his fiyle, even in writ-
feIlinu of ings purely polemical, executed a tafl so agreeable

to his natural disposition with great moderation
and address. The Creed which he composed,
known by the name of the Confession of Aiug/burg,
from the place where it was presented, was read
publicly in the diet. Some Popifhl divines were
appointed to examine it; they brought in their
animadversions; a dispute ensued between them
and Melan&hon, seconded by some of his brethren;
but though Melan&hon softened some articles,
made concessions with regard to others, and put
the least exceptionable sense upon all; though the
Emperor himself laboured with great earnestness to
reconcile the contending parties; so many marks
of diftintion were now eflablifhed, and such in-
superable barriers placed between the two churches,
that all hopes of bringing about a coalition seemed
utterly desperate P.

FROM the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been so unsuccessful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find
them, how desirous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed

P Seckend. lib. ii. 159, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annnlcs Evan-

gelici ap. -errm. Von der Ilard. Hist. Liter. Reform. Lips.
1717. fol. p. 159.

than

than the former to renounce their opinions. At T °o K-
that time, zeal for religion took poffefflon of the i-
minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely be '530
conceived by those who live in an age when the
pailions excited by the first manifestation of truth,
and the first recovery of liberty, have in a great
measure ceased to operate. This zeal was then
of such strength as to overcome attachment to
their political interest, which is commonly the
predominant motive among princes. The Elec-
tor of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hefie, and other
chiefs of the Protestants, though solicited fepa-
rately by the Emperor, and allured by the pro-
mite or prospect of those advantages which it was
known they were most solicitous to attain, re-
fuled, with a fortitude highly worthy of imita-
tion, to abandon what they deemed the cause of
God, for the fake of any earthly acquisition q.

EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Severe de-

cree againif

Protestant party proving abortive, nothing now t' e,',o-
remained for the Emperor but to take rome vi- trftants
gorous measures towards asserting the doctrines
and authority of the established church. These,
Campeggio, the papal nuncio, had always re-
commended as the only proper and effetual
course of dealing with such obstinate heretics.
In compliance with his opinions and remon- Nov. .
firanccs, the diet issued a decree, condcinning
mnof of the peculiar tenets held by the Protest-

q Slcid. 132. Scultet. Annal. 158.
VOL. III. E ants

B o0 K ants; forbidding any person to prote& or tolerate

V.

A-_--- such as taught them; enjoining a strict obferv-
1530' ance of the established rites; and prohibiting any

further innovation under severe penalties. All
orders of men were required to assist with their
persons and fortunes in carrying this decree into
execution; and such as refused to obey it, were
declared incapable of aEting as judges, or of ap-
pearing as parties in the Imperial chamber, the
supreme court of judicature in the Empire. To
all which was subjoined a promire, that an appli-
cation should be made to the Pope, requiring him
to call a general council within fix months, in
order to terminate all controversies by its sovereign
decisions '.

iThy entue THE severity of this decree, which was con-
into a league
at Sm.l- 'fidered as a prelude to the most violent perfecu-
lkaide.

tion, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced
them that the Emperor was resolved on their de-
tlrucion. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the
feeble spirit of Melanthon; and, as if the cause
had already been desperate, he gave himself up
to melancholy and lamentation. But Luther,
who during the meeting of the diet had endea-
voured to confirm and animate his party by feve-
ral treatises which he addressed to them, was not
dilconcerted or difinayed at the prolpect of this
new danger. l-Ie comforted Melancthon and his

Sleid. 139.

other

other desponding disciples, and exhorted the B 0°o K
princes nor to abandon those truths which they -
had lately afterted with such laudable boldness'. s530'
His exhortations made the deeper impreiflon upon
them, as they were greatly alarmed at that time
by the account of a combination among the Po-
pish princes of the Empire for the maintenance of
the established religion, to which Charles himself
had acceded'. This convinced them that it was
necefTary to stand on their guard; and that their
own safety, as well as the success of their cause,
depended on union. Filled with this dread of the
adverse party, and with these sentiments concern-
ing the conduct proper for themselves, they assem-
bled at Smalkalde. There they concluded a league Decem. 22.
of mutual defence against all aggressors", by which
they formed the Protestant states of the Empire
into one regular body, and beginning already to
confider thernfelves as such, they resolved to apply
to the Kings of France and England, and to im-
plore them co patronize and assist their new con-
federacy.

AN affair not conneced with religion furnished The mpe-

rorpruporfes

them with a pretence for courting the aid of so- to have his
reign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views bratheKin
enlarged in proportion to the increase of his power ofh, R-
,and grandeur, had formed a scheme of continuing
the Imperial crown in his family, by procuring

'Seck. ii. 180. Sleid. 140. c Secl. ii. 2co. iii. 1 X.
' Sleid. Hill. 142.

E i2 his

B o0v K his brother Ferdinand to be eleced King of the

-- lRomans. The present juncture was favourable
J530. for the execution of that design. The Emperor's

arms had been every where victorious; he had
given law to all Europe at the late peace; no
rival now remained in a condition to balance or
to control him; and the EleCtors, dazzled with
the splendour of his success, or overawed by the
greatness of his power, durst scarcely dispute the
will of a prince, whose solicitations carried with
them the authority of commands. Nor did he
want plausible reasons to enforce the measure.
The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said,
obliged him to be often absent from Germany;
the growing disorders occasioned by the contro-
verfies about religion, as well as the formidable
neighbourhood of the Turks, who continually
threatened to break in with their desolating armies
into the heart of the Empire, required the con-
ftant presence of a prince endowed with prudence
capable of composing the former, and with power
as well as valour sufficient to repel the latter. His
brother Ferdinand poffeied there qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany,
he had acquired a thorough knowledge of its
constitution and manners; having been present
alnmof from the filtl rife of the religious diffen-
sions, he knew what remedies were most proper,
what the Germans could bear, and how to apply
them; as his own dominions lay on the Turk-
ifh frontier, he was the natural defender of Ger-
many against the invasions of the Infidels, being

prompted

prompted by interest no less than he would be b 0 0 K

V.
bound in duty to oppose them.

1530.

THESE arguments made little impression on the TheProteft-

Proteflants. Experience taught them, that no- to it.
thing had contributed more to the undisturbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness of the reins of govcln-
mcnt which these occafiQned. Conscious of the ad-
vantages which their cause had derived from this
relaxation of government, they were unwilling to
render it more vigorous, by giving therfelves a new
and a fixed mafler. They perceived clearly the
extent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at ren-
dering the Imperial crown hereditary in his fa-
mily, and would of course eftablif l-in the Empire
an absolute dominion, to which elective princes
could not have aspired with equal facility. They
determined therefore to oppose the eletion of
Ferdinand with the utinoft vigour, and to rouse
tleir countrymen, by their example and exhorta.
tions, to withstand this encroachment on their
liberties. The Elector of Saxony, accordingly, r53.
not only refutied to be present at the elecoral col- January 5.
lege, which the Emperor fumrnoned to meet at
Cologne, but instructed his eldest ion to appear
there, and to protest against the election as in-
formal, illegal, contrary to the articles of the golden
bull, and lubverfive of the liberties of the Empire.
But the other Electors, whom Charles had been at r-r, isco-
grea.t pains to gain, without regarding either his c"'
;bl:nicc or protelt, cliole Ferdinand King of the

E 3 l.olnains;

B o0 K Romans; who a few days after was crowned at

--. Aix-la-Chapelle x
1531.

ons ofthe WHEN the Protestants, who were aflembled a
Pro, sants second time at Smalkalde, received an account of

this transaction, and heard, at the fame time, that
prosecutions were commenced, in the Imperial
chamber, against some of their number, on account
of their religious principles, they thought it ne-
ceffary, not only to renew their former confe-
deracy, but immediately to dispatch their ambaf-
Fb. 29. fadors into France and England. Francis had

observed, with all the jealousy of a rival, the re-
putation which the Emperor had acquired by his
seeming disinterestedness and moderation in set-
tling the affairs of Italy; and beheld with great
concern the successful ftep which he had taken
towards perpetuating and extending his authority
in Germany by the election of a King of the Ro-
mans. Nothing, however, would have been more
impolitic than to precipitate his kingdom into a
new war when exhausted by extraordinary es-
forts, and dircouraged by ill success, before it
had got time to recruit its strength, or to forget
past misfortunes. As no provocation had been
given by the Emperor, and hardly a pretext for a
rupture had been afforded him, he could not violate
a treaty of peace which he hiimfclf had so lately
l,)licicd, without forfeiting the esteem of all Eu-
1roIp, and being dctcfted as a prince void of probity

x S'cil. 142. Seck. iii. j. P. ilcuter. ler. Auflr. lib.
x, :. . . p. 2..vd

anil

and honour. He observed, with great joy, power- B o°V K
ful factions beginning to form in the Empire; he x-_--
listened with the urmoft eagerness to the cor- 153'.
plaints of the Protestant princes; and without
leeming to countenance their religious opinions,
determined secretly to cherish those sparks of po-
litical discord which might be afterwards kindled
into a flame. For this purpose, he sent William
de Bellay, one of the ablest negociators in France,
into Germany, who visiting the courts of the
malcontent princes, and heightening their ill-
humour by various arts, concluded an alliance
between them and his master , which though
concealed at that time, and produtive of no im-
mediate effeas, laid the foundation of an union
fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambitious
projects; and ihewed the discontented princes of
Germany, where, for the future, they might find
a protector no less able than willing to undertake
their defence against the encroachments of the
Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against with Eng-

Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope had
long retarded, and now openly opposed his di-
vorce, was no less disposed than Francis to
itrengthen a league which might be rendered to
formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite
project of the divorce led him into iuch a laby-
rinth of schemes and negociations, and he was,

Y Bellay, 129, n. 130. b. Seck. iii. 14.

E 4 at

B °0 K at the fame time, so intent on abolishing the papal

V.

-_-_--' jurifdistion in England, that he had no leisure for
'531' foreign affairs. This obliged him to reft satis-

fled with giving general promises, together with
a fiall supply in money to the confederates of
Smalkalde .

Charles MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced
courts the
Protctalits. Charles that this was not a jun6ture when the

extirpation of heresy was to be attempted by vio-
lence and rigour; that, in compliance with the
Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest tc' consolidate Germany into one
united and vigorous body, than to divide and
enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants, who
were considerable as well by their numbers as
by their zeal, had acquired additional weight and
importance by their joining in that confederacy
into which the rafl steps taken at Augsburg had
forced them. HIaving now discovered their own
firength, they despised the decisions of the Impe-
rial chamber; and being secure of foreign pro-
te tion, were ready to set the head of the Empire
at defiance. At the fame time the peace with
France was precarious, the friendflip of an irre-
solute and interclfed pontiff was not to be relied
on; and Solym:ln, in order to repair the discredit
and loss which his arms had fuflained in the for-
rner camp.airn, was preparing to enter Austria

H IIerbert, 152. 154;

7 with

with more numerous forces. On all these accounts, B 0 0 K
especially the last, a speedy accommodation with
the malcontent princes became necessary, not only '531'
for the accomplifhmicnt of his future schemes, but
for enfifring his present safety. Negociations were,
accordingly, carried on by his direction with the
Elector of Saxony and his aflbciatcs; after many
delays, occasioned by theirjealotlfy of the Emperor,
and of each other, after innum-erable difficulties
arising from the inflexible nature of religious te-
nets, which cannot admit of being altered, modifi-
ed, or relinquished in the fame manner as points of
political interest, tejrms of pacification were agreed Grintsthem
upon at Nuremberg, and ratified folernnly in the favourablc
diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty it was stipulated, Jly 23.
That universal peace be established in Germany, Aug"ut
until the meeting of a general council, the con-
vocation of which within fix months the Emperor
shall endeavour to procure; That no person shall
be molested on account of religion; That a stop
fiall be put to all procefes begun by the Imperial
chamber against Proteflants, and the sentences al-
rcady passcd' to their detriment hiall be declared
void. On their part, the Protestants engaged to
alfift the Emperor with all their forces in resisting
the invasion of the Turks . Thus, by their firm-
nets in adhering to their principles, by the unani-
mity with which they urged all their claims, and
by their dexterity in-availing themselves of the
a Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. iv. part ii. 87. 89.

Emperor's

B o0 K Emperor's situation, the Protestants obtained terms

V.
AL.- -- which amounted almost to a toleration of their re-
*53- ]ligion ; all the concessions were made by Charles,

none by them; even the favourite point of their
approving his brother's eleaion was not mentioned;
and the Protestants of Germany, who had hitherto
been viewed only as a religious fed, came hence-
forth to be confidered as a political body of no small
consequence b.

eamp-ign THE intelligence which Charles received of So-
iaHungry. lyman's having entered Hungary at the head of

three hundred thousand men, brought the delibe-
rations of the diet at Ratisbon to a period; the
contingent both of troops and money, which each
prince was to furnish towards the defence of the
Empire, having been already fettled. The Pro-
teftants, as a testimony of their gratitude to the
Emperor, exerted themselves with extraordinary
zeal, and brought into the field forces which ex-
ceeded in number the quota imposed on them;
the Catholics imitating their example, one of the
greatest and best appointed armies that had ever
been levied in Germany, afrembled near Vienna.
Being joined by a body of Spanifi and Italian ve-
terans under the marquis del Guafto; by some
heavy-armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in
Bohemia, Auft'i;i, and his other territories, it
amounted in all to ninety thousand dilciplincdc

b Sleid. 149, &c. Seek. iii. 19.

1 foot,

foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a prodi- B V K
gious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army, '-: -
worthy the first prince in Chriftendo~n, the Em- 53a'
peror took the command in person; and man-
kind waited in fulpenfe the issue of a decisive
battle between the two greatest monarchs in the
world. But each of them dreading the other's
power and good fortune, they both condu&ed
their operations with such excessive caution, that
a campaign, for which such immense preparations
had been made, ended without any memorable
event. Solyman, finding it impossible to gain September
ground upon an enemy always attentive and on
his guard, marched back to Constantinople to-
wards the end of autumnc. It is remarkable,
that in such a martial age, when every gentleman
was a fo!dier, and every prince a general, this
was the first time that Charles, who had already
carried on such extensive wars, and gained so
many victories, appeared at the head of his troops.
In this first essay of his arms, to have opposed
such a leader as Solyman, was no small honour;
to have obliged him to retreat, merited very con-
fiderable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the AuguftR6.

Elector of Saxony died, and was succeeded by his
son John Frederick. The Reformation rather
gained than loft by that event; the new Elector,

' Jovii lli. lib. xxx. p. zoo, &c. Barre Hill. de l'Em-
pirc, i. . 3 7.

no

B 0 0 K no less attached than his predecessors to the opi-

V.

_ _ -- nions of Luther, occupied the flation which they
1532. had held at the head of the Proteflant party, and

defended, with the boldnels and zeal of youth, that
cause which they had foRfered and reared with the
caution of more advanced age.

Thc Erme- IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks,
JrO' s in-r-
view with Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out on
the Pops in
his way t1 his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
Spain. desirous of an interview with the Pope, they met

a second1 time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonflrations of refped and friendship, but with
little of that confidence which had sublisted be-
tween them during their late negociations there.
Clement was much difTatisfied with the Emperor's
proceecdings at Augsburg; his concessions with re-
gard to the speedy convocation of a council, hav-
ing more than cancelled all the merit of the severe
decree against the doctrines of the Reformers. The
toleration granted to the Protestants at Ratisbon,
and the more explicit promise concerning a c un-
cil, with which it was accompanied, had irritated

Negi,- lim Rill farther. Charles, however, partly fiom
ton, (Con-
(erning a conviction that the meeting of a council would be
general C
cuici; attended with salutary effeis, and partly fiom his

delire to please the Germans, having solicited the
Pope by his ambafiTdors to call that aflembly with-
out delay, and now urging the fame thing in per-
fbn, Clement was greatly embar-alred what reply
lie Ihould make to a requelt which it was indecent

to

to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He endea- B O° K
voured at first to divert Charles from the measure;
but, finding him inflexible, he had recourle to ar- 'sia5
tifices, which he knew would delay, if not entirely
defeat, the calling of that afTembly. Under the
plausible pretext of its being previously neceflary
to fettle, with all parties concerned, the place of
the council's meeting; the manner of its proceed-
ings; the right of the persons who should be ad-
mitted to vote; and the authority of their deci-
sions; he dispatched a nuncio, accompanied by an
amballfador from the Emperor, to the Eledtor of
Saxony as head of the Protestants. With regard
to each of these articles, inextricable difficulties
and contests arose. The Proteflants demanded a
council to be held in Germany; the Pope infifed
that it should meet in Italy: they contended, that
all points in dispute flould be determined by the
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered not
only the decrees of the church, but the opinions
of fathers and doEtors, as of equal authority:
they required a free council, in which the di-
vines, commiflioned by different churches, should
be allowed a voice; he aimed at modelling the
council in such a manner as would render it en-
tirely dependant on his pleasure. Above all, the
Protestants thought it unreasonable, that they
flould bind themselves to submit to the decrees
of a council, before they knew on what principles
these decrees were to be founded, by what persons
they were to be pronounced, and what forms of

prtccceli ng

B 0O K proceeding they would observe. The Pope main-

-;- j rained it to be altogether unnecessary to call a
255, council, if those who demanded it did not pre-

vioufly declare their resolution to acquiesce in its
decrees. In order to adjust such a variety of
points, many expedients were proposed, and the
negociations spun out to such a length, as effec-
tually answered Clement's purpose of putting off
the meeting of a council, without drawing on him-
self the whole infamy of obftru&ing a measure
Which all Europe deemed so essential to the good
of the church d,

andforpre. TOGETHER with this negociation about calling
fervingthe 0
tranquillity a council, the Emperor carried on another, which
e's' he had still more at heart, for securing the peace

established in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his pretensions in that country with great reluc-
tance, Charles made no doubt but that he would
lay hold on the first pretext afforded him, or em-
brace the first opportunity which presented itself,
of recovering what he had loll. It became ne-
ceffary on this account, to take measures for as-'
lembling an army able to oppote him. As his
treasury, drained by a long war, could not supply
the fums requisite for keeping such a body con-
flantly on foot, he attempted to throw that burden
on his allies, and to provide for the safety of his
own dominions at their expence, by proposing that

d F. Paul Hill. 61. Seckend. iii. 73.

the

the Italian states should enter into a league of de- B O, K
fence against all invaders; that, on the first ap- ---yr
pearance of danger, an army should be raised and 53'
maintained at the common charge; and that An-
tonio de Leyva should be appointed the generalif-
fimo. Nor was the proposal unacceptable to Cle-
ment, though for a reason very different from that
which induced the Emperor to make it. He s1533
hoped, by this expedient, to deliver Italy from the
German and Spanish veterans, which had so long
filled all the powers in that country with terror,
and still kept them in fubjetion to the Imperial
yoke. A league was accordingly concluded; all Feb. 24.
the Italian states, the Venetians excepted, acceded
to it; the fum, which each of the contractingpar-
ties should furnish towards maintaining the army
was fixed; the Emperor agreed to withdraw the
troops which gave so much umbrage to his allies,
and which he was unable any longer to support.
Having disbanded part of them, and removed the
reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board
Doria's gallies, and arrived at Barcelona . April 2.

NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for fe- Defins and

neguciationJ

curing the peace of Germany, and maintaining of the
that system which he had established in Italy, Keng,,ca
the Emperor became every day more and more tile mpc-
apprehensive that both would be soon diflurbed
by the intrigues or arms of the French King.

c Guic. 1. 2o. 551. Ferreras, ix. 149.

His

B 0° 0 His apprehenfions'were well founded, as nothing

V. 0
--..> but the desperate situation of his affairs could have

'533. brought Francis to give his content to a treaty so

dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of Cam-
bray: he, at the very time of ratifying it, had
formed a resolution to observe it no longer than
necessity compelled him, and took a solemn pro-
test, though with the most profound secrecy, against
several articles in the treaty, particularly that
whereby he renounced all pretensions to the dutchy
of Milan, as unjust, injurious to his heirs, and
invalid. One of the crown lawyers, by his com-
mand, entered a proteit to the fame purpose, and
with the like secrecy, when the ratification of the
treaty was registered in the parliament of Paris'.
Francis seems to have thought that, by employing
an artifice unworthy of a King, deftruiilve ofpub-
lic faith, and of the mutual confidence on which
all tranfadions between nations are founded, he was
released froma any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the most sacred
engagements. From the moment he concluded
the peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for
an opporttinity of violating it with ifafety. He
endeavoured for that rcalon to flrengthen his
alliance with the King of lEngland, whose friend-
ship he cultivated with the greatefl assiduity. He
put the military force of his own kingdom on a
better and more relfpedable footing than ever.

f Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part 2. p. 5z.

He~l

He artfully fomented the jealousy and discontent B 0o o
of the German princes.

,533.
BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the particularly

with the

ftrift confederacy which subsisted between Charles pophe
and Clement; and he had soon the fatisfacion to
observe appearances of disgust and alienation ari-
sing in the mind of that suspicious and interested
Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union
would not be lasting. As the Emperor's decision
in favour of the duke of Ferrara had greatly irri-
tated the Pope, Francis aggravated the injustice
of that proceeding, and flattered Clement that the
papal fee would find in him a more impartial and
no less powerful protector. As the importunity
with which Charles demanded a council was ex-
tremely offensive to the Pope, Francis artfully cre-
ated obstacles to prevent it, and attempted to di-
vert the German princes, his allies, from insisting
so obstinately on that pointz. As the Emperor
had gained such an ascendant over Clement by
contributing to aggrandize his family, Francis en-
deavoured to allure him by the fame irresistible
bait, proposing a marriage between his second son,
Henry duke of Orleans, and Catharine, the daugh-
ter of the Pope's cousin Laurence di Medici. On
the first overture of this match, the Emperor
could not persuade himself that Francis really in-
tended to debate the royal blood of France, by an

Bnellay, 141, &c. Seclc. iii. 48. F. Paul, 63.
Vo0. III. F alliance

B 0 o K alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors had beer

V.

A -- _ iso lately private citizens and merchants in Flu.
'53-' rence, and believed that he meant only to flatter

or amuse the ambitious Pontiff. He thought it
nece!ttry, however, to efface the imprefflon which
such a dazzling ofler might have made, by pro.
mifing td break off the marriage which had been
agreed on between his own niece the King of
Denmark's daughter, and the Duke of Milan,
and to fubfitiute Catharine in her place. But the
French ambassador producing unexpeEtedly full
powers to conclude the marriage treaty with the
duke of Orleans, this expedient had no effet.
Clement was so highly pleased with an honour
which added such lufire and dignity to the house of
Medici, that he offered to grant Catharine the in-
vefliture of considerable territories in Italy, by
way of portion; he seemed ready to support Fran-
cis in prolecuting his ancient claims in that coun-
try, and consented to a personal interview with
that Monarch .

n.erv;iew CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent a
;.t"" lther meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass but
rr'ncis. what would be of detriment to hinm; nor could

he bear, after he had twice condescended to visit
the Pope in his own territories, that Clement
floukld bellow fich a mark of diftinstion on his
rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at an un-

r Guic. 1. xx. 551. S53. !ellay, 138.

7 favour-

favourable season, in order to pay court to Francis B 0o xO
in the French dominions. But the Pope's eager- .
ness to accomplish the match overcame all the 1533.
scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which would
probably have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithstanding several artifices of oaober.
the Emperor to prevent it, took place at Marseilles
with extraordinary pomp, and demonstrations of
confidence on both fides; and the marriage, which
the ambition and abilities of Catharine rendered in
the sequel as pernicious to France, as it was then
thought dishonourable, was consummated. But
whatever schemes may have been secretly concert-
ed by the Pope and Francis in favour of the duke
of Orleans, to whom his father proposed to make
over all his rights in Italy, so careful were they to
avoid giving any cause of offence to the Emperor,
that no treaty was concluded between them h. and
even in the marriage-articles, Catharine renounced
all claims and pretensions in Italy, except to the
dutchy of Urbino .

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on pope's on.

these negociations, and forming this connection dardui thh
with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to the Ki.g .of

England',

nEmperor, such was the artifice and duplicity of divorce.
Clement's character, that he suffered the latter to
direct all his proceedings with regard to the King
of England, and was no less attentive to gratify

)' Guic. 1. xx. 555.
'Du Mont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. ii. iol.

F a2 him

B o°V K him in that particular, than if the most cordial

V.

-_
- ·- union had still subsisted between them. Henry':
X533. suit for a divorce had now continued near fix years;

during all which period the Pope negociated, pro.
mifed, retracted, and concluded nothing. After
bearing repeated delays and disappointments longer
than could have been expe&ed from a prince of
such a choleric and impetuous temper, the patience
of Henry was at last so much exhausted, that he
applied to another tribunal for that decree which he
had solicited in vain at Rome. Cranmer, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the
authority of Universities, Doftors, and Rabbies,
who had been consulted with respect to the point,
annulled the King's marriage with Catharine; her
daughter was declared illegitimate; and Anne
Boleyne acknowledged as Queen of England.
At the fame time Henry began not only to neglet
and to threaten the Pope, whom he had hitherto
courted, but to make innovations in the church,
of which he had formerly been such a zealous de-
fender. Clement, who had already seen so many
provinces and kingdoms revolt from the Holy See,
became apprehensive at last that England might
imitate their example, and partly from his folici-
tude to prevent that fatal blow, partly in compli-
ance with the French King's solicitations, deter-
mined to give Henry such fatisfadion as might fill
retain him within the bosom of the church. But
'34. the violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Em-

peror, did not allow the Pope leisure for execut-

ing

ing this prudent resolution, and hurried him, with B o

o c

a precipitation fatal to the Roman See, to issue a .--
bull rescinding Cranrer's sentence, confirriting i534.
Henry's marriage with Catharine, and declaring
him excommunicated, if, within a time specified,
he did not abandon the wife he had taken, and re-
turn to her whom he had deferred. Enraged at this
unexpeced decree, Henry kept no longer any
measures with the court of Rome; his subje&s Papalau-
seconded his resentment and indignation; an aa h1d1iyabo
of Parliament was passed, abolishing the papal England.
power and jurifdition in England; by another,
the King was declared supreme head of the church,
and all the authority of which the Popes were de-
prived was vested in him. That vast fabric of
ecclesiastical dominion which had been raised with
such art, and of which the foundations seemed to
have been laid so deep, being no longer supported
by the veneration of the people, was overturned
in a moment, Henry himself, with the caprice
peculiar to his charater, continued to defend the
doctrines of the Romish church as fiercely as he
attacked its jurifdiEion. He alternately persecuted
the Protestants for rejeEting the former, and the
Catholics for acknowledging the latter. But his
subje&s, being once permitted to enter into new
paths, did not chufe to flop (hort at the precise
point prcecribed by him. Having been encou-
raged by his example to break some of their fetters,
they were so impatient to lhake off what itill re-
mainedk', that, in the following reign, with the ap-

k Herbert. Born. HIilt. of Reform.

F3 pIlallt

V'

B o O K plause of the greater part of the nation, a total fe-
t .--. paration was made from the church of Rome in
'5394 articles of dotrine, as well as in matters of dif-

cipline and jurifdiltion.

Death f A SHORT delay might have saved the See of
Clerent
vl'm Rome from all the unhappy consequences of Cle-

ment's rashness. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a languiihing distemper, which
gradually wafting his conffitution, put an end to

Sept .
5 his Pontificate, the most unfortunate, both during

its continuance, and by its effects, that the church

Elea.inn of had known for many ages. The very day on which
Paul llI.
oa 13. the cardinals entered the conclave, they raised to

the papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean of the
sacred college, and the oldest member of that.body,
who assumed the name of Paul III. The account
of his promotion was received with extraordinary
acclamations of joy by the people of Rome, highly
plealed, after an interval of more than an hundred
years, to fee the crown of St. Peter placed on the
head of a Roman citizen. Persons more capable
of judging, formed a favourable presage of his ad-
ministration, from the experience which he had ac-
quired under four Pontificates, as well as the cha-
racter of prudence and moderation which he had
uniformly maintained in a station of great emi-
nence, and during an active period that required
both talents and adclrcfs'

EURtoPE, it is probable, owed the continuance
of its peace to the deaith of Clement; for although

GCuic. I. xx. 556. F. laul, 6,..

110

no traces remain in history of any league conclud- B °° K
ed between him and Francis, it is scarcely to be' -.,
doubted but that he would have seconded the ope- '534-
rations of the French arms in Italy, that he might
have gratified his ambition by feeing one of his
family poffffed of the supreme power in Florence,
and another in Milan. But upon the election of
Paul III. who had hitherto adhered uniformly to'
the Imperial interest, Francis found it necessary to
suspend his operations for some time, and to put off
the commencement of hostilities against the Em-
peror, on which, before the death of Clement, he
had been fully determined,

WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to Jnfirrea;io

of the Ana-

renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal to baptiis in
himself and his fubjetes, a tranfadion of a very Germany-
singular nature was carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and salutary effeEts of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as must be the cafe in all actions
and events wherein men are concerned, with some
consequences of an opposite nature. When the
human mind is roused by grand objec6s, and agi-
tated by frrong passions, its operations acquire such
force, that they aie apt to become irregular and
extravagant. Upon any great revolution in reli-
gion, such irregularities abound most, at that par-
ticular period, when men, having thrown off the
authority of their ancient principles, do not yet
fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obligation

F 4 of

B o o K of those new tenets which they have embraced.

V.
* ;' ' The mind, in that situation, pufiing forward with

534. the boldness which prompted it to rejet establish-

ed opinions, and not guided by a clear knowledge
of the system substituted in their place, disdains all
restraint, and runs into wild notions, which often
lead to scandalous or immoral conduct. Thus,
in the first ages of the christian church, many of
the new converts, having renounced their ancient
systems of religious faith, and being but imper-
feEtly acquainted with the doctrines and precepts of
Christianity, broached the most extravagant opi-
nions, equally subversive. of piety and virtue; all
which errors disappeared or were exploded when the
knowledge of religion increased, and came to be
more generally diffused. In like manner, soon as-
ter Luther's appearance, the rashness or ignorance
of some of his disciples led them to publish tenets
no less absurd than pernicious, which being pro-
posed to men extremely illiterate, but fond of no-
velty, and at a time when their minds were occu-
pied chiefly with religious Speculations, gained too
easy credit and authority among them. To these
causes must be imputed the extravagances of Mun-
cer, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-five, as well as the rapid progress which
his opinions made among the peasants ; but though
the infurredtion excited by that fanatic was soon sup-
pressed, several of his followers lurked in different
places, and endeavoured privately to propagate his
opinions.

IN

IN those provinces of Upper Germany, which B °o° K

had already been so cruelly wafted by their en-
thuliaftic rage, the magistrates watched their -no- origi4nd
tions with such severe attention, chat many of tenetsof

that les¢

them found it necessary to retire into other coun-
tries, some were punished, others driven into exile,
and their errors were entirely rooted out. But
in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where the
pernicious tendency of their opinions was more
unknown, and guarded against with less care,
they got admittance into several towns, and spread
the infection of their principles. The most re-
markable of their religious tenets related to the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contended,
ought to be administered only to persons grown
up to years of understanding, and should be per-
formed, not by sprinkling them with water, but
by dipping them in it: for this reason they con-
demned the baptism of infants, and r.ebaptifing
all whom they admitted into their society, the
feEt came to be distinguished by the name of
Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion concern-
ning baptifin, which has the appearance of being
founded on the practice of the church in the apo-
ftolic age, and contains nothing inconfiffent with
the peace and order of human society, they add-
ed other principles of a most enthufiaffic as
well as dangerous nature. They maintained relar,
among Chriflians who'had the precepts of the
goliel to direEt, and the spirit of God to gui le
them, the office of magistracy was nor only un-
neccfnluy, but an unlawful encroachment on their

X~~I~~ ~f iSpiritual

B oV K. spiritual liberty; that the diftinEtions occasioned
-_--j-' by birth, or rank, or wealth, being contrary to
J534 the spirit of the gospel, which confiders all men

as equal, fiould be entirely abolished; that all
Christians, throwing their poffeffons into. one
common stock, ihould live together in that state
of equality which becomes members of the fame
family; that as neither the laws of nature, nor
the precepts of the New Testament, had imposed
any restraints upon men with regard to the number
of wives which they might marry, they flould use
that liberty which God himself had granted to the
patriarchs.
Settle n SucH opinions, propagated and maintained with

enthufiaflic zeal and boldness, were not long with-
out producing the violent effecs natural to them.
Two Anabaptifi prophets, John Matthias, a baker
of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or Beikels, a
journeyman taylor of Leyden, possessed with the
rage of making proselytes, fixed their residence at
Munster, an Imperial city in Westphalia, of the
first rank, under the sovereignty of its bishop,
but governed by its own senate and consuls. As
neither of these fanatics wanted the talents re-
quifite in desperate enterprises, great resolution,
the appearance of fantity, bold pretensions to in-
fpiration, and a confidentand plausible manner of
discoursing, they soon gained many converts.
Among these were Rothman, who had firll preached
the Protestant doctrine in Munler, and Cnipper.
doling, a citizen of good birth and considerable

eminence.

eminence. Emboldened by the countenance of B o°0 K
such disciples, they openly taught their opinions;
and not fitisfied with that liberty, they made 153-.
several attempts, though without success, to be-
come nmafers of the town, in order to get their
tenets eftabliflhed by public authority. At laaf, Become
having secretly called in their associates from the tbatcity.
neighbouring country, they suddenly took pof-
fefrion of the arsenal and fenate-houfe in the night-
time, and running through the streets with drawn
swords, and horrible howlings, cried out alter-
nately, "r Repent, and be baptised," and " Depart
ye ungodly." The senators, the canons, the February.
nobility, together with the more fober citizens,
whether Papists or Protestants, terrified at their
threats and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the
city under the dominion of a frantic multitude,
confifling chiefly of firangers. Nothing now re-
maining to overawe or control them, they set
about modelling the government according to their
own wild ideas; and though at first they flowed Eftablilh
so much reverence for the ancient constitution, ne formof

govern-

as to eled senators of their own fed, and to -m-nt.
appoint Cnipperdoling and another proselyte con-
ftlls, this was nothing more than form; for all
their proceedings were direted by Matthias, who,
in the style, and with the authority of a prophet,
uttered his commands, which it was instant death
to difob.y. I-aving begun with enouraging the
multitude to pillage the churches, and deface their
ornaments; he enjoined them to destroy all books
c:ce)pt the Bible, as ulilefs or impious ; he ordered

the

B o0 K the efRates of such as fled, to be confiscated, and

V.

--s--i fold to the inhabitants of the adjacent country;
'534' he commanded every man to bring forth his gold,

silver, and other precious effects, and to lay them
at his feet; the wealth amafTed by there means,
he deposited in a public treasury, and named
deacons to dispense it for the common use of all,
The members of this commonwealth being thus
brought to a perfea equality, he commanded all
of them to eat at tables prepared in public, and
even prescribed the difles which were to be served
up each day. Having finished his plan of re-
formation, his next care was to provide for the
defence of the city; and he took measures for that
purpose with a prudence which favoured nothing
of fanaticism. He colleaed large magazines of
every kind; he repaired and extended the forti-
fications, obliging every person without diftincion
to work in his turn; he formed such as were
capable of bearing arms into regular bodies, and
endeavoured to add the lfability of discipline to
the impetuosity of enthusiasm. He sent emissaries
to the Anabaptists in the Low-Countries, inviting
them to affrmble at Munster, which he dignified
with the name of Mount-Sion, that from thence
they might set out to reduce all the nations of the
earth under their dominion. He himself was un-
wearied in attending to every thing necessary for
the security or increase of the f&e; animating his
clifciples by his own example to decline no labour,
as; well as to submit to every hardship; and their
enthut liaic paflions being kept from subsiding

by

by a perpetual fucceflon of exhortations, revela- B O0 K
tions, and prophecies, they seemed ready to un-
dertake or to susser any thing in maintenance of '534'
their opinions.

WVHILE they were thus employed, the bishop of Thebif;op

Munfler having assembled a considerable army, take arms
advanced to besiege the town. On his approach, `tem
Matthias sallied out at the head of some chosen
troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced
it, and after great slaughter returned to the city
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this success, he appeared next day brandishing
a spear, and declared, that, in imitation of Gideon,
he would go forth with a handful of men and fiite
the hofl of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom May.
he named, followed him without hesitation in this
wild enterprize, and, rushing on the enemy with
a frantic courage, were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first great
conifernation among his disciples; but Boccold,
by the fame gifts and pretensions which had
gained Matthias credit, soon revived their spirits Johnof
and hopes to such a degree, that he succeeded the qre:geat
deceased prophet in the fame absolute direction ,athonriy
of all their affairs. As he did not posess that Anabptif.
enterprizing courage which distinguished his pre-
deceffor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
dcfcnfive war; and, without attempting to annoy
the enemy by sallies, he waited for the succours he
expected from the Low-Countries, the arrival of
which was often foretold and promised by their

prophets.

B °oV K prophets. But though less daring in ation than

v_-,- Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and of more
534. unbounded ambition. Soon after the death of

his predecessor, having, by obscure visions and
prophecies, prepared the multitude for rome ex-
traordinary event, he firipped himself naked,
and, marching through the streets, proclaimed
with a loud voice, " That the kingdom of Sion
was at hand; that whatever was highest on earth
Thould be brought low, and whatever was lowest
lhould be exalted." In order to fulfil this, he
commanded the churches, as the most lofty
buildings in the city, to be levelled with the
ground; he degraded the senators chosen by
Matthias, and depriving Cnipperdoling of the
consulship, the highest office in the common-
wealth, appointed him to execute the lowest
and most infamous, that of common hangman,
to which strange transition the other agreed, not
only without murmuring, but with the utmost
joy; and such was the despotic rigour of Boc-
cold's administration, that he was called almost
every day to perform some duty or other of his
wretched fundioni. In place of the deposed fe-
nators, he named twelve judges, according to the
number of tribes in Israel, to preside in all as-
fairs; retaining to hirmf:lf the fame authority
which Moses anciently pofltcl'cd as legislator of
that people.

ElI..,ed No'r Iatisfied, however, with power or titles,
Ki'"n. which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he

had

had gained and tutored, having called the mul- B ° O K
titude together, declared it to be the will of e_
God, that John Boccold ihould be King of Sion, '535'
and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling ne24.
down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he
solemnly protefled had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the slate and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and was
clad in the richest and most sumptuous garments.
A Bible was carried on his one hand, a naked
sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when he appeared in public.
He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his household
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was
nominated governor of the city, as a reward for his
former submission.

IIAVING now attained the height of power, rt;i;c,,

Boccold began to discover passions, which he t'ou"9,enet
had hitherto refirained, or indulged only in fe-
cret. As the excesses of enthufiafmn have been
obfcrved in every age to lead to fenflial gratifi-
cations, the hame conffitution that is fufccptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
latter, he instructed the prophets and teachers to
harangue the people for several days concern-
ing the lawfulncfs, and even ncceflity of talking
moie wives than one, which they asserted to be
one of the privileges granted by God to the

faints.

B 0 ° K faints. When their ears were once accustomed

V.
-- --. to this licentious doctrine, and their passions in-

'534' flamed with the profpe& of such unbounded in-

dulgence, he himself set them an example of
using what he called their Christian liberty, by
marrying at once three wives, among which the
widow ofMatthias, a woman of ingular beauty,
was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the num-
ber of his wives, until they amounted to fourteen,
though the widow of Matthias was the only one
dignified with the title of Queen, or who shared
with him the splendour and ornaments of royalty.
After the example of their prophet, the multi-
tude gave themselves up to the most licentious
and uncontrolled gratification of their desires.
No man remained satisfied with a single wife.
Not to use their Christian liberty was deemed a
crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young women grown up to maturity,
whom they instantly compelled to marry. To-
gether with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its
inseparable attendant, was introduced, and be-
came a new source of corruption. Every excess
was committed, of which the paflions of men are
capable, when restrained neither by the authority
of laws nor the fcnfe of decency m; and by a

monstrous

in Prophcte & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo,

totai urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque fazminas dif-
curfum elf. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum
turli fete ulla rcpcrta cft supra annum decimum quartum
qua lluprum pafla non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p. 303.

Vulng

monstrous and almost incredible conjuncion, vo- B 0 o K
luptuoufnefs was engrafted on religion, and dif- . -
solute riot accomrpanied the aufterities of fanatical 1534'
devotion.

MEANWHILE the German princes were highly Aconfede-

offended at the insult offered to their dignity by thyA'
Boccold's presumptuous usurpation of royal ho- baptiis.
nours; and the profligate wmanners of his followers,
which were a reproach to the Christian name,
filled men of all profefllons with horror. Luther,
who had testified against this fanatical spirit on its
firfi appearance, now deeply lamented its progress,
and having exposed the delufiori with great
Itrength of argument, as well as acrimony of
style, called loudly on all the flates of Germany to
put a flop to a phrenry no less pernicious to so-
ciety, than fatal to religion. The Emperor, oc-
cupied with other cares and projects, had not
leiture to attefid to such a difanth object; but the
princes of the Emtpire, assembled by the King of
the Romans, voted a supply of men and money
to the biflop of Munster, whd being unable to
keep a sufficient army oh foot, had converted the

Vulgo vir;s qilinas effe uxotes, pluribus senas, nonnullis
liprenas & ontonds. Puellas fdpraduodecimum .etatis annum
liltim amnre. Id. 305. Nemo unA contentus suit, neque
cuiquam extra eflt-tas & viris immaturas continenti efie licuit.
Id. 307. tacebo hic, ut lit fuus honor auribus, quanta
harlari: et inalitiil ufi funt in pLiellis vitiandis noridum aptis
mntrimonio, id quod mihi neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi
fermonibus hauflum cli, fed ex ca vetul:, cui cura sic vitiata-
sum demandata suit, auditum. Joh. Corvinus, 316.

VOL. III. G siege

B oO K siege of the town into a blockade. The forces

_---- railed in consequence of this resolution, were put

BeCfl g35., under the command of an officer of experience,
town. 1who approaching the town towards the end of

fprinr, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-five, presTed it more closely than
formerly; but found the fortifications so firong,
and so diligently guarded, that he durst not at-
tenmpt an alFault. It was now about fifteen
months since the Anabaptifis had established their
domi;lion in Munster; they had during that time
undergone prodigious fatigue in working on the
fortifications, and performing military duty.

May. Notwithstanding the prudent attention of their
finatflfm King to provide for their subsistence, and his
ofhdbe- frugal as well as regular ceconomy in their pub-

lic meals, they began to feel the approach of
famine. Several small bodies of their brethren,
who were advancing to their affiflance from the
Low-Countries, had been intercepted and cut
to pieces; and while all .Germany was ready
to combine against them, they had no profpe&
of succour. But such was the ascendant which
Boccold had acquired over the multitude, and so
powerful the falcination of enthufiafin, that their
hopes were as sanguine as ever, and they heark-
ened with implicit credulity to the visions and
preditlions of their prophets, who assured them
that the Almighty would speedily interpose, in
order to deliver the city. The faith, however,
of some few, fiaken by the violence and length
of their fulierings, began to fail; but being sus-

pe6ted

peaed of an inclination to surrender to the ene- B °O K
my, they were punished with immediate death, -_.
as guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of .535.
God. One of the King's wives, having uttered
certain words which implied some doubt con-
cerning his divine miflion, he instantly called
the whole number together, and commanding
the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel down,
cut off her head with his own hands; and so far
were the reft from exprefling any horror at this
cruel deed, that they joined him in dancing with
a frantic joy around the bleeding body of their
com[panion.

BY this time, the besieged endured the utmorf Thecity

rigour of famine; but they chose rather to susser taken.
hardships, the recital of which is shocking to
humanity, than to liften to the terms of capitu-
lation offered them by the bishop. At lafr, a de-
ferter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either less intoxicated with the fumes of
enthusiasm, or unable any longer to bear such
distress, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a wealk part in the forti-
fications which he had observed, and aIffiring
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger
and fatigue, kept watch there with little care,
he offcred to lead a party thither in the night.
The propolal was accepted, and a chosen boly
of troops appointed for the service; who, fcal-
ing the walls unperceived, seized one of the
gatcs, and admitted the reft of the army. The

G 2 Ana-

B o 0 K Anabaptists, though surprised, defended them.
I --. . selves in the market-place with valour, height-
June 4. ened by despair; but being overpowered by

numbers, and surrounded on every hand, mofi
of them were slain, and the remainder taken
prisoners. Among the last were the King and

Piunfiment Cnipperdoling. The King, loaded with chains,
of the King
andhisafro- was carried from city to city as a fpedtacle to
ciates, gratify the curiosity of the people, and was ex-

posed to all their insults. His spirit, however,
was not broken or humbled by this fad reverse
of his condition; and he adhered with unshaken
firmness to the distinguishing tenets of his set.
After this, he was brought back to Munster,
the icene of his royalty and crimes, and put to
death with the most exquisite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with astonishing for-
titude. This extraordinary man, who had been
able to acquire such amazing dominion over the
minds of his followers, and to excite commotions
so dangerous to society, was only twenty-fix years
of age

Icha"raer TOGETHER with its Monarch, the kingdom of
iot the led
lince that the Anabaptists came to an end. Their prin-
period,

peo ciples having taken deep root in the Low-Coun-

"Sleid. 19o, &c. Tumultuum AnabaptiRlarum Liber

unus. Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio au lore ap. Scardium, vol.
ii. p. 298, &c. Dc Miferabili Monaflerienfiun Obfidione,
&c. libellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scar. 313. Annales Ana-
baptiltici a Joh. Henrico Ottio, 4to. Basile.x, 1672. Cor.
Ileeribachius lilt. Anab. edit. 1637, p . 1.o.

tries,

ties, the party frill fubfiffts there, under the B 0°° K
name of Mennonites; but by a very singular re- ----
volution, this feet, so mutinous and sanguinary '535
at its first origin, hath become altogether inno-
cent and pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage
war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to the duties of private citi-
zens, and by their industry and charity endea-
vour to make reparation to human society for
the violence committed by their founders". A
small number of this set which is fettled in
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
enthufiafim.

THE mutiny of the Anabaptifrs, though it drew Proceedings

general attention, did not so entirely engross rityof hA
the princes of Germany, as not to allow leisure Smalkalde.
for other tranfaaions. The alliance between the
French King and the confederates at Smalkalde,
began about this time to produce great effets.
Ulric, Duke of Wurteqmberg, having been
expelled his dominions in the year one thousand
five hundred and nineteen, on account of his
violent and oppreflive administration, the house
of Austria had got pofeffion of his dutchy.
That prince having now by a long exile atoned
for the errors in his condu&, which were the
effe& rather of inexperience than of a tyrannical
(lil)poition, was become the objeet of general
compaflion. The Landgrave of Hesse, in parti-

o Baylc Dieion. art. lnaBaptfi/ir.

G 3 cular,

B 0 0 K cular, his near relation, warmly espoused his in-

V.

--v-- terest, and used many efforts to recover for him
3535 his ancient inheritance. But the King of the

Romans obstinately refuftd to relinquish a valuable
acquisition which his family had made with so
much ease. The Landgrave, unable to compel
him, applied to the King of France his new ally.
Francis, eager to embrace any opportunity of
distressing the house of Austria, and desirous of
wresting from it a territory, which gave it footing
and influence in a part of Germany at a distance
from its other dominions, encouraged the Land-
grave to take arms, and secretly supplied him
with a large fum of money. This he employed
to raifc troops; and marching with great ex-
pedition towards Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated,
and dispersed a considerable body of Austrians,
entrusted with the defence of the country. All
the Duke's fubjecl-s hastened, with emulation, to
receive their native Prince, and re-invested him
with that authority which is still enjoyed by his
descendants. At the fame time the exercise of
the Protefant religion was established in his do-
minions P.

-The King FERDINAND, how sensible soever of this un-
d t',1 Ro. peLSted blow, not daring to attack a Prince
Ilhall S LOUrts
isllln. whoml all the Protefrant powers in Germany were

ready to support, judged it expedient to conclude
a treaty with him, by which, in the mioll ample

v Sleid. 17z. Bcllay, 159, &c.

forlm,

form, he recognised his title to the dutchy. The B °V° K
ficcefs of the Landgrave's operations, in behalf of -
the Duke of Wurtemberg, having convinced J535'
Ferdinand that a rupture with a league, so formi-
dable as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided
with the utmosi care, he entered likewise into a
negociation with the Eletor of Saxon., the head
of that union, and by some concessions in favour
of the Protestant religion, and others of advan-
tage to the Ele&tor himself, he prevailed on
him, together with his confederates, to acknow-
ledge his title as King of the Romans. At the
fame time, in order to prevent any such precipi-
tate or irregular eleEtion in times to come, it was
agreed that no person should hereafter be pro-
moted to that dignity without the unanimous con-
sent of the Eletors; and the Emperor soon after
confirmed this flipulation q.

THESE ads of indulgence towards the Pro- Pr''u IT

<t"t>~ - . . ~~~c.1s a ge-
teftants, and the close union into which the King n-r.I c.i.n-

Iil ro meet

of the Romans seemed to be entering with the at antuA.
Princes of that party, gave great offence at
Rome. Paul III., though he had departed from
a resolution of his predecessor, never to content to
the calling of a general council, and had pro-
milcl, in the firif consistory held after his elecion,
that he would convoke that alrembly so much de-
fired by all Chriflendom, was no less enraged
than Clement at the innovations in Germany,

Sleid. 173. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. p. z. 19.

G 4 and

B o°v° and no less averse to any scheme for reforming

A--,-/ either the doctrines of the church, or the abuses
X335< in the court of Rome: But having been a witness

of the universal censure which Clement had in-
curred by his obstinacy with regard to thele points,
he hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seem-
ing alacrity with which he proposed a council;
flattering himself, however, that such difficulties
would arise concerning the time and place of meet-
ing, the persons who had a right to be present,
and the order of their proceedings, as would effec-
tually defeat the intention of those who demanded
that assembly, without exposing himself to any
imputation for refuting to call it. With this view
he dispatched nuncios to the several courts, in or-
der to make known his intention, and that he had
fixed on Mantua as a proper place in which to
hold the council. Such difficulties as the Pope
had foreseen, immediately presented themselves
in great number. The French King did not ap-
prove of the place which Paul had chosen, as the
Papal and Imperial influence would necessarily be
too great in a town situated in that part of Italy.
The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that objection, but refused, be-
titles, to acknowledge any council called in the
name and by the authority of the Pope. The
Dec. I. German Protestants having met together at Smal-

kalde, infitl-ed on their original demand of a
council to be held in Germany, and pleading the
flml)cror's promise, as well as the agreement at
tRatifbun to that celi-, declared that they would

not

pot confider an assembly held at Mantua as a le- B °0 K
gal or free representative of the church. By this -
diversity of sentiments and views, such a field for s535s
intrigue and negociation opened, as made it easy for
the Pope to assume the merit of being eager to as-
femble a council, while at the fame time he could
put off its meeting at pleasure. The Protestants,
on the other hand, suspecting his designs, and fen-
fible of the importance which they derived from
their union, renewed for ten years the league of
Smalkalde, which now became fironger and more
formidable by the accfflion of several new mem-
bers r

DURING there tranfaaions in Germany, the TheEmpe-

Emperor undertook his famous enterprise against rine'Pe-
the piratical flates in Africa. That part of the Africa, and

s "are of that

African continent lying along the coast of the country.
Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maifylia, together

This league was concluded December, one thousand five

hundred and thirty-five, but not extended or signed in form
till September in the following year. The Princes who ac-
ceded to it were, John Eletor of Saxony, Ernest Duke of
]3runfwick, Philip Landgrave of Hesse, Ulric Duke of Wur-
tcmberg, Barnir and Philip Dukes of Pomerania, John,
George, and Joachim, Princes of Anhalt, Gebhard and Al-
bert Counts of Mansfield, William Count of Nassau. The
cities, Strafburg, Nuremburg, Constance, Ulm, Magdeburg,
Eremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Memmengen, Lindaw, Cam-
pen, Ifna, Bibrac, Windflhcim, Augsburg, Francfort, Efling,
IBrunfwick, Goflar, Hanover, Gottingen, Eimbeck, Ham-
burg, Mindcn.

with

B 0 0 K with the republic of Carthage, and which is now

V.
vI-.-^ known by the general name of Barbary, had un-

j35· dergone many revolutions. Subdued by the Ro-

mans, it became a province of their empire. When
it was conquered afterwards by the Vandals, they
erected a kingdom there. That being overturned
by Belilarius, the country became subject to the
Greek Emperors, and continued to be so until it
was over-run, towards tlhe end of the seventh cen-
tury, by the rapid and irrefiltible arms of the Ara-
bians. It renma:i d for some time a part of that
vast empire which the Caliphs governed with abfo-
lute authority. It, iminenf distance, however,
from the feat of governiyment, encouraged the de-
fce ldants of those leaders, who had subdued the
country, or the chiefs of the Moors, its ancient in-
habitants, to throw off the yoke, and to afiert their
independence. The Caliphs, who derived their au-
thority from a spirit of enthufiafin, more fitted for
making conquests than for preserving them, were
obliged to connive at ads of rebellion which they
could not prevent; and Barbary was divided into
several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Algiers, and
Tunis were the mofl considerable. The inhabitants
ofthefe kingdoms were a mixed race, Arabs, Ne-
groes fiom the southern provinces, and Moors, ei-
ther natives of Africa, or who had been expelled
out of Spain; all zealous professors of the Maho-
metan religion, and inflamed against Christianity
with a bigoted hatred proportional to their igno-
rance and barbarous manners.

5 AMONG

AMONG these people, no less daring, inconstant, B 0°o K

and treacherous, than the ancient inhabitants of the
lame country described by the Roman historians, Rif535.he
frequent seditions broke out, and many changes in piratical
government took place. These, as they affected
only the internal state of a country extremely bar-
barous, are but little known, and deserve to be so:
But about the beginning of the Sixteenth century a
sudden revolution happened, which, by rendering.
the states of Barbary formidable to the Europeans,
hath made their history worthy of more attention.
This revolution was brought about by persons born
in a rank of life which entitled them to aft no such
illutrious part. Horuc and Hayradin, the sons of and of the
a potter in the Ife of Lesbos, prompted by a reft- Barbrofs.
leis and enterprizing spirit, forsook their father's
trade, ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates.
They soon distinguished themselves by their valour
and aftivity, and becoming maflers of a frall bri-
gantine, carried on their infamous trade with such
conduct and success, that they afTembled a fleet of
twelve galleys, besides many vessels offinaller force.
Of this fleet I-oruc, the elder brother, called Bar-
barofla from the red colour of his beard, was ad-
miral, and Hayradin second in command, but with
alnimol equal authority. They called themselves
the fiiends of the sea, and the enemies of all
'\ho itil utuon it; and their names soon became
tcrible fi'omn the Straits of the Dardanels to those
o (Sib-altar. Together with their fame and power,
tllcir ambitious views extended, and while acting

as

B O IK as Corsairs, they adopted the ideas, and acquired

V.
a_ '- the talents of conquerors. They often carried the
'535 prizes which they took on the coasts of Spain and

Italy into the ports of Barbary, and enriching the
inhabitants by the sale of their booty, and the
thoughtless prodigality of their crews, were wel-
come guests in every place at which they touched.
The convenient situation of these harbours, lying
so near the greatest commercial states at that time
in Christendom, made the brothers wish for an
eltablifhment in that country. An opportunity of
accomplishing this quickly presented itself, which
they did not susser to pass unimproved. Eutemi,
King of Algiers, having attempted several times,
without success, to take a fort which the Spanilh
governors of Oran had built not far from his ca-
pital, was so ill advised as to apply for aid to Bar-
baroffa, whose valour the Africans confidered as
,156. irresistible. The a&ive Corsair gladly accepted of

the invitation, and leaving his brother Hayradin
with the fleet, marched at the head of five thousand
men to Algiers, where he was received as their de-
liverer. Such a force gave him the command of
the town; and as he perceived that the Moors nei-
ther suspected him of any bad intentions, nor were
capable with their light-armed troops of opposing

Holuc, the his diciplined veterans, he secretly murdered the
ther, be- Monarch whom he had come to aflift, and pro-
te of Al- claimed himnrelf King of Algiers in his stead.
sic'. The authority which he had thus boldly usurped,

he endeavoured to eftabliih by arts suited to the

I genius

genius of the people whom he had to govern; by B O° K
liberality without bounds to those who favoured his
promotion, and by cruelty no less unbounded to- s535'
wards all whom he had any reason to distrust. Not
satisfied with the throne which he had acquired,
he attacked the neighbouring King of Tremecen,
and having vanquished him in battle, added his do-
minions to those of Algiers. At the fame time,
he continued to infest the coast of Spain and Italy
with fleets which resembled the armaments of a
great monarch, rather than the light fquadrdns of
a Corsair. Their frequent and cruel devastations
obliged Charles, about the beginning of his reign, 5sg8.
to furnish the marquis de Comares, governor of
Oran, with troops sufficient to attack him. That
officer, assisted by the dethroned King of Tre-
mecen, executed the commission with such spirit,
that Barbarossa's troops being beat in several en-
counters, he himself was Ihut up in Tremecen.
After defending it to the last extremity, he was
overtaken in attempting to make his escape, and
slain while he fought with an obstinate valour,
worthy of his former fame and exploits.

HI-s brother Hayradin, known likewise by the Thepro,
name of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of Algiers grafof

Hayradin,

with the fame ambition and abilities, but with bet- tll recond
ter fortune. His reign being undisturbed by the
arms of the Spaniards, which had full occupation
in the wars among the European powers, he regu-
lated with admirable prudence the interior police of

his

B o K his kingdom, carried on his naval operations witd

_ _ great vigour, and extended his conquests on the
'535s continent of Africa. But perceiving that the

Moors and Arabs submitted to his government
with the urmoft reluctance, and being afraid that
his continual depredations would, one day, draw

Putshisdo- upon him the arms of the Chrifians, he put his
n'der the dominions under the protection of the Grand
prot¢cftion Seignior, and received from him a body of Turkilh
of the Sul-
tan. soldiers sufficient for his security against his domes.

tic as well as his foreign -enemies. At last, the fame
ofhis exploits daily increasing, Solyman offered him
the command of the Turkish fleet, as the only per.
son whole valour and skill in naval affairs entitled
him to command against Andrew Doria, the great-
eft fea-officer of that age. Proud of this diflinc-
tion, Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and
with a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling the
arts of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair,
gained the entire confidence both of the Sultan and
his Vizier. To them he communicated a scheme
which he had formed of making himself master of
Tunis, the moist flourishing kingdom, at that time,
on the coast of Africa; and this being approved
of by them, he obtained whatever he demanded
for carrying it into execution.

His scheme His hopes of success in this undertaking were
for Coit1r- founded on the intestine divisions in the kingdom

of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that coun-
try, having thirty-four funs by different wives,

appointed

appointed Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest B o

o K

among them, to be his fuccefor. That weak -
Frince, who owed this preference, not to his own '535.
merit, but to the ascendant which his mother had
acouired over a monarch doating with age, first
) ibcned Mahmed his father in order to prevent
him from altering his deffination with respect to
the fuccelfion; and then, with the barbarous policy
which prevails wherever polygamy is permitted,
and the right of fuccefflon is not precisely fixed, he
put to death all his brothers whom he could get
into his power. Alrafchid, one of the eldest, was
so fortunate as to escape his rage; and finding a re-
treat among the wandering Arabs, made ieveral at-
tempts, by the afilfance of rome of their chiefs, to
recover the throne, which of right belonged to him.
But these proving unsuccessful, and the Arabs, from
their natural levity, being ready to deliver him up
to his merciless brother, he fled to Algiers, the
only place of refuge remaining, and implored the
protecion of Barbarossa, who, discerning at once
all the advantages which might be gained by sup-
porting his title, received him with every possible
idemonftration of fiiendfhip and refpeEt. Being
ready, at that time, to set fail for Constantinople,
he easily persuaded Alrafchid, whose eagerness to
obtain a crown disposed him to believe or under-
take any thing, to accompany him thither, pro-
mifing him efi-Etual assistance from Solyman, whom
lie reprecinted to be the moll- generous, as well as
Inoltl powerful Monarch in the world. But no
tonler were they arrived at Constantinople, than

the

B °0 K the treacherous Corsair, regardless of all his pro

V.
A- _ mises to him, opened to the Sultan a plan for con
'535- quering Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkif]

empire, by making use of the name of this exile,
Prince, and co-operating with the party in th
kingdom which was ready to declare in his favour
Solyman approved, with too much facility, of thi
perfidious proposal, extremely suitable to the cha
rafter of its author, but altogether unworthy of;
great Prince. A powerful fleet and numerous arm]
were soon assembled; at the fight of which the cre.
dulous Alrafchid flattered himself that he fhoul
soon enter his capital in triumph.
Its, uccers. BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going tc

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan:
shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard ol
more. Barbarofia failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After ra-
vaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid,
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard
the admiral galley. The fort of Goletta, which
commands the bay, soon fell into his hands, partly
by his own address, partly by the treachery of its
commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis, weary
of Muley-Hafcen's government, took arms$ and
declared for Alrafchid with such zeal and unani-
mity, as obliged the former to fly so precipitately,
that he left all his treasures behind him. The

gates,

gates were immediately set open to Barbarossa, as B °V.°
the restorer of their lawful sovereign. But when ---
Alrafchid himself did not appear, and when in- 535'
stead of his name, that of Solymnan alone was heard
among the acclamations of the Turkish soldiers
marching into the town, the people of Tunis began
to fufped the Corsair's treachery. Their suspicions
being soon converted into certainty, they ran to
arms with the utmost fury, and surrounded the
citadel, into which Barbarossa had led his troops.
But having foreseen such a revolution, he was not
unprepared for it: he immediately turned against
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one
brifl discharge, dispersed the numerous but un-
direted aflailants, and forced them to acknowledge
Solyman as their sovereign, and to submit to him-
self as his viceroy.

His first care was to put the kingdom, of Barbarora's

CIl l 1 1 1 /v . * formidable

which he had thus got poffeflion, in a proper power.
posture of defence. He strengthened the citadel
which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast expence,
made it the principal station for his fleet, and his
great arsenal for military as well as naval stores.
Being now poffefred of such extensive territories,
he carried on his depredations against the Christ-
ian States to a greater extent, and with more
deftrutive violence than ever. Daily complaints
of the outrages committed by his cruizers were
brought to the Emperor by his fubjeds, both in

VOL. III. II Spain

B OQO K Spain and Italy. All Christendom seemed to

-- » expet from him, as its greatest and most fortunate
1535- Prince, that he would put an end to this new and

The exiled odious species of opprefflon. At the fame time
King of K
Tunis im- Muley-Hafcen, the exiled King of Tunis, find-
lores thr ing none of the Mahometan Princes in Africa
Emperor's b
afrlinanc. willing or able to assist him in recovering his
April z1,
1535 ' throne, applied to Charles as the only person who

could aflert his rights in opposition to such a for.
midable usurper. The Emperor, equally desirous
of delivering his dominions from the dangerous
neighbourhood of Barbarossa; of appearing as the
proteCtor of an unfortunate Prince; and of ac-
quiring the glory annexed in that age to every
expedition against the Mahometans, readily con.
cluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen, and began
to prepare for invading Tunis. Having made
trial of his own abilities for war in the late cam-
paign in Hungary, he was now become so fond
of the military character, that he determined to

Hi.prepia command on this occasion in person. The united
eoxFredoithn strengrh of his dominions was called out upon an

enterprize in which the Emperor was about to
hazard his glory, and which drew the attention
of all lEurope. A lFlemifh fleet carried from the
ports of tlie Low-Country a body of German in-
fanrry ; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had diftinguilhed themselves by lb
many viCtories over the French; the Emperor

' lcra: i Annales Brabant. i. g09.

himrelf

hinfelf embarked at Barcelona with the flower of B 0 KO
the Spanish nobility, and was joined by a con- ----
fiderable squadron from Portugal, under the '535
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's
brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gal-
lies, the best appointed at that time in Europe,
and commanded by the most skilful officers; the
Pope furnished all the assistance in his power to-
wards such a pious enterprize;. and the order of
Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels,
equipped a squadron, which, though small, was
formidable by the valour of the knights who served
on board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was
the general place of rendezvous. Doria was ap-
pointed High-Admiral of the fleet; the command
of the land-forces under the Emperor was given to
the marquis de Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July,, the fleet, consisting Lan.d;n

of near five hundred vessels, having on board Afric.
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail from
Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation landed
within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa having received
early intelligence of the Emperor's immense ar-
mament, and suspecting its destination, prepared
with equal prudence and vigour for the defence of
his new conquest. He called in all his corsairs
fron their dif'erent stations; he drew from Al-
giers what forces could be spared ; he difpatchied
incnfen~.ers to all the African Princes, Moors as
wcll as Arabs, and by representing Muley-H-lalen
as ;n infrmous ipoftate, promptedi by ambition

1- 2 and

B OO K Spain and Italy. All Chrifendom seemed tc

3 v--. expe& from him, as its greatefl and most fortunate
1535. Prince, that he would put an end to this new anc

The exiled odious species of oppreflion. At the fame time
King of K
Tuns im- Muley-Hafcen, the exiled King of Tunis, find.
plores the ing none of the Mahometan Princes in Africa
Emperor's '11n
afifnaoce. willing or able to assist him in recovering hi,
April ax,
3535. ' throne, applied to Charles as the only person who

could assert his rights in opposition to such a for-
midable usurper. The Emperor, equally desirous
of delivering his dominions from the dangerous
neighbourhood of Barbarossa; of appearing as the
proteEtor of an unfortunate Prince; and of ac-
quiring the glory annexed in that age to every
expedition against the Mahometans, readily con-
cluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen, and began
to prepare for invading Tunis. Having made
trial of his own abilities for war in the late cam-
paign in Hungary, he was now become so fond
of the military charaater, that he determined to

Hi.prepNra. command on this occasion in person. The united
tocd. orihe frength of his dominions was called out upon an

enterprize in which the Emperor was about to
hazard his glory, and which drew the attention
of all Europe. A tFlemifi fleet carried from the
ports of the Low-Country a body of German in-
fantry '; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had diftirnuif-ied themselves by Io
many victories over the French ; the LEmperor

Ilerati Annales Brabant. i. ;09.

Ximfelf

hiinfelf embarked at Barcelona with the flower of B 0 oK
the Spanifi nobility, and was joined by a con- _a
fiderable squadron from Portugal, under the 1535S
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's
brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gal-
lies, the best appointed at that time in Europe,
and commanded by the most skilful officers; the
Pope furnished all the afliftance in his power to-
wards such a pious enterprize; and the order of
Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels,
equipped a squadron, which, though small, was
formidable by the valour of the knights who served
on board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was
the general place of rendezvous. Doria was ap-
pointed High-Admiral of the fleet; the command
of the land-forces 'under the Emperor was given to
the marquis de Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting Lads in

of near five hundred vessels, having on board Afric .
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail from
Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation landed
within fight of Tunis. Barbarossa having received
;arly intelligence of the Emperor's immense ar-
mament, and fuifpecing its destination, prepared
with equal prudence and vigour for the defence of
his new conquest. He called in all his corsairs
fiomn their diflerent stations; he drew friom Al-
giers what forces could be spared; he difpatccled
mncflen^ers to all the African Princes, Moors as
well as Arabs, and by representing Muley- -LHacer
as an infamous apostate, prompted by ambition

H- 2 and

B 0 0 K and revenge, not only to become the vassal of a

V. i--c--s Christian Prince, but to conspire with him to ex-

'535- tirpate the Mahommedan faith, he inflamed those

ignorant and bigoted chiefs to such a degree, that
they took arms as in a common cause. Twenty
thousand horse, together with a great body of foot,
soon assembled at Tunis; and by a proper diftri.
bution of presents among them from time to time,
Barbarossa kept the ardour which had brought
them together from subsiding. But as he was too
well acquainted with the enemy whom he had to
oppose, to think that these light troops could re-
sift the heavy-armed cavalry and veteran infantry
which composed the Imperial army, his chief
confidence was in the strength of the Goletta,
and in his body of Turkish soldiers, who were
armed and disciplined after the European fashion,
Six thousand of these, under the command of
Sinan, a renegado Jew, the bravest and most expe-
rienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort,

.lv, fre.'c which the Emperor iinmediately invested. As
tooletrc. Charles had the command of the sea, his camp

was so plentifully supplied not only with the ne-
ceffaries, but with all the luxuries of life, that
Muley HIafcen, who had not been accustomed to
fee war carried on wich such order and magnifi-
cence, was filled wich admiration of the Empe-
ror's power.. His troops, animated by his pre.
fence, and confidering it as meritorious to shed
their blood in such a pious cause, contended with
each other for the poits of honour and danger.
Three separate attacks were concerted, and the

Germans,

Germans, Spaniards, and Italians, having one' B 00 K
of there committed to each of them, pushed them I .-
forward with the eager courage which national s53s
emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and skill becoming the confidence which his
master had put in him; the garrison performed
the hard service on which they were ordered with
great fortitude. But though he interrupted the
besiegers by frequent sallies, though the Moors
and Arabs alarmed the camp with their con-
tinual incursions; the breaches soon became so
considerable towards the land, while the fleet bat-
tered those parts of the fortifications Chich it could
approach with no less fury and success, that an
afault being given on all fides at once, the place Takesit by
was taken by storm. Sinan, with the remains of Jul 's.
his garrison, retired, after an obstinate resistance,
over a shallow part of the bay towards the city.
By the reduAtion of the Goletta, the Emperor be-
came mailer of Barbarossa's fleet, consisting of
eighty-feven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mofly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remarkable
proof ofthe strength of the fort, as well as of the
greatness of the corsair's power. The Emperor
marched into the Goletta through the breach, and
turning to Muley-Hafcen who attended him,

Here," fays he, "( is a gate open to you, by

which you shall return to take pofleflion of your
dominions."

H 3 BARBA-

o 0 o K BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight ol

V.
v^_ the blow which he had received, did not, how.
1535- ever, lose courage, or abandon the defence ol

Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend on
the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the
Moors and Arabs would sustain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with his
army, which amounted to fifty thousand men',
towards the Imperial camp, and to decide the fate
of his kingdom by the issue of a battle. This re-
solution he communicated to his principal officers,
and representing to them the fatal consequences
which might follow, if ten thousand Christian
saves, whom he had shut up in the citadel, should
attempt to mutiny during the absence of the
army, he proposed, as a necessary precaution for
the public security, to massacre them without
mercy before he began his march. They all
approved warmly of his intention to fight; but
inured as they were, in their piratical depreda-
tions, to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty, thebar-
barity of his proposal concerning the slaves filled
them with horror; and Barbarossa, rather from
the dread of irritating them, than swayed by mo-
tives of humanity, consented to spare the lives of
the slaves.

ner
I B Y this time the Emperor had begun to ad-
~I,~.,. vance towards Tunis; and though his troops sus-

' Lpiltrc des Princes, par Rufcelli, p. 119, &C.

sered

sered inconceivable hardships in their march, B 00 K
over burning sands, destitute of water, and ex- _
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they soon 3535.
came up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs,
emboldened by their vast fu periority in number,
immediately rushed on to the attack with loud
shouts, but their undisciplined courage could not
long stand the shock of regular battalions; and
though Barbarossa, with admirable presence of
mind, and by exposing his own person to the
greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally them, the
rout became so general, that he himself was hur-
ried along with them in their flight back to the
city. There he found every thing in the utmost
confusion; some of the inhabitants flying with
their families and effe&s; others, ready to set
open their gates to the conqueror; the Turkish
soldiers preparing to retreat; and the citadel,
which in such circumntances might have afforded
him r ome refuge, already in the poffeflion of
the Christian' captives. These unhappy men,
rendered desperate by their situation, had laid
hold on the opportunity which Barbarofa
dreaded. As soon as his army was at some dif-
tance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose assistance, knocking off their
fetters, and bursting open their prisons, they
overpowered the Turkish garrison, and turned
the artillery of the fort against their former masters.
Barbarofla, disappointed and enraged, exclaiming
sometimes againif the false companfion of his
officers, and fornetimes condemning his own im-

1 I4 prudent

B o°v K prudent compliance with their opinion, fled preci-
L-.^;-- picately to Bona.

J535.

Tunis fur. MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy and
rencs. almost bloodless victory which he had gained, and

advancing slowly with the precaution necessary in
an enemy's country, did not yet know the whole
extent of his own good fortune.. But at last, a
messenger dispatched by the slaves acquainted him
with the success of their noble effort for the reco-
very of their liberty ; and at the fame time deputies
arrived from the town, in order to present him the
keys of their gates, and to implore his protection
from military violence. While he was deliberating
concerning the proper measures for this purpose,
the soldiers, fearing that they fiould be deprived of
the booty which they had expe&ed, ruffed suddenly,
and without orders, into the town, and began to
kill and plunder without diftinaion. It was then
too late to restrain their cruelty, their avarice, or li-
centioufnefs. All the outrages of which soldiers
are capable in the fury of a storm, all the excesses
of which men can be guilty when their passions are
heightened by the contempt and hatred which dif-
ference in manners and religion inspire, were
committed. Above thirty thousand of the inno-
cent inhabitants perished on that unhappy day,
and ten thousand were carried away as saves.
Muley-Hafcen took possession of a throne fur-
rounded with carnage, abhorred by his subjects
on whom he had brought such calamities, and

pitied

pitied even by those whole rashness had been the B 0. K
occasion of them. The Emperor lamented the v.
fatal accident which had stained the lustre of this vic- 535s
tory; and amidst such a scene of horror there was
but one fpetacle that afforded him any satisfaCtion.
Ten thousand Christian slaves, among whom were
several persons of diftinfion, met him as he enter-
ed the town; and falling on their knees, thanked
and blesTfd him as their deliverer.

AT the fame time that Charles accomplished his Retorc the

exiled King

promise to the Moorish King, of re- establishing him to his
in his dominions, he did not neglec what was ne- throae
ceffary for bridling the power of the African cor-
fairs, for the security of his own subjects, and for
the interest of the Spanish crown : In order to gain
these ends, he concluded a treaty with Muley- :
Hafcen on the following conditions: that he flould
hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee' of the crown of
Spain, and do homage to the Emperor as his liege
lord; that all the Chriffian slaves now within
his dominions, of whatever nation, should be set
at liberty without ransom; that no subjec of the
Emperor's flould for the future be detained in ser-
vitude; that no Turkifhl corsair flhould be admitted
into the ports of his dominions; that free trade, so-
gether with the public exercile of the Chritlian reL
ligion, should be allowed to all the Emperor's
fulbj&ts; that the Emperor should not only retain
the Goletta, but tiiat all the other sea-ports in the
kingdom which were fortified flhould be put into
his hands; that Muley-l-lafcen should pay annu-

ally

BOO K ally twelve thousand crowns for the fubfiltence of
a__ - the Spanish garrison in the Goletta; that he
'53S- should enter into no alliance with any of the Em.

peror's enemies, and should present to him every
year, as an acknowledgment of his vassalage, fix
Moorish horses, and as many hawks U. Having
thus fettled the affairs of Africa; chaitifed the in.
folence of the corsairs; secured a safe retreat for the
thips of his fubje6ts, and a proper station 'to his
own fleets, on that coast from which he was mot
Augut 17. infested by piratical depredations; Charles embark-

ed again for Europe, the tempestuous weather, and
sickness among his troops, not permitting him to
pursue Barbaroffax.

The glory 1 BY this expedition, the merit of which seems to
shichhe have been estimated in that age, rather by the ap.
acquired. parent generosity of the undertaking, the magni-

ficence wherewith it was conducted, and the success
which crowned it, than by the importance of the
consequences that attended it, the Emperor attain-
ed a greater height of glory, than at any other pe.
riod of his reign. Twenty thousand slaves whom
he freed from bondage, either by his arms, or by

u Du Mont Corps Diplomat. ii. 128. Summonte Hilt. di
Napoli, iv. g89

x Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetanra, ap. Scard.

v. ii. p. 320, &c. Jovii Hillor. lib. xxxiv. 153, &c. Sandov.
ii. 154, &c. Vcrtot Hilt. de Cheval de Malthe. Epiltres
des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Bclleforeft, p. 119,
izo, &c. Anton. Pontii Conicntini Hill. Belli adv. Barbar.
ap. Mattihui Analeta.

his

his treaty with Muley-HafcenY, each of whom he B o o K
clothed and furnished with the means of returning 2 -r- ..
to their refpeEtive countries, spread over all Europe '53ss
the fame of their benefa&tor's munificence, extol-
ling his power and abilities with the exaggeration
flowing from gratitude and admiration. In com-
parison with him, the other monarchs of Europe
made an inconsiderable figure. They seemed to
be solicitous about nothing but their private and
particular interefRs; while Charles, with an eleva-
tion of sentiment which became the first Prince in
Christendom, appeared to be concerned for the
honour of the Christian name, and attentive to the
public security and welfare.

r Sumnmonte HifR. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VI.

T II
H I S T OR Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VI.
B 0 0 K VI.
B o K T TNFORTUNATELY for the reputation of

__*.. Francis I. among his contemporaries, his
Th35.e condu&, at this jun&ture, appeared a perseEt con-
The causes
fa new traft to that of his rival, as he laid hold on the
war be-
tweenthe opportunity afforded him, by the Emperor's
auP'rncis. having turned his whole force against the com-

mon enemy of Chrifendom, to revive his pre-
tensions in Italy, and to plunge Europe into a
new war. The treaty of Cambray, as has been
observed, did not remove the causes of enmity
between the two contending Princes; it cover-
ed up, but did not extinguifl the flames of dif-
cord. Francis in particular, who waited with im-
patience for a proper occasion of recovering the
reputation as well as the territories which he had
loft, continued to carry on his negociations in dif-

ferent

ferent courts againfl the Emperor, taking the ut- B O O K
most pains to heighten the jealousy which many -,.
Princes entertained of his power or designs, and to '35'
inspire the reft with the fame suspicion and fear:
among others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who,
though indebted to Charles for the poffefflon of the
dutchy of Milan, had received it on such hard con-
ditions, as rendered him not only a vassal of the
Empire, but a tributary dependant upon the Em-
peror. The honour of having married the Empe-
ror's niece, did not reconcile him to this ignomi-
nious state of fubjedtion, which became so intole-
rable even to Sforza, though a weak and poor-fpirited
Prince, that he listened with eagerness to the first
proposals Francis made of rescuing him from the
yoke. These proposals were conveyed to him by
Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by the
French historians, a Milanese gentleman residing
at Paris; and soon after, in order to carry on the
negociation with greater advantage, Merveille was
sent to Milan, on pretence of visiting his rela-
tions, but with fecrer credentials from Francis as
his envoy. In this chara&er he was received by
Sforza. But notwithstanding his care to keep that
circumstance concealed, Charles fufpeting, or hav-
ing received information of it, remonstrated and
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke and
his ministers, equally intimidated, gave the world
immediately a most infamous proof of their servile
fear of offending the Emperor. As Merveille had
neither the prudence nor the temper which the func-
tion wherein he was employed required, they art-

7 fully

B ° o K fully decoyed him into a quarrel, in which he hap.

v _ pened to kill his antagonist, one of the Duke's do.
D15353. meftics, and having instantly seized him, they or.

dered him to be tried for that crime, and to be be.
headed. Francis, no less affonilhed at this viola.
tion of a character held sacred among the most un.
civilized nations, than enraged at the insult offered
to the dignity of his crown, threatened Sforza with
the effe&s of his indignation, and complained to
the Emperor, whom he confidered as the real au-
thor of that unexampled outrage. But receiv.
ing no satisfaction from either, he appealed to all
the Princes of Europe, and thought himfelfnow
entitled to take vengeance for an injury, which it
would have been indecent and pusillanimous to let
pass with impunity.

Franis de- BEING thus furnished with a pretext for begin.
allies ning a war, on which he had already resolved, he

multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by un-
foreseen events. After having sacrificed the honour
ofthe royal family of France by the marriage of
his son with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain
Clement, the death of that Pontiff had deprived
him of all the advantages which he expected to de-
rive from his fi-iendfhip. Paul, his -successor,
though attached by inclination to the Imperial in-
terest, seemed determined to maintain the neutra-
lity suitable to his characer as the common father
of the contending Princes. The King of England,

1i~~~ ~occupied

occupied with domestic cares and projects, declin- B O 0 K
ed, for once, engaging in the affairs of the conti- Ho
nent, and refused to assist Francis, unless he would '535s
imitate his example, in throwing off the Papal fu-
premacy. These disappointments led him to so- His negoci
licit, with greater earnestness, the aid of the Pro- the ocrmsa
teftant Princes associated by the league of Smal- 'Potetants.
kalde. That he might the more easily acquire their
confidence, he endeavoured to accommodate him-
felfto their predominant passion, zeal for their re-
ligious tenets. He affected a wonderful modera-
tion with regard to the points in dispute; he per-
mitted Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain
his sentiments concerning tome of the most import-
ant articles, in terms not far different from those
used by the Protestants a; he even condescended to
invite Melanahon, whose gentle manners and pa-
cific spirit distinguished him among the Reformers,
to visit Paris, that by his assistance he might con-
cert the most proper measures for reconciling the
contending fe&s which so unhappily divided the
church b. These concessions must be confidered ra-
ther as arts of policy, than the refj*t of convition;
for whatever impression the new opinions in religion
had made .on his sifters, the Queen of Navarre
and Dutchess of Ferrara, the gaiety of Francis's
own temper, and his love of pleasure, allowed

a Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid. Hist.
178. 183. Seckend. lib. iii. 103.

b Camerarii Vita Ph. Melanthonis, 1z°. Ilag. 1655.
p. 12.

him

B 6. o K him little leisure to examine theological contre

Vy.
.- __ verfies.

1535.

Irritates BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this dif
thcm. ingenuous artifice, by a ftep very inconfirtent witl

his declarations to the German Princes. Thi
ftep, however, the prejudices of the age, and thi
religious sentiments of his own subjects, renderec
it neceffarv for him to take. His close union witd
the King of England, an excommunicated heretics
his frequent negociations with the German Protest.
ants; but above all, his giving public audience to
an envoy from Sultan Solyrnan, had excited violent
suspicions concerning the sincerity of his attachment
to religion. To have attacked the Emperor, who,
on all occasions, made high pretensions to zeal in
defence of the Catholic faith, and at the very junc-
ture when he was preparing for his expedition against
Barbarossa, which was then confidered as a pious
enterprise, could not have failed to confirm such
unfavourable sentiments with regard to Francis, and
called on him to vindicate himrelf by some extra-
ordinary demonfration of his reverence for the efta-
blifhed doctrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal
of some of his fubjeEts, who had imbibed the Pro-

1,ba teftant opinions, furnished him with such an oc-
"',i cafion as he desired. They had affixed to the

gates of the Louvre, and other public places,
papers containing indecent reflections on the doc-
trines and rites of the Popish church. Six of the
persons concerned in this rash a we re disco-

, ~..t vered

vered and seized. The King, in order to avert the. B o o cK
judgments which it was supposed their blasphemies -
might draw down upon the nation, appointed a so- '535'
lemn procession. The holy sacrament was carried
through the city in great pomp; Francis walked un-
covered before it, bearing a torch in his hand; the
princes of the blood supported the canopy over it;
the nobles marched in order behind. In the pre-
fence of this numerous assembly, the King, accuf-
tomed to express himself on every subjet in strong
and animated language, declared, that if one of his
hands were infected with heresy, he would cut it
off with the other, and would not spare even his
own children, if found guilty of that crime. As a
dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the fix un-
happy persons were publicly burnt before the pro-
cession was finished, with circumstances of the most
shocking barbarity attending their execution c.

THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled Theyrefufe

.* ~ r s ~* i ~ * ~

ei ~ 0~ .. to join him.

with resentment and indignation at the cruelty with
which their brethren were treated, could not con-
ceive..Fancis to be sincere, when he offered to pro -
tet in Germany those very tenets, which he perse-
cuted with such rigour in his own dominions; so
that all Bellay's art and eloquence in vindicating
his master, or apologising for his conduct, made
but little impression upon them. They confidered

c Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hist. 17.
&c. )

VoL. III. I like-

. o0 K likewise, that the Emperor, who hitherto had neve
%m employed violence against the doctrines of the Re.

's35. formers, nor even given them much moleftatior

in their progress, was now bound by the agree.
ment at Ratilbon, not to disturb such as had em.
braced the new opinions and the Protestants wifely
regarded this as a more certain and immediate fe.
curity, than the precarious and distant hopes with
which Francis endeavoured to allure them. Be.
fides, the manner in which he had behaved to his
allies at the peace of Cambray, was too recent to
be forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely
much on his friendship or generosity. Upon all
these accounts, the Protestant Princes refused toaffift
the French King in any hostile attempt against the
Emperor. The Eletor of Saxony, the most zeal.
ous among them, in order to avoid giving any
umbrage to Charles, would not permit Melan&hop
to visit the court of France, although that Re-
former, flattered perhaps by the invitation offogreat
a Monarch, or hoping that his pretence there
might be of signal advantage to the Protestant
cause, discovered a strong inclination to undertake
the journey d.

The French BUT though none of the many Princes who
army ad-
vances to- envied or dreaded the power of Charles, would
ward Il. econd Francis's efforts in order to reduce and

d Camerarii Vita Melan. .lz, &c. 4T1. Seckend. lib. iii.
!07.

circuim-

circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded his B 0 K -
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy. As .---
is sole pretext for taking arms was that he might 1535.
haftife theDuke of Milan for his insolent and cruel
reach of the law of nations, it might have been
xpeced that the wholeweight of his vengeance was
ohave fallen on his territories. But on a fidden,
nd at their very commencement, the operations of
ar took another direction. Charles Duke of Sa-
oy, one of the least active and able Princes of the
ine from which he descended, had married Beatrix
f Portugal, the sifter of the Empress. By her
reat talents, The soon acquired an absolute ascend-
nt over her husband ; and proud of her affinity to
e Emperor, or allured by the magnificent pro-
ifes with which he flattered her ambition, she
rmed an union between the Duke and the Impe-
alcourt, extremely inconsistent with that neurra.
ty, which wife policy as well as the situation of his
ominions had hitherto-induced him to observe in
1 the quarrels between the contending Monarchs.
rancis was abundantly sensible of the diflrefs to
hich he might be exposed, if, when he enteredl
aly, he lhould leave beliind him the territories of
Prince, devoted so obfcquioufly to the Emperor,
at he had sent his eldest son to be educated in the
urt of Spain, as a kind of hoflage for his fidelity.
lement the Seventh, who had represented this
anger in a strong light during his interview with
rancis at Marseilles, fiuggefted to him, at the
me time, the proper met',d of guarding againf

I 2 ' ' Jt,

B o o K it, having advised him to begin his operations

--- against the Milanese, by taking poffiefion of Savoy

,j;s. and Piedmont, as the only certain way of securing

TakeRpor- a communication with his own dominions. Fran.
frli ,n of
th= Duke of cis, highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts,
syn^,isdo- particularly for having supplied the Constable Bour-

bon with the money that enabled him to levy the
body of troops which ruined the French army in
the fatal battle of Pavia, was not unwilling to let
him now feel both how deeply he resented, and how
leverely he could punilh these injuries. Nor did
he want several pretexts which gave rome colourof
equity to the violence that he intended. The ter-
ritories of France and Savoy lying contiguous to
each other, and intermingled in many places, va.
rious disputes, unavoidable in such a situation, sub.
sifted between the two sovereigns concerning the
limits of their refpetive property; and besides,
Francis, in right of his mother Louise of Savoy,
had large claims upon the Duke her brother, for
her fltare in their father's succession. Being un-
willing, however, to begin hostilities without fomi
cause of quarrel more specious than these preten-
sions, many of which were obsolete, and others
dubious, he demanded permission to march through
Piedmont in his way to the Milanele, hoping that
the Duke, from an excess of attachment to the
Imperial interest, might' refue this request, and
thus give a greater appearance of jutlice to all his
operations against him. But, if we may believe
the hifodrians of Savoy, who appear to be bette
informed with regard to this particular than tlhol

of

of France, the Duke readily, and with a good B 0 0.o
grace, granted what it was not in his power to - _--
deny, promising free passage to the French troops as 1'
was desired; so that Francis, as the only method
now left ofjuftifying the measures which he deter-
mined to take, was obliged to insist for full satis-
fa&tion with regard to every thing that either the
crown of France or his mother Louise could de-
mand of the house of Savoy e. Such an evasive
answer, as might have been expected, being made
to this requisition, the French army under the ad-
miral Biron poured at once into the Duke's terri-
tories at different places. The countries of BrefTe
and Bugey, united at that time to Savoy, were
over-run in a moment. Most of the towns in the
dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the approach
of the enemy; a few which attempted to make re-
fiftance were easily taken; and before the end of
the campaign, the Duke saw himself stripped of
all his dominions, but the province of Piedmont,
in which there were not many places in a condition
to be defended.

To complete the Duke's misfortunes, the city TheitYof

of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed, cover, is
and in some degree poffefled, threw off his yoke, Lb"ty.
and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the ad-
jacent territories. Geneva was, at that time, an

H illoire Genealogiquede Savoye, par Guichenon, 2 tom.
fol. Lyon. i66o. i. 639, &c.

I 3 Imperial

B °VI K Imperial city, and though under the dire& domi.

Ai m. -nion of its own biWhops, and the remote sovereignty
,535. of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of its internal

confticution was purely republican, being governed
by syndics and a council chosen by the citizens,
From these diltina and often clashing jurisdictions,
two opposite parties took their rife, and had long
fibfifted in the state; the one, composed of the ad.
vocates for the privileges of the community, as.
fumed the name of Eignotz, or confederates in de-
fence of liberty; and branded the other, which
supported the episcopal or ducal prerogatives, with
the name of Mammelukes, or slaves. At-length, the
353%. Protestant opinions beginning ro spread among the

citizens, inspired such as embraced them with that
bold enterprising spirit which always accompanied
or was naturally produced by them in their first
operations. As both the Duke and Biffop were
from interest, from prejudice, and from political
considerations, violent enemies of the Reformation,
all the new converts joined with warmth the parry
of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion,mingling with
the love of liberty, added strength to that generous
paflion. The rage and animosity of two factions,
(hut up within the fame walls, occasioned. frequent
infiurreEtions, which terminating noftly to the ad-
vantage of the friends of liberty, they daily became
more powerful.

T1IE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their ancient
contrcts aboutjur illiction, had united against their

coilmon1

common enemies, and each attacked them with his B OJo K
proper weapons. The Bilhop excommunicated A
the people of Geneva as guilty of a double crime; '535s
of impiety, in apostatising from the established re-
ligion; and of sacrilege, in invading the rights of
his fee. The Duke attacked them as rebels againit
their lawful Prince, and attempted to render him-
self master of the city, first by surprise, and then
by open force. The citizens, despising the thun- '534.
der of the Bilhop's censures, boldly afferced their
independence against the Duke; and partly by their
own valour, partly by the powerful afftance which
they received from the canton of Berne, together
with some small supplies both of men and money,
secretly furnished by the King of France, they de-
feated all his attempts. Not satisfied with having
repulsed him, or with remaining always upon the
defensive themselves, they now took advantage of
the Duke's inability to resist them, while over-
whelmed by the armies of France, and seized fe-
veral castles and places of strength which he pof-
fefred in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thus de-
livering the city from those odious monuments of
its former fubjeftion, and rendering the public li-
berty more secure for the future. At the fame
time the canton of Berne invaded and conquered
the Pays de Vaud, to which it had some preten-
sions. The canton of Friburgh, though zealously
attached to the Catholic religion, and having no
fulhjet of contest with the Duke, laid hold on part
of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince. A great

I 4 portion

B O o K portion of these conquests or usurpations being still
I- --' retained by the two cantons, add considerably to
1535. their power, and have become the most valuable

part of their territories. Geneva, notwithstanding
many schemes and enterprizes of the Dukes of
Savoy to re-establish their dominion over it, still
keeps poflfefion of its independence; and in con.
sequence of that blefling, has attained a degree of
consideration, wealth, and elegance, which it could
not otherwise have reached f.

'rhe Empe- AMIDST such a succession of disastrous events,
ror unabt the Duke of Savoy had no other resource but the
to aflifi the
Duke of Emperor's protection, which, upon his return
Savwy. from Tunis, he demanded with the most earnelt

importunity; and as his misfortunes were occa.
sioned chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial
interest, he had a just title to immediate assist-
ance. Charles, however, was not in a condition
to support him with that vigour and dispatch
which the exigency of his affairs called for. Mot
of the troops employed in the African expedition,
having been raited for that service alone, were
disbanded as soon as it was finifled; the veteran
forces under Antonio de Leyva were hardly sus.
ficient for the defence of the Milanese; and the

f Hilt. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon, 12°, Utr. j68;,

p. 99. Ilii. de la Reformation de Suisse, par Rouchat. Gen.
17Z8, tom. iv. p. 294, &c. tom. v. p. zl6, &c. Mei. de
Bcllay, 181.

Emperor's

Emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his ex- B 0 0 K.
traordinary efforts against the Infidels. _

1535.

BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned, o. -24.

according to some historians, by the terror of a SforzaDuke
French invasion, which had twice been fatal to of Milam.
his family, afforded the Emperor full leisure to
prepare for aaion. By this unexpected event, the
nature of the war, and the causes of discord, were
totally changed. Francis's first pretext for taking
arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the insult of-
sered to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut
off; but as that Prince died without issue, all
Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan, which
he had yielded only to Sforza and his posterity,
returned back to him in full force. As the re-
covery of the Milanese was the favourite objet of
that Monarch, he instantly renewed his claim to
it; and if he had supported his pretensions by
ordering the powerful army quartered in Savoy to
advance without losing a moment towards Milan,
he could hardly have failed to secure the important
point of pofTeflon. But Francis, who became
less enterprising as he advanced in years, and
who was overawed at rome times into an ex-
cess of caution by the remembrance of his past
nisfortunes, endeavoured to cftablifi his rights
by negociation, not by arms; and from a timid w.,.e
moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negle&cd pre.eninfs
to improve the favourable opportunity which pre- dutchy.
sented itself. Charles was more decisive in his
operations, and in quality of fovcreign, took

poflifllion

B o01 K poffeftlon of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the

Empire. While Francis endeavoured to explain
L53ss and afiert his title to it, by arguments and me.

morials, or employed various arts in order to re-
concile the Italian powers to the thoughts of his
regaining footing in Italy, his rival was silently
taking effeEual fleps ro prevent it. The Empe-
ror, however, was very careful not to discover
too early an intertion of this kind ; but feefning
to admit the equity of Francis's claim, he appeared
solicitous only about giving him poueffion in such
a manner as might not disturb the peace of Eu.
rope, or overturn the balance of power in Italy,
which the politicians of that country were so de-
firous of preserving. By this artifice he deceived
Francis, and gained so much confidence with the
reft of Europe, that, almost without incurring any
suspicion, he involved the affair in new difficulties,
and protrated the negociation at pleasure. Some-
times he proposed to grant the investiture of Milan
to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's second son,
sometimes to the Duke of Angouleme, his third
son; as the views and inclinations of the French
court varied, he transferred his choice alternately
from the one to the other, with such profound
and well-conduAed dissimulation, that neither
Francis nor his minilters seem to have penetrated
his real intention; and all military operations
were entirely suspended, as if nothing had remained
but to enter quietly into pofleflion of what they
(lemandcd.

DURING

DURING the interval of leisure gained in this B o o

VI.

manner, Charles, on his return from Tunis, afeim- . ,
bled the fiates both of Sicily and Naples, and as ch'36.
they thought themselves greatly honoured by the p eparaiona
presence of their sovereign, and were no less pleased
with the apparent disinterestedness of his expedi-
tion into Africa, than dazzled by the success which
had attended his arms, he prevailed on them to vote
him such liberal subsidies as were seldom granted
in that age. This enabled him to recruit his ve-
teran troops, to levy a body of Germans, and to
take every other proper precaution for executing
or supporting the measures on which he had de-
termined. Bellay, the French envoy in Germany,
having discovered the intention of rairing troops
in that country, notwithifanding all the pretexts
employed in order to conceal it, first alarmed his
matter, with this evident proof of the Emperor's
insincerity -. But Francis was so possessed at that
time with the rage of negociation, in all the arti-
sices and refinements of which his rival far furpafed
him, that instead of beginning his military opera-
tions, and pushing them with vigour, or seizing
the Milanese before the Imperial army was aflem-
bled, he satisfied hinmfelf with making new offers
to the Emperor, in order to procure the inveffiture
by his voluntary deed. His offers were, indeed,
so liberal and advantageous, that if ever Charles had
intended to grant his demand, he 'could not have
rejected them with decency. He dexterously

z Mem. dp Bcllay, 192.

eluded

B o 0 K eluded them by declaring that until he consulted

._? the Pope in person, he cotld not take his final
1536. resolution with regard to a point which so nearly

concerned the peace of Italy. By this evasion he
gained some farther time for ripening the schemes
which he had in view.

The rmpe- THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome,
or entersa
Rome." and made his public entry into that city with ex.
April 6. traordinary pomp; but it being found necessary

to remove the ruins of an ancient temple of Peace,
in order to widen one of the streets, through
which the cavalcade had to paSs, all the historians
take notice of this trivial circumflance, and they
are fond to interpret it as an omen of the bloody
war that followed. Charles, it is certain, had by
this time banished all thoughts of peace; and
at laif threw off the mask, with which he had
.o long covered his designs from the court of
France, by a declaration of his sentiments no less
singular than explicit. The French ambassadors
having in their master's name demanded a defi-
nitive reply to his propositions concerning the in.
veftiture of Milan, Charles promired to give it
next day in pretence of the Pope and Cardinals

His pthlic afiembled in full consistory. These being ac-
ligaenV cordingly met, and all the foreign ambassadors
Francis. invited to attend, the Emperor flood up, and ad.

dressing himself to the Pope, expatiated for fomne
time on the sincerity. of his own wifles for the
peace of Chriflendom, as well as his abhorrence
of war, the miseries of which he enumerated at

7 great

great length, with studied and elaborate oratory.; B < 0 Kc
he complained that all his endeavours to preserve yL
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de- 536
feated by the restless and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile intentions
of that Monarch; that, afterwards, he had openly
attempted to wrest from him the Imperial crown
which belonged to him by a title no less just than
natural; that he had next invaded his kingdom
of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he had
attacked his territories as well as those of his allies
both in Italy and the Low-Countries; that when
the valour} of the Imperial troops, rendered ir-
resistible by the protection of the Almighty, had
checked his progress, ruined his armies, and
seized his person, he continued to pursue by de-
ceit what he had undertaken with injustice; that
he had violated every article in the treaty of Ma-
drid to which he owed his liberty, and as soon as
he returned to his dominions took measures for
rekindling the war which that pacification had
happily extinguished; that when new misfortunes
compelled him to sue again for peace at Cambray,
he concluded and observed it with equal insincerity;
that soon after he had formed dangerous connexions
with the heretical Princes in Germany, and incited
them to disturb the tranquillity of the Empire;,
that now he had driven the Duke of Savoy, a
Prince married to a filser of the Empress, and:
joined in close alliance with Spain, out of the greater
part of his territories ; that after injuries so often.

repeated,

B o 1 K repeated, and amidst so many sources ofdifcord, all

VI.

,--- hope of amity or concord became desperate; and
I536- though he himself was still willing to grant the in.

veftiture of Milan to one of the Princes of France,
there was little probability of that event taking
place, as Francis, on the one hand, would not con-
sent to what was necefiary for securing the tran-
quillity of Europe; nor on the other, could he think
it reasonable or safe to give a rival the uncon-
ditional poffeflion of all that he demanded. ,c Let
us not, however, added he, continue wantonly to

Chalin-es shed the blood of our innocent fubjests; let us
hi' t o decide the quarrel man to man, with what arms
bc. he pleases to chufe, in our shirts, on an island, a

bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river; let
r(he dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit on his
part, and that of Milan on mine; these /hall be
the prize of the conqueror; and after that, let
the united forces of Germany, Spain, and France,
be employed to humble the power of the Turk,
and to extirpate heresy out of Christendom. But
if he, by declining this method of terminating
our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing
shall divert me from prosecuting it to such extre-
mity, as ihall reduce one of us to be the poorest
gentleman in his own dominions. Nor do I fear
that it will be on me this misfortune shall fall; I
enter upon aFtion with the fairest profpeft of fuc-
cess; the juffice of my cause, the union of my
fubje'ts, the number and valour of my troops,
the experience andl fidelity of my generals, all
combine to cnfilre it. Of all these advantages,

I the

the Kingof France is destitute; and were my re- B o 0 K
sources no more certain, and my hopes of vitory
no better founded than his, I would inflantly throw 1536.
myfclf at his feet, and with folded hands, and a
rope about my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered

with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greatest vehemence ofexpreffion and gesture. The
French ambaladors, who did not fully compre-
hend his meaning, as he spake in the Spanish
tongue, were totally disconcerted, and at a loss how
they should answer such an unexpected invective s
when one of them began to vindicate his master's
condut, Charles interposed abruptly, and would
not permit him to proceed. The Pope, without
entering into any particular detail, satisfied himself
with a short but pathetic recommendation of peace,
together with an offer of employing his sincere
endeavours in order to procure that blessing to
Christendom; and the assembly broke up in the
greatest astonishment at the extraordinary scene.
which had been exhibited. In no part of his
conduct, indeed, did Charles ever deviate so
widely from his general character. Instead of Themotivew
that prudent recollection, that composed and re- mCafurc.
gular deportment so ftritly attentive to decorum,
and so admirably adapted to conceal his own pas-
sions, fbr which he was at all other times confpicu-
ous, he appears on this occasion before one of the.

' Jellay, i99. Sandov. Hillfr. del' Emper, ii. zz6.

molt

B 0 0 K most august alfemblies in Europe, boasting of his

vi.

a-_-J--- own power and exploits with n folence; inveighing
'536. againfl his enemy with indecehcy; and challenging

him to combat with an ostentatious valour, more
becoming a champion in romance, than the firrf
Monarch in Christendom. But the well-known
and powerfiul operation of continued' prosperity,
as well as of exaggerated praise, even upon the
firmest minds, sufficiently account for this seeming
inconsistency. After having compelled Solyman
to retreat, and having firipped Barbarossa of a
kingdom, Charles began to confider his arms as
invincible. He had been entertained, ever since
his return from Africa, with repeated scenes of
triumphs and public rejoicings; the orators and
poets of Italy, the most elegant at that time in
Europe, had exhausted their genius in panegyric
on his conduct and merit, to which the astrologers
added magnificent promises of a more splendid for-
tune still in store. Intoxicated with all these, he
forgot his usual reserve and moderation, and was
unable to restrain this extravagant sally of vanity,
which became: the more remarkable, by being
both lo uncommon and so public.

SHE himself seems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour; and.
when the French ambassadors demanded next day
a more clear explanation of what he had said con-
cerning the combat, he told them that they were
not to confider his proposal as a formal challenge
to their ?nafter, but as an expedient for preventing

bloodhied;

bloodfied; he endeavoured to soften several expref- B OO. K
sions in his discourse; and spoke in terms full of 1- '
refpe& towards Francis. But though this flight 1536.
apology was far from being sufficient to remove the
offence which had been given, Francis, by an un-
accountable infatuation, continued to negociate, as
if it had still been poflible to bring their differences
to a period by an amicable composition. Charles,
finding him so eager to run into the snare, favoured
the deception, and, by teeming to liften to his pro-
pofals, gained farther time to prepare for the execu-
tion of his own designs .

AT last, the Imperial army assembled on the Charles

frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of forty Franc
thousand foot and ten thousand horse, while that
of France encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont,
being greatly inferior in number, and weakened
by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom Charles
artfully persuaded the popish cantons to recal, that
they might not serve against the Duke of Savoy,
their ancient ally. The French' general not dar-
ing to rifque a battle, retired as soon as the Impe-
rialifts advanced. The Emperor put himself at the May 6.
head of his forces, which the Marquis del Guafto,
the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand de Gonzaga
commanded under him, though the supreme di-
rection of the whole was committed to Antonio de
Leyva, whose abilities and experience justly enti-
tled him to that diftinEtion. Charles soon disco-

' Mem. de Bellay, 20o, &c.
Vor.. III. K vered

B °0 K vered his intention not to'confine his operations to

VI.
( - ~the recovery of Piedmont and Savoy, but to push
X536. forward and invade the southern provinces of France.

This scheme he had long meditated, and had long
been taking measures for executing it with such
vigour as might ensure success. He had remitted
large tums to his filter, the governess of the Low.
Countries, and to his brother, the King of the
Romans, inflrucRing them to levy all the forces in
their power, in order to form two separate bodies,
the one to enter France on the fide of Picardy,
the other on the fide of Champagne; while he, with
the main army, fell upon the opposite frontier of
the kingdom. Trusting to there vafl preparations,
he thought it impofible that Francis could refif
so many unexpected attacks on such different
quarters; and began his enterprise with such con-
fidence of its happy issue, that he desired Jovius
the historian, to make a large provision of paper
sufficient to record the vietories which hle was go-
ing to obtain.

FIrs ministers and generals, intfead of entertain-

ing the fame sanguine hopes, reprelented to him
in the fl-ongefl terms the danger of leading his
troops so far from his own territories, to fucha
distance firom his magazines, and into provinces
which did not yield sufficient fubfilence for their
own inhabitants. Thley entreated him to confider
the inexhauftlible reolurces of France in niaintainl
in, a defensive war, and the alive zeal with which

a gallaui

a gallant nobility would serve a Prince whom B o o K
they loved, in repelling the enemies of their coun- -
try; they recalled to his remembrance the fatal "36.
miscarriage of Bourbon and Pescara, when they
ventured upon the fame enterprise under circum-
flances which seemed as certainly to promise success;
the Marquis del Guafto, in particular, fell on his
knees, and conjured him to abandon the undertak-
ing as desperate. But many circumstances com-
bined in leading Charles to disregard all their re-
monstrances. He could seldom be brought, on
any occasion, to depart from a resolution which he
had once taken; he was too apt to under-rate and
despise the talents of his rival the King of France,
because they differed so widely from his own; he
was blinded by the presumption which accompanies
prosperity; and relied, perhaps, in some degree,
on the prophecies which predi6ted the increase of
his own grandeur. He not only adhered obfti-
nately to his own plan, but determined to advance
towards France without waiting for the reduction
of any part of Piedmont, except such towns as were
absolutely necelfary for preserving his communi-
cation with the Milanese.

THE Marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had Recoers

pare of the

entrulted the command of a frnall body of rctops Dlike of
left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered this mnion,."
more easy than Charles had any reason to expea.
That nouleman, educated in the court of France,
difinguinlcd by continual marks of the King's hfa

K 2 vour,

B o0 0 your, and honoured so lately with a charge of such
a_-_-- importance, suddenly, and without any provo.

1536. cation or pretext of disgust, revolted from his be-

nefactor. His motives to this treacherous aftion
were as childish as the deed itself was base. Being
tfrongly possessed with a superstitious faith in divi-
nation and astrology, he believed with full affur-
ance, that the fatal period of the French nation
was at hand ; that on its ruins the Emperor would
establish an universal monarchy; that therefore he
ought to follow the dictates of prudence, in attach.
ing himself to his riling fortune, and could incur
no blame for deserting a Prince whom Heaven had
devoted to deftrution k. His treason became still
more odious, by his employing that very authority
with which Francis had invested him, in order to
open the kingdom to his enemies. Whatever
measures were proposed or undertaken by the of-
ficers under his command for the defence of their
conquests, he rejected or defeated. Whatever pro.
perly belonged to himself, as commander in chief,
to provide or perform for that purpole, he totally
neglected. In this manner, he rendered towns
even of the greatest conlequence untenable, by
leaving them destitute either of provisions, or am-
mnlition, or artillery, or a sufficient garrioln; and
the Imperialifis mu:f have reduced Piedmont in as
fliort a time as was necellary to march through it,
if Montpezat, the governor of Foflano, had not, by

k LIellay, 222, a. z. 6, b,

in

an extraordinary effort of courage and military con- B O0 K
duct, detained them almost a month before that A
inconsiderable place. 1536,

BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he Francis,

plan for the
gained his master sufficient time for assembling his defence of

his king.

forces, and for concerting a system of defence dom.
against a danger which he now saw to be inevi-
table. Francis fixed upon the only proper and es-
fet&tal plan for defeating the invasion of a power-
ful enemy; and his prudence in chufing this plan,
as well as his perseverance in executing it, deserve
the greater praise, as it was equally contrary to his
own natural temper, and to the genius of the
French nation. He determined to remain altoge-
ther upon the defensive; never to hazard a battle,
or even a great skirmish, without certainty of fuc-
cess; to fortify his camps in a regular manner; to
throw garrisons only into towns of great strength;
to deprive the enemy of subsistence, by laying waste
the country before them; and to save the whole
kingdom, by sacrificing one of its provinces. The EMtri,'s
execution of this plan he committed entirely to the rency wirh
marechal Montmorency, who was the author of it; tiun ol it.
a man wonderfully fitted by nature for such a truf.
laughty, severe, confident in his own abilities, and
dekpifing those of other men; incapable of being
diverted from any refolurion by remonstrances or
entreaties; and, in prosecuting any scheme, regard-
less alike of love or of pity.

K 3 MONTr-

B O0 K MONTMORENCY made choice of a fsrong camp
A__-- under the walls of Avignon, at the confluence of
Hee3ncmp the Rhone and the Durance, one of which plenti-
atAvignon. fully supplied his troops with all necessaries from

the inland provinces, and the other covered his
camp on that fide where it was most probable the
enemy would approach. He laboured with un-
wearied industry to render the fortifications of this
camp impregnable, and assembled there a confider-
able army, though greatly inferior to that of the
enemy ; while the King with another body of troops
encamped at Valence higher up the Rhone. Mar-
feilles and Aries were the only towns he thought it
necessary to defend; the former, in order to retain
the command of the sea; the latter, as the barrier
of the province of Languedoc; and each of there
he furnished with numerous garrisons of his bet
troops, commanded by officers on whose fidelity
and valour he could rely. - The inhabitants of the
other towns, as well as of the open country, were
compelled to abandon their houses, and were con-
ducted to the mountains, to the camp at Avignon,
or to the inland provinces. The fortifications of
such places as might have afforded flelter or de-
fence to the enemy, were thrown down. Corn,
forage, and provisions of every kind, were carried
away or destroyed; all the mills and ovens were
ruined, and the wells filled up or rendered useless.
The devastation extended from the Alps to Mar-
fcilles, and from the siea to the confines of Dau-

phinr;

phine; nor does hifftory afford any instance among B 0O0 K
civilized nations, in which this cruel expedient for -J
the public safety was employed with the fame 15 6'
rigour.

AT length, the Emperor arrived with the van Charles en-

t:' - l. ters Pro.

of his army on the frontiers of Provence, and was vence.
still so polfefed with confidence of success, that,
during a few days when he was obliged to halt
until the reft of his troops came ups he began to
divide his future conquests among his officers; and
as a new incitement to serve him with zeal, gave
them liberal promises of offices, lands, and ho-
nours in France'. The face of desolation, how-
ever, which presented itself to him, when he en-
tered the country, began to damp his hopes, and
convinced him that a Monarch, who, in order to
iftrefs an enemy, had voluntarily ruined one of
is richest provinces, would defend the reft with
efperate obstinacy. Nor was it long before he
ecame sensible that Francis's plan of defence was
s prudent as it appeared to be extraordinary.
lis fleet, on which Charles chiefly depended for
ubfiftence, was prevented for some time by con-
rary winds, and other accidents to which naval
pperations are subje&t, firom approaching the
1recnch coast ; even after his arrival, it afforded
at best a precarious and scanty supply to luch a
rumerous body of troops m; nothing was to be
found in the country itself for their support; nor

Bcllay, z66, a. m Sandov. ii. 231.

K 4 could

B o°v K could they draw any considerable aid from the do.
I v----' minions of the Duke of Savoy, exhausted already

1536' by maintaining two great armies. The Emperor

was no less embarrassed how to employ, than how
to fubfiff his forces; for though he was now in po.
session of almoit an entire province, he could not
be said to have the command of it, while he held
only defenceless towns; and while the French, be
fides their camp at Avignon, continued maitersof
Marseilles and Aries. At first he thought of at-
tacking the camp, and of terminating the war by
one decisive blow; but ikilful officers, who were
appointed to view it, declared the attempt tobe

Befi ges utterly impracticable. He then gave orders to in.
Malieics. vei Marseilles and Aries, hoping that the French

would quit their advantageous pofl in order to re-
lieve them ; but Montmorency adhering firmly to
his plan, remained immoveable at Avignon, and
the Imperialifis met with such a warm reception
from the garrisons of both towns, that they relin-
quifhed their enterprises with loss and disgrace,
As a last effort, the Emperor advanced once more
towards Avignon, though with an army harafled by
the perpetual incursions of finall parties of the
French light troops, weakened by diseases, and
dispirited by disasters, which seemed the morein.
tolerable, because they were unexpected.

M'intmro-
r-.c.. for- DURING there operations, Montmorency found
,1, ,,,,'r, himself exposed to greater danger from his own

icc'.n (f troops than fiom the enemy ; and their inconfi'

dcrate

derate valour went near to have precipitated the B ° ° K
kingdom into those calamities which he with such v_
industry and caution had endeavoured to avoid. "536
Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ravaging
their country almost without controul; impatient
of such long inaEtion; unacquainted with the
flow and remote, but certain effets of Mont-
morency's system of defence; the French wished
for a battle with no less ardour than the Imperial-
ilts. They confidered the conduct of their
general as a disgrace to their country. His cau-
tion they inputed to timidity; his circumfpec-
tion to want of spirit; and the. constancy with
which he purfied his plan, to obstinacy or pride.
These reflections, whispered at first among the
soldiers and subalterns, were adopted, by. degrees,
by officers of higher rank; and as many of them
envied Montmorency's favour with the King, and
more were dissatisfied with his harsh disgusting
manner, the discontent soon became great in his
camp, which was filled with general murmurings,
and almost open complaints against his measures.
Montmorency, on whom the sentiments of his
own troops made as little impression as the insults
of the enemy, adhered fleadily to his system;
though, in order to reconcile the army to his
maxims, no lets contrary to the genius of the na-
tion, than to the ideas of war among undisciplined
troops, he aftumeed an unulial affability in his
deportment, and often explained, with great con-
dlefceiifion, the motives of his conduct, the advan-
tages which had already resulted from it, and the

certain

B °0 K certain success which which it would be attended

Vi.
v_ At last, Francis joined his army at Avignon
3536. which, having received several reinforcements, he

now confidered as of strength sufficient to face the
enemy. As he had put no finall constraint upon
himself, in consenting that his troops should re.
main so long upon the defensive, it can hardly be
doubted but that his fondness for what was daring
and splendid, added to the impatience both of
officers and soldiers, would at lafl have over-ruled
Montmorency's salutary caution".

Th reteat- HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered the
and wretch-
ed condition kingdom from the danger which any rash refo.
.of the lmpe-
rial army. lution might have occasioned. The Emperor,

after spending two inglorious months in Provence,
without having performed any thing suitable to
his vast preparations, or that could justify the
confidence with which he had boasted of his own
power, found that, besides Antonio de Leyva,
and other officers of distinction, he had loft one
half of his troops by diseases or by famine; and
that the reft were in no condition to struggle any
longer with calamities, by which so many of their
companions had perished. Necessity, therefore,
extorted from him orders to retire; and though
he was some time in motion before the French
fuiif)ted his intention, a body of light troops,
aflifted by crowds of peasants, eager to be re-
venged on those who had brought such desolation

" AMem. de Bcllay, 269, &c. 312, &c.

on

n their country, hung upon the rear of the Im- B 0 o K
erialifts, and by seizing every favourable oppor-
unity of attackirg them, threw them often into 1536.
onfufion. The road by which they fled, for they
urlued their march with such disorder and preci-
itation that it fcarceiy delerves the name of a
treat, was firewed with arms or baggage, which
their hurry and trepidation they had abandoned,
nd covered with the tick, the wounded, and the
ead; insomuch that Martin Beliay, an eye-
itnefs of their calamities, endeavours to give his
aders jome idea of them, by comparing their
nieries to those which the Jews suffered from
e vi'torious and deftruaive arms of the Ro-
ans °. If Montmorency, at this critical moment,
ad advanced with all his forces, nothing could have
ved the whole Imperial army from utter ruin.
ut that general, by standing so long and so ob-
inately on the defensive, had become cautious
excess; his mind, tenacious of any bent it had
nce taken, could not assume a contrary one as
ddenly as the change of circumstances required;
nd he still continued to repeat his favourite
axims, that it was more prudent to allow the
on to escape, than to drive him to despair, and
at a bridge of gold should be made for a retreat-
g enemy.

Til. Emperor having conducted the flhattered
mains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,

AMem. dc Bellay, 316. Sandov. Hill. del Emper. ii. 232.

Ir~~ ~~and

B o oV K and appointed the marquis dcl Guafto to fuccee

Vi.

-- Leyva in the government of that dutchy, set o0
3536. for Genoa. As he could not bear to expo

himself to the scorn of the Italians, after such
fad reverse of fortune; and did not chufe, under h
present circumstances, to revisit those cities throug
which he had so lately palTed in triumph for or
Novembcr. conquest, and in certain expectation of another, h

embarked directly for Spain P.

Operationn NOR was the progress of his arms on the oppo
in Picardy.

site frontier of France such as to alleviate, in an
degree, the losses which he had sustained in Pro
vence. Bellay, by his address and intrigues, ha
prevailed on so many of the German Princes to
withdraw the contingent of troops which they hai
furnished to the King of the Romans, that hi
was obliged to lay aside all thoughts of his in
tended irruption into Champagne. Though
powerful army levied in the Low-Countries en
tered Picardy, which they found but feebly guard,
ed, while the strength of the kingdom was drawl
towards the south; yet the nobility, taking armi
with their usual alacrity, supplied by their spirit
the defects of the king's preparations, and de.
fended Peronne, and other towns which were at
tacked with such vigour, as obliged the enemy
to retire, without making any conquest of im
portLnce ''

r Jovii lHillor. lib. xxxv. p. 174, &c.
s Mier . de BLcllay, 318, &'c.

T'IIC

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his own B o°° K
measures, and by the union and valour of his sub- *
eAs, rendered abortive those vast efforts in which .536'
his rival had almost exhausted his whole force.
As this humbled the Emperor's arrogance no less
han it checked his power, he was mortified more
sensibly on this occasion than on any other, during
the course of the long contests between him and
the French Monarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy Deathoffth

with which the success of the campaign inspired Dauphia.
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his eldest son, a Prince of great hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
efemblance to his father. This happening fud- mputed to
enly, was imputed to poison, not only ty the
vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
personages to extraordinary causes, but by the
King and his ministers. The count de Monte-
cuculi, an Italian nobleman, cupbearer to the
Dauphin, being seized on suspicion and put to
he torture, openly charged the Imperial gene-
rals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with having inffigated
him to the commission of that crime; he even
threw out some indiret and obscure accusations
against the Emperor himself. At a time when
all France was exasperated to the utmost against
Charles, this uncertain and extorted charge was
confidered as an inconteftible proof of guilt;
while the confidence with which both he and his
oflicers afierted their own innocence, together

with

B O O K with the indignation, as well as horror, which they

- , 'expressed on their being supposed capable of such
1536. a deteflable ation, were little attended to, anc

less regarded . It is evident, however, that the
Emperor could have no inducement to perpetrate
such a crime, as Francis was still in the vigour
of life himself, and had two sons, betide the Dau.
phin, grown up almost to the age of manhood.
That single consideration, without mentioning the
Emperor's general charaater, unblemished by the
imputation of any deed resembling this in atrocity,
is more than sufficient to counterbalance the weight
of a dubious testimony uttered during the anguish
of tortureS. According to the most unprejudiced
historians, the Dauphin's death was occasioned by
his having drunk too freely. of cold water after
over-heating himself at tennis; and this account,
as it is the most simple, is likewise the most cre-
dible. But if his days were cut short by poison,
it is not improbable that the Emperor conjec-
tured rightly, when he affirmed that it had been
administered by the direEtion of Catherine of Me-
dici, in order to secure the crown to the duke of
Orleans, her husband . The advantages relult-
ing to her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious
as well as great; nor did her boundless and daring
ambition ever recoil fiom any action necessary to-
wards attaining the objects which ihe had in view.

Mem. de rellay, 289.
Sandov. liill. del Emper. ii. 231.
Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75.

NEXT

NEXT year opened with a tranfation very un- B o o K

common, but so incapable of producing any -.
effe&, that it would not deserve to be mentioned, Decrs37 -

Decree of

if it were not a itriking proof of the personal theparlia-
animosity which mingled irfelf in all the hofili- Paasagainf
ties between Charles and Francis, and which often roEmp'
betrayed them into such indecencies towards each
other, as lefiened the dignity of both. Francis,
accompanied by the peers and princes of the
blood, having taken his feat in the parliament of
Paris with the usual folemnities, the advocate-
general appeared; and after accusing Charles of
Austria (for so he affeaed to call the Emperor)
of having violated the treaty of Cambray, by
which he was absolved from the homage due to
the crown of France for the counties of Arto:- and
Slanders; insisted that this treaty being now void,
he was frill to be confidered as a vassal of the
crown, and by consequence had been guilty of
rebellion in taking arms against his sovereign;
and therefore he demanded that Charles should
be furnmoned to appear in person, or by his
counsel, before the parliament of Paris, his legal
judges, to answer for this crime. The request was
granted; a herald repaired to the frontiers of Pi-_
cardy, and summoned him with the accustomed
formalities to appear against a day prefixed. That
term being expired, and no person appearing in
his name, the parliament gave judgment, " That
Charles of Auflria had forfeited by rebellion and
contumacy tholfi fiefs; declared Slanders and
Artois to be re- r.(.d to the crown of France ;"

and

B 0 O K and ordered their decree for this purpose to be

VI.
-_ --» published by found of trumpet on the frontiers of
J537- these provinces".

Campaign SOON after this vain display of his resentment,
tbe ow- rather than of his power, Francis marched to.
Countris. wards the Low-Countries, as if he had intended
Mamch. to execute the sentence which his parliament had

pronounced, and to seize those territories which
it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hun.
gary, to whom her brother the Emperor had
committed the government of that part of his
dominions, was not prepared for so early a cam-
paign, he at firit made some progress, and took
several towns of importance. But being obliged
soon to leave his army, in order to superintend
the other operations of war, the Flemings, having
assembled a numerous army, not only recovered
most of the places which they had loft, but began
to make conquests in their turn. At last they
invested Terouenne, and the Duke of Orleans,
now Dauphin, by the death of his brother, and
Montmorency, whom Francis had honoured with
the constable's sword, as the reward of his great
services during the former campaign, determined

A furpen. to hazard a battle in order to relieve it. While
sion of arms
thee;f they were advancing for this purpose, and within

a few miles of the enemy, they were fiopt short
by the arrival of an herald from the Queen of

u Lettres et Mcmoircs d'Etat, par Ribier, z tom. Bloil
x666. tom. i. p. i.

I-Hungary,

Hungary, acquainting him that a suspension of B oo lK
arms was now agreed upon.

1537.

THIS unexpeEted event was owing to the zeal-

ous endeavours of the two ifters, the Queens of
France and of Hungary, who had long laboured
to reconcile the contending Monarchs; The war
in the Netherlands had laid waste the frontier
provinces of both countries, without any real ad-
vantage to either. The French and Flemings
equally regretted the interruption of their com-
merce, which was beneficial to both. Charles
as well as Francis, who had each strained to the
utmost, in order to support the vast operations of
the former campaign, found that they could not
now keep armies on foot in this quarter, without
weakening their operations in Piedmont, where
both wilhed to push the war with the greatest
vigour. All there circumstances facilitated the July 30.
negociations of the two Queens; a truce was con-
cluded, to continue in force for ten months, but
it extended no farther than the Low-Countries '.

IN Piedmont the war was frill prosecuted with andin

great animosity; and though neither Charles nor Pcdi, t
Francis could make the powerful efforts to which
this animosity prompted them, they continued to
exert thernfelves like combatants, whose rancour
remains after their fftrength is exhausted. Towns
were alternately loft and retaken; Ikirmifhes were

X Memoires de Ribier, 56.
VOL. IIt. L fought

B 0 OKv fought every day; and much blood was lied

V._. without any a&ion that gave a decided fuperi.
*537. ority to either fide. At last the two Queens de.

termining not to leave unfiniihed the good work
which they had begun, prevailed, by their im.
portunate solicitations, the one on her brother,
the other on her husband, to content also to a
truce in Piedmont for three months. The con.
ditions of it were, that each should keep posses.
sion of what was in his hands, and after leaving
garrisons in the towns, should withdraw his army
out of the province; and that plenipotentiaries
Should be appointed to adjust all matters in dispute
by a final treaty y.
Motivesof THE powerful motives which inclined both

Princes to this accommodation, have been often
mentioned. The expences of the war had far
exceeded the fums which their revenues were
capable of supplying; nor durst they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established, as fubjets had not yet learnt to bear
with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accustomed in modern times.
The Emperor in particular, though he had con-
trated debts which in that age appeared pro.
digious z, had it not in his power to pay the large
arrears long due to his army, At the fame time
he had no profpe& of deriving any aid in money
or men either from the Popq or Venetians, though

r Memoires de Ribier, 62. Z Ribier, i. 294.

he had employed promires and threats, alternately, B o ° K
in order to procure it. But he found the former ---
not only fixed in his resolution of adhering steadily '37
to the neutrality which he had always declared
to be suitable to his character, but paflionately
efirous of bringing about a peace. He per-
ceived that the latter were flill intent on their an-
cient object of holding the balance even between
the rivals, and solicitous not to throw too great a
eight into either scale.

WHAT made a deeper impression on Charles ofwhich
han all there, was the dread of the Turkish arms, Iiiance with
hich, by his league with Solyman, Francis had EhmpTr",kh
rawn upon him. Though Francis, without the moftbcani-
ffifance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
gainft an enemy greatly superior in power to
imfelf, yetfo great was the horror of Christians,
nthat age, at any union with Infidels, which
ey confidered not only as dishonourable but
rofane, that it was long before he could be
rought to avail himself of the obvious advan-
ages refuling from such a confederacy. Neceflicy
t last surmounted his delicacy and scruples. To-
ards the close of the preceding year, La Forest,
I secret agent at the Ottoman Porte, had con-
:luded a treaty with the Sultan, whereby Soly-
nan engaged to invade the kingdom of Naples,
luring the next campaign, and to attack the King
If the Romans in Hungary with a powerful army,
/hileFrancis undertook to enter the Milanese at
ie fame time with a proper force: Solyman had

L 2 punctually

B o0 0 K puncually performed what was incumbent on

_-----» him. Barbarossa with a great fleet appeared on
1537. the coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from

which all the troops had been drawn towards
Piedmont, with consternation, landed without
resistance near Taranto, obliged Castro, a place
of some strength, to surrender, plundered the ad.
jacent country, and was taking measures for fe.
curing and extending his conqueffs, when the
unexpected arrival of Doria, together with the
Pope's gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian
fleet, made it prudent for him to retire. In
Hungary the progress of the Turks was more for.
midable. Mahmet, their general, after gaining
Ieveral small advantages, defeated the Germans
in a great battle at Effek on the Drave a. Hap-
pily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exaEtnefs what he
had stipulated; nor could he assemble at this junc.
ture an army strong enough to penetrate into the
Milanese. By this he failed in recovering posses.
sion of that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved
from the calamities of a new war, but from feel-
ing the desolating rage of the Turkifi arms, as
an addition to all that it had fufferedb. As the
Emperor knew that he could not long resist the
efforts of two such powerful confederates, nor
could expe& that the fame fortunate accident
would concur a second time to deliver Naples,

Iftuanhefli Hilt. -Hung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
i Jovii -ift. lib. xxxv. p. 183.

nd to preserve the Milanese: as he foresaw that B o.00 I-
he Italian states would not only tax him loudly I
virh insatiable ambition, but might even turn 1537-
eir arms against him, if he should be so re-
ardleFs of their danger as obstinately to protract
le war, he thought. it necessary, both for his safety
nd reputation, to give his content to a truce.
or was Francis willing to sustain all the blame of
bftrufting the re establishment of tranquillity, or

expose himself on that account to the danger
f being deferred by the Swiss and other so-
eigners in his service. He even began to appre-
end that his own fubjeats would serve him coldly,
by contributing to aggrandize the power of the
nfidels, which it was his duty, and had been the
mbition of his ancestors to depress, he continued

aa& in dire& opposition to all the principles
hich ought to influence a Monarch diflinguifhed
y the title of Most Chriflian King. He chose
r all these reasons, rather to run the risk of dif-
liging his new ally the Sultan, than, by an un-
afonable adherence to the treaty with him, to
,feit what was of greater consequence.

BUT though both parties consented to a truce, Nego;i,-
he plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficul- peace le-

tween

cs in iettling the articles of a definitive treaty. Cha.le and
;ach of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a Fra"nis.
)nqueror, aimed at giving law to the other; and
:ither would so far acknowledge his inferiority,
to ficrifice any point of honour, or to relinquifl
ly matter of right ; o that the plenipotentiaries

1-. 3 spent

B o°v K spent the time in long and fruitless negociationi

L-- and separated after agreeing to prolong the truc
,538. for a few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair of accom
conduacs
thee inper- plifhing a point in which the plenipotentiarie

had failed, and took upon himself the sole burdei
of negociating a peace. To form a confederaq
capable of defending Christendom from the for.
midable inroads of the Turkish arms, and to con
cert effeEtual measures for the extirpation of ti
Lutheran heresy, were two great objefts whid
Paul had much at heart, and he confideredthi
union of the Emperor with the King of France a
an eflential preliminary to both. To be th
instrument of reconciling these contending Mo
narchs, whom his predeceflors by their interefitd
and indecent intrigues had so often embroiled
was a circumfiance which could not fail ofthrowa
ing a distinguished lustre on his character and ad.
ministration. Nor was he without hopes thl
while he pursued this laudable end, he mig
secure advantages to his own family, the aggran
dizing of which he did not neglea, though
aimed at it with a less audacious ambition thl
was common among the Popes of that century
Influenced by these considerations, he propofc
an interview between the two Monarchs at Nic
and offered to repair thither in person, that
might a& as mediator in composing all their di
ferences. When a Pontiffof a venerable charac
ter, and of a very advanced age, was willing

frol

from his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues n oo/ K
of so long a journey, neither Charles nor Francis '
could with decency decline the interview. But 538
though both came to the place of rendezvous, so
great was the difficulty of adjusting the ceremonial,
or such the remains of distrust and rancour on
each fide, that they refused to fee one another,
and every thing was tranfadted by the interven-
tion of the Pope, who visited them alternately.
With all his zeal and ingenuity he could not find
out a method of removing the obflacles which
prevented a final accommodation, particularly those
arising from the poffeflion of the Milanete; nor
was all the weight of his authority sufficient to
overcome the obstinate perseverance of either
Monarch in afterting his own claims. At last, A truce for
that he might not seem to have laboured altogether concluded
without effe&c, he prevailed on them to sign a at Nice.
truce for ten years, upon the fame condition
with the former, that each should retain what was
now in his poffefion, and in the mean time should
fend ambassadors to Rome, to discuss their pretenl
sions at leisure ',

Taus ended a war of no long continuance, but

very extensive in its operations, and in which both
parties exerted their utmost strength. Though
Francis failed in the object which he had prin-

Recucil des Traitez,ii. zto. Relatione del NicoloTiepolo

de I'Abocamento di Nizza, chez Du Mont Corps Diplomat.
par. i. p. 174.

L 4 pally

B OVI K pally in view, the recovery of the Milanese, he
LA-,-_- acquired, nevertheless, great reputation by the

1538. wisdom of his measures as well as the success of

his arms in repelling a formidable invasion; and
by keeping pofeffion of one half of the Duke of
Savoy's dominions,- he added no inconsiderable
accession of strength to his kingdom. Whereas
Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boasted
so arrogantly of vietory, purchased an inglorious
truce, by sacrificing an ally who had rashly confided
too much in his friendship and power. The un-
fortunate Duke murmured, complained, and re.
monftrated against a treaty so much to his dif.
advantage, but in vain; he had no means of
redress, and was obliged to submit. Of all his
dominions, Nice, with its dependencies, was the
only corner of which he himself kept poffeflion.
He saw the reft divided between a powerful in-
vader and the ally to whose protection he had trusted,
while he remained a fad monument of the impru.
dence of weak princes, who, by taking part in the
quarrel of mighty neighbours, between whom they
happen to be situated, are crushed and over-
whelmed in the shock.

Tnteriew A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce,
Chalesand the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was driven
Aig'e',a' by contrary winds to the island St. Margaret.
maLter. on the coast of Provence. When Francis, who

happened to be not far distant, heard of this, he
confidered it as an office of civility to invite him
to take shelter in his dominions, and proposed a

personal

personal interview with him at Aigues-mortes. B o° K
The Emperor, who would not be outdone by his _----a
rival in complaisance, instantly repaired thither. 53S
As soon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis,
without waiting to fettle any point of ceremony,
but relying implicitly on the Emperor's honour
for his security, visited him on board his galley,
and was received and entertained with the warmest
demonftrarions ofefteem and affeation. Next day
the Emperor repaid the confidence which the King
had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-mortes
with as little precaution, and met with a reception
equally cordial. He remained on shore during
the night, and in both visits the two Monarchs vied
with each other in expressions of refpea and friend-
Ihip d. After twenty years of open hostilities, or
of secret enmity; after so many injuries recipro-
cally inflicted or endured; after having formally
given the lie, and challenged one another to single
combat; after the Emperor had inveighed so pub-
licly against Francis as a Prince void of honour or
integrity; and after Francis had accused him of
being accessary to the murder of his eldest son;
such an interview appears altogether singular and
even unnatural. But the history of there Monarchs
abounds with such surprising transitions. From
implacable hatred they appeared to pass, in a
moment, to the most cordial reconcilement; from

a Sandov. I-lif. vol. ii. 238. Relation de l'Entrevue de
Charl. V. &'Fran. I. par M. de la Rivoirc. Hil. de Langued,
par D. D. Dc Vic. & Vaifette, tom. v. Preuvcs, p. 93.

fulpicion

B o°V K suspicion and distrust, to perfec confidence; anc
i-.-I-' from pra&ising all the dark arts of a deceitful po.

53 ' licy, they could assume, of a sudden, the liberal

and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having restored

peace to Europe, gained, according to his expeft.
ation, a point of great consequence to his family,
by prevailing on the Emperor to betroth Margaret
of Austria, his natural daughter, formerly the wife
of Alexander di Medici, to his grandson .Otavio
Farnese, and in consideration of this marriage, to
bestow several honours and territories upon his fu.

hioano'fi ture son- in-law. A very tragical event, which hap.
Alexander pened about the beginning of the year one thou.

sand five hundred and thirty-feven, had deprived
Margaret of her first husband. That young Prince,
whom the Emperor's partiality had raised to the
supreme power in Florence, upon the ruins of the
public liberty, negleEted entirely the cares of go-
vernment, and abandoned himself to the most dif.
solute debauchery. Lorenzo di Medici his nearest
kinfran was not only the companion but dire&or
of his pleasures, and employing all the powers of a
cultivated and inventive genius in this dishonour.
able ministry, added such elegance as well as va.
riety to vice, as gained him an absolute ascendant
over the mind of Alexander. But while Lorenzo
seered to be funk in luxury, and affected such an
appearance of indolence and effeminacy, that he
would not wear a sword, and trembled at the fight

of

of blood, he concealed under that disguise, a dark, B o0 K
designing, audacious spirit. Prompted either by v.
the love of liberty, or allured by the hope of at- ,53S
taining the supreme power, he determined to affaf-
finate Alexander his benefa&tor and friend. Though
he long revolved this design in his mind, his re-
served and suspicious temper prevented him from
communicating it to any person whatever; and
continuing to live with Alexander in their usual fa-
miliarity, he, one night, under pretence of having
secured him an assignation with a lady of high
rank whom he had often solicited, drew that
unwary Prince into a secret apartment of his
house, and there stabbed him, while he lay care-
lefsly on a couch expecting the arrival of the
lady whose company he had been promised.
But no sooner was the deed done, than stand-
ing astonished, and struck with horror at its
atrocity, he forgoh in a moment, all the motives
which had induced rim to commit it. Instead of
rousing the people to recover their liberty by pub-
lifhing the death of the tyrant, instead of taking
any ftep towards opening his own way to the dig-
nity now vacant, he locked the door of the apart-
ment, and, like a man bereaved of reason and pre-
ience of mind, fled with the utmofi precipitation
out of the Florentine territories. It was late next
morning before the fate of the unfortunate Prince
was known, as his attendants, accustomed to his
irregularities, never entered his apartment early.
Immediately the chief ptfons in the itate assembled.
Being induced partly by the zeal of cardinal Cibo

for

B oVI0 K for the house of Medici, to which he was nearly

vI.
--C-.-' related, partly by the authority of Francis Guicci-

Co538.di ardini, who recalled to their memory, and repre-
Med"idc tented in firiking colours the caprice as well as tur-
placed at
the head of bulence of their ancient popular government, they
the Floren.
tine ftal. agreed to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth of eigh.

teen, the only male heir of that illustrious house,
at the head of the government; though at the fame
time such was their love of liberty, that they efta-
blifhed several regulations in order to circumscribe
and moderate his power.

His govern- MEANWHILE, Lorenzo having reached a place of
fd byth safety, made known what he had done, to Philip
Florcn:ine Strozzi and the other Florentines who had been

driven into exile, or who had voluntarily retired,
when the republican form of government was abo-
lifhed, in order to make way for the dominion of
the Medici. ' By them, the deed was extolled with
extravagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo
was compared with that of the elder Brutus, who
disregarded the ties of blood, or with that of the
younger, who forgot the friend(hip and favours
of the tyrant, that they might preserve or reco-
ver the liberty of their country e. Nor did they
reft satisfied with empty panegyrics; they im-
mediately quitted their different places of re-
treat, assembled forces, animated their vassals and
partizans to take arms, and to seize this opportu-
pity of re-eftablifhilng the public liberty on its an-

Lcttere di Principi, tom. iii. p. 52.

Sc5'~~~~~~~~~ cient

cient foundation. Being openly assisted by the B o o 'c
French ambassador at Rome, and secretly encou- -
raged by the Pope, who bore no good-will to the '538.
l.ouse of Medici, they entered the Florentine do-
minions with a considerable body of men. But
the persons who had elected Cosmo possessed not
only the means of supporting his government, but
abilities to employ them in the most proper man-
ner. They levied, with the greatest expedition, a
good number of troops; they endeavoured by
every art to gain the citizens of greatest authority,
and to render the administration of the young
Prince agreeable to the people. Above all, they
courted the Emperor's proteCtion, as the only firm
foundation of C6fmo's dignity and power. Charles,
knowing the propensity of the Florentines to the
friendship of France, and how much all the parti-
zans of a republican government detested him as
the oppressor of their liberties, saw it to be greatly
for his interest to prevent the re-establishment of
the ancient constitution in Florence. For this
reason, he not only acknowledged Cosmo as head
of the Florentine state, and conferred on him all
the titles of honour with which Alexander had been
dignified, but engaged to defend him to the ut-
most; and as a pledge of this, ordered the com-
manders of such of his troops as were stationed on
the frontiers of Tuscany, to support him against,
all aggressors. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an
easy victory over the exiles, whose troops he fur-
prifed in the night-time, and took most of the

chiefs

B o0 K chiefs prisoners: an event which broke all their

V. v----_ measures, and fully established his own authority.

3538. But though he was extremely desirous of the addi-

tional honour of marrying the Emperor's daughter,
the widow of his predecetflor, Charles, secure al-
ready of his attachment, chore rather to gratify the
Pope, by bestowing her on his nephew .

The friend- DURING the war between the Emperor and
FraPincnd Francis, an event had happened which abated in
begin to some degree the warmth and cordiality of friend-
abate. ihip which had long subsisted between the latter

and the King of England. James the Fifth of
Scotland, an enterprising young Prince, having
heard of the Emperor's intention to invade Pro-
vence, was so fond of shewing that he did not yield
to any of his ancestors in the sincerity of his attach-
ment to the French crown, and so eager to diftin.
guifh himself by some military exploit, that he le-
vied a.body of troops with an intention of leading
them in person to the assistance of the King of
France. Though some unfortunate accidents pre-
vented his carrying any troops into France, nothing
could divert him from going thither in person.
Immediately upon his landing, he hastened to Pro-
vence, but had been detained so long in his voy-
age, that he came too late to have any lhare in the
military operations, and met the King on his return

r Jovii Hist. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Belcarii Comment. I.

xxii. p. 696. Ifloria de fui Tempi di Giov. Bat, Adriani.
Ven. 1587. p. 0o.

after

after the retreat of the Imperialists. But Francis was B O o K
so greatly pleated with his zeal, and no less with
his manners and conversation, that he could not s538.
refute him his daughter Magdalen, whom he de- J"n .,
manded in marriage. It mortified Henry ex-
tremely to fee a Prince of whom he was immode-
rately jealous, form an alliance, from which he
derived such an accession of reputation as well as
security g. He could not, however, with decency,
oppose Francis's bestowing his daughter upon a
Monarch descended from a race of Princes, the
most ancient and faithful allies of theFrench crown.
But when James, upon the sudden death of Mag-
dalen, demanded as his second wife Mary of Guise,
he warmly solicited Francis to deny his suit, and
in order to disappoint him, asked that lady in mar-
riage for himself. When Francis preferred the
Scottilh King's sincere courtship to his artful and
malevolent proposal, he discovered much diffatif-
fation. The pacification agreed upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renounced
his friendship for the fake of new connections
with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly ac- The Empep

rot courts

quainted with the temper of the Englifli King, Henry.
and watchful to observe all the shiftings and ca-
prices of his passions, thought this a favourable
opportunity of renewing his negociations with

I-ift. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.
I him,

B °0 K him, which had been long broken off. By the
»-,_ death of Queen Catharine, whose interest the Em.

3S peror could not with decency have abandoned, the

chiefcaule of their discord was removed; so that
without touching upon the delicate question of her
divorce, he might now take what measures he
thought most effecual for regaining Henry's good.
will. . For this purpose, he began with proposing
several marriage-treaties to the King. He offered
his niece, a daughter of the King of Denmark, to
Henry himself; he demanded the princess Mary
for one of the Princes of Portugal, and was even
willing to receive her as the King's illegitimate
daughter '. Though none of these projected alli-
ances ever took place, or perhaps were ever feri-
oufly intended, they occasioned such frequent in-
tercourfe between the courts, and so many reci-.
procal professions of civility and esteem, as confi-
derably abated the edge of Henry's rancour against
the Emperor, and paved the way for that union
between them which afterwards proved so difad-
vantageous to the French King.

Progrvefof THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor
the Re-
formrtion. had been engaged, and the wars he had been car-

rying on for some years, proved, as usual, ex-
tremely favourable to the progress of the Reform-
ation in Germany. While Charles was absent
upon his African expedition, or intent on his
projecs against France, his chief objec in Ger-

h Mcm. de Ribier, t. i. 496.

many

many was to prevent the dissensions about religion B O0o Ki
from disturbing the public tranquillity, by grant-
ing such indulgence to the Protestant Princes as s38.
might induce them to concur with his measures,
or at leaf hinder them from taking part with his
rival. For this reason, he was careful to secure to
the Protestants the poffefflon of all the advantages
which they had gained by the articles of paci-
fication at Nuremberg, in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirty-two'; and except rome
flight trouble from the proceedings of the Impe-
rial chamber, they met with nothing to disturb
them in the exercise of their religion, or to inter-
rupt the successful zeal with which they propagated
their opinions. Meanwhile the Pope continued Joegoca',.

tions and
his negociations for convoking a general council; intrigues

with refpet'

and though the Protestants had expressed great toa gencral
diffatisfation with his intention to fix upon Man- ouncnil.
tua as the place of meeting, he adhered obstinately
to his choice, ilrued a bull on the second of June,
one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appoint-
ing it to afemble in that city on the twenty-third
of May the year following: he nominated three
cardinals to preside in his name; enjoined all
Christian Princes to countenance it by their au-
thority, and invited the Prelates of every nation
to attend in person. This summons of a council,
an assembly which fiom its nature and intention
demanded quiet times, as well as pacific difpofi-
tions, at the very juncture when the Emperor was

Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part 2.p. 138.
VOL. III. M on

B °v0 K on his march towards France, and ready to involve
k --.- a a great part of Europe in the confusions of war,

,538. appeared to every person extremely unseasonable,

It was intimated, however, to all the different
courts by nuncios dispatched of purpose k. With
an intention to gratify the Germans, the Emperor,
during his residence in Rome, had warmly solicit.
ed the Pope to call a council; but being at the
fame time willing to try every art in order to per-
fuade Paul to depart from the neutrality which he
preserved between him and Francis, he sent Heldo
his vice-chancellor into Germany, along with a
nuncio dispatched thither, inftruccing him to fe.
cond all the nuncio's representations, and to en.
force them with the whole weight of the Imperial

Feb. 25, authority. The Protestants gave them audience
1537.

at Smalkalde, where they had assembled in a body
in order to receive them. But after weighing all
their arguments they unanimously refused to ac
knowledge a council summoned in the name and
by the authority of the Pope alone; in which he
assumed the sole right of presiding; which was
to be held in a city not only far distant from Ger-
many, but subject to a Prince, who was a firanger
to them, and closely connected with the courtof
Rome; and to which their divines could not repair
with safety, especially after their doctrines had been
stigmatized in the very bull of convocation with
the name of heresy. These and many other ob.

k Pallavic. Hist. Cone. Trid. 1 3.

jestions

jections against the council, which appeared to them r °0° K
unanswerable, they enumerated in a large mani-
fests, which they published in vindication of their 53i'
condu t'.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as
a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and prctump-
tion, and the Pope still persised in his resolution
to hold the council at the time and in the place
appointed. But some unexpected difficulties be-
ing flarted by the Duke of Mantua, both about
he right of jurifdiaion over the perIons who re-
orted to the council, and the security of his ca-
ital amidst lfuch a concourse of firangers, the
ope, after fruitless endeavours to adjufl these, O nob.3,
ift prorogued the council for tome months, and
frerwards, transferring the place of meeting to Vi-
nza in the Venetian territories, appointed it to
Te-nble on the first of May in the following year.
s neither the Emperor nor the French King,
ho had not then come to any accommodation,
ould permit their fubjets to repair thither, not a
ngle prelate appeared on the day prefixed, and the
ope, that his authority might not become alto-
ether contemptible by Ib many ineffectual es-
rts to convoke that assembly, put off the meet-
g by an indefinite prorogation "

' Sicidan, 1. xii. z23, &c. Seckend. Com. lib. iii.
1 '43, &c.
1 S.i Paul, 117. Piallavic. 117.

M 2 l ,

B O O K BUT, that he might not seem to have turne

Vi.
- .--j his whole attention towards a reformation whic

A partial he was not able to accomplish, while he negle&te
"ftormation that which was in his own power, he deputed
of abuses by
the Pope. certain number of cardinals and bishops, with

full authority to inquire into the abuses and cor
ruptions of the Roman court; and to propose th
most effe&ual method of removing them. This
scrutiny, undertaken with relutance, was carriei
on slowly and with remissness. All defe&s were
touched with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too
deep, or of discovering too much. But even by
this partial examination, many irregularities wer
dete&ed, and many enormities exposed to light,
while the remedies which they suggested as moll
proper, were either inadequate, or were never ap4
plied. The report and resolution of there depu.
ties, though intended to be kept secret, were
transmitted by some accident into Germany, and
being immediately made public, afforded ample
matter for reflection, and triumph to the Pro.
teftants . On the one hand they demonstrated
the neceflity of a reformation in the head as well
as the members of the church, and even pointed
out many of the corruptions against which Luther
and his followers had remonstrated with the great.
eft vehemence. They shewed, on the other hand,
that it was vain to expe& this reformationfrom
ecclcria[lics themselves, who, as Luther llrongly

u Sleidan, .233.

cxprefsd

exprelfed it, piddled at curing warts, while they B 0° K
overlooked or confirmed ulcers . ,.

1539.

THE earnestness with which the Emperor seem- A league

ed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the Pope's ppfildon
scheme of holding a council in Italy, alarmed the to th't of
Protestant Princes so much, that they thought it
prudent to strengthen their confederacy, by admit-
ting several new members who bolicited that pri-
vilege, particularly the King of Denmark. Heldo,
who, during his residence in Germany, had ob-
'erved all the advantages which they derived from
that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its es-
sets by an alliance among the Catholic powers of
the Empire. This league, distinguished by the
name of Holy, was merely defensive; and though
concluded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterwards difbwned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes P.

THE Protestants soon got intelligence of this Alarms the
association, notwithstanding all the endeavours of tef.
the contrating parties to conceal it; and their
zeal, always apt to fufpe& and to dread, even to
exces, every thing that seemed to threaten reli-
ion, instantly took the alarm, as if the Emperor
had been just ready to enter upon the execution
of some formidable plan for the extirpation of
their opinions. In order to disappoint this, they

Secck. 1. iii. 164. P Seek. i. iii. 171. Recucil
les lTraitc .3

M 3 held

o 0 0 K held fiequent consultations, they courted the King
VI.
L- -- of France and England with great assiduity, and

1539. even began to think of raising the refpefive con.

tingents both in men and money which they were
obliged to furnifl by the treaty of Smalkalde
But it was not long before they were convinced
that these apprehensions were without foundation,
and that the Emperor, to whom repose was abfo.
lutely necessary after efforts so much beyond his
strength in the war with France, had no thoughts
of diflurbing the tranquillity of Germany. Asa
April 19. proof of this, at an interview with the Protestant

Princes in Francfort, his ambassadors agreed that
all concessions in their favour, particularly those
contained in the pacification of Nuremberg, should
continue in force for fifteen months; that during
this period all proceedings of the Imperial chamber
against them fiould be suspended; that a confer.
ence should be held by a few divines of each party,
in order to discuss the points in controversy, and
to propose articles of accommodation which should
be laid before the next Diet. Though the Empe-
ror, that he might not irritate the Pope, whore-
monftrated against the firfi part of this agreement
as impolitic, and against the latter as an impious
encroachment upon his prerogative, never formally
ratified this convention, it was observed with con-
fiderable exatnefs, and greatly strengthened the
bais of that ecclesiastical liberty, for which the
Protestants contended q.

r F. Paul, 32. Slcid. 247. Seek. 1. iii. 200,

y5 it~~A rw

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, B OO K
George Duke of Saxony died, and his death was
an event of great advantage to the Reformation. A1539'
That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or younger Reforma-
branch of the Saxon family, poflelred, as marquis blifhedin
of Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories, ofSaony.
comprehending Dresden, Leipfic, and other cities
now the most considerable in the elecorate. From
the first dawn of the Reformation, he had been its
enemy as avowedly as the eleEtoral Princes were
irs protetors, and had carried on his opposition
not only with all the zeal flowing from religious
prejudices, but with a virulence inspired by personal
antipathy to Luther, and imbittered by the domes-
tic animosity subsisting between him and the other
branch of his family. By his death without issue,
his succession fell to his brother Henry, whose at-
tachment to the Protestant religion surpassed, if
possible, that of his predeceflbr to popery. Henry
nofooner took possession of his new dominions,
than, disregarding a clause in George's will, dic-
tated by his bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his
territories to the Emperor and King of the Ro-
mans, if his brother should attempt to make any
innovation in religion, he invited lome Protestant
divines, and among them Luther himself, to Leipfic.
By their advice and assistance, he overturned in a
few weeks the whole system of ancient rites, efta-
blifhing the full exercise of the reformed religion,
with the universal applause of his subje61s, who
had long wished for this change, which the au-

M 4 thority

B o 0 K thority of their Duke alone had hitherto prevent.
v--,-' ed'. This revolution delivered the Protestants

'53)' from the danger to which they were exposed by

having an inveterate enemy situated in the middle
of their territories; and they had now the fatisfac-
tion of feeing that the poffeflons of the princes and
cities attached to their cause, extended now in one
great and almost unbroken line from the shore of
the Baltic to the banks of the Rhine.

Amtitinyof SOON after the conclusion of the truce at Nice,
theumpti"a an event happened, which 1atisfied all Europe that

Charles had prosecuted the war to the utmost ex-
tremity that the state of his affairs would permit.
Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he had
long amused with vain hopes and promises. As
they now foresaw what little attention would be
paid to their demands, when by the re-establish-
ment of peace their services became of less im-
portance, they loft all patience, broke out into
an open mutiny, and declared that they thought
th.emselves entitled to seize by violence what was
detained from them contrary to all justice. Nor
was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of
the IEmperor's dominions; the mutipy was almost
as general as the grievance which gave rife to it.
The soldiers in the Milanese plundered th4 open
country without controul, and filled the capital,
itCelf with confternatioq. Those in gar rifon a,.
Goletta threatened to give up that impqrtpnt
fortrcfs to Barbarossa. In Sicily, the troops pro-

, Sleidan, 249. ceed

ceedcd

ceeded to fill greater excesses; having driven B 0 K
away their officers, they ele6ted others in their I* _
fiead, defeated a body of men whom the viceroy '539.
sent against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conducRing themselves all the while in such a
manner, tlat their operations resembled rather
the regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion,
than the rashness and violence of a military mu-
tiny. But by the address and prudence of the
generals, who partly by borrowing money in their
own name, or in that of their master, partly by
extorting large fums from the cities in their re-
fpetive provinces, raised what was sufficient to
discharge the arrears of the soldiers, these infur-
reftions were quelled. The greater part of the
troops were disbanded, such a number only being
kept in pay as was necessary for garrisoning the
principal towns, and protecting the fea-coaats from
the insults of the Turks '.

IT was happy for the Emperor that the abilities Corte of

Castile held

of his generals extricated him out of these diffi- at Tolehd
culties, which it exceeded his own power to have
removed. He had depended, as his chief re-
Iource for discharging the arrears due to his fol-
diers, upon the subsidies which he expected from
his Caffilian subjects. For this purpose, he as-
fembled the Cortes of Castile at Toledo, and
having represented to them the extraordinary ex-
pence of his military operations, together with the

' Jovii Iiftor. 1. xxxvii, 2z3. c. Sandov. Ferrcras, ix.
209.

great

D o o K great debts in which there had necessarily involved

vi. .--,..a him, he proposed to levy such supplies as the pre.
1539- sent exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general

The co- excise on commodities. But the Spaniards al-
dfatisfac-d ready felt themfellves opprefied with a load oftaxes
ion of that unknown to their anceflors. They had often com-
aiembly.

plained that their country was drained not only of
its wealth but of its inhabitants, in order to pro-
fecute quarrels in which it was not intereffed, and
to fight battles from which it could reap no bene-
fit, and they determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor
with the means of engaging in new enterprizes no
less ruinous to the kingdom than mofi: of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles,
in particular, inveighed with great vehemence
against the imposition proposed, as an encroach.
ment upon the valuable and diftinguiflling privi-
lege of their order, that of being exempted from
the payment of any tax. They demanded a con-
ference with the representatives of the cities con-
cerning the slate of the nation. They contended
that if Charles would imitate the example of his
predecessors, who had resided constantly in Spain,
and would avoid entangling himself in a multi-
plicity of tranfadions foreign to the concerns of
his Spanifl dominions, the fiated revenues of the
crown would be fully sufficient to defray the ne-
ceffary expences of government. They repre-
sented to him, that it would be unjufft to lay new
burdens upon the people, while this prudent and
cfFlcdual method of rc-cftablifhing public credlir,

a,,i1

and securing national opulence, was totally neg- B O V K
lected . Charles, after employing arguments, --r-
entreaties, and promises, but without success, in ,539.
order to overcome their obstinacy, dismissed the
assembly with great indignation. From that pe- Theancient
riod neither the nobles nor the prelates have been of the cr-
called to these assemblies, on pretence that such te rb
as pay no part of the public taxes, should not
claim any vote in laying them on. None have
been admitted to the Cortes but the procurators
or representatives of eighteen cities. These, io
the number of thirty-fix, being two from each
community, form an assembly which bears no re-
semblance either in power or dignity or independ-
ence to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at
the devotion of the court in all their determina-
tions . Thus the imprudent zeal with which the
Castilian nobles had supported the regalpreroga-
tive, in opposition to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one, proved at last fatal
to their own body. By enabling Charles to de-
press one of the orders in the slate, they destroyed
that balance to which the conftirution owed its
security, and put it in his power, or in that of his
lucceffors, to humble the other, and to strip it gra-
dually of its mofl: valuable privileges.

r Sandov. IIiR. vol. ii. 269.
U Sandov. ibid. Le Science du Gouvernement, par M. de
Peal, tom. ii. p. ipz.

AT

BO OK AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees

Vi. ----' still possessed extraordinary power as well as pr.

Th53.snif vileges, which they exercised and defended with
grandees an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this
still posi'esed
high privi- the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof du.

;ey'. ring the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As

he was returning one day from a tournament ac.
companied by moss of the nobility, oie of the
serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear
the way for the Emperor, str.uck the Duke of In.
fantado's horse with his batton, which that haugh-
ty grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat and
wounded the officer. Charles, provoked at such
an insolent deed in his presence, immediately
ordered Ronquillo the judge of the court to arrest
the Duke; Ronquillo advanced to execute his
charge, when the constable of Caffile interposing,
checked him, claimed the right of jurifdicion
over a grandee as a privilege of his office, and
conducted Infantado to his own apartment. All
the nobles present were so pleated with the bold.
ness of the constable in aflerting the rights of their
order, that, deserting the Emperor, they attended
him to his house with infinite applauses, and
Charles returned to the palace unaccompanied by
any person but the cardinal Tavera. The Em-
peror, how sensible soever of the affront, saw the
danger of irritating a jealous and high-fpirited
order of men, whom the slightest appearance of
offence might drive to the most unwarrantable ex-
tremities. For that reason, inflcad of straining

at

at any ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, he B o00 K
prudently connived at the arrogance of a body too _
potent for him to controul, and sent next morn- 539
ing to the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflict
what punishment he pleated on the person who
had affronted him. The Duke confidering this
as a full reparation to his honour, instantly for-
gave the officer; bestowing on him, besides, a
considerable present as a compensation for his
wound. Thus the affair was entirely forgotten ;
nor would it have deserved to be mentioned, if it
were not a striking example of tie high and inde-
pendent spirit of the Spanish nobles in that age, as
well as an instance of the Emperor's dexterity in
accommodating his conduct to the circumstances
in which he was placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering the fame Infurreaioa

condescension or lenity towards the citizens of Gent
Ghent, who not. long after broke out into open
rebellion against his government. An event
which happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this rash
insurrection so fatal to that flourishing city. At
that time the Queen-dowager of Hungary, gover-
nelf of the Netherlands, having received orders
from her brother to invade France with all the
forces wlhich the could raise, the assembled the
States of the United Provinces, and obtained
fiom them a subsidy of twelve hundred thousand
* Sandov. ii. 274. Ferreras, ix. z2z. Miniana, 113.

rI~~~ ~florins,

B V0 K florins, to defray the expence of that undertaking,
L-C-. Of this fum, the county of Slanders was obliged

I539. to pay a third part as its proportion. But the

Prethefiti citizens of Ghent, the most considerable cit)
zens. in that country, averse to a war with France, witli

which they carried on an extensive and gainful
commerce, refused to pay their quota, and con.
tended, that in consequence of Itipulations be-
tween them and the ancestors of their present so.
vereign the Emperor, no tax could be levied upon
them, unless they had given their express content
to the imposition of it. The governess, on the
other hand, maintained, that as the subsidy of
twelve hundred thousand florins had been granted
by the States of Slanders, of which their repre-
fentatives were members, they were bound, of
course, to conform to what was enacted by them,
as it is the first principle in society, on which the
tranquillity and order of government depend, that
the inclinations of the minority muff be over-
ruled by thejudgment and decision of the superior
number.

Proccrdingi THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not will-
ngainft
them. ing to relinquish a privilege of such high import-

ance as that which they claimed. Having been
accuflomed, under the government of the house
of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, and
to be treated with much indulgence, they dif-
dained to sacrifice to the delegated power of a
regent, those rights and liberties which they had
often and fuccefbfully asserted againit their greatest

Princes.

Princes. The Queen, though she endeavoured n 0 0 K
at first to tooth them, and to reconcile them to 'v
their duty by various concefflons, was at last so 'i39'
mluch irritated by the obfiinacy with which they
adhered to their claim, that Ihe ordered all the
citizens of Ghent, on whom she could lay hold in
any part of the Netherlands, to be arrested. But
this rafl aftion made an impreffon very different
from what she expeaed, on men, whose minds
were agitated with all the violent paflions which
indignation at oppression and zeal for liberty in-
spire. Less affeeed with the danger of their
friends and companions, than irritated at the
governess, they openly despised her authority, and
lent deputies to the other towns of Slanders, con-
juring them not to abandon their country at such
a junEure, but to concur with them in vindi-
cating its rights against the encroachments of a
woman, who either did not know or did not re-
gard their immunities. All but a few incon-
fiderable towns declined entering into any confe-
deracy against the governess: they joined, how-
ever, in petitioning her to put off the term for
payment of the tax so long, that they might have
it in their power to fend tome of their number into
Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption
before their sovereign. This she granted with
some difficulty. But Charles received their coim-
missioners with an haughtiness to which they were
not accufiomed from their ancient Princes, and
enjoining them to yield the fame refpe&ful obedi-
ence to his lifler, which they owed to hintn in per-

.lo;

B o 0 K son, remitted the examination of their claim t(

Vh. __--.; the council of Malines. This court, which i!
3539' properly a standing committee of the parliament

or flates of the country, and which possesses th(
supreme jurifdicion in all matters civil as well a!
criminal Y, pronounced the claim of the citizensol
Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed them forth.
with to pay their proportion of the tax.

Theytake ENRAGED at this decision, which they confi.
arms, and
offrto sub- dered as notoriously unjust, and rendered desperate
Fance. on feeing their rights betrayed by that very court

which was bound to protect them, the people ol
Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner; drove
such of the nobility as resided among them outol
the city; secured several of the Emperor's officers;
put one of them to the torture, whom they ac.
cufed of having stolen or destroyed the record that
contained a ratification of the privileges of ex.
emption from taxes which they pleaded; chofea
council to which they committed the diretion of
their affairs; gave orders for repairing and adding
to their fortifications; and openly erected the
standard of rebellion againfl: their sovereign'.
Sensible, however, of their inability to support what
their zeal had prompted them to undertake, and
desirous of securing a protecor against the for-

Y Defcrittione di tutti Paeli Bafli di Lud. Guicciardini.
Ant. 1571. fol. p. 53.

i Memoires fur la Revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean

d'Hollander, ecrit en 1547. A la Ilaye, 1747. P. Hecter.
Rer. AuRr. lib. xi. p. 262. Sandov. Hiltor. tom. ii. p. 282.

midable

nmidable forces by which they might expect soon to B °v0 K
be attacked, they sent some of their number to -
Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him as '539'
their sovereign, and to put him in immediate pof-
fcffion of Ghent, but to assist him with all their
forces in recovering those provinces in the Nether-
lands, which had anciently belonged to the crown
of France, and had been so lately re-united to it by
the decree of the parliament of Paris. This un-
expected proposition coming from persons who had
it in their power to have performed instantly one
part of what they undertook, and who could con-
tribute so effectually towards the execution of the
whole, opened great as well as alluring profpe6ts to
Francis's ambition. The counties of Slanders and
Artois were of greater value than the dutchy of
Milan, which he had so long laboured to acquire
with passionate but fruitless desire; their situation
with refpea to France rendered it more easy to
conquer or to defend them; and they might be
formed into a separate principality for the Duke of
Orleans, no leTs suitable to his dignity than that
which his father aimed at obtaining. To this, the
Flemings, who were acquainted with the French
manners and government, would not have been
averse; and his own subjects, weary of their de-
itrudive expeditions into Italy, would have turned
their arms towards this quarter with more good-
will, and with greater vigour. Several confidera- Franc;is fe.
tions, nevertheless, prevented Francis fiom laying ' thl' r
hold of this opportunity, the mofl- favourable in

VOL. III. N appear-

B 0 v K obstinacy with which their minds, flow but firn

Vr.

v_ _and persevering, adhered to any measure on whicd
5s39- they had deliberately resolved. He easily saw whai

encouragement and support they might have de.
rived from the assistance of France; and thougi
now free from any danger on that quarter, he wa!
frill sensible that some immediate as well as vigor.
ous interposition was necessary, in order to prevent
the spirit of difaffeaion from spreading in a coun.
try where the number of cities, the multitude ol
people, together with the great wealth diffused
among them by commerce, rendered it peculiarly
formidable, and would supply it with inexhauftiblt

Charles's resources. No expedient, after long deliberation,
delibera..
tion con- appeared to him so effetual as his going in person
journngey to the Netherlands; and the governess his siser
athe Neer- being of the fame opinion, warmly solicited him

to undertake the journey. There were only two
routes which he could take; one by land through
Italy and Germany, the other entirely by sea,
from r ome port in Spain to one in the Low.
Countries. But the former was more tedious than
suited the present exigency of his affairs; nor could
he in consistency with his dignity, or even his safe.
ty, pass through Germany without such a train
both of attendants and of troops, as would have
added greatly to the time that he must havecon.
fumed in his journey; the latter was dangerousat
this season, and while he remained uncertain with
refpet to the friendfiip of the King of England,
was not to be ventured upon, unless under the con.

voy

voy of a powerful fleet. This perplexing fitua- B O° K
tion, in which he was under the necessity of chuf- -v--
ing, and did not know what to chute, inspired him '539'
at last with the singular and seemingly extravagant
thought of passing through France, as the most Propnfs to

pafsthrough

expeditious way of reaching the Netherlands. He France..
proposed in his council to demand Francis's per-
miltion for that purpose. All his counsellors join-
ed with one voice in condemning the measure as
no less rash than unprecedented, and which must
infallibly expose him to disgrace or to danger; to
dilgrace, if the demand were rejected in the manner
that he had reason to expect; to danger, if he put
his person in the power of an enemy whom he had
often offended, who had ancient injuries to re-
venge, as well as subjects of present contest fill
remaining undecided. But Charles, who had flu-
died the character of his rival with greater care
and more profound discernment than any of his
ministers, persisted in his plan, and flattered him-
self that it might be accomplished not only with-
out danger to his own person, but even without
the expence of any conceflion detrimental to his
crown.

WITH this view he communicated the matter To hich

Francia-

to the French ambafTador at his court, and sent confentE.
Granvelle his chief minister to Paris, in order to
obtain from Francis permission to pass through
his dominions, and to prolnife that he would soon
fettle the affair of the Milanese to his satisfaction.
But at the fame time he entreated that Francis

N 3 would

B o0 K would not exat any new promise, or even insist on

vi.
a__-- former engagements, at this juncure, left what.

539'. ever he should grant, under his present circum.

fiances, might seem rather to be extorted by ne-
ceffity, than to flow from friendship or the love of
justice. Francis, instead of attending to the snare
which such a flight artifice scarcely concealed, was
so dazzled with the splendour of overcoming an
enemy by aas of generosity, and so pleated with
the air of superiority which the rectitude and difin.
tereftednefs of his proceedings gave him on this
occasion, that he at once assented to all that was
demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart by
his own, he imagined that the sentiments of gra.
titude, arising from the remembrance of good of.
sices and liberal treatment, would determine him
more forcibly to fulfil what he had so often pro.
mifed, than the most precise stipulations that could
be inserted in any treaty.

His recep. UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment
tion in that
kingdom. was precious, let out, notwithstanding the fears

and suspicions of his Spanish subjects, with a fimall
but splendid train of about an hundred persons.
At Bayonne, on the frontiers of France, he was re-
ceived by the Dauphin and the Duke of' Orleans,
attended by the constable Montmorency. The
two Princes offered to go into Spain, and to remain
there as hostages for the Emperor's safety; but
this he rejeEted, declaring, that he relied with im-
plicit confidence on the King's honour, and had
never demanded, nor would accept of any other

pledge

pledge for his security. In all the towns through B °O K
which he passed, the greatest poflible magnificence --.
was displayed; the magistrates presented him the 1539.
keys of the gates; the prison doors were fee open;
and, by the royal honours paid to him, he appear-
ed more like the sovereign of the country than a
foreign prince. The King advanced as far as
Chatelherault to meet him; their interview was 1540.
distinguished by the warmest expressions of friend-
Ihip and regard. They proceeded together to-
wards Paris, and presented to the inhabitants of
that city, the extraordinary fpe&acle of two rival
Monarchs, whose enmity had diffturbed and laid
waste Europe during twenty years, making their
solemn entry together with all the symptoms of a
confidential harmony, as if they had forgotten for
ever past injuries, and would not revive hostilities
for the future '.

CHARLES remained fix days at Paris; but amidst The Empe-

the perpetual caresses of the French court, and tude,
the various entertainments contrived to amuse or
to do him honour, he discovered an extreme im-
patience to continue his journey, arising as much
from an apprehension of danger which constantly
haunted him, as from the neceflity of his pre-
fence in the Low-Countries. Conscious of the
difingenuity of his own intentions, he trembled
when he reflected that some fatal accident might
betray them to his rival, or lead him to fufpeE

c Thuan. Hilt. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bellay, 26.l.

N 4 thelm;

B o° K them; and though his artifices to conceal them

VI.
I - flhould be fuccelsful, he could not help fearing
'j40' that motives of interest might at last triumph over

the scruples of honour, and tempt Francis to
avail himself of the advantage now in his hands.
Nor were there wanting persons among the French
ministers, who advised the King to turn his own
arts against the Emperor, and as the retribution
due for so many inflances of fraud or falsehood, to
seize and detain his person until he granted him
full satisfaction with regard to all the just claims
of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had
pledged, nor could any argument convince him
that Charles, after all the promises that he had
given, and all the favours which he had received,
might still be capable of deceiving him. Fullof
this false confidence, he accompanied him to St.
Quintin ; and the two Princes, who had met him
on the borders of Spain, did not take leave of
him until he entered his dominions in the Low.
Countries.

and diinge. As soon as the Emperor reached his ownter.
"nuty. ritories, the French ambassadors demanded the
January 24. accomplishment of what he had promised con-

cerning the invefliture of Milan; but Charles,
under the plausible pretext that his whole atten-
tion was then cngroflicd by the consultations ne.
cefitry towards fuppr-efing the rebellion in Ghent,
put off the nmatter for 1ome time. But in order
to prevent Francis fiom fufpeeting his sincerity,

lit

he still continued to talk of his resolutions with B o o K
refpec to that matter in the fame strain as when v-
he entered France, and even wrote to the King '540.
much to the fame purpose, though in general
terms, and with equivocal exprefflons, which he
might afterwards explain away or interpret at plea-
sure .

MEANWHILE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, Rduaton

detitute of leaders capable either of direaing their of Chenti
councils, or condueting their troops; abandoned
by the French King, and unsupported by their
countrymen; were unable to resist their offended
sovereign, who was ready to advance against them
with one body of troops which he had raised in
the Netherlands, with another drawn out of Ger-
many, and a third which had arrived from Spain
by sea. The near approach of danger made
them, at last, so sensible of their own folly, that
they sent ambafadclors to the Emperor, imploring
his mercy, and offering to set open their gates at
his approach. Charles, without vouchsafing them
any other answer, than that he would appear
among them as their sovereign, with the sceptre
and the sword in his hand, began his march at
the head of his troops. Though he chore to enter
the city on the twenty-fourth of February, his
birth-day, he was touched with nothing of that
tenderness or indulgence which was natural to-

IMemoirce de Ribier, i, 504.

wards

B o0 K wards the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix o0

VI.
-- A_ the principal citizens were put to death; a greater
54and0. number was sent into banishment; the city was

and punith-
mentofthe declared to have forfeited all its privileges and
s-itizene. April20. immunities; the revenues belonging to it were

confiscated; its ancient form of government was
abolished; the nomination of its magistrates was
vested for the future in the Emperor and his fuc.
ceffors; a new system of laws and political admi.
niftration was prescribed b; and in order to bridle
the seditious spirit of the citizens, orders were
given to ere& a strong citadel, for defraying the
expence of which a fine of an hundred and fifty
thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants,
together with an annual tax of fix thousand florins
for the support of the garrifonc. By there rigor.
ous proceedings, Charles not only puniihed the
citizens of Ghent, but set an awful example of
severity before his other fubjeas in the Netherlands,
whose immunities and privileges, partly the effet,
partly the cause of their extensive commerce, cir.
cumfcribed the prerogative of their Sovereign with-
in very narrow bounds, and often flood in the way
of measures which he wished to undertake, or set-
tered and retarded him in his operations.

CharTes re- CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-efla-
uf(oe to ful-
filhi en. blifhed his authority in the Low-Countries, aid
gagements
to Francis,

b Lea Coutemes & Loix du Comptó de Flandre, par Alex.
le Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i. p. 169.

c Harai Annales Brabantia, vol. i. 616.

being

being now under no necessity of continuing the B OO K
fame scene of falsehood and diflimulation with '
which he had long amused Francis, began gradu- 1540.
ally to throw aside the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with refpea to the Mila-
nefe. At firfr, he eluded the demands of the
French ambafladors, when they again reminded
him of his promires; then he proposed, by way
of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant
the Duke of Orleans the investiture of Slanders,
clogging the offer, however, with impracticable
conditions, or such as he knew would be rejeEt-
ed d. At last, being driven from all his evasions
and subterfuges by their insisting for a categorical
answer, he peremptorily refused to give up a ter-
ritory of such value, or voluntarily to make such
a liberal addition to the strength of an enemy by
diminilhing his own power . He denied, at the
fame time, that he had ever made any promise
which could bind him, to an ation so foolish, and
so contrary to his own interest f.

OF all the tranfaAions in the Emperor's life,

this, without doubt, refleds the greatest dilhonour
on his reputation g. Though Charles was not ex-
tremely fci upulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplishing his ends,
and was not always observant of the strict pre-

d M Rer.

de Ribier, i. 509.

514. Ribir

f B'.llay, 365. 6.
g Jovii Hilt. lib. xxxix. p. 238. a.

cepts

B (O K cepts of veracity and honour, he had hitherto

, maintained some regard for the maxims of that
5°40 Ilefs precise and rigid morality by which Mo.

narchs think themselves entitled to regulate their
conduct. But, on this occasion, the scheme that
he formed of deceiving a generous and open.
hearted Prince; the illiberal and mean artifices by
which he carried it on; the insensibility with which
he received all the marks of his friendship, as
well as the ingratitude with which he requited
them; are all equally unbecoming the dignityof
his character, and inconsistent with the grandeur
of his views.

THIS transaction exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After
the experience of a long reign, after so many op.
portunities of discovering the duplicity and artifices
of his rival, the credulous simplicity with which
he trusted him at this juncture seemed to merit
no other return than what it actually met with.
Francis, however, remoni-rated and exclaimed,
as if this had been the first inifance in which the
Emperor had deceived him. Feeling, as is ulual,
the insult which was offered to his understanding
still more sensibly than the injury done to his in.
terest, he discovered such resentment, as made it
obvious that hle would lay hold on the first oppor-
tunity of being revenged, and that a war, no ess
rancorous than that which had so lately ragocl
would soon break out anew in Europe.

But

BUT singular as the tranfaEtion which has been B 0 0 K

related may appear, this year is rendered still more '-
memorable by the eitabliflment of the Order of TwS Pope
Jefiuits; a body whole influence on ecclefiafticalas authorize
well as civil affairs hath been so considerable, that ti ns tbc

Order of

an account of the genius of its laws and govern- jesuit,.
ment justly merits a place in history. When men
take a view of the rapid progress of this society to-
wards wealth and power; when they contemplate
the admirable prudence with which it has been
governed; when, they attend to the persevering and
systematic spirit with which its schemes have been
carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a singular
inflitution to the superior wisdom of its founder,
and to suppose that he had formed and digested his
plan with profound policy. But the Jesuits, as
well as the other monastic orders, are indebted for
the existence of their order not to the wisdom
of their founder, but to his enthufiafin. Ignatio
Loyola, whom I have already mentioned on occa-
sion of the wound which he received in defending
Pampeluna h, was a fanatic distinguished by extra-
vagancies in sentiment and conduct, no less incom-
patible with the maxims of fober reason, than re-
pugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary schemes, in which his
enthusiasm engaged him, equal any thing recorded
in the legends of the Romifl faints; but are un-
worthy of notice in history.

h Vol. ii. Book ii. p. 192.

PROMIP-

B O O K PROMPTED by this fanatical spirit, or incited by

Vi.

- vY the love of power and diftinEtion, from which

,5t40. such pretenders to superior fanaity are not exempt,

Fanaticism
of LoyoIa Loyola was ambitious of becoming the founder of
its soundcr.

a religious order. The plan, which he formed of
its constitution and laws, was suggested, as he gave
out, and as his followers still teach, by the imme.
diate inspiration of heaven . But notwithstanding
this high pretension, his design met at first with
violent opposition. The Pope, to whom Loyola
had applied for the fantion of his authority to con.
firm the institution, referred his petition to a com.
mittee of Cardinals. They represented the efta.
blifhment to be unnecessary as well as dangerous,
and Paul refused to grant his approbation of it.
At last, Loyola removed all his scruples by an offer
which it was impossible for any Pope to resist,

The pope's He proposed that besides the three vows of poverty,
motives for
confirming of chastity, and of monafiic obedience, which are

theod. common to all the orders of regulars, the members

of his society lhould take a fourth vow of obe-
dience to the Pope, binding themselves to go
whithersoever he should command for the service
of religion, and without requiring any thing from
the Holy See for their support. At a time when
the papal authority had received such a shock by
the revolt of so many nations from the Romish
church; at a time when every part of the popilh
system was attacked with so much violence and

J Compte rendu dcs Confitutions des JeCuits, au Parle
ment de Provence, par M. de Monclar, p. z8s.

filccefs,

success, the acquisition of a body of men, thus B o o K
eculiarly devoted to the See of Rome, and whom -,-.
t might set in opposition to all its enemies, was an 1540.
bje& of the highest consequence. Paul, inifantly Sept. 27.
erceiving this, confirmed the inffitution of the Je-
uits by his bull; granted the most ample privi-
eges to the members of the society; and appointed
oyola to be the firfE general of the order. The
vent hath fully justified Paul's discernment, in ex-
e(ting such beneficial consequences to the See of
ome from this institution. In less than half a
entury, the society obtained establishments in
very country that adhered to the Roman catholic
hurch; its power and wealth increased amazingly;
he number of its members became great; their
haraster as well as accomplishments were still
reater; and the Jesuits were celebrated by the
iends, and dreaded by the enemies, of the Romifli
ith, as the most able and enterprizing order in
he church.

THE constitution and laws of the society were ti connitu-
perfeced by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two ge- nus merit
lerals who succeeded Loyola, men far superior to Particula
heir master in abilities, and in the science of go-
rernment. They framed that system of profound
ind artful policy which distinguishes the order.
?he large infusion of fanaticism, mingled with
Is regulations, should be imputed to Loyola its
sunder. Many circumstances concurred in giving
peculiarity of character to the order of Jesuits,
nd in forming the members of it not only to

take

B 0 0 K take a greater part in the affairs of the world thai

V, .-. any othert-sdy of monks, bur'to acquire fuperioi
1540. influence in the conduct of them.

The oheat THE primary obje& of almost all the monastic
of the order
liieuilar. orders is to separate men from the world, and from

any concern in its affairs. In the solitude and silence
of the cloister, the monk is called to work out his
own salvation by extraordinary aEs of mortification
and piety. EIe is dead to the world, and ought not
to mingle in its tranfadions. He can be of no be.
nefit to mankind, but by his example and by his
prayers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are taught to
confider themselves as formed for aftion. They are
chosen soldiers, bound to exert themselves conti.
nually in the service of God, and of the Pope, his
vicar on earth. Whatever tends to inftrut the
ignorant; whatever can be of use to reclaim or to
oppose the enemies of the Holy See, is their proper
obje&. That they may have full leisure for this
ative service, they are totally exempted from those
functions, the performance of which is the chief
business of other monks. They appear in no
processions; they pratife no rigorous aufterities;
they do not consume one half of their time in the
repetition of tedious offices k. But they are re.
quired to attend to all the tranfaaions of the
world, on account of the influence which these
may have upon religion; they are direted to

k Compte rendu, par M. de Monclar, p. xiii. 290. Sr
la Dfelrut. des Jcfuites, par M. D'Alembert, p. 42.

ludy

fludy the dispositions of persons in high rank, B 0°o K
and to cultivate their friendship ; and by the very '---
conltiution, as well as genius of the order, a fpi- 1540'
rit of action and intrigue is infused into all its
members.

As the objec of the society of Jesuits differed Peculiari-
from that of the other monastic orders, the di- form of its

policy, par-

verficy was no less in the form of its government. ticularly
The other orders are to be confidered as volun- twthrefper
tary associations, in which whatever affects the of the -
whole body, is regulated by the common suffrage
of all its members. The executive power is vet-
ed in the persons placed at the head of each con-
vent, or of the whole society; the legislative au-
thority resides in the community. Affairs of mo-
ment, relating to particular -convents, are deter-
mined in conventual chapters; such as refpe&t the
whole order are confidered in general congrega-
tions. But Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit
obedience, which he had derived from his military
profefflon, appointed that the government of his
order flould be purely monarchical. A General,
cholen for life by deputies from the several pro-
vinces, possessed power that was supreme and in-
!dependent, extending to every person, and to every
cafe. He, by his sole authority, nominated pro-
vincials, re&cors, and every other officer employed
in the government of the society, and could re-
move them at pleasure. In him was velfed the

Compte par M. de Monclar, p. 12.
Vo., III. 0 love-

B 0 0 K sovereign administration of the revenues and funds
L^ J of the order. Every member belonging to it was

1540. at his disposal; and by his uncontrolable mandate,

he could impose on them any task, or employ
them in what service soever he pleated. To his
commands they were required not only to yield
outward obedience, but to resign up to him the
inclinations of their own wills, and the sentiments
of their own understandings. They were to liften
to his injunctions, as if they had been uttered by
Christ himself. Under his direEtion, they were to
be mere passive instruments, like clay in the hands
of the potter, or like dead carcases incapable of
refftance ". Such a singular form of policy could
not fail to impress its chara&er on all the mem-
bers of the order, and to give a peculiar force to
all its operations. There is not in the annalsof
mankind any example of such a perfe6t despotism,
exercised not over monks shut up in the cells ofa
convent, but over men dispersed among all the
nations of the earth.

Circum(fan. As the constitutions of the order vest, in the Ge-
ces which
enable him neral, such absolute dominion over all its members,
it withche they carefully provide for his being perfectly in.
greatef ad- formed with refpe& to the charaEter and abilities

of his fubjeEs. Every novice who offers himself
as a candidate for entering into the order, is oblig.

m Compte rendu au Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Ch

lotais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar, 83. 18i
343. d

ed to manifcf his conscience to the superior, or to a B °vr K
person appointed by him; and in doing this is re- _
quired to confess not only his fins and defects, but s540'
to discover the inclinations, the passions, and the
bent of his foul. This manifestation muff be re-
newed every fix months . The society, not satis-
fled with penetrating in this manner into the inner-
mos recefres of the heart, direAs each member to
observe the words and actions of the novices; they
are constituted spies upon their conduBt; and are
bound to disclose every thing of importance con-
cerning them to the superior. In order that this
crutiny into their charater may be as complete as
offible, a long noviciate must expire, during which
hey pass through the several gradations of ranks in
he society, and they muff have attained the full
ge of thirty-three years before they can be admit-
ed to take the final vows, by which they become
rose/ed members°. By there various methods,
he superiors, under whose immediate infpetion
he novices are placed, acquire a thorough know-
edge of their dispositions and talents. In order
hat the General, who is the foul that animates and
oves the whole society, may have under his eye
very thing necessary to inform or dire&t him, the
rovincials and heads of the several houses are
bliged to transmit to him regular and frequent re-
orts concerning the members under their infpec-

Compte par M. de Monclar, p. 121, &c.
° Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. zi4. Sur la Dcftr. des
es. par M. d'Alemb. p. 39.

0 2 tion.

B 0 0 K tion. In there they descend into minute detail

VI.
.--- - with refpeEt to the character of each person, his

'A40. abilities natural or acquired, his tenper,whis expe.

rience in affairs, and the particular department for
which he is best fitted P. These reports, when di.
gested and arranged, are entered into registers kept
on purpose that the General may, at one corn.
prehenfive view, survey the ltate of the society
in ev.ery corner of the earth; observe the qua.
lifications and talents of its members; and thus
choose, with perfect information, the inftru.
ments, which his absolute power can employ

P M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number

of these reports, which the General of the Jesuits multaan
nually receive according to the regulations of the society,
I'hefe amount in all to 6584. If this fum be divided by 37,
the number of provinces in the order, it will appear that 177
reports concerning the rfate of each province are transmitted
to Rome annually. Compte, p. 52. Besides this, there may
be extraordinary letters, or such as are sent by the monitorsor
spies whom the General and Provincials entertain in each
house. Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 43 1. Hist. des Jeuite,
*Amlt. 1761, tom. iv. p. 56. The provincials and heads of
houses not only report concerning the members of the focitty,
but are bound to give the General an account of the civil as.
fdirs in the country wherein they arc fettled, as far as their
krowledge of there may be of benefit to religion. This con
dition may extend to every particular, so that the Generalis
furnifed with full information concerning the tranfaFtioniof
every Prince and State in the world. Compte par M. de
Moncl. 4.I3 Jlill. des Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When theaffair
uith refped to which the provincials or re&ors write are
importance, they are dircAed to uife cyphers; and each
them has a particular cypler from the General. ComptePr
M. Chalotais, p. .1.

7 in

in any service for which he thinks meet to destine B o O K
them q*. '-

1540.
As it was the professed intention of the order P'rogress of

the po-er

of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro- ad Pflu-
moting the salvation of men, this engaged them, ores the
of course, in many ative functions. From their
first institution, they confidered the education
of youth as their peculiar province; they aimed
at being spiritual guides and confessors; they
preached frequently in order to inftru& the people;
they set out as missionaries to convert unbelieving
nations. The novelty of the institution, as well
as the singularity of its objets, procured the or-
der many admirers and patrons. The governors
of the society had the address to avail themselves
of every circumstance in its favour, and in a short
time the number as well as influence of its mem-
bers increased wonderfully. Before the expira-
tion of the sixteenth century, the Jesuits had ob-
tained the chief direction of the education of youth
in every Catholic country in Europe. They had
become the confessors of almost all its monarchs,
a function of no finall importance in any reign,
but under a weak Prince, superior even to that
of minifier. They were the spiritual guides of
almost every person eminent for rank or power.
They possessed the highest degree of confidence
and interest with the papal court, as the most

9 Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 215. 439.-Compte par
M. de Chalotais, p. 52. 222.

0 3 zealous

B 0v K zealous and able champions for its authority.

Vi.
. v---' The advantages which an aftive and enterpriing
J540. body of men might derive from all these circum.

stances are obvious. They formed the minds of
men in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They pof.
sessed, at different periods, the direation of the
most considerable courts in Europe. They min.
gled in all affairs. They took part in every in.
trigue and revolution. The General, by means
of the extensive intelligence which he received,
could regulate the operations of the order with the
most perfect discernment, and by means of his ab.
solute power could carry them on with the utmost
vigour and effeLtr.

Prngref. of TOGETHER with the power of the order, its
ts wca.h. wealth continued to increase. Various expedi.

ents were devised for eluding the obligation of
the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample
pofieffions in every Catholic country; and by the
number as well as magnificence of its public
buildings, together with the value of its property,

' When Loyola, in the year 1540, petitioned the Popeo

authorize the institution of the order, he had only ten di.
ciples. But in the year 16o., fixty.eight years after theirfrl
inlitution, the number of Jesuits had increased to tentho0'
sand five hundred and eighty-one. In the year 1710. theol0
der ponfetied twenty-four pro.ffid houses; fifty-nine houfesof
probation; three hundred and forty refidencies; fix hundred
and twelve colleges; two hundred miflions; one hundred and
fifty seminaries and boarding-fchools; and confifed of 1i9,98
Jclaits. i-litA. des Jesuites, tom. i, p. zo.

moveable

moveable or real, it vied with the most opulent of B 0 0 K
the monastic fraternities. Besides the sources of -
wealth common to all the regular clergy, the Je- 5s49
suits poffefled onewhich was peculiar to themselves.
Under pretext of promoting the success of their
missions, and of facilitating the support of their
mifionaries, they obtained a special licence from
the court of Rome, to trade with the nations which
they laboured to convert. In consequence of this,
they engaged in an extensive and lucrative com-n
merce, both in the East and Weft Indies. They
opened warehouses in different parts of Europe, in
which they vended their commodities. Not satisfied
with trade alone, they imitated the example of other
commercial societies, and aimed at obtaining fettle-
ments. They acquired possession accordingly of a
large and fertile province in the southern continent
of America, and reigned as sovereigns over some
hundred thousand fubjeEts '.

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influence Pen:cious
which the order of Jesuits acquired by all there trco,,n
different means, has been often exerted with the civil ociety.
most pernicious effea. Such was the tendency of
that discipline observed by the society in forming
its members, and such the fundamental maxims
in its constitution, that every Jesuit was taught to
regard the interest of the order as the capital ob-
je4t, to which every consideration was to be facri-

' I-Iift. des Jef. iv. 168-196, &c.

0 4 siced.

B V 0 K siced. This spirit of attachment to their order,

vI.

*-» . the most ardent, perhaps, that ever influenced any
1540' body of men , is the characteristic principle of the

Jesuits, and serves as a key to the genius of their
policy, as well as to the peculiarities in their senti.
ments and conduct.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the so.

ciety, that its members should possess an ascendant
over persons in high rank or of great power, the
desire of acquiring and preserving such a direction
of their conduEt, with greater facility, has led the
Jesuits to propagate a system of relaxed and pliant
morality, which accomrnodares itfelfto the patfions
of men, which justifies their vices, which tolerates
their imperfecions, which authorizes almost every
action that the most audacious or crafty politician
would wish to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

conne&ed with the preservation of the papal au-
thority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame prin.
ciple of attachment to the interefs of their so-
ciety, have been the most zealous patrons of those
do6Arines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical power
on the ruins of civil government. They have at-
tributed to the court of Rome a jurifdidion as
extensive and absolute as was claimed by the most
presumptuous pontiffs in the dark ages. They

' Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 285.

have

have contended for the entire independence of B o o K
ecclesiastics on the civil magistrate. They have i
publifled such tenets concerning the duty of op- 's4o*
posing Princes who were enemies of the Catholic
faith, as countenanced the most atrocious crimes,
and tended to dissolve all the ties which connet
fubjecs with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au-
thority from the zeal with which it flood forth in
defence of the Romish church againfi the attacks
of the reformers, its members, proud of this dif-
tintion, have confidered it as their peculiar func-
tion to combat the opinions, and to check the
progress of the Protestants. They have made use
of every art, and have employed every weapon
against them. They have set themselves in oppo-
fitibn to every gentle or tolerating measure in
their favour. They have incessantly stirred up
against them all the rage of ecclesiastical and civil
persecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious doctrines,
and have held opinions equally inconsistent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have either
delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or
have propagated them with lcfs fucccfs. Who-
ever recolle&s the events which have happened in
Europe during two centuries, will find that the

Jesuits

B o I K Jesuits may justly be confidered as responsible for
Am, ma most of the pernicious effecs arising from that cor.

1540, rupt and dangerous casuistry, from those extrava-

gant tenets concerning ecclefiaflical power, and
from that intolerant spirit, which have been the
disgrace of the church of Rome throughout that
period, and which have brought so many calami.
ties upon civil society u.

Some ad. BUT amidst many bad consequences flowing
vantages re-
ful.ingfro from the institution of this order, mankind, it
tion of this must be acknowledged, have derived from it
order. some considerable advantages. As the Jesuits

made the education of youth one of their capital
objects, and as their first attempts to eftablilh
colleges for the reception of students were vio.
lently opposed by the universities in different
countries, it became necessary for them, as the
most effectual method of acquiring the public
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in-

particularly duftry. This prompted them to cultivate the
toieraturc. study of ancient literature with extraordinary ar-

dour. This put them upon various methodsfor
facilitating the instruction of youth; and by the
improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed so much towards the progress of po-
lite learning, that on this account they have me-
rited well of society. Nor has the order of Je-
luits been Iuccelsful only in teaching the elements

u Encyclopedie, art. 7rcyites, tom. viii. 513.

6 of

of literature; it has produced likewise eminent B 0O, K
maters in many branches of science, and can alone
boast of a greater number of ingenious authors, 1540.
than all the other religious fraternities taken to-
gether x.

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have More erpe.

cially from

exhibited the most wonderful display of their abili- the fcttle-
ties, and have contributed molt effectually to the emnttof the
benefit of the human species. The conquerors of '"iraUay.
that unfortunate quarter of the globe a&ed at first
as if they had nothing in view, but to plunder, to

x M. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jesuits have
made extraordinary progress in erudition of every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who have
been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and critics; though
they have even formed some orators of reputation; yet
the order has never produced one man, whose mind was
so much enlightened with found knowledge, as to merit the
name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable
effet of monastic education to contrac and fetter the human
mind. The partial attachment of a monk to the interest of
his order, which is often incompatible with that of other ci-
tizens; the habit of implicit obedience to the will of a fupe-
rior, together with the frequent return of the wearisome and
frivolous duties of the cloifler, debase his faculties, and ex-
tinguifi that generosity of sentiment and spirit, which quali-
fies nien for thinking or feeling justly with refpett to what ii
proper in life and condut. Father Paul of Venice is, per-
haps, the only pcrobn educated in a cloister, that ever was
altogerher superior to its prejudices, or who viewed the tranf-
as.ions of nlen, and realoned concerning the interefis of so-
icery, with the enlarged sentiments of a philosopher, with the
dilcernmcnt of a man converlfnt in affairs, and with the
liberality of a gentleman.

enllave,

B o o K enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants. The
v__-.. Jesuits alone made humanity the object of their

i540. fettling there. About the beginning of the last

century they obtained admission into the fertile
province of Paraguay, which stretches across the
southern continent of America, from the east fide
of the immense ridge of the Andes, to the confines
of the Spanilh and Portuguese settlements on the
banls of the river de la Plata. They found the
inhabitants in a state little different from that which
takes place among men when they firit begin to
unite together; firangers to the arts; fubfifing
precariously by hunting or fishing; and hardly
acquainted with the firit principles of fubordina-
tion and government. The Jesuits set them-
selves to instruct and to civilize there savages.
They taught them to cultivate the ground, to
rear tame animals, and to build houses. They
brought them to live together in villages. They
trained them to arts and manufactures. They
made them taste the sweets of society; and accuf-
tomed themn to the blessings of security and order.
These people became the fubjecis of their bene-
faaors; who have governed them with a tender
attention, resembling that with which a father di-
reas his children. RefpeEted and beloved almoR
to adoration, a few Jesuits presided over .ome
hundred thousand Indians. They maintained a
perfeCt equality among all the members of the
community. Each of them was obliged to la-
bour not for himself alone, but for the public.
The produce of their fields, together with the

fruits

fruits of their industry of every species, were de- n °0 K
polited in common storehouses, from which each V--
individual received every thing necessary for the s54'.
supply of his wants. By this institution, almost all
the passions which disturb the peace of society, and
render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magisfrates, chosen from among
their countrymen, by the Indians themfc-ves,
watched over the public tranquillity, and secured
obedience to the laws. The sanguinary punifi-
ments frequent under other governments were un-
known. An admonition from a Jesuit; a flight
mark of infamy; or, on some singular occasion, a
few laihes with a whip, were sufficient to maintain
good order among these innocent and happy people'.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Je- Even here

suits for the good of mankind, the genius and tionandpo.
spirit of their order have mingled and are dil- o,:derdif-
cernible. They plainly aimed at eftablilhing in cetnibh.
Paraguay an independent empire, fuljeE to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excel-
lence of its conititution and police, could scarcely
have failed to extend its dominion over all the
southern continent of America. With this view,
in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in the adjacent settlements, from acquiring any
dangerous influence over the people within the

Y Hill. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 42,
&c. Voyage au Pcrou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de Ulloa,
tom, i. so, &c. Par. 0to. 1752.

limits

B 0 0 K limits of the province fubje& to the society, the
-^- i' Jesuits endeavoured to inspire the Indians with

J540' hatred and contempt of these nations. They cut

off all intercourse between their fubjets and the
Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They prohi.
bited any private trader of either nation from
entering their territories. When they were obliged
to admit any person in a public character from
the neighbouring governments, they did not per-
mit him to have a:ny conversation with their sub-
jeits, and no Indian was allowed even to enter
the house where these strangers resided, unless in
the presence of a Jesuit. In order to render any
communication between them as difficult as pof.
fible, they industriously avoided giving the In.
dians any knowledge of the Spanish, or of any
other European language; but encouraged the
different tribes, which they had civilized, to acquire
a certain dialeE of the Indian tongue, and laboured
to make that the universal language throughout
their dominions. As all these precautions, with.
out military force, would have been insufficient
to have rendered their empire secure and perma-
nent, they instructed their fubjets in the Euro.
pean arts of war. They formed them into bodies
of cavalry and infantry, completely armed and
regularly disciplined. They provided a great
train of artillery, as well as magazines stored with
all the implements of war. Thus they establish,
ed an army so numerous and well-appointed, as
to be formidable in a country, where a few sickly
and ill-difciplined battalions composed all the

military

military force kept on foot by the Spaniards or B o O Kc
Portuguese Z.

1540.
THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of ReaCon for

giving so

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with full a view
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten- overnfh t
dency of the institution, and checked its progress a. dpogroe
But as the order was founded in the period of
which I write the history, and as the age to which
I address this work hath seen its fall, the view
which I have exhibited of the laws and genius of
this formidable body will not, I hope, be unac-
ceptable to my readers; especially as one circum-
fiance has enabled me to enter into this detail
with particular advantage. Europe had observed,
for two centuries, the ambition and power of the
order. But while it felt many fatal effects of
these, it could not fully discern the causes to
which they were to be imputed. It was unac-
quainted with many of the singular regulations in
the political constitution or government of the
Jesuits, which formed the enterprising spirit of
intrigue that distinguished its members, and ele-
vated the body itself to such a height of power.
It was a fundamental maxim with the Jesuits,
fiom their first institution, not to publish the rules
of their order. These they kept concealed as an
impenetrable mystery. They never communi-

z Voyage do Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recueil dos
toutes les Picces qui ont paru fur Ics Affaires des Jesuites en
Portngal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 31 2,

cated

oB

0 K cated them to firangers; nor even to the greater
VI.
-.- i part of their own members. They refuted to
5s40. produce them when required by courts ofjufticeb;

and by a strange solecism in policy, the civil
power in different countries authorised or con.
nived at the establishment of an order of men,
whose constitution and laws were concealed with
a Solicitude, which alone was a good reason for
excluding them. During the prosecutions lately
carried on against them in Portugal and France,
the Jesuits have been so inconsiderate as to
produce the mysterious volumes of their in-
ftitute. By the aid of these authentic records,
the principles of their government may be deli-
neated, and the sources of their power investigated
with a degree of certainty and precision, which,
previous to that event, it was impossible to at-
tain . But as I have pointed out the dangerous
tendency of the constitution and spirit of the order
with the freedom becoming an historian, the can-
dour and impartiality no less requisite in that

b Hist. des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par. M. de
Chalot p. 38.

c The greater part of my information concerning thego,

vernmcnt and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived from
the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. I ret
not my narrative, however, upon the authority even of theft
refpeLtable magistrates and elegant writers, but upon innu.
merable pafflges which they have extra&cd from the conllitui
tions of the order, depolited in their hands. I-ofpinian, a
1'roteltant Divine of Zurich, in his HiJiorin :ef/uitira, printed
A. D. 1619, published a small part of the conllitutions 0o
the Jesuits. of which by fume accident he had got a copy;
P. 13--S 4. charaCer

chara&ter call on me to add one observation, B o K

VI.

That no class of regular clergy in the Romish _V
church has been more eminent for decency, and 15'0.
even purity of manners, than the major part of
the order of Jefuirs d. The maxims of an in-
triguing, ambitious, intereffed policy, might in-
fluence thore who governed the society, and might
even corrupt the heart, and pervert the conduct
of some individuals, while the greater number,
engaged in literary pursuits, or employed in the
functions of religion, was left to the guidance of
those common principles which restrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and
laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin
of this mighty body, as well as the circumstances
and effeets with which it has been attended in the
different countries of Europe, though objects ex-
tremely worthy the attention of every intelligent
observer of human affairs, do not fall within the
period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-eRtablifhed order in Affirs of

Ithe Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn Gcrman'
his attention to the affairs in Germany. The Pro-
tefants pressed him earnestly' to appoint that con-
ference between a fele&t number of the divines of
each party, which had been stipulated in the con-
vention at Francfort. The Pope confidered such
an attempt to examine into the points in dispute,
or to decide concerning them, as derogatory to his

d Sur la Deflrua. des Jef. par M. D'Alembcrt, p. 55.
VOL. III. p right

B OV K right of being the supreme judge in controversy;

vI_-_- and being convinced that such a conference would
1540. either be ineffectual by determining nothing,,or

prove dangerous by determining too much, he em-

A confer- ployed every art to prevent it. The Emperor,
ence be-
tween the however, finding it more for his interest to tooth
Popifi and the Germans than to gratify Paul, paid little regard
div'ines to his remonstrances. In a diet held at Haguenaw,
June z5.
Dec. 6. matters were ripened for the conference. In an-

other diet assembled at Worms, the conference was
begun, Melancthon on the one fide and Eckius on
the other, fuffaining the principal part in the dif-
pute; but after they had made some progress,
though without concluding any thing, it was sus.
pended by the Emperor's command, that it might
be renewed with greater solemnity in his own pre.
fence in a diet summoned to meet at Ratisbon.
J34r. This assembly was opened with great pomp, and

with a general expectation that its proceedings
would be vigorous and decisive. By the content
of both parties, the Emperor was entrusted with
the power of nominating the persons who should
inanage the conference, which it was agreed should
be conducted not in the form of a public difpu-
tation, but as a friendly scrutiny or examination
into the articles which had given rife to the pre-
sent controverlies. I e appointed Eckius, Grop-
per, and Pflug, on the part of the Catholics;
Melantlhon, Bucer, and Piftorius, on that of the
Protefrants; all men of diftinguifhled reputation
among their own adherents, and, exccpt Eckius,
all eminent foi moderation, as well as dcfirous of

peace.

peace. As they were about to begin their con- B o0 K

VI.

fultations, the Emperor put into their hands a -j
book, composed, as he said, by a learned divine 1541.
in the Low-Countries, with such extraordinary
perspicuity and temper, as, in his opinion, might
go far to unite and comprehend the two contend-
ing parties. Gropper, a canon of Cologne, whom
he had named among the managers of the confer-
ence, a man of address as well as of erudition, was
afterwards fufpeted to be the author of this short
treatise. It contained positions with regard to
twenty-two of the chief articles in theology, which
included most of the questions then agitated in the
controversy between the Lutherans and the church
of Rome. By ranging his sentiments in a natural
order, and expressing them with great simplicity;
by employing often the very words of scripture, or
of the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of
some opinions, and explaining away what was ab-
surd in others by conceflions, omertimes on one
fide, and sometimes on the other; and especially
by banifling as much as possible scholastic phrases,
those words and terms of art in controverfey, which
lerve as badges ofdiftintion to different felcs, and
for which theologians often contend more fiercely
than for opinions themselves; he at last framed
his work in such a manner, as promised fairer than
any thing that had hitherto been attempted to com-
pose and to terminate religious dissentions c.

' Goldaft. Conftit. Imper. ii. p. 182.

P 3 Bur

B 0 0 K BUT the attention of the age was turned, with

such acute observation, towards theological con.
fuitlcfs. troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it by

any gloss, how artful or specious soever. The
length and eagerness of the dispute had separated
the contending parties so completely, and had set
their minds at such variance, that they were not
to be reconciled by partial concessions. All the
zealous Catholics, particularly the ecclesiastics
who had a feat in the diet, joined in condemning
Gropper's treatise as too favourable to the Luthe-
ran opinion, the poison of which heresy it con.
veyed, as they pretended, with greater danger,
because it was in some degree disguised. The
rigid Protestants, especially Luther himself, and
his patron the Elector of Saxony, were for rejet-
ing it as an impious compound of error and truth,
craftily prepared that it might impose on the
weak, the timid, and the unthinking. But the
divines, to whom the examination of it was com.
mitted, entered upon that business with greater
deliberation and temper. As it was more eafyin
itself, as well as more confiflent with the dignity
of the church, to make concefflons, and even al-
terations with regard to speculative opinions, the
discussion whereof is confined chiefly to schools,
and which present nothing to the people that
either flrikes their imagination or affects their
senses, they came to an accommodation about
these without much labour, and even defined the
great article concerning jullication to their mu-
tual fatisfahcion. But, when they proceeded to

points

points of jurifdiaion, where the interest and au- n ° o K
thority of the Roman See were concerned, or to -, _
the rites and forms of external worship, where 1541.
every change that could be made must be public,
and draw the observation of the people, there the
Catholics were altogether untratable; nor could
the church either with safety or with honour
abolish its ancient institutions. All the articles
relative to the power of the Pope, the authority
of councils, the administration of the sacraments,
'the worship of faints, and many other particu-
lars, did not, in their nature, admit of any tenm-
perament; so that after labouring long to bring
about an accommodation with refpec to these,
ithe Emperor found all his endeavours ineffec-
tual. Being impatient, however, to close the
jdiet, he at last prevailed on a majority of the
members to approve of the following recess;
:" That the articles concerning which the divines Recerfof
lhade agreed in the conference, should be held as R^tbn.,t
1points decided, and be observed inviolably by all; faevr ofa
that the other articles about which they had dif- council,
fcired, should be referred to the determination of July 2.
a general council, or if that could not be obtain-
ed, to a national fynod of Germany; and if it
llould prove impracticable, likewise, to assemble
a lynodl, that a general diet of the Empire should
lhe called within eighteen months, in order to give
tne final judgment upon the whole controversy;
that the IEmperor flould ule all his interest and
ai lhority with the Pope, to procure the meeting

1' 3 either

B 0 0 K either of a general council or fynod; that, in the

VI.
aI - mean time, no innovations should be attempted

' no endeavours should be employed to gain pro.

felytes; and neither the revenues of the church,
nor the rights of monasteries, should be invadeda.

gives of- ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the
fe,,ce both
to Papifrs recess in which they terminated, gave great of.
,and tr9tf- fence to the Pope. The power which the Ger.
ants.

mans had assumed of appointing their own divines
to examine and determine matters of controversy,
he confidered as a very dangerous invasion of his
rights; the renewing of their ancient proposal
concerning a national fynod, which had been so
often rejected by him and his predecessors, ap.
peared extremely undutiful; but the bare men.
tion of allowing -a diet, compored chiefly of lay.
men, to pass judgment with refpe& to articlesof
faith, was deemed no less criminal and profane,
than the worst of those herefies which they seem.
ed zealous to suppress. On the other hand, the
Protestants were no less dinfatisfied with a recess,
that considerably abridged the liberty which they

CharIls enjoyed at that time. As they murmured loudly
o°rettht. against it, Charles, unwilling to leave any feeds

of discontent in the Empire, granted them apri-
vate declaration in the most ample terms, ex-
empting them from whatever they thought op.

f Sleidan, z67, &c. Pallav. I. iv. c. n. p, 136. F. Paul,
p. 86. Seckend. 1. iii. 256.

prefive

preffive or injurious in the recess, and ascertaining B O30 K
to them the full pofeffion of all the privileges v_
which they had ever enjoyed . 3541.

EXTRAORDINARY as these conceftions may ap- Afl^"n of

pear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at this
junture made it necessary for him to grant them.
He foresaw a rupture with France to be not only
unavoidable, but near at hand, and durst not
give any such cause of disgust or fear to the Pro-
teftants, as might force them, in felf-defence, to
court the protection of the French King, from
whom, at present, they were much alienated.
The rapid progress of the Turks in Hungary,
was a more powerful and urgent motive to that
moderation which Charles discovered. A great
revolution had happened in that kingdom; John
Zapol Scaepus having chosen, as has been related,
rather to possess a tributary kingdom, than to
renounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the afliftance of his mighty
protector Solyman, wrested from Ferdinand a
great part of the country, and left him only the
precarious possession of the reft. But being a
prince of pacific qualities, the frequent attempts
of Ferdinand, or of his partisans among the Hun-
garians, to recover what they had loft, greatly
disquieted him; and the necefity on these occa-
sions, of calling in the Turks, whom he confidered

r Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom. iv.
. p. z O.

P 4 and

B o o K and felt to be his masters rather than auxiliaries,

v
u-- -. was hardly less mortifying. In order, therefore,
. S41. to avoid these diftrefies, as well as to secure quiet

and leisure for cultivating the arts and enjoying
amusements in which he delighted, he secretly
came to an agreement with his competitor, on this
condition; That Ferdinand should acknowledge
him as King of Hungary, and leave him, during
life, the unmolestcd possession of that part of the
kingdom now in his power; but that, upon his de.
mise, the sole right of the whole should devolve
upon Ferdinand h. As John had never been mar-
ried, and was then far advanced in life, the terms
of the contract seemed very favourable to Ferdi-
nand. But, soon after, some of the Hungarian
nobles, solicitous to prevent a foreigner from as-
cending their throne, prevailed on John to put an
end to a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the

Death of daughter of Sigifinond King of Poland. John
the King of
Hungary. had the fatisfaLcion, before his death, which hap-

pened within less than a year after his marriage, to
fee a son born to inherit his kingdom. To him,
without regarding his treaty with Ferdinand, which
he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event
not foreseen when it was concluded, he bequeath-
ed his crown; appointing the Queen and George
Martinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, guardians of his
son, and regents of the kingdom. The greater
part of the Hungarians immediately acknow-
ledged the young Prince as King, to whom, in

g ifluanhfii i-lilt. Hung. lib. xii. p. 135.

memory

memory of the founder of their monarchy, they B 0, K
ave the name of Stephen i.

1541.

FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by Ferdinand's
his unexpected event, resolved not to abandon tobain tt
the kingdorn which he flattered himself with having c"own-
acquired by his compat with John. He sent
anbaffado-s to the Queen to claim possession, and
to offer the province of Transylvania as a fettle-
?nent for her ton, preparing at the lame time to
ffiert his right by force of arms. But John had
committed the care of his son to persons, who had
too much spirit to give up the crown tamely, and
who poffeficd abilities sufficient to defend it. The
(Qteen, to all the address peculiar to her own sex,
dlded a masculine courage, ambition, and magnani-
mity. Martinuzzi, who had raised himself from clharaaer
the lowest rank in life to his present dignity, was ofMarti
pne of those extraordinary men, who, by the extent """ui
as well as variety of their talents, are fitted to a6c
a fiuperior part in bufiling and faaious times. In
dilcharging the functions of his ecclesiastical
Df1ice, he put on the semblance of an humble and
austere fandity. In civil tranfations, he disco-
yered induiiry, dexterity, and boldness, During
war lhe laid aside the cassock, and appeared on
h(rlcbacki with his fcymitar and buckler, as active,
as olllctatcious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
trymen, Amidfl all there different and contra-
:iidory forms which he could aliilme, an inix-

Jovii His. lib. xxxix. p. 239, a. &c,

tiable

1 o o K tiable desire of dominion and authority was con

VI.
_ - 1 fpicuous. From such persons it was obvious wha
'54Z. answer Ferdinand had to expect. He soon per

ceived that he mulf depend on arms alone for re
covering Hungary. Having levied for this pur
pose a considerable body of Germans, whom hi
partisans among the Hungarians joined with thei
vaiTals, he ordered them to march into that par
of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. Mar
tinuzzi, unable to make head against such a power
ful army in the field, satisfied himself with hold
ing out the towns, all of which, especially Buda
the place of greatest consequence, he provide
with every thing necessary for defence; and ii

Calls in te the mean time he font ambassadors to Solyman
t'urks. beseeching him to extend towards the son, thi

fame Imperial protecion which had so long main
tained the father on his throne. The Sultan
though Ferdinand used his utmost endeavours
thwart this negociation, and even offered to ac
cept of the Hungarian crown on the fame igno.
minious condition of paying tribute to the Otto
man Porte, by which John had held it, saw ful
profpecs of advantage from espousing the intere
of the young King, that he instantly promifei
him his protection; and commanding one armi
to advance forthwith towards Hungary, he him
self followed with another. Meanwhile the Ger
mans, hoping to terminate the war by the reduc
tion of a city in which the King and his mothe
were shut up, had formed the siege of Buda
Martinuzzi, having drawn thither the itrengtll

till

the Hungarian nobility, defended the town with B o o K
such courage and skill, as allowed the Turkish V.
forces time to come up to its relief. They in- '54x.
ftantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue,
diseases, and desertion, and defeated them with
great slaughter k.

SOLYMAN soon after joined his victorious troops, Solyman's
and being weary of so many expensive expedi- con"'
tions undertaken in defence of dominions which
were not his own, or being unable to resist this
alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom, while
possessed by an infant, under the guardianship of
a woman and a priest, he allowed interested con-
fiderations to triumph with too much facility
over the principles of honour and the sentiments
of humanity. What he planned ungenerously,
he executed by fraud. Having prevailed on the
Queen to fend her son, whom he pretended to be
desirous of feeing, into his camp, and having, at
the fame time, invited the chief of the nobility
to an entertainment there, while they, fufpeting
no treachery, gave themselves up to the mirth
and jollity of the feast, a feled band of troops by
the Sultan's orders seized one of the gates ot
Buda. Being thus mailer of the capital, of the
King's person, and of the leading men among the
nobles, he gave orders to conduct the Queen,
together with her son, to Transylvania, which pro-
vince he allotted to them, and appointing a,

k Illuanhaffii Hill. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 15o.

Bafha

B O v K Bafha to preside in Buda with a large body of

VI.
»_" soldiers, annexed Hungary to the Ottoman em.
541-' pire. The tears and complaints of the unhappy

Queen had no influence to change his purpose, nor
could Martinuzzi either resist his absolute and
uncontroulable command, or prevail on him to
recall it'.

\

Ferdin.nd's BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation
overtures to
Solyman. reached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to have

dispatched other ambassadors to Solyman with a
fresh representation of his right to the crown of
Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former over-
ture to hold the kingdom of the Ottoman Porte,
and to pay for it an annual tribute. This ill-
timed proposal was rejected with scorn. The Sul-
tan, elated with success, and thinking that he might
prescribe what terms he pleased to a Prince who
voluntarily proffered conditions so unbecoming his
own dignity, declared that he would not suspend
the operations of war, unless Ferdinand instantly
evacuated all the towns which he still held in
Hungary, and consented to the imposition of a
tribute upon Austria, in order to reimburse the
fums which his presumptuous invasion of Hungary
had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in de-
fence of that kingdom m.

I Iftuanhaffii Hilt. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 56. Jovii Hiofr,
lib. xxxix. p. 2476. &c.

Iltuanhaflii illt, Hung. lib. xiv. p. 158.

1w

IN this state were the affairs of Hungary. As B o o K
the unfortunate events there had either happened v--
before the dissolution of the diet at Ratisbon, or '54'.
were dreaded at that time, Charles saw the danger
of irritating and inflaming the minds of the Ger-
mans, while a formidable enemy was ready to break
into the Empire; and perceived that he could not
expec any vigorous assistance either towards the
recovery of Hungary, or the defence of the Austrian
frontier, unless he courted and satisfied the Pro-
teftants. By the concefflons which have been
mentioned, he gained this point, and such liberal
supplies both of men and money were voted for
carrying on the war against the Turks, as left him
uinder little anxiety about the security of Germany
(duing next campaign".

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, Fmrror

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he passed v.i.s taly.
through Lucca he had a short interview with the
Pope; but nothing could be concluded concern-
ing the proper method of composing the religious
disputes in Germany, between two Princes, whole
views and interest with regard to that matter were
at this juncture so opposite. The Pope's endea-
vours to remove the causes of discord between
Charles and Francis, and to extinguifl those
mutual animofities which threatened to break out
suddenly into open hostility, were not more fuc-
celsrul.

" Slcid. 283.

THE

B 0 0 K THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely,

VI. I-0-0_ ' at that time, on the great enterprize which he had

Hi54xdi- concerted against Algiers, that he listened with
tion againrt little attention to the Pope's schemes or overtures,
Algiers, and
mnotives of and hastened to join his army and fleet .
i.

ALGIERS fill continued in that state of depend.

ence on the Turkish empire to which Barbarossa
had subjected it. Ever since he, as Captain Bafha,
commanded the Ottoman fleet, Algiers had been
governed by Hafcen-Aga, a renegado eunuch,
who, by passing through every station in the Cor-
fair's service, had acquired such experience in war,
that he was well fitted for a fation which required
a man of tried and daring courage. Hafcen, in
order to shew how well he deserved that dignity,
carried on his piratical depredations against the
Christian States with amazing a&ivity, and out.
did, if possible, Barbarossa himself in boldness and
cruelty. The commerce of the Mediterranean
was greatly interrupted by his cruisers, and such
frequent alarms given to the coast of Spain, that
there was a neceflity of ereting watch-towers at
proper distances, and of keeping guards constantly
on foot, in order to descry the approach of his
squadrons, and to protect the inhabitants from their
descents P. Of this the Emperor had received re-
peated and clamorous complaints from his subje&s,
who representcd it as an enterprise corresponding Co

0 Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. z98.
P Jovii Htilt 1. l1. p. 266.

his

his power, and becoming his humanity, to reduce B 0°° aC
Algiers, which, since the conquest of Tunis, was
the common receptacle of all the free-booters; and '5+,
to exterminate that lawless race, the implacable
enemies of the Christian name. Moved partly by
their entreaties, and partly allured by the hope of
adding to the glory which he had acquired by his
last expedition into Africa, Charles, before he left
Madrid, in his way to the Low-Countries, had
issued orders both in Spain and Italy to prepare a
fleet and army for this purpose. No change in
circumstances, since that time, could divert him
from this resolution, or prevail on him to turn his
arms towards Hungary; though the success of the
Turks in that country seemed more immediately
to require his presence there; though many of his
molP faithful adherents in Germany urged that the
defence of the Empire ought to be his first and
peculiar care; though such as bore him no good-
will ridiculed his preposterous conduct in flying
from an enemy almost at hand, that he might go
in quest of a remote and more ignoble foe. But
to attack the Sultan in Hungary, how splendid
soever that measure might appear, was an under-
taking which exceeded his power, and was not con-
fiRent with his interest. To draw troops out of
Spain or Italy, to march them into a country so
distant as Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus
necessary for transporting thither the artillery, am-
munition, and baggage of a regular army, and to
push the war in that quarter, where there was little
proli). ' {:, .)rin -,; il it to -'1 i..l',' during several

campaigns,

B 0 0 K campaigns, were undertakings so expensive and un.
-- --» wieldy as did not correspond with the low condition
·54*. of the Emperor's treasury. While his principal

force was thus employed, his dominions in Italy
and the Low-Countries muff have lain open to
the French King, who would not have allowed such
a favourable opportunity of attacking them to go
unimproved. Whereas the African expedition,
the preparations' for which were already finished,
and almost the whole expence of it defrayed, would
depend upon a single effort; and besides the fe.
curity and fatisfadion which the success of it mul
give his subjects, would detain him during so
flort a space, that Francis could hardly take ad-
vantage of his absence, to invade his dominions
in Europe.
H;. Prepa. ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his

ion first plan, and with such determined obstinacy,

that he paid no regard to the Pope, who adviled,
or to Andrew Doria-who conjured him not to ex.
pose his whole armament to almost unavoidable
deiruction, by venturing to approach the danger-
ous coast of Algiers at iuich an advanced season of
the year, and when the autumnal winds were rs
violent. Having embarked on board Doria's
gallies at Porto-Venere in the Genoese territories,
he toon found that this experienced tailor had not
judged wrong concerning the element with which
he was lb well acquainted ; for such a florm arole
that ic was wilh the utlmoll- difficulty and danger
lie reaclicl Sa.ilinia, the place of general rendcz.

7 vOUS.

vous. But as his courage was undaunted, and B o o K
his temper often inflexible, neither the renewed re- . -,.
monstrances of the Pope and Doria, nor the danger S54'
to which he had already been exposed by disregard-
ing their advice, had any other effeCt than to'confirm
him in his fatal resolution. The force, indeed,
which hehad collected, was such as might have in-
spired a Prince less adventurous, and less confident
in his own schemes, with the most sanguine hopes
of success. It consisted of twenty thousand foot,
and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and
Germans, mostly veterans, together with three
thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spaniih and
Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Em-
peror by attending him in his favourite expedi-
tion, and eager to share in the glory which they
believed he was going to reap; to these were
added a thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its most
gallant Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the African Lands in

coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard, than Africa.
that which he had just finilhed. When he ap-
proached the land, the roll of the sea, and ve-
hemence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to disembark. But at las, the Emperor, seizing
a favourable opportunity, landed them without
opposition, not far from Algiers, and immediately
advanced towards the town. To oppose this
mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
Turks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives

VOL.I. Q-I of

B 0 0 K of Africa, and partly refugees from Granada. He

-v---I returned, however, a fierce and haughty answer
J541. when summoned to surrender. But with fucha

handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage,
nor consummate skill in war, could have long re-
silted forces superior to those which had defeated
Barbarofa at the head of sixty thousand men, and
which had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his en-
deavours to save it.

The dhif- BUT how far soever the Emperor might think
besel his -4 himself beyond the reach of any danger from the
a""'y' enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dread.

ful calamity, and one against which human pru.
dence and human efforts availed nothing. On
the second day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to disperse some light.
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea-
vens to appear with a fierce and threatening aspea.
Towards evening, rain began to fall, accompanied
with violent wind; and the rage of the tempel
increasing, during the night, the soldiers, who
had brought nothing ashore but their arms, re-
mained exposed to all its fury, without tents, or
flielter, or cover of any kind. The ground was
ioon to wet that they could not lie down on it;
their camp being in a low situation was overflow
ed with water, and they funk at every flep to the
ankles in ud l; while the wind blew with such
imipettiolity, that, to prevent their falling, thle
were obliged to thrust their spears into the ground

and

and to support themselves by taking hold of them. B o0 0 K

VI.

Hafcen was too vigilant an officer to allow an -
enemy in such distress to remain unmoletted. s541
About the dawn of morning, he sallied out with
soldiers, who having been screened from the storm
under their own roofs, were fieffl and vigorous. A.
body of Italians, who were fiationed nearest the
city, dispirited and benumbed with cold, fled at
the approach of the Turks. The troops at the
post behind them discovered greater courage; but
as the rain had extinguished their matches, and
wet their powder, their muflets were useless, and
having scarcely strength to handle their other
arms, they were soon thrown into confusion.
Almost the whole army, with the Emperor him-
self in person, was obliged to advance, before
the enemy could be repulsed, who, after spread-
ing such general consternation, and killing a con-
fiderable number of men, retired at last in good
order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loTs and fleet.
and danger were quickly obliterated by a more
dreadful as well as afie6ting fpcctacle. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated nothing
of its violence, and the sea appeared agitated with
all the rage of which that deitru-tive element is
capable; all the ships, on which alone the whole
army knew that their safety and fubiiftcnce de-
pended, were fcen driven fiom their anchors,
Ime dallling against each other, lome beat to
)ieces on the rocks, many forced alhore, and not a

Q 2 few

B o K few finking in the waves. In less than an hour,

VI. v,--^- fifteen ships of war, and an hundred and forty
1541' transports with eight thousand men, perished; and

such of the unhappy crews as escaped the fury of
the sea, were murdered without mercy by the
Arabs, as soon as they reached land. The
Emperor flood in silent anguish and astonishment
beholding this fatal event, which at once blasted all
his hopes of success, and buried in the depths
the vast stores which he had provided, as well
for annoying the enemy, as for fubrifting his own
troops. He had it not in his power to afford
them any other assistance or relief than by fending
some troops to drive away the Arabs, and thus de.
livering a few who were so fortunate as to get
ashore from the cruel fate which their companions
had met with. At last the wind began to fall, and
to give some hopes that as many Ihips might es.
cape, as would be sufficient to save the army from
perifling by famine, and transport them back to
Europe. But there were only hopes; the approach
of evening covered the sea with darkness; and it
being impossible for the officers aboard the ihips
which had outlived the florm, to fend any intelli-
gence to their companions who were ashore, they
remained during the night in all the anguish of
suspense and uncertainty. Next day, a boat dif
patched by Doria, made flift to reach land, with
information, that having weathered out the torm,
to which, during fifty years knowledge of the sea,
he had never seen any equal in fierceness and hor-

ror,

ror, he had found it neceflary to bear away with B o o K

Vi.

his shattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised .
the Emperor, as the face of the sky was frill low- I54"'
eringand tempestuous, to march with all speed to
that place, where the troops could re-embark with
greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded Obiged to

Charles, from being assured that part of his fleet retrat.
had escaped, was balanced by the new cares and
perplexity in which it involved him with regard to
his army. Metafuz was at lealt three days march
from his present camp; all the provisions which he
had brought ashore at his first landing were now
consumed; his soldiers, worn out with fatigue, were
hardly able for such a march, even in a friendly
country; and being dispirited by a succession of
hardships, which victory itself would scarcely have
rendered tolerable, they were in no condition to
undergo new toils. But the situation of the army
was such, as allowed not one moment for delibe-
ration, nor left it in the least doubtful what to
choose. They were ordered instantly to march,
the wounded, the tick, and the feeble, being placed
in the centre; fulch as seemed most vigorous were
Itationed in the fiont and rear. Then the fad es-
fe&s of what they had suffered began to appear
more manifestly than ever, and new calamities were
added to all those which they had already endured.
Some could hardly bear the weight of their arms;
others, Ipent with the toil of forcing their way
through deep and almost impassable roads, funk

Q 3 down

B ov K down and died; many perished by famine, as the
-----' whole army subsisted chiefly on roots and berries,

Al41' or the flesh of horses, killed by the Emperor's or-

der, and dfilributed among the several battalions;
many were drowned in brooks, which were fwoln
so much by the excessive rains, that in paffingthem
they waded up to the chin; not a few were killed
by the enemy, who, during the greatest part of
their retreat, alarmed, harassed, and annoyed them
night and day. At last they arrived at Metafuz;
and the weather being now so calm as to restore
their communication with the fleet, they were sup-
plied with plenty of provisions, and cheered with
the prospect of fafery.

Mis forti- DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the
rude of
nmind. Emperor discovered great qualities, many of

which a long continued flow of prosperity had
scarcely afforded him an opportunity of display-
ing. He appeared conspicuous for firmness and
constancy of spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude,
humanity, and compassion. He endured as great
hardihips as the meanest soldier; he exposed his
own person wherever danger threatened; he en-
couraged the desponding; visited the tick and
wounded; and animated all by his words and
example. When the army embarked, he was
among the last who left the shore, although a body
of Arabs hovered at no great distance, ready to
fall on the rear. By thelf virtues, Charles atoned,
in iome degree, for his obfiinacy and prcfump
tion in undertaking an expedition so fatal to his
fubtjdols.

TiE

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate B O O I

vi.

enterprize did not end here; for no sooner were L-
the forces got on board, than a new florm arising, Re, r';to
though less furious than the former, scattered the Eurpe.
fleer, and obliged them, separately, to make to-
wards such ports in Spain or Italy as they could
first reach ; thus spreading the account of their
difaRfers, with all the circumstances of aggravation
and horror, which their imagination, frill under the
influence of fear, fuggefred. The Emperor him-
elf, after escaping great dangers, and being forced
into the port of Bugia in Africa, where he was Decem.z.
obliged by contrary winds to remain several weeks,
arrived at last in Spain, in a condition very different
from that in which he had returned from his
former expedition against the Infidels z.

z Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam, per Nicolaum Villag-
nonem Equitem Rhodium, ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii
llilL 1. xl. p. 269, &c. Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlos V.
p. 83. Sandov. Hiflor. ii. 299, &c.

Q 4

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VII.

THE
H I STORY

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VII.

THE calamities which the Emperor suffered B o
v

in his unfortunate enterprize against Algiers

x541.

were great; and the account of there, which aug- Renewalof
miented in proportion as it spread at a greater Fhrancit, abd
distance from the scene of his dilaflers, encouraged his motivecs

n

. ° tor it.

Francis to begin hostilities, on which he had been
for rome time resolved. But he did not think
it prudent to produce, as the motives of this re-
solution, either his ancient pretensions to the dutchy
ofMilan, or the Emperor's difingenuity in vio-
lating his repeated promires with regard to the
lellitution of that country. The former might
have been a good reason against concluding the
truce of Nice, but was none for breaking it; the
latter could not be urged without exposing his

own

B 0 K own credulity as much as the Emperor's want of
_-_ integrity. A violent and unwarrantable aaion

3541. of one of the Imperial generals furnished him

with a reason to justify his taking arms, which
was of greater weight than either of these, and
such as would have roused him, if he had been
as desirous of peace as he was eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice,
without consulting Solyman, gave (as he foresaw)
great offence to that haughty Monarch, who con-
fidered an alliance with him as an honour of which
a Christian prince had cause to be proud. The
friendly interview of the French King with the
Emperor in Provence, followed by .such extra-
ordinary appearances of union and confidence which
distinguished the reception of Charles when he
passed through the dominions of Francis to the
Low-Countries, induced the Sultan to fufpeAthat
the two rivals had at last forgotten their ancient
enmity, in order that they might form such a ge.
neral confederacy againfi the Ottoman power, as
had been long wished for in Christendom, and often
attempted in vain. Charles, with his usual art,
endeavoured to confirm and strengthen these fufpi.
cions, by inftruEting his emissaries at Conftanti.
nople, as well as in those courts with whichSoly.
man held any intelligence, to represent the concord
between him and Francis to be so entire, that their
sentiments, views, and putrfuits, would be the
fame for the future '. It was not without difli

a Mem. dc Ribier, tom. i. p. 502.

culty

culty that Francis effaced these impressions; but B o0 K
the address of Rincon, the French ambassador at ^ J
the Porte, together with the manifest advantage 1541'
of carrying on hostilities against the house of
I Austria in concert with France, prevailed at length
on the Sultan not only to banish his suspicions, but
to enter into a closer conjunction with Francis than
ever. Rincon returned into France, in order to
communicate to his master a scheme of the Sultan's,
for gaining the concurrence of the Venetians in
their operations againct the common enemy. Soly-
man having lately concluded a peace with that re-
public, to which the mediation of Francis and the
good offices of Rincon had greatly contributed,
thought it not impossible to allure the senate by
such advantages, as, together with the example of
the French Monarch, might overbalance any
fcrples arising either from decency or caution,
that could operate on the other fide. Francis,
warmly approving of this measure, dispatched Rin-
con back to Constantinople, and, directing him to
go by Venice along with Fregofo, a Genoese exile,
whom he appointed his ambassador to that repub-
lic, empowered them to negociate the matter with
the senate, to whom Solyman had sent an envoy
fur the fame purpole b. The marquis del Guafto,
governor of the Milanese, an officer of great abili-
ties, but capable of attempting and executing the
moli atrocious actions, got intelligence of the mo-
tions and destination of these aimbaffadors. As he

I' Ilt. de Venet. dc Paruta, iv. 125.

cknew

B °0 K knew how much his master wilhed to discover the

VII.

A_- - _ intentions of the French King, and of what con.

'S4X' sequence it was to retard the execution of his mea.

of hi am-d fures, he employed some soldiers belongingto the
bafTdors his garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and
pretext for t
this. Fregofo as they failed down the Po, who murdered

them and most of their attendants, and seized their
papers. Upon receiving an account of this bar-
barous outrage, committed, during the subsistence
of a truce, against persons held sacred by the most
uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for the unhappy
fate of two servants whom he loved and trusted, his
uneasiness at the interruption of his schemes by
their death, and every other passion, were fwal.
lowed up and loft in the indignation which this in.
fult on the honour of his crown excited. He ex.
claimed loudly against Guafto, who, having drawn
upon himfelfall the infamy of assassination with-
out making any discovery of importance, as the
ambassadors had left their instructions and other
papers of consequence behind them, now boldly
denied his being accessary in any wife to the
crime. He sent an ambassador to the Emperor,
to demand suitable reparation for an indignity,
which no prince, how inconsiderable or pufillani-
mous soever, could tamely endure: and when
Charles, impatient at that time to set out on his
African expedition, endeavoured to put him off
with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the
courts in Europe, setting forth the heinousness
of the injury, the spirit of moderation with
which he had applied for redress, and the ini-

quity

quity of the Emperor in disregarding this just B o 1 K-
request. %5

154!.

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with which
Guafto asserted his own innocence, the accufa-
tions of the French gained greater credit than all
his protestations; and Bellay, the French com-
mander in Piedmont, procured, at length, by his
industry and address, such a minute detail of the
tranfaftion, with the testimony of so many of the
parties concerned, as amounted almost to a legal
proof of the marquis's guilt. In consequence of
this opinion of the public, confirmed by such strong
evidence, Francis's complaints were universally
allowed to be well founded, and the steps which
he took towards renewing hostilities, were ascribed
not merely to ambition or resentment, but to the
unavoidable necessity of vindicating the honour of
his crown c.

HOWEVER just Francis might esteem his own

cause, he did not trust so much to that, as to
neglec the proper precautions for gaining other
allies besides the Sultan, by whose aid he might
counterbalance the Emperor's superior power.
But his negociations to this effet were attended
with very little success. Henry VIII. eagerly
bent at that time upon schemes against Scotland,
which he knew would at once dissolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part

l3cllay. 367. &r. Jovii Hilt. lib, xl. 268.

with

B Ovr K with the Emperor, than to contribute in any de,
%a, gree towards favouring the operations againithim

3541- The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient syster

of neutrality. The Venetians, notwithftandinc
Solyman's solicitations, imitated the Pope's ex.
ample. The Germans, satisfied with the religious
liberty which they enjoyed, found it more their in.
terest to gratify than to irritate the Emperor; so
that the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, who on
this occasion were first drawn in to interest them.
selves in the quarrels of the more potent Monarchs
of the south, and the duke of Cleves, who had
dispute with the Emperor about the possession of
Gueldres, were the only confederates whom Fran.
cis secured. But the dominions of the two former
lay at such a distance, and the power of the latter
was so inconsiderable, that he gained little by their
alliance.

Francis's BUT Francis by vigorous efforts of his own
indufsiy in
preparing activity supplied every defect. Being afflited at
for war. this time with a distemper, which was the effect of

his irregular pleasures, and which prevented his
pursuing them with the fame licentious indulgence,
he applied to business with more than his usual in.
duffry. The fame cause which occasioned thisex-
traordinary attention to his affairs, rendered him
morose and dissatisfied with the ministers whom he
had hitherto employed. This accidental peevish-
ness being sharpened by reflecting on the falie feps
into which he had lately been betrayed, as wellas
the insults to which he had been exposcd, some of

those

those in whom he had usually placed the greatest B O°0 K
confidence felt the effects of this change in his a--
temper, and were deprived of their offices. At '54'
last he disgraced Montmrorency himself, who had
long directed affairs, as well civil as military, with
all the authority of a minister no less beloved than
trusted by his mailer; and Francis being fond of
Ihewing that the fall of such a powerful favourite
did not affect the vigour or prudence of his admi-
nifration, this was a new motive to redouble his
diligence in preparing to open the war by some
splendid and extraordinary effort.

HE accordingly brought into the field five r54Z;
armies. One to at in Luxembourg under the fiearimi
duke of Orleans, accompanied by the duke of into the
Lorraine as his inftruaor in the art of war. An-
other commanded by the dauphin marched to-
wards the frontiers of Spain. A third led by Van
Roffem the marshal of Gueldres, and composed
chiefly of the troops of Cleves, bad Brabant al-
lotted for the theatre of its operations. A fourth,
of which the duke of Vendome was general,
hovered on the borders of Slanders. The last,
consisting of the forces cantoned in Piedmont, was
destined for the Admiral Annebaut. The dauphin
and his brother were appointed to command
where the chief exertions were intended, and the
greatest honour to be reaped; the army of the
former amounted to forty thousand, that of the
latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears
more surprising than that Francis did not pour

with

B O O K with these numerous and irresistible armies int
,_. the Milanese, which had so long been the obje(

*54-. of his wishes as well as enterprizes; and that h

ihould choose rather to turn almost his whol
strength into another direction, and towards new
conquests. But the remembrance of the disaster
which he had met with in his former expedition
into Italy, together with the difficulty of support.
ing a war carried on at such a distance from his
own dominions, had gradually abated his violen
inclination to obtain footing in that country, and
made him willing to try the fortune of his arms in
another quarter. At the fame time he expe&ed
to make such a powerful impression on the fron.
tier of Spain, where there were few towns of any
strength, and no army assembled to oppose hip,
as might enable him to recover possession of the
country of Roussillon, lately dismembered from the
French crown, before Charles could bring into
the field any force able to obftruft his progress.
The necessity of supporting his ally the dukeof
Cleves, and the hope of drawing a considerable
body of soldiers out of Germany by his means,
determined him to ad with vigour in the Low.
Countries.

June. THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opened the
rations. campaign much about the fame time; the former

laying siege to Perpignan the capital of Roufil'
Ion, and the latter entering Luxembourg. Tle
duke of Orleans pushed his operations with the
greatest rapidity and success, one town falling

7 after

afteranother, until no place in that large dutchy B o0 :I
remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville. a_
Nor could he have failed of over-running the I54s.
adjacent provinces with the fame ease, if he had
not voluntarily ftopt short in this career of vicory.
But a report prevailing that the Emperor had de-
termined to hazard a battle in order to save Per-
pignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by youth-
ful ardour, or moved, perhaps, by jealousy of his
brother, whom he both envied and hated, aban-
doned his own conquest, and haffened towards
Roullon, in order to divide with him the glory of
he vicory.

ON his departure some of his troops were dif-
anded, others deserted their colours, and the
es, cantoned in the towns which he had taken,
emained inaftive. By this conduct, which leaves
dilhonourable imputation either on his under-
anding or his heart, or on both, he not only
enounced whatever he could have hoped from
ich a promising commencement of the cam-
iaign, but gave the enemy an opportunity of re-
!oveiing, before the end of summer, all the con-
lueRs which he had gained. On the Spanish
iontier, the Emperor was not so inconsiderate as
D venture on a battle, the loss of which might
ave endangered his kingdom. Perpignan, though
oorly fortified, and briskly attacked, having been
Irgely supplied with ammunition and provisions
y the vigilance of Dorla , was defended so long

d Sigonii Vita A. Doria, p. 1191.
VOL. III. R and

B O0 K and so vigorously by the duke of Alva, the,per.
'-_rv-- fevering obstinacy of whose temper fitted him ad.

154a r mirably for such a service, that at last the French,

after a siege of three months, wafted by diseases,
repulsed in Several affaulcs, and despairing of fuc.
cess, relinquished the undertaking, and retired
into their own country . Thus all Francis's
mighty preparations, either from some defect in
his own condut, or from the superior power and
prudence of his rival, produced no effe&s which
bore any proportion to his expence and efforts, or
such as gratified, in My degree, his own hopes, or
answered the expectation of Europe. The only
solid advantage of the campaign was the acquisition
of a few towns in Piedmont, which Bellay gained
rather by stratagem and address, than by force of

arms

9543. THE Emperor and Francis, though bothcon-

tion so fiderably exhausted by such great but indecisive
camrpan. efforts, discovering no abatement of their mutual

animosity, employed all their attention, triedevery
expedient, and turned themselves towards every
quarter, in order to acquire new allies, together
with such a reinforcement of strength as would
give them the iilperiority in the ensuing campaign.
Charles, taking advantage of the terror and resent-
ment of the Spaniards, upon the sudden invasion
of their country, prevailed on the Cortes of the
several kingdoms to grant him subsidies with a

Sandov. Hist. tom. i. 315.
e Sandov. Hill. ii. 318. Blllay, 387, &c. Ferrer. ix, 237

110re

more liberal hand than usual. At the fame time B 0 K
he borrowed a large fum from John King of .- ,
Portugal, and, by way of security for his repay- i543-
ment, put him in poffeflion of the Molucca Isles
in the Eaf' Indies, with the gainful commerce
of precious spices, which that sequestered corner
of the globe yields. Not satisfied with this, he
negociated a marriage between Philip his only son,
now in his sixteenth year, and Mary daughter of
that Monaach, with whom her father, the mofl
opulent prince in Europe, gave a large dower;
and having likewise persuaded the Cortes of
Aragon and Valencia to recognise Philip as the
heir of there crowns, he 'obtained from them the
donative usual on such occasions . These ex-
traordinary supplies enabled him to make such
additions to his forces in Spain, that he could
detach a great body into the Low-Countries, and
yet reserve as many as were sufficient for the de-
fence of the kingdom. Having thus provided for
the security of Spain, and committed the govern-
ment of it to his son, he failed for Italy, in his
way to Germany. But how attentive soever to May.
raise the funds for carrying on the war, or eager
to grasp at any new expedient for that purpose, he
was not so inconsiderate as to accept of an over-
ture which Paul, knowing his neceflities, artfully
threw out to him. That ambitious Pontiff, no
less sagacious to discern, than watchful to seize
Opportunities of aggrandizing his family, solicited

' Ferreras, ix. 238. 2,1. Jovii Hit. lib. xlii. 298. 6.

R 2 him

B3 0 0 him to grant Oscavio his grandchild, whom the
.-Kv. -Emperor had admitted to the honour of being his
s343. son in-law, the invefture of the dutchy of Mi.

lan, in return for which he promised such a fum
of money as would have gone far towards sup-
plying all his present exigencies. But Charles,
as well from unwillingness to alienate a province
of so much value, as from disgust at the Pope,
who had hitherto refused to join in the war againlt
Francis, rejeEted the proposal. His diffatisfation
with Paul at that juncture was so great, that he
even refused to approve his alienating Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter,
and fettling them on his son and grandson as
a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no
other expedient for raising money among the
Italian states remained, he consented to withdraw
the garrisons which he had hitherto kept in the
citadels of Florence and Leghorn; in confidera.
tion for which he received a large present from
Cosmo di Medici, who by this means secured his
own independence, and got pofeflion of two
forts, which were justly called the fetters of Tuf.
cany h.

The Empe- Be Lr Charles, while he seemed to have turned
itionl" his whole attention towards railing the fums ne.
vihH'nr cef(lry for defraying the expences of the year,

had not been negligent of objet-s more diltant,
though no less important, and had concluded a

Adriani Ifloria, i. 195. Sleid. 3 z. Jovii Hill. lib. xlii,
p. 301. Vita di Cos. Medici di Baldini, p. 3 i.

league

league offensive and defensive with Henry VIII. B O O K
from which he derived, in the'end, greater advan- _
tage than from all his other preparations. Several 1543.
flight circumifances which have already been men-
tioned, had begun to alienate the affecions of that
Monarch from Francis, with whom he had been for
some time in close alliance; and new incidents of
greater moment had occurred to increase his disgust
and animosity. Henry, desirous of establishing an Henry's
uniformity in religion in both the Britilh kingdoms, ,tu,,,c re
as well as fond of making proselytes to his own opi- Scot'"nd.
nions, had formed a scheme ofperfuading his nephew
the King of Scots to renounce the Pope's fuprema-
cy, and to adopt the fame system of reformation,
which he had introduced into England. This mea-
sure he pursued with his usual eagerness and impetu-
ofity, making such advantageous offers to James,
whom he confidered as not over-fcrupuloufly at-
tached to any religious tenets, that he hardly
doubted of success. His propositions were ac-
cordingly received in such a manner, that he flat-
tered himself with having gained his point. But
the Scottiih ecclefialtics, foreseeing how fatal the
union of their Sovereign with England must prove
both to their own power, and to the ettablifhed
system of religion; and the partisans of France, no
less convinced that it would put an end to the in-
fluence of that crown upon the public councils of
Scotland; combined together, and by their infinua-
tions defeated Henry's scheme at the very moment
when he exlpeted it to have taken effect'. Too

Hilt. of Scotl. vol. i. p. 71, &c. 9th edit. 8vo.

R 3 haughty

B O I K haughty to brook such a disappointment, which he
'-v-__' imputed as much to the arts of the French, as to

1543' the levity of the Scottish Monarch, he took arms

against Scotland, threatening to subdue the king.
dom, since he could not gain the friendship of its
King. At the fame time, his reftmement againat
Francis quickened his negociations with the Em.
peror, an alliance with whom he was now as for.
ward to accept as the other could be to offer it,
During this war with Scotland, and before thecon.
clufion of his negociations with Charles, James V,
died, leaving his crown to Mary his only daughter.
an infant a few days old. Upon this event, Henri
altered at once his whole system with regard to Scot.
land, and abandoning all thoughts of conquering it,
aimed at what was more advantageous as well a,
more practicable, an union with that kingdom by,
marriage between Edward his only son and thf
young Queen. But here, too, he apprehended;
vigorous opposition from the French faction ir
Scotland, which began to bestir itself in order t(
thwart the measure. The necessity of cruihing thi!
party among the Scots, and of preventing Franci
from furnishing them any effetual aid, confirme
Henry's resolution of breaking with France, an(
pushed him on to put a finishing hand to the treat)
of confederacy with the Emperor.

Feb. xi. IN this league were contained first of all, ar
betwr n ticles for securing their future amity and mutua
har:-s nd defence; then were enumerated the demand!

which they were refpetively to make lup0o Fran'

¢isi

cis; and the plan of their operations was fixed, B 0o K
if he should refute to grant them fatisfacion.
They agreed to require that Francis should not 1543-
only renounce his alliance with Solyinan, which
had been the source of infinite calamities to
Chri.cendom, but also that he should make repa-
ration for the damages which that unnatural union
had occasioned; that he fiould restore Burgundy
to the Emperor; that he should deffit immediately
from hoffilities, and leave Charles at leisure to
oppose the common enemy of the Christian faith;
and that he should immediately pay the fums due
to Henry, or put some towns in his hands as fe-
curity to that effet. If, within forty days, he
did not comply with theie demands, they then
engaged to invade France each with twenty thou-
sand foot and five thousand horse, and -not to lay
down their arms until they had recovered Bur-
gundy, together with the towns on the Somme,
for the Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne,
or even the whole realm of France, for Henry k.
Their heralds, acccordingly, set out with these
haughty requisitions; and though they were not
permitted to enter France, the two Monarchs
held themselves fully entitled to execute whatever
was stipulated in their treaty.

I'RANcIs, on his part, was not less diligent in Frnnc;S',

preparing for the approaching campaign. I-av- tv; sl""
"ng early observcd symptoms of Henry's dif- ma""

k Rym. xiv. 768. I-Irb. 238.

IR gust

B o 0 K gust and alienation, and finding all his endeavours
L_ v to tooth and reconcile him ineffe&ual, he knew

3543- his temper too well not to expect that open hofti-

lities would quickly follow upon this cessation of
friendship. F'or this reason he redoubled his en.
deavours to obtain from Solyman such aid as might
counterbalance the great acceflion of firength
which the Emperor would receive by his alliance
with England. In order to supply the place of
the two ambassadors who had been murdered by
Guafto, he sent as his envoy, first to Venice, and
then to Constantinople, Paulin, who, though in no
higher rank than a captain offoot, wasdeemed worthy
of being raised to this important station, to which
he was recommended by Bellay, who had trained
him to the arts of negociation, and made trial of
his talents and address on several occasions. Nor
did he belie the opinion conceived of his courage
and abilities. Hastening to Constantinople, with-
out regarding the dangers to which he was ex-
posed, he urged his maffer's demands with such
boldness, and availed himself of every circum-
fiance with such dexterity, that he soon re-
moved all the Sultan's difficulties. As fomeof the
Bashaws, swayed either by their own opinion, or
influenced by the Emperor's emissaries, who had
made their way even into this court, had declared
in the Divan agairnfl acting in concert with France,
lie found means either to convince or silence themk.

k Sandov. Hiltor. tom. ii. 346. Jovii Hil. lib. xli. 28;
&c. 300, &c. Brantome.

* ,. · ,

,, ,
~At

At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to fail B 'o K
with a powerful fleet, and to regulate all his ope- -
rations by the directions of the French King. 1543.
Francis was not equally successful in his attempts
to gain the Princes of the Empire. The extraor-
dinary rigour with which he thought it necessary
to punifli such of his fubjels as had embraced the
Protestant opinions, in order to give some notable
evidence of his own zeal for the Catholic faith,
and to wipe off the imputations to which he was
liable fi-om his confederacy with the Turks, placed
an insuperable barrier between him and such of
the Germans as interest or inclination would have
prompted most readily to join him'. His chief
advantage, however, over the Emperor, he de-
rived on this, as on other occasions, from the
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the
extent of the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and disappoint-
ments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies
provide for the expences of government by occa-
fional and frugal subsidies. Hence his domestic
preparations were always carried on with vigour
and rapidity, while those of the Emperor, unless
when quickened by tome foreign supply, or tome
temporary expedient, were extremely flow and
dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to op- Operation
pose him, Francis took the field in the Low- iouhtLrW-

1 Seck. lib. iii. 403.
l Countries,

B 0 0° K Countries, against which he turned the whole

ViI.

.->--> weight of the war. He made himself master of
1543' Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the

key to the whole province of Hainault; and or.
dered it to be fortified with great care. Turning
from thence to the right, he entered the dutchy
of Luxembourg, and found it in the fame de.
fenceless state as in the former year. While he
was thus employed, the Emperor having drawn
together an army, composed of all the different
nations fubje& to his government, entered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he
had vowed to inflit exemplary vengeance. This
prince, whose conduct and situation were similar
to that of Robert de la Mark in the first war be.
tween Charles and Francis, resembled him like-
wife in his fate. Unable, with his feeble army,
to face the Emperor, who advanced at the head
of forty-four thousand men, he retired at his ap-
proach; and the Imperialists being at liberty to
a& as they pleased, immediately invested Duren.

The Empe- That town, though gallantly defended, was taken
for becomes
,nif'eof by aflault; all the inhabitants were put to the
the Ileuchy sword, and the place itself reduced to ashes. This
.ugut24. dreadful example of severity struck the peopleof

the country with such general terror, that allthe
other towns, even fich as were capable of refill
ance, sent their keys to the Emperor; and beforea
body of French, detached to his assistance, could
come up, the Duke himself was obliged to make
his ftibmiffion to Charles in the molt abjec man-
ner. Being admitted into the Imperial prefeune,

he

e kneeled, together with eight of his principal B o° K
ubje&s, and implored mercy. The Emperor al- -
owed him to remain in that ignominious posture, 1543'
nd eyeing him with an haughty and severe look,
ithout deigning to answer a tingle word, re-
iitted him to his ministers. The conditions,
owever, which they prescribed were not so rigo-
us as he had reason to have expected after such a
eception. He was obliged to renounce his alli- Sept. 7.
nce with France and Denmark; to resign all his
retensions to the dutchy of Gueldres; to enter
nto perpetual amity with the Emperor and King
f the Romans. In return for which, all his he-
editary dominions were restored, except two towns
hich the Emperor kept as pledges of the Duke's
delity during the continuance of the war; and
e was reinflated in his privileges as a Prince of
the Empire. Not long after, Charles, as a proof
of the sincerity of his reconcilement, gave him
in marriage one of the daughters of his brother
Ferdinand m,

HAVING thus chaflifed the presumption of the nBcfit-e
Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies fiom Landrccy.
Francis, and annexed to his own dominions in' the
Low-Countries a considerable province which lay
contiguous to them, Charles advanced towards
iHainault, and laid siege to Landrecy. There, as
the first fiuits of his alliance with Henry, he was

ITarxi Annal. Brabant. t. i. 628. Rccueil dcs Traitez,
t iji. 226.

joined

3B o0 K joined by fix thousand Englilh under Sir John Wal
'--v.- lop. The garrison, consisting of veteran troop

*543' commanded by De la Lande and Defle, two of

cers of reputation, made a vigorous refifranc,
Francis approached with all his forces to relieve
that place; Charles covered the siege; both were
determined to hazard an engagement; and all Eu
rope expe&ed to fee this contest, which had conti.
nued so long, decided at last by a battle betweet
two great armies, led by their refpetive Monarchi
in person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was such, as put the disadvantage ma.
nifeftly on his fide who ihould venture to attack,
and neither of them chose to run that rifque,
Amidst a variety of movements, in order to draw
the enemy into the snare, or to avoid it themselves,
Francis, with admirable condu6t and equal good
fortune, threw first a supply of fresh troops, and
then a convoy of provisions, into the town, so that
the Emperor, despairing of success, withdrew into
winter-quarters ", in order to preserve his army from
being entirely ruined by the rigour of the season.

November. DURING this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his
Solymanin-
wades Hun- engagements to the French King with great punc.
gary. tuality. He himself marched into Hungary with

a numerous army; and as the Princes of the Em.
pire made no great effort to save a country which
Charles, by employing his own force against Fran.
cis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was no ap.

n Bellay, 405, &c.

pearance

earance of any body of troops to oppose his pro- B o o K
refs. He besieged, one after another, Quinque _.
cclefie, Alba, and Gran, the three most confi- 154.
erable towns in the kingdom, of which Ferdi-
and had kept pofTeffion. The first was taken by
orm; the other two surrendered; and the whole
ingdom, a small corner excepted, was fubje&ed
the Turkish yoke". About the fame time, Barbarofla'
arbarofa failed with a fleet of an hundred and Italy.
n gallies, and coasting along the ihore of Cala-
ia, made a descent at Rheggio, which he plun-
ered and burnt; and advancing from thence to
e mouth of the Tiber, he flopt there to water.
he citizens of Rome, ignorant of his deftina-
on, and filled with terror, began to fly with such
eneral precipitation, that the city would have
en totally deserted, if they had not resumed cou-
ge upon letters from Paulin the French envoy,
ring them that no violence or injury would be
erd by the Turks to any slate in alliance with
e King his mafier P. From Ostia, Barbarossa
led to Marseilles, and being joined by the French
et with a body of land forces on board, under
e count d'Enguien, a gallant young prince of
e house of Bourbon, they directed their course
wards Nice, the sole retreat of the unfortunate
uke of Savoy. There, to the astonishment and Augufi Io.
andal of all Christendom, the Lilies of France
id Crescent of Mahomet appeared in conjunction

Illuanhaff. I-Iiltor. Hung. 1. xv. 167.
P Jovii Hil. 1. xliii. 304, &c. Pallavic. 16o.

againit

B o1 o K againif a fortress on which the Cross of Savoy was

_--, displayed. The town, however, was bravely de.
'543. fended, against their combined force by Montforta

Savoyard gentleman, who flood a general afraut,
and repulsed the enemy with great loss, beforehe
retired into the castle. That fort, situated upona
rock, on which the artillery made no impreflon,
and which could not be undermined, he held out
so long, that Doria had time to approach with his
fleet, and the Marquis del Guafto to march with
Sept. s. a body of troops from Milan. Upon intelligence

of this, the French and Turks raised the fiegee;
and Francis had not even the consolation of fuc.
cess, to render the infamy which he drew on him.
self by calling in such an auxiliary, more par.
donable.

Prepara- FROM the small progress of either party during
tio Scama this campaign, it was obvious to what a length
PaiLn. the war might be drawn out between two princes,

whose power was so equally balanced, and who,
by their own talents or activity, could so vary and
multiply their resources. The trial which they
had now made of each other's fireilgth might have
taught them the imprudence of persisting in a war,
wherein there was greater appearance of their dif
tressing their own dominions than of conquering
those of their adversary, and flould have disposed
both to wifli for peace. If Charles and Francis

CGuichenon Hifloire de Savoyc, t. i. p. 651. BellJy
425, &c.

had

lad been influenced by considerations of interest B °o o K

VII.

rprudence alone, this, without doubt, must have
een the manner in which they would have reason- 1543.
d. But the personal animosity, which mingled
tfelfin all their quarrels, had grown to be so vio-
ent and implacable, that, for the pleafirre of gra-
if'ing it, they disregarded every thing else; and
ere infinitely more solicitous how to hurt each/
ther, than how to secure what would be of ad-
vantage to themselves. No sooner then did the
eafon force them to suspend hostilities, than, with-
nut paying any attention 'to'the Pope's repeated
endeavours or paternal exhortations to re-eftabl'iflh
peace, they began to provide for the operations of
the next year with new vigour, and an activity in--
crearing with their hatred.' Charles turned his
chief attention towards gaining the Princes of the
Empire, and endeavoured to rouse the formidable
but unwieldy strength of the Germanic body against Aff.i;r, of
Francis. In order to underitand the propriety of Gcr'n""'
the iteps which he took for that purpose, it is ne-
cefihry to review the chief tranfacions in that coun-
try since the diet of Ratisbon in the year one thou-
find five hundred and forty-one.

MUcH about the time that assembly broke up, Maurceof
VMaurice succeeded his father Henry in the govern- Sioniy fl-
ment of that part of Saxony which belonged to the 'ler.
Albertine branch of the Saxon family. This young
prince, then only in his twentieth year, had, even
at that early period, begun to discover the great ta-

7 lents

B 0O K lents which qualified him for aEting such a difin.

- .---.aI guilhed part in the affairs of Germany. As so
'543. as he entered upon the administration, he struck

out into such a new and singular path, as Thewed
that he aimed, from the beginning, at something

The view, great and uncommon. Though zealously attached
and condua
odsth°n to the Protestant opinions, both from education
young and principle, he refused to accede to the league of

Simalkalde, being determined, as he said, to main-
tain the purity of religion, which was the original
object of that confederacy, but not to entangle
himself in the political interests or combinations to
which it had given rife. At the fame time, fore-
feeing a rupture between Charles and the confede.
rates of Smalkalde, and perceiving which of them
was mofl likely to prevail in the contest, instead of
that jealousy and diftrufl which the other Proteit-
ants expressed of all the Emperor's designs, he
affected to place in him an unbounded confidence;
and courted his favour with the utmost afiduity.
When the other Protestants, in the year fifteen
hundred and forty-two, either declined assisting
Ferdinand in Hungary, or afforded him reluctant
and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in per-
son, and rendered himself conspicuous by his zeal
and courage. From the fame motive, he had led
to the Emperor's affifance, during the last cam-
paign, a body of his own troops; and the grace-
fulness of his person, his dexterity in all military
exercises, together with his intrepidity, which
courted and delighted in danger, did not difling-

guifli

Uinfh him more in the field, than his great abilities B O O K
and inflnuating address won upon the Emperor's ._
confidence and favour . While by this conduct, 1543
vwhich appeared extraordinary to those who held
the fame opinions with him concerning religion,
Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the Empe-
ror, he began to discover some degree of jealousy
of his cousin the Eleaor of Saxony. This, which
proved in the sequel so fatal to the Elector, had
almost occasioned an open rupture between them;
and Loon after Maurice's accession to the govern-
ment, they both took arms with equal rage, upon
account of a dispute about the right ofjurifdiaion
over a paltry town situated on the Moldaw. They
were prevented, however, from proceeding to ac-
tion by the mediation of the Landgrave of Hesse,
whole daughter Maurice had married, as well as
by the powerful and authoritative admonitions of
Luther .

AMIDST these tranfaaions, the Pope, though TlhePope
extremely irritated at the Emperor's concessions hold.ge-
to the Protestants at the diet of Ratisbon, was so cila''rent.
warmly solicited on all hands, by fucl as were
molt devoutly attached to the See of Rome, no
less than by those whose fidelity or designs he sus-
peted, to summon a general council, that he
Iiund it impossible to avoid any longer calling
that anll;mbly. The impatience for its mettinlg,

Sleid. 317. Seck. 1. iii. 371. 336. 428.

' Sleid. 292. Seck . , iii. 403.
\'OL. I1, S and

B 01° K and the expectations of great effects fiom its de-

vil.
-.- ...i cifions, seemed to grow in proportion to the diffi-
'543. culty of obtaining it. He still adhered, however,

to his original resolution of holding it in some town
of Italy, where, by the number of ecclesiastics, re.
tainers to his court, and depending on his favour,
who could repair to it without difficulty or expence,
he might influence and even direa all its proceed.
ings. This propolition, though often rejected by
the Germans, he inftruted his nuncio to the diet
MAarth 3. held at Spires, in the year one thousand five hun.

dred and forty-two, to renew once more; and if he
found it gave no greater satisfaction than formerly,
he empowered him, as a last conceflion, to propose
for the place of meeting, Trent, a city in the Tyrol,
subjea to the King of the Romans, and situated on
the confines between Germany and Italy. The
Catholic princes in the diet, after giving it as their
opinion that the council might have been held with
greater advantage in Ratisbon, Cologne, or some of
the great cities of the Empire, were at length in-
duced to approve of the place which the Pope had
named. The Protestants unanimously expressed
their dissatisfaction, and protested that they would
pay no regard to a council held beyond the pre-
cin&s of the Empire, called by the Pope's autho-
rity, and in which he assumed the right of pre-
fiding '.

iMwy 22. THE Pope, without taking any notice of their
sun54 .it objeaions, publiflhed the bull of intimation, named
to meet.

c Sleid. 291. Scck. 1. iii. zS1.

three

three cardinals to preside as his legates, and ap- B O O K
pointed them to repair to Trent before the first of --
November, the day he had fixed for opening the X543.
council. But if Paul had desired the meeting of a
council as sincerely as he pretended, he would not
have pitched on such an improper time for calling
it. Instead of that general union and tranquillity,
without which the deliberations of a council could
neither be conducted with security, nor attended
with authority, such a fierce war was just kindled
between the Emperor and Francis, as rendered it
impossible for the ecclesiastics from many parts of
Europe to resort thither in safety. The legates,
accordingly, remained several months at Trent; but
as no person appeared there, except a few prelates
from the ecclesiastical state, the Pope, in order to Obliged to
avoid the ridicule and contempt which this drew
upon him from the enemies of the church, re-
called them and prorogued the council ".

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the papal fee, The Empc
at the very time that the German Protestants took ,o ,otti
every occasion of pouring contempt upon it, the '"nt
Emperor and King of the Romans found it necef-
lary not only to connive at their conduct, but to
court their favour by repeated acts of indulgence.
In the fame diet of Spires, in which they bad pro-
tested in the moRs disrespectful terms againlt as-
fembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand, who de-

. F. Paul, p. 97. Sleid. xz.

S 2 pended

B ° R K pended on their aid for the defence of Hungary;
a,_-- -j not only permitted that protestation to be inserted

1543. in the records of the diet, but renewed in their fa-

vour all the Emperor's concefflons at Ratisbon,
adding to them whatever they demanded for their
farther security. Among other particulars, he
granted a suspension of a decree of the Imperial
chamber against the city of Gofar (one ofthofe
which had entered into the league of Smalkalde),
on account of its having seized the ecclesiastical
revenues within its domains, and enjoinedHenry
Duke of Brunswick to desist from his attempts to
carry that decree into execution. But Henry, a
furious bigot, and no less obstinate than rash in all
his undertakings, continuing to disquiet the people

Theiri- of Goflar by his incursions, the Elecor of Saxony
tediSgb. and Landgrave of Hesse, that they might not sus-

ser any member of the Smalkaldic body to be op.
pressed, assembled their forces, declared war in form
against Henry, and in the space of a few weeks,
stripping him entirely of his dominions, drove him
as a wretched exile to take refuge in the court of
Bavaria. By this a&t of vengeance, no less revere
than sudden, they filled all Germany with dread of
their power, and the confederates of Smalkalde ap-
peared, by this first effort of their arms, to be as
ready as they were able to protea those who had
joined their association ".

x Sleid. 296. Commemoratio fuccinaaCaufarumBelli, &

a Smalkaldicis contra Henr. Brunfw. ab iifdem edica; a.
Scardium, tom. ii. 307.

6 EMBOLD.

EMBIOLDENED by so many concessions in their B 0 o K
favour, as well as by the progress which their opi- I
nions daily made, the princes of the league of Smal- 'i43
kalde took a solemn protefl against the Imperial
chamber, and declined itsjurifdition for the future,
because that court had not been visited or reformed
according to the decree of Ratisbon, and continued
to discover a most indecent partiality in all its pro-
ceedings. Not long after this, they ventured a ftep
farther; and protesting against the recess of a diet
held at Nuremberg, which provided for the defence
of Hungary, refused to furnifhl their contingent for April .3,
that purpose, unless the Imperial chamber were re- J543-
formed, and full security were granted them in every
point with regard to religion Y.

SuCHi were the lengths to which the Protestants Dit a
had proceeded, and such their confidence in their 5is.
own power, when the Emperor returned from the
Low-Countries, to hold a diet, which he had fum-
moned to meet at Spires. The refpet due to the
Emperor, as well as the importance of the affairs
which were to be laid before it, rendered this a(-
fembly extremely full. All the EleEtors, a great
number of princes ecclesiastical and secular, with
tle deputies of most of the cities, were present.
Charles loon perceived that this was not a time to
olicnCd the jealous tpirit of the Protestants, by as-
Iritiln in any high tone the authority and dotrines
of he church, or by abridging, in the smallest ar-

Y :;lcid. 30,1. 307. Scck. 1. iii. 404. 416.

S 3 ticle,

B o o K tide, the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that,

VII.
V__I' on the contrary, if he expected any support from
'544- them, or wilhed to preserve Germany from intef-

tine disorders while he was engaged in a foreign
war, he must tooth them by new concessions, and a
more ample extension of their religious privileges.
He began, accordingly, with courting theEleEtor
of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, the heads of
the Protestant party, and by giving up some things
in their favour, and granting liberal promises with
regard to others, he secured himself from any dan.

TheEmpe- ger of opposition on their part. Having gained
its acit this capital point, he then ventured to address the
a'gain, diet with greater freedom. He began by repre-

fernting his own zeal, and unwearied efforts with
regard to two things most essential to Chrifendom,
the procuring of a general council in order to com-
pose the religious dissensions which had unhappily
arisen in Germany, and the providing some proper
means for checking the formidable progress of the
Turkish arms. But he observed, with deep regret,
that his pious endeavours had been entirely defeat-
ed by the unjustifiable ambition of the French
King, who having wantonly kindled the flame of
war in Euiope, which had been so lately extin-
guilhed by the truce of Nice, rendered it impof-
fible fbr the fathers of the church to affemblein
council, or to deliberate with security; and obliged
him to employ those forces in his own defence,
%vhich, with greater fatisfadEion to himself, as well
as more honour to Chriltendom, he would have
turned against the Infidels: That Francis, not

thinking

thinking it enough to have called him off from op- B 1 o K
posing the Mahometans, had, with unexampled _
impiety, invited them into the heart of Christen- '54.
dom, and, joining his arms to theirs, had openly
attacked the Duke of Savoy a member of the Em-
pire: That Barbarossa's fleet was now in one of the
ports of France, waiting only the return of spring
to carry terror and desolation to the coast of rome
Christian state: That in such a situation it was folly
to think of distant expeditions against the Turk,
or of marching to oppose his armies in Hungary,
while such a powerful ally received him into the
centre of Europe, and gave him footing there.
It was a dictate of prudence, he added, to oppose
the nearest and most imminent danger, first of all,
and by humbling the power of France, to deprive
Solyman of the advantages, which he derived from
the unnatural confederacy formed between him and
a Monarch who fill arrogated the name of Most
Christian: That, in truth, a war against the French
King and the Sultan ought to be confidered as the
fame thing; and that every advantage gained over
the former, was a revere and sensible blow to the
latter: On all there accounts, he concluded with
demanding their aid against Francis, not merely
as an enemy of the Germanic body, or of him
who was its head, but as an avowed ally of the
Infidels, and a public enemy to the Chriftiar
name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent
invective of the Emperor, the King of the Ro,

S 4 mans

B 0 o K mans flood up, and related the rapid conquelfs ol

viI.
a _--c-^ the Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he fait, by

s44-' the fatal neceflity impoSed on his brother, ofem.

ploying his arms against France. *V hen he had
finifihed, the ambassador of Savoy gave a detail of
Barbarollta's operations at Nice. and of the ravage,
which he had committed on that coast. All there,
added to the general indignation which Francis's
unprecedented union with the Turks excited in
Europe, made such an impression on the diet as
the Emperor wished, and disposed most of the
members to grant him such effectual aid as he had
demanded. The ambafiadors whom Francis had
sent to explain the motives of his conduct, were
not permitted to enter the bounds of the Empire;
and the apology which they published for their
mailer, vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by
examples drawn from Scripture, and the practiceof
Christian princes, was little regarded by men who
were irritated already, or prejudiced againfi him to
such a degree, as to be incapable of allowing their
proper weight to any arguments in his behalf.

Hisva SUCH being the favourable disposition of the
i^.('mdr'to Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could
raint'ne. now obftrut his gaining all that he aimed at, but

the fears and jealousies of the Protestants, which
he determined to quiet by granting every thing
that the utmost solicitude of these paflions could
desire for the security of their religion. With
this view, he consented to a recels, whereby all
the rigorous edicts hitherto ifued againit the Pro-

teftants

teftlnts were fulpended; a council either general B O° K
;r national to be aflembled in Germany was de- -
cldred ncceffary, in order to re-establish peace in 1544.
the church; until one of these should be held
(whicll the Emperor undertook to bring about
as tbon as piofiblt), the free and public exercise
of the Protestant religion was authorized; the
Imperial chamber was enjoined to give no moleffa-
tion to the Protestants; and when the term, for
which the present judges in that court were elected,
should expire, persons duly qualified were then
to be admitted as members, without any diftinc-
tion on account of religion. In return for there Aid grarted
extraordinary acts of indulgence, the Protestants b, thcdlet-
concurred with the other members of the diet, in
declaring war againit Francis in name of the
empire; in voting the Emperor a body of twenty-
four thousand foot and four thousand horse, to be
maintained at the public expence for fix months,
to be employed against France; and at the fame
time the diet imposed a poll-tax to be levied
throughout all Germany on every person without
exception, for the support of the war against the
'Turks.

CHAr.RLES, while he gave the greatest attention Charlec-'

to thle minute and intricate derail of particulars 'n(",trin"
ncccfllry towards conducting the deliberations of m.k and
a numerous and divided alfembly to such a fuc-
t:ls;fl period, negociatcd a leparate peace with
the lig of Denmark k ; who, though he had hi-
thcrto pterormicd nothing considerable in confe-

quence

B o0° K quence of his alliance with Francis, had it in lhi
_-.._ power, however, to make a troublefomediverlion
x54+' in favour of that Monarch z. At the fame time,

he did not neglect proper applications to the
King of England, in order to route him to more
vigorous efforts against their common enemy,
Little, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this;
for such events had happened in Scotland as in.
flamed Henry to the most violent pitch of relent.
ment against Francis. Having concluded with
the parliament of Scotland a treaty of marriage
between his son and their young Queen, by which
he reckoned himself secure of effecting the union
of the two kingdoms, which had been long de.
fired, and often attempted without success by his
predecessors, Mary of Guise the Queen-mother,
cardinal Beatoun, and other partizans of France,
found means not only to break off the match,
but to alienate the Scottilh nation entirely from
the friendship of England, and to strengthen its
ancient attachment to France. Henry, however,
did not abandon an objet of so much importance;
and as the humbling of Francis, betides the plea-
sure of talcing revenge upon an enemy who had
disappointed a favourite measure, appeared the
most effectual method of bringing the Scots to
accept once more of the treaty which they had
relinquifncd, he was so eager to accomplish this, that
he was ready to second whatever the Emperor
could propose to be attempted againit the French

T Dumont Corps Diplor, t. iv. p, ii. p. 274.

ktin

,ing The plan, accordingly, which they con- B o o0 K
cerred, was such, if it had been pun6tually exe-
cuted, as must have ruined France in the.firft 1544
lace, and would have augmented so prodigiously
the Emperor's power and territories, as might in the
nd have proved fatal to the liberties of 'Europe.
hey agreed to invade France each with an army
f twenty-five thousand men, and, without losing
ime in besieging the frontier towns, to advance
iretly towards the interior provinces, and to join
heir forces near Paris a,

FRANvCIS flood alone in opposition to all the TheFrench
enemies whom Charles was mustering against him. field in
Solyman had been the only ally who did not desert Picdsllt.
him; but the assistance which he received from
him had rendered him so odious to all Christen-
0om, that he resolved rather to forego all the ad-
vantages of his friendship, than to become, on
that account, the objec of general detestation.
For this reason, he dismissed Barbarossa as soon as
winter was over, who, after ravaging the coast of
Naples and Tuscany, returned to Constantinople.
As Francis could not hope to equal the forces of
o many powers combined against him, he en-
leavoured to supply that defe6t by dispatch, which
vas more in his power, and to get the start of them
ntaking the field. Early in the spring the count rilgan.
1'Enguien inverted Carignan, a town in Piedmont,
which the marquis del Guafto the Imperial gene-

' Icrbert, 2,5. Bellay, 448.

ra4

B 0 0 K ral having surprised the former year, confidere

vi1.

-3---j' as of so much importance, that he had fortifiCe
1544' it at great expence. The count pushed the sieg

with such vigour, that Guafto, fond of his ow
conquest, and 1ieing no other way of favingil
from falling into the hands of the French, re.
Iblved to hazard a battle in order to relieveit

lTh impe- lHe began his march fi-om Milan for this purpose

mrrch to and as he was at no pains to conceal his intention,
lehVeit. it was ioon known in the French camp. En.

guien, a gallant and enterprising young man,
wii-ded pafionately to try the fortune of a battle;
his troops desired it with no les ardour; butthe
peremptory injunction of the King not to venture
a general engagement, flowing from a prudent
attention to the present situation of affairs, as
well as from the remembrance of former difafers,
restrained him fi-om venturing upon it. Unwill.
ing, however, to abandon Carignan, when itwa
juss ready to yield, and eager to diffinguifl hii
command by fonme memorable ation, he dif.
patched Monluc to court, in order to lay before
the King the advantages of fighting the enemy,
and the hopes which he had of victory. The
King referred the matter to his privy council; all
the ministers declared, one after another, againl
fighting, and supportcd their tnfltirents by rea
sons extremely plaufiblc. While they were de.
livering thcir opinions, Monluc, who was per.
nintted to be peltci t, (lifcovered lich vilibleand
extrava;galnlt fynpllrtomis of impatience to ftcak, 5
wvcll as luch diilitibfclion with what he nheart, i

:1' itllCicl

rancis, divelted with his appearance, called on B o o

.

il) to declare what he could offer in reply to -
.ntilnents which seemed to be as jutt as they '54,
cre (eneral. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but
iritcd Ibkldier, and of known courage, repre-
inted the good condition of the troops, their
.gernefs to meet the enemy in the field, their
onfidence in their officers, together with the ever-
atling infamy which the declining of a battle
ou!d bring on the French arms; and he urged
is arguments with such lively impetuosity, and
iici a flow of military eloquence, as gained over to
is opinion, not only the King, naturally fond of
iring a6tions, but several of the council. Fran-
is, catching the fame enthufiafin which had ani-
mated his troops, frLddenly flarted up, and having
iftcd his hands to Heaven, and implored the
ivine protection, he then addrefTed himself to
lonluc, " Go, fays he, return to Piedmont, and
fight in the name of God b."

No sooner was it known tlat the King had nJtlirof

given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialifis, cui,.
than fucl was the martial ardour of the gallant
and highl-pirited gentlemen of that age, that the
ourt was quite deserted, every perlbn desirous
of reputation, or capable of service, hurrying to
Piedmlont, in order to ffiare, as volunteers, in
the dnnger and glory of the acition. Encouraged
by the arrival of so many brave oficers, Enguien

b Memoires dc Monluc.

imme-

o 0 0 K immediately prepared for battle, nor did Guafc

'_- decline the combat. The number of cavalry -,a!
'544. almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded

the French by at least ten thousand men. They
April ,i. met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which as.

forded to neither any advantage of ground, and
both had full time to form their army in proper
order. The shock was such as might have been
expeted between veteran troops, violent and ob.
ftinate. The French cavalry rushing forward to
the charge with their usual vivacity, bore down
every thing that opposed them; but, on the other
hand, the steady and disciplined valour of the
Spanish infantry having forced the body which
they encountered to give way, victory remained
in suspense, ready to declare for whichever ge-
neral could make the best use of that critical mo-
ment. Guafto, engaged in that part of his army
which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of
falling into the hands of the French, whose venge-
ance he dreaded on account of the murder of
Rincon and Fregofo, loft his pretence of mind,
and forgot to order a large body of reserve to ad-
vance; whereas Enguien, with admirable courage
and equal conduet, supported, at the head of his
gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to
yield; and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss
in his service, who had been viEtorious wherever
they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards. This
motion proved decisive. All that followed was
confiftion and slaughter. The marquis del Guaflo,
wounded in the thigh, escaped only by the swift-

ness

es of his horse. The viaory of the French was B O O K
omplete, ten thousand of the Imperialists being '
ai, and a considerable number, with all their '544.
nts, baggage, and artillery, taken. On the part
f the conquerors, their joy was without allay,
few only being killed, and among these no officer
diftinfion '.

THIS splendid acion, beside the reputation with Efftsof it.
hich it was attended, delivered France from an
ninent danger, as it ruined the army with which
uafto had intended to invade the country between
eRhone and Saone, where there were neither
rtified towns nor regular forces to oppose his
ogress. But it was not in Francis's power to
rfue the victory with such vigour as to reap
the advantages which it might have yielded; for
ough the Milanese remained now almost de-
celefs; though the inhabitants, who had long
urmured under the rigour of the Imperial go-
rnment, were ready to throw off the yoke;
0ugh Enguien, flushed with success, urged the
ingto seize this happy opportunity of recovering
country, the acquisition of which had been long
B favourite object; yet, as the Emperor and
ingof England were preparing to break in upon
eo ppofite frontier of France with numerous ar-
ies, it became necessary to sacrifice all thoughts
conquest to the public safety, and to recal

B'ellay, 29, &c. Mcmoires de, Mcnluc. Jovii His.
lv P. 327. 6.

1 twelve

B o0 0 K twelve thoufind of Enguien's best troops to be

A - ~employed in defence of the kingdom. Enguien's
si ';- subsequent operations were, of consequence, so

languid and inconsiderable, that the reduationof
Carignan and some other towns in Piedmont,
was all that he gained by his great vitory at
Ccrifules d,

Opration THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking the
in the Low- °
Lou.triii. field, but he appeared, towards the beginningof

June, at the head of an army more numerous
and better appointed than any which he hadhi-
therto led against France. It amounted almoR
to fifty thousand men, and part of it having re-
duced Luxembourg and some other towns in the
Netherlands, before he himself joined it, he now
marched with the whole towards the frontiersof
June. Champagne. Charles, according to his agree.

ment with the King of England, ought to have
advanced diretly towards Paris; and the Dau-
phin, who commanded the only army to which
Francis trusted for the security of his dominionsin
that quarter, was in no condition to oppose him.
But the success with which the French had defended
Provence in the year one thousand five hundredand
thirty-fix, had taught them the mnoft effecual me-
thod ofdiltrefling an invading enemy. Champagne,
a country abounding more in vines than corn, wa
incapable of maintaining a great army; and be.
fore the Empelr's approach, whatever could be

4 Bell3i, 4ss, &c.

of any use to his troops had been carried off or B O00 K
detroyed. T'his rendered it necessary for him to -,
be matter of some places of strength in order to '544.
secure the convoys, on which alone he now per-
ceived that he muff depend for subsistence; and
he found the frontier towns so ill provided for
defence, that he hoped it would not be a work
either of much time or difficulty to reduce them.
Accordingly Ligny and Commercy, which he
filrf attacked, surrendered after a Ihort refiflance.
He then inveited St. Difler, which, though it The Emp--

ror invcfls

colnmnanded an .important pass on the Marne, s. Difier.
was dclitute of every thing necessary for fuficain- JulY 8s
inga (icge. But the count de Sancerre and M.
e la Lande, who had acquired such reputation
y the defence of Landrecy, generously threw
hemiclves into the town, and undertook to hold
t out to the last extremity. The emperor soon
ound how capable they were of making good their
romifl, and that he could not expect to take the
own without besieging it in form. This ac-
ordingly he undertook; and as it was his nature
ever to abandon any enterprise in which he had
nce engaged, he persisted in it with an incon-
derate obstinacy.

TijE King of England's preparations for the HenryVIr.
aml)aigli wet re complete long before the EI-m- il".ou-.
erOr's; hut as he did not choose, on the one
Ianc, to (-lcointer alone the whole power of

1((, an:td wavs unwvilling, on the other, that

s tr(o)o, fniould remain inactive, he took that
V I.. 1I. '1' oppor--

B OO K opportunity of chastising the Scots, by fending his
-._..-, fleet, together with a considerable part of his in.

'544. fantry, under the earl of Hertford, to invadetheir

country. Hertford executed his commiflion with
vigour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh and Leith,
laid waste the adjacent country, and reimbarked his
men with such dispatch that they joined their
July 14. sovereign soon after his landing in France *. When

Henry arrived in that kingdom, he found the Em-
peror engaged in the siege of St. Difier; an ambaf
iador, however, whom he sent to congratulate the
English Monarch on his safe arrival on the con-
tinent, solicited him to march, in terms of the
treaty, directly to Paris. But Charles had set his
ally such an ill example of fulfilling the conditions
of their confederacy with exatnefs, that Henry,
observing him employ his time and forces in taking
towns for his own behoof, saw no reason why he
should not attempt the reduction of some places
that lay conveniently for himself. Without pay-
ing any regard to the Emperor's remonstrances, he
inl-m ediately invelred Boulogne, and commanded
the duke of Norfolk to press the siege of Mon.
trcuil, which had been begun before his arrival, by
a body of Flemnings, in conjuntlion with some
1' nglinl troops. Wh'ile Charles and Henry shew'
ecl lich attention each to his own interef, they
both negleEted the common caufi. Inflead ofthe
iiiion and confidence icquilite towards con(ducinb
tlih glreat plan that they had formed, they early

* Ilil. Scotland, i. l z.

difrcovered

discovered a mutual jealousy of each other, which, by B o o K
degrees, begot diflruft, and ended in open hatred. c .

1544.

BY this time,' Francis had, with unwearied in- Gallant de-

dufry, drawn together an army, capable, as well Difof t.
from the number as from the valour of the
troops, of making head againff the enemy. But
the dauphin, who still aEted as general, prudently
declining a battle, the loss of which would have
endangered the kingdom, satisfied himself with
harafling the Emperor with his light troops, cut-
ting off his convoys, and laying waste the coun-
try around him. Though extremely distressed
by there operations, Charles frill pressed the siege
of St. Difier, which Sancerre defended with afto-
niffling fortitude and conduct. He flood repeated
assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all; and
undismayed even by the death of his brave associate
Dela Lande, who was killed by a cannon-ball, he
continued to shew the fame bold countenance and
obstinate resolution. At the end of five weeks,
he was still in a condition to hold out some time
longer, when an artifice of Granvelle's induced
him to surrender. That crafty politician, having
intercepted the key to the cypher which the Duke
of Guise used in communicating intelligence to
Sancerre, forged a letter in his name, authorizing
Sancerre to capitulate, as the King, though highly
iatisfied with his behaviour, thought it impru-
dent to hazard a battle for his relief. This letter

c Herbert.

'T 2 he

B 0 0 K he conveyed into the town in a manner which
---.. could raise no suspicion, and the governor fell
'544. into the snare. Even then, he obtained such ho.

nourable conditions as his gallant defence merit.
ed, and among others, a cessation of hostilities for
eight days, at the expiration of which he bound
himself to open the gates, if Francis, during that
time, did not attack the Imperial army, and
throw fresh troops into the town . Thus San.
cerre, by detaining the Emperor so long before
an inconsiderable place, afforded his sovereign full
time to assemble all his forces, and what rarely
falls to the lot of an officer in such an inferior
command, acquired the glory of having favedhis
country.

Augrei r-. As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the Emperor
"or peo'- advanced into the heart of Champagne, but San-
trael iltof cerre's obitinate resistance had damped his fan-
France. guine hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led him

fi-rioufly to reflect on what he might expeatbe-
fore towns of greater ffrength, and defended by
more numerous garrilons. At the fame time,
the procuring fubfiitence for his army was at.
tended with great difficulty, which increased in
proportion as he withdrew farther fiom his own
fiontier. He had loft a great number of his beR
troops in the siege of St. Dificr, and many fell
daily in Ikirmifihes, which it was not in his power
to avoid, though they wafted his army infelfibly,

f Brantomc, tom. vi. 489.

without

without leading to any decisive ation. The sea- B o0 K
son advanced apace, and he had not yet the corn- i--
mand either of a sufficient extent of territory, or 1544.
of any such considerable town as rendered it safe
to winter in the enemy's country. Great arrears
too were now due to his soldiers, who were upon the
point of mutinying for their pay, while he knew
not from what funds to satisfy them. All these
considerations induced him to liften to the over-
tures of peace, which a Spanish Dominican, the
confessor of his fifeer the Queen of France, had fe-
cretly made to his confessor, a monk of the fame
order. In consequence of this, plenipotentiaries
were named on both fides, and began their con-
ferences in Chauffi, a small village near Chalons.
At the fame time, Charles, either from a desire
of making one great final effort against France, or
merely to gain a pretext for deserting his ally, and
concluding a separate peace, sent an ambassador
formally tc require Henry, according to the fti-
pulation in their treaty, to advance towards Paris.
While he expected a return from him, and waited
the issue of the conferences at Chauffe, he con-
tinued to march forward, though in the utmost
diRfrefs from scarcity of provisions. But at last,
by a fortunate motion on his part, or through
flume neglcl or treachery on that of the French,
lie surprised firm-t Efperney and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable maga-
zines. No sooner was it known that these towns,
the latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than that

T 3 great

B o ° K great capital, defenceless, and susceptible of any
----.- violent alarm in proportion to its greatness, was
1544- filled with consternation. The inhabitants, as if

the Emperor had been already at their gates, fed
in the wildefr confusion and despair, many fend.
ing their wives and children down the Seine to
Roiien, others to Orleans, and the towns upon
the Loire. Francis himself, more afflicted with
this than with any other event during his reign,
and sensible as well of the triumph that his rival
would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of the
danger to which the kingdom was exposed, could
not refrain from crying out, in the first emotion
of his surprise and sorrow, " How dear, 0 my
God, do I pay for this crown, which I thought
thou hadst granted me freely g !" But recovering
in a moment from this sudden sally of peevishness
and impatience, he devoutly added, " Thy will,
however, be done ;" and proceeded to issue the
necefary orders for opposing the enemy withhis
usual activity and presence of mind. The daut
phin detached eight thousand men to Paris, which
revived the courage of the affiighted citizens; he
threw a firong garrison into Meaux, and by a
forced march got into Fert&, between the Impe-
rialifts and the capital.

osiiged to UPON this, the Emperor, who began again to
Cteile. feel the want of provisions, perceiving that the

dauphin fiill prudently declined a battle, and not

g Brantome, tom. vi. 381.

daring

daring to attack his camp with forces so much B o K
shattered and reduced by hard service, turned
suddenly to the right, and began to fall back to- I54'
wards Soissons. Having about this time received
Henry's answer, whereby he refused to abandon
the sieges of Boulogne and Montreuil, of both
which he expected every moment to get poffefion,
he thought himself absolved from all obligations of
adhering to the treaty with him, and at full liberty
to consult his own interest in what manner soever
he pleased. He consented, therefore, to renew
the conference, which the surprise of Efperney
had broken off. To conclude a peace between Peace be-

'-r~~ i 1tween him
two princes, one of whom greatly desired, and and Francis

concluded at

the other greatly needed it, did not require a long crefpy.
negociation. It was signed at Crefpy, a finall
town near Meaux, on the eighteenth of Septem-
ber. The chief articles of it were, That all the
conquests which either party had made since
the truce of Nice shall be restored; That the
Emperor shall give in marriage to the Duke of
Orleans, either his own eldest daughter, or the
second daughter of his brother Ferdinand ; That
if he chore to bef-ow on him his own daughter,
he shall fettle on her all the provinces of the Low-
Countries, to be erected into an independent
tfate, which shall descend to the male issue of the
marriage; That it he determined to give him his
niece, he shall, with her, grant him the invefti-
tule of Milan and its dependencies; That he
hall within four months declare which of there
two lrincclles he had pitched upon, and fulfil

T + the

B 0 0 K the refpeaive conditions upon the confummatior

_--^--' of the marriage, which ihall take place withi a
J54+. year from the date of the treaty; That as soon as

the Duke of Orleans is put in possession either oi
the Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis Ihal] re-
store to the Duke of Savoy all that he now possesses
of his territories, except Pignerol and Montmilian;
That Francis shall renounce all pretensions to the
kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois, and Charles shall give up his
claim to the dutchy of Burgundy and county of
Charolois; That Francis ;hall give no aid to the
exiled King of Navarre That both Monarchs
shall join in making war upon the Turk, towards
which the King shall furnish, when required by the
Emperor and Empire, fix hundred men at arms,
and ten thousand sooth.

lotives of BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace,
concluding
it. arising from the distress of his army through want

of provilions; from the difficulty of retreating
out of France, and the impossibility of securing
winter-quarters there ; the Emperor was infu-
enced bv other considerations, more distant in-
deed, but not less weilhty. The Pope was of-
fended to a great degree, as well at his concil:
sions to the Protftlants in the late diet, as athis
consenting to call a council, and to admit of
public dilputations in Germany with a view of

h Recueil des Traitez, t. i. 227. Belius de Caufis Pacis
Crcpiac, in A-tis Lrudit. Lips. 1763.

deter-

determining the doctrines in controversy. Paul B 0 K
confidering both these steps as sacrilegious en- L L
croachments on the jurifdiaion as well as privi- 1544'
leges of the Holy See, had addreffed.to the Em-
perora remonstrance rather than a letter on this
fubjeft, written with such acrimony of language,
and in a flyle of such high authority, as discover-
ed more of an intention to draw on a quarrel than
of a desire to reclaim him. This ill humour was
not a little inflamed by the Emperor's league with
Henry of England, which being contraced with
an heretic, excommunicated by the apostolic fee,
appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and was
not less dreaded by him than that of Francis with
Solyman. Paul's son and grandson, highly in-
cenfed at the Emperor for having refused to gra-
tify them with regard to the alienation of Parma
and Placentia, contributed by their suggestions to
four and disgust him still more. To all which was
added the powerful operation of the flattery and
promises which Francis incessantly employed to
gain him. Though from his desire of maintain-
ing a neutrality, the Pope had hitherto ulppreffed
his o\vn resentment, had eluded the artifices of his
own family, and resifted the solicitations of the
French King, it was not safe to rely much on the
lleaclincl' of a man whom his passions, his friends,
and his interest combined to ihake. The union of
tel Pope with France, Charles well knew, would
i:1iltnrly expose his dominions in Italy to be at-
t(:c!:I. T'he Venetians, lie foresaw, would pro-
.lblJy follow the example of a Pontiff, who was

confider-

B °0 K confidered as a model of political wisdom amnon
t-__-
- .the Italians; and thus, at a junture when he fell

1544. himself hardly equal to the burden of the prefeni

war, he would be overwhelmed with the weightofa
new confederacy against him '. At the fame time,
the Turks, almost unresisted, made such progress
in Hungary, reducing town after town, that they
approached near to the confines of the Austrian
provinces . Above all these, the extraordinary
progress of the Protestant doctrines in Germany,
and the dangerous combination into which the
Princes of that profession had entered, called for
his immediate attention. Almost one half of Ger.
many had revolted from the established church;
the fidelity of the reft was much shaken; the no.
bility of Austria had demanded of Ferdinand the
free exercise of religion'; the Bohernians, among
whom some feeds of the doctrines of Huss fill
remained, openly favoured the new opinions; the
archbishop of Cologne, with a zeal which is fel-
dom found among ecclesiastics, had begun the re-
formation of his diocese; nor was it possible, un-
less tome timely and efFctm ual check were given to
the spirit of innovation, to foresee where it would
end. H-e himself had been a witness, in the late
diet, to the peremptory and decisive tone which
the Protestants had now affimed. H-e had lien
how, from confidence in their number and union,

I 1. Paul, loo. PI'llavic. 163.

l- Iluanhalii lill. !lung. 177.
I Sleid. itJ.

tlhey

they had forgotten the humble style of their first B o K
petitions, and had grown to such boldness as
openly to despise the Pope, and to shew no great 1544.
reverence for the Imperial dignity itself. If, there-
fore, he wished to maintain either the ancient re-
ligion or his own authority, and would not choose
to dwindle into a mere nominal head of the Em-
pire, omne vigorous and speedy effort was requisite
on his part, which could not be made during a
war that required the greatest exertion of his
strength' against a foreign and powerful enemy.

SUCH being the Emperor's inducements to
peace, he had the address to frame the treaty of
Crefpy lo as to promote all the ends which he had
in view. By coming to an agreement with Fran-
cis, he took from the Pope all profpeOt of advan-
tage in courting the friendship of that Monarch in
preference to his. By the proviso with regard to a
war with che Turks, he not only deprived Soly-
man of a powerful ally, but turned the arms of
that ally against him. By a private article, not
inlcrted in the treaty, that it might not raise any
unfcafonable alarm, he agreed with Francis that
both should exert all their influence and power in
or(ler to procure a general council, to after its
authority, and to exterminate the Protestant heresy
out of their dominions. This cut off all chance
of alillance which the confederates of Smalkalde
"'iglt cxpccl fiomn the French Kiing "' and left

'" Seek. i. ii. 496.

their

B o0 c K their solicitations, or his jealousy of an ancient ri.

viI.
Av--.' val, should hereafter tempt Francis to forget thi
544- engagement, he left him embarrassed with a war

against England, which would put it out of his
power to take any considerable part in the affairs
of Germany.

War con- HENRY, poffefled at all times with an high idea
tinues be-
w been of his own power and importance, felt, in the moli
Franceand enfible manner, the neglect with which the Em.

peror had treated him in concluding a separate
peace. But the situation of his affairs was fuchas
somewhat alleviated the mortification which this
occasioned. For though he was obliged to recall
Sept. 14. the Duke of Norfolk from the siege of Montreuil,

because the Flemish troops received orders tore.
tire, Boulogne had surrendered before the negoci.
ations at Crefpy were brought to an issue. Vhile
elated with vanity on account of this conqueR, and
inflamed with indignation against the Emperor, the
ambafladors whom Francis sent to make overtures
of peace, found him too arrogant to grant what
was moderate or equitable. His demands were
indeed extravagant, and made in the tone of a
conqueror; that Francis should renounce his alli
ance with Scotland, and not only pay up the ar-
rears of former debts, but reimburse the money
which Henry had expended in the present war.
lrancis, though sincerely desirous of peace, and
willing to yield a great deal in order to obtain it,
being now free fiom the preiffre of the Imperial
arms, reje&ed there ignominious propolitions

wiith

with disdain; and Henry departing for England, B 0°1 K
oftilities continued between the two nations". _.
THE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to The dau-

thei~ people*~~~~~~~~~~~~~ -Tphin difa-

he people of France, whom it delivered from the lified with
dread of an enemy who had penetrated into the ti,'ya,"f
eart of the kingdom, was loudly complained of
by the dauphin. He confidered it as a manifest
proof of the King his father's extraordinary par-
tiality towards his younger brother, now Duke of
rleans, and complained that, from his eagerness
to gain an eitablifhment for a favourite son, he

iad sacrificed the honour of the kingdom, and re-
ounced the most ancient as well as valuable rights
of the crown. But as he durst not venture to
offend the King by refuting to ratify it, though
extremely desirous at the fame time of securing to
himself the privilege of reclaiming what was now
alienated so much to his detriment, he secretly
protested, in pretence of some of his adherents,
against the whole tranfadion; and declared what-
ever he should be obliged to do in order to con-
firm it, null in itself, and void of all obligation.
The parliament of Thouloufe, probably by the
instigation of his partisans, did the fame0. But
Francis, highly pleased as well with having deli-
vered his hfbjects from the miseries of an invasion,
as with the prolpea of acquiring an independent
fcttlenient for his son at no greater price than that

n Mem. de Ribicr, t. i. p. 572. Herbert, 244.
o Kecueil des 'I'raitez, t. ii. 235. 238.

of

B V0 K of renouncing conquefis to which he had no juR
-- ,- claim; titles which had brought so much expence

'5494 and so many difaf'ers upon the nation; and rights

grown obsolete and of no value; ratified the treaty
with great joy. Charles, within the time prefcrib.
ed by the treaty, declared his intention of giving
Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the Dukeof
Orleans, together with the dutchy of Milan as her
dowry P. Every circumstance seemed to promise
the continuance of peace. The Emperor, cruelly
affliEted with the gout, appeared to be in no con.
dition to undertake any enterprise where great ac.
tivity was requisite, or much fatigue to be endured.
He himself felt this, or wished at least that it should
be believed; and being so much disabled by this
excruciating distemper, when a French ambassador
followed him to Brussels, in order to be prefentat
his ratification of the treaty. of peace, that it was
with the utmost difficulty that he signed his name,
he observed, that there was no great danger of
his violating these articles, as a hand that could
hardly hold a pen, was little able to brandilh a
lance.

The Em- THE violence of his disease confined the Em.
,rcri'em peror several months in Brufels, and was the
to Gtr-Plt apparent cause of putting off the execution of the
mlany. great fcheine which he had formed in order to

humble the Protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For,

P Recueil des Traitez, t. ii. 238.

however

however prevalent the motives were which deter- B o0
mined him to undertake this enterprise, the nature -

'

of that great body which he was about to attack, 1544'
as well as the situation of his own affairs, made it
necessary to deliberate long, to proceed with cau-
tion, and not too suddenly to throw aside the veil
tunder which he had hitherto concealed his real senti-
ments and schemes. He was sensible that the Pro-
tetants, conscious of their own strength, but under
continual apprehensions of his designs, had all the
boldness of a powerful confederacy joined to the
jealousy of a feeble facEion; and were no less quick-
fighted to discern the first appearance of danger,
than ready to take arms in order to repel it. At
the fame time, he still continued involved in a
Turkish war; and though, in order to deliver him-
fclf from this incumbrance, he had determined to
fend an envoy to the Porte with most advantageous
and even flbmifiTve overtures of peace, the refo-
lutions of that haughty court were so uncertain,
that before there were known, it would have been
Ilighly imptrudent to have kindled the flames of
civil war in his own dominions.

UPox this account, he appeared difatisfied with The Pope
a bull ilUlecd by the Pope immediately after the peace summons a

general

Cf Crcli), fulimtioning the council to assemble at colincilto
Trent early next spring, and exhorting all Christian Tenr,
1rinces to cnmbrace the opportunity that the pre- Nov.- 9.
lent liippYy inter-val of tranquillity afforded them,
of lupi'tl:llin tholie herefies which threatened to

2 ubvcert

B °o K subvert whatever was sacred or venerable among

VII.
_, v-- Christians. But after such a flight expression of
'544' dislike, as was necessary in order to cover his de.

signs, he determined to countenance the council,
which might become no inconsiderable instrument
towards accomplishing his projects, and therefore
not only appointed ambassadors to appear therein
his name, but ordered the ecclesiastics in his do.
minions to attend at the time prefixed 1.

1545. SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Im-

Diet at
wo,,,t perial diet, after several prorogations, was opened
March :4. at Worms. The Protestants, who enjoyed the

free exercise of their religion by a very precarious
tenure, having no other security for it than the
recess of the last diet, which was to continue in
force only until the meeting of a council, wished
earnestly to establish that important privilege
upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a per.
petual not a temporary title. But instead of
offering them any additional security, Ferdinand
opened the diet with observing, that there were
two points, which chiefly required consideration,
the prosecution of the war against the Turks, and
the fate of religion; that the former was the molt
urgent, as Solyrnan, after conquering the greatelt
part of Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the
Austrian provinces; that the Emperor, who, from
the beginning of his reign, had neglected no op-

' F. Paul, lo4.

portunity

portunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and B oo1 K
with the hazard of his own person had refitted his - »
attacks, being animated fiill with the fame zeal, 's55s
had now consented to flop short in the career of his
success against France, that, in conjuncion with
his ancient rival, he might turn his arms with
greater vigour against the common adversary of
the Christian faith; that it became all the members
of the Empire to second those pious endeavours of
its head; that, therefore, they ought, without
delay, to vote him such effetual aid as not only
their duty but their interest called upon them to
furnilh; that the controversies about religion were
so intricate, and of such difficult discussion, as to
give no hope of its being possible to bring them
at present to any final issue; that by perseverance Ferdinand
and repeated solicitations the Emperor had at Ge,,mae t,
length prevailed on the Pope to call a council, for acknow-

ledge the

which they had so often wished and petitioned; council.
that the time appointed for its meeting was now
come, and both parties ought to wait for its de-
crees, and submit to them as the decisions of the
universal church.

THE popish members of the diet received this
declaration with great applause, and signified their
entire acquiescence in every particular which it
contained. The Protestants expressed great fur-
prile at propositions, which were so manifestly
repugnant to the recess of the former diet; they
infilted that the questions with regard to religion,
as first in dignity and importance, ought to come

VOL, III. U first

B VI K firt. under deliberation; that, alarming as th

VII.
_ - Aprogrefs of the Turks was to all Germany, th
354s5 securing the free exercise of their religion touched

them still more nearly, nor could they profecut
a foreign war with Ipirit, while solicitous and un.
certain about their domestic tranquillity; that i
the latter were once rendered firm and permanent,
they would concur with their countrymen in
pushing the former, and yield to none of them in
activity or. zeal. But if the danger from the
Turkish arms was indeed so imminent, as not to
admit of such a delay as would be occasioned by
an immediate examination of the controverted
points in religion, they required that a diet lhould
be instantly appointed, to which the final fettle.
ment of their religious disputes should be referred;
and that in the mean time the decree of thefor.
mer diet concerning religion ihould be explained
in a point which they deemed essential. Bythe
recess of Spires it was provided, that they should
enjoy unmolested the public exercise of their re.
iigion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to submit, they be.
gan to fufpeEt that their adversaries might take
advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of there-
cess, and pretending that the event therein men
tioned had now taken place, might pronounce them
to be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence.
In order to guard againfi this interpretation, they
renewed their former remonstrances againt a
council called to meet without the bounds of th

Empire,

Empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, and B 0O K
in which he aflumed the right of presiding; and _
declared that, notwithstanding the convocation of 1545.
any such illegal assembly, they still held the recess
of the late diet to be in full force.

A'r other juncures, when the Emperor .thought Emperor ar.
it of advantage to tooth and gain the Pro- wime.
reftants, he had devised expedients for giving
them fatisfa&tion with regard to demands seem-
ingly more extravagant; jbut his views at present
being very different, Ferdinand, by his command,
adhered inflexibly to his first propositions, and
would make no conceflio!ns which had .the most
remote tendency to throw discredit on the coun-
cil, or to weaken its authority. The Protestants,
on their part, were no less inlexible; and after
much time spent in fr.tlef .endeavours. to con-
vince each other, they came to no agreement.
Nor did the prefeice of the Emperor, who upon
ihis recovery arrived at Worms, contribute in any May rs.
degree to render :the Pro.teftaats more compliant.
yully convinced that they were maintaining the
icaufe of God and of truth, they shewed themselves
superior to the allurements of interest, or the fug-
gellions of fear; and in proportion as the Em-
peror redoubled his solicitations, or discovered his
designs, their boldness seems to have increased.
At last they openly declared, that they would not The ProteL-

itgnh dif-
even deign to vindicate their tenets in presence of ldi, a

a council, assembled not to examine, but to con- connexito
"emn them; and chat they would pay no regard counci of

U 2 OTr

B 0 0 K to an assembly held under the influence of a Pope
a_-_-.. who had already precluded himself from all titl

'545s to a&t as a judge, by his having stigmatized their

opinions with the name of heresy, and denounced
against them the heaviest censures, which, n
the plenitude of his usurped power, he could
inflit .

conad.a of WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well
Alaurice of
Saxony in as firmness, rejeted all intercourse with the coun.
tim diet. :cil, and refused their assent to the Imperial de.

mands in refpeA to the Turkish war, Mauriceof
Saxony alone shewed an inclination to gratify the
Emperor with regard to both. Though he pro.
fefled an inviolable regard for the Protestant re.
ligion, he assumed an appearance of moderation
peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the
favourable sentiments which the Emperor already
entertained of him, and gradually paved the way
for executing the ambitious designs which always
occupied his active and enterprising mind'. His
example, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions;
and Charles perceived that he could not hope
either to procure present aid from the Protefants
against the Turks, or to quiet their fears and jea.
loufies on account of their religion. But, as his
schemes were not yet ripe for execution, nor his
preparations so far advanced that he could force

r Slkid. 343, &c. Scck. iii. 543, &c. Thuan. Hi10or
lib. ii. p. 56.

* Seek. iii. 571.r

the compliance of the Proteflants, or pdnifh their B o,, K
obRinacy, he artfully concealed his own intentions. ---J
That he might augment their security, he appointed AUsl4.
a diet to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in
order to adjust what was now left undetermined;
and previous to it, he agreed that a certain number
of divines of each party should meet, in order to
confer upon the points in dispute .
BUT, how far soever this appearance of a desire The Protef-

tants begin

to maintain the present tranquillity might have to furpee
imposed upon the Protestants, the Emperor was or.Emp
incapable of such uniform and thorough diffimu-
lation, as to hide altogether from their view the
dangerous designs which he was meditating
againf them. Herman count de Wied, Arch-
bilhop and Elector of Cologne, a prelate confpi-
cuous for his virtue and primitive simplicity of
nanners, though not more distinguished for learn-
ing than the other descendants of noble families,
who in that age polfeffed most of the great bene-
sices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the dotrines of the Reformers, had begun in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-three,
with the assistance of Melancthon and Bucer, to
Ibolifh the ancient fuperitition in his diocese, and
:o introduce in its place the rites established
imong the Protestants. But the canons of his
,atiedral, who were not possessed with the fame
pin't of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal

t Sleid. 351.

U 3 the

B o0 K the levelling genius of the new fe& would prove

VII.
V~-,- . to their dignity and wealth, opposed, from the

254$5 beginning, this unprecedented enterprise of their

Archbishop, with all the zeal flowing from reve.
rence for old institutions, heightened by concern
for their own interest. This opposition, which
the Archbishop confidered only as a new argu.
ment to demonitrate the necessity of a reforma-
tion, neither ihook his resolution, nor slackened
his ardour in prosecuting his plan. The canons,
perceiving all their endeavours to check his ca-
reer to be ineffectual, solemnly protested againfi
his proceedings, and appealed for redress to the
Pope and Emperor, the former as his CcclefiafRi.
cal, the latter as his civil superior. This ap.
peal being laid before the Emperor, during his
residence in Worms, he took the canons of Co-
logne under his immediate protection; enjoined
them to proceed with rigour against allwhore-
volted from the established church; prohibited the
Archbishop to make any innovation in his diocese;
and summoned him to appear at Brussels within
thirty days, to answer the accusations which Ihould
be preferred against him u.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions

against the Protestant party, Charles addedother
proofs fill more explicit. In his hereditary do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he perfecutedall
who were fufpcaed of Lutheranifm with unrelent

' Sleid. 310. 340. 351 Seckend, iii. 443. 553'

ing

ihg rigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms, he 8.O K
silenced the Protestant preachers in that city. He -% .
allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the 545'
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to
call upon him, as he regarded the favour of God,
toexterminate that pestilent heresy. He dispatched
the embassy, which has been already mentioned,
to Constantinople, with overtures of peace, that
he might be free from any apprehensions of danger
or interruption from that quarter. Nor did any of
there steps, or their dangerous tendency, escape the
jealous observation of the Protestants, or fail to
alarm their fears, and to excite their solicitude for
the safety of their fe&.
MEANWHILE, Charles's good fortune, which Deahofthe

J ° Duke of

predominated on all occasions over that of his Orleans.
rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty,
from which, with all his sagacity and address, he
would have found it no easy matter to have difen-
tangled himself. Just about the time when the sept. g.
Duke of Orleans should have received Ferdi-
nand's daughter in marriage, and together with
her the possession of the Milanese, he died of a
malignant fever. By this event, the Emperor
was freed from the neceflity of giving up a valu-

pble province into the hands of an enemy, or

from the indecency of violating a recent and so-
lemn engagement, which must have occasioned arl
immediate rupture with France. He affeaed,
h(wever, to express great sorrow for the untimely
Ieath of a young Prince, who was to have been

U 4 £o

B 0 O K so nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided

A __ entering into any fresh discussions concerning the
1545 Milanese; and would not liften to a proposal

which came from Francis of new-modelling the
treaty of Crefpy, so as to make him some repara.
tion for the advantages which he had loft by the
demise of his son. In the more aftive and vigorous
part of Francis's reign, a declaration of war would
have been the certain and instantaneous consequence
of such a flat refusal to comply with a demand
seemingly so equitable; but the declining slate of
his own health, the exhausted condition of his
kingdom, together with the burden of the war
against England, obliged him, at present, to dif.
femble his resentment, and to put off thoughts
of revenge to Tome other juncure. In confe-
quence of this event, the unfortunate Duke of
Savoy loft all hope of obtaining the restitution of
his territories; and the rights or claims relinquished
by the treaty of Crefpy, returned in full force to
the crown of France, to serve as pretexts for future

wars x.

The Pnpe UPoN the first intelligence of the Duke of Or-
dutchiesof leans's death, the confederates of Smalkalde flat.
Placetir d tered themselves that the essential alterations which
to his ton. appeared to be unavoidable consequences of it could

hardly fail of producing a rupture, which would
prove the means of their safety. But they were not
more disappointed with regard to this, than in their
x Belcarii Comment. 769. Paruta, Hilt. Venet. iv. P. '11'

expect

expe&ations from an event which seemed to be B o00 K
the certain prelude of a quarrel between the -- --
Emperor and the Pope. When Paul, whose l545s
pafion for aggrandizing his family increased as
he advanced in years, and as he saw the dig-
nity and power which they derived immediately
from him becoming more precarious, found
that he could not bring Charles to approve of
his ambitious schemes, he ventured to grant his
son Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and
Placentia, though at the risk of incurring the dif-
pleasure of the Emperor. At a time when a great
part of Europe inveighed openly against the cor-
rupt manners and exorbitant power of Ecclesiastics,
and when a council was summoned to reform the
disorders in the church, this indecent grant of such
a principality, to a son of whose illegitimate birth
the Pope ought to have been alhamed, and whole
licentious morals all good men detested, gave ge-
neral offence. Some Cardinals in the Imperial
interest remonstrated against such an unbecoming
alienation of the patrimony of the church; the
Spanilh ambafador would not be present at the so-
lemnity of his infeofment; and upon pretext that
these cities were part of the Milanese ltate, the
Emperor peremptorily refused to confirm the deed
of investiture. But both the Emperor and Pope
being intent upon one common object in Germany,
they sacrificed their particular passions to that pub-
lic cause, and suppressed the emotions of jealousy
or resentment which were rising on this occasion,

that

B o 0 K that they might jointly pursue what each deemed

VII.

to be of greater importancey.

'545.

Henry of ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was
Brun(wick
kindles a disturbed by a violent but short eruption of Henry
Mrn,,,.c Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, though flill

fiript of his dominions, which the Emperor held
in sequestration, until his differences with the con.
federates of Smalkalde ihould be adjusted, pofleff.
ed however so much credit in Germany, that he
undertook to raise for the French King a confider.
able body of troops to be employed in the war
against England. The money stipulated for this
purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the troops
were levied; but HIenry, instead of leading them
towards France, suddenly entered his own domi-
nions at their head, in hopes of recovering posses.
lion of them before any army could be aflembled
to oppose him. The confederates were not more
surprised at this unexpeced attack, than the King
of France was astonished at a mean thievish fraud,
so unbecoming the characer of a Prince. But
the Landgrave of Hesse, with incredible expedi-
tion, collected as many men as put a stop to the
progress of Henry's undisciplined forces, and be-
ing joined by his fon-in-law, Maurice, and by
some troops belonging to the Ele6tor of Saxony,
he gained such advantages over Henry, who was
rash and bold in forming his schemes, but feeble

y Paruta, Hill. Venet. iv. 178. Pallavic. 18o.

and

and undetermined in executihg them, as obliged B o o K
him to disband his army, and to surrender himself, l
together with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion. 3546.
He was kept in close confinement, until a new re-
verse of affairs procured him liberty .

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise added TheRefor.

mation of

new reputation to the arms of the Proteflants, the the Palati.
efablifhment of the Protestant religion in the Pa- natt
latinate brought a great accefflon of ffrength to
their party. Frederick, who succeeded his brother
Lewis in that Electorate, had long been fufpeaed
ofa secret propensity to the doctrines of the Re-
formers, which, upon his acceflion to the princi-
pality, he openly manifested. But as he expeEted
that something effeaual towards a general and legal
establishment of religion, would be the fruit of so
many diets, conferences, and negociations, he did
not, at sirs*, attempt any public innovation in his
dominions. Finding all there issue in nothing, he Jan. lo.
thought himself called, at length, to countenance
by his authority the system which he approved of,
and to gratify the wishes of his subjects, who, by
their intercourse with the Protestant states, had almost
universally imbibed their opinions. As the warmth
and impetuosity which accompanied the spirit of
Reformation in its first efforts, had somewhat abat-
ed, this change was made with great order and re-
gularity; the ancient rites were abolilhed, and. new
forms introduced, without any acts of violence, or

Sleid. 352. Seck. iii. 567.

fymptoQn

B oo° K symptom of discontent. Though Frederick adopt.

C--^-> ed the religious system of the Protestants, he ini.
2546. tated the example of Maurice, and did not acced(

to the league of Smalkalde ".

Thecouncil A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Pa.
affermbles at
Trent. latinate, the general council was opened with the

accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes of the
Catholic states were turned with much expecation
towards an assembly, which all had confidered as
capable of applying an effectual remedy for the
disorders of the church when they first broke out,
though many were afraid that it was now too late
to hope for great benefit from it, when the malady,
by being suffered to increase during twenty-eight
years, had become inveterate, and grown to such
extreme violence. The Pope, by his last bull of
convocation, had appointed the first meeting to be
held in March. But his views, and those of the
Emperor, were so different, that almost the whole
year was spent in negociations. Charles, who fore-
saw that the rigorous decrees of the council against
the Protestants would soon drive them, in self-
defence as well as from resentment, to some defpe-
rate extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until
his warlike preparations were so far advanced,
that he might be in a condition to second its de-
cifions by the force of his arms. The Pope, who
had early sent to Trent the legates who were to

' Sleid. 356. Seck, I. iii. 616.

prefidle
/1

preside in his name, knowing to what contempt B o° K
it would expose his authority, and what suspicions iv .
it would beget of his intentions, if the fathers of ,546.
the council should remain in a state of inacivity,
when the church was in such danger as to require
their immediate and vigorous interposition, in-
filled either upon translating the council to some
city in Italy, or upon suspending altogether its
proceedings at that juncture, or upon authorizing
it to begin its deliberations immediately. The
Emperor rejected the two former expedients as
equally offensive to the Germans of every deno-
mination; but finding it impoflible to elude the
latter, he proposed that the council should begin
with reforming the disorders in the church, before
it proceeded to examine or define articles of faith.
This was the very thing which the court of Rome
dreaded most, and which had prompted it to- em-
ploy so many artifices in order to prevent the
meeting of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul,
though more compliant than some of his prede-
ceffors with regard to calling a council, was no
less jealous than they had been of its jurifdiEtion,
and saw what matter of triumph such a method
of proceeding would afford the heretics. He ap-
prehended consequences not only humbling but
fatal to the papal fee, if the council came to con-
fider an inquest into abuses as their only bulinefs;
or if inferior prelates were allowed to gratify their
own envy and peevishness, by prescribing rules to
those who were exalted above them in dignity and

power.

B o 0 K power. Without listening, therefore, to this in.
vI A fidious proposal of the Emperor, he inftrusted his
'54S legates to open the council.

Jan. 18. THE first session was spent in matters of form.
prsced- In a subsequent one, it was agreed that the fram.

ing a confeflion of faith, wherein Ihould be con.
tained all the articles which the church required
its members to believe, ought to be the firit and
principal business of the council; but that, at the
fame time, due attention ihould be given to what
was necessary towards the reformation of manners
and discipline. From this first symptom of the
spirit with which the council was animated, from
the high tone of authority -which the legates who
presided in it assumed, and from the implicit de.
ference with which most of the members followed
their direcions, the Proteflants conjectured with
ease what decisions they might expet. It afto.
nilied them, however, to fee forty prelates (for
no greater number were yet assembled) assume
authority as representatives of the universal church,
and proceed to determine the most important
points of doctrine in its name. Sensible of this
indecency, as well as of the ridicule with which
it might be attended/ the council advanced slowly
in its deliberations, and all its proceedings were
for rome time languishing and feeble b. As oon
as the cpnfederates of Smalkalde received informi

b F. Paul, Izo, &c. Pallavic. p. 180, &c.

ation

ation of the opening of the council, they publish- B o°0
ed a long manifesto, containing a renewal of their --
protest against its meeting, together with the rea- *546
sons which induced them to decline its jurifdic-
tions'. The Pope and Emperor, on their part,
were so little solicitous to quicken or add vigour
to its operations, as plainly discovered that some
object of greater importance occupied and inte-
refted them.

THE Protestants were not inattentive or uncon- Appretn,
cerned fpetators of the motions of the Sovereign o of

cfth:

Pontiff and of Charles, and they entertained every
day more violent suspicions of their intentions, in
consequence of intelligence received from different
quarters of the machinations carrying on against
them. The King of England informed them, that
the Emperor having long resolved to exterminate
their opinions, would not fail to employ this inter-
val of tranquillity which he now enjoyed, as the
most favourable juncture for carrying his design
into execution. The merchants of Augsburg,
which was at that time a city of extensive trade,
received advice, by means of their correspondents
in Italy, among whom were some who secretly .fa-
voured the Proteltant cause d, that a dangerous con-
federacy against it was forming between the Pope
and Emperor. In confirmation of this, they.heard
from the Low-Countries that Charles had ilfued
orders, though with every precaution which could

Seckend. 1. iii. 602, &c. d Seek. 1. iii. 579,

keep

B 0 0 K keep the measure concealed, for railing troops both

-v_ -1 there and in other parts of his dominions. Such a
*546. variety of information, corroborating all that their

own jealousy or observation led them to appre.
hend, left the Protefants little reason to doubt of

Their deli- the Emperor's hostile intentions. Under this im.
bcations. preflion, the deputies of the confederates of Smal.

kalde assembled at Francfort, and by communicat.
ing their intelligence and sentiments to each other,
reciprocally heightened their sense of the impend.
ing danger. But their union was not such as
their situation required, or the preparations of
their enemies rendered necessary. Their league
had now fubrifted ten years. Among so many
members, whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the cuftomof
Germany, had created an infinite variety of mu-
tual rights and claims by intermarriages, alliances,
and contracts of different kinds, fubjets of jea.
lousy and discord had unavoidably arisen. Some
of the confederates, being connected with the
Duke of Brunswick, were highly disgusted with
the Landgrave, on account of the rigour with
which he had treated that rath and unfortunate
Prince. Others taxed the EleAtor of Saxony and
Landgrave, the heads of the league, with having
involved the members in unnecessary and exorbi.
tant expences by their profuseness or want of eCO0
nomy. The views, likewise, and temper of thofC
two Princes, who, by their superior power and au-
thority, influenced and directed the whole body,
being extremely different, rendered all its mo0

a ~2.~~~ t~tions

tions languid, at a time when the utmost vigour B o°o K
and dispatch were requisite. The Landgrave, of a v
violentand enterprising temper, but not forgetful, 1546.
amidst his zeal for religion, of the usual maxims of
human policy, insisted that, as the danger which
threatened them was manifest and unavoidable, they
should have recourse to the most effectual expedi-
ent for securing their own safety, by courting the
proteftion of the Kings of France and England,
or by joining in alliance with the Protestant can-
tons of Swifferland, from whom they might expect
such powerful and present assistance as their fitua-
tion demanded. The Elector, on the other hand,
with the most upright intentions of any Prince in
that age, and with talents which might have qua-
lified him abundantly for the administration of go-
vernment in any tranquil period, was possessed with
such superstitious veneration for all the parts of the
Lutheran system, and such bigoted attachment to
all its tenets, as made him averse to an union with
those who differed from him in any article of faith,
and rendered him very incapable of undertaking its
defence in times of difficulty and danger. He
seemed to think, that the concerns of religion were
to be regulated by principles and maxims totally
different from those which apply to the common
affairs of life; and being swayed too much by the
opinions of Luther, who was not only a firanger
to the rules of political conduct, but despised them;
he often discovered an uncomplying spirit, that
proved of the greatest detriment to the cause which
he win(ed to support. Influenced, on this occa-

VOL. I X lion,

B O IoK sion, by the revere and rigid notions of thatRe.

(-- former, he refused to enter into any confederacy
2546. with Francis, because he was a persecutor of the

truth; or to solicit the friendship of Henry, be.
cause he was no less impious and profane than the
Pope himself; or even to join in alliance with
the Swiss, because they differed from the Ger.
mans in several essential articles of faith. This
difcenfion, about a point of such consequence,
produced its natural effects. Each secretly cen.
fured and reproached the other. The Landgrave
confidered the Elector as fettered by narrow pre.
judices, unworthy of a Prince called to ac a chief
part in a scene of such importance. The Elector
fuipeced the Landgrave of loose principles and
ambitious views, which corresponded ill with the
sacred cause wherein they were engaged. But
though the Elector's scruples prevented their
timely application for foreign aid; and the jea.
lousy or discontent of the other Princes defeated a
proposal for renewing their original confederacy,
the term during which it was to continue in force
being on the point of expiring; yet the sense of their
common danger induced them to agree with re-
gard to other points, particularly that they would
never acknowledge the assembly of Trent as a
lawful council, nor susser the archbishop ofCo-
logne to be oppressid on account of the teps
which he had taken towards the reformation of
his diocese '.

Seck. I. iii. 566. 576. 613. Slcid. 355'

TIIE

THE Landgrave, about this time, desirous of B o o K
penetrating to the bottom of the Emperor's in- L- -
tendions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to Thl5ó4ego-
be thoroughly acquainted with all his maiter's ciations

with the

schemes, informing him of the several particulars Emperor.
which raised the suspicions of the Protestants, and
begging an explicit declaration of what they had
to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, assured
them, that the intelligence which they had receiv-
ed of the Emperor's military preparations was
exaggerated, and all their suspicions destitute of
foundation; that though, in order to guard his
frontiers against any insult of the French or Eng-
lifh, he had commanded a finall body of men
to be raised in the Low-Countries, he was as so-
licitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in Ger-
many f.

BUT the Emperor's actions did not correspond

with these professions of his minister. For, instead
of appointing men of known moderation and a pa-
cific temper to appear in defence of the Catholic
doErines at the conference which had been agreed
on, he made choice of fierce bigots, attached to
their own fyfiem with a blind obflinacy, that ren-
dered all hope of a reconcilement desperate. Mal-
venda, a Spaniffl divine, who took upon him the
conduct of the debate on the part of the Catholics,
managed it with all the subtle dexterity of a Itho-
latlic metaiphyfician, more studious to perplex his

f S!eid. 356.

X 2 adver-

B o 0 K adversaries than to convince them, and more in.
----' tent on palliating error than on discovering truth,

1546. The Protestants, filled with indignation, as well at

his sophistry as at some regulations which the Em.
peror endeavoured to impose on the disputant,
broke off the conference abruptly, being now fully
convinced that, in all his late measures, the Em.
peror could have no other view than to amuse them,
and to gain time for ripening his own fchemese.

X Sleid. 358. Seek. t. iii. 620.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK VIII.

TH
HISTORR Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.
WT H I L E appearances of danger daily in- B o o K

created, and the tempest which had been ,i-
so long a gathering was ready to break forth in all sD46.

`0' ~ '

i i T Death of

its violence against the Protestant church, Luther Luther.
was saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling
or beholding its deftruftive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining state of health, and during
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eyfeben,
in order to compose, by his authority, a diffen-
sion among the counts of Mansfield, he was seized Feb. i.
with a violent inflammation in his stomach, which
in a few days put an end to his life, in the sixty-
third year of his age. As he was raised up by Pro-
vidence to be the author of one of the greatest
anid most interesting revolutions recorded in his-
tory, there is not any person perhaps whose cha-

X 3 rafer

B O O K raaer has been drawn with such opposite colours.

I - In his own age, one party, struck with horror
1546. and inflamed with rage, when they saw with what

a daring hand he overturned every thing which
they held to be sacred, or valued as beneficial,
imputed to him not only all the defects and vices
of a man, but the qualities of a daemon. The
other, warmed with the admiration and gratitude,
which they thought he merited as the' eftorerof
light and liberty to the Christian church, ascribed
to him perfections above the condition of huma-
nity, and viewed all his actions with a veneration
bordering on that which should be paid only to
those who are guided by the immediate infpira-
Pl" cha- tion of Heaven. It is his own conduct, not the

ta'Ar undiftinguifhing censure or the exaggerated praise

of his contemporaries, that ought to regulate the
opinions of the present age concerning him.
Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain his own system, abilities,
both natural and acquired, to defend his prin-
ciples, and unwearied industry in propagating
them, are virtues which shine so confpicuounyin
every part of his behaviour, that even his enemies
must allow him to have possessed them in an emi-
nent degree. To these may be added, with equal
justice, such purity and even austerity of manners,
as became one who assumed the charaer of a
Reformer; such fanaity of life as suited tht
do&rine which he delivered ; and such perse dii
intereflecdnefs as affords no flight prefurmptiol0n
his sincerity. Superior to all felfill conlitcr'l

lrions,

tions, a stranger to the elegancies of life, and B O K
despising its pleasures, he left the honours and _.-.'
emoluments of the church to his disciples, re- 1546.
maining satisfied himself in his original state of
profelror in the university, and pallor of the town
of\Vittemberg, with the moderate appointments
annexed to these offices. His extraordinary qua-
lities were allayed with no inconsiderable mixture
of human fiailty and human pafflons. These,
however, were of such a nature, that they cannot
be imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart,
but seem to have taken their rife fi-om the fame
lource with many of his virtues. His mind,
forcible and vehement in all its operations, roused
by great objeEts, or agitated by violent paflions,
broke out, on many occasions, with an impetuo-
fity which astonishes men of feebler spirits, or
such as are placed in a more tranquil situation.
By carrying some praise-worthy dispositions to
excess, he bordered sometimes on what was cul-
pable, and was often betrayed into actions which
expolet hill to censure. His confidence that his
0own opinions were well founded, approached to
arrogance; his courage in aTerting them, to raih-
nles; his firmnels in adhering to them, to obiti-
Incy; and his zeal in confuting his -adversaries,
to rage and scurrility. Accustomed himself to
confidier every thing as flbordinate to truth, he
c'" pccd the rfle dceference for it fiom other
Mcrn; andi, without miaking any allowances for
tcr tiiiiry or prejudices he poured forth

X ,4 gaint

8 Oir K against such as disappointed him in this parti.
L- -V-.' cular, a torrent of invective mingled with con.

J546- tempt. Regardless of any diftinntion of rank oi

chara&er when his doctrines were attacked, he
chastised all his adversaries indiscriminately, with
the fame rough hand; neither the royal dignity
of Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning and
abilities of Erasmus, screened them from the
fame gross abuse with which he treated Tetzel or
Eccius.

BUT there indecencies of which Luther was

guilty, muff not be imputed wholly to the vio.
lence of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which by putting continual restraint on the pas
sions of individuals, have polished society, and
rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were
managed with heat, and strong emotions were
uttered in their natural language without reserve
or delicacy. At the fame time, the works of
learned men were all composed in Latin, and
they were not only authorized, by the example of
eminent writers in that language, to use their
antagonists with the most illiberal scurrility; but,
in a dead tongue, indecencies of every kindap-
pear less shocking than in a living language,
whose idioms and phrafcs seem gross, becaufc
they are familiar,

I.s

IN passing judgment upon the characters of nB 0 K
men, we ought to try them by the principles and
maxims of their own age, not by those of an- 1546.
other. For, although virtue and vice are at all
times the fame, manners and customs vary con-
tinually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour, which
to us appear most culpable, gave no disgust to his
contemporaries. It was even by some of those
qualities, which we are now apt to blame, that he
was fitted for accomplishing the great work which
he undertook. To route mankind, when funk
in ignorance or superstition, and to encounter
the rage of bigotry armed with power, required
the utmost vehemence of zeal, as well as a tem-
per daring to excess. A gentle call would
neither have reached, nor have excited those to
whom it was addressed. A spirit more amiable,
butlefs vigorous than Luther's, would have shrunk
back from the dangers which he braved and
surmounted. Towards the close of Luther's life,
though without any perceptible diminution of his
zeal or abilities, the infirmities of his temper in-
creased upon him, so that he grew daily more
peevish, more irascible, and more impatient of
contradiction. Having lived to be a witness of
his own amazing success; to fee a great part of
Europe embrace his doctrines i and to shake the
foundation of the papal throne, before which the
mightiest Monarchs had trembled, he discovered,
on some occasions, symptoms of vanity and self-
aPplause. HIe must have been, indeed, more than
man, if, upon contemplating all that he actually

acComn-

B o01 K accomplifed, , he had never felt any sentiment of
.----.- this kind rising in his breast *.

1546.

SOME time before his death he felt his strength

declining, his constitution being worn out by a
prodigious multiplicity of business, added to the
labour of discharging his ministerial function with
unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of conifant
itudy, besides the composition of works as vo.
luminous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted lei-
sure and retirement. His natural intrepidity did
not forsake him at the approach of death; his
last conversation with his friends was concerning
the happiness reserved for good men in a future
life, of which he spoke with the fervour and delight
natural to one who expected and wished to enter

A remarkable instance of this, as well as of a certain fin-

gularity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Last Will
Though the effeas which he had to bequeath were very
inconsiderable, he thought it neceflary to make a Teflament,
but scorned to frame it with the usual legal formalities. No.
tus fum, fays he, in cclo, in terra, & inferno, & auAorita.
tem ad hoc fufiicientem habeo, ui mihi soli credatur, cum
Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et miferabili peccatori,
ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui crediderit, dede.
ritque ut in co verax & fidelis fuerim, ita ut multi in mundo
illud per me acceperinr, &C me pro Do&ore veritatis agnove.
rint, fpreto banno Papa, Cxfaris, Ri,-gum, Principum &
facerdotum, immo omnium damonum odio. Quidni, igiltu
ad dispositionem hanc, in re exigua, fufliciat, si adit manus
inlt-r t-lflimonlium, & dici polfit, hirc fcripfit D. MartinusLu-
ther, Notarius Dei, & tellis Evangelii ejus. Sec. 1. iii
p. 65.

fooln

soon upon the enjoyment of ita. The account of B 0 1° K
his death filled the Roman Catholic party with ex- _
ceffive as well as indecent joy, and damped the 1546-
spirits of all his followers; neither party sufficiently
confiering that his doctrines were now so firmly
rooted, as to be in a condition to flourish inde-
pendent of the hand which had sirs planted them.
His funeral was celebrated by order of the Elector
of Saxony with extraordinary pomp. He left
fevcral children by his wife Catherine a Boria, who
survived him. Towards the end of the last cen-
tury, there were in Saxony some of his descendants
in decent and honourable flations b

TnE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan The Empe.

of difirnulation with which he had set out, em- vours"a
ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and to adfea"dhe
quiet their fears and jealousies. For this purpose ProteRfants.
he contrived to have an interview with the Land-
grave of Hesse, the most active of all the confe-
derates, and the most suspicious of his designs.
To him he made such warm profeflions of his March 2S.
concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent measures; he denied in
luch express terms, his having entered into any
league, or having begun any military preparations
which flould give, any just cause of alarm to the
i'rottflints, as leein to have dispelled all the Land-
grave's doubts and apprehensions, and lent him

' Slitl. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 63Z, &c.
b Scck. 1. iii. 651.

away

B OI K away fully satisfied of his pacific intentions. This
-..-.-.a artifice was of great advantage, and effectually
1546. answered the purpose for which it was employed.

The Landgrave, upon his leaving Spires, where
he had been admitted to this interview, went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldic confederates were
assembled, and gave them iuch a flattering repre.
fentation of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, who were too apt, as well
from the temper of the German nation, as from the
genius of all great associations or bodies of men, to
be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their deli.
berations, thought there was no necessity of taking
any immediate measures against danger, which ap.
peared to be distant or imaginary .

Proceedings SUCH events, however, soon occurred, as flag.
of the coun-
cil against gered the credit which the Proteffants had given
ahrotct. to the Emperor's declarations. The council of

Trent, though fill composed of a small numberof
Italian and Spanish prelates, without a single de.
puty from many of the kingdoms which it assumed
a right of binding by its decrees, being ashamed
of its long inactivity, proceeded now to fettle
articles of the greatest importance. Having be.
gun with examining the first and chief point in
controversy between the church of Rome and the
Reformers, concerning the rule which should he
held as supreme and decisive in matters of faith,
the council, by its infallible authority, deter.

c Slcid. Hilt. 367. 373 .

mined,

mined, " That the books to which the defigna- B ° i K
tionof Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal
authority with those which were received by the Apl:4s.
Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from the
apostolic age, and preserved in the church, are
entitled to as much regard as the doctrines and
precepts which the inspired authors have com-
mitted to writing; that the Latin translation of
the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome,
and known by the name of the Vulgate translation,
flould be read in churches, and appealed to in the
schools as authentic and canonical." Against l11
who disclaimed the truth of there tenets, anathemas
were denounced in the name and by the authority
of the Holy Ghost. The decision of there points,
which undermined the main foundation of the
Lutheran system, was a plain warning to the Pro-
teftants what judgment they might expect when
the council ihould have leisure to take into con-
fileration the particular and Subordinate articles of
their creed d.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to
condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was soon
followed by a striking instance of the Pope's re-
solution to punish such as embraced them. The
appeal of the canons of Cologne against their
Archbiflop having been carried to Rome, Paul
eagerly seized on that opportunity, both of dif-

d F. Paul, 141. Pallav. 206.

1 playing

B III K playing the extent of his own authority, and of

A.--J-L teaching the German ecclesiastics the danger of
J546. revolting from the established church. As no

person appeared in behalf of the Archbishop, he
was held to be convicted of the crime of heresy,
April 16. and a Papal bull was issued, depriving him of his

ecclesiastical dignity, infliacing on him the sentence
of excommunication, and absolving his fubjets
from the oath of allegiance which they had taken
to him as their civil superior. The countenance
which he had given to the Lutheran heresy was
the only crime imputed to him, as well as the
only reason assigned to justify the extraordinary
severity of this decree. The Protestants could
hardly believe that Paul, how zealous soever he
might be to defend the established system, or
to humble those who invaded it, would have ven-
tured to proceed to such extremities againfta
Prince and Elector of the Empire, without hav.
ing previously secured such powerful proteEtion as
would render his censure something more than an
impotent and despicable sally of resentment. They
were of course deeply alarmed at this sentence
against the Archbishop, confidering it as a lure
indication of the malevolent intentions not only
of the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the whole

party d

Charles UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with
Cournmnce such violence as is natural to men roused froma
hoflilities
againf the
Pioteltans. d' Sceid. 34. F. Paul, i55. Pallavic. 224.

filfe

faile security, and conscious of their having been B 0 ,0 K
deceived, Charles saw that now it became necessary '--
to throw aside the mask, and to declare openly 546
lwhat part he determined to aCt. By a long series
of artifice and fallacy, he had gained so much
time, that his measures, though not altogether
ripe for execution, were in great forwardness. The
Pope, by his proceedings against the Elecaor of
Cologne, as well as by the decrees of the council,
had precipitated matters into such a situation, as
rendered a breach between the Emperor and the
Protestants almost unavoidable. Charles had there-
fore no choice left him, but either to take part with
them in overturning what the See of Rome had
determined, or to support the authority of the
church openly by force of arms. Nor did the Negociate»
Pope think it enough to have brought the Emn- Pope.
peror under a necessity of acting; he pressed him
to begin his operations immediately, and to carry
them on with such vigour as could not fail of
securing success. Transported by his zeal againfl
heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious
maxims of the Papal See, with regard to the
danger of extending the Imperial authority be-
Y(dlc due bounds ; and in order to crufl the Lu-
therans, he was willing to contribute towards
railing up a inafler that might one day prove
formidable to himlelf as well as to the reft of
Italy.

Bu1', betides the certain expectation of aflifl- Concludes,
ance froml the PIope, Charles was now secure fiom Soly;n,.

any

B 11° K any danger of interruption to his designs byth

,-__ Turkish arms. His negociations at the Porte
1546. which he had carried on with great afiduity fino

the peace of Crefpy, were on the point of beinT
terminated in such a manner as he desired. Soly.
man, partly in compliance with the French King
who, in order to avoid the disagreeable obliga.
tion of joining the Emperor againfl his ancient
ally, laboured with great zeal to bring about an
accommodation between them, and partly from
its being necessary to turn his arms towards the
east, where the Persians threatened to invade his
dominions, consented without difficulty to a truce
for five years. The chief article of it iwas, That
each should retain poffeflion of what he now held
in Hungary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the
pride of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual
tribute of fifty thousand crowns c.

CansMau- BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the
therand Germans themselves that the Emperor relied with
Princes in the greatest confidence. The Germanic body,

rmany. he knew, was of such vait strength, as to be in.

vincible if it were united, and that it was only by
employing its own force that be could hope to
subdue it. Happily for him, the union of the
several members in this great system was so feeble,
the whole frame was so loosely compated, and
its difflerent parts tended so violently towards fe

e Iltuanhaffi I-il. Ihun. 18o. Mcm. dc Ribier, tm.i.
582. para.ion

narat01

paration from each other, that it was almoff in- B O o K
possible for it, on any important emergence, to v
join in a general or vigorous effort. In the pre- j546
fentjunure, the sources of discord were as many,
and as various, as had been known on any occa-
sion. The Roman Catholics, animated with zeal
in defence of their religion proportional to the
fierceness with which it had been attacked, were
eager to second any attempt to humble those in-
novators, who had overturned it in many pro-
vinces, and endangered it in more. John and
Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several other
Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and rigour
with which the Duke of Brunswick had been
reated by the confederates of Smalkalde, were
impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged on
them. Charles observed, with fatisfasion, the
orking of those passions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever

he should think it proper to aft, he found it, in

he mean time, more necessary to moderate than
o inflame their rage.
SUCH was the situation of affairs, such the dif- Hids a d;et

at Rlatilbon.

ernment with which the Emperor foresaw and
rovided for every event, when the diet of the
mpire met at Ratisbon. Many of the Roman
atholic members appeared there in person, but
oft of the confederates of Smalkalde, tinder
letence of being unable to bear the expence oc-
a"loned by the late unneceflary frequency of such
VOL. Hll. Y asireii-

B i0 K assemblies, sent only deputies. Their jealousy
,_-.-_. of the Emperor, together with an apprehen.

546. sion that violence might, perhaps, be employ.

ed, in order to force their approbation of what
he should propose in the diet, was the true cause
of their absence. The speech with which the
Emperor opened the diet was extremely artful,
After professing, in common form, his regard
for the prosperity of the Germanic body, and
declaring, that, in order to bellow his wholeat.
tention upon the re-establishment of its order
and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned all
other cares, rejected the most pressing solicitations
of his other subje&s to reside among them, and
postponed affairs of the greatest importance; he
took notice, with some disapprobation, that his
disinterested example had not been imitated;
many members of chief consideration having ne-
gleeted to attend an assembly to which he had
repaired with such manifest inconvenience to him.
self. He then mentioned their unhappy dilfen
sions about religion; lamented the ill fuccefsof
his past endeavours to compose them; complain-
ed of the abrupt diflolution of the late conference,
and craved their advice with regard to the bel
and most efftctual method of refloring union tO
the churches of Germany, together with that
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their
ancestors had found to be of no less advantage t
their civil interest, than becoming their Chrifila
profession.

BY this gracious and popular method of con- B 0 0 K
lulting the members of the diet, rather than of -
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own, be- 1546.
fides the appearance of great moderation, and the
merit of paying much respect to their judgment,
the Emperor dexterously avoided discovering his
own sentiments, and reserved to himself, as his
only part, that of carrying into execution what
they flould recommend. Nor was he less secure
of such a decision as he wished to obtain, by
referring it wholly to themselves. The Roman
Catholic members, prompted by their own zeal,
or prepared by his intrigues, joined immediately
in representing that the authority of the council
now met at Trent ought to be supreme in all
matters of controversy ; that all Christians should
submit to its decrees as the infallible rule of their
faith; and therefore they besought him to exert
the power, with which he was invested by the
Almighty, in protecting that assembly, and in
compelling the Protestants to acquiesce in its
determinations. The Protestants, on the other
hand, presented a memorial, in which, after re-
peating their objeEions to the council of Trent,
they proposed, as the only effetual method of
deciding the points in dispute, that either a free
general council should be assembled in Germany,
or a national council of.the Empire fiould be called,
or a select number of divines ihould be appoint-
ed out of each party to examine and define ar-
ticles of faith. They mentioned the recesses of
fcveral diets favourable to this proposition, and

Y L which

B °
o K which had afforded them the profpe& of ter.
a__- dminating all their differences in this amicable

1546- manner; they now conjured the Emperor not

to depart from his former plan, and by offering
violence to their coni:iences, to bring calamities
upon Germany, the very thought of which must
fill every lover of his country with horror. The
Emperor receiving this paper with a contemptu-
ous smile, paid no farther regard to it. Hav-
ing already taken his final resolution, and per-
ceiving that nothing but force could compel
June 9. them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the Car-

dinal of Trent to Rome, in order to conclude
an alliance with the Pope, the terms of which
were already agreed on; he commanded a body
of troops, levied on purpose in the Low-Coun-
tries, to advance towards Germany; he gave
commissions to several officers for raising men in
different parts of the Empire; he warned John
and Albert of Brandenburg, that now was the
proper time of exerting themselves, in order to
rescue their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from cap-
tivity f.

The Pro- A.L there things could not be tranfaEed with-
testants ailrmed. out the observation and knowledge of the Pro-

teflants. The secret was now in many hands;
under whatever veil the Emperor still affected to
conceal his designs, his officers kept no such myf-
terious reserve; and his allies and subjects spoke
out his intentions plainly. Alarmed with reports

f Sleid. 374. Seck. iii. 658.

of

of this kind from every quarter, as well as with B o° K
the preparations for war which they could not but -a
observe, the deputies of the confederates demand- 1546.
ed audience of the Emperor, and, in the name of
their maflers, required to know whether there mi-
litary preparations were carried on by his com-
mand, and for what end, and against what enemy ?
To a question put in such a tone, and at a time
when fasts were become too notorious to be de-
nied, it was neceitary to give an explicit answer,
Charles owned the orders which he had issued,
and professing his purpose not to molest on ac-
count of religion those who should act as dutiful
bfbjeEts; declared, that he had nothing in view
but to maintain the rights and prerogatives of the
Imperial dignity, and, by punilhing some sac-
tious members, to preserve the ancient conftitu-
tion of the Empire from being impaired or dif-
solved by their irregular and licentious condu&.
Though the Emperor did not name the persons
whom he charged with such high crimes, and def-
tined to be the obje&s of his vengeance, it was
obvious that he had the Ele&or of Saxony and
Landgrave of Hleffe in view. Their deputies
confidcring what he had said, as a plain declar-
ation of his hostile intentions, immediately re-
tired from Ratisbon g.
THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult The Eme-

ror B treaty
matter to treat with the Pope, who having at with ti,

X Sleid. 376.

Y 3 length

B OVI K length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan

_ -l which he had long recommended, assented with
Ju y s.4 eagerness to every article that he proposed. The

league was signed a few days after the Cardinal's
arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies which
abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of the Pro-
teftants in rejecting the holy cotncil assembled at
Trent, and the necessity of maintaining found
doctrine, together with good order in the church,
are mentioned as the motives of this union be-
tween the contracting parties. In order to check
the growth of these evils, and to punish such as
had impiously contributed to spread them, the
Emperor, having long and without success made
trial of gentler remedies, engaged instantly to
take the field with a sufficient army, that he might
compel all who disowned the council, or had
apostatized from the religion of their forefathers,
to return into the bosom of the church, and fob-
mit with due obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
consent, nor without afligning him his share in
any conquests which flould be made upon them;
and that even after this period he should not agree
to any accommodation which niglht be detrimen-
tal to the church, or to the interest of religion.
On his part, the Pope fl-ipulatcd to deposit a large
film in the bank of Venice towards defraying the
cxpcnce of the war; to naintain, at his own
charge, drinig the laice of fix nonths, twelve
thloulLlcl foot, and five hlundred Ihor lc; to gria"t

tlhe

the Emperor, for one year, half of the ecclefiafli- B o°° K
cal revenues throughout Spain; to authorize him, ---
by a bull, to alienate as much of the lands, be- '546.
longing to religious houses in that country, as
would amount to the fum of five hundred thou-
sand crowns; and to employ not only spiritual
censures, but military force, against any Prince who
Thould attempt to interrupt or defeat the execution
of this treaty h.

NOTWITHSTANDING the explicit terms in which E.deavours

the extirpation of heresy was declared to be the ceal hi in-
objeft of the war which was to follow upon this fomhe
treaty, Charles still endeavoured to persuade the Protestant
Germans that he had no design to abridge their'
religious liberty, but that he aimed only at vin-
dicating his own authority, and repressing the in-
folence of such as had encroached upon it. Vith
this view, he wrote circular letters in the fame
strain with his answer to the deputies at Ratisbon,
to most of the free cities, and to several of the
Princes who had embraced the Proteflant doc-
trines. In there he complained loudly, but in
general terms, of the contempt into which the
Imperial dignity had fallen, and of the prefump-
tuous as well as disorderly behaviour of some
members of the Empire. HIe declared that he
now took arms, not in a religious, but in a civil
quarrel; not to oppress any who continued to
behave as quiet and dutiful fubjedls, but to
h Slcid. 381 Pallav. 255. Dumont Corps Diplom. 1.

Y 4 humble

B °0 K humble the arrogance of such as had thrownoff

VIII. -__-; all sense of that subordination in which they were
£546- placed under him as head of the Germanic

body. Gross as this deception was, and mani.
felt as it might have appeared to all who confi.
dered the Emperor's conduct with attention, it
became necessary for him to make trial of its
effect; and such was the confidence and dexterity
with which he employed it, that he derived the
most solid advantages from this artifice. If he
had avowed at once an intention of overturning
the Protestant church, and of reducing all Ger-
mnany under its former slate of fubjetion to the
Papal See, none of the cities or Princes who had
embraced the new opinions could have remained
neutral after such a declaration, far less could
they have ventured to alfift the Emperor in such
an enterprize. Whereas by concealing, and even
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved himself from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all the
Protestant stares, but he furnished the timid with
an excuse for continuing inactive, and the design-
ing or interested with a pretext for joining him,
without exposing thermelves to the infamy of aban-
doning their own principles, or taking part openly
in lupprcfling them. At the fame time the Em-
peror well knew, that if, by their assistance, he
were enabled to break the power of the Eletor
of Saxony and the Landgrave, he might afterwards
prelfribe what terms lie pleaedc to Che feeble re-
mpains of a party without union, and deflitute of

leaders,

leaders, who would then regret, too late, their mif- B o o K
taken confidence in him, and their inconsiderate I
desertion of their associates. 1546.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen difpfay The Pope

dilconcerts

of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this plan hispla.
which the Emperor had formed with so much
care and art. Proud of having been the author
of such a formidable league against the Lu-
theran heresy, and happy in thinking that the
glory of extirpating it was reserved for his Pon-
tificate, lie published the articles of his treaty
with the Emperor, in order to demonstrate the
pious intention of their confederacy, as well as
todifplay his own zeal, which prompted him to
make such extraordinary efforts for maintaining
the faith in its purity. Not satisfied with this,
he soon after issued a bull, containing most libe-
ralpromifes of indulgence to all who should en-
gage in this holy enterprize, together with warm
exhortations to such as could not bear a part in
it themselves, to increase the fervour of their
prayers, and the severity of their mortifications,
that they might draw down the blessing of Hea-
ven upon those who undertook it'. Nor was it
zeal alone which pufled the Pope to make decla-
rations so inconsistent with the account which the
Emperor himself gave of his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
dinimnulation in such a cause; at his seeming to

Du Mont Corps Diplom.

be

B 0 0 K be ashamed of owning his zeal for the church,
t.-, -and at his endeavours to make that pass for a po.

1546. litical contest, which he ought to have gloried in

as a war that had no other object than the de-
fence of religion. With as much solicitude,
therefore, as the Emperor laboured to disguise
the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope en-
deavour to publish their real plan, in order that
they might come at once to an open rupture with
the Protetlants, that all hope of reconcilement
might be cut off, and that Charles might be
under fewer temptations, and have it less in his
power than at present, to betray the interests of
the church by any accommodation beneficial to
himself

THE Emperor, though not a little offended at

the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making this
discovery, continued boldly to pursue his own plan,
and to assert his intentions to be no other than what
he had originally avowed. Several of the Protestant
states, whom he had previously gained, thought
themfelvesjuftified, in some measure, by his decla-
rations, for abandoning their aflociates, and even
for giving afliftance to him.

The prepa- BUT these artifices did not impose on the greater
Prtienofnt and founder part of the Protestant confederates,
or ,heir They clearly perceived it to be against the re-
ferce^. formed religion that the Emperor had taken arms,

'; F. Paul, 18. Thuan. Hilt. i. 61.

and

and that not only the suppression of it, but the B o 0 K
extinction of the German liberties, would be the -
certain consequence of his obtaining such an en- 3546.
tire superiority as would enable him to execute
his schemes in their full extent. They determined,
therefore, to prepare for their own defence, and
neither to renounce those religious truths, to the
knowledge of which they had attained by means so
wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights
which had been transmitted to them by their an-
ceftors. In order to give the necessary directions
for this purpose, their deputies met at Jlm,
soon after their abrupt departure from Ratisbon.
Their deliberations were now conducted with such
vigour and unanimity, as the imminent danger
which threatened them required. The contin-
gent of troops, which each of the confederates
was to furnish, having been fixed by the original
treaty of union, orders were given for bringing
them immediately into the field. Being sensible,
at las, that through the narrow prejudices of
some of their members, and the imprudent fe-
curity of others, they had neglected too long to
trengthen therfelves by foreign alliances, they
now applied with great earnestness to the Venetians
and Swiss.
To the Venetians they represented the Emnpe- They roi'clt

the aid o'

ror's intention of overturning the present fyl-emn the Venc-
of Germany, and of raising himself to abiblute
power in that country by means of foreign force

furni lled

B o00 K furnished by the Pope; they warned them how

VIII.

ó-- fatal this event would prove to the liberties of
'546. Italy, and that by suffering Charles to acquire

unlimited authority in the one country, they would
soon feel his dominion to be no less despotic in
the other; they besought them, therefore, not to
grant a passage through their territories to those
troops, which ought to be treated. as common
enemies, because by subduing Germany they pre.
pared chains for the reft of Europe. These re-
flections had not escaped the sagacity of those
wife republicans. They had communicated their
ientiments to the Pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render irresistible the power of a potentate, whose
ambition he already knew to be boundless. But
they had found Paul so eager in the prosecution
of his own plan, that he disregarded all their re-
monstrances'. This attempt to alarm the Pope
having proved unsuccessful, they declined doing
any thing more towards preventing the dangers
which they foresaw; and in return to the applica-
tion from the confederates of Smalkalde, they in-
formed them, that they could not obftru& the
march of the Pope's troops through an open coun-
try, but by levying an army strong enough to face
them in the field; and that this would draw upon
themselves the whole weight of his as well as of the
Emnperor's indignation. For the fame reason they
declined lending a ium of money, which the

Adriani Jndria di fuoi Tempi, liv. v. p. 332.

Elcaor

Eleeor of Saxony and Landgrave-propofed to bor- B o0 K
row of them, towards carrying on the war m. -
-

1546.

THE demands of the confederates upon the Swiss or he
were not confined to the obftruEting of the en-
trance of foreigners into Germany; they required
of them, as the nearest neighbours and closest allies
of the Empire, to interpose with their wonted
vigour for the preservation of its liberties, and nor
to tland as inacdive fpeEtators, while their brethren
were oppressed and enslaved. But with whatever
zeal some of the Cantons might have been dif-
posed to a& when the cause of the Reformation
was in danger, the Helvetic body was lb divided
with regard to religion, as to render it unsafe for
he Protestants to take any ftep without consulting
their Catholic associates; and among them the
miflaries of the Pope and Emperor had such in-
uence, that a resolution of maintaining an exa&t
eutrality between the contending parties, was the
tmoft which could be procured .

BEING disappointed in both these applications, of Francis
he Protestants, not long after, had recourse to IryaV.n'"
heKings of France and England; the approach
f danger either overcoming the Elestor of
axony's scruples, or obliging him to yield to the
Importunities of his aflbciates. The situation of

Sb'idl. 3sr. Paruta Illor. Veiiet. tom. iv. 18o. Lam-

er"U llortenlius de Bello CGrmanico, apud 5carilJulii, vol.
* j) 47.

" ld.t
392.

B o\Cl K the two Monarchs flattered them with hopes'o

---- success. Though hostilities between them had
54G- continued for some time after the peace of Crefpy.

they became weary at last of a war, attended with
no glory or advantage to either, and had lately ter.
minated all their differences by a peace concluded
at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great
difficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to be in.
eluded in the treaty, in return for that concefiion
he engaged to pay a great fum, which Henry
demanded as due to him on several accounts, and
he left Boulogne in the hands of the English, asa
pledge for his faithful performance of that articlk
But though the re-establishment of peace feeird
to leave the two Monarchs at liberty to turn the
attention towards Germany, so unfortunate wer
the Protestants, that they derived no immediate
advantage fiom this circumstance. Henry ap.
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the supreme direcdo
of their league; a pre-eminence which, as t
bonds of union or interest between them were b
feeble, and as he differed from them so wide
in his religious fcntiments, they had no inclinatio
to admit °. Francis, more powerfully inclined
political considerations to afford them affiftanc
found his kingdom so much exhausted byalon
war, and was lo much afraid of irritating tl
Pope, by entering into close union with excon

o Rymcr, xv. 93. IHerbert, 258.

municate

municated heretics, that he durst not undertake B o o K
the protection of the Smalkaldic league. By this ---
ill-timed caution, or by a superstitious deference to 46
scruples, to which at other times he was not much
addicted, he loft the most promising opportunity of
mortifying and distressing his rival, which presented
itelf during his whole reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their Proteaants

take the

negociations with foreign courts, the confederates field witha
found no difficulty at home, in bringing a fuffi- grea army.
cient force into the field. Germany abounded at
that time in inhabitants; the feudal institutions,
which subsisted in full force, enabled the nobles
to call out their numerous vassals, and to put
them in motion on the shortest warning; the
martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or ener-
vated by the introduction of commerce and arts,
had acquired additional vigour during the con-
tinual wars in which they had been employed, for
half a century, either in the pay of the Emperors,
or the Kings of France. Upon every opportunity
of entering into service, they were accustomed to
run eagerly to arms; and to every standard that
was erected, volunteers flocked from all quarters P.
Zeal seconded, on this occasion, their native ar-
dour. Men on. whom the doctrines of the Re-
formation had macle that deep impression which
accompanies truth when firfl- clicovered, prepared
ro maintain it with proportional vigour and

P Seck. 1. iii. 16i.

among

B °V, K among a warlike people, it appeared infamous
-v - to remain inactive, when the defence of religion
'546. was the motive for taking arms. Accident corn.

bined with all these circumstances in facilitating
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being difriffed by the King on the pro.
fpet of peace with England, joined in a body the
flandard of the Protestants q. By such a concur.
rence of causes, they were enabled to affemblein
a few weeks an army composed of seventy thou.
sand foot and fifteen thousand horse, provided
with a train of an hundred and twenty cannon,
eight hundred ammunition waggons, eight thou.
sand beasts of burden, and fix thousand pioneers'.
This army, one of the most numerous, and un.
doubtedly the best appointed, of any which had
been levied in Europe during that century, did
not require the united effort of the whole Pro.
teftant body to raise it. The Elector of Saxony,
the Landgrave of Hesse, the Duke of Wurtemberg,
the Princes of Anhalt, and the Imperial citiesof
Aufbourg, Ulmn, and Strafburg, were the only
powers which contributed towards this great arma
ment: the Eletors of Cologne, of Brandenburg,
and the Count Palatine, overawed by the Emperor's
threats, or deceived by his profefions, remained
neuter. John marquis of Brandenburg Bareith,

S Thuan. 1. i. 68.
r Thuan. 1. i. 6or. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Comn

mentariorum de Bel. Germ. lib. duo, Antw. 155o. Limo0
p. 13, a.

- and

and Albert of Brandenburg Anfpach, though both B 0 o K
curly converts to Lutheranifm, entered openly _
into the Emperor's service, under pretext of hav- 1546.
ilig obtained his promise for the security of the
Proteflant religion; and Maurice of Saxony soon
followed their example.

THE number of their troops, as well as the Theinequa-
amazing rapidity wherewith they had assembled Eperor,.
them, aftonifled the Emperor, and filled him fresirt
with the rnoft disquieting apprehensions. He was,
indeed, in no condition to resist such a mighty
force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great
itrength, whose inhabitants, being mostly Lu-
therans, would have been more ready to betray
than to aflift him, with only three thousand Spanish
foot, who had served in Hungary, and about five
thouiand Germans who had joined him from dif-
ferent parts of the Empire, he must have been
overwhelmed by the approach of such a formidable
army, which he could not fight, nor could he even
hope to retreat from it in safety. The Pope's'
troops, though in full march to his relief, had

rdy reached the frontiers of Germany; the forces
which he expected from the Low-Countries had
ot yet begun to move, and were even far from
°eing complete'. His situation, however, called
r more immediate succour, nor did it teem

Praicable for him to wait for such distant auxili-
ICs, with whom his junction was so piecarious.

' Sleid. 389. Avila, 8, a.
VOL. Il. Z BUT

B O 0 K BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that
..--- the confederates did not avail themselves of the
Theyl4- advantage which lay so full in their view. In civil
prudently wars, the firfl steps are commonly taken with
negotiate
inllead of much timidity and hesitation. Men are soli.
aeing. citous, at that time, to put on the semblance of

moderation and equity; they strive to gain parti.
fans by teeming to adhere ftridly to known forms;
nor can they be brought, at once, to violate those
established inffitutions, which in times of tran.
quillity they have been accustomed to reverence;
hence their proceedings are often feeble or di.
latory, when they ought to be most vigorous
and decisive. Influenced by those considerations,
which, happily for the peace of society, operate
powerfully on the human mind, the confederates
could not think of throwing off that allegiance
which they owed to the head of the Empire,
or of turning their arms againff him without
one solemn appeal more to his candour, and to
the impartial judgment of their fellow-fubje&s.
July 15. For this purpose, they addressed a letter to the

Emperor, and a manifesto to all the inhabitants
of Germany. The tenour of both was the fame.
They represented their own conduct with regard
to civil affairs as dutiful and fubmiflive; they
mentioned the inviolable union in which theyhad
lived with the Emperor, as well as the many and
recent marks of his good-will and gratitude where-
withal they had been honoured ; they asserted re-
ligion to be the sole cause of the violence which
the Emperor now meditated again f them; and in

proof

proof of this produced many arguments to con- B o, K
vince those who were so weak as to be deceived --
by the artifices with which he endeavoured to 1546.
cover his real intentions ; they declared their own
resolution to risk every thing in maintenance of
their religious rights, and foretold the dissolution
of the German constitution, if the Emperor ihould
finally prevail against them '.

CHARLES, though in such a perilous situation The mpe-
as might have inspired him with moderate feni- thr under
ments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if the pire.
his affairs had been in the most prosperous state. JY lo.
His only reply to the address and manifesto of the
Protestants, was to publish the ban of the Empire
against the Ele&or of Saxony and Landgrave of
Hefle, their leaders, and against all who should
dare to affif: them. By this sentence, the ulti-
mate and most rigorous one which the German
jurisprudence has provided for the punishment of
traitors, or enemies to their country, they were
declared rebels and outlaws, and deprived of
every privilege which they enjoyed as members
of the Germanic body; their goods were confif-
cated; their subje6s absolved from their oath of
allegiance; and it became not only lawful but
meritorious to invade their territories. The nobles,
and free cities, who framed or perfected the con-
iItution of the German government, had not been
iu negligent of their own safety and privileges as to

Sleid. 384.

Z 2 trust

B o0 0 trust the Emperor with this formidable jurifdiqion
--p--' The authority of a diet of the Empire ought t
1546. have been interposed before any of its member

could be put under the ban. But Charles over
looked that formality, well knowing that, if hi!
arms were crowned with success, there would re.
main none who would have either power or cou.
rage to call in question what he had done". The
Emperor, however, did not found his sentence
against the EleEtor and Landgrave on their revolt
from the eftabliihed church, or their conduft
with regard to religion; he affeaed to assign for
it reasons purely civil, and those too expreffedin
such general and ambiguous terms, without
ipecifying the nature or circumstances of their
guilt, as rendered it more like an a&t of despotic
power than of a legal and limited jurifidition.
Nor was it altogether from choice, or to conceal
his intentions, that Charles had recourse to the
ambiguity of general expreflions; but he durl
not mention too particularly the causes of his fen.
tence, as every acion which he could have charged
upon the Eleaor and Landgrave as a crime, might
have been employed with equal justice to condemn
many of the Protestants whom he still pretended
to confider as faithful fubjests, and whom i
would have been extremely imprudent to alarm
or disgust.

u Sleid. 386. Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 1l 314
Pfcffel Hist. Abregc du Droit Publ. 168. 736. 158.

6 Tlc

THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes of B ° 1 K
accommodation to be at an end, had only to .
choose whether they would submit without reserve h546.
to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open hoftili- clare war
ties. They were not defitute either of public Charles.
Ipirir, or of resolution to make the proper choice.
A few days after the ban of the Empire was pub-
lifled, they, according to the custom of that age,
sent a herald to the Imperial camp, with a solemn
declaration of war against Charles, to whom they
no longer gave any other title than that of pre-
tended Emperor, and renounced all allegiance, ho-
mage, or duty which he might claim, or which they
had hitherto yielded to him. But previous to this
formality, part of their troops had begun to a&.
The command of a considerable body of men Their fir
railed by the city of Augsburg having been given operations
to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who
by the booty that he got when the Imperialists
plundered Rome, together with the merit of long
service, had acquired wealth and authority which
placed him on a level with the chief of the Ger-
man nobles: that gallant veteran resolved, before
he joined the main body of the confederates, to
attempt something suitable to his former fame,
and to the expectation of his countrymen. As
the Pope's forces were hastening towards Tyrol,
in order to penetrate into Germany by the nar-
row pafres through the mountains which run across
that cuntry, he advanced thither with the utrnof
'rpi.iry, and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffi-ein,
tWO llhong castles which commanded the principal

Z 3 defiles.

B 0 0 K defiles. Without flopping a moment, he con.

---_ tinued his march towards Infpruck, by getting
i546. poireffion of which he would have obliged the

Italians to flop Ihort, and with a small body of men
could have resifted all the efforts of the greatest
armies. Caftlealto, the governor of Trent, know.
ing what a fatal blow this would be to the Empe-
ror, all whose designs must have proved abortive
if his Italian auxiliaries had been intercepted,
raised a few troops with the utmost dispatch, and
threw himself into the town. Schertel, however,
did not abandon the enterprize, and was prepar-
ing to attack the place, when the intelligence of
the approach of the Italians, and an order from
the Ele&or and Landgrave, obliged him to defil.
By his retreat the passes were left open, and the
Italians entered Germany without any opposition,
but from the garrisons which Schertel had placed
in Ehrenberg and Cuffitein, and these, having no
hopes of being relieved, surrendered, after a thort
resistance *.

NoR

x Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iltoria di fuoi Tempi, lib,
335

* Seckendorf, the indutlrious author of the Commentariu3

Apologeticus de Luthcranifmo, whom I have so long and
safely followed as my guide in German affairs, was a de.
fcendant from Schertel. With the care and solicitude ofa
German, who was hinfelf of noble birth, Seckendorf has
published a long digreifion concerning his anceflor, calcolated
chiefly to flow how Schertel was ennobled, and his polleity
allied to many of the most ancient families in the Empire
Among other curious particulars, he gives us an accout of
his wealth, the chief source of which was the plunder he 0t

at

NOR was the recalling of Schertel the only B oio K
error of which the confederates were guilty. As ,---
the supreme command of their army was corn- andil46on-
mitred, in terms of the league of Smalkalde, to dua.
the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse
with equal power, all the inconveniencies arif-
ing from a divided and co-ordinate authority,
lwhich is always of fatal consequence in the opera-
tions of war, were immediately felt. The Elec-
tor, though intrepid in his own person to excess,
and most ardently zealous in the cause, was flow
in deliberating, uncertain as well as irresolute in
his determinations, and constantly preferred mea-
lures which were cautious and safe, to such as
were bold or decisive. The Landgrave, of a
more active and enterprising nature, formed all
his resolutions with promptitude, wilhed to exe-
cute them with spirit, and uniformly preferred
such measures as tended to bring the contest to a
speedy issue. Thus their maxims, with regard
to the conduct of the war, differed as widely as
those by which they were influenced in preparing
for it. Such perpetual contrariety in their senti-
ments gave rife, imperceptibly, to jealousy and
the spirit of contention. These multiplied the
diifenfions flowing from the incompatibility of
their natural tempers, and rendered them more

atRome. His landed elfate alone was fold by his grandsons
for fix hundred thousand florins. By this we may form rome
idea of the riches amassed by the Condottieri, or commanders
of mercenary bands in that age. At the taking of Rome
chlertel was only a captain. Seckend. lib. ii. 73.

Z 4 violent.

B 10 K violent. The other members of the league con.

A-- _J fidering themselves as independent, and fu!jet
iJ46t to the EleCor and Landgrave, only in conte.

quence of the articles of a voluntary confederacy,
did not long retain a proper veneration for corn.
manders who proceeded with so little concord;
and the numerous army of the Protestants, likea
vast machine whose parts are ill-compa&ed, and
which is destitute of any power sufficient to move
and regulate the whole, acted with no consistency,
vigour, or effect.

The Pop-' T THE Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
troorpe join
the Empe- maining at Ratisbon, he might render it impof.

ur.f ible for the Pope's forces to join him, having

boldly advanced to Landihut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe.
ther it was proper to follow him into the territo-
ries of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at last they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly
abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave only
a small garrison. By this time the Papal troops,
amounting fully to that number which Paul had
stipulated to furnish, had reached Landshut, and
were soon followed by fix thousand Spaniards of
the veteran bands stationed in Naples. The con-
federates, after Schertel's spirited but fruitless
expedition, teem to have permitted there forces
to advance unmolested to the place of rendez-
vous, without any attempt to attack either them

or

or the Emperor separately, or to prevent their B o0o K
iundion". The Imperial army amounted now to -
lhirty-fix thousand men, and was still more for- 1546.
midable by the discipline and valour of the troops,
than by their number. Avila, commendador of
Alcantara, who had been present in all the wars
carried on by Charles, and had served in the
armies which gained the memorable victory at
Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and invaded
France, gives this the preference to any military
force he had ever seen assembled Y. Otavio Far-
nefe, the Pope's grandson, affifled by the ablest
officers formed in the long wars between Charles
and Francis, commanded the Italian auxiliaries.
His brother, the Cardinal Farnese, accompanied
him as Papal legate; and in order to give the
war the appearance of a religious enterprize, he
proposed to march at the head of the army, with
a cross carried before him, and to publish indul-
gences wherever he came, to all who should give
them any assistance, as had anciently been the
practice in the Crusades against the Infidels. But
this the Emperor ftritly prohibited, as incon-
fitlent with all the declarations which he had
made to the Germans of his own party; and the
legate perceiving, to his astonishment, that the
exercise of the Protestant religion, the extirpation
of which he confidered as the sole object of the
war, was publicly permitted in the Imperial camp,
soon returned in disgust to Italy a.

Adriani ltoria de fuoi Tempi, lib. v. 340.
A' vil3a, 8.
i F. Paul, 191.

THC

B 0 K THE arrival of these troops enabled the Empe.

VIII.
*TLV_--. ror to fend such a reinforcement to the garrison

3546. at Ratisbon, that the confederates, relinquilhing

all hopes of reducing that town, marched towards
Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to which Charles
was now encamped. They exclaimed loudly
against the Emperor's notorious violation of the
laws and constitution of the Empire, in having
called in foreigners to lay waste Germany, and to
oppress its liberties. As in that age, the domi
nion of the Roman See was so odious to the Pro.
teftants, that the name of the Pope alone was
sufficient to inspire them with horror at anyen-
terprize which be countenanced, and to raise in
their minds the blackefd suspicions, it came to be
universally believed among them, that Paul, not
satisfied with attacking them openly by force of
arms, had dispersed his emiflaries all over Ger.
many, to set on fire their towns and magazines,
and to poison the wells and fountains of water.
Nor did this rumour, which was extravagant and
frightful enough to make a deep impreflion on the
credulity of the vulgar, spread among them only;
even the leaders of the party, blinded by their
prejudices, published a declaration, in which they
accused the Pope of having employed such Anti.
christian and diabolical arts against them'. These
sentiments of the confederates were confirmed, in
tome measure, by the behaviour of the Papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous to

a Sleid. 399. ,ards

wards heretics anathematized by the church, were B 0 o K
guilty of great excesses in the territories of the
Lutheran States, and aggravated the calamities of s146.
war, by mingling with it all the cruelty of bigoted
zeal.

THE first operations in the field, however, did The confre
not correspond with the violence of those paflions vance to-
which animated individuals. The Emperor had Imperial
prudently taken the resolution of avoiding an arm''
aftion with an enemy so far superior in number b,
especially as he foresaw that nothing could keep
a body composed of so many and such difimilar
members from falling to pieces, but the prefling
to attack it with an inconsiderate precipitancy.
The confederates, though it was no less evident
that to them every moment's delay was pernicious,
were still prevented by the weakness or division
of their leaders from exerting that vigour, with
which their situation, as well as the ardour of their
soldiers, ought to have inspired them. On their Auguft9g.
arrival at Ingoldftadt, they found the Emperor
in a camp not remarkable for firength, and fur-
rounded only by a flight entrenchment. Before
the camp lay a plain of such extent, as afforded
sufficient space for drawing out their whole army,
and bringing it to aEt at once. Every confider-
ltion ihould have determined them to have seized
this opportunity of attacking the Emperor; and
their great luperior-ity in numbers, the eagerness of
their troops, together with the tlability of the

b Avila, 78, a.

German

B I0 o K German infantry in pitched battles, afforded them

A--_j the most probable expectation of viatory. The
'546. Landgrave urged this with great warmth, declar.

ing that if the role command were vested in him,
he would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general action the fate of the two
parties. But the Elecor, reflecting on the valour
and discipline of the enemy's forces, animated by
the presence of the Emperor, and conduced by
the best officers of the age, would not venture
upon an action, which he thought to be so doubt-
ful, as the attacking such a body of veterans on
ground which they themselves had chosen, and
while covered by fortifications which, though
imperfect, would afford them no small advantage
in the combat. Notwithstanding his hesitation
and remonstrances, it was agreed to advanceto-
wards the enemy's camp in battle array, in order
to make a trial whether by that insult, and by a
furious cannonade which they began, they could
draw the Imperialifis out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into this

The Empe- snare. He adhered to his own system with in.
yor declenes
a bJatl.e flexible conflancy; and drawing up his soldiers

behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should venture
upon an afihult, calmly waited their approach, and
carefully recfl'ained his own men from any excur-
lions or 1fkirnifhes which might bring on a general
engagement. He rode along the lines, and ad.
dressing the troops of the diffirent nations in their
own language, encouraged them not only by his
words, but by the cheerfulnets of his voice and

cotil-

countenance; he exposed himself in places of great- B o o K
eti danger, and amidst the warmest fire of the ene- _
my's artillery, the most numerous that had hitherto 1546.
been brought into the field by any army. Roused
by his example, not a man quitted his ranks; it
was thought infamous to discover any symptom of
fear when the Emperor appeared so intrepid; and
the meanest soldier plainly perceived, that their
declining the combat at present was not the effect
of timidity in their general, but the result of a
well-grounded caution. The confederates, after
firing several hours on the Imperialists, with more
noise and terror than execution, feeing no pro-
fpe& of alluring them to fight on equal terms,
retired to their own camp. The Emperor em-
ployed the night with such diligence in strength-
tning his works, that the confederates, returning
to the cannonade next day, found that, though
they had now been willing to venture upon such
a bold experiment, the opportunity of making an
attack with advantage was loft c.

AFTER fuich a discovery of the feebleness or The Fie-
irresolution of their leaders, and the prudence as jo, th"'
well as firmness of the Emperor's conduet, the 'mptror.
confederates turned their whole attention towards
preventilng the arrival of a powerful reinforcement
of ten thou find foot, and four thouland horse,
which the count de Buren was bringing to the
Emperor from the Low-Countries. But though

Sleid.

S i 395. 397. Avila, z7, a. Lamb. Hortenf. ap.

that

B o0 K that general had to traverse such an extent of

VIII.
----' country; though his route lay through the terri.

35+6. tories of several ifates warmly disposed to favour

the confederates; though they were apprized of
his approach, and by their Superiority in numbers
might easily have detached a force sufficient to
overpower him, he advanced with such rapidity,
and by such well-concerted movements, while they
opposed him with such remissness, and so little
Sept. 1o. military skill, that he conduEted this body to the

Imperial camp without any loTs d

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he

placed great confidence, the Emperor altered, in
some degree, his plan of operations, and began
to aEt more upon the offensive, though he still
avoided a battle with the utmost industry. He
made himself mailer of Neuburg, Dillingen, and
Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen, and
several other towns, situated on the most confl.
derable streams which fall into that mighty river,
By this he got the command of a great extentof
country, though not without being obliged to
engage in several sharp encounters, of which the
success was various, nor without being expostd,

State of oftener than once, to the danger of being drawn
both armies.

into a battle. In this manner the whole autumn
was spent; neither party gained any remarkable
superiority over the other, and nothing was yet
done towards bringing the war to a period. 1he
Emperor had often foretold, with confidence,

d Sleid. 403.

that discord and the want of money would compel B o ° K
the confederates to disperse that unwieldy body, -
which they had neither abilities to guide nor 1546.
funds to support'. Though he waited with im-
patience for the accomplishment of his predidion,
there was no profpeft of that event being at hand.
1iut he himself began to susser from the want
of, forage and provisions; even the Catholic
provinces being so much incensed at the intro-
duaion of foreigners into the Empire, that they
furnished them with relucance, while the camp of
the confederates abounded with a profusion of all
necessaries, which the zeal of their friends in the
adjacent countries poured in with the utmost li-
berality and good will. Great numbers of the
Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomed to the cli-
mate or food of Germany, were become unfit for
service through iicknefss. Considerable arrears
were now due to the troops, who had scarcely
received any money from the beginning of the
ampaign; the Emperor, experiencing on this,
as well as on former occasions, that his jurifdic-
tion was more extensive than his revenues, and
that the former enabled him to assemble a greater
umber of soldiers, than the latter were sufficient
to support. Upon all there accounts, he found it
ifficult to keep his army in the field; some of
is ablcfe generals, and even the Duke of Alva

'Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Grrco fermone fcriptus
IJoach. Camcrario, ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.
tCamerar. ap. Freher. 483.

2 himself,

B 11 K hirfelf, persevering and obstinate as he usually

VIII.

v-- was in the prosecution of every measure, advifin
546. him to disperse his troops into winter-quarters,

But as the arguments urged against any plan
which he had adopted, rarely made much impref-
sion upon the Emperor, he paid no regard to their
opinion, and determined to continue his efforts
in order to weary out the confederates; being
well assured that if he could once oblige them to
separate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body g. Still, however, it re.
mained a doubtful point, whether his steadiness
was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be ex-
haufted. It was still uncertain which party, by
first dividing its forces, would give the superiority
to the other; when an unexpected event decided
the contest, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the
affairs of the confederates.

Schemre of MAURICE of.Saxony having insinuated himself
Saxony. into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts which

have already been described, no sooner saw hofti.
iities ready to break out between the confederates
of Smalkalde and that monarch, than vast pro.
fpets of ambition began to open upon him. That
portion of Saxony, which descended to him from
his ancestors, was far from satisfying his aspiring
mind; and he perceived with pleasure the ap.
proach of civil war, as, amidst the revolutions and
convulsions occasioned by it, opportunities o

a Thuan. 8j.

acquiring

Acquiring additional power or dignity, which at B o o K
other times are fought in vain, present themselves
to an enterprising spirit. As he was thoroughly 1546.
acquainted with the tRate of the two contending
arties, and the qualities of their leaders, he did
ot hesitate long in determining on which fide the
reateft advantages were to be expeEted. Having
evolved all these things in his own breast, and
aving taken his final resolution of joining the
mperor, he prudently determined to declare
early in his favour; that by the merit of this,
e might acquire a title to a proportional recom-
enfe. With this view, he had repaired to Ra-
ibon in the month of May, under pretext of
attending the diet; and after many conferences His league
with Charles or his ministers, he, with the most EImhoth
yfterious secrecy, concluded a treaty, in which
eengaged to concur in assisting the Emperor as
faithful subject; and Charles, in return, ftipu-
ated to bestow on him all the spoils of the EleCtor
f Saxony, his dignities as well as territoriesh.
ifRory hardly records any treaty that can be
onfidered as a more manifest violation of the
oft powerful principles which ought to influence
iman actions. Maurice, a professed Protestant,
ta time when the belief of religion, as well as
eal for its interests, took frong possession of
very mind, binds himself to contribute his assist-
ce towards carrying on a war which had mani-

h larxi Annal. Brabant, vol. i. 638. Struvii Corp. 1048.
Vuan. 8S.
Yol,' iII. A a fefsly

B o 0 K feftly no other objeet than the extirpation of the
---- Protestant doctrines. He engages to take arms
1546. against his father-in-law, and to firip his nearef

relation of his honours and dominions. He joins
a dubious friend against a known benefactor, to
whom his obligations were both great and recent.
Nor was the Prince who ventured upon all this,
one of those audacious politicians, who, provided
they can accomplish their ends, and secure their
interest, avowedly disregard the most sacred obli.
gations, and glory in conternning whatever is ho.
nourable or decent. Maurice's condut, if the
whole mufft be ascribed to policy, was more artful
and masterly; he executed his plan in all its parts,
and yet endeavoured to preserve, in every ftep
which he took, the appearance of what was fair,
and virtuous, and laudable. It is probable, from
his subsequent behaviour, that, with regard to
the Protestant religion at least, his intentions were
upright, that he fondly trusted to the Emperor's
promises for its security, but that, according to
the fate of all who refine too much in policy, and
who tread in dark and crooked paths, in attempt-
ing to deceive others, he himself was, in some de.
gree, deceived.

H. ariificesi Iis firfl: care, however, was to keep the en
in older to
cr,,ie.I his gagements into which he had entered with tih
iicrlons,. Emperor clolcly concealed : and so perfect a nialre

was he in the art of liffinlulanon, that the confe
derates, notwithflanding his declining all connexioll
with them, and his remarkable afliduity in payiln

2 (0court

ourt to the Emperor, seemed to have entertained B 0 o Kc
o suspicion of his designs. Even the Eletor of -V.
axony, when he marched at the beginning of the 1546.
mpaign to join his associates, committed his
minions to Maurice's protection, which he, with
insidious appearance of friendship, readily un-
rtook'. But scarcely had the Elector taken the
ld, when Maurice began to consult privately
ith the King of the Romans how to invade those
ry territories, with the defence of which he was
trusted. Soon after, the Emperor sent him a
py of the Imperial ban denounced againit the
ledor and Landgrave. As he was next heir to
e former, and particularly interested in pre-
enting firangers from getting his dominions into
eir pofeffion, Charles required him, not only
r his own fake, but upon the allegiance and
ty which he owed to the head of the Empire,
antly to seize and detain in his hands the for-
ted estates of the EleCtor; warning him, at the
me time, that if he negle6ced to obey there
mmands, le should be held as accessary to the
imes of his kinsman, and be liable to the fame
nifhmcnt k

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice
mfelf fuggtlerd, was employed by him in or-
that his conducl towards the Ele&or might
n a matter of necessity but not of choice, an
of obedience to his superior, rather than a
$trrlvii Corp. 1o.46. k Sleid. 391. Thuan. 84.

A a 2 voluntary

B o0 K voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinfinan

-

--J and ally. But in order to give tome more fpe.
-i546. cious appearance to this thin veil with whichhe

endeavoured to cover his ambition, he, soon
afrer his return from Ratiibon, had called toge.
ther the flates of his country; and representing to
them that a civil war between the Emperor and
confederates of Smalkalde was now become un.
avoidable, desired their advice with regard to te
part which he should at in that event. They
having been prepared, no doubt, and tutored be.
fore-hand, and being desirous of gratifying their
Prince, whom they esteemed as well as loved, gave
fuchl counsel as they knew would be molt agree.
able; advising him to offer his mediation towards
reconciling the contending parties ; but if that
were rejected, and he could obtain proper security
for the Protestant religion, they delivered it as
their opinion, that, in all other points, he ought
to yield obedience to the Emperor. Upon re-
ceiving the Imperial rescript, together with the
ban against the Elector and Landgrave, Maurice
summoned the flates of his country a second time;
he laid before them the orders which he had re
ceived, and mentioned the puniflmnent with whic
he was threatened in cafe of disobedience; ie ac
quainted them that the confederates had refuf
to admit of his mediation, and that the EmperO
had given him the most fatisfolory declaration
with regard to religion; he pointed out his owl
intereo a

in securing pofeffion of the eletoral d
minions, as well as the danger of allowing tiran

getI

.ers to obtain an establishment in Saxony; and B 00 K
upon the whole, as the point under deliberation a-
refpeded his fubjets no less than himself, he de- 1546.
fired to know their sentiments, how he should
steer in that difficult and arduous conjunc6ure.
The states, no less obsequious and complaisant
than formerly, professing their own reliance on the
Emperor's promises as a perfect security for their
religion, proposed that, before he had recourse to
more violent methods, they would write to the
Ele&tor, exhorting him, as the best means, not
only of appealing the Emperor, but of prevent-
ing his dominions from being seized by foreign or
hoftilepowers, to give his content that Maurice
should take possession of them quietly and without
opposition. Maurice himself seconded their argu-
ments in a letter to the Landgrave, his father-in-
law. Such an extravagant proposition was reje&ted
with the scorn and indignation which it deserved.
The Landgrave, in return to Maurice, taxed him
with his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinf-
man to whom he was so deeply indebted; he
treated with contempt his affectation of executing
the Imperial ban, which he could not but know
to be altogether void by the unconf-itutional and
arbitrary manner in which it had been issued; he
bcfought him, not to susser himself to be bo far
blinded by ambition, as to forget the obligations
oihonour and fi-iendfhlip, or to betray the Pro-
teflant religion, the extirpation of which out of
Gelriany, even by the acknowledgment of the

A a 3 Pope

B 0 0 K Pope himself, was the great obje: of the present

A-_- war'.
1546.

He invades BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di.
the territo-
ies of the verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or
Sax&oy. arguments. Nothing now remained but toexe.

cute with vigour, What he had hitherto carried on
November. by artifice and ditilmulation. Nor was his bold.

ness in action inferior to his subtlety in contri-
vance. Having assembled about twelve thousand
men, he suddenly invaded one part of the eletoral
provinces, while Ferdinand, with an army com-
posed of Bohemians and Hungarians, overran
the other. Maurice, in two sharp encounters,
defeated the troops which the Eletor had left to
guard his country; and improving these advan-
tages to the utmost, made himself master of all
the Elettorate, except Wittemberg, Gotha, and
Eisenach, which being places of considerable
strength, and defended by sufficient garrisons,
refused to open their gates. The news of there
rapid conquests soon reached the Imperial and
confederate camps. In the former, fatisfadion
with an event, which it was foreseen would be
productive of the most important consequences,
was expressed by every possible demonstration of
joy. The latter was filled with aftoniflmentand
terror. The name of Maurice was mentioned
with execration, as an apoltate from religion, a

] Sleid. 405, &c. Thuan. 85. Camerar 484.

betrayer

trayer of the German liberty, and a contemner B 0 o K
f the most sacred and natural ties. Every thing IJ_. -
at the rage or invention of the party could 56
ggeft, in order to blacken and render him odi-
us; invecives, satires, and lampoons, the furious
eclamations of their preachers, together with the
ude wit of their authors, were all employed
gainft him. While he, confiding in the arts
,hich he had so long praffifed, as if his ations
ould have admitted of any serious juflification,
ublilhed a manifesto, containing the fame frivo-
us reasons for his conduct, which he had former-
alleged in the meeting of his states, and in his
tter to the Landgrave m=

THE Elector, upon the first intelligence of The confe-
laurice's motions, proposed to return home with mkover,
is troops for the defence of Saxony. But the tureo'fa-
eputies of the league, assembled at Ulm, pre- tion tothe
iled on him, at that time, to remain with the Emro
rmy, and to prefer the success of the common
aule before the security of his own dominions.
tlength the sufferings and complaints of his
bjets increased so much, that he discovered the
tmoll impatience to set out, in order to rescue
en from the opprefflon of Maurice, and from
cruelty of the Hungarians, who, having been
cctforned to that licentious and merciless fpe-
sos war which was thought lawfil against the
t;is, committed, wherever they came, the wild-

' Sleid. 409, 41o.

Aa 4 es

B o 0 K eft acts of rapine and violence. This desire ol
.-_-. the Elector was so natural and so warmly urged,
1546. that the deputies at Ulm, though fully fenfiblt

of the unhappy consequences of dividing their
army, durst not refuse their consent, how unwill.
ing soever to grant it. In this perplexity, they
repaired to the camp of the confederates at Gien.
gen, on the Brenz, in order to consult their con.
flituents. Nor were they less at a loss what to
determine in this pressing emergence. But, after
having confidered seriously the open desertion of
some of their allies; the scandalous lukewarm.
ness of others, who had hitherto contributed
nothing towards the war; the intolerable load
which had fallen of consequence upon such
members as were most zealous for the cause, or
most faithful to their engagements; the ill fuc.
cess of all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid;,
the unusual length of the campaign; the rigour
of the season; together with the great number
of soldiers, and even officers, who had quitted
the service on that account; they concluded that
nothing could save them, but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decifon of a batt,
by attacking the Imperial army, or an accommo
dation of all their differences with Charles by
treaty. Such was the despondency and dejeio
which now oppressed the party, that of thefet
they chore what was most feeble and unmanl
empowering a minifler of the Ele6cor of Bran
denburg to propound overtures of peace in
name to the Emperor.

No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty B o o K
confederacy, which had so lately threatened to _
drive him out of Germany, condescending to whi'c54h
make the first advances towards an agreement, rcjms.
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed the
tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
ciation, but upon condition that the Ele&or of
Saxony should previously give up himself and
his dominions absolutely to his disposal ". As
nothing more intolerable or ignominious could
have been prescribed, even in the worst Situation
of their affairs, it is no wonder that this pro-
position should be rejected by a party, which was
rather humbled and disconcerted -than subdued.
But though they refused to submit tamely to the
Emperor's will, they wanted spirit to pursue the
only plan which could have preserved their inde-
pendence; and forgetting that it was the union of
their troops in one body which had hitherto ren-
dered the confederacy formidable, and had more
than once obliged the Imperialists to think of quit-
ting the field, they inconsiderately abandoned this
advantage, which, in spite of the diversion in
Saxony, would frill have kept the Emperor in
awe; and yielding to the Ele&or's entreaties, The troop.
consented to his proposal of dividing the army. cfddreytc -
Nine thousand men were left in the dutchy of P"rat"
WVultembcrg, in order to protect that province,

" Hortcnfius, ap. Scard. ii, 4Rg.

as

B 0 0 K as well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a

.--x-, considerable body marched with the Eletor to.
3546. wards Saxony; but the greater part returned with

their respective leaders into their own countries,
and were dispersed there .

Almol all THE moment that the troops separated, the
the mncm-
ters ft confederacy ceased to be the objet of terror; and
ithe EwPe the members of it, who, while they composed

nor part of a great body, had felt but little anxiety

about their own security, began to tremble when
they reflected that they now flood exposed singly
to the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leisure to recover from
their consternation, or to form any new schemes
of union. As soon as the confederates began to
retire, he put his army in motion, and though it
was now the depth of winter, he resolved to keep
the field, in order to make the molf of that fa.
vourable juncture for which he had waited so long.
Some small towns in which the Protestants had left
garrisons, immediately opened their gates. Nor-
lingen, Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could nor
prevent the Elector from levying, as he retreated,
large contributions upon the archbishop of Mentz,
the abbot of Fulda, and other ecclesiastics P, this
was more than balanced by the submission of
Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly
distinguished by its zeal for the Snalkaldic

Slcid. 411. P Thuan. 88.

league.

league. As soon as an example was set of desert- B 1°0 K
ing the common cause, the reft of the members '-,--.
became instantly impatient to follow it, and seem- *546.
ed afraid left others, by getting the start of them
in returning to their duty, should, on that account,
obtain more favourable terms. The Elector
Palatine, a weak Prince, who, notwithstanding
his profefions of neutrality, had, very prepofle-
roufl, sent to the confederates four hundred horse,
a body so inconsiderable as to be scarcely any
addition to their strength, but great enough to
render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the most abject
manner. The inhabitants of Augsburg, shaken
by so many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleated to
grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the
sirs who had offered to submit, was obliged to
sue for pardon on his knees; and even after this
mortifying humiliation, obtained it with difficul-
tyg. Memmingen, and other free cities in the 1547.
circle of Suabia, being now abandoned by all
their former associates, found it neceflary to pro-
vide for their own fifety, by throwing themselves
0" the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg and Frank-
fort on the Maine, cities far remote fiom the feat
of danger, discovered no greater fleadinefs than

q Mcm, de Ribicr, tom. i. 589.

those

B r. oc hoye which lay more exposed. Thus a confede

v racy, lately so powerful as to shake the Imperial
'547. throne, fell to pieces, and was dissolved in the

space of a few weeks; hardly any member of that
formidable combination now remaining in arms,
but the Eleaor and Landgrave, to whom the Em.
peror, having from the beginning marked them
out as vidims of his vengeance, was at no pains to

WTe rignr. offer terms of reconciliation. Nor did he grant
ous condi-
tionsim- those who submitted to him a generous and un-
pofr'dY .he conditional pardon. Conscious of his own fuperi.

ority, he treated them. both with haughtiness and
rigour. All the Princes in person, and the cities
by their deputies, were compelled to implore mer-
cy in the humble posture of supplicants. As the
Emperor laboured under great difficulties from
the want of money, he imposed heavy fines upon
them, which he levied with most rapacious exat-
ness. The Duke of Wurtemberg paid three hun-
dred thousand crowns ; the city of Augsburg an
hundred and fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred
thousand; Frankfbrt eighty thousand; Memmin-
gen fifty thousand; and the reft in proportion to
their abilities, or their different degrees of guilt.
They were obliged, betides, to renounce the league
-of Smalkalde; to furnish assistance, if required,
towards executing the Imperial ban against the
Elector and Landgrave; to give up their artillery
and warlike stores to the Emperor ; to admit gar.
rifons into their principal cities and places of
firength ; and, in this dilfarmed and depectlent
situation, to expeEt the final award which the E'1

7 Ieror

peror flhould think proper to pronounce when the B 0°V Kl
war came to an issuer. But, amidit the great - .
variety of articles dictated by Charles on this occa- .547-
sion, he, in conformity to his original plan, took
care that nothing relating to religion should be in-
lerted; and to such a degree were the confederates
humbled or overawed, that, forgetting the zeal
which had so long animated them, they were soli-
citous only about their own safety, without ventur-
ing to infif on a point, the mention of which they
law the Emperor avoiding with so much industry.
The inhabitants of Memmingen alone made tome
feeble efforts to procure a promise of protection in
the exercise of their religion, but were checked so
severely by the Imperial ministers, that they in-
ftlnty fell from their demand.

THE Elector of Cologne, whom, notwith-
flanding the lentence of excommunication issued
against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in pofleffion of the archiepif-
copal fee, being now required by the Emperor to
submit to the censures of the church, this virtu-
ous and disinterested prelate, unwilling to expose
his subjects to the miseries of war on his own
account, voluntarily resigned that high dignity.
With a moderation becoming his age and cha- Jan 2S.
rater, he chore to enjoy truth, together with the
exercise of his religion, in the retirement of a pri-
Vate life, rather than to disturb society by enga-

Slcid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. i25. Mem. tie Ri-
bier, tom i. 6o6.

gi ng

B o
0l K ging in a doubtful and violent struggle in order to

retain his office'.

1547.

TheEleator DURING these tranfaaions, the Elector of Saxony
Saxony,and reached the frontiers of his country unmoldfed..
Setionrofit As Maurice could assemble no force equal to the

army which accompanied him, he, in a short time,
not only recovered possession of his own territories,
but over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all
that belonged to him, except Dresden and Leiplic,
which, being towns of some strength, could not
be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit
the field, and to shut himself up in his capital,
dispatched courier after courier to the Emperor,
representing his dangerous situation, and soliciting
him with the most earnest importunity to march
immediately to his relief. But Charles, busy at
that time in prescribing terms to such members
of the league as were daily returning to their al-
legiance, thought it sufficient to detach Albert
Marquis of Brandenburg-Anfpach with three
thousand men to his assistance. Albert, though
an enterprising and active officer, was unexpe&t-
edly surprised by the ElecEor, who killed many
of his troops, dilperfed the remainder, and took
him prisoner'. Maurice continued as much ex.
posed as formerly; and if his enemy had known
how to improve the opportunity which presented
itself, his ruin mufft have been immediate and un-
avoidable. But the EleEtor, no less sow and li-

Sleid. 418. Thuan. lib. iv. I28.
c Avila, 99. 6. Mem. de Ribier. toni. i. 2o0,

la;cory

lacory when inveRted with the sole command, than B °0 K
he had been formerly when joined in authority
wich a partner, never gave any proof of military s547.
aStiviy but in this enterprize against Albert. In-
Rfead of marching directly towards Maurice, whom
the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed, he in-
considerately listened to overtures of accommoda-
tion, which his artful antagonist proposed with no
other intention than to amuse him, and to flacken
the vigour of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the posture of the Empe- The Empe-

ror prevent-

ror's affairs, that he could not march instantly to edfrom at-
the relief of his ally. Soon after the reparation El'eo and
of the confederate army, he, in order to ease him- L^dv'"v.
self of the burden of maintaining a superfluous
number of troops, had difmilfed the count of
Buren with his Flemings , imagining that the
Spaniards and Germans, together with the papal
forces, would be fully sufficient to crush any de-
gree of vigour that yet remained among the
members of the league. But Paul, growing wife
too late, began now to discern the imprudence
of that measure, from which the more sagacious
Venetians had endeavoured in vain to dissuade
h1l. Tihe rapid progress of the Imperial arms,
anItthe cael with which they had broken a com-
bination that appeared no less firm than powerful,
0o"enied his eyes at length, and made him not only
forget all the advantages which he had expected

' Avil, 83. 6. Mem. dc Ribier, tom. i. 592.

from

B i0 0 K from such a complete triumph over heresy, but

__
- placed, in the strongest light, his own impolitic
'547' conduct, in having contributed towards acquiring

for Charles such an immense increase of power,
as would enable him, after oppressing the liber.
ties of Germany, to give law with absolute autho.
rity to all the flates of Italy. The moment that
he perceived his error, he endeavoured to corref

ThePope]3 it. Without giving the Emperor any warningof
tro. his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson,

to return instantly to Italy with all the troops un-
der his command, and at the fame time recalled
the licence which he had granted Charles, of ap.
propriating to his own use, a large share of the
church lands in Spain. He was not detitute of
pretences to justify this abrupt desertion of his
ally. The term of fix months, during which the
flipulations in their treaty, were to continue in
force, was now expired; the league, in oppofi-
tion to which their alliance had been framed,
seemed to be entirely dissipated; Charles, in all
his negociations with the Princes and cities which
had submitted to his will, had neither consulted
the Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the
conquests which lie had made, nor had allowed
him any flare in the vast contributions which
he had raised. He had not even made any pro-
vision for the fupprefflon of heresy, or the re-
eftablilhment of the Catholic religion, which were
Paurs chief inducements to bestow the treasures
of the church so liberally in carrying on the
war. These colours, however fpccious, dild nt

conceal

conceal from the Emperor that secret jealousy B °u 0 K
which was the true motive of the Pope's conduct. ----
Bur, as Paul's orders with regard to the march '547
of his troops were no lets peremptory than un-
expeaed, it was impoflible to prevent their retreat.
Charles exclaimed loudly against his treachery, in
abandoning him so unseasonably, while he was
prosecuting a war undertaken in obedience to the
papal injunctions, and from which, if successful,
lb much honour and advantage would redound
to the church. To complaints he added threats
and expostulations. But Paul remained inflexible;
his troops continued their march towards the ec-
cleGiaflical state; and in an elaborate memorial,
intended as an apology for his conduct, he dif-,
covered new and more manifest symptoms of alien-
ation from the Emperor, together with a deep-
rooted dread of his power=. Charles, weakened
by the withdrawing of so great a body from his
army, which was already much diminilhed by the
number of garrisons that he had been obliged to
throw into the towns which had capitulated, found
it necessary to recruit his forces by new levies, be-
fore he could venture to march in person towards
Saxony.

THE fame and splendour of his success could A conp.'-
not have failed of attracting such multitudes of turnth go-
soldiers into his service from all the extensive ter- en.oa.
ritroies now fubje& to his authority, as must have

P. Paul, 208. Pallavic. par. ii. p. 5. Thuan. 126.
1v01 I1. B b soon

B 0 0 K soon put him in a condition of taking tle field
--v-- against the Eletor; but the sudden and violent

1547' eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as well as the

great revolutions which that event, extremely my.
fterious in its first appearances, seemed to portend,
obliged him to avoid entangling himself in new
operations in Germany, until he had fully disco.
vered its source and tendency. The form of go.
vernment which had been established in Genoa, at
the time when Andrew Doria restored liberty to
his country, though calculated to obliterate the
memory of former dissensions, and received at first
with eager approbation, did not, after a trialof
near twenty years, give universal fatisfa&tion to
those turbulent and fa&ious republicans. As the
entire administration of affairs was now lodged in a
certain number of noble families, many envying

XTheobjea them that pre-eminence, wished for the restitution
of the con-
ipiratort. of a popular government, to which they had been

accustomed ; and though all reverenced the difin-
terested virtue of Doria, and admired his talents,
not a few were Jealous of that ascendant which he
had acquired in the councils of the commonwealth.
His age, however, his moderation, and his loveof
liberty, afforded ample security to his countrymen
that he would not abuse his power, nor tlin the
close of his cays by attempting to overturn that
fabric, which it had been the labour and pride of
his life to erect. But the authority and influence
which in his hands were innocent, they eafily'faw
would prove deflruE-ive, if usurped by any citizen
of greater ambition, or lets virtue. A citizen 0

this

this dangerous charaCter had a6tually formed such B o00 K
pretensions, and with some profpe& of success. a _-
Giannetino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew ;547.
deffined to be the heir of his private fortune,
aimed likewise at being his successor in power.
His temper haughty, insolent, and overbearing to
such a degree as would hardly have been tolerated
in one born to reign, was altogether insupportable
in the citizen of a free state. The more sagacious
among the Genoese already feared and hated him
as the enemy of those liberties for which they were
indebted to his uncle. While Andrew himself,
blinded by that violent and undifcerning affection
which persons in advanced age often contrat for
the younger members oftheir family, set no bounds
to the indulgence with which he treated him;
seeming less solicitous to secure and perpetuate the
freedom of the commonwealth, than to aggrandize
that undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or
whatever dissatisfaction with the system of admini-
firation in the commonwealth, these circumstances
might have occasioned, they would have ended, it
is probable, in nothing more than murmurings
and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco count of
Lavagna, observing this growing disgust, had not
been encouraged by it to attempt one of the bold-
ecl ations recorded in history. That young no- FicCfcocont
bleman, the richest and most illustrious subject in the hea of
the republic, pofieffed, in an eminent degree, all rct~,yn
the qualities which win upon the human heart,

B b 2 which

B or0 K which command refpe&, or secure attachment
c_.- He was graceful and majestic in his person; mag.

'547. nificent even to profusion; of a generosity thatan.

ticipated the wishes of his friends, and exceeded
the expetations of strangers; of an insinuating
address, gentle manners, and a flowing affability,
But under the appearance of these virtues, which
seemed to form him for enjoying and adorning
social life, he concealed all the dispositions which
mark men out for taking the lead in the mot
dangerous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable
and restless ambition, a courage unacquainted with
fear, and a mind that disdained subordination,
Such a temper could ill brook that station of in.
feriority, wherein he was placed in the republic;
and as he envied the power which the elder Doria
had acquired, he was filled with indignation at the
thoughts of its descending, like an hereditarypof.
session, to Giannetino. These various palfions,
preying with violence on his turbulent and afpir-
ing mind, determined him to attempt overturn.
ing that domination to which he could not sub.
mit.

Intrigues As the most effectual method of accomplilhing
rand pepahe this, he thought at first of forming a connexion
con(piratora. with Francis, and even proposed it to the French

ambaffador-at Rome; and after expelling Doria,
together with the Imperial faction, by his altift
ance, he offered to put the republic once more un.
der the protection of that Monarch, hoping in return
for that service to be entrusted with the principa

Tharl

sharein the administration of government. But B o0 0 K
having communicated his scheme to a few chosen I -
confidents, from whom he kept nothing secret, '547'
Verrina, the chief of them, a man of desperate
fortune, capable alike of advising and executing
the nmof audacious deeds, remonfirated with ear-
neftnefs against the folly of exposing himself to
the most imminent danger, while he allowed an-
other to reap all the fruits of his success; and ex-
horted him warmly to aim himself at that pre-
eminence in his country, to which he was destined
by his illustrious birth, was called by the voice
of his fellow-citizens, and would be raised by the
zealof his friends. This discourse opened such
great profpeas to Fiefco, and so suitable to his
genius, that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other persons pre-
sent, though sensible of the hazardous nature of
the undertaking, did not choose to condemn what
their patron had so warmly approved. It was
instantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to assassinate
the two Dorias, as well as the principal persons
of their party, to overturn the eitablifhed system
of government, and to place Fiefco on the ducal
throne of Genoa. Time, however, and prepara-
tions were requisite to ripen such a design for ex-
ecution; and while he was employed in carrying
onthefe, Fiefco made it his chief care to guard
against every thing that might betray his secret,
or create suspicion. The disguise he assumed,
Was of all others the most impenetrable. He
femed to be abandoned entirely to pleasure and,

B b j dissipation..

B Q.O K dissipation. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by the

-- ' pursuit of all the amusements in which persons of
1547. his age and rank are apt to delight, engrossed, in

appearance, the whole of his time and thoughts.
But amidst this hurry of dissipation, he prosecuted
his plan with the most cool attention, neither re-
tarding the design by a timid hesitation, nor pre.
cipitating the execution by an excess of impatience.
He continued his correspondence with the French
ambassador at Rome, though without communi.
cating to him his real intentions, that by his means
he might secure the protection of the French arms,
if hereafter he should find it necessary to call them
in to his aid. He entered into a close confederacy
with Farnese Duke of Parma, who beingdifgut-
ed with the Emperor for refuting to grant. him the
investiture of that dutchy, was eager to promote
any measure that tended to diminish his influence
in Italy, or to ruin a family so implicitly devoted
to him as that of Doria. Being sensible that, in a
maritime state, the acquisition of naval power was
what he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased four
gallies from the Pope, who probably was not unac-
quainted with the design which he had formed, and
did not disapprove of it. Under colour of fitting
out one ofthefe gallies to fail on a cruise against the
Turks, he not only assembled a good number of
his own vassals, but engaged in his service many
bold adventurers, whom the truce between the
Emperor and Solyrman had deprived of their usual
occupation and fublinence.

WmlllF.

WHILE Fiefco was taking there important steps, B o°I K
he preserved so admirably his usual appearance of a
being devoted entirely to pleasure and amusement, '547T
and paid court with such artful address to the two
Dorias, as imposed not only on the generous and
unfufpicious mind of Andrew, but deceived Gian-
netino, who, conscious of his own criminal inten-
tions, was more apt to distrust the designs of others.
So many instruments being now prepared, nothing
remained but to strike the blow. Various consult-
ations were held by Fiefco with his confidents, in
order to fettle the manner of doing it with the
greatest certainty and effe&t. At first, they pro-
posed to murder the Dorias and their chief adher-
ents, during the celebration of high mass in the
principal church; but as Andrew was often absent
from religious folemnities, on account of his great
age, that design was laid aside. It was then con-
certed that Fiefco should invite the uncle and ne-
phew, with all their friends whom he had marked
out as victims, to his house; where it would be
easy to cut them off at once without danger or re-
fiflance; but as Giannetino was obliged to leave
the town on the day which they had chosen, it be-
came necessary likewise to alter this plan. They
at lafl determined to attempt by open force, what
they found difficult to effea by stratagem, and fix-
ed on the night between the second and third of
January, for the execution of their enterprize,
The time was chosen with great propriety; for as
thilr )oge of the former year was to quit his officei

B b 4 according

B ovl K according to cufrom, on the first of the month,
^,J-. and his fucceflor could not be elected sooner than

-547' the fourth, the republic remained during that in.

terval in a fort of anarchy, and Fiefco might with
less violence take poffeflion of the vacant dignity.

Thecon(pi. THE morning of that day Fiefco employed in
rators as.
lemble to visiting his friends, passing some hours among
their plan. them with a pirit as gay and unembarrafled as

at other times. Towards evening, he paid court
to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpeft, and
Surveying their countenance and behaviour with
the attention natural in his situation, was happy
to observe the perse& security in which they re-
mained, without the least foresight or dread of
that storm which had been so long a gathering,
and was now ready to burst over their heads.
From their palace he hastened to his own, which
flood by itself in the middle of a large court, fur-
rounded by a high wall. The gates had been let
open in the morning, and all persons, without
dillintion, were allowed to enter, but strong
guards potted within the court suffered no one to
return. Verrina, meanwhile, and a few persons
trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, after
conducting Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews
of his gallies, into the palace in small bodies, with
as little noise as possible, dispersed themfclves
through the city, and, in the name of their pa-
tron, invited to an entertainment the principal
citizens whom they knew to be difguited with the

admini-

aJminiftration of the Dorias, and to have inclina- B 0 o K
tion as well as courage to attempt a change in v_
the government. Of the vast number of persons 8547'
who now filled the palace, a few only knew for
what purpose they were assembled; the reft, afto-
ninled at finding, instead of the preparations for
a feast, a court crowded with armed men, and apart.
ments filled with the initruments of war, gazed on.
each other with a mixture of curiosity, impatience,
and terror.
WHILE their minds were in this state of fur- FieCco'sex.

hortations

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a to them.
look full of alacrity and confidence, he addressed
himself to the persons of chief diffintion, telling
them, that they were not now called to partake of
the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join in a
deed of valour, which would lead them to liberty
and immortal renown. He set before their eyes
the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority of
the elder Doria, which the ambition of Gianne-
tino, and the partiality of the Emperor to a
family more devoted to him than to their coun-
try, was about to enlarge and to render perpe-
tual. This unrighteous dominion, continued he,
you have it now in your power to subvert, and
to establish the freedom of your country on a
firm basis. The tyrants rnuft be cut off. I have
taken the most effecual measures for this pur-
pose. My afTociates are numerous. I can de-
)end on allies and protetors if necessary. I-ap-
1'ily, tile tyrants are as secure as I have been pro-

vident.

i30 0 K vident. Their insolent contempt of their coun.
A__- trymen has banished the suspicion and timidity
1547' which usually render the guilty quick-fightedto

discern, as well as sagacious to guard against the
vengeance which they deserve. They will now
feel the blow, before they suspect any hostile
hand to be nigh. Let us then sally forth, that
we may deliver our country by one generous
effort, almost unaccompanied with danger, and
certain of success. These words, uttered with
that irresistible fervour which animates the mind
when routed by great objects, made the desired
impression on the audience. Fiefco's vassals,
ready to execute whatever their master should
command, received his discourse with a murmur
of applause. To many whose fortunes were de.
'perate, the licence and confusion of an infurrec-
tion afforded an agreeable profpe&. Those of
higher rank and more virtuous fentimens, durst
not discover the surprise or horror with which
they were struck at the proposal of an enterprize
no less unexpected than atrocious; as each of
them imagined the other to be in the secret of the
conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by per-
sons who waited only a signal from their leader to
perpetrate the greatest crime. With one voice
then all applauded, or feigned to applaud, the un-
dertalking.

His inter- FIESCO having thus fixed and encouraged his
his wife. alTociates, before he gave them his last orders, he

hastencd for a moment to the apartment of his

W (c,

wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom he B o o K
loved with tender affection, and whose beauty and x__
virtue rendered her worthy of his love. The noise '547.
of the armed men who crowded the court and
palace, having long before this reached her ears,
the concluded some hazardous enterprize to be in
hand, and Ihe trembled for her husband. He
found her in all the anguish of uncertainty and
fear; and as it was now impossible to keep his de-
sign concealed, he informed her of what he had
undertaken. The profpeQ of a scene so full of
horror as well as danger, completed her agony;
and foreboding immediately in her mind the fatal
irfue of it, ihe endeavoured, by her tears, her en-
treaties, and her despair, to divert him from his
purpose. Fiefco, after trying in vain to tooth and
to inspire her with hope, broke from a situation
into which an excess of tenderness had unwarily
reduced him, though it could not shake his refo-
lution. " Farewell, he cried, as he quitted the
apartment, you shall either never fee me more, or
you shall behold to-morrow every thing in Genoa
fubje& to your power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he They attack
allotted each his proper station; some were ap- the ity.
pointed to afault and seize the different gates of
the city; some to make themfelvcs mafiers of the
principal ftrects or places of strength: Fiefco
reserved for himself the attack of the harbour
"here Doria's gallies were laid up, as the post of
chief importance, and of grearcft danger. It was

now

B o0 K now midnight, and the citizens slept in the fe.
_2-^-.. curity of peace, when this band of conspirators,
3547. numerous, desperate, and well-armed, rushed out

to execute their plan. They surprised some of
the gates, without meeting with any resistance.
They got possession of others after a iharp con.
flict with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with
the galley which had been fitted out against the
Turks, blocked up the mouth of the Darfenaor
little harbour where Doria's fleet lay. All poffi.
bility of escape being cut off by this precaution,
when Fiefco attempted to enter the gallies from
the shore, to which they were made fast, they were
in no condition to make resistance, as they were
not only unrigged and disarmed, but had no crew
on board, except the slaves chained to the oar.
Every quarter of the city was now filled with noise
and tumult, all the streets resounding with the
cry of Fiefco and Liberty. At that name, so po-
pular and beloved, many of the lower rank took
arms, and joined the conspirators. The nobles
and partisans of the aristocracy, astonished or
affrighted, Ihut the gates of their houses, and
thought of nothing but of securing them from
pillage. At last the noise excited by this scene of
violence and confusion, reached the palace of
Doria; Giannetino itarted immediately from his
bed, and imagining that it was occasioned by
some mutiny among the sailors, rufled out with
a few attendants, and hurried towards the har-
bour. The gate of St. Thomas, through which
he had to pals, was already in the poflielion of the

6 conlfii-

conspirators, who, the moment he appeared, fell B 0o K
upon him with the utmost fury, and murdered vll
him on the spot. The fame must have been the 1547.
fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco had
executed his brother's plan, and had proceeded
immediately to attack him in his palace; but
he, from the fordid consideration of prevent-
ing its being plundered amidfl the confusion,
having forbid his followers to advance, Andrew
got intelligence of his nephew's death, as well as
of his own danger; and mounting on horseback,
saved himself by flight. Amidfl this general
consternation, a few senators had the courage to
assemble in the palace of the republic . At
firfi, some of the most daring among them at-
tempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to
attack a body of the conspirators; but being re-
pulsed with loss, all agreed that nothing now re-
mained, but to treat with the party which seemed
to be irrefiflible. Deputies were accordingly
sent to learn of Fiefco what were the concef-
sions with which he would be satisfied, or rather
tofubmit to whatever terms he Ihould please to
prescribe,

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they were cure of

their mir-

empowered to negociate, was no more. Just as carriaac,
he was about to leave the harbour, where every
thing had succeeded to his wish, that he might
join his victorious companions, he heard some

r I palazza della Signoria.

extra-

B 0 0 K extraordinary uproar on board the Admiral gal.
-----I ley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing that the
'547 slaves might break their chains, and overpower

his afrociates, he ran thither; but the plank
which reached from the Ihore to the veifl hap.
pening to overturn, he fell into the sea, whilfthe
hurried forward too precipitately. Being loaded
with heavy armour, he funk to the bottom, and
perilhed in the very moment when he must have
taken full possession of every thing that his ambi.
tious heart could desire. Verrina was the first who
discovered this fatal accident, and foreseeing, at
once, all its consequences, concealed it with the
utmost industry from every one but a few leaders
of the conspiracy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the
darkness and confusion of the night, to have kept
it secret, until a treaty with the senators should
have put the city in the power of the conspirators.
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the
imprudence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the
deputies of the senate inquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposal to him, replied with a childish va-
nity, " I am now the only person to whom that
title belongs, and with me you must treat." These
words discovered as well to his friends as to his
enemies what had happened, and made the im-
pression which might have been expected upon
both. The dleputies, encouraged by this event,
the only one which could occasion such a sudden
revolution as might turn to their advantage,

alfumed

assumed infRantly, with admirable presence of B 0o0 K
mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in their ----
circumrtances, and made high demands. While '547'
they endeavoured to gain time by protracting the
negociarion, the reft of the senators were busy in
assembling their partisans, and in forming a body
capable of defending the palace of the republic.
On the other hand, the conspirators, astonished
at the death of a man whom they adored and
trusted, and placing no confidence in Jerome, a
giddy youth, felt their courage die away, and
theirarms fall from their hands. That profound
and amazing secrecy with which the conspiracy
had been concerted, and which had contributed
hitherto so much to its success, proved now the
chief cause of its miscarriage. The leader was
gone; the greater part of those who acted under
him, knew not his confidents, and were strangers
tothe object at which he aimed. There was no
person among them whose authority or abilities
entitled him to assume Fiefco's place, or to finish
his plan; after having loft the spirit which ani-
mated it, life and activity deserted the whole body.
Many of the conspirators withdrew to their
houses, hoping that amidst the darkness of the
night they had pased unobserved, and might re-
main unknown. Others fought for safety by a
timely retreat; and before break of day, most of
them fled with precipitation from a city, which, but
a few hours before, was ready to acknowledge them
as matters.

NE.X T

B V0 K NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa

i_ .- not an enemy was to be seen; few marks of the
Trsq7i li_ violence of the former hight appeared, the con
tblre-ca- fpirators having condu&ed their enterprize with
bl/hsed in
Genoa. more noise than bloodshed, and gained all their

advantages by surprise, rather than by force o
arms. Towards evening, Andrew Doria returned
to the city, being met by all the inhabitants, who
received him with acclamations of joy. Though
the disgrace as well as danger of the preceding
night were frelh in his mind, and the mangled
body of his kinsman fill before his eyes, such wia
his moderation as well as magnanimity, that th
decree issued by the senate against the conspirators,
did not exceed that just measure of severity which
was requisite for the support of government, and
Was ditated neither by the violence of resentment
nor the rancour of revenge z. *

r alarmed AFTER taking the neceftary precautions so
Pa this con- preventing the flame) which was now so happily
(piracy.

t Thuan. 93. Sigonii Vita Andraz Doriae, 1196. Lt

Conjuration du Compte de Fief4ue, par Cardin. de Retz
Adriani ltoria, lib. vi. 369. Folietae Conjuratio Jo. Lud
Ficfci, ap. Grev. Thef. Ital. i. 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at theagec

eighteen, composed a hiRory of this cohfpiracy, containin!
such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his enlet
prize, as render it not surprising that a minister, fojealOu
and discerning as Richlieu, flould be led, by the perusal ofil
to prcdit the turbulent and dangerous spirit of that youn
EccleGiaiic. Mem. de Rctz, tom. i. p. 13.

extin,

extinguished, from breaking out anew, the first care B O0 K
of the senate was to fend an ambassador to the Em- _
peror, to give him a particular detail of what had '547
happened, and to beg his affliftance towards the re-
duction of Montobbio, a strong fort on the here-
ditary estate of the Fiefci, in which Jerome had
fhur himself up. Charles was no less alarmed than
astonished at an event so strange and unexpe&ed.
He could not believe that Fiefco, how bold or
adventurous soever, durit have attempted such an
enterprize, but on foreign suggestion, and from
the hope of foreign aid. Being informed that the
Duke of Parma was well acquainted with the plan
of the conspirators, he immediately supposed that
the Pope could not be ignorant of a measure,
which his son had countenanced. Proceeding
from this to a farther conjeEture, which Paul's
cautious maxims of policy in other initances ren-
dered extremely probable, he concluded, that the
French King must have known and approved of
thedcfign ; and he began to apprehend that this
spark might again kindle the flame of war which
had raged so long in Italy. As he had drairied Surpendsh;i

operations

his Italian territories of troops on account of the inPermany.
German war, he was altogether unprovided for
refifring any hostile attack in that country; and
on the fill- appearance of danger, he must have
detachedl thitlher the greatest part of his forces for
its defenrce. In this situation of affairs, it would
hlave been altogether imprudent in the Emperor
to have aclvan.:cd in person against the Elecor,
V\UL. 11* C c until

B o O K until he ihould learn with some degree of cer-

VIII.

,_ _ tainty whether such a scene were not about to
.547 open in Italy, as might put it out of his power

to keep the field with an army sufficient to op.
pose him.

# THE HISTORY OF THE REIGN OF THE EMPEROR CHARLES V. BOOK IX.

TH E
HISTO R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.
riH E Emperor's dread of the hostile inten- B o o K

tions of the Pope and French King did .--.

not proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded Fra547.
suspicion. Paul had already given the strongest lou of he

' 3 .~Emperor's

proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles poer and
could not hope, that Francis, after a rivallhip fuccefir
of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the confe-
derate Protestants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjefture. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefs of his arms with deep concern, and though
hitherto prevented, by circumstances which have
been mentioned, froim interporing in order to
check them, he was now convinced that, if he

C c 2 did

0 0 K did not make some extraordinary and timely es.
1X.

fort, Charles mufft acquire such a degree of power
i547 as would enable him to give law to the reft of

Europe. This apprehension, which did not take
its rile from the jealousy of rivalfhip lone, but
was entertained by the wisest politicians of the
age, Iuggefted various expedients which might
serve to retard the course of the Emperor's vic-
tories, and to form by degrees such a combination
against him as might put a stop to his dangerous

career.

Negoc;ates WITH this view, Francis inftrucced his emif-
Protelhtts saries in Germany to employ all their address in

order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from submitting to the Em-
peror. He made liberal offers of his affitance to
the Elector and Landgrave, whom he knew to be
the most zealous as well as the molt powerful
of the whole body; he used every argument, and
proposed every advantage, which could either con-
firm their dread of the Emperor's designs, or de-
termine them not to imitate the inconsiderate
credulity of their associates, in giving up their
religion and liberties to his disposal. While he
took this fep towards continuing the civil war
which raged in Germany, he endeavoured like-
wile to stir up foreign enemies against the Em'

wi, Soly. peror. He solicited Solyman to leize this fa-
man" vourable opportunity of invading Itungary1

which had been drained of all the troops neccl-
ltry for its defence, in order to form the army

agia'in

againf the confederates of Smalkalde. He ex- B o o K

IX.

horted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and sea- ~--
tnable effort, the error of which he had been 1547.
guilry in contributing to raise the Emperor to fiaclh
a formidable height of power. Finding Paul, both with the
fiom the consciousness of his own mistake, and his v'cetads
dread of its consequences, abundantly disposed to
iliten to what he suggested, he availed himself of
this favourable disposition which the Pontiff
began to discover, as an argument to gain the
Venetians. He endeavoured to convince them
that nothing could save Italy, and even Europe,
from oppression and servitude, but their joining
with the Pope and him, in giving the first begin-
ning to a general confederacy, in order to humble
that ambitious potentate, whom they had all equal
reason to dread.

HIAVING set on foot there negociations in the with the
southern courts, he turned his attention next to- D~;aT
wards those in the north of Europe. As the King and Eg-
of Denmark had particular reasons to be offended
with the Emperor, Francis imagined that the
object of the league which he had projected would
be highly acceptable to him; and left considerations
of caution or prudence Ihould restrain him firom
juning in it, he attempted to overcome there, by
oi'reilng him the young Q(Leen of Scots in rnar-
frige to his son '. As the rninifters who govcrned
1'JiSl ld in the name of Edlward VI. had openly

Mecm. de Rihier, i. 60o. 6o6.

C c declared

B °0 K declared themselves converts to the opinions of

Ix.
.---. the Reformers, as soon as it became safe upon

»'7* Henry's death to lay aside that disguise which his

intolerant bigotry had forced them to assume,
Francis flattered himself that their zeal would not
allow them to remain inactive fpe&ators of the
overthrow and deftrution of those who profefled
the fame faith with themselves. He hoped, that
notwithstanding the struggles of faction inci-
dent to a minority, and the profpe& of an ap.
proaching rupture with the Scots, he might pre.
vail on them likewise to take part in the common
cause b

WHILE Francis employed such a variety of ex-

pedients, and exerted himself with such extraor-
dinary activity, to rouse the different states of
Europe against his rival, he did not neglet what
depended on himself alone. He levied troops in
all parts of his dominions; he colleced military
fiores; he contracted with the Swiss cantons for
a considerable body of men; he put his finances
in admirable order; he remitted considerable fums
to the EleEtor and Landgrave; and took all the
other steps necessary towards commencing hoftili-
ties, on the ihorteft warning, and with the greatel
vigour c.

TheEnmpe. OPERATIONS so complicated, and which re-
larmtd.Y quired the putting lb many instruments in mo-

b Mem. de Ribier, i. 635. c Ibid. 595.

tlOD)

tion, did not escape the Emperor's observation. B 0°° K
He was early informed of Francis's intrigues in ----
the several courts of Europe, as well as of his iS47.
domestic preparations; and sensible how fatal
an interruption a foreign war would prove to his
designs in Germany, he trembled at the prospect
of that event. The danger, however, appeared
to him as unavoidable as it was great. He knew
the insatiable and well-direEced ambition of Soly-
man, and that he always chose the season for be-
ginning his military enterprises with prudence
equal to the valour with which he conducted
them. The Pope, as he had good reason to be-
lieve, wanted not pretexts to justify a rupture,
nor inclination to begin hostilities. He had al-
ready made some discovery of his sentiments, by
expressing a joy altogether unbecoming the head
of the church, upon receiving an account of the
advantage which the Elecor of Saxony had gained
over Albert of Brandenburg; and as he was now
secure of finding, in the French King, an ally of
sufficient power to support him, he was at no
pains to conceal the violence and extent of his
enmity d. The Venetians, Charles was well as-
fured, had long observed the growth of his power
with jealousy, which, added to the solicitations
and promises of France, might at last quicken
their flow counsels, and overcome their natural
caution. The Danes and Englishs it was evident,
had both peculiar reason to be difguited, as well

Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. 637.

Cc 4 as

B OOK as firong motives to aa against him. But above

---, all, he dreaded the ative emulation of Francis
'547. himself, whom he confidered as the foul and mover

of any confederacy that could be formed againit
him; and, as that Monarch had afforded pro.
teEtion to Verina, who failed diretly to Mar.
feilles upon the miscarriage ofFiefco's conspiracy,
Charles expected every moment to fee the con.
mencement of those hostile operations in Italy, of
which he conceived the infurreetion in Genoa to
have been only the prelude.

Entertains BUT while he remained in this state of suspense
hope from
thedeclin- and solicitude, there was one circumstance which
Fnrgl,', afforded him some profpe& of escaping the dan.
health. ger. The French King's health began to decline.

A disease, which was the effect of his inconfi.
derate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually on
his conffitution. The preparations for war, as
well as the negociations in the different courts,
began to languish, together with the Monarch
March. who gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during

that interval, reduced Montobbio, took Jerome
Fiefco prisoner, and putting him to death, to.
gether with his chief adherents, extinguished all
remains of the conspiracy. Several of the Im-
perial cities in Germany, despairing of timely
afliflance from France, submitted to the Empe-
ror. Even the Landgrave seemed disposed to
abandon the Eletor, and to bring matters to a
speedy accommodation, on such terms as he could
obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited with

impa.

impatience the issue of a diflemper, which was to B 0 0 XK

iX.

decide whether he must relinquish all other schemes, _
in order to prepare for refifing a combination of 'S-7.
the greater part of Europe against him, or whether
he might proceed to invade Saxony, without inter-
ruption or fear of danger.

TpE good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that some hiflorians have called it
the Star of the House of Auflria, did not desert
him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram- Death of

Francis, and

bouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty- refl;ios
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his ahirch,-
reign. During twenty-eight years of that time, rivaf"'
an avowed rivalfhip subsisted between him and Charles.
theEmperor, which involved not only their own
dominions, but the greater part of Europe, in
wars, which were prosecuted with more violent
animosity, and drawn out to a greater length, than
had been known in any former period. Many
circumstances contributed to this. Their animo-
fity was founded in opposition of interest, height-
ened by personal emulation, and exasperated not
only by mutual injuries, but by reciprocal insults.
At the fame time, whatever advantage one seemed
to polTefs towards gaining the ascendant, was
wonderfully balanced by some favourable cir-
cumfiance peculiar to the other. The Empe-
ror's dominions were of greater extent, the French
King's lay more compac; Francis governed his
kingdom with absolute power; that of Charles
'as limited, but he supplied the want of autho-

rity

Bo o K rity by address: the troops of the former were
v__x more impetuous and enterprising; those of the
1547- latter better disciplined, and more patient of fa.

tigue. The talents and abilities of the twoMo.
narchs were as different as the advantages which
they possessed, and contributed no less to prolong
the contest between them. Francis took his re-
solutions suddenly,. prosecuted them at firft.with
warmth, and pushed them into execution with a
most adventurous courage; but being destitute
of the perseverance necessary to surmount diffi-
culties, he often abandoned his designs, or re.
laxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience, and
Sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long,
and determined with coolness; but having once
fixed his plan, he adhered to it with inflexible
obstinacy, and neither danger nor discourage-
ment could turn him aside from the execution o
it. The success of their enterprises was suitable
to the diversity of their characters, and was uni-
formly influenced by it. Francis, by his impetu.
ous activity, often disconcerted the Emperor's bet
laid schemes; Charles, by a more calm but steady
prosecution of his designs, checked the rapidity
of his rival's career, and baffled or repulsed his
most vigorous efforts. The former, at the open-
ing of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon his
enemy with the violence of a torrent, and carried
all before him; the latter, waiting until he saw
the force of his rival begin to abate, recovered in
the end not only all that he had loft, but madt
new acquisitions. Few of the French Monarch's

attempu

ttempts towards conquest, whatever promising as- B °X° K
pea they might wear at first, were conduAed to an ---
Lappy issue; many of the Emperor's enterprises, '547'
vyen after they appeared desperate and imprati-
able, terminated in the most prosperous manner.
Francis was dazzled with the splendour of an un-
dertaking; Charles was allured by the profpeEt of
its turning to his advantage.

THE degree,' however, of their comparative
merit and reputation has not been fixed either by
a ftrit scrutiny into their abilities for government,
or by an impartial consideration of the greatness
and success of their undertakings; and Francis
is one of those Monarchs who occupies a higher
rank in the temple of Fame, than either his ra-
lents or performances entitle him to hold. This
pie-eminence he owed to many different circurn-
stances. The superiority which Charles acquired
by the vitory of Pavia, and which from that pe-
riod he preserved through the remainder of his
reign, was so manifest, that Francis's struggle
against his exorbitant and growing dominion was
viewed by most of the other powers, not only with
the partiality which naturally arises for those who
gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but with
thefavour due to one who was resisting a com-
mon enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds to a
Monarch equally formidable to them all. The
claraacrs of Princes, too, especially among their
contemporaries, depend not only upon their ta-
lents for government, but upon their qualities as

5 lnCIn.

B °x° K men. Francis, notwithltanding the many errors
*-----' conspicuous in his foreign policy and dorrefic
J547. adminiflration, was nevertheless humane, benefi.

cent, generous. He possessed dignity without
pride; affability free from meanness; and cour.
tefy exempt from deceit. All who had access to
him, and no man of merit was ever denied that
privilege, refpeted and loved him. Captivated
with his personal qualities, his fubjeds forgot his
defeds as a Monarch, and admiring him as the
most accomplished and amiable gentleman in his
dominions, they hardly murmured at ass of male.
administration, which, in a Prince of less engag.
ing dispositions, would have been deemed unpar.
donable. This admiration, however, must have
been temporary only, and would have died away,
with the courtiers who bestowed it; the illusion
arising from his private virtues must have ceased,
and posterity would have judged of his public
conduEt with its usual impartiality; but another
circumtfance prevented this, and his name hath
been transmitted to posterity with increasing re.
putation. Science and the arts had, at that time,
made little progress in France. They were jus
beginning to advance beyond the limits of Italy,
where they had revived, and which had hitherto
been their only feat. Francis took them imme-
diately under his protection, and vied with Leo
himself, in the zeal and munificence with which
he encouraged them. He invited learned men
to his court, he conversed with them familiarly,

6 le

he employed them in business, he raised them to B 0 0 K
Offices of dignity, and honoured them with his ----
confidence. That order of men, not more prone '5+7.
t0 complain when denied the refped to which they
conceive themselves entitled, than apt to be pleas-
ed when treated with the diftin&ion which they
confider as their due, thought they could not ex-
ceed in gratitude to such a benefacor, and strain-
ed their invention, and employed all their inge-
nuity in panegyric. Succeeding authors, warmed
with their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopt-
led their encomiums, and even added to them.
'The appellation of Father of Letters bestowed
upon Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred
among historians; and they seem to have regarded
it as a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities,
or to point out his defeEts. Thus Francis, not-
withstanding his inferior abilities, and want of fuc-
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of Charles.
The good qualities which he possessed as a man,
have entitled him to greater admiration and praise
than have been bestowed upon the extensive genius
and fortunate arts of a more capable, but less ami-
able rival.

B' his death a considerable change was made in EfRas of
the ltate of Europe. Charles, grown old in the death.
arts of government and command, had now to
contend only with younger Monarchs, who could
not be regarded as worthy to enter the lifts with
lilm, who had stood so many encounters with
-i'lry VIII. and Francis I. and come off with

honour

B 0 0 K honour in all those different struggles. By thi
--.---I event, he was eased of all disquietude, and wa
£547. happy to find that he might begin with safety thof

operations against the Eletor of Saxony, which he
had hitherto been obliged to suspend. He knei
the abilities of Henry II. who had juft-mounted
the throne of France, to be greatly inferior t
those of his father, and foresaw that he would b
so much occupied for some time in displacing th
late King's ministers, whom he hated, and in gra
tifying the ambitious demands of his own favour
ites, that he had nothing to dread, either fromhi
personal efforts, or from any confederacy whic
this unexperienced Prince could form.

Charles BUT as it was uncertain how long such an inter
agarinhthe val of security might continue, Charles determino
Eleetor of instantly to improve it; and as soon as he heard
Saxony.
April 13. Francis's demise, he began his march from Egr

on the borders of Bohemia. But the departure
the papal troops, together with the retreat of th
Flemings, had so much diminiihed his army, tha
sixteen thousand men were all he could affemblk
With this inconsiderable body he set out on an ex
pedition, the event of which was to decide wha
degree of authority he should possess from that pe
riod in Germany: but as this little army confilte
chiefly of the veteran Spanifl and Italian bands,h
did not, in trusting to them, commit much toth
decision of chance; and even with so small a forc
he had reason to entertain the mofl sanguine hope
of success. The Elecor had levied an arnl

great!l

greatly superior in number; but neither the expe- B o o K
rience and discipline of his troops, nor the abili-
ties of his officers, were to be compared with those 547.
of the Emperor. The Elector, besides, had al-
ready been guilty of an error, which deprived him
of all the advantage which he might have derived
from his superiority in number, and was alone sus-
ficient to have occasioned his ruin. Instead of
keeping his forces united, he detached one great
body towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to
facilitate his junaion with the malecontents of that
kingdom, and cantoned a considerable part of
what remained in different places of Saxony, where
he expeEed the Emperor would make the first
impression, vainly imagining that open towns, with
small garrisons, might be rendered tenable against
an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontier of Progrefsof
Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elfter. The am
impropriety of the measure which the Elector had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted in
that town surrendering without resistance; and
those in all the other places between that and the
Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled as
the Imperialists approached. Charles, that they
might not recover from the panic with which
they seemed to be struck, advanced without los-
ing a moment. The Elector, who had fixed his
head-quarters at Meissen, continued in his wonted
slate of fluctuation and uncertainty. I-Ie even
bec;ame more undetermined, in proportion as the

danger

B ° o K danger drew near, and called for prompt and de.
,__ - cifive resolutions. Sometimes he aated, as if he

1547. had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe, and

to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon as the
detachments which he had called in were able to
join him. At other times, he abandoned this as
raft and perilous, seeming to adopt the more pru-
dent counsels of those who advised him to endea.
vour at protranting the war, and for that end to re-
tire under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where
the Imperialists could not attack him without ma.
nifeft disadvantage, and where he might wait, in
safety, for the succours which he expected from
Mecklenburgh, Pomerania, and the Protestant
cities on the Baltic. Without fixing upon either
of there plans, he broke down the bridge at Meif.
fen, and marched along the east bank of the Elbe
to Muhlberg. There' he deliberated anew, and,
after much hesitation, adopted one of those middle
schemes, which are always acceptable to feeble
minds incapable of deciding. He left a detach-
ment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperialists, il
they should attempt to pass at that place, and ad-
vancing a few miles with his main body, encamp-
ed there in expectation of the event, according to
which he proposed to regulate his fubfcquent mo.
tions.
Pn'Tcs the CHARLES, meanwhile, puffing forward incef,

Ei'. fantly, arrived the evening of the twenty-third o

April on the banks of the Elbe, opposite to Mull'

berg'

berg. The river, at that place, was three hun- f 0o K
dred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth, _
itscurrent rapid, and the bank possessed by the 547.
Saxons was higher than that which he occupied.
Undismayed, however, by all these obstacles, he
called together his general officers, and, without
asking their opinions, communicated to them his
intention of attempting next morning to force his
passage over the river, and to attack the enemy
wherever he could come up with them. They
all expressed their astonishment at such a bold
resolution; and even the Duke of Alva, though
naturally daring and impetuous, and Maurice of
Saxony, notwithtfanding his impatience to crush
his rival the Elector, remonfirated earnestly against
it. But the Emperor, confiding in his own judg-
ment or good fortune, paid no regard to their
arguments, and gave the orders necessary for exe-
cuting his design.

EARLY in the morning a body of Spanish
and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incessant fire upon the enemy. The
long heavy muflets used in that age, did exe-
cution on the opposite bank, and many of the fol-
dlers, hurried on by a martial ardour in order to
et nearer the enemy, rushed into the stream, and,
advancing breaft-high, fired with a more certain
am, and with greater effect. Under cover of
heir fire, a bridge of boats was begun to be laid
for the infantry; and a peasant having under-
tiaken to conducl- the cavalry through the river by
Vl.. III. D d a ford

B ° ° K a ford with which he was well acquainted, they
1- - also were put in motion. The Saxons polled in
1347. Muhlberg endeavoured to obftruc .these opera-

tions, by a brisk fire from a battery which they
had eireccd; but as a thick fog covered all the
low grounds upon the river, they could not take
aim with any certainty, and the Imperialists sus-
sered very little; at the fame time the Saxons
being much galled by the Spaniards and Italians,
they set on fire some boats which had been col-
lected near the village, and prepared to retire.
The Imperialists perceiving this, ten Spanifi fol-
diers instantly stript themselves, and holding their
swords with their teeth, fwarn across the river, put
to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to oppose
them, saved from the flames as many boats as were
sufficient to complete their own bridge, and by
this spirited and successful action, encouraged their
companions no less than they intimidated the
enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper having

a foot soldier behind him, began to enter the river,
the light horse marching in the front, followed
by the men at arms, whom the Emperor led in
person, mounted on a Spanifll horse, dressed in a
sumptuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his
hand. Such a numerous body struggling through
a great river, in which, according to the direio0ns
of lleir guide, they were obliged to make several
turns, Ifometic es treading on a firm bottoll,
fomc inics fwiLirnling, prelfented to their compli'

S ninsS

nions, whom they left behind, a fpeóacle equally B 0o K
magnificent and intereftingd. Their courage, at
lait, frmounted every obstacle, no man betray- 1547.
ing any symptom of fear, when the Emperor
Thared in the danger no less than the meanest fol-
dier. The moment that they reached the opposite
fide, Charles, without waiting the arrival of the
reft of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had passed along with him,
who, flulhed with their good fortune, and de-
fpifrin an enemy who had neglected to oppose
them, when it might have been done with such
advantage, made no account of their superior
numbers, and marched on as to a certain vic-
tory.

DURING all thele operations, which necefarily Tl crd,,t
consumed much time, the Elcdtor remained in- it.,
active in his camp; and from an infatuation which
appears to be so amazing, that the best informed
hillorians impute it to the treacherous arts of his
generals who deceived him by false intelligence,
hewould not believe that the Emperor had passid
the river, or could be lo near at hand'. Being
convinced, at last, of his fatal miltake, by the
concurring testimony of eyc-witnefres, he gave
orders for retreating towards Wittemberg. Buc
aGerman army, encumbered, as usual, with bag-
gage and artillery, could not be put filddenly in

dAvila, 115, a.
C;lmerar. ap. lFreher. iii. 493. Struv. Corp. IHill. Germ.

Ic. d 2 m

on.).
I) d 2 motion.

B 0 0 K motion. They had just begun to march when

ix.
t- _ » the light troops of the enemy came in view, and

X547. the Elector saw an engagement to be unavoidable.
Battle of As he was no less bold in action than irresolute in

council, he made the disposition for battle with the
greatest presence of mind, and in the molt proper
manner; taking advantage of a great forest to co.
ver his wings, so as to prevent his being surround.
ed by the enemy's cavalry, which were far more
numerous than his own. The Emperor, likewise,
ranged his men in order as they came up, andrid-
ing along the ranks, exhorted them with few but
efficacious words to do their duty. It was with a
very different spirit that the two armies advanced
to the charge. As the day, which had hitherto
been dark and cloudy, happened to clear up at that
moment, this accidental circumstance made an im-
prefflon on the different parties corresponding to
the tone of their minds; the Saxons, surprised and
disheartened, felt pain at being exposed fully to the
view of the enemy; the Imperialifis, being now
secure that the Protestant forces could not escape
from them, rejoiced at the return offun-fhine, as
a certain presage of vicory. The shock of battle
would not have been long doubtful, if the personal
courage which the Eletor displayed, together with
the activity which he exerted from the moment
that the approach of the enemy rendered an en-
gagement certain, and cut off all possibility of he.
litation, had not revived in some degree the iPifit
of his troops. They repulsed the Hungarian light.
horse who began the attack, and received with

firmness

firmners the men at arms who next advanced to B 0o K
the charge; but as these were the flower of the _
Imperial army, were commanded by experienced '547-
officers, and fought under the Emperor's eye, the
Saxons soon began to give way, and the light
troops rallying at the fame time and falling on
their flanks, the flight became general. A small ThleEleor
body of chosen soldiers, among whom the Elec- andraken
tor had fought in person, flill continued to de- prifonr.
fend themselves, and endeavoured to -save their
master by retiring into the forest; but being fur-
rounded on every fide, the Elector wounded in
the face, exhausted with fatigue, and perceiving
all reiftance to be vain, surrendered himself a
prisoner. He was conducted immediately to-
wards the Emperor, whom he found just returned
from the pursuit, standing on the field of battle
inthe full exultation of success, and receiving the
congratulations of his officers, upon this com-
plete vidtory obtained by his valour and conduct.
Even in such an unfortunate and humbling fitua-
tion, the Eleaor's behaviour was equally magna-
nimous and decent. Sensible of his condition,
he approached his conqueror without any of the
sullenness or pride which would have been im-
proper in a captive; and conscious of his own
dignity, he descended to no mean fubmiflion, un-
becoming the high station which he held among
the (;erman Princes. " The fortune of war,
said he, has made me your prisoner, most gra-

E'o mls 'lmperor, and I hope to be treated"

D d 3 I-Iere,

B o o K Here, Charles harshly interrupted him: "And

Ix.
-jar nam I then, at lait, acknowledged to be Em-
5'47i. peror ? Charles of Ghent was the only title you

reep.i n y lately allowed iie. You Ihall be treated as you
ror. i deterve." At these words he turned from him

abruptly with an haughty air. To this cruel re-
puli:e, the King of the Romans added reproaches
in.his own name, using expressions still more un-
generous and insulting. The Ele&or made no
reply; but, with an unaltered countenance, which
discovered neither astonishment nor dejetion, ac-
companied the Spanish soldiers appointed to guard
him f.

cha-le;'s TITIS decisive victory cost the Imperialists only
ler his fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons were
viaor'. killed, chiefly in the pursuit, and a greater num-

ber taken prisoners. About four hundred kept
in a body, and escaped to Vittemberg, together
with the EleEtoral Prince, who had likewise been
wounded in the ation. After refting two days in
the field of battle, partly to refrefhl his army, and
partly to receive the deputies of the adjacen
towns, which were impatient to fccure his pro
teetion by submitting to his will, the Empero
began to move towards Wittemberg, that h
might terminate the war at once, by the reduc
tion of that city.. The unfortunate Ele&or wa

f Sleid. -lifn. 426. Thuan. 136. I-ortenfiusde Bllo Ge

man. np. Scard. vol. ii. 49;5. DUclcript. Pugnal Mulberg.ibi
p, . ' .
P IIeutcr. I'.cr, Aultr. lib. xii. c. 13. . 'Z98'

carrie

carried along in a fort of triumph, and exposed B 0° K
every where, as a captive, to his own fubjeds ; a -_^-
fpetacle extremely afficting to them, Who both 1547'
honourecl and loved him ; though the infitt was

so fr- fiom subduing his firm spirit, that it did not

even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and composure
of his mind.
As Wittember;g, the residence, in that age, of TnveflsWi-

-embtcrg.

tdele&oral branch of the Saxon family, was one
of the strongest cities in Germany, and could not
betaken, if properly defended, without great dif-
fiicuy, the Emperor marched thither with the ut-
mofdifpatch, hoping that while the consternation
occasioned by his victory was still recent, the inha-
bitants might imitate the example of their country-
tmen, and submit to his power, as soon as he ap-
ipeaied before their walls. But Sybilla of Cleves,
itheElctor's wife, a woman no less ditlinguifhed
by her abilities than her virtue, instead of aban-
oning herself to tears and lamentations upon her
hiulhnd's misfortune, endeavoured, by her example
as well as exhortations, to animate the citizens.
She nfpiied them with such rcfolution, that, when
Un'noncd to fLirrender, they retulrned a vigorous
anfver, warning the Emperor to behave towards
ha loverc eign with the refLpecCt due to his rank, as
cy were determined to treat Albert of Branden-
rg, whlo was itill a priloner, prc.ilely in the
Icmnner that lie treated the lilcor. '.1he
spit of tie inhabitants, no les ta

t the f-rength
[tlle ity, iclcmle now to render a 1 igei in foin

1) d 4 neccllar-y

B ox K necessary. After such a signal vitory it would

A--, have been disgraceful not to have undertaken it

'547' though at the fame time the Emperor was defi.

tute of every thing requisite for carrying it on
But Maurice removed all difficulties by engaging
to furnish provisions, artillery, ammunition, pi.
neers, and whatever else flould be needed. Trust
ing to this, Charles gave orders to open the
trenches before the town. It quickly appeared
that Maurice's eagerness to reduce the capital o
those dominions, which he expe&ted as his rewar
for taking arms against his kinsman, and deserting
the Protestant cause, had led him to promise wha
exceeded his power to perform. A battering train
was, indeed, carried safely down the Elbe from
Prefden to Wittemberg; but as Maurice had no
sufficient force to preserve a secure communicatio
between his own territories and the camp ofth
besiegers, Count Mansfeldt, who commanded
body of electoral troops, intercepted and deftroye
a convoy of provisions and military stores, and di
perfed a band of pioneers destined for the fervic
of the Imperialists. This put a stop to the pro
grefs of the siege, and convinced the Empero
that as he could not rely on Maurice's promise
recourse ought to be had to forne more expedition
as well as more certain method of getting pofel
sion of the town.

The Empe- THE unfortunate EleEtor was, in his hand
rors unge-
neroustreat- and Charles was ungenerous and hard-heart
;eOsrL bc enough to take advantage of this, in order i

1.,

make an experiment whether he might not bring B °x°

;

about his design, by working upon the tenderness Am
of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety of *5s'
children towards their parent. With this view, he
summoned Sybilla a second time to open the gates,
letting her know that if she again refuted to com-
ply, the Elecor Ihould answer with his head for
her obltinacy. To convince her that this was not
an empty threat, he brought his prisoner to an im-
mediate trial. The proceedings against him were
as irregular as the stratagem was barbarous. In-
llead of consulting the states of the Empire, or re-
mitting the cause to any court, which, according
to the German conffitution, might have legally
taken cognizance of the Ele&or's crime, he sub-
jested the greatest Prince in the Empire to the ju-
rifdicion of a court-martial, composed of Spanifi
andItalian officers, and in which the unrelenting
Duke of Alva, a fit instrument for any at of vio-
lence, presided. This firange tribunal founded its May o.
charge upon the ban of the Empire which had
been issued against the prisoner by the sole autho-
rity of the Emperor, and was destitute of every le-
gal formality which could render it valid. But the
court-martial, presuming the Eletor to be there-
by manifestly convicted of treason and rebellion,
condemned him to susser death by being beheaded.
This decree was intimated to the Elector while he
was ainuing himself in playing at Chefs with Ernest
of Brunswick his fellow-prifoner. He paused for a
moment, though without discovering any symptom

either

B 0xo K either of furprize or terror; and after taking no

--V---, tice of the irregularity as well as injustice of th
Th5e iec Emperor's proceedings: " It is easy, continued
tor's rn- he, to comprehend his scheme. I must die, be

cause Wittelmblrg will not lurrender ; and I fl3
lay down my life with pleafore, if, by that fjcrifice
I can preserve the dignity of my house, and tr'an:
mit to my posterity the inheritance which belonj
to them. XVould to God, that this sentence ma)
not assea my wife and children more than it inti.
midates ne ! and that they, for the 1ake ofaddiin
a few days to a life already too long, may not re
nounce honours and territories which they were
born to pofffs g !" H-e then turned to his antago
nift, whom he challenged to continue the game
He played with his ulual attention and ingenuity
and having beat Ernest, exprefled all the latisfac.
tion which is commonly felt on gaining such vic
tories. After this, he withdrew to his own apart.
ment, that he might employ the reft of his time it
such religious exercises as were proper in his ftu-
ation '

The dmfrers IT was not with the fame indifference, or comn
fhi pfa- pofure, that the account of the Eleaor's danger

was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had
flupported with such undaunted fortitude her hus.
band's niisfortunes, while flhe imagined that they
could reach no farther than to diminifni his power

E Thuan. i. .1z. 1 Struvii Corpus, 1050.

or

territories, felt all her relolution fail as soon as B O O K
s life was threatened. Solicitous to fave'that, -
e defpifi: every other consideration; and was ,547
illing to make any sacrifice, in order to appease
incensed conqueror. At the fame time, the
),ie of Cleves, the Elector of Brandenburg, and
lauricc, to none of whom Charles had communi-
ated the true motives of his violent proceedings
.in(t the ,letor, interceded warmly with him
ofpare his life. The first was prompted to do so
nerely by compaflion for his sifter, and regard for
i, brother in-law. The two others dreaded the
jniverfll reproach that they would incur, if, after
iaving boafled so often of the ample security
&hich the Emperor had promised them with re-
fp¢c to their religion, the first effcEt of their union
i'ith himn should be the public execution of a
Prince, who was justly held in reverence as the
mos zealous proteator of the Protestant cause.
laurice, in particular, foresaw that he mult be-
come the object of detestation to the Saxons, and
could never hope to govern them with tranquil-
itv, if he were confidered by them as accessary to
tile death of his nearest kinsman, in order that he
might obtain possession of his dominions.

WnrlIL.e they, from such various motives, soli- l;s treaty
citad Charles, with the most earnest importunity, ci.,.c,,y
n(t to cexCLute the sentence; Sybilla, and his chil- wi,.inh he,
dtell, conjured the Eilclor, by letters as well as 't'' l'l'c
nldicngcLrs, to scruple at no concefTion that would tur

extricate

B O o K extricate him out of the present danger, and deli-

Ix.
vI ver them from their fears and anguish on his ac-
1547. count. The Emperor, perceiving that the expe-

dient which he had tried began to prodcce the es-
fed that he intended, fell by degrees from his for.
mer rigour, and allowed himself to soften into pro.
mites of clemency and forgiveness, if the Eletor
would shew himself worthy of his favour, by sub-
mitting to reasonable terms. The EleEtor, on
whom the consideration of what he might susser
himself had made no impression, was melted by the
tears of a wife whom he loved, and could not re-
May 19. sift the intreaties of his family. In compliance

with their repeated solicitations, he agreed to ar.
ticles of accommodation, which he would other-
wife have rejedted with disdain. The chief of them
were, that he should resign the Eletoral dignity,
as well for himself as for his posterity, into the
ELmperor's hands, to be disposed of entirely at his
pleasure; that he Ihould instantly put the Imperial
troops in poffeflion of the cities of Wittemberg
and Gotha; that he should set Albert of Branden-
burg at liberty without ransom; that he should sub-
mit to the decrees of the Imperial chamber, and
acquiesce in whatever reformation the Emperor
should make in the conifitution of that court; that
he should renounce all leagues against the Empe-
ror or King of the Romans, and enter into no al-
liance for the future, in which they were not com-
prehended. In return for there important concef-
sions, the Emperor not only promised to spare his

1 life,

life, but to fettle on him and his posterity the city B o K
of Gotha and its territories, together with an an- s.j
nual pension of fifty thousand florins, payable out '547.
of the revenues of the Electorate; and likewise to
grant him a fum in ready money to be applied to-
wards the discharge of his debts. Even these ar- and remains
tides of grace were clogged with the mortifying ' prifo"r.
condition of his remaining the Emperor's prisoner
during the reft of his life i. To the whole, Charles
had subjoined, that. he should submit to the de-
crees of the Pope and council with regard to the
controverted points in religion; but the Elector,
though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the
objects which men commonly hold to be the dear-
eft and most valuable, was inflexible with regard
to this point; and neither threats nor intreaties
could prevail to make him renounce what he
deemed to be truth, or persuade him to ac in
opposition to the dictates of his conscience.

As lbon as the Saxon garrison marched out of Mauric put
Wittcmberg, the Emperor fulfilled his engage- of the Elec-
ments to Maurice; and in reward for his merit in ,i"aldm-
having deserted the Protestant cause, and having
contributed with such success towards the diffolu-
tion of the Smalkaldic league, he gave him pof-
fefllon of that city, together with all the other
towns in the Eletorate. It was not without re-
lucance, however, that he made such a sacrifice;

' Seid. 427. Thuan. i. 142, Du Mont, Corps Diplom.
i* '. i. 332.

the

B 0 0 K the extraordinary success of his arms had begun to

.-_ operate, in its usual manner, upon his ambitious
'547- mind, suggesting new and valt projets for the ag-

grandizement of his family, towards the accorn-
plifhment of which the retaining of Saxony would
have been of the utmost consequence. But as this
scheme was not then ripe for execution, he durit
not vet venture to disclose it; nor would it have
been either safe or prudent to offend Maurice, at
that juncture, by such a manifest violation of all
the promises, which had reduced him to abandon
his natural allies.

Negocia- THE Landgrave, MIaurice's father-in-law, was
tions with
the Land- still in arms; and though now left alone to main-
grave. tain the Protestant cause, was neither a feeble nor

contemptible enemy. His dominions were of con-
fiderable extent; his subjeCts animated with zeal
for the Reformation; and if he could have held
the Imperialifis at bay for a short time, he had
much to hope fi-om a party whose strength was flill
unbroken, whole union as well as vigour might
return, and which had reason to depend, with cer-
tainty, on being effectually supported by the King
of France. The Landgrave thought not of any
thing to bold or adventurous; but being fiized
with the fame contlernation which had taken pof-
feflion of his aflbciates, he was intent only on the
means of procuring favourable termns from the
lImperor, wholn he viewed as a conquelor, tO
wlhole will there was a necefliy of submitting.

Manuri Ce

Maurice encouraged this tame and pacific spirit, n ° ° K
b1 magnifying, on the one hand, the Emperor's -
power; by boafling, on the other, of his own in- ,547'
rcret with his vitorious ally; and by representing
the advantageous conditions which he could not
f,il of obtaining by his intercession for a friend,
whom he was lo solicitous to save. Sometimes the
landgravc was induced to place such unbounded
conlidence in his promises, that he was impatient
to bring matters to a final accommodation. On
other occasions, the Emperor's exorbitant ambi-
tion, restrained neither by the scruples of decency,
nor the maxims of justice, together with the recent
and shocking proof which he had given of this in
his treatment of the Elector of Saxony, came so
full into his thoughts, and made such a lively im-
prcffion on them, that he broke off abruptly the
negociations which he had begun; teeming to be
(onvincec that it was more prudent to depend for
lifecy on his own arms, than to confide in Charles's
generosity. But this bold resolution, which de-
fpair had suggested to an impatient spirit, fretted
bydillippointmlents, was not of long continuance.
Upon a more deliberate survey of the enemy's
power, as well as his own wcaknefs, his doubts and
fears returned upon hims, and together with them
the spirit of negociating, and the desire of accom-
mnodation.

VI'tU'RIC:, and the llcE-or of Brandenburg, The coni-
Sl'd as mediators between him and the E'l- crntied by

Ihlr einpe-
p)CIor; rsr.

B °i K peror; and after all that the former had vaunted

,_ of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the
'547. Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The articles

with regard to his renouncing the league of Smal.
kalde, acknowledging the Emperor's authority, and
submitting to the decrees of the Imperial chamber,
were the fame which had been imposed on the
Elector of Saxony. Besides these, he was requir-
ed to surrender his person and territories to the
Emperor; to implore for pardon on his knees; to
pay an hundred and fifty thousand crowns towards
defraying the expences of the war; to demolilh
the fortifications of all the towns in his dominions
except one; to oblige the garrison which he placed
in it to take an oath of fidelity to the Emperor;
to allow a free passage through his territories to
the Imperial troops as often as it shall be demand-
ed; to deliver up all his artillery and ammunition
to the Emperor; to set at liberty, without ransom,
Henry of Brunswick, together with the other pri-
foners whom he had taken during the war; and
neither to take arms himself, nor to permit any of
his fubjeEts to serve, against the Emperor or his
allies for the future k

Tn which THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though
helubmit. biths th t utmost reluctance, as they contained no

flipulation with regard to the manner in which
he was to be treated, and left him entirely at the

k Sleid. 430. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.

Emperor's

Emperor's mercy. Necefity, however, compelled B 0 K
him to give his assent to them. Charles, who had -
afumed the haughty and imperious tone of a con- 1547.
queror, ever since the reduction of Saxony, infifled
on unconditional submission, and would permit no-
thing to be added to the terms which he had pre-
fcribed, that could in any degree limit the fulness
of his power, or restrain him from behaving as he
saw meet towards a Prince whom he regarded as
absolutely at his disposal. But though he would
not vouchsafe to negociate with the Landgrave, on
such a footing of equality, as to susser any article
to be inferred among those which he had dictated
to him, that could be confidered as a formal iti-
pulation for the security and freedom of his perfbn ;
he, or his ministers in his name, gave the Elector
of Brandenburg and Maurice such full satisfaction
with regard to this point; that they aflured the
Landgrave, that Charles would behave to him rit
the fame way as he had done to the Duke of Wur-
temberg, and would allow him, whenever he had
made his submission, to return to his own territo-
ries. Upon finding the Landgrave to be fill pof-
Ifcled with his former suspicions of the Emperor's
intentions, and unwilling to trust verbal or ambi-
guous declarations, in a matter of such efFlntial
concern as his own liberty; they sent him a bond
signed by them both, containing the most solemn
obligations, tliat if any violence whatloever was
ofil'CC(l to his person, during his interview with lth
inmperor, they would instantly surrender tlhcmllves
VoL. 11. Ee to

n o o K to his sons, and remain in their hands to be treated

Ix.
,_-, by them in the fame manner as the Emperor should

1547. treat him '

He eps THIS, together with the indispensable obligation

He repals ->
tothe m- of performing what was contained in the articles
pcrinalourt. of which he had accepted, removed his doubts and

scruples, or made it necessary to get over them.
He repaired, for that purpose, to the Imperial
camp at Hall in Saxony, where a circumstance oc-
curred which revived his suspicions and increased
his fears. Just as he was about to enter the cham-
ber of pretence, in order to make his public sub.
mission to the Emperor, a copy of the articles
which he had approved of was put into his hands,
in order that he might ratify them anew. Upon
perusing them, he perceived that the Imperial
miniflers had added two new articles; one import-
ing, that if any dispute should arise concerning
the meaning of the former conditions, the Empe-
ror should have the right of putting what inter-
pretation upon them he thought most reasonable;
the other, that the Landgrave was bound to sub-
mit implicitly to the decisions of the council of
Trent. This unworthy artifice, calculated to fur-
prise him into an approbation of articles, to which
he had not the molf distant idea of assenting, by
proposing them to him at a time when his mind
was engrofied and disquieted with the thoughts of

Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. 11. 336.

.that

that humiliating ceremony which he had to per- B o o K
form, filled the Landgrave with indignation, and --,_
made him break out into all those violent expref- '547.
lions of rage to which his temper was prone.
With some difficulty, the Elector of Branden-
burg and Maurice prevailed at length on the Em-
peror's ministers to drop the former article as un-
just, and to explain the latter in such a manner,
that he could agree to it, without openly renoun-
cing the Protestant religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Landgrave The mn-
was impatient to finish a ceremony which, how th E"rph-
mortifying soever, had been declared necefiary to- himtecived
wards his obtaining pardon. The Emperor was
feated on a magnificent throne, with all the ensigns
of his dignity, surrounded by a numerous train of
the Princes of the Empire, among whom was
Henry of Brunswick, lately the Landgrave's pri-
soner, and now, by a sudden reverse of fortune, a
fpeclator of his humiliation. The Landgrave was
introduced with great solemnity, and advancing
towards the throne, fell upon his knees. His
chancellor, who walked behind him, immediately
read, by his master's command, a paper which
contained an humble confession of the crime whereof
hehad been guilty; an acknowledgment that he had
merited on that account the molt severe punish-
ment; an absolute resignation of himlrfelf and his
doininions to be disposcd of at the 1 mperor's plea-
'ltei a f; tibillive petition for pardon, his hopes of

1f e '. vwhicih

B °x K which were founded entirely on the Emperor's cle
'--- -J r mency; and it concluded with promises of behav.
1547. ing, for the future, like a fubjeft whose principles

of loyalty and obedience would be confirmed, and
would even derive new force from the sentiments
of gratitude which must hereafter fill and animate
his heart. While the chancellor was reading this
abjec declaration, the eyes of all the fpeaators
were fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few
could behold a Prince, so powerful as well as high-
spirited, suing for mercy in the posture of a fuppli-
cant, without being touched with commiseration,
and perceiving serious reflections arise in their
minds upon the instability and emptiness of human
grandeur. The Emperor viewed the whole tranf-
action with an haughty unfeeling composure; and
preserving a profound silence himself, made a sign
to one of his secretaries to read his answer; the te-
nor of which was, That though he might have
justly inflicted on him the grievous punishment
which his crimes deserved, yet, prompted by his
own generosity, moved by the solicitations of fe-
veral Princes in behalf of the Landgrave, and in-
fluenced by his penitential acknowledgments, he
would not deal with him according to the rigour
of jullice, and would subjeCt him to no penalt)
that was not specified in the articles which he had
already subscribed. The moment the secretary had
finifled, Charles turned away abruptly, withou
deigning to give the unhappy suppliant any figa
of compatfion or reconcilement. He did not eve

defir

deire him to rife from his knees; which the B o o K
Landgrave having ventured to do unbidden, ad- .
vanced towards the Emperor with an intention to '547'
kifs his hand, flattering himself, that his guilt
being now fully expiated, he might presume to
take that liberty. But the Elecor of Branden-
burg, perceiving that this familiarity would be
offensive to the Emperor, interposed, and defir-
ed the Landgrave to go along with him and
Maurice to the Duke of Alva's apartments in
the castle.

HE was received and entertained by that noble-
man with the refpet and courtesy due to such a
guest. But after supper, while he was engaged in
play, the Duke took the Elecor and Maurice
aside, and communicated to them the Emperor's
orders, that the Landgrave must remain a prisoner He i, de-
in that place under the custody of a Spanish guard. tlil're,
Asthey had not hitherto entertained the most dif-
tant suspicion of the Emperor's fincericy or recti-
tude of intention, their surprise was excessive, and
their indignation not inferior to it, on discovering
how greatly they had been deceived themselves,
and how infamously abused, in having been made
the instruments of deceiving and ruining their
friend. They had recourse to complaints, to ar-
guments, and to intreaties, in order to save them-
selves from that disgrace, and to extricate him out
oftle wretched situation into which he had been
betrayed by too great confidence in them. But
tile )uke of Alva remained inflexible, and plead-

E e3 ed

B
x K ed the necessity of executing the Emperor's corn

v_- mands. By this time it grew late, and the Land.
1547. grave, who knew nothing of what had passed, nor

dreaded the snare in which he was entangled, pre-
pared for departing, when the fatal orders were
intimated to him. He was struck dumb at first
with astonishment, but after being silent a few mo-
ments, he broke out into all the violent exprefifons
which horror, at injuflice accompanied with fraud,
naturally suggests. He complained, he expofiu-
lated, he exclaimed; sometimes inveighing against
the Emperor's artifices as unworthy of a great and
generous Prince; sometimes censuring the credu-
lity of his friends in trusting to Charles's insidious
promises; Sometimes charging them withmeannefs
in stooping to lend their assistance towards the
execution of such a perfidious and dishonourable
scheme; and in the end he required them to re-
member their engagements to his children, and
inflantly to fulfil them. They, after giving way
for a little to the torrent of his passion, solemnly
afierted their own innocence and upright intention
in the whole transaction, and encouraged himto
hope, that as Soon as they saw the Emperor, they
would obtain redress of an injury, which affected
their own honour, no less than it did his liberty.
At the fame time, in order co soothe his rage and
impatience, Maurice remained with him during the
night, in the apartment where he was confined"'

D Sleid. 433 Thuan. I. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ
ii. 1052.

tlVXT

NEXT morning, the Eleaor and Maurice ap- B O o K
plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the .-
infamy to which they would be exposed through- 5Th'E47.o

0 The Eletor

out Germany, if the Landgrave were detained in of BraDdc-
custody; that they would not have advised, nor Maurice o-

licit in vain

would he himself have cohfented to an interview, forhi, ii-
if they had fufpeaed that the loss of his liberty berty.
was to be the consequence of his fubmifion; that
they were bound to procure his release, having
plighted their faith to that effect, and engaged
their own persons as sureties for his. Charles
listened to their earnest remonfirances with the
utmost coolness. As he now flood no longer in
need of their services, they had the mortification
to find that their former obsequiousness was for-
gotten, and little regard paid to their interceflion.
He was ignorant, he told them, of their particu-
lar or private tranfaaions with the Landgrave,
nor was his conduEt to be regulated by any en-
gagements into which they had thought fit to en-
ter; though he knew well what he himself had
promised, which was not that the Landgrave
should be exempt from all restraint, but that he
fliould not be kept a prisoner during life *. Hav-

ing

* According to several hiflorians of great name, the Em-
peror, in his treaty with the Landgrave, flipulated that he
Would not detain him in any prison. But in executing the
dted, which was written in the German tongue, the Imperial
minillers fraudulently fubltituted the word eaniger, instead of
e:Vler, and thus the treaty, in place of a promise that he

E e 4 ihould

B O°I K ing said this with a peremptory and decisive tone,

,---_' he put an end to the conference; and they feeing
i547. no probability, at that time, of making any im.

preflion upon the Emperor, who seemed to have
taken this resolution deliberately, and to be ob-
ftinarely bent on adhering to it, were obliged to
acquaint the unfortunate prisoner with the ill
success of their endeavours in his behalf. The
disappointment threw him into a new and more
violent transport of rage, so that to prevent his
proceeding to some desperate extremity, the
Ele&or and Maurice promised that they would
not quit the Emperor, until, by the frequency
and fervour of their intercessions, they had ex-
torted his content to let him free. They accord-
ingly renewed their solicitations a few days after-
wards, but found Charles more haughty and in-
tractable than before, and were warned that if

should not be detained in any prison, contained only an en-
gagement that he should not be detained in perpetual impri.
fonment. But authors, eminent for historical knowledge and
critical accuracy, have called in question the truth of this com-
mon tfory. The silence of Sleidan with regard to it, as well
as its not being mentioned in the various memorials which
he has published concerning the Landgrave's imprisonment,
greatly favour this opinion. But as several books which con-
tain the information necessary towards difculfing this point
with accuracy, are written in the German language, which I
do not underlland, I cannot pretend to inquire into this mat-
ter with the fame precision wherewith I have endeavoured to
fettle some other controverted fa&s which have occurred in tlie
course of this history. See Struv. Corp. 1052. Moflieim's
Rcclef. Hist. vol. ii. p. 161, 16z. Engl. edition.

they

they touched again upon a fubje& so disagreeable, B o KIo
and with regard to which he had determined to -_
hear nothing farther, he would instantly give or- 1547.
ders to convey the prisoner into Spain. Afraid of
hurting the Landgrave by an officious or ill-timed
zeal to serve him, they not only desisted, but left
thecourt, and as they did not chufe to meet the
first sallies of the Landgrave's rage upon his learn-
ing the cause of their departure, they informed
him of it by a letter, wherein they exhorted him
to fulfil all that he had promised to the Emperor,
as the most certain means of procuring a speedy
release.

WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning His impa.

his cause in this manner occasioned, the Land- 'reraint.
grave's impatience to recover liberty made him
follow their advice. He paid the fum which had
been imposed on him, ordered his fortresses to
be razed, and renounced all alliances which could
give offence. This prompt compliance with the
will of the conqueror produced no effect. He
was frill guarded with the fame vigilant severity;
and being carried about, together with the de-
graded Elecor of Saxony, wherever the Empe-
ror went, their disgrace and his triumph was
each day renewed. The fortitude as well as
equanimity, with which the Eleedor bore these
repeated inlults, were not more remarkable than
the landgrave's fretfulness and impatience. His
ative impetuous mind could ill brook restraint;

and

B X
0 R and refletion upon the shameful artifices, by which

IX.
--u-- he had been decoyed into that situation, as well as
1547- indignation at the injuflice with which he was fill

detained in it, drove him often to the wildest ex-
ceffcs of passion.

The rieour THE people of the different cities, to whom
er...s ex,- Charles thus wantonly exposed those illustrious pri-

imnanyl foners as a public fpedacle, were sensibly touched

with such an insult offered to the Germanic body,
and murmured loudly at this indecent treatment of
two of its greatest Princes. They had soon other
causes of complaint, and such as affected them
more nearly. Charles proceeded to add opprefiion
to insult, and arrogating to himself all the rights
of a conqueror, exerciled them with the utmost
rigour. He ordered his troops to seize the artil-
lery and military stores belonging to such as had
been members of the Smalkaldic league, and hav-
ing collected upwards of five hundred pieces of
cannon, a great number in that age, he sent part
of them into the Low-Countries, part into Italy,
and part into Spain, in order to spread by this
means the fame of his success, and that they might
serve as monuments of his having subdued a na-
tion hitherto deemed invincible. He then levied,
by his sole authority, large fiums of money, as well
upon those who had served him with fidelity during
the war, as upon such as had been in arms against
him; upon the former, as their contingent towards
a war, which, having been undertaken, as he pre.

tended,

tended, for the common benefit, ought tobe car- B 00 Ki
ried on at the common charge; upon the latter, *
as a fine by way of punishment for their rebellion. 1547-
By these exacions, he amafied above one million
fix hundred thousand crowns, a fum which appear-
ed prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so
general was the consternation which had seized the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at the fame time,
these extraordinary stretches of power greatly alarm-
ed a people jealous of their privileges, and habitu-
ated, during several ages, to confider the Imperial
authority as neither extensive nor formidable.
This discontent and resentment, how industriously
soever they concealed them, became universal; and
the more these passions were restrained and kept
down for the present, the more likely were they to
burst out soon with additional violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like a Ferdinand'a

encroach-

conquered people, Ferdinand treated his fubje&ts ments on
in Bohemia with frill greater rigour. That king- the libertes

oCof his Bo-

dom pofeffed privilegesanf immunities as exten- jhemianfub-
five as those of any nation in which the feudal in-
flitutions were efiablifhed. The prerogative of
their Kings was extremely limited, and the crown
itself eletive. Ferdinand, when raised to the
throne, had confirmed their liberties with every
.f0ceninty prescribed by their exceflive solicitude
for the security of a conticution of government to

which

B 0 K which they were extremely attached. He soon

IX.

-_ began, however, to be weary of a jurifdition so
,547. much circumscribed, and to despise a sceptre which

he could not transmit to his posterity; and not-
withstanding all his former engagements, he at.
tempted to overturn theconftitution from its found.
ations; that, instead of an elective kingdom, he
might render it hereditary. But the Bohemians
were too high-fpirited tamely to relinquish privi-
leges which they had long enjoyed. At the fame
time, many of them having embraced the doc-
trines of the Reformers, the feeds of which John
Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in their
country about the beginning of the preceding cen-
tury, the desire ofacquiring religious liberty mingled
itself with their zeal for their civil rights; and
there two kindred passions heightening, as usual,
each other's force, precipitated them immediately
into violent measures. They had not only refused
to serve their sovereign against the confederates of
Smalkalde, but having entered into a close alliance
with the Eletor of Saxony, they had bound them-
selves, by a solemn aflociation, to defend their an-
cient confiitution ; andl'to "perfilt, until they should
obtain such additional 'privi-4leges as they thought
necessary towards perfecting the present model of
their government, or rendering it more permanent.
They chore Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of diftinc-
tion, to be their general; and raised an army of
thirty thoufind men to enforce their petitions,
But either fiom the weakness of their leader, or

5 from

from the difThnfions in a great unwieldy body, n 0 0 K
which, having united hastily, was not thoroughly '---
compated, or from some other unknown cause, 5'47
the subsequent operations of the Bohemians bore
no proportion to the zeal and ardour with which
they took their first resolutions. They suffered
themselves to be amused so long with negociations
and overtures of different kinds, that before
they could enter Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg
was fought, the Elecor deprived of his dignity
and territories, the Landgrave confined to close
custody, and the league of Smalkalde entirely dif-
fipated. The fame dread of the Emperor's power
which had seized the reft of the Germans, reached
them. As soon as their sovereign approached with
a body of Imperial troops, they instantly dispersed,
thinking of nothing but how to atone for their palt
guilt, and to acquire some hope of forgiveness by
a prompt submission. But Ferdinand, who enter-
ed his dominions full of that implacable resent-
ment which inflames Monarchs whose authority
has been despised, was not to be mollified by the
late repentance and involuntary return of rebelli-
ous fubjefts to their duty. Hie even heard, un-
moved, the intreaties and tears of the citizens of
Prague, who appeared before him in the posture
of luppliants, and implored for mercy. The
lentence which he pronounced against them was
ngorous to extremity ; he abolished many of their
privileges, he abridged others, and new-modelled
the conflitution according to his pleasure. He

condemned

B o0 K condemned to death many of thofewho Had been

IX.
v--o tmolt ative in forming the late association againf
'547- him, and punished still a greater number with con.

fifcation of their goods, or perpetual banishment.
He obliged all his fubjeas, of every condition, to
give up their arms to be deposited in forts where
he planted garrisons; and afterdifarming his people,
he loaded them with new and exorbitant taxes.
Thus, by an ill-conducted and unsuccessful effort
to extend their privileges, the Bohemians not only
enlarged the sphere of the royal prerogative, when
they intended to have circurncribed it, but they
almost annihilated those liberties which they, aimed
at eftabliihing on a broader and more secure found-
ation ".

Diet held at THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as he
Augiburg.

imagined, subdued the independent and stubborn
spirit of the Germans by the terror of arms and
the rigour of punishment, held a diet at Augsburg,
in order to compose finally the controversies with
regard to religion, which had so long difsurbed
the Empire. He durst not, however, trust the
determination of a matter so interesting to the free
suffrage of the Germans, broken as their minds
now were to fubjeEtion. He entered the city at
the head of his Spanish troops, and assigned them
quarters there. The reft of his soldiers he can-
roned in the adjacent villages; so that the mem-

, Sleid. 408. 419. 434. Thuan. 1. iv. 129. ZSo. Struv.
Corp. ii.

bers

bers of the diet, while they carried on their B o° K
deliberations, were surrounded by the fame army v__
which had overcome their countrymen. Imme- 1s547
liarely after his public entry, Charles gave a proof
ofthe violence with which he intended to proceed.
He took possession by force of the cathedral, toge-
ther with one of the principal churches; and his
priests having, by various ceremonies, purified
them fi-om the pollution with which they supposed
the unhallowed ministrations of the Protestants to
have defiled them, they re-eflablifhed with great
pomp the rites of the Romish worship .

THE concourse of members to this diet was ex- Trc E-pp-

ror exhorts
traordinary; the importance of the affairs concern- then to

-. ,

. i ri_ jj 3 i. c C submit to

ing which it was to deliberate, added to the fear of the General
giving offence to the Emperor by an absence which Council.
lay open to mifconftrution, brought together al-
m(,t all the Princes, nobles, and representatives of
cities who had a right to fit in that assembly. The
Emperor, in the speech with which he opened the
meeting, called their attention immediately to that
point, which leemed chiefly to merit it. Having
mentioned the fatal effecis of: the religious difmen-
ions which had arilen in Germany, and taken no-
tice of li. own unwearied endeavours to procure a
general council, which alone could provide a re-
meedy adequate to thole evils, he exhorted them to
recognise its authority, and to acquiesce in the deci-

Sleid. 435- 437.
6 rions

B 0 0 K sions of an assembly to which they had originally ap-

lx.
Do1 - pealed, as having the sole right of judgment in

1547. the cafe.

Vrious re- BUT the council, to which Charles wished them
volutinns in
thecuunci,. to refer all their controversies, had, by this time,

undergone a violent change. The fear and jea-
lousy, with which the Emperor's first successes
against the confederates of Smalkalde had inspired
the Pope, continued to increase. Not satisfied
with attempting to retard the progress of the Im-
perial arms, by the sudden recal of his troops,
Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he must soon feel, and
against whom he could not be too hasty in taking
precautions. He foresaw that the immediate effec
of the Emperor's acquiring absolute power in Ger-
many, would be to render him entirely mailer of all
the decisions of the council, if it should continue to
meet in Trent. It was dangerous to allow a Mo-
narch, so ambitious, to get the command of this
formidable engine, which he might employ at plea-
sure to limit or to overturn the papal authority. As
the only method of preventing this, he determin-
ed to remove the council to some city more imme-
diately under his own jurifdition, and at a greater
distance from the terror of the Emperor's arms,
or the reach of his influence. An incident for-
tunately occurred, which gave this measure the
appearance of being neceflhry. One or two of
the fathers of the council, together with some of

their

their domestics, happening to die suddenly, the B o°O K
physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or suborn- ,-- -
ed by the Pope's legates, pronounced the diftem- '547'
per to be infettious and pestilential. Some of the
prelates, struck with a panic, retired; others were
impatient to be gone; and after a short consult-
ation, the council was translated to Bologna, a city March ir.
fubje& to the Pope. All the bishops in the Impe-
rial interest warmly opposed this resolution, as
taken without neceflity, and founded on faife or
frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish prelates, and Translated
most of the Neapolitan, by the Emperor's express to Bologna.
command, remained at Trent; the reft, to the
number of thirty-four, accompanying the legates
to Bologna. Thus a schism commenced in that
very aifembly, which had been called to heal the
divisions of Christendom; the fathers of Bologna
inveighed against those who staid at Trent, as con-
tumacious and regardless of the Pope's authority;
while the other accused them of being so far inti-
midated by the fears of imaginary danger, as to
remove to a place where their consultations could
prove of no service towards re-establishing peace
and order in G ermany P.

THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed all symptoms
his interest to procure the return of the council between the
to Trent. But Paul) who highly applauded his Ep,,i.,.
own sagacity in having taken a i]ep which put it

P F. Paul, 2+8, &c.
VOL, III. F f out

B X0 K out of Charles's power to acquire the direction of

Ix.
----- that assembly, paid no regard to a request, the
'547' object of which was so extremely obvious. The

summer was consumed in fruitless negociations
with respect to this point, the importunity of the
one and obstinacy of the other daily increasing. At
last an event happened which widened the breach
irreparably, and rendered the Pope utterly averse
from listening to any proposal that came from the
Emperor. Charles, as has been already observed,
had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese,
the Pope's son, by refuting to grant him the mvefti.
ture of Parma and Placentia, that he had watched
ever since that time with all the vigilance of resent-
ment for an opportunity of revenging that injury.
He had endeavoured to precipitate the Pope into
open hostilities against the Emperor, and had ear-
neffly solicited the King of France to invade Italy.
His hatred and resentment extended to all those
whom he knew that the Emperor favoured; he
did every ill office in his power to Gonzaga, go-
vernor of Milan, and had encouraged Fiefco in his
attempt upon the life of Andrew Doria, because
both Gonzaga and Doria possessed a great degree
of the Emperor's esteem and confidence. His
malevolence and secret intrigues were not unknown
to the Emperor, who could not be more defirotls
to take vengeance on him, than Gonzaga and Doria
were to be employed as his instruments in inflicting
it. Farnese, by the profligacy of his life, and by
enormities of every kind, equal to those committed

by

by the worst tyrants who have disgraced human B 0IO I
nature, had rendered himself so odious, that it was
thought any violence whatever might be lawfully i547.
attempted against him. Gonzaga and Doria
soon found, among his own fubjefts, persons who
were eager, and even deemed it meritorious, to lend
their hands in such a service. As Farnese, animat-
ed with the jealousy which usually possesses petty
sovereigns, had employed all the cruelty and fi-aud,
whereby they endeavour to supply their defe&t of
power, in order to humble and extirpate the nobi-
lity fubjetq to his government, five noblemen of
the greatest diftindtion in Placentia combined to
avenge the injuries which they themselves had sus-
sered, as well as those which he had offered to their
order. They formed their plan in conjun&tion with
Gonzaga; but it remains uncertain whether he ori-
ginally suggested the scheme to them, or only ap-
proved of what they proposed, and co-operated in
carrying it on. They concerted all the previous
Reps with such foresight, conduEted their intrigues
with such secrecy, and displayed such courage in the
execution of their design, that it may be ranked
among the most audacious deeds of that nature
mentioned in history. One body of the confpira- Sept. lo.
tors surprised, at mid-day, the gates of the citadel
of Placentia where Farnese relided, overpowered The ifrfil-

~iso' nation of
is guards, ant murdered him. Another party of the I ope'

tem made themselves masters of the town, and f"'

:alled upon their fellow-citizens to take arms, in
irder to recover their liberty. The multitude ran

F f 2 towards

B o o K towards the citadel, from which three great guns, a

IX. ,_-l--J signal concerted with Gonzaga, had been fired; and
547- before they could guess the cause or the authors of

the tumult, they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant
hanging by the heels from one of the windows of
the citadel. But so universally detestable had he
become, that not one expressed any sentiment of
concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or disco.
vered the least indignation at this ignominious treat.
ment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation at the
success of the conspiracy was general, and all ap-
plauded the actors in it, as the deliverers of their
country. The body was tumbled into the ditch
that surrounded the citadel, and exposed to the in
fults of the rabble; the reft of the citizens return
ed to their usual occupations, as if nothing extra
ordinary had happened.

The Impe- BEFORE next morning, a body of troops arriv
rial troops
tale: poses- ing from the frontiers of the Milanese, where the
Placentia. had been posted in expectation of the event, took

possession of the city in the Emperor's name, an
reinstated the inhabitants in the possession of the
ancient privileges. .Parma, which the Imperialif
attempted likewise to surprise, was saved by th
vigilance and fidelity of the officers whom Farnme
had intrusted with the command of the garrifol
The death of a son whom, notwitlhfanding his in
famous vices, Paul loved with an excels of parent
tencldrnets, overwhelmed him with the deepest a
flidion ; and the loss of a city of liuch confequenC

i i

as Placentia, greatly embittered his sorrow. He °0 ° K
accused Gonzaga, in open consistory, of having '-
committed a cruel murder, in order to prepare the '547'
way for an unjust usurpation, and immediately de-
manded of the Emperor fatisfation for both , for
the former, by the punishment of Gonzaga; for
tie latter, by the reffitution of Placentia to his
:randfon Otavio, its rightful owner. But Charles,
who, rather than quit a prize of such value, was
willing, not only to expose himself to the imputa-
ton of being accessary to the crime which had given
an opportunity of seizing it, but to bear the infamy
ofdefrauding his own fon-in-law of the inheritance
which belonged to him, eluded all his solicitations,
and determined to keep possession of the city, to-
gether with its territories q.
THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so The Pope

courts the

rapacious, as to be restrained by no consideration aliance of
either of decency or justice, transported the Pope ',hI Fr"gn
so far beyond his usual moderation and prudence, the Venc-
that he was eager to take arms against the Empe- tians
ror, in order to be avenged on the murderers of his
son, and to recover the inheritance wrested from his
family. Conscious, however, of his own inability
to contend with such an enemy, he warmly solicited
the 'rench King and the republic of Venice to join
in all ofcnfive league against Charles. But Ienry
was intent at that time on other objects. Hlis an-

' . Paul, 257. Pallavic. .1.l, z4 . 'Thuan. iv. 156. Mem.
de libier, 59. 07. Natalis Comitis -liltor. lib. iii. p. 6+.

F f 3 cient

B o 0 K cient allies the Scots, having been defeated by the

---j English in one of the greatest battles ever fought
'547- between these two rival nations, he was about to

fend a numerous body of veteran troops into that
country, as well to preserve it from being conquer.
ed, as to gain the acquisition of a new kingdom
to the French monarchy, by marrying his son the
Dauphin to the young Queen of Scotland, An
undertaking accompanied with such manifest ad-
vantages, the success of which appeared to be so
certain, was not to be relinquished for the remote
prospect of benefit from an alliance depending up-
on the precarious life of a Pope of fourscore, who
had nothing at heart but the gratification of his
own private resentment. Instead, therefore, of
rushing headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry
amused the Pope with such general professions and
promises, as might keep him from any thoughts
of endeavouring to accommodate his differences
with the Emperor, but at the fame time he avoid-
ed any such engagement as might occasion an im-
mediate rupture with Charles, or precipitate him
into a war for which he was not prepared. The
Venetians, though much alarmed at feeing Placen-
tia in the hands of the Imperialists, imitated the
wary conduct of the French King, as it nearly re.
fembled the spir.it which usually regulated their
own condut'r.

r Mem. de Ribier, ii. 63. 71. 78. 85. 95. Partta Ifor.
di Vencz. 199. 203. Thuan. iv. 16o.

Br'r,

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not in B °0 K
his power to kindle immediately the flames of war, -
he did not forget the injuries which he was obliged Th'5det of
for the present to endure; resentment fettled deeper Augsburg

petitions for
in his mind, and became more rancorous in pro- the return

of the coun-

portion as he felt the difficulty of gratifying it. It ciltoTrent.
was while these sentiments of enmity were in full
force, and the desire of vengeance at its height,
that the diet of Augsburg, by the Emperor's com-
mand, petitioned the Pope, in the name of the
whole Germanic body, to enjoin the prelates who
had retired to Bologna to return again to Trent,
and to renew their deliberations in that place.
Charles had been at great pains in bringing the
members to join in this request. Having obferv-
eda considerable variety of sentiments among the
Protestants with refpedt to the submission which he
had required to the decrees of the council, some
ofthem being altogether intractable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdiEtion
upon certain conditions, he employed all his ad-
dress in order to gain or to divide them. He threat-
ened and overawed the Elector Palatine, a weak
Prince, and afraid that the Emperor might inflict on
him the punifihment to which he had made himself
liable by the assistance that he had given to the con-
federates of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring
liberty for the Landgrave, together with the formal
confirmation of his own electoral dignity, over-
came Maurice's scruples, or prevented him from
OPposing what he knew would be agreeable to the

F f 4 Imperor.

B °°o K Emperor. The EleEtor of Brandenburg, less in,

_Lc-s fluenced by religious zeal than any Prince of that
3547' age, was easily induced to imitate their example,

in aSTenting to all that the Emperor required. The
deputies of the cities remained still' to be brought
over. They were more tenacious of their prin-
ciples, and though every thing that could operate
either on their hopes or fears was tried, the utmost
that they would promise was, to acknowledge the
jurifdition of the council, if effectual provision
were made for securing to the divines of all parties
free access to that assembly, with entire liberty of
debate; and if all points in controversy were decid-
ed according to scripture and the usage of the pri-
initive church. But when the memorial contain-
ing this declaration was presented to the Emperor,
he ventured to put in practice a very extraordinary
artifice. Without reading the paper, or taking any
notice of the conditions on which they had infieed,
he seemed to take it for granted that they had com-
oa. 9. plied with his demand, and gave thanks to the de-

puties for their full and unrefervcd'fubmiffion to the
decrees of the council. The deputies, though afto-
nifled at what they had heard, did not attempt to
set him right, both parties being better pleased that
the matter thould remain under this state of ambi-
guity, than to push for an explanation, which mull
have occalioned a clilputc, and would have led, per-
haps, to a rupture '.

F. Paul, 259. Sleid. 40o. Tliuan. tom. i. 155.

-IAVIN,

HAVING obtained this seeming submission from B o o K

Ix.

the members of the diet to the authority of the v-
council, Charles employed that as an argument The547pe
to enforce their petition for its return to Trent. elude the
But the Pope, from the fatisfaftion which he felt in
mortifying the Emperor, as well as from his own
aversion to what was demanded, resolved, without
hesitation, that his petition should not be granted;
though, in order to avoid the imputation of being
influenced wholly by resentment, he had the address
to throw it upon the fathers at Bologna, to put a
direA negative upon the request. With this view
he referred to their consideration the petition of the
diet, and they, ready to confirm by their assent Decem.ao.
whatever the legates were pleased to dictate, de-
clared that the council could not, consistently with
its dignity, return to Trent, unless the prelates who,
by remaining there, had discovered a schismatic
spirit, would first repair to Bologna, and join their
brethren; and that, even after their junEtion,
the council could not renew its consultations with
any profpeEt of benefit to the church, if the Ger-
mans did not prove their intention of obeying its
future decrees to be sincere, by yielding imme-
diate obedience to those which it had already
passed .

Trls answer was communicated to the Empe- The Empe-

ror by the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted 'rgraint'he
him to comply with demands which appeared to cincil of

t. P.ul, 250. Pallav. ii. 49.

be

B oo K be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac-

- ,

.. quainted with the duplicity of the Pope's charac-
>547' ter than to be deceived by such a gross artifice;

he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst utter
no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and, there-
fore, overlooking them as mere tools in the
hand of another, he confidered their reply as a
full discovery of the Pope's intentions. As he
could no longer hope to acquire such an ascend-
ant in the council as to render it subservient to
his own plan, he saw it to be necessary that Paul
Ihould not have it in his power to turn against
him the authority of so venerable an assembly.

154-. In order to prevent this, he sent two Spanilh
Jauar y lawyers to Bologna, who, in the pretence of the

legates, protested, That the translation of the
council to that place had been unnecessary, and
founded on false or frivolous pretexts; that while
it continued to meet there, it ought to be deemed
an unlawful and fchifinatical conventicle; that all
its decisions ought of course to be held as null
and invalid; and that since the Pope, together with
the corrupt ecclesiastics who depended on him,
had abandoned the care of the church, the Empe-
ror, as its protector, would employ all the power
which God had committed to him, in order to
preserve it from those calamities with which it
was threatened. A few days after, the Imperial
January 23. ambalfador at Rome demanded an audience of

the Pope, and in presence of all the Cardinals, as
well a& forIeign Ininiftcrs, protefled against the

procccel-

proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms B 0 0 K
equally harsh and difrefpetful u

154.
IT was not long before Charles proceeded to The Empe-

e rer preptes

carry there threats, which greatly alarmed both a fyem, 'o
the Pope and council at Bologna, into execu- frleoait
tion. He let the diet know the ill success of his in Ger-

many.

endeavours to procure a favourable answer to
their petition, and that the Pope, equally re-
gardlefs of their entreaties, and of his services
to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom of
debate and judgment, was not to be given up, the
profpet of it was, at present, distant and uncer-
tain; that, in the mean time, Germany was torn
in pieces by religious dissensions, the purity of
the faith corrupted, and the minds of the people
difqukited with a multiplicity of new opinions
and controversies formerly unknown among
Chliftians; that, moved by the duty which he
owed to them as their sovereign, and to the
Church as its protecor, he had employed some
divines, of known abilities and learning, to
prepare a iyfiem of doftrine, to which all should
conform, until a council, filch as they wished
for, could be convocated. This yli(eem was
compiled by Pnfli, e Ilding, and Agricola, of
wh(un the two former were dignitaries in the

U p. l'aul, z26 . Pallav. 5 . Slcid. .,'.6. Goldalli Conflit.
l.nperial. i. 561.

Rlormifnl

B x 0 K Romilh church, but remarkable for their pacific

lx.
cc-J- and healing spirit; the last was a Protestant divine,

4S. ifufpected, not without reason, of having been

gained, by bribes and promises, to betray or mif-
lead his party on this occasion. The articles pre-
sented to the diet of Ratisbon in the year one
thousand five hundred and forty-one, in order to
reconcile the contending parties, served as a model
for the present work. But as the Emperor's situ-
ation was much changed since that time, and he
found it no longer necessary to manage the Pro-
teftants with the fame delicacy as at that juncture,
the concessions in their favour were not now so
numerous, nor did they extend to points of so
much consequence. The treatise contained a
complete system of theology, conformable in al-
most every article to the tenets of the Romilh
church, though exprefed, for the moit part, in the
softest words, or in scriptural phrases, or in terms
of studied ambiguity. Every doctrine, however,
peculiar to Popery, was retained, and the obferv-
ation of all the rites, which the Protestants con-
dcmned as inventions of men introduced into
the wo:-llip of God, was enjoined. With regard
to two points only, some relaxation in the rigour
of opinion as well as some latitude in praStice were
admitted. Such ecclesiastics as had married, and
would not put away their wives, were allowed,
nevelhellefs, to perform all the functions of their

tlhcrced oficce; and tihofc provinces which liad'

been accuiflomeld to )artake of the cup, as well
.is of the brciad in the fcrarncnt of lie Lord's

S uIpI)r,

Supper, were still indulged in the privilege of re- B O O K
ceiving both. Even these were declared to be x
conceflions for the fake of peace, and granted only i54S'
for a season, in compliance with the weakness or
prejudices of their countrymen .

THIS system of doftrine, known afterwards by This,which

the name of the Interim, because it contained tv^'acelid
temporary regulations, which were to continue no he lays bet

fore the diet,

longer in force than until a free general council lway xs.
could be held, the Emperor presented to the diet,
with a pompous declaration of his sincere intention
to re-establish tranquillity and order in the church,
as well as of his hopes that their adopting these
regulations would contribute greatly to bring about
that desirable event. It was read in presence
of the diet, according to form. As soon as
it was finished, the archbishop of Mentz, pre-
sident of the elecRoral college, rose up hastily,
and, having thanked the Emperor for his un-
wearied and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the diet,
signified their approbation of the system of doc-
trine which had been read, together with their
resolution of conforming to it in every particular.
The whole assembly was amazed at a declaration
so unprecedented and unconstitutional, as well as
at the Eleaor's presumption in pretending to de-
liver the fenfc of the diet, upon a point which
had not hitherto been the fubjecat of consultation

' . Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 6o. Sleid. 453. 457. Struv.
Corp. o1;.. Goldaft. Conllit. Impcr, i. 518.

or

B o 0 K or debate. But not one member had the courage

IX. --.----' to contradi6c what the Elector had said; some

,ndlx4;ts being overawed by fear, others remaining silent
Ibhei appro- through complaisance. The Emperor held the
bation of it.

archbishop's declaration to be a full conffitutional
ratification of the Interim, and prepared to en-
force the observance of it, as a decree of the
Empire Y.

New and DURING this diet, the wife and children of the
fruitless so-
lict.,lions Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of
Landgrave's Saxony, endeavoured to interest the members in
liberty. behalf of that unhappy Prince, who still lan-

guifhed in confinement. But Charles, who did
not chufe to be brought under the necessity of
rejecting any request that came, from such a re-
fpectable body, in order to prevent their repre-
fentations, laid before the diet an account of his
tranfations with the Landgrave, together with
the motives which had at first induced him to de-
tain that Prince in custody, and which rendered
it prudent, as he alleged, to keep him still under
restraint. It was no easy matter to give any
good reason for an action, incapable of being
justified. But he thought the most frivolous pre-
texts might be produced in an assembly the mem-
bers of which were willing to be deceived, and afraid
of nothing so much as of discovering that they saw
his conduct in its true colours. His account of his
own conduct was accordingly admitted to be fully

y Sleid. 46o. F. Paul, 273. Pallav. 63.

satis-
4

fatisfa&ory, and after some feeble intreaties that he f o o t
would extend his clemency to his unfortunate pri- _
soner, the Landgrave's concerns were no more 548.
mentioned z.

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable im-
pression which this inflexible rigour might make,
Charles, as a proof that his gratitude was no less
permanent and unchangeable than his resentment,
invested Maurice in the ele&oral dignity, with all
the legal formalities. The ceremony was per-
formed, with extraordinary pomp, in an open court,
so near the apartment in which the degraded Elec-
torwas kept a prisoner, that he could view it from
his windows. Even this insult did not ruffle his
usual tranquillity; and turning his eyes that way,
he beheld a prosperous rival receiving those en-
signs of dignity of which he had beer' stripped,
without uttering one sentiment unbecoming the
fortitude that he had preserved amidst all his
calamities '.

IMMEDIATELY after the difTolution of the diet, TheTnterim

equally dii-
the Emperor ordered the Interim to be published approved of

by Protest.

in the German as well as Latin language. It ant and
met with the usual reception of conciliating 'l"i''
schemes, when propoled to men heated with dif-
putatiunj both parties declaimed against it with

Sleid. ++1.
Thuan. llilt. lib. v. 176. Struv. Corp. 105 .. nvcf-

11tura iVlauritii, a Mammerano Luccmnburgo dclcripta, ap.
;irdiumn, ii. 508 .

5 equal

.

B oX K equal violence. The Protestants condemned i1

V-b-- as a system containing the grossest errors of
i548» Popery, disguised with so little art,' that it could

impose only on the most ignoranti or on those
who, by wilfully flutting their eyes, favoured the
deception. The Papists inveighed against it, as
a work in which some doctrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly conceal-
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated
rather to deceive the unwary, than to instruct the
ignorant, or to reclaim such as were enemies to
the truth. While the Lutheran divines fiercely
attacked it, on one hand, the general of the Do.
minicans with no less vehemence impugned it on
the other. But at Rome, as soon as the con-
tents of the Interim came to be known, the in-
dignation of the courtiers and ecclesiastics rose
to the greatest height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the fa-
cerdotal function, in presuming, with the con-
currence of an assembly of laymen, to define
articles of faith, and to regulate modes of wor-
ship. They compared this rash deed to that of
Uzziah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had
touched the ark of God; or to the bold attempts
of those Emperors, who had rendered their me-
mory detestable, by endeavouring to model the
Christian church according to their pleasure.
They even affeced to find out a refeiblance
between the Emperor's conduct and that of
Henry VIII. and exp-clTed their fear of his imi-
tating the example of that apostate, by usurping

the

the title as well as jurifdi&ion belonging to the B 0 o K
head of the church. All, therefore, contended -x.
with one voice, that as the foundations of eccle- 1548.
fiaftical authority were now shaken, and the whole
fabric ready to be overturned by a new enemy,
some powerful method of defence muff be provid-
ed, and a vigorous resistance muff be made, in the
beginning, before he grew too formidable to be op-
posed.

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved by Thefenti-

n1menit ofthe

longer experience in great tranfations, as well as Pope with
by a more extensive observation of human affairs, regard to t.
viewed the matter with more acute discernment,
and derived comfort from the very circumflance
which filled them with apprehension. He was
aflonilhed that a Prince of such superior saga-
city as the Emperor, should be so intoxicated
with a single vi&tory, as to imagine that he might
give law to mankind, and decide even in those
matters, with regard to which they are most im-
patient of dominion. He saw that, by joining
any one of the contending parties in Germany,
Charles might have had it in his power to have
oppressed the other, but that the presumption of
fuccels had now inspired him with the vain
thought of his being able to domineer over both.
le foretold that a system which all attacked, and
none defended, could not be of long duration;
and that, for this reason, there was no need of
his interporing in order to haften its fall; for as
VOL. III. G g soon

B o o K soon as the powerful hand which now upheld it was

1x.

v__ withdrawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be

3548. forgotten for everb.

The Empe- THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered
compliane to his resolution of carrying it into full execution,
Inhrim. But though the Ele&or Palatine, the EleEtor of

Brandenburg, and Maurice, influenced by the
fame* considerations as formerly, seemed ready to
yield implicit obedience to whatever he should
enjoin, he met not every where with a like ob.
fequious fubmiflion. John Marquis of Bran.
denburg Anfpach, although he had taken part
with great zeal in the war against the confederates
of Smalkalde, refused to renounce doctrines which
he held to be sacred; and reminding the Empe.
ror of the repeated promises which he had given
his Protestant allies, of allowing them the free
exercise of their religion, he claimed, in confe-
quence of these, to be exempted from receiving
the Interim. Some other Princes, also, ven.
tured to mention the fame scruples, and to plead
the fame indulgence. But on this, as on other
trying occasions, the firmness of the Fledor o
Saxony was most dilRinguifhed, and merited th
highest praile. Charles, well knowing the authio
rity of his example with all the ProteRfant parit
l.btoured, wich the urtnoft earnelrnefs, to gain
his approbation of the Interim, and by employ
in,, fo-ulertirlles promii s of fitting him at liberty

SleiJ. i68. I. P. aul, 271. 277. Pallav. ii. 64.

fumit

sometimes threats of treating him with greater 3 0 0° K

Ix.

harlhnefs, attempted alternately to work upon his
hopes and his fears. But he was alike regardless s548.
of both. After having declared his fixed belief in
the doctrines of the Reformation, " I cannot now,
said he, in my old age, abandon the principles,
for which I early contended; nor, in order to
procure fieedom during a few declining years,
will I betray that good cause, on account of
which I have suffered so much, and am fill
willing to susser. Better for me to enjoy, in this
solitude, the efleem of virtuous men, together
with the approbation of my own conscience, than
to return into the world, with the imputation
and guilt of apoftacy, to disgrace and embitter
the remainder of my days." By this magnani-
mous resolution, he set his countrymen a pattern
ofconduct, so very different from that which the
Emperor wiiled him to have exhibited to them,
that it drew upon him fi-efl marks of his difplea-
sure. The rigour of his confinement.was in-
crealed; the number of his servants abridged; the
Lutheran clergymen, who had hitherto been per-
mitted to attend him, were difiniffed; and even
theboolks of devotion, which had been his chief
confulation during a tedious imprisonment, were
taken from him c. The Landgrave of Hletffe,
ill colmpanion in misfortune, did not maintain
t!l f;iimc conilancy. l-is patience and fortitude
g'':c both so much exhausted by the length of his

c Slcid. 46z,
G g 2 confine-

B °0 K confinement, that, willing to purchase freedom at

Ix.
,--- ,--' any price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering not

45S4 oonly to approve of the Interim, but to yield an

unreserved fubmiflion to his will in every other
particular. But Charles, who knew that what.
ever course the Landgrave might hold, neither
his example nor authority would prevail on his
children or subjects to receive the Interim, paid
no regard to his offers. He was kept confined
as ftrilty as ever; and while he suffered the cruel
mortification of having his condut set in contraRl
to that of the Eletor, he derived not the smallest
benefit from the mean siep which exposed him to
much deserved censure d,

The free BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles
Cities drug-
le againit met with the most violent opposition to the In-
Teceiving the
It'cerim. terin. These small commonwealths, the citizens

of which were accustomed to liberty and independ-
ence, had embraced the dotrines of the Reform.
ation when they were firfl published, with remark-
able eagerness; the bold spirit of innovation being
peculiarly suited to the genius of free government.
Among them, the Protestant teachers had made
the greatest number of proselytes. The most emi-
nent divines of the party were fettled in them as
paflors. By having the diretion of the schools
and other seminaries of learning, they had trained
u11p disciples, who were as well inft-rucied in the
articles of their faith, as they were zealous to de-
fend them. Such persons were not to be guided

d S;cid. 46z.

by example, or swayed by authority; but having B °X° K
been taught to employ their own underitanding in -
examining and deciding with refpe&t to the points ,548.
in controverly, they thought that they were both
qualified and entitled to judge for themselves. As
soon as the contents of the Interim were known,
they, with one voice, joined in refuting to admit it.
Augsburg, Ulm, Strafburg, Constance, Bremen,
Magdeburg, together with many other towns of
less note, prelented remonstrances to the Emperor,
setting forth the irregular and unconstitutional man-
ner in which the Interim had been enafted, and
beseeching him not to offer such violence to their
confcienccs, as to require their assent to a form of
doftrine and worship, which appeared to them re-
pugnant to the express precepts of the divine law.
But Charles having prevailed on so many Princes
of the Empire to approve of his new model, was
not much moved by the representations of those
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved, if they could have been formed into
one body, lay so remote from each other, that it
was easy to oppress them separately, before it was
pofible for them to unite.

IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor Compelled
law it to be requisite that his measures should be tolubyn,"
vigorous, and executed with such rapidity as to
allow no time for concerting any common plan
Of opposition. Having laid down this maxim
1s tlh rule of his proceedings, his first attempt

G g 3 was

B o o K was upon the city of Augsburg, which, though
I'--_-' overawed by the presence of the Spanish troops,
'548. he knew to be as much dissatisfied with the In.

terim as any in the Empire. He ordered one body
of there troops to seize the gates; he posted the
reit in different quarters of the city; and assem.
Aug. 3. bling all the burgesses in the town-hall, he, by his

sole absolute authority, published a decree abo-
liffling their present form of government, dif-
solving all their corporations and fraternities, and
nominating a small number of persons, in whom
he veited for the future all the powers of govern-
ment. Each of the persons, thus chosen, took an
oath to observe the Interim. An ac of powerfo
unprecedented as well as arbitrary, which ex-
cluded the body of the inhabitants from any share
in the government of their own community, and
subjected them to men who had no other merit
than their servile devotion to the Emperor's will,
gave general disgust; but as they durst not ven-
ture upon refifiance, they were obliged to sub-
mit in silence'. From Augsburg, in which he
left a garrison, he procceded to Ulm, and new-
modelling its government with the fame violent
hand, he fidized such of their pallors as refused to
fiibfci-ibe the Interim, committed them to prison,
and at his departure carried them along withhim
in chains . By this lcveity lie not only secured
the reception of the Interim 'in two of the mo0t

" Sleild, . b46. 4z.

t Ibid. ,t7:'11

powerful cities, but gave warning to the reft B o OK
what such as continued refraltory had to expect. -
The effect of the example was as great as he x54Ss
could have wished; and many towns, in order to
save themselves from the like treatment, found
it necessary to comply with what he enjoined.
This obedience, extorted by the rigour of autho-
rity, produced no change in the sentiments of the
Germans, and extended no farther than to make
them conform so far to what he required, as was
barely sufficient to screen them from punishment.
The Protestant preachers accompanied those reli-
gious rites, the observation of which the Interim
prescribed, with such an explication of their ten-
dency, as served rather to confirm than to re-
move the scruples of their hearers with regard to
them. The people, many of whom had grown
up to mature years since the establishment of
the reformed religion, and had never known any
other form of public worship, beheld the pomp-
ous pageantry of the popish service with cohtempt
or horror; and in molt places the Romish eccle-
fia(ics who returned to take possession of their.
churches, could hardly be proteced from insult,
or their ministrations from interruption. Thus,
rnotwithftanding the apparent compliance of so
many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed to
freedom, submitted with reluctance to the power
lhich now oppressed them. Their underfland-
ing as well as inclination revolted against the doc-
trilcs and ceremonies imposed on them; and

I though,

B °x° though, for the present, they concealed their disgust
_---^- and resentment, it was evident that these passions
B548- could not always be kept under restraint, but would

break out at lafl in effTcs proportional to their
violence g.

The P.pe CHARLES, however, highly pleased with hav-
dismisses n bt e of the Germans to
the Council ing bent the stubborn fpilit of the Germans to
afrtmbled at sUCh general submission, departed for the Low-
Bologna.. t

Countries, fully determined to compel the cities,
which still tsood out, to receive the Interim. He
carried his two prisoners, the Elecor of Saxony
and Landgrave of FIeffe, along with him, either
because he durst not leave them behind him in
Germany, or because he wished to give his coun-
trymen the Flemings this illustrious proof of the
success of his arms, and the extent of his power.
ept. 17. Before Charles arrived at Brussels, he was in-

formed that the Pope's legates at Bologna had
difinifed the council by an indefinite prorogation,
and that the prelates affenmbled there had re-
turned to their refpetive countries. Necessity had
driven the Pope into this measure. By the secef-
sion of those who had voted against the tranfla-
tion, togethcr with the departure of others, who
grew weary of continuing in a place where they
were not lfulered to proceed to business, so few
and such inconfidcrable members remained, that
the pompous appellation of a General Council
could not, with decency, be beflowed any longer

g Mcm. dc Ribier, ii. 218. Sleid. 491.

upon

upon them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve B o O K
an assembly which was becone the objeEt of con-
tempt, and exhibited to all Chriflendom a moi t o s+q-
glaring proof of the impotence of the Romish
See. But unavoidable as the measure was, it lay
open to be unfavourably interpreted, and had the
appearance of withdrawing the remedy, at the
very time when th!ose for whose recovery it was
provided, were prevailed on to acknowledge its
virtue, and to make trial of its efficacv. Charles
did not fail to put this conftrution on the con-
duct of the Pope; and by an artful comparison of
his own efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's
scandalous inattention to a point so elfential, he en-
deavoured to render the Pontiff odious to all zeal-
ous Catholics. At the fame time, he commanded
the prelates of his fation to remain at Trent, that
the Council might still appear to have a being, and
might be ready, whenever it was thought expe-
dient to resume its deliberations for the good of
the church h.

THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low- Thr Em.e-
Countries, betide gratifying his favourite passion rr recives.
of travelling from one part of his dominions to Philip in

the Low-

another, was to receive Philip his only son, who Countries.
was now in the twenty-firft year of his age, and
whom he had called thither, not only that he
!ight be recognized by the Stares of the Ne-

h Pallay. p. X
. 72,

thcrlands

B °x K therlands as heir-apparent, but in order to fa.

A1_*.-
- cilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the obje&
154S- of which, and the reception it met with, shall be

hereafter explained. Philip, having left the go-
vernment of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
eldest son, to whom the Emperor had given the
Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, embarked
for Italy, attended by a numerous retinue of
Spanish nobles '. The squadron which escorted
him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithstanding his advanced age, infiled on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the son, which he had often discharged to-
Nov. 5. wards the father. He landed safely at Genoa;

5. from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
April x. through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court

in Brussels. The States of Brabant, in the first
place, and those of the other provinces in their
order, acknowledged his right of fuccefflon in
common form, and he took the customary oath
to preserve all their privileges inviolate k. In all
the towns of the Low-countries through which
Philip pafird, he was received with extraordinary
pomp. Nothing that could either express the re-
fpe& of the people, or contribute to his amusement,
was negleted; pageants, tournaments, and pub-
lic spectacles of every kind, were exhibited with
that expensive magnificence which commercial

i Ochoa, Carolea, 36z.
'. flara;i Annul. Brabant. 652.

nations

nations are fond of displaying, when, on any occa- B 0°° K
sion, they depart from their usual maxims of fru-
gality. But amidst these scenes of festivity and '549.
pleasure, Philip's natural severity of temper was
discernible. Youth itself could not render him
agreeable, nor his being a candidate for power
form him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty
reserve in his behaviour, and discovered such
manifef partiality towards his Spanish attendants,
together with such an avowed preference to the
manners of their country, as highly disgusted the
Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy, which
afterwards occasioned a revolution fatal to him in
that part of his dominions'.

CHRL.ES was long detained in the Nether-
lands by a violent attack of the gout, which re-
turned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken, to a great
degree, the vigour of his constitution. He ne-
vrrthelefs did not flacken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
buliL, after a long struggle, found it necessary to
yilil obedience; those of Conflance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were com-
pcllctl not only to conform to the Interim, but
to renounce their privileges as a frce city, to do
hornlce to Ferdinand as Archduke of Austria,

M 'c;n. (le liljier, ii. 29. L'Evcfque Mem. de Card.

ravclle, i~. zl.and,

and,

B o 0 K therlands as heir-apparent, but in order to fa.

lx.
'- --' cilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the obje&t

154S. of which, and the reception it met with, shall be

hereafter explained. Philip, having left the go-
vernment of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
eldest son, to whom the Emperor had given the
Princess Mary his daughter in marriage, embarked
for Italy, attended by a numerous retinue of
Spanish nobles'. The squadron which escorted
him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithstanding his advanced age, insisted on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the son, which he had often discharged to-
Nov. 5. wards the father. He landed safely at Genoa;

7549. from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
April i. through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court

in Brussels. The States of Brabant, in the first
place, and those of the other provinces in their
order, acknowledged his right of fuccefion in
common form, and he took the customary oath
to preserve all their privileges inviolatek. In all
the towns of the Low-countries through which
Philip pafled, he was received with extraordinary
pomp. Nothing that could either express the re-
fpeA of the people, or contribute to his amusement,
was neglected; pageants, tournaments, and pub-
lic fpeclacles of every kind, were exhibited with
that expensive magnificence which commercial

Ochoa, Carolea, 362.
k larai Annal. Brabant. 652.

nations

nations are fond of displaying, when, on any occa- B o Ix6
sion, they depart from their usual maxims of fru- -
gality. But amidst these scenes of festivity and '549
pleasure, Philip's natural severity of temper was
discernible. Youth itself could not render him
agreeable, nor his being a candidate for power
form him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty
reserve in his behaviour, and discovered such
manifelt partiality towards his Spanish attendants,
together with such an avowed preference to the
manners of their country, as highly disgusted the
Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy, which
afterwards occasioned a revolution fatal to him in
that part of his dominions '.

CHARLES was long detained in the Nether-
lands by a violent attack of the gout, which re-
turned upon him so frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken, to a great
degree, the vigour of his conffitution. He ne-
vrhllelefs did not flacken his endeavours to
enf)rce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
butr, after a long ffruggle, found it necessary to
yirll obedience; those of Conflance, who had
taken arms in their own defence, were com-
pldlcl not only to conform to the Interim, but
to renounce their privileges as a free city, to do
homage to Ferdinand as Archduke of Austria,

Mein. (de ilier, ii. 29. L'Evcfctue Mem. dc Card.

ralvdcllle, ;i. z..nd,

and,

B 0o o and, as his vassals, to admit an Austrian governor

- ,- _ and garrison . Magdeburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
'549' and Lubeck, were the only Imperial cities of note

that fiill continued refratory.

m Sleid. 474. 491.
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
