pI~~~

THE
HISTORY

O F TI E

REIGN
R E I G N

0 F T H E
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBUPuH , and HISTO-

RIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for ScOTI.AND.

A NEW EDITION.

VOL. IV.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADILL, in the

Strand; and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

M DCCLXXIV.

# BOOK X.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V6

BOOK X.
W I-HILE Charles laboured, with such BooK X,

unwearied induifry, to overcome the ---J
obftinacyofthe Protellants, the elfedts Tle Popte'

of his fteadinels in the execution of his plan ,ai,,,nth,
were rendered less considerable by his rupr..re El'"lpr"'
with the lope, which daily increased T'le
firm rclolution which the Emperor Iecmed to
have taken againll rcltoring Placentia, together
with hi5s lepeateu encroachments on the cccle-
fiaftical jurlifdi6tion, not only by the regulations
contained in the Interim, but by his attempt
to re-affemblc a council at Trent, exafpecr.itcl

VOL. IV. U1 Paul

LOOK X. Paul to the utmost, who, with the weakness in.

cident to old age, grew more attached to his
1 49.

family, and more jealous of his authority, as he
advanced in years. Puflbed on by thele pal-
sions, he made new efforts to draw the French
King into an alliance against the Emperor :
But finding that Monarch, notwithfanding his
hereditary enmity to Charles, and dread of his
growing power, as unwilling as fornmrly to
involve himntilf in immediate hostilities, he was
obliged to contract his views, and to think of
preventing future encroachments, since it was
not in his power to inflict vengeance on account
of thole which were past. For this purpose,
he determined to recall his grant of Parma and
Placentia, and after declaring them to be re-
.annexed to the I-oly See, to indemnify his
gra.nd(lon Caavio by a new eftablifllment in the
ecclesiastical state. By this expedient, he hoped
to gTill two points of no fmiall consequence.
1 lr, firlt of all, rendered his poffefion of Par-
ma mnorc ticcure ; as the Emperor would be cau-
i;.'u.s of invading the patrimony of the church,
thoug'. he might lCize without scruple a town be-
longing to tle house ofF'arnefe. In thenext place,
he would acquire a better chance of recovering
I'lacentia, as his solicitations to that efftc
nitght decently be urged with greater importu-
nity, and would infallibly be attended with

Mcm. de Ribier. ii. 230.

more

more weight, when he was confidered not BOOK X.
as pleading the cause of his own family, but 549,
as an advocate for the interest of the church.
But while Paul was priding himself in this de-
vice, as a happy refinement in policy, Cftavio,
an ambitious and high-fpirited young man, who
could not bear with patience to be spoilcd of
one half of his territories by the rapacioulcefs
of his father-in-law, and to be deprived of the
other by the artifices of his grandfather, took
measures in order to prevent the execution of
a plan fatal to his :ntereft. He set out secretly
from Rome, and having first endeavoured to
furprize Parma, which attempt was frustrated
by the fidelity of the governor to whom the
Pope had entrusted the defence of the town, he
made overtures to the Emperor, of renouncing
all connexion with the Pope, and of depending
entirely on him for his future fortune. This
unexpeEted defection of one of the Pope's ovn
family to an enemy whom he hated, irritated,
almolt to madnels, a mind peevilh with oli
age; and there was no degree of fcIvceri;v to
which Paul might not have prc:e(lccl ;I;gallt a
grandson whom he repruacnled as an tunnatural
apostate. But happily ftr Oat;vio, death pre-
vented his carrying into execution the harfhi
relolutions which he had taken with rcf)cct to
him, and put an end to his pontificate in the

13 2 ixtl.criiih

BOOK X. sixteenth year of his adminifiration, and the

£,n. tcighty-fecond of his age *.

As

· Among many inflances of the credulity or weakners

of hiltori,,ns in attributing the death of illulrrious pcrfon-
ages to extraordinary causes, this is one. Almoll all the
hiilorians of the sixteenth century affirm, that the death of
Paul 1. was occalioned by the violent passions which the
behaviour of his grandson excited; that being informed,
w hii he was refreshing himself in one of his gardens near
Rome, of Oftavio's attempt on Parma, as well as of his
negociations with the Emperor by means of Gonzaga, he
fainted away, continued some hours in a swoon, then be-
came fcverih, and died within three days. This is the
acccunt given of it by Thuanus, lib. vi. 21 . Adriani
Iflor. di fuoi tempi, lib. vii. 480. and by 'ather Paul, 2zc.
Even cardinal Pallavicini, better informed than any writer
with regard to the events which happened in the papal
court, and when not warped by prejudice or fyflem, more
mccurate in relating them, agrees with their narrative in its
chiefcircumflances. Pallav. b. ii. 74. Paruta, who wrote his
Lillory by command of the senate of Venice, relates it in
the fame manner. Hliftorici Venez. vol. iv. 212. But
there skas no occasion to search for any extraordinary cause
to account for the death of an old man of eighty-two.
There remains an authentick account of this event, in
.hic :h we find none of those marvellous circumlliaces of
w hich ti, nilt(,;:;: are so fond. The cardinal of Ferrara,
who waL cntrullcd with the aflairs of France at the court
(,f Iomic, nd l I. )'Urf6, I enry's ambassador in ordinary
thlle, wiotc an account to that Monarch of the affair of
Parlma, and of the Pope's death. By these it appears, that
(;avino's attempt to furprize Parma, was made on the
twnentli th of Oc'tlC ; that next day in the cvening, and not
while lie was airing hinifelf in the gardens of Monte Ca-
Vallo, the P'ope rec;ivcd intclliecncic of what he had done;

that

As this event had been long expeted, there BooK X.

was an extraordinary concourle of Cardinals at
Rome; and the various competitors having
had time to form their parties, and to concert
their measures, their ambition and intrigues pro-
trated the conclave to a great length. The
Imperial and French factions strove, with emu-

that he was seizcd with such a transport of paflion, and
cried so bitterly, that his voice was heard in several apart-
ments of the palace; that next day, howvevcr, he was li \scl!
as to give an audience to the cardinal of l:errara, and to go
through business of different kinds; that Ol .v:o wrote a
letter to the Pope, not to cardinal Farnese his brother, in-
timating his resolution of throwing himself into the arms
of the Emperor; that the Pope received this on the tvwenty-
first without any new symptoms of remotion, and returned
an answer to it; that on the twenty-fecond of (O ,Uer, the
day on which the cardinal of Ferrara's letter i: dated, the
Pope was in his usual tate of health. Mem. de Ribier. ii.
247. cy a letter of i\,. D'Urt;, Nov. 5. it appears that
the Pope was in such good heaith, that c'iu the third of that
month he had celebrated the anniversary u; his coro.nation
with the usual foleniitics. Ibidem, z; . By anoiier let-
ter from tle fanme prlfon, we learn, that on the si: tli of
November a catarrh or defluxion fell down on the Pope's
lungs, with such dangerous fymnptoms, thlt hii life was inl-
mediately delicailrcd of; Ibid. 2 2. Ant11 by a third kltter,
we are informed, that he died November the tcntih. In
none of these letters i his death iniput.'d to any extraor-
dinary cause. It appears, that more than twenty days
claplid between O(tavio's attempt on 'arima, and the death
of his grandlather, and that the dii.'life was the natural
cftect of old age, not one of those occaliuncd by violence
of paflion.

B 3 lation,

BooK X. lation, to promote one of their own number,

, 5o. and had, by turns, the prospect of success. But

as Paul during a long Pontificate had raised
many to the purple, and those chiefly persons
of eminent abilities, as well as zealously devoted
to his family, Cardinal Farnese had the com-
mand of a powerful and united squadron, by

Feb. 7th. whose address and firmness he exalted to the
The elec-
tion of papal throne the Cardinal di Monte, whom
jUlius1 Paul had employed as his principal legate in

the council of Trent, and trusted with his molt
secret intentions. He assumed the name of
Julius III. and, in order to expreis his gratitude
towards his benefactor, the first act of his ad-
minifiration was to put Oscavio Farnefc in pol-
session of Parma. When he was told of the
injury which he did to the Holy See by aliena-
ting a territory of such value, he briskly replied,
"( That he would rather be a poor Pope, with
the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich one,
with the infamy of having forgotten the obli-
gations conferred upon him, and the promises
which he had macde'." But all the lutire of this
candour or gcnerofity lie quickly fflaced by an

His crac. aItion nmof fliockingly indeccnt. According
d on'"d"'. to an ancient and eitahlifhed praclice, every

Pope upon his ..lclilon claims the privilege of
bcltowing, on whom he pleases, the Cardinal's

b Mecn. 4c Ribier.

tiat,

hat, which falls to be disposed of by his being BooK X.
invelted with the triple crown. Julius, to the 5 s)
astonishment of the sacred college, conferred
this mark of diftindtion, together with ample
ecclesiastical revenues, and the right of bear-
ing his name and arms, upon one Innocent, a
youth of sixteen, born of oblcure parents, and
known by the name of the Ape, from his having
been trusted with the care of an animal of that
l)ecics, in the Cardinal di Montc's family.
Such a proflitution of the highell dignity in the
lhulrch would have given offence, even in thole
!lark periods, when the credulous fuperllition
of the people emboldened ecclefiafticks to ven-
ture on the moll flagrant violations of (i'corunli.
But in an enlightened age, when, by the pro-
(rels of knowledge and phlil)fophy, the ',li-
gations of duty and decency were bettter under-
ltood, when a blind veneration f;r tlie Iontiiic;!
c-iara-cr was every where abated, and oIne li.lf
of Chriflendom in open rebtcllion as ainll the
Papal See, this action was viewc'l \itl hrror-.
Romen was immediately filled willi liljels and
)afciluinades, which imputed the ')(,.'s extra-
v;alant reTard for such an uInworthy ol!it.& to
thle moll criminal paitions. 1 lie I'rotcllants
exclaimed ;, ainlt the abflrdilty of supposing
that the in!.,llible spirit of divine truth could
dwell in a breast so impure, and called more

B 4 loudly

BooK X. loudly than ever, and with greater appearance

S. of justice, for the immediate and thorough re-

formation of a church, the Head of which was
a disgrace to the Christian name'. The reft
of the Pope's conduct was of a piece with this
first specimen of his dispositions. Having now
reached the summit of ecclesiastical ambition,
he seemed eager to indemnify himself, by an
unrestrained indulgence of his desires, for the
felf-denial or dissimulation which he had thought
it prudent to pradife while in a subordinate
fRation, He became careless, to so great a de-
gree, of all serious business, that he could seldom
be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of
extreme necessity; and giving up himself to
amusements and dissipation of every kind, he
imitated the luxurious elegance of Leo, rather
than the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of
which it was necessary to display, in contending
with a set which derived great credit from the
rigid and austere manners of its teachers d

Htcviews THE Pope, however ready to fulfil his en-
and proceed-
inge with gagements to the family of Farnese, discovered
th general no inclination to observe the oath, which each
ouncil. cardinal had taken when he entered the con-

clave, that if the choice Ihould fall on him, he

c Sleid. 492. F. Paul. 281. Pallay. ii, 76. Thuan.
lib. vi. z 25 d F. Paul, ibid.

would

would immediately call the council to re-affume BooK X.
its deliberations. Julius knew, by experience, ~ I
how difficult it was to confine such a body of
men within the narrow limits which it was the
interest of the church of Rome to prescribe;
and how easily the zeal of some members, the
rashness of others, or the suggestions of the
Princes on whom they depended, might preci-
pitate a popular and ungovernable assembly into
forbidden inquiries, as well as dangerous deci-
sions. He wished, for thele reasons, to have
eluded the obligation of his oath, and gave an
ambiguous answer to the first proposals which
were made. to him by the Emperor, with regard
to that matter. But Charles, either from his
natural obfiinacy in adhering to the measures
which he had once adopted, or from the mere
pride of accomplishing what was held to be al-
most impossible, persisted obstinately in his refo-
lution of forcing the Protestants to return into
the bosom of the church. Having persuaded
himself, that the authoritative decisions of the
council might be employed with efficacy in com-
bating their prejudices, he, in consequence of
that persuasion, continued to Iblicit carneftly
that a new bull of convocation might be issued;
and the Pope could not, with decency, rejet
that request. When Julius found that he could
not prevent the calling of a council, he endea-

voured

BooK X. voured to take all the merit of having procured
^-v- the meeting of an assembly, which was the obje&

of such general desire and expectation. A con-
gregation of Cardinals, to whom he referred the
consideration of what was necelfary for restoring
peace to the church, recommended, by his di-
rection, the speedy convocation of a council, as
the most effectual expedient for that purpose;
and as the new herefies raged with the greatest
violence in Germany, they proposed Trent as
the place of its meeting, that, by a near infpedion
of the evil, the remedy might be applied with
greater discernment and certainty of success.
The Pope warmly approved of this advice, which
he himself had dictated, and sent nuncios to the
Imperial and French courts, in order to make
known his intentions .

A dietat ABOUT this time, the Emperor had summoned
Augfbarg to
enforce the a new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to en-
Interim. force the observation of the Interim, and to pro-

cure a more authentick act of the Empire, ac-
knowledging the jurisdiction of the council, as
well as an explicit promise of conforming to its
June 5. .decrees. He appeared there in person, together

with his son the Prince of Spain. Few of the
Electors were present, but all sent deputies in
their name. Charles, notwithstanding the def-

F.Paul, 281. Pallav.ii.77.

potick

potick authority with which he had given law in BOOK X.
the Empire during two years, knew that the zHO0
spirit of independence among the Germans was
not entirely subdued, and for that reason took
care to over-awe the diet by a considerable body
of Spanish troops which escorted him thither.
The first point, submitted to the consideration
of the diet, was the neceflity of holding a coun-
cil. All the Popish members agreed, without
difficulty, that the meeting of that assembly
ihould be renewed at Trent, and promiied an
implicit acquiescence in its decrees. The Pro-
teftants, intimidated and disunited, mutl have
followed their example, and the resolution of
the diet would have proved unanimous, if Mau-
rice of Saxony had not begun at this time to dif.
close new intentions, and to at a part very diffe-
rent from that which he had so long assumed.

BY an artful dissimulation of his own senti- Maurcebe-

ments, by address in paying court to the Em- gi " form
peror; and by the teeming zeal with which he 'agini' the
forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
had railed himself to the Eletoral dignity; and
having added the dominions of the elder branch
of the Saxon family to his own, he was become
the most powerful prince in Germany. But
his long and intimate union with the Emperor,
had afforded him many opportunities of obferv-
ing narrowly the dangerous tendency of his

schemes.

BOOK X. schemes. He saw the yoke that was preparing

^s° for his country; and from the rapid as well as

formidable progress of the Imperial power, was
convinced that but a few steps more remained
to be taken, in order to render Charles as abfo-
lute a Monarch in Germany as he had become
in Spain. The more eminent the condition was
to which he himself had been exalted, the more
solicitous did he naturally become to maintain
all its rights and privileges, and the more did
he dread the thoughts of descending from the
rank of a Prince almost independent, to that of
a vassal subjea to the will of a master. At the
fame time, he perceived that Charles was bent
on exacting a rigid conformity to the do&rines
and rites of the Romish church, instead of allow-
ing liberty of conscience, the promise of which
had allured several Protestant Princes to assist
him in the war against the confederates of Smal-
kalde. As he himself, notwithfanding all the
compliances which he had made from motives
of interest, or an excess of confidence in the
Emperor, was sincerely attached to the Lutheran
tenets, he determined not to be a tame fpedtator
of the overthrow of a system which he believed
to be founded in truth.

The poiti. THIS resolution, flowing from the love of
cal motives
which in. liberty, or zeal for religion, was itrengthened
uenced by political and intereRted considerations. Ip

2 that

fhat elevated station, in which Maurice was now BOOK X.
placed, new and more extensive profpets opened 5i 0
to his view. His rank and power entitled him
to bethe head of the Protestants in the Empire.
His predecessor, the degraded Eletor, with in-
ferior abilities, and territories less considerable,
had acquired such an ascendant over the coun-
cils of the party; and Maurice neither wanted
discernment to fee the advantage of this pre-
eminence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it.
But he found himself in a situation which ren-
dered the attempt no less difficult, than the ob-
jeat of it was important. On the one hand, the
connexion which he had formed with the Em-
peror was so intimate, that he could scarcely
hope to take any ftep.which tended to dissolve
it, without alarming his jealousy, and drawing
on himfelfthe whole weight of that power, which
had crushed the greatest confederacy ever formed
in Germany. On the other hand, the calami-
ties which he had brought on the Protestant
party were so recent, as well as great, that it
seemed almost impossible to regain their confi-
dence, or to rally and re-animate a body of men,
after himself had been the chief instrument in
breaking their union and vigour. These con-
fiderations were sufficient to have discouraged
any person of a spirit less adventtrous than
Mauricels. But to him the grandeur and vastness
of the enterprize were allurements and he boldly

rtlblved

Boot X. resolved on measures, the idea of which a geniui
A"_ of an inferior order could not have conceived,

1550.

or would have trembled at the thoughts of the
danger that attended the execution of them.

The paffons His passions concurred with his interest in
oeradted confirming this resolution; and the resentment
witthefe. excited by an injury, which he sensibly felt,

added new force to the motives for opposing the
Emperor, which found policy suggested. Mau-
rice, by his authority, had prevailedon the Land-
grave of Hesse to put his person in the Empe-
ror's power, and had obtained a promise from
the Imperial ministers that he should not be
detained a prisoner. This had been violated in
the manner already related. The unhappy Land-
grave exclaimed as loudly against his fon-in-law
as against Charles. The Princes of Hesse re-
quired Maurice incessantly to fulfil his engage-
ments to their father, who had loft his liberty
by trusting to him; and all Germany suspected
him of having betrayed, to an implacable enemy,
the friend whom he was most bound to prote&.
Roused by these solicitations or reproaches, as
well as prompted by duty and affetion to hig
father-in-law, Maurice had employed not only
entreaties but remonstrances in order to procure
his release. All these Charles had disregarded;
and the shame of having been first deceived,
and then flighted, by a Prince whom he had

Srvcd

served with zeal as well as success, which merited BOOK X.
a very different return, made such a deep impref- "5`J
sion on Maurice, that he waited with impatience
for an opportunity of being revenged.

THE utmost caution as well as delicacy were Thecautioe

1nd addresz
requisite in taking every ftep towards this end ; with which

he carriea

as he had to guard, on the one hand, against on hii
giving a premature alarm to the Emperor; fchces
while, on the other, something considerable and
explicit was necessary to be done, in order to
regain the confidence of the Proteltant party.
Maurice had accordingly applied all his powers
of address and dissimulation to attain both these
points. As he knew Charles to be inflexible
with regard to the fubmilfion which he required
to the Interim, he did not hesitate one moment
whether he should eftablilh that form of doc-
trine and worship in his dominions: But being
sensible how odious it was to his fubjeAs, instead
of violently imposing it on them by the mere
terror of authority, as had been done in other
parts of Germany, he endeavoured to render
their obedience a voluntary deed of their own.
For this purpose, he had assembled the clergy H, enforce,
of his country at Leipfick, and had laid the !h'sl',;i,'
Interim before them, together with the reasons
which made it necessary to conform to it. He

had

BOOK X. had gained some of them by promises, otherS

550. he had wrought upon by threats, and all were

intimidated by the rigour with which obedience
to the Interim was extorted in the neighbouring
provinces. Even Melandthon, whose merit of
every kind entitled him to the first place among
the Protestant divines, being now deprived of
the manly counsels of Luther, which were wont
to inspire him with fortitude, and to preserve
him iteady amidit the storms and dangers that
threatened the church, was seduced into unwar-
rantable concessions, by the timidity of his tern
per, his fond desire of peace, and his excessive
complaisance towards persons of high rank. By
his arguments and authority, no less than by
Maurice's arts, the affcmbly was prevailed on to
declare, that, in points which were purely indif-
ferent, obedience was due to the commands of
a lawful superior. Founding upon this maxim,
no less uncontrovertible in theory, than danger-
ous when carried into praEtice, especially in reli-
gious matters, they proceeded to class, among
the number of things indifferent, several doc-
trines, which Luther had pointed out as gross
and pernicious errors in the Romish creed; and
placing in the fame rank many of those rites
which diftinguilhed the Reformed from the
Popish worship, they exhorted their people to

comply

comply with the Emperor's injuncions con. BOOK X.
cerning these particulars f. 5o.

BY this dextrous conduet, the introducion Makes pro.

feflions of
of the Interim excited none of those violent zealfor th

Protestant

convulsions in Saxony, which it occasioned in religion.
other provinces. But though the Saxons sub-
mitted, the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed
againit MelanAhon and his associates, as false
brethren, who were either so wicked as to apof-
tatize from the truth altogether; or so artful
as to betray it by subtle diftinaions; or so
feeble-fpirited as to give it up from pusillanimity
and criminal complaisance to a prince, capable
of sacrificing to his political interest that which
he himself regarded as most sacred. Maurice,
being conscious what a colour of probability
his past conduct gave to those accusations, as
well as afraid of losing entirely the confidence
of the Protestants, issued a declaration contain-
ing profeflions of his zealous attachment to the
Reformed religion, and of his resolution to guard
against all the errors or encroachments of the
Papal fee X.

I-lAVING gone so far in order to remove the Attheramo

time courts
fears and jealoulies of the Protestants, he found the Empc.

*leid. qSI, qsy. ror.

f Sleid. 481, 485. Jo. Laur. Moshemii Infli;utionum

Hill. Ecclefialticae, lib. iv. Helnmt. 1755. 4to. . 748. Jo.
And. Schmidii Hiltoria InteriiniRica, p. 70, &c. Helmlt.
1730. $ Slcid, j85.

VOL. IV. C it

Booc X. it necessary to efface the impreflion which fucb
1550. a declaration might make on the Emperor.

For that purpose, he not only renewed his pro-
sessions of an inviolable adherence to his al-
liance with him, but as the city of Magde-
burg fill persisted in reje&ing the Inteij) he
undertook to reduce it to obedience, and in-
ftantly set about levying troops to be employed
in that service. This damped all the hopes which
the Protestants begun to conceive of Maurice,
in consequence of his declaration, and left them
mhore than ever at a loss to guess at his real in-
tentions. Their former suspicion and distrust
of him revived, and the divines of Magdeburg
filled Germany with writings in which they
represented him as the most formidable enemy
of the Protestant religion, who treacherously
assumed an appearance of zeal for its interest,
that he might more effectually execute his
schemes for its destruction.

Protens THIS charge, supported by the evidence of
agirtI the
modeofpro. recent fans, as well as by his present dubious
teinSogniC conduit, gained such universal credit, that

Maurice was obliged to take a vigorous ftep in
his own vindication. As soon as the re-affem-
bling of the council at Trent was proposed in
the diet, his ambassadors protested that their
maifer would not acknowledge its authority,

unless

'unless all the points which had been already BOOK X.
decided there were reviewed, and confidered as "550.
entire; unless the Protestant divines had a full
hearing granted them, and were allowed a de-
cifive "oice in the council; and unless the Pope
rent iced his pretensions to preside in the
council, engaged to submit to its decrees, and
absolved the bishops from their oath of obe-
dience, that they might deliver their sentiments
with greater freedom. These demands, which
were higher than any that the Reformers had
ventured to make, even when the zeal of their
party was warmest, or their affairs most pro-
fperous, counterbalanced, in some degree, the
imprefifon which Maurice's preparations against
Magdeburg had made upon the minds of the
Protestants, and kept them in fufpence with
regard to his designs. At the fame time, he
had address enough to represent this part of his
conduct in such a light to the Emperor, that
it gave him no offence, and occasioned no inter.
ruption of the ftrift confidence which subsisted
between them. What the pretexts were which
he employed in order to give such a bold de-
claration an innocent appearance, the contem-
porary historians have not explained; that they
imposed upon Charles is certain, for he still
continued not only to prosecute his plan as well
concerning the Interim as the council, with the

C 2 fame

BOOK X. fame ardour, but to place the fame confidence in
, j5o. Maurice, with regard to the execution of both.

The ddetre. THE Pope's resolution concerning the council
foive to
make war not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
f Mjgd. business of the diet was to enforce the obfer-
burg. vation of the Interim. As the senate of Mag-

deburg, notwithitanding various endeavours
to frighten or to sooth them into compliance,
not only persevered obflinately in their oppofi-
tion to the Interim, but began to strengthen
the fortifications of their city, and to levy
troops in their own defence, Charles required
the diet to aflift him in quelling this audacious
rebellion againfl a decree of the Empire. Had
the members of the diet been left to aC agree-
ably to their own inclination, this demand
would have been rejeted without hesitation.
All the Germans who favoured, in any degree,
the new opinions in religion, and many who
were influenced by no other consideration than
jealousy of the Emperor's growing power, re-
garded this effort of the citizens of Magdeburg,
as a noble stand for the liberties of their country.
Even such as had not resolution to exert the
fame spirit, admired the gallantry of their enter-
prize, and wished it success. But the presence
of the Spanish troops, together with the dread
of the Emperor's displeasure, over-awed the

members

members of the diet to such a degree, that, BooK X.
without venturing to utter their own senti- ,5-o
ments, they tamely ratified, by their votes,
whatever the Emperor was pleated to prescribe.
The rigorous decrees, which Charles had issued
by his own authority against the Magdeburgers,
were confirmed; a resolution was taken to raise
troops in order to besiege the city in form;
and persons were named to fix the contingent in
men or money to be furnished by each state.
At the fame time, the diet petitioned that Appoint

Maurice

Maurice might be entrusted with the command general.
of that army, to which Charles gave his con-
sent with great alacrity, and with high enco-
miums upon the wisdom of the choice which
they had made . As Maurice conducted all
his schemes with profound and impenetrable
secrecy, it is probable that he took no ftep
avowedly in order to obtain this charge. The
recommendation of his countrymen was either
purely accidental, or flowed ftom the opinion
generally entertained of his great abilities; and
neither the diet had any forclight, nor the Em-
peror any dread of the confcqucnces which fol-
lowed upon this nomination. Maurice accepted
without hesitation the trust committed to him,
instantly discerning the important advantages
which he might derive from it.

Slcid. 503. 512.

C 3 MEAN-

BOOK X. MEANWHILE, Julius, in preparing the bull

i55o. for the convocation of the council, observed

Thil fu' all those tedious forms which the court of Rome
,oned to can employ, with wonderful dexterity, to retard
re-assemble
at Trent. any disagreeable measure. At last it was pub-
December.

lifhed, and the council summoned to meet at
Trent on the first day of the ensuing month of
May. As he knew that many of the Germans
rejected or disputed the authority and jurisdiction
which the Papal fee claims with refpet to
general councils, he took care, in the preamble
of the bull, to assert, in the strongest terms, his
own right, not only to call and preside in that
aflembly, but to direct its proceedings; nor
would he soften these exprefions, in any de-
gree, in compliance with the repeated folicita-
tions of the Emperor, who foresaw what offence
they would give, and what construction might
be put on them. They were censured, accord-
ingly with great severity, by several members
of the diet; but whatever disgust or suspicion
they excited, such absolute direction of all their
deliberations had the Emperor acquired, that
Feb. 13. he procured a recess in which the authority of

the council was recognised, and declared to be
the proper remedy for the evils which at that
time afflicted the church; all the Princes and
Rtates of the Empire, such as had made innow
vations in religion, as well as those who adhered

to

to the fyffem of their forefathers, were required BOOK X.
to fend their representatives to the council the 155
Emperor engaged to grant a fafe-conduc to
such as demanded it, and to secure them an
impartial hearing in the council; he promised
to fix his residence in some city of the Empire,
in the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might
protect the members of the council by his pre-
fence, and take care that, by conducting their
deliberations agreeably to scripture and the
doctrine of the fathers, they might bring them
to a desirable issue. In this recess, the obfer-
vation of the Interim was more ftriAly enjoined
than ever; and the Emperor threatened all who
had hitherto neglected or refused to conform to
it, with the severest effects of his vengeance, if
they persisted in their disobedience'.

DURING the meeting of this diet, a new at- Anothw

fiuitlcfs at-

tempt was made in order to procure liberty to ,^,, to
the Landgrave. That Prince, no-wise recon. -Pngr,'th
ciled by time to his situation, grew every day liberty.
more impatient of restraint. Having often ap-
plied to Maurice and the Elector of Branden-
burg, who took every occafon of soliciting the
Emperor in his behalf, though without any
effect, he now commanded his ions to summon
them, with legal formality, to perform what

1 Slkid. 512. Thuan. lib. vi. 233. Goldafti Conftit. Im.
pcrialcs, vol. ii. 340.

C 4 was
q

BOOK X. was contained in the bond which they had

granted him, by surrendering themselves to be
treated with the fame rigour as the Emperor
had used him. This furnished them with a
freih -pretext for renewing their application to
the Emperor, together with an additional argu-
ment to enforce it. Charles firmly resolved not
to grant their request; though at the fame time
being extremely desirous to get rid of their
incessant importunity, he endeavoured to pre-
vail on the Landgrave to give up the obligation
which he had received from the two Eletors.
But that Prince refusing to part with a security
which he deemed essential to his safety, the
Emperor boldly cut the knot which he could
not untie; and by a publick deed annulled the
bond which Maurice and the Elector of Bran-
denburg had granted, absolving them from all
their engagements to the Landgrave. No pre-
tension to a power so pernicious to society is
that of abrogating at pleasure the most sacred
laws of honour, and most formal obligations
of publick faith, had hitherto been formed by
any but the Roman Pontiffs, who, in confe-
quence of their claim of infallibility, arrogate
the right of dispensing with precepts and duties
of every kind. All Germany was filled with
aftoniflnment, when Charles assumed the fame
prerogative. lThe fate of subjection, to which
the Empire was reduced, appeared to be more

rigorous

rigorous as well as intolerable than that of the BooK X.
most wretched and enlaved nations, if the Em.-
peror by an arbitrary decree might cancel those
solemn contracts, which are the foundation of
that mutual confidence whereby men are held
together in social union. The Landgrave him-
self now gave up all hopes of recovering his
liberty by the Emperor's content, and endea-
voured to procure it by his own address. But
the plan which he had formed to deceive his
guards being discovered, such of his attendants
as he had gained to favour his escape were put
to death, and he was confined in the citadel of
Mechlin more closely than everk.

ANOTHER tranfadion was carried on during ciaries',

this diet, with refpeEt to an affair more nearly cringthe'
interesting to the Emperor, and which occa- ImPwia^
sioned likewise a general alarm among the his son
Princes of the Empire. Charles, though formed
with talents which fitted him for conceiving and
conducing great designs, was not capable, as
has been often observed, of bearing extraor-
dinary luccefs. Its operation on his mind was
so violent and intoxicating, that it elevated him
beyond what was moderate or attainable, and
turned his whole attention to the pursuit of vast
but chimerical objects. Such had been the
effec of his victory over the confederates of

k Sleid. 504. TIhuan. 1. vi. 234, 71'.

Snialkalde.

BooK X. Smalkalde. He did not long reft satisfied with

ssz, the fubtantial and certain advantages which

were the result of that event, but despising there,
as poor or inconsiderable fruits of such great
success, he had aimed at bringing all Germany
to an uniformity in religion, and at rendering
the Imperial power defpotick. These were ob-
je&s extremely splendid, indeed, and alluring
to an ambitious mind; the pursuit of them,
however, was attended with manifest- danger,
and the attainment of them very precarious.
But the iReps which he had already taken to-
wards them, having been accompanied with such
success, his imagination, warmed with contem-
plating this vast design, overlooked or despised
all remaining difficulties. As he conceived the
execution of his plan to be certain, he began to
be solicitous how he might render the possession
of such an important acquisition perpetual in
his family, by transmitting the German Empire,
as well as the kingdoms of Spain, and his do-
minions in Italy and the Low-Countries, to
his son. Having long revolved this flattering
idea in his mind, without communicating it,
even to those ministers whom he most trusted,
he had called Philip out of Spain, in hopes that
his pretence would facilitate the carrying for-
ward the scheme.

GREAT

GREAT obstacles, however, and such as BOOK X.

would have deterred any ambition less accuf- ,i'7
tomed to overcome difficulties, were to be fur- Thcoblta

cles that

mounted. He had in the year one thousand lood ia it
five hundred and thirty imprudently assisted in
procuring his brother Ferdinand the dignity of
King of the Romans, and there was no proba-
bility that this Prince, who was still in the
prime of life, and had a son grown up to the
years of manhood, would relinquish, in favour
of his nephew, the near profped of the Im-
perial throne, which Charles's infirmities and
declining state of health opened to himself.
This did not deter the Emperor from venturing
to make the proposition; and when Ferdinand,
notwithstanding his profound reverence for his
brother, and obsequious submission to his will
in other inflances, rejeced it in a peremptory
tone, he was not discouraged by one repulie.
He renewed his applications to him by his
siser, Mary Queen of Hungary, to whom Ser-
dinand flood indebted for the crowns both of
Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her great
abilities, tempered with extreme gentleness of
disposition, had acquired an extraordinary in-
fluence over both the brothers. She entered
warmly into a measure, which tended so mani-
feflly to aggrandize the house of Austria; and
flattering herself that The could tempt Ferdinand

2 to

BooK X. to renounce the reversionary poffefion of the

1^1 Imperial dignity for an immediate eitabliih-

ment, she assured him that the Emperor, by
way of compensation for his giving up his
chance of fucceflion, would inflantly beitow
upon him territories of very considerable value,
and pointed out in particular those of the
Duke of Wurtemberg, which might be con-
fifcated upon different pretexts. But neither
by her address nor intreaties, could she induce
Ferdinand to approve of a plan, which would
have degraded him from the highest rank
among the Monarchs of Europe to that of a
subordinate and dependent Prince. He was, at
the fame time, more attached to his children,
than by a rash concession, to frustrate all the
high hopes in profpea of which they had been
educated.

Hi, endca- NOTWITHSTANDING the immovable firnnefs
vou,,,it - which Ferdinand discovered, the Emperor did

thef onot abandon his scheme. He flattered himself

that he might attain the objet in view by ano-
ther channel, and that it was not impossible to
prevail on the Eletors to cancel their former
choice of Ferdinand, or at least to elect Philip
a second King of the Romans, fubltituting him
as next in succession to his uncle. With this
view he took Philip along with him to the diet,

that

that the Germans might have an opportunity BOOK X.
to observe and become acquainted with the ,I1.
Prince, in behalf of whom he courted their in-
terest; and he himself employed all the arts of
address or insinuation to gain the Electors, and
to prepare them for lending a favourable ear
to the 'proposal. But no sooner did he venture
upon mentioning it to them, than they, at
once, saw and trembled at the consequences with
which it would be attended. They had long
felt all the inconveniences of having placed at
the head of the Empire a Prince whose power
and dominions were so extensive; if they Ihould
now repeat the folly, and continue the Imperial
crown, like an hereditary dignity, in the fame
family, they foresaw that they would give the
son an opportunity of carrying on that fyltem
of oppression, which the father had begun; and
would put it in his power to overturn whatever
was yet left entire in the ancient and venerable
fabrick of the German coniitution.

THE character of the Prince, in whose favour Philip',

this extraordinary proposition was made, ren- dtre!e
dered it still less agreeable. Philip, though pof- tolIC GCr-
fefled with an insatiable desire of power, was a
itranger to all the arts of conciliating good-will.
l-laughty, relerved, and ifvcre, lie, inltead of
gaining new friends, difgultcd the ancient and

3 llQlt:

BOOK X. most devoted partizans of the Austrian interest.

.-,,.' He scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the

language of the country to the government of
which he aspired; nor would he condescend to
pay the Germans the compliment of accom-
modating himself, during his residence among
them, to their manners and customs. He al-
lowed the Electors and most illustrious Princes
in Germany, to remain in his presence uncovered,
affecting a fately and distant demeanour, which
the greatest of the German Emperors, and even
Charles himself, amidst the pride of power and
vi6tory, had never assumed '. On the other hand,
Ferdinand, from the time of his arrival in Ger-
many, had studied to render himself acceptable
to the people, by a conformity to their manners,
which seemed to flow from choice; and his son
Maximilian, who was born in Germany, pofleffed,
in an eminent degree, such amiable qualities as
rendered him the darling of his countrymen,
and induced them to look forward to his elec-
tion as a most desirable event. Their esteem and
affelion for him, fortified the resolution which
found policy had suggested; and determined
the Germans to prefer the popular virtues of
Ferdinand and his son, to the stubborn austerity
of Philip, which interest could not soften, nor

' Frediman Andrea Zulich Diflertatio politico-hiflo-
rica de Navis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 1706. 40t. p. 21.

ambition

ambition teach him to disguise. All the Elec- BOOK X.
tors, the ecclesiastical as well as secular, con- ,
curred in expressing such strong disapprobation Charles

obliged to
of the measure, that Charles, notwithstanding elinqui.h

this fchem e.

the reluctance with which he gave up any point,
was obliged to drop the scheme as impraticable.
By his unseasonable perseverance in pushing it,
he not only filled the Germans with newjealoufy
of his ambitious designs, but laid the founda-
tion of rivalfhip and discord in the Austrian
family, and forced his brother Ferdinand, in self-
defence, to court the Electors, particularly Mau-
rice of Saxony, and to form such connexions
with them, as cut off all profpea of renewing
the proposal with success. Philip, sowered by
his difappointnlent, was sent back to Spain, to
be called thence when any new scheme of am-
bition should render his pretence necessary m.

HAVING relinquished this plan of domeftick The Pope

ambition which had long occupied and engrossed fd fEmp,
him, Charles imagined that he would now have deign tore-

~~~~~~~~- _ ~cover Par ma

leisure to turn all his attention towards his and -lcn-
grand scheme of eftablifling uniformity of reli-
gion in the Empire, by forcing all the contend-
ing parties to acquiesce in rhe decisions of the
council of Trent. But such was the extent of

m Sleid, 505. Thuan. 180. 238. Memoir.de Rib:er, ii.
219, 28s, 314. Adriani I for, lib. viii. 507. 50o .

his

BooK X. his dominions, the variety of connexions isd
*7T, which this entangled him, and the multiplicity

of events to which these gave rife, as feldorrl
allowed him to apply his whole force to any
one object. The machine which he had to con-
duct was so great and complicated, that an um-
foreseen irregularity or obftrution in one of the
inferior wheels, often disconcerted the motion
of the whole, and disappointed him of the most
considerable effcts which he expected. Such
an unlooked-for occurrence happened at this
juncture, and created new obstacles to the exe-
cution of his schemes with regard to religion.
Julius III. though he had confirmed Odavio
Farnese in the poffffion of the dutchy of Parma,
during the first effusions of his joy and gratitude
on his promotion to the papal throne, soon be-
gan to repent of his own generosity, and to be
apprehensive of consequences which either he
did not foresee, or had disregarded, while the
sense of his obligations to the family of Farnese
was recent. The Emperor frill retained Pla-
centia in his hands, and had not relinquished
his pretensions to Parma as a fief of the Empire.
Gonzaga, the governor of Milan, having, by
the part which he took in the murder of the
late Duke Peter Ludovico, offered an insult to
the family of Farnese, which he knew could
never be forgiven, had, for that reason, vowed

its

its deftrufion and employed all the influence BooK X.
which his great abilities, as well as long services ,
gave him with the Emperor, in persuading him
to seize Parma by force of arms. Charles, in
compliance with his solicitations, and that he
might gratify his own desire of annexing Parma
to the Milanese, listened to the proposal; and
Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement from the
slightest appearance of approbation, began to
assemble troops, and to make other preparations
for the execution of his scheme.

OCTAVIO, who saw the impending danger, oav;o
found it necessary, for his own safety, to increase Farnece

·*"~~~ ~

- *'~ ~~

'courts the

the garrison of his capital, arid to levy soldiers afliftance of
for defending the reft of the country. But as
the expence of such an effort far exceeded his
scanty revenues, he represented his situation to
the Pope, and implored that protection and aflift-
ance which was due to him as a vaflal of the
church. The Imperial minister, however, had
already pre-occupied the Pope's car; and by
discoursing continually concerning the danger
of giving offence to the Emperor, as well as the
imprudence of supporting Oaavio in an ufurpa-
tion so detrimental to the Holy See, had totally
alienated him from the family of Farnese. O&a-
vio's remonstrance and petition met, of confe-
quence, with a cold reception and he, despair-
ing of any afiftance from Julius, began to look
- VOL. IV. D round

BooK X. round for protection from some other quarter.

ss ,. Henry I1. of France was the only Princepowerful

enough to afford him this protection, and fortu-
nately he was now in a situation which allowed
him to undertake it. He had brought his tranf-
aaions with the two British kingdoms, which
had hitherto diverted his attention from the as-
fairs of the Continent, to such an issue as he de-
fired. This he had effected partly by the vigour
of his arms, partly by his dexterity in taking
advantage of the political factions which raged
in both kingdoms to such a degree, as rendered
the councils of the Scots violent and preci-
pitate, and the operations of the English feeble
and unsteady. He had procured from the Eng-
lifh favourable conditions of peace for his allies
the Scots; he had prevailed on the nobles of
Scotland not only to affiance their young Queen
to his son the Dauphin, but even to fend her
into France, that she might be educated under
his eye s and had recovered Boulogne, together
with its dependencies, which had been conquered
by Henry VIII.

H;. league HAVING gained points of so much confe-
Henry i. quence to his crown, and disengaged himself

with such honour from the burden of support-
ing the Scots, and maintaining a war against
England, Henry was now at full leisure to pur-
sue the measures which his hereditary jealousy

of

of the Emperor's power naturally suggested. He BOOK X.
listened, accordingly, to the first overtures which 55
Otavio Farnese made him; and embracing
eagerly an opportunity of recovering footing in
Italy, he instantly concloded a treaty, in which
he promised to espouse his cause, and to furnish
him all the affliftance which he desired. This
tranfation could not be long kept secret from
the Pope, who foreseeing the calamities which
must follow if war were rekindled so near the
ecclesiastical state, immediately issued monitory
letters, requiring Octavio to relinquish his new
alliance. Upon his refusal to comply with the
requisition, he soon after pronounced his fief to
be forfeited, and declared war against him as a
disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as with his
own forces alone, he could not hope to fubduc
Oatavio while supported by such a powerful ally
as the King of France, he had recourse to the
Emperor, who being extremely folicit6us to pre-
vent the establishment of the French in Parma,
ordered Gonzaga to second Julius with all his
troops. Thus the French took the field as the Occfltn

the renewal

allies of Ocsavio; the Imperialists as the pro- ofho.,lial
tetors of the Holy See; and hoftlliries corn- hln, .j
menced between them, while Charles and Henry H"Iry
themselves still affeeed to give out that they
would adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy.
The war of Parma was not diftinguilhed by any
memorable event. Many small rencounters hap-

b 2 pened

pooK X. pened with alternateuccefs; the French ravaged
'7 77 Ppatt of the ecclefrifical territories; the Impe,

rialifs laid waste the Parmesan; and the latter;
after having begun Xo besiege Parma in forms
*ere obliged to abandon The enterprize with
disgrace ".

Itetards the BUT the motions and alarm which this war,
l.¢ctino or the preparations for it, occasioned in Italy,

prevented most of the Italian prelates from re-
pairing to Trent on the first of May, the day
appointed for re-assembling the council; and
though the papal legate and nuncios resorted
thither, they were obliged to adjourn to the first
of September, hoping such a number might
then assemble, that they might with decency be-
gin their deliberations. At that time, about
sixty prelates, rnoftly from the ecclesiastical state
or from Spain, together with a few Germans,

flenry pro- convened o. The fefllion was opened with the
iests againd.
the o'ncil. accustomed formalities, and the fathers were

about to proceed to business, when the abbot of
Bellozane appeared, and presenting letters of
credence as ambassador from the French King,
demanded audience. Having obtained it, he
protested, in Henry's name, against an assembly

a Adriani Itor. lib. viii. o50. 5s4. 2z4. 2 Skid. 513.

Paruta, p. zz20. Lettere del,Caro fritte al nome del Card.
farnese, tom. ii. p. i , &c, F F. Paul, 268.

. 2 called

called at such an improper junture, when a war, BOKX.
wantonly kindled by the Pope, made it impof. s .
fible for the deputies from the Gallican church
to resort to Trent in safety, or to deliberate con-
cerning articles of faith and discipline with the
requisite tranquillity; he declared,, that his
niafter did not acknowledge this to be a general
or oecumenick council, but must confider, an4
would treat it, as a particular and partial con;
vention P. The legate affected to. despise this
protest; and the prelates proceeded, notwith-
standing, to examine and decide the great point
in controversy concerning the sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, penance, and extreme undtion
This measure of the French Monarch, however,
gave a deep wound to the credit of the council
at the very commencement of its deliberations,
The Germans could not pay much regard to an
.assembly, the ,authority of which the second
..Prince in Christendom had formally difclaimecd,
or feel any great reverence for the decisions of a
few men, who arrogated to themselves all the
rights belonging to the representatives of the
church universal, a title to which they had such
.poor pretensions,

THE Emperor, nevertheless, was ftraining'his
authority to the utmost, in order to establish the

t Sleid.s 8 Thuan. aSs. F. Pul, 30oi ..
.... D 3 - reputation

Boot X. reputation and jurifdietion of the council. He

li ,. had prevailed on the three ecclesiastical Efctors,
eViolECc,° the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the
S's pro- church next to the Pope, to repair thither in
,*ijf h person. He had obliged several German bilhops
p>t, * of inferior rank, to go to Trent themselves, or

to fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial
fafe-condut to the ambagtadors nominated by
the Elector of Brandenburg, the duke of Wur-
temberg, and other Proteclant states, to attend
the council; and exhorted them to fend their
divines thither, in order to propound, explain,
and defend their docrine. At the fame time,
his zeal anticipated the decrees of the council;
and as if the Protestant dotrines had already
been condemned, he took large steps towards
exterminating them. With this intention, he
called together the ministers of Auglburg; and
after interrogating them concerning several con.
troverted points, enjoined them to teach nothing
with refpet to these, contrary to the tenets of
the Romih church. Upon their declining to
comply with a requisition so contrary to the dic-
tates of their consciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without reveal.
ing to any person the cause of their banishment;
he prohibited them to preach for the future in
any of the countries fubje& to the Imperial
jurifdiaion and obliged them to take an oath

9 3 , *e~that

that they would punc&ually obey these injunc- BooK X.
tions. They were not the only vitims to his
zeal. The Protestant clergy, in most of the
cities in the circle of Swabia, were ejected with
the fame violence; and in many places, such ma-
giftrates as had distinguished themselves by their
attachment to the new opinions, were dismissed
with the most abrupt irregularity, and their of-
sices filled, in consequence of the Emperor's ar-
bitrary appointment, with the most bigotted of
their adversaries. The Reformed worship was
almot entirely suppressed throughout that exten-
five province. The ancient and fundamental
privileges of the free cities were violated. The
people were compelled to attend the ministration
of priests, whom they regarded with horror as
idolaters; and to submit to the jurifdi&ion of
magistrates, whom they detested as usurpers q.

THE Emperor, after this discovery, which Hisendea.

Your! to

was more explicit than any that he had hitherto fpportthe
made, of his intention to subvert the German couc"l.
conifitution, as well as to extirpate the Pro-
teftant religion, set out for Infpruck in the November.
Tyrol. He fixed his residence in that city, as
by its situation in the neighbourhood of Trent,
and on' the confines of Italy, it appeared a
commodious fation, whence he might iofpect

4 Sloid. 516. 5. .Thuan. s76.

D 4 khe

Bo90 X. the opprations of the ,cgOil, 4.obh te the

q'p. progress of the war ii xt4 Parpmeqp, wiomut

louing fight of such 4ocurrences as might hap
pen in Germany '. ;.:.
The fegeof DURING there tranfraaions, the flRe Qo Mag»

deburg was carried or with va4o, fcefi,.
At the time when Charles. pr9fcrip4lhe cit,
gens of Magdeburg, and put them mw4er thi
ban of the Empire, hehad exhorte axnd even
enjoined all the neighbouring ftaes to gtak.
arms against them, as rebels and colr'on eeno
mies. Encouraged by his exhoritios, ag well
as promises. George f Mecklenburg, a yQuloge
brother of the reigning Duke, an a-ive aa4
gmbitious Prince, colleted a considerable rnin
ber of thoik soldier$ of '.tuPe who had aecornM
panied kIenry of B.t3pfwack in all hi wild
enterprizes; and though a zealous Lutheran
himfolf, invaded the Jterriories of the Maide-
burgerS, hoping that, by the merit of .cis .er-
vice, he might procure. fomc part of - chei. do,
mains to be allotted to him as an eftablifhmcnt.
The citiZens, unaccustomed as yet to endure
patiently the calamities if war, could not .be
restrained from sallying: iut in order.to faye
their lands from being laid waste4:; They at-
aclwd ;bhC ukt of lecJldahurgJwitih.:Qre

r $1ciG.5sl9:-o : :-u

! . reFfolution

refolutizn than condua, and were repulsed with BOOK X.
great fliatghter. But as they were animated 51,
with that unconquerable spirit, which flows from
geal for religion co-operating with the love of
civil jirty, far from being diiheartened by
their mi*ftrunie, theyprepared to defend .em-
Ivws.- wjh -yigour, Many: of the veterA fol-
dier w fs jirvyl in the. ;ong wars between
the Efi gpr.w.4 IKg of ;F{.ce, crowding to
hoir 4fta9d^d under aNbe an experienced -oQf-
e. rh they, acquired ;mjlisary ikill by degees,
wd oadded all the Odva.nuges of that to the
cfforts ,qs ^:diunted courage. The duke of
Mecklepburg, notwithstanding the severe blow
which he 'had given the Magdeburgers, not
.4wring, tp ioveft a town firongly fortified, and
.defeoded :y f.wh a girrifen, continued to. ri-
vage the ~n:9uptry¥. -.

As the: hopes of booty 'drew many adven- Mauric

turers to the camp of this young Prince, Mau- comkmnd
rice of Saxonyjbegan to be jealous of the power. oth, arm,

aoy~g pow which car-

which he possesld by being at the head of such ri°eon thc
a numerous body, and marching towards Mag-
deburg ,with `hia 'wn troops, assumed the
supreme command of the whole army, an
honour to which his high rank and great abili-
Mes, as well 's the nOmination of the diet, gave
him an indisputable title. With this united

force

BooK X. force he invested the town, and began the siege

·.in form claiming great merit with the Emperor
on that account, as, from his zeal to execute
the Imperial decree, he was exposing himself
once more to the censures and maledictions of
the party with which he agreed in religious fen.
timeits. But the approaches to the town went
on lowly; the garribon interrupted the besiegers
by frequent rallies, in one of which the duke of
Mecklenburg was taken prisoner, levelled part
of their works, and cut off the soldiers in
fheir advanced posts. While the citizens of
Magdeburg, animated by the discourses of their
pastors, and the soldiers encouraged by the ex-
ample of their officers, endured all the hard-
ships of a siege without murmuring, and de-
fended themselves with the fame ardour which
they had at first discovered; the troops of the
besiegers acted with extreme remifhnefs, repining
at every thing that they suffered in afervicewhich
they disliked. They broke out, more than
once, into open mutiny, demanding the arrears
of their pay, which, as the Germans sent in
theit contributions sparingly, and with great
relucance, towards defraying the expences of
this war, amounted to a conliderable fum'.
Maurice, too, had particular motives, though
such as he durst not avow at that juncure,

Thuan.2'77. Sleid. 514.

which

which induced him not to puth the siege with BOOK X.
vigour, and made him chufe rather to continue s's~-
at the head of an army exposed to all the impu.
tations which his dilatory proceedings drew
upon him, than to precipitate a conquest that
might have brought him some acceflon.of re-
putation, but would have rendered it necessary
to disband his forces.

At last, the inhabitants of the town begin- The cty

ning to susser distress from want of provisions, to Ma^,idU.
and Maurice finding it impoflible to protra&t
matters any longer without filling the Emperor
with such suspicions as might have disconcerted
all his measures, he concluded a treaty of capi-
tulation with the city upon the following con-
ditions that the Magdeburgers thould humbly
implore pardon of the Emperor; that they
lhould not for the future take arms, or enter
into any alliance against the house of Austria; Noremb. 3.
that they mhould submit to the authority of the
Imperial chamber; that they lhould conform
*to the decree of the diet at Augiburg with
refpe& to religion; that the new fortifications
added to the town ihould be demoliihed; that
they lhould pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns,
deliver up twelve pieces of ordnance to the
Emperor, and set' the duke of Mecklenburg,
together with their other prisoners, at liberty,

without

BOOK X. without ransom. Next day their garrison

marched out, and Maurice took pofleffion of
the town with great military pomp.

Maurice's BEFPOE tthe terms of capitulation were let.
views at this
juaeAre. tied, Maurie had held maAy conferences with

Albert count Mansfeldt,. who had the chief
command in Magdeburg. He consulted like-
wife with count Heideck, an officer who had
served with:great reputation. h the army of' the
league of Smalkalde, whom the Emperor'had
proscribed on account of his zeal for that cause,
but whom Maurice had, notwithstanding, fe-
cretly engaged in his service, and admitted into
the most intimate confidence. To them he
communicated a scheme, which he had. long
revolved in his mind, for procuring liberty to
his father-in-law the Landgrave, for vindicating
the privileges of the Germanick body, and set-
ting bounds to the dangerous encroachments
of the Imperial power. Having deliberated
with them concerning the measures which might
be necessary for securing the success of such an
arduous enterprize, he gave Mansfeldt fecrrt
assurances that the fortifications of Magdeburg
should not be destroyed, and that the inha-
bitants ihould neither be disturbed in the exer-
.cife of their religion, nor be deprived of any
of their ancient immunities. In order to engage

~~; ·~-·~ ·Maurice

Maurice more thoroughly from considerations BooK X.
of interest to fulfil these engagements, the senate '
of Magdeburg eleted him their Burgrave, a
dignity which had formerly belonged to the
electoral house of Saxony, and which entitled
him to a very ample jurifdidion not only in the
city but in its dependencies'.

THUS the citizens of Magdeburg,. after en- Theadvan.

during a siege of twelve months, and struggling ied fro,
for their liberties, religious and civil, with an htion With
invincible fortitude, worthy of the cause in which the M1grdc
it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to
conclude a treaty, which left them in a better
condition than the reft of their countrymen,
whom their timidity or want of publick spirit
had betrayed into such mean fubmiflions to the
Emperor. But while a great part of Germany
applauded the gallant conduct of the Magde.
burgers, and rejoiced in their having escaped
the deftru6ion with which they had been threat-
ened, all admired Maurice's address in the con-
du&t of his negociation with them, as well as
the dexterity with which he converted every
event to his own advantage. They saw, with
amazement, that after having affli&ed the Mag-
deburgers during many months with all the

Sleid. 528. Thuan. 276. Obfidionis Magdeburgici
Defcriptio per Sebat. Beffelmcierum, ap. Scard. ii. 5 i 8.

calamitics

Foot X. calamities of war, he was at last, by their vo;
L551. luntary election, vested with supreme authority

in that city which he had so lately besieged;
that after having been so long the objet of their'
satirical inve&ives as an apostate, and an enemy
to the religion which he professed, they seemed
now to place unbounded confidence in his zeal
and good-will". At the fame time, the publick
articles in the treaty of capitulation were so
perfecly conformable to those which the Em-
peror had granted to the other Protestant cities,
and Maurice took such care to magnify his
merit in having reduced a place which had
defended itself with so much obstinacy, that
Charles, far from fufpeting any thing fraudu-
lent or collusive in the terms of accommodation,
ratified them without hesitation, and absolved
the Magdeburgers from the sentence of ban
which had been denounced against them.

His exped. THE only point that now remained to em-
,pig fan barrafs Maurice was how to keep together the
*frm on veteran troops which had served under him, as

well as those which had been employed in the
defence of the town. For this, too, he found
an expedient with singular art and felicity. His
schemes against the Emperor were not yet so
fully ripened, that he durst venture to disclose

' Arnoldi vita Maurit. apud Mcnken, ii. 1227.

them,

them, and proceed openly to carry them into BooK X.
execution. The winter was approaching, which 5rr5.
made it impossible to take the field immediately.
He was afraid that it would give a premature
alarm to the Emperor, if he should retain such
a considerable body in his pay until the season
of action returned in the spring. As soon then
as Magdeburg opened its gates, he sent home
his Saxon fubjeas, whom he could command to
take arms and re-assemble on the shortest warn-
ing; and at the fame time, paying part of the
arrears due to the mercenary troops, who had
followed his standard, as well as to the soldiers
who had served in the garrison, he absolved
them from their tefpetive oaths of fidelity, and
diibanded them. But the moment he gave them
their discharge, George Duke of Mecklenburg,
who was now set at liberty, offered to take
them into his service, and to become surety for
the payment of what was still owing to them.
As such adventurers were accustomed often to
change masters, they instantly accepted the
offer. Thus there troops were kept united,
and ready to march wherever Maurice should
call them, while the Emperor, deceived by this
artifice, and imagining that the Duke of Meck-
lenburg had hired them with an intention to
affirt his claim to a part of his brother's terri-
tories by force of arms, suffered this tranf-

action

BdOK X. aLion to pass without obfervionan a if it hid

*l "been a mater of no confleq~l.ne .

His addref HAVING ventured to take thefi siep whlich
inconceal-
ing his in- were of fb much conafquce towards the exa
tentions
from the cution of his schemes, Maurice, that he might
Emperor divert the Emperor from observing their ten-

dency too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions
which that mufft have excited, saw the necessity
of employing some new artifice in order to en-
gage his attention, and to confirm him in his
present security. As he knew that the chief
obje& of the Emperor's solicitude at: this junc.
ture, was how he might prevail with the Pro-
teftant States of Germany to recognise the au-
thority of the council of Trent, and to fend
thither ambassadors in their own name, as well
as deputies from their refpetive churches, he
took hold of this predominating paflion in order
to amuse and to deceive him. He aflifted a
wonderful zeal to gratify Charles in what he
desired with regard to this matter; he nomi-
nated ambassadors, whom he empowered to
attend the council; he made choice of Me.
lanthon and some of the most eminent among
his brethren to prepare a confeflion of faith,
and to lay it before that assembly. After his

xThuan. 278. Struv. corp. hiR. Germ. 1054. Arnoldi
vita Mauritii apud Menken, ii. 1227.

example,

example§ and probably in consequence of his Boo X.
solicitations, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the city 'h'
of Straburg, and other Protestant States ap-
pointed ambaffidors and divines to attend the
council They all applied to the Emperor for
his fafe-condut, which they obtained in the
most ample form. This was deemed sufficient
for the security of the ambafladors, and they
proceeded accordingly on their journey, but
a separate fafe-condu&t from the council itself
was demanded for the Protestant divines. The
fate of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom
the council of Constance, in the preceding cen-
tury, had condemned to the flames without
regarding the Imperial fafe-condud which had
been granted them, rendered this precaution
prudent and necessary. But as the Pope was
no less unwilling that the Protestants Ihould be
admitted to an hearing in the council, than the.
Emperor had been eager in bringing them to
demand it, the legate by promises and threats
prevailed on the fathers of the council to de*
dine issuing a fafe-condu& in the fame form
with that which the council of Basil had granted.
to the followers of Huss. The Protestants, on
their part, insisted upon the council's copying
the precise words of that instrument. The Im-
perial ambassadors interpored, in order to obtain
what would satisfy them. Alterations in the

VOL. IV. E form

BO36 X. action to pass without obfervatcina at f it hbd
" v-r been a matter of no confeqotce ' . -

z551.

His addrer HrAVIN ventured to take thtlfe fepl which
inconceal-
ing his in. were of so much confecquwicc towards the axe-
tentions
fromthe cution of his schemes, Maurice, that he might
Emteror. divert the Emperor from observing their tens

dency too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions
which that must have excited, saw the necefity
of employing some new artifice in order to ens
gage his attention, and to confirm him in his
present security. As he knew that the chief
objeat of the Emperor's solicitude at this unc-
ture, was how he might prevail with the Pro-
teftant States of Germany to recognise the au-
thority of the council of Trent, and to fend
thither ambassadors in their own name, as well
as deputies from their refpetive churches, he
took hold of this predominating pafflon in order
to amuse and to deceive him. He affled a
wonderful zeal to gratify Charles in what he
desired with regard to this matter; he nomi.
nated ambassadors, whom he empowered to
attend the council; he made choice of Me*
lanahon and some of the most eminent among
his brethren to prepare a confelion of faith,
and to lay it before that aflembly. After his

x Thuan. 278. Struv. corp. hit. Germ. 1064. Arnoldi
vita Mauritii apud Menken, ii, 12z7.

example,

example, and probably in consequence of his Boo X.
folicitationsi the Duke of Wurtemberg, the city 1 -L.
of Strafburg, and other Protestant States ap-
pointed ambafidors and divines to attend the
council They all applied to the Emperor for
his fafe-conduit, which they obtained in the
most ample form. This was deemed sufficient
for the security of the ambafladors, and they
proceeded accordingly on their journey but
a separate fafe-condut from the council itself
was demanded for the Protestant divines. The
fate of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom
the council of Constance, in the preceding cen-
tury, had condemned to the flames without
regarding the Imperial fafe-condu& which had
been granted them, rendered this precaution
prudent and necessary. But as the Pope was
no less unwilling that the Protestants should be
admitted to an hearing in the council, than the.
Emperor had been eager in bringing them to
demand it, the legate by promises and threats
prevailed on the fathers of the council to de-
dine ilfuing a fafe-condu& in the fame form
with that which the council of Basil had granted.
to the followers of Huss. The Protetants, on
their part, insisted upon the council's copying
the precise words of that instrument. The Im-
perial ambassadors interposed, in order to obtain
what would satisfy them. Alterations in the

VOL. IV. E form

BOOK X. form of the writ were propofd;i expedients

were. suggested; protests and .counter-protefs
were taken.: the: legate, together ,withm his affo.
ciates, .laboured to gain their. point b.y artifice
and:chicane; the Protestants adhered to theirs
with firmness and obstinacy. An account of
every thing that passed in Trent was transmitted
to the Emperor at Infpruck, who, attempting,
from an excess of zeal, or of confidence in his
own address, to reconcile the contending par.
tties, was involved in a labyrinth of inextricable
negociations. By means of this, however, Mau-
rice gained all that he had in view the Em-
peror's time was wholly engrossed, and his
attention diverted; while he himself had leisure
to mature his schemes, to carry on his intrigues,
and to finish his preparations, before he threw
off the malk, and struck the blow which he had
so long meditated '.

The affair BUT previous to the history of Maurice's
·f Hungary. operations, some account must be given of a

new revolution in Hungary, which contributed
not a little towards their producing such extra-
ordinary effects. When Solyman, in the year
1541, by a stratagem, which suited the base
and insidious policy of a petty usurper, rather
than the magnanimity of a mighty conqueror,

r Sleid. 5z6. 529. F.Paul, 33.3338. Thuan. 286.

deprived

deprived the young King of Hungary of the BooK X,
dominions, W.hich his father had left him, he 55-.
had granted that unfortunate Prince the country
of Transylvania, a province of his, paternal
kingdom. The government of this, together
with the care of educating the young King, for
he till allowed him to retain that title, though
h&-hada rendered it only an empty name, he
committed to the Queen and Martinuzzi bishop
of Waradin, whom the late King had appointed
his sons guardians and regents of his dominions,
at a timne when those offices were of greater
importnce. This co-ordinate jurifdicion occa-
fie ,.me dissentions in a small princi-
pality as it would have excited in a great king-
dom; an ambitious young Queen, conscious of
her capacity for governing, and an high-fpirited
prelate, fond of power, contending who should
engross the greatest share in the adminifiration.
Each had their partizans among the nobles; but
as Martinuzzi, by his great talents, began to
acquire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own
arts against him, and courted the protection of
the Turks.

THE neighbouring Bafhlas, jealous of the Mttu,,;

bishop's power as well as abilities, readily pro- f"aourFe".
mifed her the aid which The demanded, and prtenfions

in that
would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have kingdom,

E 2 given

K X. given up to her the lk direcion of affairs, 'i

his ambition, fertile in expedients, had not fug-
gested to him a new nieafure, mna>one that
tende'd not only to: rferrve but torelarge his
authority. Having concluded an agreement
with the Queen, by the mediation of fame of
the nobles, who were solicitous to live their
country from the calanmities of a civil war, he
secretly dispatched one of his confidents to
Vienna, and entered into a negotiation with
Ferdinand. As it was no difficult matter to
persuade Ferdinand, that the fame man whose
enmity and intrigues had driven him out of a
great part of his Hungarian domin. it,
upon a reconciliation, become equally innru-
mental in recovering them, he listened eagerly
to the firt overtures of an union with that pre.
late. Martinuzzi allured him by fuchprofpee
of advantage, and engaged, with so much con-
£dence, that he would prevail on the most
powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take arms
in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwithstanding
his truce with Solynn, agreed to invade Tran.
fylvania. The command of the troops destined
for that service, consisting of veteran Spanish
and German soldiers, was given to Caftaldo
Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed by the
famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he strongly
resembled both in his enterprizing genius for

2 civil

civil business, and in 'his great knowledge in BOOK X.'
the art of war. This airny, more formidable ',^
by the discipline of the soldiers, and the abili-
ties of the general, than by its numbers, was
powerfully seconded by Martinuzzi and his
faiion among the Hungarians. As the Turkilh
Bafhas, the Sultan himself being at the head of
his army on the frontiers of Persia, could; not
afford the Queen such immediate or effeual
afliftance as the exigency of her affairs required,
she quickly lft all hopes of being able to retain
any longer the authority which she poffffed as
regent, and even began to despair of her son's
safety.

MARTIlnuzZI did not susser this, favourable The tLccef.

of his mea.

opportunity of aceomplifhing his own designs sure,.
to pass unimproved, and-.ventured, while flie
was in this state of dejecion, to lay before her
a propofaI, which at any other time the would
have reje6ed with difdain*,He represented -how
impoflible it was for her to itefit Ferdinand's
victorious arms ; that evaif tle Tuirs flbuld
enable her to make head against them, she
would be fat. from changing her condition to
tle better; and could not confider them as deli-
verers, but as masters, to whose commands ihe
must submit; he conjured her,. therefore^ aif he
regarded her own dignity, the safety of her son,

E of

pooK X. or the' ecurity of Christendom, rather to give
S)551 up Transylvania to Ferdinahd, and to make

over to:him her son's title to the crown of
Hungary, than to allow both to be usurped by
the inveterate enemy of the Christian faith. At
the fame time, he promised her, in' Ferdinand's
name, a compensation for herself, as well as for
her son, suitable to their rank, and propor-
tional to the value of what they were to facri,-
fice. '.Iabella, deserted by some of her adhe.
rents, distrusting others, destitute of friends,
and surrounded by Caftaldo's and Martinuzzi's
troops, subscribed there hard conditions, though
with a reluctant hand. Upon this, she furren.
dered such places of firength as were .fill in
her- pofieflion, (he gave up all the ensigns of
royalty, particularly a crown of gold, which, as
the Hungarians believed; had descended from
heaven, and conferred on him who wore it an
undoubted right to the throne. As the could
not bear to remain a gyvate person, in a country
where bhe had once joyed foyereign power,
Ihe inLfntly set out w4 her ftn for Silesia, in
order to take poflefion of the principalities of
Oppelan and Ratibor, the investiture of which
Ferdinand,had engagel to grant her son, and
likewise to bestow one of his daughters upon
him in marriae.

.PON

UPON the resignation of the young King, BOOK X.

Martinuzzi, and after his. example the reft of T
the Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to Appointed
Ferdinand; who, in order to testify his grateful tha part of

zeal* i '

i * , Hungary

sense of the zeal as well as success with which which wY
that prelate had served him, affected to ditin- Ferdnand.
guifh him by every poflible mark of favour and
confidence. He appointed him governor of
Transylvania, with almost unlimited authority;
he ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest deference
to his opinion and commands; he increased his
revenues, which were already very great, by new
appointments; he nominated him archbishop
of Gran, and prevailed on the Pope to raise
him to the dignity of a Cardinal. All this often-
tation of good-will, however, was void of fin-
cerity, and calculated to conceal sentiments the
most perfecly its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded
Martinuzzi's abilities; diftrufed his fidelity;
and foresaw, that as his extensive authority en-
abled him to check any attempt towards cir-
cumfcribing or abolishing the extensive privi-
leges which the Hungarian nobility pofffered,
he would stand forth, on every occasion, the
guardian of the liberties of his country, rather
than aft the part of a viceroy devoted to the
will of his Sovereign.

FOR this reason, he secretly gave it in charge Ferdinand
to Caftaldo to watch his motions, to guard form defgn

E 4 against A'g"Rit im.

Boo;' X. agai fthis defigs, :.nd. w thwart lit nmeaiure
'S'. -But Mar.inuzi,. eithe bemuse he ,ib 4 per-

ceive. thgt R taldo was -laced as a. spy on bis
ci.opn, .becau ie. he ,defpWed Ferdiviand's .i
fidou.s #rts, affijped the direaion of te .ww
gnftthe, Tu.',k with .his usual tone of.authq.
rity,, iand on4dft.ed it. with great magnani-
msity, ad no less success, He recovered some
places of ,whi.h the', lfidels bhd taken posseg-
fioni he. rqdered ;hcitrattcnipts toxroduc others
abortive i ad eftablijted Ferdinand's authority
pot only in Transylv\ania but in the Bannat of
Temefwar, and several of the countries adjacent,
In carrying op these operations, he often differe4
in sentiments from Caftatdo and his cfi.cers, and
treated the Turkish prifopers with a degree not
only of humanity, but even of geaeroity, which
Caftaldo loudly condemned. This was reprel.
sented at Vienna as an artful method of fourt
ing the friendship of the Infidels, that, by fe-
curing their prote'ton, he might hakge off all
dependence upon the ifoveregn whom he now
acknowledged, Though Martinuzzi, in jufti.
,cation of his ovw condiut, contended that it
was impolitics to exafperae an enemy prone tq
revenge by upnecefary fqvcritics Cafaldo's ac-
¢ufations gained creit with Ferdinand, prepof-
sessed already against Martinuzzi, and jealous
of every thing that could; endanger hie own aM-
thority in Iugary, ia proortiQn aa hc kone

'

'
* ^ ~ ~

it to bo precarious and ill eftabliihed. These Boo .
suspicions Calaldo confirmed and strengthened, 55
by the intelligence which he transmitted con-
tinually. to his confidents at Vienna. By mifre-
prefening what was innocent, and putting the
worst copftru&tio on what seemed dubious in
Martinuazzis condu&t by imputing to him de.
signs which he never formed, and charging him
with a&tions of which he was not guilty; he at
last convinced Ferdinand, that, in order to prt-
serve his Hungarian crown,. he must cut off that
ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand, foreseeing
that it would be dangerous to proceed in the
regular ourfe of law against a fubje& of such
exorbitant power, as enabled him to set his fove-
reign at defiance, determined to employ vio-
lence, in order to obtain that fatisfadion which
the laws were too feeble to afford him.

HE ifued his orders accordingly to Caftaldo, He ; aaCr.

who willinglyundertook that infamous fervxce. bidco.y
Having communicated the design, tofome Italian vAnd
and Spanifil officers whom he could trust, and
concerted with them the plan of executing it,
they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, earlyone Dec. ig.
morning, under pretence of prefnting to hirm
fame dispatches which were to. be font off inme-
diately to Vienna and while he perused a paper
with atuption, one of thei number st;rut him

with

BooK X. with his poignard in the throat. The:blow was

ss,. not mortal. Martinuzzi started up with the in-

trepidity natural to him, and grappling the as-
faflin, threw him to the ground. But the other
conspirators rulhing in, an old man, unarmed,
and alone, unable long 'to sustain such an un-
equal conflict, funk under the wounds which
he received from so many hands. Their dread
of the foreign troops refrained the Tranfylva-
nians from rising in. arms, in order to take ven-
geance on the murderers of a prelate who had
long been the obje& of their love as well as

Theeeff-to veneration. They spoke of the deed, however,
that violent
t^ion. with horror and execration; and exclaimed

against Ferdinand, whom neither gratitude for
recent and important services, nor reverence for
a character confidered as sacred and inviolable
among Christians, could restrain from ihedding
the blood of a man, whose only crime was at.
tachment to his native country. The nobles,
detesting the jealous as well as cruel policy of a
court, which, upon uncertain and improbable
surmises, had given up a person, no less confpi-
cuous for his merit than his rank, to be but-
chered by aflaflins, either retired to their own
e':ates, or if they continued with the Aufirian
army, grew cold to the service. The Turks,
encouraged by the death of an enemy whose abi-
lities they knew and dreaded, prepared to renew

hotilities

oftilities early in the spring and inflead of the Buoxc X.
curity which Ferdinand had expected from the '' X
removal of Martinuzzi, it was evident that his
erritories in Hungary were about to be attacked
with greater vigour, and defended with less zeal,
than ever .

BY this time, Maurice having almost finished Maurice

his intrigues and preparations, was on the point pro,,t
of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking ofIhc
the field against the Emperor. His first care, Kins.
after he came to this resolution, was to disclaim
that narrow and bigotted maxim of the confe-
derates of Smalkalde, which had led them to
shun all connexion with foreigners. He had
observed how fatal this had been to their cause;
and inftrufted by their error, he was as eager
to court the protecion of Henry II. as they had
been solicitous to prevent the interposition of
Francis I. Happily for him, he found Henry
in a disposition to liften to the first overture on
his part, and in a situation which enabled him
to bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into action. Henry had long observed the pro-
grefs of the Emperor's arms with jealousy, and
wished to diftinguilh himself by trying his

Sipid. 535. Thuan. lib. ix. 3o09, &c. Iluanhafli

HiL Regn. Hungarici, lib. xvi. 189, &c. Mcm. de Ribicr.
ii, 87 x Natalie Comitis Hiftoria, lib. iv, 84, &c.

strength

BOOK X. strength against the fame enemy, whom it had
'""` been the glory of his father's reign to oppose.

He had laid hold on the first opportunity in
his power of thwarting the Emperor's designs,
by taking the duke of Parma under his protec-
tion; and hostilities were already begun, not
only in that dutchy but in Piedmont. Having
terminated the war with England by a peace,
no less advantageous to himself than honourable
for his allies the Scots, the reliefs and enter-
prizing courage of his nobles was impatient to
display itself on some theatre of aftion more
conspicuous than the petty operations in Parma
or Piedmont afforded them.

n, tr.,ty JOHN DE FIEssz, bishop of Bayonne, whom
with him, Henry had sent into Germany, under pretence

of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was
empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his associates. As it would have
been very indecent in a King of France to
have undertaken the defence of the Protefant
church, the interests of religion, how much so-
ever they might be affeced by the treaty, were
not once mentioned in any of the articles. Re-
ligious concerns, they pretended to commit en-
tirely to the disposition of divine providence;
the only motives assigned for their present con-
federacy against Charles, were to procure the

Landgrave

Landgrave liberty, and to prevent the fubver- BOOK X.
sion of the ancient constitution and laws of the ,s.
German Empire. In order to accoinplifh these
ends, it was agreed, that all the contrating
parties ihould, at the fame time, declare war
against the Emperor; that neither peace nor
truce ihould be made but by common content,
nor without including each of the confederates
that, in order to guard against the inconveni-
encies of anarchy, or of pretensions to joint
command, Maurice should be acknowledged as
head of the German confederates, with absolute
authority in all military affairs; that Maurice
and his associates ihould bring into the field
seven thousand horse, with a proportional num-
ber of infantry; that towards the subsistence of
this army, during the three first months of the
war, Henry should contribute two hundred and
forty thousand crowns, and afterwards sixty
thoufind crowns a-month, as long as they con-
tinued in arms; that Henry ihould attack the
Emperor on the fide of Lorrain with a powerful
army; that if it were found requisite to elet a
new Emperor, such a person mhould be nomi-
nated as shall be agreeable to the King of
France b. This treaty was concluded on the
fifth of October, some time before Magdeburg

b Recueil des Traitez, tom. ii. 258. Thuan. lib. vii.

furrendclered,

Beg,~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ll
z~~~~~~~~~~g.~ta ~ Z l v n

BoK X. surrendered, and the preparatory negociationj

Tc were conduc&ed with fubh profound secrecy, that

of all the Princes who afterwards acceded to it,
Maurice communicated what he was carrying
on to two only, John Albert, the reigning duke
of Mecklenburg; and William of Hefle, the
Landgrave's eldest son. The league itself was no
iefs anxiously concealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumour concerning it reached the
ears of the Emperor or his ministers; nor do
they seem to have conceived the most distant
suspicion of such a tranfa&ion.

Slici;ts AT the fame time, with a solicitude which
the aid of
Edward Vr. was careful to draw some accession of strength
of Engand. from every quarter, Maurice applied to Edward

VI. of England, and requested a subsidy of four
hundred thousand crowns for the support of a
confederacy formed in defence of the Protestant
religion. But the factions which prevailed in
the Englilh court during the minority of that
Prince, and which deprived both the councils
and arms of the nation of their wonted vigour,
left the English ministers neither time nor incli-
nation to attend to foreign affairsi'ald prevented
Maurice's obtaining that aid, which their zeal
for the Reformation would have prompted them
to grant him '.

c Burnet's Hid. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

MAURICE,

MAURICE, however,, having secured the pro- Boos X.

teEtion of such a powerful Monarch as Henry II. 1'i'
proceeded with great confidence, but with equal Demands
caution, to execute his plan. As he judged it thattde3

Landgrave

necessary to make one effort more, in order to Ilould be fe
obtain the Emperor's content that the Land- at libety.
grave mhould be set at liberty, he sent a solemn December.
embassy, in his own name, and in that of the
Elector of Brandenburg, to Infpruck. After
resuming, at great length, all the fats and ar-
guments upon which they founded their claim,
and representing, in the strongest terms, the
peculiar engagements which bound them to be
ib assiduous in their solicitations, they renewed
the request in, behalf of the unfortunate prisoner,
which they had so often preferred in vain. The
Elector Palatine, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the
Dukes of Mecklenburg, the Duke of Deux-
ponts, the Marquis of Brandenburg Bareith,
and the Marquis of Baden, by their ambaffa-
dors, concurred with them in their fuic. Let-
ters.were likewise delivered to the fame effect
from the King of Denmark, the Duke of Bava-
ria, and the Dukes of Lunenburg. Even the
King of the Romans joined in this application,
being moved with companifon towards the Land-
grave in his wretched situation, or influenced,
perhaps, by a secret jealousy of his brothtr's
power and'defigns, which, since his attempt to
alter the order of fucceflion in the Empire, he

had

*BOOK X. had come to view with other eyes, and dreaded

s551. to a great degree.

BUT Charles, constant to his own system with

regard to the Landgrave, eluded a demand
urged by such powerful interceflors; hnd having
declared that he would communicate his refolu-
tion concerning the matter to Maurice as soon
as he arrived at Infpruck, where he was every
day expected, he did not deign to descend into
any more particular explication of his inten-
tions 1. This application, though of no benefit
to the Landgrave, was of great advantage to
Maurice. It served to justify his subsequent
* proceedings, and to demonstrate the neceflity of

employing arms in order to extort that equitable
conceflion, which his mediation or intreaty could
not obtain. It was of use, too, to confirnt the
Emperor in his security, as both the solemnity
of the application, and the solicitude with which
so many Princes were drawn in to enforce it,
led him to conclude, that Maurice placed all his
hopes of retoring the Landgrave to liberty, in
gaining his consent to dismiss him.

i;,1. MAURICE employed artifices still more refined
,inti'nuto to conceal his machinations, to amuse the Em-
mu pcthe peror, and to gain time. He affected to be more

Slcid. 531. Thuan. lib. viii. a80.

solicitous

solicitous than ever to find out some expedient BoOK X.
for removing the difficulties with regard to the '.
fafe-condu& for the Protestant divines appointed
to attend the council, so that they might repair
thither without any apprehension of danger.
His ambassadors at Trent had frequent con-
ferences concerning this matter with the Impe-
rial ambaradors in that city, and laid open their
sentiments to them with the appearance of the
most unreserved confidence.. He was willing,
at last, to have it believed, that he thought all
differences with refpe&t to this preliminary ar-
tide were on the point of being adjusted; and
in order to give credit to this opinion, he com-
manded Melanathon, together with his bre-
thren, to set out on their journey to Trent. At
the fame time, he held a close correspondence
with the Imperial court at Infpruck, and re-
newed on every occasion his professions not only
of fidelity but of attachment to the Emperor.
He talked continually of his intention of going
to Infpruck in person; he ordered a house to be
hired for him in that city, and to be fitted up
with the greatest dispatch for his reception'.

BUT, profoundly skilled as Maurice was in The ros.

the arts of deceit, and impenetrable as he °orcuno
thought the veil to be under which he con- u'p',,",n

c(cilcrr ;ng
his i,lccn'

Arnoldi vita Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. xzZt t fr.
VOL. IV. F ceal4

Boxu X. cealed his designs, there were several things in

5s. hii:condut which alarmed the Emperor amidfc

his security, and tempted him frequently to
fufpet that he was meditating fomethiig extra-
ordinary. As there suspicions toolk their rife
from circumstances inconsiderable in themselves,
or of an ambiguous as well as uncertain nature,
they were more than counterbalanced-by Mau-
rice's address; and the Emperor would not,
lightly, give up his confidence in a man, whom
he had once trusted and loaded with favours.
One particular alone seemed to be of such con-
sequence, that he thought it necessary to de-
mand an explanation with regard to it. The
troops, which George of Mecklenburg had
taken into pay after the capitulation of Mag-
deburg, 'having fixed their quarters in Thurin-
gia, lived at discretion oh the lands of the rich
ccclefifticks in their neighbourhood. Their li-
cence and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exactions, complained
loudly to the Emperor, and represented them
as a body of men kept in readiness for some
desperate enterprize. But Maurice, partly by
extenuating the enormities of which they had
been guilty, partly by representing the impoli-
bility of disbanding these troops, or of keeping
them to regular discipline, unless the arrears
still due to them by the Emperor were paid,
either removed the apprehensions which this

,8i ,~'~ had

had occasioned, or as Charles was not in a.con- BooK X.
dition to fatisfy;the deninds of these soldiers, AWt
obliged him to be silen.t with, regard to the
matter.; . - -

THB time of aFiqn : W nfow approaching; Mauri;c

Maurice had privately d4ipatched Albert of aalont
Btgarnb.ugg :to Jaris, in order to confirm his
league with, Henrys and to haften the march of
tie Feench .army.. He had taken measures to
bring iS. wown fubjeas together on the first fum-
mons,., he; had provided for the security of
Saxony whie, he should. be absent with the
army; and he held the troops in Thuringia, on
which he chiefly depended, ready to advance on
a momente's warning, All there complicated
operations wvre carried. on without being dif-
covered by the. court at Infpruck, and the Em-
peror.xreained there in perfet tranquillity,
busied entirely in countera&ing the intrigues of
the Pppe's legate at Trent, and in fettling the
conditions on which the Protestant divines ihould
be admitted into the council, as if there had
not been any tranfaCion of greater moment in
agitation,

T'us credulous fecutity in a Prince, who by
his sagacity in observing the condut of all around

leid. 549. Thuan. 3394 .

F 2 h;n

BOOK X. him was commonly led to an excess of diftrut{

t ;C may seem unaccountable,: and has beenl imputed.

Circumflan- to infatuation. But besides the exquifiteJ ad-
ccs which
contribute dress with which Maurice concealed his inten-
to deceive
the Empe. tions, two circumfiances contributed to the

' delusion. The gout had returned upon Charles

soon after his arrival- at Infpruck, with an in-
crease of violence; and his confitution being
broken by such frequent attacks, he was reldm
able to exert his natural vigour of mind; or to
confider affairs with his usual' vigilance: and
penetration ; and Granvelle, bilhop of' Arras,
his prime minister, though one of :the mofl
fobtle ftatcfmen of that, or perhaps of any age,
was on this occasion the dupe of his own craft.
He entertained such an high. opinion of his own
abilities, and held the political talents of the
Germans in fuch'contempt, that he despised all
the intimations given' him concerning Maurice's
an I.; secret machinations, or the dangerous designs

which he was carrying on. When the Duke of
Alva, whose dark fulpicious mind harboured
many doubts concerning the Eleeor's sincerity,
proposed calling him immediately to court to
answer for his conduc, Granville replied with
great scorn, That there apprehensions were
groundless, and that a.drunken German head
was too gross to form any scheme which he
could not easily penetrate and baffle. Nor did

he

he assume this peremptory tone merely from BooK.X.
confidence in his own discernment; he had J552.
bribed two of Maurice's ministers, and received.
from them frequent and minute information
concerning all their matter's motions. But
through this very channel, by which he expeced
to gain access to all Maurice's counsels, and
even to his thoughts, such intelligence was con-
veyed to him as completed his deception.
Maurice fortunately discovered the correfpon-
dence of the two traitors with Granvelle, but
instead of punishing them for their crime, he
dexterously availed himself of their fraud, and
turned his own arts against the biihop. He
affected to treat these ministers with greater
confidence than ever 1 he admitted them to his
consultations; he seemed to lay open his heart
to them; and taking care all the while to let
them be acquainted with nothing but what it
was his interest ihould be known, they tranf-
Tnitted to Infpruck such accounts as pofleffed
Granvelle with a firm belief of his sincerity as
well as good intentions '. The Emperor him-
self, in the fulness of security, was to little
moved by a memorial, in name of the ecclefi-
aRtical Ele&ors, admonilhing him to be on his
guard against Maurice, that he made light of
this intelligence, and his answer to them

s Melvil's Memoin, fol. edit p. as.

F 3 abounds

BOOK X. abounds with declarations of his entire and con-
,s, sident reliance on the fidelity as well as attach-

mnpt of that Prince b

Mauripe AT last Maurice's preparations were com-
takes the
field againt pleted, and he had the fatisfation to find that
'te e'` his intrigues and designs were Rill unknown.

But, though now ready to take the field, he
did not lay aside the arts which he had hitherto
employed i and by one piece of craft more, he
deceived his enemies a few days longer. He
gave out, that he was about to begin that jour-
pey to Infpruck of which he had so often
ralked, and he took one of the ministers whom
Granvelle had bribed, to attend him thither.
After travelling post a few Rages, he pretended
to be indisposed by the fatigue of the journey,
and difparthing the fufpe.ed mnnifter to make
his apology to the Emperor for this delay, and
to assure him that he would be at Infpruck
within a few days, he mounted on horseback,
as soon as this spy on his a&ioqs was gone, rode
arc t. , full speed towards Thuringia, joined his army,

which amounted to twenty thousand foot and
five thousand horse, and put it immediately in
motion *.

AT

' SeCid. 335.
* Melv. Mem. p. 13. Thee circumflances concerning
the Saxon minilcrs whom Granvelle had bribed, are not

mentioned

AT the fame time he publihed a manifeto BoorK I.

containing his rcafons for taking arms. These * 's.
were three in number; That he might secure Publ.ies

manifesto

the Protestant religion, which was threatened justifying
with immediate deftrution; That he might hitcondu.
maintain the constitution and laws of the Em-
pire, and save Germany. from being fubjeEted
to the dominion of an absolute monarch; That
he might deliver the Landgrave of Hesse from-
the miseries of a long and unjust imprisonment.
By the first, -he routed all the favourers of the
Reformation, a party formidable by their zeal
as well as numbers, and rendered desperate by
oppreflion. By the second, he interested all the
friends of liberty, Catholicks rio less than Pro-
teftants, and made it their interest to unite with
him in aferting the rights and privileges com-
mon to both. The third, besides the glory
which he acquired by his zeal to fulfil his en-
gagements to the unhappy prisoner, was become
a cause of general concern, not only from the
compaflion which the Landgrave's sufferings
excited, but from indignation at the injustice
and rigour of the Emperor's proceedings against
him. Together with Maurice's manifesto, ano-
ther appeared in the name of Albert Marquis

mentioned by the German historians; but as Sir James
Melvil received his information from the Eletor Palatine,
and as they are pedeitly agreeable to the reft of Maurice's
conduet, they may be confidered as authentick.

F 4 of

Boox . of. Brandenburg Culmbach, who had joined

;i- him with a body of. adventurers whom he had

drawn together. The fame grievances which
Maurice had pointed out are mentioned in it,
but with an excess of virulence and animosity
suitable to the charater of the prince in whose
name it was published.

We ispower- THE King of France added to these a mani-
fully £up.
pored by fefto in his own name; in which, after taking
ith- nch notice of the ancient alliance between the French

and German nations, both descended from the
fame ancestors, and after mentioning the appli-
cations, which, in consequence of this, some of
the most illustrious among the German Princes
had made to him for his protetion; he declared
that he now took arms to re.establish the an-
cient constitution of the Empire, to deliver
tome of its princes from captivity, and to secure
the privileges and independence of all the mem-
bers of the Germanick body. In this mani.
fefto, Henry afiumed the extraordinary title of
ProtSlor of the Likerties of Germany, and of its
aptive Princes; and there was: engraved on it
a cap, the ancient symbol of freedom, placed
between two daggers, in order to intimate to
the Germans, that this blelling was to be ac-
quired and secured by force of arms '

SI ld. 549. Thurn. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribier, ii.
371'

2 MAURIC$

MAURICE had now a very different part to BooI X.

a&, but his flexible genius was capable of ac- 52.
commodating itself to every situation. The Maurice'.

operations

moment he took arms, he was as bold and en- in the ield.
terprizing in the field, as he had been cautious
and crafty in the cabinet. He advanced by
rapid marches towards the Upper Germany.
All the towns in his way opened their gates to
him. He reinstated the magistrates whom the
Emperor had deposed, and gave poffiefion of
the churches to the Protestant ministers whom
he had ejeated. He directed his march to
Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison, which
was too inconsiderable to thinL of defending it,
retired immediately, he took poffefllon of that
great city, and made the fame changes there Aprils.
as in the towns through which he had passed k.

No words can express the Emperor's astonish- The Emp-t

*ror's aflo-

ment and consternation at events so unexpected. niflnment
He saw a great number of the German Princes and di
in arms against him, and the reft either ready
to join them, or wihling success to their enter-
prize. He beheld a powerful Monarch united
with them in close league, seconding their ope-
rations in person at the head of a formidable
army, while he, through negligence and cre-
dulity, which exposed him no less to scorn than

k Sleid. 55. Thuan. 342.

to

Boos X. to.danger, had neither made nor was in con-
X '52 dition to make any effe&tual provision either for

crushing his rebellious fubjeds, or resisting the
invasion of the foreign enemy. Part of his
Spanish troops had been prdered into Hungary
against the Turks; the test had marched back
to Italy upon occasion of the war in the dutchy
of Parma. The bands of veteran Germans had
been dismissed, because he was not able to pay
them; or had entered into Mauw4e's service
after the siege of Magdeburgi and he remained
at Infpruck with a body of soldiers hardly strong
enough to guard his own person. His treasury
was as much exhausted, as his army was re-
duced. He had received no remittances for
some time from the new world. He had for-
feited all credit with the merchants of Genoa
and Venice, who refused to lend him money,
though tempted by the offer of exorbitant in-
terest. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the
most considerable potentate in Christendom, and
capable of exerting the greatest strength, as his
power, notwithstanding the violent attack made
upon it, was fill unimpaired, found himself in
a situation which rendered him unable to make
such a sudden and vigorous effort as the junc-
ture required, and was neccfiary to have saved
him from the present danger.

IN

IN this situation, the Emperor placed all his Booz X.

hopes on negociating; the only resource of ''.^
such as are conscious of their own weakness. Endeavoor

to gain tim

But thinking it inconsistent with his dignity to by a negc-
make the first advances to fubjeds who were in 'tio.
arms againit him, he avoided that indecorum
by employing the mediation of his brother Ser-
dinand. Maurice confiding in his own talents
toconduct any negociation in such a manner as
to derive advantage from it, and hoping that
by the appearance of facility in hearkening to
.the first overture of accommodation, he might
amuse the Emperor and tempt him to lacken
the activity with which he was now preparing
to defend himself, readily agreed to an inter-
view with Ferdinand in the town of Lintz in
Aufria: and having left his army to proceed
on its march under the command of the Duke
of Mecklenburg, he repaired thither.

MEANWHILE the King of France punctually Profreiof

fulfilled his engagements to his allies. He took army.
the field early with a numerous and well ap-
pointed army, and marching directly into Lor-
.rain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at
his.approach. His forces appeared next before
Metz, and that city by a fraudulent stratagem
of the Constable Montmorency, who having
obtained permission to pass through it with a
small guard, introduced as many troops as were

sufficient

Boor X. sufficient to overpower the garrison, was like-
15z wife seized without bloodshed. .Henry made

his entry into all these towns with great pomp;
he obliged the inhabitants to swear allegiance
to him, and annexed those important conquests
to the French Monarchy. He left a strong
garrison in Metz. From thence he advanced
towards Alsace, in order to attempt new con-
quests, to which the success that had hitherto
attended his arms invited him '.

The neo- THE lconference at Lintz did not produce

ilations be- * I
.twcthe any accommodation. Maurice, when he con-
Endoric, ented to it, seems to have had nothing in view
*'ffise. but to amuse the Emperor; for he made such

demands both in behalf of his confederates,
and their ally the French King, as he knew
would not be accepted by a Prince, too haughty
to submit, at once, to conditions dicated by
an enemy. But however firmly Maurice ad-
hered during the negociation to the interests of
his afrociates, or how Readily soever he kept
in view the objets which had induced him to
take arms, he often profefled a strong incli-
nation to terminate the differenceswith the Em-
peror in an amicable manner. Encouraged by
this appearance of a pacifick disposition, Ferdi-
nand proposed a second interview at Paflau on

' Thuan. 349.

the

the twenty-fixth of May, and that a truce Boor X.
(hould commence on that day, and continue to !;52.
the tenth of-June, in order to give them leisure
for adjusting all the points in difputc.

UPON this, Maurice rejoined his army on the Munce ad.

ninth of May, which had now advanced to ,Vaarl.
Gundelfingen. He pug his troops in motion ptuck,
next morning; and as sixteen days yet remained
for ation before the commencement of the
truce, he resolved, during that period, to ven-
ture upon an enterprize, the success of which
would be so decisive, as would render the nego-
ciations at Paffau extremely short, and entitle
him to treat upon his own terms. He foresaw
that the profpet of a cessation of arms, which
was to take place so foony together with the
opinion of his earnestness to re-establish peace,
with which he had artfully amused Ferdinand,
could hardly fail of inspiring the Emperor. with
such false hopes, that he would naturally become
remiss, and relapse into some degree of that
security which had already been bo fatal to
him. Relying on this conjeture, he marched
diretly at. the head of his army towards In-
fpruck, and advanced with the most rapid
motion that could be given to so great a body
of troops. On the eighteenth he arrived at
Pieffen, a post of great consequence, at the

entrance

BoeK X. entrance into the Tyrolele. There he found

ss.i ' a body of eight hundred men, whom the Em-

peror had allembled, strongly intrenched, in
order to oppose his progress. He attacked them
instantly with such violence and impetuosity
that they abandoned their lines precipitantly,
and falling back on a second body posted near
Ruten, communicated the panick terror with
which they themelves had been seized :to those
troops, so that they likewise took to flight, after
a feeble resistance.

Takes the ELATED with this success, which exceeded his
¢,bergh. most sanguine hopes, Maurice prefied forward

to Ehrenbergh, a castle situated on an high and
seep precipice, which commanded the only pass
through the mountains. As this fort had been
furrehdered to the Protestants at the beginning
of the Smalkaldick war, because the garrison was
then too weak to defend it, the Emperor, fen*
fible of its importance, had taken care, at this
juncture, to throw into it a body of troops sus-
ficient to maintain it against the greatest army.
But a shepherd, in pursuing a goat which had
strayed from his flock, having discovered an
unknown path by which it was pollible to ascend
to the top of the rock, came with this season.
able piece of intelligence to Maurice. A small
band of chosen soldiers, under the command of

George

George of Mecklenburg, was instantly ordered Boor x.
to follow this guide. They set out in the even- ,5.a
ing, and clambering. up the rugged track with
infinite fatigue as well as danger, they reached
the summit unperceived ; and at an hour which
had been: concerted, :when Maurice began the
aflult on the one fide of the castle, they ap-
peared on the other, ready to scale the walls,
which were feeble in that place, because it had
been hitherto deemed inaccessible. The gar-
rifon, struck with terror at the fight of an
enemy on a quarter where they had thought
themselves perfectly secure, immediately threw
down their arms. Maurice, almost without
bloodshed, and which was of greater confe-
quence to him, without loss of time, took pof-
session of a place, the reduaion of which might
have retarded him long, and have required the
utmost efforts of his valour and ikill m.

MAURICE was now only two days march from A mutinyof

his troops

Infpruck, and without losing a moment he retards hi
ordered his infantry to advance thither, having
left his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
mountainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the
mouth of the pass. He proposed to advance with
such rapidity as to anticipate any accounts of
the loss of Ehrenbergh, and to surprise the Em-
peror, together with his attendants, in an open

m Arnoldi vita Maurit. 123.

town

BoogX. town incapable :of defence. But just as his

troops tgan to move, a battalion ofmercenaries
nmutinied~. declaiagl that they would not stir
until they ha4d eceived the gratuity, which,
according..to..the cutom. of that age, they
claimed as the recompense, due to them for
having, taken a. place by. assault. It was with
great difficulty as well as danger, and not.with-
out some considerable lofs.of time, that Maurice
quieted this inifurre&ion, and prevailed on the
soldiers to follow him to a place where he pro-
mise them such rich booty as would, be an
ample reward for all their services.

The itmpe- To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen
Tor flies in
confusion accident, the Emperor owed his safety. He

'rom !ns-
ruck. was informed of the approaching danger late

in the evening, and knowing that nothing could
save him but a speedy flight, he instantly left
Infpruck, without regarding the darkness of
the night, or the violence of the rain which
happened to fall at that time; and notwith-
standing the debility occasioned by the gout,
which rendered him unable to bear any motion
but that of a litter, he travelled by the light of
torches, taking his way over the Alps, by roads
almost impassable. His courtiers and atten-
dants followed him with equal precipitation, some
of them on such horses as they could hastily

procure,

procure, many of them on foot, and all in the BOOK X.
utmost confusion. In this miserable plight, very ,5
unlike the pomp with which Charles had appear-
ed during the five preceding years as the con-
queror of Germany, he arrived at length with his
dejected train at Villach in Carinthia, and scarce-
ly thought himself secure even in that remote
inaccessible corner.

MAURICE entered Infpruck a few hours after Mauticen.

ters that

the Emperor and his attendants had left it; and town.
enraged that the prey should escape out of his
hands when he wasjuft ready to seize it, he pur-
sued them some miles; but finding it impossible
to overtake persons, to whom their fear gave
speed, he returned to the town, and abandone
all the Emperor's baggage, together with that of
his ministers, to be plundered by the soldiers;
while he preserved untouched every thing be-
longing to the King of the Romans, either be-
cause he had formed some friendly connexion
with that Prince, or because he wished to have
it believed that such a connexion subsisted be-
tween them. As there now remained only three
days to the commencement of the truce, (with
such nicety had Maurice calculated his opera.
tions) he set out for Paffau, that he might meet
Ferdinand on the day appointed.

VOL. IV. G BEFORE

BOOK X.! BEFORE Charles left Infpruck, he withdrew

', the guards placed on the degraded Elecor of

The Empe. Saxony, whom, during five years, he had car-
ror lets the d
E eaor of ried about with him as a prisoner; and set him
Saxony at
Lbe.y. entirely at liberty, either with an intention to

embarrass Maurice by letting loose a rival, who
might dispute his title to his dominions and
dignity, or from a sense of the indecency of
detaining him a prisoner, while he himself run
the risk of being deprived of his own liberty.
But that Prince, feeing no other way of efca-
ping than that which the Emperor took, and
abhorring the thoughts of falling into the hands
of a kinsman, whom he justly confidered as the
author of all his misfortunes, chose rather to
accompany Charles in his flight, and to expet
the final decision of his fate from the treaty
which was now approaching.

The coun. THESE were not the only effecs which Mau-
cil of Trent
breakupin rice's operations produced. It was no sooner
eratoin. known at Trent that he had taken arms, than a

general consternation seized the fathers of the
council. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the
safety of their respective territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the le-
gate, who had hitherto difappointedall the endea-

vOurs

yours of the Imperial ambassadors to procure BOOK X.
an audience in the council for the Protestant 15z.
divines, laid hold with joy on Iuch a plausible
pretext for difmilling an assembly, which he
had found it so difficult to govern. In a con-
gregation held on the twenty-eighth of April,
a decree was issued proroguing the council du-
ring two years, and appointing it to meet at the
expiration of that time, if peace were then re-
efablifhed in Europe ". This prorogation, how-
ever, continued no efsl than ten years; and the
proceedings of the council, when re-assembled
in the year one thousand five hundred and sixty-
two, fall not within the period prescribed to this
history.

THE convocation of this afemrbly had been The effe

of its de-

passionately desired by all the states and Princes crec,.
in Christendom, who, from the wisdom as well
as piety of prelates representing the whole body
of the faithful, expeted some charitable and
efficacious endeavours towards composing the
dissensions which unhappily had arisen in the
church. But the several Popes by whose au-
thority it was called, had other objects in view.
They exerted all their power or policy to attain
these i and by the abilities as well as address of
their legates, by the ignorance of many of the

a F. Paul, 353.

G 2 prelates,

BOOK X. prelates, and by the servility of the indigent

1^7. Italian bilhops, acquired such influence in the

council, that they dictated all its decrees, and
framed them not with an intention to restore
unity and concord to the church, but to stablish
their own dominion, or to confirm those tenets,
upon which they imagined that dominion to be
founded. Dotrines, which had hitherto been
admitted upon the credit of tradition alone, and
received with some latitude of interpretation,
were now defined with a scrupulous nicety, and
confirmed by the fan&ion of authority. Rites,
which had formerly been observed only in de-
ference to custom supposed to be ancient, were
eftabli(hed by the decrees of the church, and
declared to be essential parts of its worship.
The breach, infiead of being closed, was wi-
dened, and made irreparable. In place of any
attempt to reconcile the contending parties, a
line was drawn with such studied accuracy, as
ascertained and marked out the diftin&ion be-
tween them. This fill serves to keep them at
a distance; and, without some signal interpo-
fition of Divine Providence, must render the
reparation perpetual.
charaaer OUR knowledge of the proceedings of this

ns ho f assembly, is derived from three different authors.
c"unc"'. Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of the

Council

Council of Trent, while the memory of what had BOOK X.
passed there was recent, and some who had been ,Z
members of it were still alive. He has exposed
the intrigues and artifices by which it was con-
du&ed, with a freedom and severity which have
given a deep wound to the credit of the council.
He has described its deliberations, and explained
its decrees, with such perspicuity and depth of
thought, with such various erudition and such
force of reason, as have justly entitled his work
to be placed among the most admired historical
compositions. About half a century thereafter,
the Jesuit Pallavicini published his history of
the council, in opposition to that of Father Paul,
and by employing all the force of an acute and
refining genius to invalidate the credit, or to
confute the reasonings of his antagonist, he la-
bours to prove, by artful apologies for the pro-
ceedings of the council, and subtile interpre-
tations of its decrees, that it deliberated with
impartiality, and decided with judgment as well
as candour. Vargas, a Spanish doctor of laws,
who was appointed to attend the Imperial am-
baffadors at Trent, sent the bilhop of Arras a
regular account of the tranfa&ions there, ex-
plaining all the arts which the Legate employed
to influence or over-awe the council. His let-
ters have been published, in which he inveighs
against the papal court with that asperity of cen-
sure, which was natural to a man whose fitua-

G 3 tion

BOOK tion enabled him to observe its arts thoroughly,

, and who was obliged to exert all his attention

and talents in order to disappoint them. But
whichsoever of there authors an intelligent per-
son takes for his guide, in forming a judgment
concerning the spirit of the council, he must dif'
cover so much ambition as well as artifice among
some of the members, so much ignorance and
corruption among others; he mufl observe such
a large infusion of human policy and passions,
mingled with such a scanty portion of that fim-
plicity of heart, fanaity of manners, and love
of truth, which alone qualify men to determine
what dotrines are worthy of God, and what
worship is acceptable to him; that he will find
it no easy matter to believe, that any extraordi-
nary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over
this assembly, and dictated its decrees,

The Prench WHILE Maurice was employed in negociat-
endpavour ing with the King of the Romans at Lintz, or
to surprise
Sttalburghi in making war on the Emperor in the Tyrol,

the French King had advanced into Alfaoe as
far as Strafburgh; and having demanded leave
of the Senate to march through the city, he
hoped that, by repeating the fame fraud which
he had prafifed at Metz, he might render him-
self mailer of the place, and by that means fe-
cure a passage over the Rhine into the heart of

Germany,

Germany. But the Strafburghers, inftruaed and BooK X.
put on their guard by the credulity and misfor- '5 '
tune of their neighbours, shut their gates; and
having aflcmbled a garrison of five thousand
oIldiers, repaired their fortifications, rated the
houses in their suburbs, and determined to defend
themselves to the utmost. At the fame time
they sent a deputation of their most refpedtable
citizens to the King, in order to divert him from
making any hostile attempt upon them. The
Electors of Treves and Cologn, the Duke of
Cleves, and other Princes in the neighbourhood,
interposed in their behalf; beseeching Henry
that he would not forget so soon the title which
he had generously assumed; and instead of being
the Deliverer of Germany, become its Oppressor.
The Swiss Cantons seconded them with zeal,
soliciting Henry to spare a city which had long
been conneEted with their community in friend-
ihip and alliance.

POWERFUL as this united intercession was, it bllt *lout

would not have prevailed on Henry to forego a
prize of so much value, if he had been in a con-
dition to have seized it. But, in that age, the
method of fubrifting numerous armies at a dif-
tance from the frontiers of their own country,
was imperfectly understood, and neither the re-
venues of Princes, nor their experience in the

G 4 art

BooK X. art of war, were equal to the great and compli-

1552. cated efforts which such an undertaking required.

The French, though not far removed from their
own country, began already to susser from scar-
city of provisions, and had no sufficient maga-
zines collected to support them during a siege,
which must necessarily have been of great
length °. At the fame time, the Queen of Hun-
gary, governess of the Low-Countries, had as-
fembled a considerable body of troops, which,
under the command of Martin de Roffem, laid
waste Champagne, and threatened the adjacent
provinces of France. These concurring circum-
itances obliged the King, though with reluctance,
to abandon the enterprize. But being willing
to acquire some merit with his allies, by this
retreat which he could not avoid, he pretended
to the Swiss that he had taken the resolution
merely in compliance with their request P ; and
then, after giving orders that all the horses in
his army ihould be led to drink in the Rhine,
as a proof of his having pushed his conquests so
far, he marched back towards Champagne.

The opera- WHILE the French King and the main army
tbt of of the confederates were thus employed, Albert
budrg. of Brandenburg was entrusted with the com-

mand of a separate body of eight thousand men,

* Thuan. 51, 35.

35 Sleid. 557. Brantome,
tom. vii. 39.

confiting

consisting chiefly of mercenaries who had re- BnOK X.
forted to his standard, rather from the hope of -*

155z.

plunder, than the expectation of regular pay.
That Prince, secing himself at the head of such
a number of desperate adventurers, ready to
follow wherever he ihould lead them, soon be-
gan to disdain a fate of subordination, and to
form such vast schemes of aggrandizing himself,
as seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless
when civil war or violent facions route them
to bold exertions, by alluring them with imme-
diate hopes of success. Full of these aspiring
thoughts, Albert made war in a manner very
different from the other confederates. He en-
deavoured to spread the terror of his arms by
the rapidity of his motions, as well as the ex-
tent and rigour of his devastations; he exaced
contributions wherever he came, in order to
amass such a fum of money, as would put it
in his power to keep his army together; he
laboured to get poifeffion of Nuremberg, Ulm,
Or some other of the free cities in upper Ger-
many, in which, as a capital, he might fix the
feat of his power. But, finding these cities on
their guard, and in a condition to resist his at-
tacks, he turned all his rage against the popish
ecclefiafticks, whose territories he plundered
with such wanton and merciless barbarity, as
gave them a very unfavourable impreflion of

the

BOOK X. the spirit of that reformation in religion, with

1552 zeal for which he pretended to be animated.

The bishops of Bambergh and Wurzburgh, by
their situation, lay particularly exposed to his
ravages; he obliged the former to transfer to
him, in property, almost one half of his exten-
five diocese; and compelled the latter to ad-
vance an immense fum in order to save his coun-
try from ruin and desolation. During all those
wild sallies, Albert paid no regard either to
Maurice's orders, whose commands as General-
iIimo of the league he had engaged to obey,
or to the remonstrances of the other confede-
rates; and manifestly discovered, that he at-
tended only to his own private emolument, with-
out any solicitude about the common cause, or
the general objeEts which had induced them to
take arms .

The nego. MAURICE having ordered his army to march
ciationi of back into Bavaria, and having published a pro-
peace at
Parau. clamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and

inftruaors of youth, to resume the exercise of
their functions in all the cities, schools, and uni-
verfitics from which they had been ejected, met
Ferdinand at Palfau on the twenty-fixth day of
May. As matters of the greatest consequence
to the future peace and independence of the

q Sklid. 561, Thuan. 357.

Empire

Empire were to be fettled in this congress, the BooK X.
eyes of all Germany were fixed upon it. Be- 1^
fides Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors,
the Duke of Bavaria, the bishops of Saltzburgh
and Aichftadt, the ministers of all the EleEtors,
together with deputies from most of the con-
fiderable Princes and free cities, retorted to
Paflau. Maurice, in name of his associates,
and the King of the Romans as the Emperor's
representative, opened the negociation. The
Princes who were present, together with the de.
puties of such as were absent, acted as intercef-
fors or mediators between them.

MAURICE, in a long difcou:fe, explained the Tteterms

v hich

motives of his own condut. After having enu. M.,rice
merated all the unconstitutional and oppressive P"1°'0'
ats of the Emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to the manifesto which he had published
when he took arms against him, limited his de-
mands to three articles. That the Landgrave
of Hesse ihould be immediately set at liberty;
That the grievances in the civil government of
the Empire ihould be redressed; and that the
Protestants ihould be allowed the publick exer-
cife of their religion without molestation. Ser-
dinand and the Imperial ambassadors discovering
their unwillingness to gratify him with regard to
all these points, the mediators wrote a joint letter

to

BOOK X. to the Emperor, beseeching him to deliver Ger-
'7552. many from the calamities of a civil war, by

giving such fatisfation to Maurice and his party
as might induce them to lay down their arms;
and at the fame time they prevailed upon Mau-
rice to grant a prolongation of the truce for a
short time, during which they undertook to pro-
cure the Emperor's final answer to his demands.

Powerfully THIS request was presented to the Emperor
supported by
tho Princes in the name of all the Princes of the Empire,
of the ]nm-
peie. Popish as well as Protestant, in the name of such

as had lent an helping hand to forward his am-
bitious schemes, as well as of those who had
viewed the progress of his power with jealousy
and dread. The uncommon and cordial unani-
mity with which they concurred at this junc-
ture in enforcing Maurice's demands, and in re-
commending peace, flowed from different causes.
Such as were most attached to the Roman catho-
lick church could not help observing, that the
Protefant confederates were at the headof a
numerous army, while the Emperor was but
just beginning to provide for his own defence.
They foresaw that great efforts would be required
of them, and would be necessary on their part,
in order to cope with enemies, who had been
allowed to get the start so far, and to attain
such formidable power. Experience had taught

them,

them, that the fruit of all there efforts would be Boo K X.
reaped by the Emperor alone, and the more ,s2.
complete any vitory proved which they should
gain, the faster would they bind their own set-
ters, and render them the more intolerable.
These refletions made them cautious how they
contributed a second time, by their indiscreet
zeal, to put the Emperor in possession of power
which would be fatal to the liberties of their
country. Notwithstanding the implacable fierce-
ness of the spirit of bigotry in that age, they
chose rather that the Protestants Thould acquire
that fecuricy for their religion which they de-
manded, than by aflifting Charles to oppress
them, to give such additional force to the Impe-
rial prerogative, as would overturn the conftitu-
tion of the Empire. To all these considerations,
the dread of feeing Germany laid waste by a civil
war, added new force. Many states of the Em-
pire already felt the defRru&ive rage of Albert's
arms, others dreaded it, and all wished for an
accommodation between the Emperor and Mau-
rice, which they hoped would save them from
that cruel scourge.

SucH were the reasons that induced so many Themntv;,.

Princes, notwithstanding the variety of their po- ,'i'h ,You
litical intercffs, and the opposition in their re- E~ir. ..
ligious sentiments, to unite in recommending to tutr.
the Emperor an accommodation with Maur:ce,

nct

BOOK X. not only as a salutary, but as a necessary mea;

sure. The motives which prompted Charles to
desire it, were not fewer or of less weight. He
was perfectly sensible of the superiority which
the confederates had acquired through his
own negligence; and he now felt the infuffi-
ciency of his own resources to oppose them.
His Spanish fubjets, disgusted at his long ab-
fence, and weary of endless wars, which were of
no benefit to their country, refused to furnilh
him any considerable supply either of men or
money; and although by his address or impor-
tunity he might have hoped to draw from them
at last more effectual aid; that, he knew, was
too distant to be of any service in the present
exigency of his affairs. His treasury was drain-
ed; his veteran forces were dispersed, or dif-
banded, and he could not depend much either
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied fol-
diers whom he was collecing. There was no
hope of repeating with success the fame artifices
which had weakened and ruined the Smalkaldick
league. As the end at which he aimed was now
known, he could no longer employ the specious
pretexts, which had formerly concealed his am-
bitious designs. Every Prince in Germany was
alarmed and on his guard; and it was vain to
think of blinding them a second time to fuc!
a degree, as to make one part of them inftru-
ments to enslave the other. The spirit of a

2 con-

confederacy, whereof Maurice was the head, BooK X,
experience had taught him, to be very different 152.
from that of the league of Smalkalde; and
from what he had already felt, he had no reason
to flatter himself that its counsels would be as
irresolute, or its efforts as timid and feeble. If
he ihould resolve on continuing the war, he
might be aflured, that the most considerable
states in Germany would take part in it against
him; and a dubious neutrality was the utmost
he could expec from the reft. While the con-
federates found full employment for his arms
in one quarter, the King of France would seize
the favourable opportunity, and push on his
operations in another, with almost certain fuc-
cess. That Monarch had already made con-
quests in the Empire, which he was no less eager
to recover, than impatient to be revenged on
him for aiding his malecontent subje&s. Though
Henry had now retired from the banks of the
Rhine, he had only varied the scene of hofti-
lities, having invaded the Low-Countries with
all his forces. Tlhe Turks, roused by the soli-
citations of the French King, as well as ftimu-
lated by resentment against Ferdinand for having
violated the truce in Hungary, had prepared a
powerful fleet to ravage the coasts of Naples and
*cily, which he had left almost defenceless, by
calling thence the greatest part of the regular

troops

Book X. troops to join the army which he was now as.

A55.2 fembling.

Ferdinand FERDINAND, who went in person to Villach,
prmitan in order to lay before the Emperor the result
:ati°on' of the conferences at Palfau, had likewise rea.

sons peculiar to himself for desiring an accom-
modation. These prompted him to second,
with the greatest earnestness, -he arguments
which the Princes assembled there had employed
in recommending it. He had observed, not
without secret fatisfation, the fatal blow that
had been given to the defpotick power, which
his brother had usurped in the Empire. He
was extremely solicitous to prevent Charles from
recovering what he had loft, as he foresaw that
he would immediately resume with fresh eager-
ness, and with a better chance of success, his
favourite scheme of transmitting that power to
his son by excluding him from the right of fuc-
cefflon to the Imperial throne. On this ac-
count, he was willing to contribute towards
circumscribing the Imperial authority, in order
to render his own poffefion of it certain. Bc-
fides, Solyman, exasperated at the loss of Tran-
fylvania, and till more at the fraudulent arts
by which it had been seized, had ordered into
the field an army of an hundred thousand mh,
which having defeated a great body of Ferdi-

nand's

nand's troops, and taken several places of im.. BooK X.
portance, threatened not only to complete the ,.
conquest of the province, but to drive him out
of that part of Hungary which was still fubje;
to his jurifdidion. He was unable to resist
such a mighty enemy; his brother, while engaged
in a domeftick war, could afford him no aid b
and he could not even hope to draw from Ger-
many the contingent, either of troops or money,
usually furnilhed to repel the invasions of the
Infidels. Maurice, having observed Ferdinand's
perplexity with regard to this lafft point, had
offered, if peace were re-established on a secure
foundation, that he would march in person with
his troops into Hungary againif the Turks.
Such was the effe of this well-timed proposal,
that Ferdinand, destitute of every other profpe&t
of relief, became the most zealous advocate
whom the confederates could have chosen to
urge their claims, and there was hardly any
thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have chosen to grant, rather than
have retarded a pacification, to which he trussed
as the only means of saving his Hungarian
crown.

WHEN so many causes conspired in rendering c;rcumnln.

an accommodation eligible, it might have been c,,,
expeted that it would have taken place imme-
diately. But the inflexibility of the Emperor's

VOL. IV. H temper,

BOOK X. temper, together with his unwillingness at once

Jz s2 to relinquilh obje&s which he had long pur-

sued with such earnertnefs and afliduity, coun-
terbalanced, for rome time, the force of all the
motives which disposed him to peace, and nor
only put that event at a difance, but seemed
to render it uncertain. When Maurice's de-
mands, together with the letter of the mediators
at Paffau, were presented to him, he peremp-
torily refused to redress the grievances which
were pointed out, nor would he agree to any
stipulation for the immediate security of the
Proteflant religion, but proposed referring both
these to the determination of a future diet. On
his part, he required that instant reparation
lhould be made to all who, during the present
war, had suffered either by the licentiousness of
the confederate troops, or the exactions of their
leaders.

Mlaurse.s MAURICE, who was well acquainted with the
pigoro'u Emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he
Opera ions
,,cili,^,c t. had nothing in view by there overtures but to

amuse and deceive; and therefore, without
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Pafahu
abruptly, and joining his troops which were
encamped at Mergentheim, a city in Franc6nia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonick order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hostilities.
As three thousand men in the Emperor's pay

had

had thrown themselves into Frankfort, on the BOOK X.
Mlaine, and might from thence infest the neigh- I5z.
bouring country of Hefle, he marched towards
that city and laid siege to it in form. The July ,.
briskness of this enterprize, and the vigour with
which Maurice carried on his approaches against
the town, gave such an alarm to the Emperor,
is difpored him to lend a more favourable ear
to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of an accom.
modation. Firm and haughty as his nature
was, he found it necessary to bend, and figni-
fled his willingness to make conceflhons on his
part, if Maurice3 in return, would abate some-
what of the figour of his deniands. Ferdinand,
as foori as he perceived that his brother began
to yield, did hot desist from his importunities,
uhtil he prevailed on him to declare what was
the utmost that he would grant for the feturity
of the confederates. Havihg gained this dit-
cult point, he instantly dispatched a meflenger
to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the
Eniperor's final resolution, conjured him not to
frustrate his endeavours for the re.establishment
of peace, o0, by an urifeafonable obstinacy on
his fide, to disappoint the wishes of all Germany
for that salutary event.

MAURICE, notwithianding the profpetous SMuri,;

defirom ns

situation of his affairs, was strongly inclined to anarom-
liften to his advice. The Emperor, though

H a over-

Bool: X, over-reached and surprised, had now begun to
'S'. asemble troops, and however flow his motions

might be, while the first effe&s of his confter-
nation remained, he was sensible that Charles
must at laif aft with vigour proportional to the
extent of his power and territories, and lead into
Germany an army formidable by its numbers,
and Rill more by the terror of his name, as well
as the remembrance of his past vicories. He
could scarcely hope that a confederacy com-
posed of so many members would continue to
operate with sufficient union and perseverance to
resist the consistent and well-direCted efforts of
an army, at the absolute disposal of a leader
accustomed to command and to conquer. He
felt already, although he had not hitherto ex-
perienced the {hock of any adverse event, that
he was the head of a disjointed body. He saw,
from the example of Albert of Brandenburg,
how difficult it would be, with all his address
and credit, to prevent any particular member
from detaching himself from the whole, and
how impossible to recal him to his proper rank
and subordination. This filled him with appre-
henfions for the common cause. Another con-
fideration gave him no less disquiet with regard
to his own particular interests. By setting at li-
berty the degraded Elecor, and by repealing
the act depriving him of his hereditary honours

and

and dominions, the Emperor had it in his power BooK X.
to wound him in the most sensible part. The ;5'
efforts of a Prince beloved by his ancient sub-
je&s, and revered by all the Protestant party,
in order to recover what had been unj.ustly taken
from him, could hardly have failed of exciting
commotions in Saxony, which would endanger
all.that he had acquired at the expence of so
much diflimulation and artifice. It was no less
in the Emperor's power to render vain all the
solicitations of the confederates in behalf of the
Landgrave. He had only to add one aft of
violence more to the injustice and rigour with
which he had already treated him; and he had
accordingly threatened the tons of that unfortu-
nate Prince, that if they persisted in their pre-
Sent enterprize, instead of feeing their father re-
stored to liberty, they should hear of his having
suffered the punishment which his rebellion ha4
merited r.

HAVING deliberated upon all there points The peace

of Religion
with his associates, Maurice thought it more conclecd

at tPallu,

prudent to accept of the conditions offered,
though less advantageous than those which he
had proposed, than again to commit all to the
doubtful issue of war'* He repaired forthwith

r Sleid. 571. Slcid. Hil. 563, &c. Thuan.
lib. x. 359, &c.

3 to

Boot X. to Paflau, and signed the treaty of peace; of

15 2. which the chief articles were, That before the
a"-. s. twelfth day of August, the confederates shall

Jay down their arms, and disband their forces;
That on or before that day the Landgrave shall
be set at liberty, and conveyed in safety to his
castle of Rheinfels; That a diet shall be held
within fix months, in order to deliberate con-
cerning the most proper and effe&ual method of
preventing for the future all disputes and diffen-
sions about religion; That, in the mean time,
neither the Emperor, nor any other Prince, shall,
upon any pretext whatever, offer any injury or
violence to such as adhered to the confession of
Augsburg, but allow them to enjoy the free
and undisturbed exercise of their religion; That
in return, the Protestants shall not molest the
Catholicks either in the exercise of their eccle-
fiaftical jurifdi&ion, or in performing their reli-
gious ceremonies; That the Imperial chamber
ihall adminifterjuftice impartially to persons of
both parties, and Protestants be admitted indif-
criminately with the Cathollcks to fit as judges
in that court; That if the next diet should not
be able to terminate the disputes with regard to
religion, the stipulations in the present treaty in
behalf of the Protestants, shall continue for ever
in full force and vigour That none of the con.
federates shall be liable to any action on accoupn

Qs

of what had happened during the course of the Boo6 X.
war; That the consideration of those encroach-
'ments which had been made, as Maurice pre-
tended, upon the constitution and liberties of the
Empire, shall be remitted to the approaching
diet; That Albert of Brandenburg shall be com-
prehended in the treaty, provided he shall ac-
cede to it, and disband his forces before the
twelfth of Augut '.

.SUCH was the memorable treaty of Paffau, Rflef;on,
that overturned the vast fabrick, in erecing pc and
which Charles had employed so many years, and pndua'o
had exerted the utmost efforts of his power and Maurice.
policy; that annulled all his regulations with
regard to religion; defeated all his hopes of
rendering the Imperial authority absolute and
hereditary in his family; and e[tablifhed the
Protestant church, which had hitherto subsisted
precariously in Germany, through connivance,
or by expedie ts, upon a firm and secure basis.
Maurice reaped all the glory of having con-
certed and completed this unexpe&ed revo-
lution. It is a singular circumrfance, that the
Reformation should be indebted for its security
and full establishment in Germany, to the fame
hand which had formerly brought it to the
brink of defruftion, and that both events should

t Rccucil dcs Traitez, ii. 26,.

H 4 have

BOOK X. have been accomplished by the fame arts of

i's.' diflimulation. The ends, however, which Mau-

rice had in view, at those different junicures,
seem to have been more attended to than the
means by which he attained them; and he was
now as universally extolled for his zeal and
publick spirit, as he had lately been condemned
for his indifference and interefRed policy. It is
no less worthy of observation, that the French
King, a monarch zealous for the Catholick
faith, should employ his power in order to
protec and maintain the Reformation in the
Empire, at the very time when he was perse-
cuting his own Protestant fubjeEts with all the
fierceness of bigotry, and that the league for this
purpose, which proved so fatal to the Romish
church, should be negociated and signed by a
Roman Catholick bishop. So wonderfully doth
the wisdom of God superintend and regulate the
caprice of human paflions, and render them sub-
servient towards the accomplilhment of his own
purposes.

Little atten- LITTLE attention was paid to the ihterefts of
tFio paid the French King during the negociations at
the French
King inthis Paflau. Maurice and his associates, having
treaty.

gained what they had in view, discovered no
great solicitude about an ally, whom, perhaps,
they reckoned to be overpaid for the assistance

which

which he had given them, by his acquisitions BOOK X.
in Lorrain. A short clause which they pro- 1ssz
cured to be inserted in the treaty, importing
that the King of France might communicate to
the confederates his particular pretensions or
causes of hoitility, which they would lay before
the Emperor, was the only sign that they gave
of their remembering how much they had been
indebted to him for their success. Henry ex-
perienced the fame treatment, which every Prince
who lends his aid to the authors of a civil war
may expect. As soon as the rage of faction
began to subside, and any profpe&t of accom-
modation to open, his services were forgotten,
and his associates made a merit with their fove-
reign, of the ingratitude with which they aban-
doned their protector. But how much soever
Henry might be enraged at the perfidy of his
allies, or at the impatience with which they
hastened to make their peace with the Emperor
at his expence, he was perfectly sensible that it
was more his interest to keep well with the Ger-
manick body, than to resent the indignities of-
sered him by any particular members of it. For
that reabon he difiniffed the hostages which he
had received from Maurice and his associates,
and affected to talk in the fame strain as former-
ly, concerning his zeal for maintaining the an-
cient constitution and liberties of the Empire.

# BOOK XI.

THE
HISTO RY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF T H
,MPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XI.
A S soon as the treaty of Paffau was signed, BOOK XI.

Maurice, in consequence of his engage- 5

ments with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary ^'" 3.
at the head of twenty thousand men. But the marches ins
vast superiority of the Turkish armies, the fre- aganithe
quent mutinies both of the Spanish and German
soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay, toge-
ther with the dissensions between Maurice and
Caftaldo, who was piqued at being obliged to
resign the chief command to him, prevented his
performing any thing in that country ftitable to

his

BOOK XI. his former fame, or of great benefit to the King

5',, of the Romans'.
155Z.

The Land. WHEN Maurice set out for Hungary,' tte
s¢,re:. Prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
~,,, hi,

under his command, and marched back into his
own country, that he might be ready to receive
his father upon his return, and give up to him
the reins of government which he had' held du-
ring his absence. But fortune was not yet weary
of persecuting the Landgrave. A battalion of
mercenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Hele, being reduced by Reifenberg their colo-
nel, a soldier of fortune, ready to engage in any
enterprize, secretly withdrew from the young
Prince as he was marching homewards, and join-
ed Albert of Brandenburg, who still continued
in arms against the Emperor, refuting to be in-
cluded in the treaty of Paflat. Unhappily for
the Landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was difmifed from the
citadel of Mechlin where he had been confined,
but before be had got beyond the frontiers of
'that country. The Queen of Hungary, who
governed there in her brother's name, incensed
at such an qpen violation of the treaty to which
,be owed his liberty, commanded him to be

*l uanhafii Hilt. Huigar. 288. Thuan. lib. x. 371.

arrectcd,

arrested, and committed him again to the custody BOOK XI.
of the fame Spanish captain who had guarded Li
him for five years with such revere vigilance.
Philip beheld all the horrors of his imprison.
ment renewed, and his spirits subsiding in the
fame proportion as they had risen during the
Ihort interval in which he had enjoyed liberty
he funk into despair, and believed himself to be
doomed to perpetual captivity. But the matter
being explained to the Emperor's full fatisfac-
tion, that the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries
could be imputed neither to the Landgrave nor
to his son, he gave orders for his release; and
Philip at last obtained the liberty for which he
had so long languished b. But though he re-
covered his freedom, and was reinstated in his
dominions, his sufferings seem to have broken
the vigour, and to have extinguished the acivity
of his mind: From being the boldest as well. as
moR enterprising Prince in the Empire, he be-
came the most timid and cautious, and passed
the remainder of his days in a pacifick indolence.

THI degraded Eletor of Saxony, likewise, Likewi;e

ti c I:ettor

procured his liberty in consequence of the treaty of s',ODy.
of Paffau. The Emperor having been obliged
to relinquish all his schemes for extirpating the
Protetant religion, had no longer any motive

b Sleid. 573. BclcariiComment. 834.

for

Boos XL for detaining him a priboner; and being enx

1552' tremely solicitous, at that junture, to recover

the confidence and good-will of the Germans,
whose aiiftance was essential to the success of
the enterprize which he meditated against the
King of France, he, among other expedients
for that purpose, thought of releasing from im-
prifonment a Prince whose merit entitled him no
less to esteem, than his sufferings rendered him
the obje&t of companlion. John Frederick took
poffefflon accordingly of that part of his terri-
tories which had been reserved for him, when
Maurice was invested with the Elecoral dignity.
As in this situation, he continued to display
the fame virtuous magnanimity for which he had
been conspicuous in a more prosperous and fplen-
did state, and which he had retained amidst all
his sufferings, he lived several years in that high
reputation to which he had fojuft a title.

The Empe- THE .los of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had
tor reolvc made a deep imprefflon on the Emperor. Ac-
tomake
warup.n customed to terminate all his operations against

France with advantage to himself, he thought
that it nearly concerned his honour not to allow
Henry the superiority in this war, or to susser
his own administration to be stained with the
infamy of having permitted territories of such
consequence to be dismembered from the Em-

pire

pire. This was no less a point of interest than BOOK XI.
of honour. As the frontier of Champagne was s55.
more naked, and lay more exposed than that of
any province in France, he had frequently, du-
ring his wars with that kingdom, made inroads
upon it with great success and effect; but if
Henry were allowed to retain his late conquests,
France would gain such a formidable barrier on
that fide, as to be altogether secure, where for-
merly she had been weakest. On the other
hand, the Empire had now loft as much, in
point of security, as France had acquired; and
being stripped of the defence which those cities
afforded it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter,
where all the towns having been hitherto con-
fidered as interior, and remote from any enemy,
were but slightly fortified. These considerations
determined Charles to attempt recovering the
three towns of which Henryhad made himself
master; and the preparations which he had made
agaihft Maurice and his associates, enabled him
to carry his resolution into immediate exec&-
tion.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at H; prepara.

tions for

Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach, thipurpore.
and advanced to Augsburg, at the head of a
considerable body of Germans which he had
levied, together with all the troops which he had

drawn

BboK XI. drawn out of Italy and Spain. To these lib

55,. added feverat battalions, which having been in

the pay of the confederates, entered into his
service when difmifled by them; and he pre-
vailed likewise on some Princes of the Em-
pire to join him with their vassals. In order
to conceal the destination of this formidable
army, and to guard against alarming the French
so as to put them on preparing for their de-
fence, he gave out that he was to march forth.
with into Hungary, in order to second Maurice
in his operations againf the Infidels. When
he began to advance towards the Rhine, and
could no longer employ that pretext, he tried
a new artifice, and spread a report, that he took
this route in order to chastise Albert of Branden-
burg, whose cruel exactions in that part of the
Empire called loudly for his interposition to
check them.

The precau. BUT the French having grown acquainted,
tions of the
French for at last, with arts by which they had been so
the defence
ofMet. often deceived, viewed all Charles's motions

with distrust. Henry immediately discerned the
true obje&t of his vast preparations, and resolved
to defend the important conquests which he had
gained with vigour equal to that with which they
were about to be attacked. As he foresaw that
the whole weight of the war would be turned

2 against

aginft Mtz, by whos .fate that of Toul and BOOK XI.
Verdun would be determined, he nominated Fran- i5.
cis of Lorrain, Duke of.Gife,. to. take the comrn Th'c

of Ouisc p,*
mand in that city during the siege, the iflue of pointed o-

vernor of

which would equally affc& the honour and in- tbe twn
tcreft of his country. His choice could not
have fallen upon .any person more worthy of
that,truft. The Duke of Guise possessed, in a
.high.:degree, all the talents of courage, saga-
city,, and-prefence ps mind, which render men
eminent in military command. He was largely
endowed with that magnanimity, of. foul which
delights in bold enterprizes, and aspires to. fame
by splendid aud extraordinary afions. He re-
paired with joy to the dangerous station assigned
himu,.as .to a theatre on.which he might display
his great qualities under the immediate eye of
his.countrymen, all ready to applaud him. The
martial genius of the French nobility in that
age, which confidered it as the greatest reproach
to remain inactive, when there was any oppor-
tunity of signalizing their courage, prompted
great numbers to follow a leader who was the
darling as well as the pattern of every one that
courted military fame. Several Princes of the
blood, many noblemen of the highest rank, and all
tthe young officers: who could obtain the King's

termiflion, entered Metz as volunteers. By their
.presence they added spirit to the garrioln, and

VOL. IV. I enabled

BOOi:X, Cr. iabled theiutee of fuifet. eCnmploy,; onrvery

1t emergency,. :perfodis, !eagero D .difinguifih- them-

.selves, and si; to-condudt!ny feriicc, ; .) ' :

Prtpm for ' BUT withwhatever alacrity the Iuke. o£f-ifC
a eigor undertook the. defence of Metz; he fouind every

thirng4 upronlids arrival ,there, in iuch:a'ituation,
as-might'haveinduced arnyperfon of ln e intrepid
.ouotage %todcfpair of defending :it with fucc~ei.
Wihe cityiwas of great extent, with large suburbs,;
,the valls i ere in. manyplaces feeble and with-
,out rarparts;;the-ditch natrow; and thelold
:towes, whicbprojeted iiqftd of baftionat,-ilere
·at tod great distance from each other tot dfend
'the space between them. · or. all these defects
,he endeavoiured.to provide the best :reecdy,
.which the time would: pemit.. He orderpdthe
-fbblurbs, without ,sparing ithe moiafteries lor
churches,i not even that of St. Arnulph, in.which
,'several Kings of France ihad: been buried, te be
levelled. witi the;ground; 'but' in order to guard
against theCimputation of impiety, to whith such
a violation of so many sacred edifices, :as well
as of the ashes of the dead might expose ihim,
he executed this with much religious ceremony.
Having ordered all the holy vestments and uten-
fils, together with the bones of the Kings, and
other persons deposited in these churches, to be
removed, they were carried in solemn procefflon
to a church within the walls, he himself walking

before;

,btfore them uncovered; ,with a touqh in his.hano.. BpoK X[.
He then puec down fucf houfei astood nenr 55.
the walls, l.eared .and, elrge, 'the ditch, re-
paired the ruinous fortifications, and ere&ed new
ones. Asiit was:nece.lhry that all thefe,,worls
.hould be fnileed with .the ttmloft: expecitsio,
.he laboured,at them with his own ;hands:s .the
officers and vglunteers imitated his example,. aad
the soldiers submitted with cheerfulnef$ to the
most severe fatigues, .when .tley saw that their
Superiors did not, decline to bear a part in these
together with them, At the fame time he c'tp-
pelled all useless persons to:leave the place; .e
,filled the magazines with provisions and mili-
tary ifores ; burnt the mills, and deftrbyed;.,the
corn and forage for several miles round the
rtown. Such were his popular talents, as well
as his arts, of acquiring an ascendant over the
minds of'.men, that the citizens seconded him
. With no less ardour than the soldiers; and every
. other paflion being swallowed up in the zeal to
repulse theenemy, with which he inspired them,
they beheld the ruin of their estates, together
*with the havock which he made among their
publick and private buildings, without any eno-
.-tion of resentment '.

MEANTIME the Emperor, having colle&ted ch3r'e'ld-
all his forces, continued his march towards wariMes,

c Thuan. xi. 387.

I 2 Metz.

B6ocK X. IMetz. Ashe pifled through the cities on the

',7 s: Rhine, -he saw the dismal effe&ts of that licen-

tious and waftdful war which Albert had carried
on ird there parts. Upon his approach, that
Prince, though at the head of twenty thousand
rmen, -withdrew into Lorrain as if he had in-
tended to join the French King, whose arms he
had quartered with his own in all his standards
and ensigns. Albert was not in a condition to
cope with the imperial troops d, which amounted
at least to sixty thoufald men, forming one of
:the nmoft numerous and best appointed armies
which had been brought into the field during
-that age, in any of the wars among Christian
Princes.

rvens the UTHE chief com'nand, under the Emperor, wts
fe' S' committed to the Duke of Alva, aflifted by the

Marquis de Marignano, together with the most
experienced of the Italian and Spanish generals.
As it was towards the end of O6tober, these
intelligent officers reprefsnted the great danger
of beginning, at such an advanced season, a
siege which could not fail to prove-very tedious.
But Charles adhered to his own opinion with
his usual obstinacy, and being confident that he
had made such preparations, and taken such
precautions, as Would ensure success, he ordered

Natal. Comitis, liil. 127.

the

-the city to be invested. As lfoon as the. Duke Boox Xf.
of Alva appeared, a large body of the French ;2'
sallied out and attacked his van-guard with On. i,.
great vigour, put it in confusion, and killed or
took prisoners a considerable, number of men.
By this early specimen which they gave of the
conduct of their officers, as well as the valour
of their troops, they shewed ther ImperialiSs
what an enemy they had to encounter, and how
dear every advantage muf cost them. The
place, however, was completely invested, the
trenches were opened, and the other works
begun.

THE attention both of the besiegers and be- Both partkie

fieged was turned for some time towards Albert to gin Al-
of Brandenburg, and they strove with emu- denburg.
lation which should gain that Prince, who still
hovered in the neighbourhood, flutuating in all
the uncertainty of irresolution, natural to a
man, who, being swayed by no principle, was
allured different ways by contrary views of in-
terest. The French tempted him with offers
extremely beneficial; the Imperialists scrupled
at no promise which they thought would make
an impression upon him. After much hefita.
tion he was gained by the Emperor, from whom
he expeted to receive advantages, which were
both more immediate and more permanent. As
the French King, who began to fufpea 'his in-

I 3 tentions,

BOOK XI. tent.ions,, had appointed a body of troops under
%:" ' tthe Duke of Aurmle, brother to the Duke of

ls5z Guise, to watch his mibtios, Albert fetl upon.

them unexpe&edly with such vigour that he
Nov. 4. routed them entirely,: killed many of the offi-

cers, wounded Aumale ,himself, and took. him
prisoner. Immediately after this viclory, he
marched in triirmph. to Metz, and joinid his
army to that of the Emperor, Charles, in
reward for this service, and the great acceflion
of ftrnngth which he brought him,: granted
Albert a formal pardon of all past offences, and
confirmed him in the possession of the territories
which he had violently usurped during the war".

The rIIant THE Duke of Guise, though deeply affected
behaviour
of the Duke with hi.s bfother's misfortune, did rot remit, in
and GhisCr. any degree, 'the vigour with which he defended

io. the town. He harassed the besiegers by fre-

4uent rallies, in which his officers were so eager
to diffinguilh theifelves, that his authority
being hardly fufmicient to restrain the impe.
tuofity of their courage, he was obliged at dif-
ferent times to lhut the gates, and to conceal
the keys, in order to prevent the Princes of the
blood, and noblemen of the first rank, from
exposing themselves to danger in every sally.
He repaired in the night what the enemy's
irtillery had beat down during the day, or

e Scid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

erceted

ereEted.behinl the, ruined works new fortifica- ROOK :Xl
tions of almost equal, ftrngth. The Impe-: ls-
rialifts, on their part, pushed on the attack with
great spirit, and carried forward, at once, ap-
proaches against different parts of the town.
But the art of attacking fortified places was not.
then arrived at that degree, of perfe&tion to
which it was carried towards the close of the.
sixteenth century, during the long war in the
Netherlands. The besiegers, after the unwea,
ried labour of many weeks, found 'that they
had made but little progress; and although
their batteries had made breaches in differen;
places, they saw, to their aftonilhment, works
suddenly appear, in demolishing which their
fatigues and dangers would be renewed. The
Emperor, enraged at the oblinate resistance
which his army met with, left Thionville, where
he had been confined by a violent fit of the
gout, and though still so infirm that he was ob-
liged to be carried in a litter, he repaired to Nov. G.
the camp; that by his presence he might ani-
mate the soldiers, and urge on the attack wich
greater spirit. Upon his arrival new batteries
were erected, and new efforts were made with
redoubled ardour.

BUT, by this time, the winter had let in with Thie d(lr

great rigour; the camp was alternately dehlged of rl rT
with rain or covered with snow at the lame

I 4 time

Boos xr, time provisions were become extremely scarce,

5 as a body of French cavalry which hovered in

the neighbourhood, often interrupted the con-
voys, o0 rendered their arrival difficult and.un-
certain. Diseases began to spread among the
soldiers, especially among the italians and Spa-
niards, unaccuflomed to such inclement wea-
ther great numbers were disabled from serving,
and many died. At length, such breaches were
made as seemed practicable, and .Charles re-
solved to hazard a general assault, in spite of
all the remonstrances of his generals concerning
the imprudence of attacking a numerous gar-
rifon, condu&ed and animated by the. molt
gallant of the French nobility, with an army
weakened by diseases, and disheartened with ill
success. The Duke of Guise, fufpeting the Em.
peror's intentions from the extraordinary hurry
which he observed in the enemy's camp, ordered
all his troops to their respective pofls. They ap-
peared immediately on the walls, and behind
the breaches, with such a determined coun-
tenance, so eager for the combat, and so well
prepared to give the assailants a warm recep.
tion, that the Imperialists, instead of advancing
to the charge when the word of command was
given, stood motionless, in a timid deje&ed
silence. The Emperor, perceiving that he could
not trust troops whose spirits were so much
broken, retired abruptly to his quarters, com-

plaining

plaining that he was now deserted by his fol- Boor XI.
diers, who deserved no longer the name of men . 3552.

DEEPLY as this behaviour of his troops mor- The-mPe-

. ror chalna
tified and asseted Charles, he would not hear themethli

of attacrk

of abandoning the siege, though he saw the
neceflity of changing the method of attack. He
suspended the fury of his batteries, and pro-
posed to proceed by the more secure but tedious
method of tapping. But as it still continued
to rain or to snow almost incessantly, such as
were employed in this service endured incre-
dible hardships; and the duke of Guise, whole
industry was not inferior to his valour, discover-
ing all their mines, counterworked them, and
prevented their effe&. At last, Charles finding
it impossible to contend any longer with the
rigour of the season, and with enemies whom
he could neither overpower by force, nor sub-
due by art, while at the fame time a contagious
distemper raged among his troops, and cut off
daily great numbers of the officers as well as
soldiers, yielded to the solicitations of his gene-
rals, who conjured him to save the remains of.
his army by a timely retreat; " Fortune,"
fays he, " I now perceive, resembles other fe-
males, and choofes to confer her favours on
young men, while lhe forsakes those who are
advanced in years."

' Thuaa. 397.

UPON

BK~:X Ua ot: this, he gave orders immediately to

xss. ra ife thfieWge, and Submitted to the disgrace of
oDec. 6. abandoning the enterprise, after having con-
triiuic tinued fifty-fix days before the town, during

which time he had loft upwards of thirty thou-
sand men, who died of diseases, or were killed
by the enemy. The duke of Guise, as soon as
he perceived the intention of the Imperialists,
took measures to prevent their retiring unmo-
lefted, and sent out several bodies. both of
cavalry and infantry to infest their rear, to pick
up stragglers, and to seize every opportunity of
attacking them with advantage. Such was the
confusion with which they made their retreat,,
that the French might have annoyed them in

R;n of the the most cruel manner. But when they sallied
Imperial out, a fpe&acle presented itself to their view,
army, and
humanity of which extinguished at once all hostile rage, and
the French.,

melted them into tenderness and compaflion.
The Imperial camp was filled with the sick and
wounded, with the dead and the dying. In
all the different roads by which the army retired,
numbers were found, who, having made an
effort to escape, beyond their strength, were left,
when they could go no farther, to perish with-
out assistance. This they received from their
enemies, and were indebted to them for all the
kind offices which their friends had not the
power to perform. The duke of Guise imme.

diately

dtiately drdered proper refrefhmehts' for fuih as Booi xt
were dying of hutger; he applt ied: fuigeons t;
to attend the sick and wounded; he: rnri/oved
fich as cotsld bear it intfo the adjaent¥flilages;
and tMQ W*hb would haie suffered by' beii
carried so far, he adrtitced into the hidfpitls
which he had fitted up in' the eity for lhis owtf
soldiet§'. As soon as; they rtedvered&, he: ne
them fiomie' inder an escort ds soldiers, and
with money to bear their charges. 'B tlhfe
,ats of humaiity, which were tlneommon in that
age, when 'war was carried on with greater ran-
cour and ferocity than at present, the duke of
Guise completed the fame which he had acquired
by his gallant and successful defence of Metz,
and engaged those whom he had vanquilhed to
vie with his own countrymen in extolling his
namee.

To these calamities in Germany, were added Bd ftua,

such unfortunate events in Italy, as rendered o"'otho,:
this the most disastrous year in the Emperor's affirs in

Italy.

life. During his residence at Villach, Charles
had applied to Cosmo di Medici for the loan
of two hundred thousand crowns. But his

* Sleid. 57S Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel,

Hit. de France, tor. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of
this ficge is taken from ile journal of the Sicur de Sdlignac,
who was present. Natal. Comit, Hillor. 1i9.

. 2 credit

BQOK XI. credit at that time was so low, that in order to

aj~. obtain this inconsiderable fum, he was obliged

to put him in poffeflion of the principality of
Piombino, and by giving up that, he loft the
footing which he had hitherto maintained in
Tuscany, and enabled Cosmo to assume, for the
future, the tone and deportment of a Prince
altogether independent. Much about the time
that his indigence constrained him to part with
this valuable territory, he loft Siena, which was
of still greater consequence, through the ill
conduc of Don Diego de Mendoza h.

SIENA, like most of the great cities in Italy,
,fhsiea.t had long enjoyed a republican government, un-

der the protecion of the Empire; but being
torn in pieces by the dissensions between the
nobility and the people, which divided all the
Italian commonwealths, the faction of the peo-
ple, which gained the ascendant, besought the
Emperor to become the guardian of the admi-
niltration which they had established, and ad-
mitted into their city a small body of Spanish
soldiers, whom he had sent to countenance the
execution of the laws, and to preserve tran-
quillity among them. The diretion of there
troops was given to Mendoza, at that time
ambassador for the Emperor at Rome, who per-

1 Thuan. lib. xi. 376.

fuaded

fuaded the credulous multitude, that it was BO XLr.
necessary .for their security against any future I.f
attempt of the nobles, to allow him to build a
citadel in Siena; and as he flattered himfelfthat
by means of this fortress he might render the
Emperor matier of the city, he pushed on the
works with all possible dispatch. But he threw
off the malk too soon. Before the fortifications
were completed,. he began to indulge his na-
tural haughtiness and severity of temper, and
to treat the citizens with great insolence. At
the fame time the soldiers in garrilbn being paid
as irregularly as the Emperor's troops usually
were, lived almost at discretion upon the inha-
bitants, and were guilty of many ats of licence
and oppression.

TIEsE injuries 'awakened the Sienefe to a TheSiekfe

fefe of their danger. As they saw the neceflity co.urtthe f.
of exerting themselves, while the unfinished for- Fracae.
tifications of the citadel left them any hopes of
success, they applied to the French ambassador
at Rome, who readily promised them his master's
protection and aflfitance. At the fame time,
forgetting their domeftick animofities when such
a mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and
existence of the republick, -they sent agents to
the exiled nobles, and invited them to concur
with them in saving their country from the ler-

vituide

.Q. XJ. -vitude with whiqb it w.as .threatend. As ther

352^. ,was not a nment to f, .,neafeures were con.

,certed speedily, but with great prudence; .ant
-were executed with equal vigour.. The citizeq
.,rose suddenly in .agrms.;.e exiles flocked in(
.the town froi different parts,with all heir,-pa.
tifans, and what troops they, ,could draw tpge
ther; and several bodies of n)ercenaries in th(
_pay of Erance: appeared. to support them. .TIll
Spaniards?,thQugh surprised and much, inferiot
in number, .defended ;hemfilves .with .greal
courage but feeing no profpeea of r,elief, . and
.having no hopes of maintaining their station
long in a half-finiihed for.tress, they soon gave
. it up. The Sienefe, with tlte utmost alacrity,
levelled it with the ground, that no monument
might remain of that odious ftruture, which
r.had been raised in order, to icflave them., At
the fame ,timne .renouncing .all !onnexipn j yth
the Emperor, they fent.,ambaflsdcors to thhnk
the King of France as,the .reitorer of their
. liberty, and to entreat tbat he.:would secure go
.tblm the pe4r'etual enjoyment of that bleflng by
continuing his protetion to their republick'.

tefcent of To these misfortunes, Qsne {till more fatal'had
the TurkJ
inthekins. amoft fuc;eedqd. Thc. Jvere administration
dom of
Naplres.

1 Pecci Memorie de Siena, vol. iii, p. 230. 261. Thuan.

375. 377, &c. Paruta. His. Vcnet.: i., Mem. de'R.bier,
424, '&c.

*of DioPddro de Tolbdo, viceroy of Naples, BoosL.
having filled that kingdoi: wilt nimutrmuring and `
;faffietion, the Prinoe of' Saerno, thi hcad of
-;the malec&ntents,. had fled to the ?court iof
-France, where all who bofr ill-will to the Em-
,peror Aor his ministers, were fute of finding pro-
'teffion. andrafliftance. -That nobleman, in the
,usual ityleof. exiles, boasing much of his par-
tifans, and, of his great influence with them,
!prevailed on Henry to .;think of invading. Na-
pes, frnm: expedtation .of beiqg joined (by all
\those .wirh whom the Printe of. Salerno 'held
correspondence, or who were dissatisfied ,with
Toledo's gvcernm ent. 'ilBit though.the. first
(hint 'of this enterprise; was suggested by the
liPrince eos1 Saleeno, 'Henry did' not choose that
·ts cficeei fliojild entirely depend upon his:beitg
*rtble' to fiilfiFthe-'promifes -Which he had ;madc.
lHe/ pplied foraid to Solyman, whom he court-
ed, after his father's example, as his mot vigor-
' dis auxiiary agairn the Emperor, and solicited
"'him to' second his operatiOns by fenling; a
pibwverful fleet into the Mediterranean.' Itias
" bt difficult' t6 obtain what he requested of the
Sultan, who, at this time, was highly-incehfnd
' against the house of Austria, on accoutlht'bfnhc
'proceedings in Hungary. He ordered anr-hitn
':'dred and fifty Ihips to be equipped, that tiey
.wight fail towards the coast of Naples, at what-

ever

Booix d... .ever ime, lI ihlldltdiarme, and might co~'
.i$ '. ;operte -with theFrsenrtroops in their attempts

:upoi- that .kingdom,, The cwQmrnXd of .this
.fleet Was gicvn, to b cbrfair Dragtti an officer
:trained up under liarbaroffa ,and -fcareely in-
ferior to his master in.courage, in: talents, or in
good fortune.' -He- appeared.'on :the coast of
-Calabria ,at the .time,;which, had been agreed on,
lhnded :at fevcral'places,, plundered. and.burnt
-SeveraL.villages and .:at .las casting anchor in
':thctbay,of Naples' 'filled that city, with confter-
;:nationi ., But as .the French fieer, detained by
fo.rme. accident, -,which the coqtemporary hifto-
'rians have not:explained, did notjoin the Turks
accQrding.to concer:t, they,-after waiting.twenty
days, without haing. any tidings.pf:it,. e feail
forC.ooftantinopl, ,and thus deciv^lthe vice-
· roytof .Naples' from the terror :of;-ean inlvaion,

h whtih.h was. ip n.Q condition: ;ohay; refitedk.

*O' AS the French iad neyer t girn so severe, a
or enfb check to the Emperor in any fgrmer campaign,

^e t

i lyh expressed .immoderate, jy at t]e success of
i ffair*. their arms. Charles himself£, ,ccuftomed to a

lopg fcries of prosperity, felt the }blow most fen-
sibly, pnd retired from Metz into the Low-Coun-
, ;ries. much dejeted with the cruel reverse of

fortune which ,assesed him in his declining age,

k Thuan. 37S. 380. Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 403. Giaei .

when

%when the violence of the gout had increased to Booc XI.
fich a pitch, as entirely broke the vigour of his h,.~
constitution, and rendered him peevish, difficult
of access, and often incapable of applying to
business. But whenever he enjoyed any interval
of ease, all his thoughts were bent on revenge;
and he deliberated, with the utmost solicitude,
concerning the most proper means of annoying
France, and of effacing the stain which had ob-
fcured the reputation and glory of his arms.
All the schemes concerning Germany, which
had engrofled him so long, being disconcerted
by the peace of Paffau, the affairs of the Em-
pire become only secondary objects of attention ;
and enmity to France was the predominant pas-
sion which chiefly occupied his mind.

THE turbulent ambition of Albert of Bran. The violent

denburg excited violent commotions, which dif- P^'l'Bt
turbed the Empire during this year. That ,ult,.,
Prince's troops having shared in the calamities
of the siege of Metz, were greatly reduced in
number. But the Emperor, prompted by gra-
titude for his dillinguilhed services on that oC-
cafion, or perhaps with a secret view of foment-
ing divisions among the Princes of the Empire,
having paid up all the money due td him, he
was enabled with that fum to hire so many of

VOL. IV. K the

BOOK XI. the soldiers dismissed from the Imperial army,

553^ that he was soon at the head of a body of men

as numerous as ever. The biflops of Bam-
berg and Wurtzburg having fglicited the Im-
perial chamber, to annul, by its authority, the
iniquitous conditions which Albert had com-
pelled them to sign, that court unanimously
found all their engagements with him to be
void in their own nature, because they had been
extorted by force; enjoined Albert to renounce
all claim to the performance of them; and, if
he Should persist in such an unjufl demand, ex-
horted all the Princes of the Empire to take
arms against him as a disturber of the publick
tranquillity. To this decision, Albert opposed
the confirmation ps his tranfaations with the two
prelates, which the Emperor had granted him
as the reward of his having joined the Imperial
army at Metz; and in order to intimidate his
antagonists, as well as to convince them of his
resolution not to relinquiih his pretensions, he
put his troops in motion, that he might secure
the territory in question. Various endeavours
.were employed, and many expedients proposed,
in order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the fame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enterpriz-
ing, inspiring him with the most sanguine hopes

of

f fuiccefs, even in his wildest undertakings, he BOOK XI.
disdainfully rejected all reasonable overtures of 0
accommodation.

UPON this; the Imperial chamber ifiued its Hciscon.

decree against him, and required the Ele&or of the inpetri
Saxony, together with several other Princes chamber'
mentioned by name, to take arms in order to
carry it into execution. Maurice, and those
associated with him, were not unwilling to un-
dertake this service. They were extremely soli-
citous to mairitain publick order by supporting
the authority of the Imperial chamber, and
saw the necessity of giving a timely check to the
usurpations of ar ambitious Prince, who had no
principle of action but regard to his own in-
terefllt and no motive to dire& him bNit the im-
pulfe'of iingovernable paflions. They had good
reason to fufpet, that the Emperor encouraged
Albert in his extravagant and irregular proceed-
ings, 'and secretly afforded him assistance, that,
by raiting him up to rival Maurice in power,
he might, in any future broil, make use of his
assistance, to counterbalance and control the
authority which the other had acquired in the
Empire'.

Sleid. S85. Mem. de Ribier, ii; 4C. Arnoldi vita
'Maurit. ap. Menken, ii. 1 24z.

K 2 THESS

BooK xr. TaESB conflderaions united the most poi~-

ful Princes in Germany in a league against AI

APc'ri fd bert, of which Maurice was dechu'ed general.
racy formed ,. fimo. This formidable confederacy, however,
against him,
of w..ich wrFtght no change in Alberns sentiments but
Maurice
W":.h as he knew that he coild not resisT so many

Princes, if he *hould allow them time to aiemble
their forces% he endeavoured, by his activity, to
deprive them of all the advantages which they
might derive from their united power and nim-
bers;.and for that reason marched direftlyagainft
Maurice, the enemy whom he dreaded moit.
It was happy for the allies, that the condu&t of
their affairs was committed to a Prince of such
abilities. He, by his authority and example
had inspired them with vigour; and having car.
ried on their preparations with a degree of rapi.
dity, of which confederate bodies are eldom
capable, he was in condition to face Albert be-
fore be could make any coniLderablc progrcf.

M attacks TErrt armies, which werF nearly equal if
Albert, number, each confiftmig of twenty-four thousand

men, met at Sieverhatfen, in tht dutchy of Lu-
tenbiurgh and the violent animosity againlt
each other, which poffefied the two leaders did
not susser them to continue long ina&ive. The
troops, inflamed with the fame. hostile rage,

marched

arched fiercely to the combat; they fought with BooK Xi-

the greatest obstinacy; and as both generals 5
were capable of availing themselves of every Ju""ne
favourable occurrence, the battle remained long
doubtful, each gaining ground upon the other
alternately. At Jlar victory declared fr Mau- hi1s drat^
aice, who was superior in cavalry, and Albertc'
army sied in confuion, leaving four thousand
dead in the field, and their camp, baggage and
.artillery, in the hands of the conquerors. The
allies bought their victory dear, their bet troops
suffered greatly, two sons of the Duke of Brunf-
wick, a Duke of Lunenburgh, and many other
persons of diftintion, were among the number of
the fain". Butall these were Coon forgotten for ibut i, ltlcd
Maurice himself, as he led up to a second charge a
body of horse which had been broken, received a
wound with a piftol-bullet in the belly, of which
he died two days after the battle, in the thirty.
Second year of his age, and in the sixth after his
attaining the ele&oral dignity.

OF all the personages who have appeared in F;5 chrllac

the history of this a&ive age, when great occur-
cences, and sudden revolutions, called forth ex-
traordinary talents to view, and afforded them

- m Hiftori; pugnz infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert. Tlhom.
Wintatro auRore spud Scard. ii. 559. Slcid. 58j. Ruf-
cclUi epiirce aux Princes, 154. Arnoldi vita Maurit. 1245.

K 3 full

BOOK XI. full opportunity to display themselves, Maurioe

'5s3. may justly be confidered as the most remarkable.

If his exorbitant ambition, his profound difli-
mulation, and his unwarrantable usurpation of
his kinfmaR's honours and dominions, exclude
him from being praised as a virtuous man; his
prudence in concerting his measures, his vigour
in executing them, and the uniform success with
which they were attended, entitle him to the
appellation of a great Prince. At an age, when
impetuosity of spirit commonly predominates
over political wisdom, when the highest effort
even of a genius of the first order is to fix on
a bold fchenle, and to execute it with prompti-
tude and courage, he formed and conducted an
intricate plan of policy, which deceived the most
artful Monarch in Europe. At the very junc-
ture when the Emperor had attained to almost
unlimited despotism, Maurice, with power seem-
ingly inadequate to such an undertaking, com-
pelled him to relinquish all his usurpations, apd
established not only the religious but civil liber-
ties of Germany on such foundations as have
hitherto remained unshaken. Although, at one
period of his life, his conduct excited the jealousy
of the Protestants, and at another, drew on him
the resentment of the Roman Catholicks, fucl
was his maiterly address, that he was the only
Prince of the age who, in any degree, possessed

the

the confidence of both, and whom both lamented BooK XL.
as the most able as well as faithful guardian of 553
the constitution and laws of his country.

THE consternation which Maurice's death oc- Alhert con.

t'nies the

cafioned among his troops, prevented them from wal.
making the proper improvement of the vic-
tory which they had gained. Albert, whose ac-
tive courage, and profuse liberality, rendered
him the darling of such military adventurers as
were little solicitous about thejuitice of his cause,
soon re-assemblcd his broken forces, and made
fresh levies with such success, that he was
quickly at the head of fifteen thousand men,
and renewed his depredations with additional
fury. But Henry of Brunlwick having taken
the command of the allied troops, defeated him
in a second battle, scarcely less bloody than the Sept. ,z.
former. Even then his courage did not fink,
nor were his resources exhauited. He made
several efforts, and some of them very vigorous,
to retrieve his affairs: But being laid under the
ban of the Empire by the Imperial chamber;
being driven by degrees out of all his hereditary
territories, as well as those which he had usurped;
being forsaken by many of his officers, and
overpowered by the number of his enemies, he
fled for refuge into France. After having been, He ;s rrivrn

out of (ier-

for a considerable time, the terror and scourge mai.y.
of Germany, he lingered out some years in an

K 4 indigent

BOK Xr. indigent and dependant Rfate of exile, the mile.
15 3. Ties of which his restless and arrogant spirit en-

dured with the mot indignant impatience.
Jaary ,.r Upon his death without issue, his territories,

which had been seized by the Princes who took
arms against him, were restored, by a decree of
the Emperor, to his collateral heirs of the house
of Brandenburg".

Maur;ce's MAURICE having left only one daughter,
brother Au.
uRus fuce who was afterwards married to William Prince
the elcaori of Orange, by whom she had a son who bore his
dignity, grandfather's name, and inherited the great

talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent
dispute arose concerning the succession to his
honours and territories. John Frederick, the
degraded ele&or, claimed the ele&oral dignity,
and that part of his patrimonial estate of which
he had been violently itripped after the Smal-
kaldick war. Augustus, Maurice's only brother,
pleaded his right not only to the hereditary pof.
feflions of their family, but to the elctoral dig-
nity, and to the territories which Maurice had
acquired. As Augustus was a Prince of con-
fiderable abilities, as well as of great candour
and gentleness of manners, the states of Saxony,
forgetting the merits and sufferings of their for-
mer master, declared warmly in his favour. His

' Slcid. 59. 594. 599. Struv. Corp. hill. Germ. 1075.

pretensions

prctcnfions were powerfully fupporte by the BooK XL
King of Denmark, whose daughter he had mar- ,it
ried, and zealously espoused by the King of the
Romans, out of regard to Maurice's memory.
The degraded EleEtor, though secretly favoured
by his ancient enemy the Emperor, was at last
obliged to relinquish his claim, upon obtaining
a small addition to the territories which had been
allotted to him, together with a stipulation, fecu-
ring to his family the eventual fucceflion, upon
a failure of male heirs in the Albertine line.
That unfortunate, but magnanimous Prince
died next year, soon after ratifying this treaty of
agreement; and the electoral dignity is still pof-
fefled by the descendants of Augutus °.

DURING there tranfa&ions in Germany, war Hoftiliies

in the Low.

was carried on in the Low-Countries with con- Countriu.
fiderable vigour. The Emperor, impatient to
efface the itain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an
army early in the field, and laid siege to Terou.
ane. Though the town was of such import.
ance, that Francis used to call it one of the two
pillows on which a King of France might sleep
with security, the fortifications were in disrepair:
Henry, trusting to what had happened at Metz,
thought nothing more was necessary to render

v SItid, 587. Thuan. 409. Struv. Corp. hill. Germ,

all

BooK Xl. all the efforts of the enemy abortive, than to
J5_v3 Areinforce the garrison with a considerable num-

ber of the young nobility. But d'Eff, a vete-
ran officer who commanded them, being killed,
and the Imperialifis pufiing the siege with great
Jlne 21. vigour and perseverance, the place was taken

by assault. That it might not fall again into
the hands of the French, Charles ordered not
only the fortifications but the town to be rated,
and the inhabitants to be dilferfed in the adja-
cent cities. Elated with this success, the Im-
perialifts immediately invested Hefdin, which,
though defended with great bravery, was like-
wife taken by assault, and such of the garrison
as escaped the sword were made prisoners. The
Emperor entrusted the conduct of this siege to
Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, Prince of Pied-
mont, who, on that occasion, gave the first dif-
play of those great talents for military command,
which soon entitled him to be ranked among the
first generals of the age, and facilitated his re-
elabliflment in his hereditary dominions, the
greater part of which having been over-run by
Francis in his expeditions into Italy, were still
occupied by Henry P.

Thtprognrtc Tu loss of there towns, together with so
of theim many persons of diftindion, either killed or
perialiss
difquiett tho
French PThuan. 411. IIarai Annale Brabant. 669.
King.t

taken

taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable cala- BOOK XI.
mity to France, and Henry felt it very sensibly; ,53.
but he was still more mortified at the Em-
peror's having assumed his wonted fupeliority
in the field so soon after the blow at Metz,
which the French had represented as fatal to
his power. He was afliamed, too, of his own
remissness and excessive security at the opening
of the campaign; and, in order to repair that
error, he assembled a numerous army, and led
it into the Low-Countries.

ROUSED at the approach of such a formidable

enemy, Charles left Brussels, where he had been
shut up so closely during seven months, that it
came to be believed in many parts of Europe
that he was dead; and though he was so much
debilitated by the gout that he could hardly
bear the motion of a litter, he hastened to join
his army. The eyes of all Europe were turned
with expecation towards those mighty and ex-
afperated rivals, between whom a decisive battle
was now thought unavoidable. But Charles
having prudently declined to hazard a general
engagement, and the violence of the autumnal
rains rendering it impossible for the French to
undertake any siege, they retired, without having
performed any thing suitable to the great pre-
parations which they had made q.

iHarqu!, 67z. Thuan. 44.

THE

BOOK XI. THE Imperial arms did not make the fame

1r, 3. progress in Cialy. The narrowness of the Em-

Trb imp,. peror's finances seldom allowed him to a& with
.uccsfuin vigour in two different places at the fame time;

and having exerted himself to the utmost in
order to make a great effort in the Low-Coun-
tries, his operations on the other fide of the
Alps were proportionally feeble. The viceroy
of Naples, in conjunaion with Cosmo di Me-
dici, who was greatly alarmed at the intro-
du&ion of French troops into Siena, endea-
voured to become matler of that city. But,
instead of reducing the Sienefe, the Imperialists
were obliged to retire abruptly, in order to
defend their own country, upon the appearance
of the Turkish fleet, which threatened the coast
of Naples; and the French not only eftablihed
themselves more firmly in Tuscany, but, by
the aliftance of the Turks, conquered a great
part of the ifand of Corsica, subjet, at that
time, to the Geoeofre'

,, ,, THE aiffirs of the house of AuRria declined
Hugary. no less in Hungary during the course of this

year. As the troops which Ferdinand kept in
Transylvania received their pay very irregularly,
they lived almost at discretion upon the inha-
bitants; and their insolence and rapaciousness

'Thuan. 417.

greatly

reatly disgusted all ranks of men, gnd alienated BooK XL
them from their new sovereign, who, instead of 'S3
protecting, plundered his fubjeas. Their in.
dignatilo at this, added to their desire of re-
venging Martinuzzs death, wrought so much

lpo a turbutlent n6bifty, ItmpPtient of injury,

and upoh a fierce people, prone to chaiget that
they were ripe for a tevok. At that vey jutic-
ture, thetir late Queen Isabella, t6gether with
her Ifon appeared in Ttanfyrlania. Her am-
bitiots m cind ud not beat the solitude and
inactivity of a private life; and repenting
quickly of the cefflor which she had made of
the crown in the year one thoufarid five hun-
dred and fifty-one, lhe left the place of her
retreat, hoping that the diffatisfa&'ion of the
Hungarians with the Aufttian government
would prompt them once more to recogniif her
f6fi's right to the crown. Some noblemen of
great eminence declared immediately in his fa-
vour. The Bafha of Belgrade, by Solyman's
order, espoused his cause, in opposition to Ser-
dinand; the Spanish and German soldiers, in-
stead of advancing against the enemy, mutinied
for want of pay, declaring that they would
march back to Vienna; so that Caaldo, their Ferd;nra
general, was obliged to abastdon Transylvania iiSd
to ItabeIla and the turks, and to place higifelf Tran.rl-
at the head of the mutineers, that by his autho-
rity he might restrain them from plundering

the
0

BooK XI. the Austrian territories, through which they
'* r3. passed' .

Solymin's FRp1INANDS attention was turned so entirely
,ir,¢c,. towards the affairs of Germany, and hi trea-

fures so much exhausted by his late efforts in
Hungary, that he made no attempt to recover
this valuable province, although a favourable
opportiunity for that purpose prefented.itfelf, as
Solyman was then engaged in a war with Persia,
and involvedbefides in domeftick calamities which
engrossed and disturbed. his mind., Solyman,
though.diftinguifhed, by, many accomplishments,
from the other Ottoman Princes, had all the
pafliens peculiar to that violent and haughty
race. He was jealeas of his authority, sudden
as well as furious in .his anger, and susceptible
of all that rage of love, which reigns in the
East, and often produces the wildest and moif
tragical effects. His favourite miftref was a

lrhy agcf Circafiiah slave of exquisite beauty, who bore
his Ton him a son called Muftapha, whom, both on

Mapha. ccount of his birth-right and merit, he destined

to be the heir of his crown. Roxalana,'a Ruf-
fian captive, soon supplanted the Circassian, and
gained the Sultan's heart. Having the address
to retain the conquest' which ihe had made, the
kept polieffion of his love Without any rival for

Thuan. 450.

many

many years, during which ihe brought him BOOK XL
several sons and one daughter. All the happi.- 15-.
ness, however, which Ihe derived from the un-
bounded sway that (he had acquired over a
monarch whom one half of the world revered
or dreaded, was embittered by perpetual reflec-
tions on Muftapha's accefflon to the throne,
and the certain death of her sons, who, she fore-
saw, would be immediately sacrificed, according
to the barbarous jealousy of Turkish policy, to
the safety of the new Emperor. By dwelling
continually on this melancholy idea, she came
gradually to view Muftapha as the enemy of
her children, and to hate him with more than
a step.mother's ill-will. This prompted her to
with his deftruaion, in order to secure for one
of her own sons the throne which was destined
for him. Nor did ihe want either ambition to
attempt such a high enterprise, or the arts re-
quifite for carrying it into execution. Having
prevailed on the Sultan to give her only daughter
in marriage to Ruftan the Grand Vifier, she
disclosed her scheme to that crafty minister, who
perceiving that it was his own interest to co-
operate with her, readily promised his afiflance
towards aggrandizing that branch of the royal
line, to which he was so nearly allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her mea-
fures with this able confident, the began to

aSSe^L-

Jao* XL. aBlEt a wonderful zeal ftr the Mahometan reli.

4/5 gbin, to wSich Solyman was superstitiously at-

tached, and proposed to found and endow a
royal mnofque, a work of great expence, but
deemed by the Turks meitoritors in the highest
degree. Thei Miffti whom she confuleed, ap.
proved much of her pious intention; but, having
been gained and inftruded by Ruftan, told her,
that she being a slave could derive no benefit
herself fromi that holy deed, for all the merit of
it would accrue to Solyman, the master whose
property ihe was. Upon this- he seemed to be
overwhelmed with sorrow, and to fink into the
deepest melancholy, as if she had been disgusted
with life and all its enjoyments. Solyman, who
was absent with the army, being informed of
this dejection of mind,, and of the cause from
which it proceeded, discovered all the solicitude
of a lover to remove it, and by a writing under
his hand declared her a free womana Roxalana
having gained this point, proceeded to build
the Mosque, and re-affumed her usual gaiety
of spirit. But when Solyman, on his return to
Constantinople, sent an eunuch, according to
the custom of the seraglio, to bring her to par-
take of his bed, Ihe, seemingly with deep re-
gret, but in the most peremptory manner, de-
clined to follow the eunuch, declaring that what
had been an honour to her while a slave, became

a~~~~2 ~a crime

a'trime as fhe'was now a free woman, and that Boor XI*
she would not involve either the Sultan or her- 'T*

'55j)

felfin the guilt that must be contrated by such
an open violation of the law of their prophet.
Solyman, whose paflior this difficulty, as well
as the affcted delicacy which gave rife to it,
heightened and inflamed, had recourse imme-
diately to the Mufti for his diretion. He
replied, agreeably to the Koran, that Roxalana'S
scruples were well founded; but added, artfully,
in words which RuftRa had taught him to use,
that it was in the Sultan'* power to remove
these difficulties by espousing her as his lawful
wife. The amorous monarch closed eagerly
with the ptopofal, and solemnly married her,
according to the form of the Mahometan ritual t
though, by doing so, he disregarded a maxim of
policy which the pride of the Ottoman blood
had taught all the Sultans since Bajazet I. to
confider as inviolable. From his time, none of
the Turkish monarchs had married, because,
when he was vanquished and taken prisoner by
Tamerlane, his wife had been abused with bar.
barous insolence by the Tartars. That no fimi-
lar calamity might subjet the Ottoman family
to the like disgrace, the Sultans admitted none
to their bed but slaves, whose dishonour could
not bring any such Rain upon their house.

VOL. IV. L BuV

BooK XI. ·UT the more uncommon the ftep was, the

more it convinced Roxalana,, of the unbounded
influence which iae had acquired over the Sul-
tan's heart , and. emboldened her to prosecute,
with, greater hope of success, the scheme that.
the had formed in order to destroy Muftapha.
This young Prince having been entrusted bp
his father, according to the praftire of tie Sul-
tans in that age, with the government of several
different provinces, was at that time inveftecL
with the administration in Diarbequir, the an-
cient Mesopotamia, which Solyrman had wrested
from the Persians, and added' to his.empire. In
all there different commands, Muftapha had
conduced himself with such cautious prudence
as could give no offenqe to his father,. though,
at the fame time, he governed with so much
moderation as well as juftice,and displayed such
valour and generosity as rendered him equally
the favourite of the people and the darling of
the soldiery,

THERE was no room to lay any folly or vice

to his charge, that could impair the high opim
nion which his father entertained of him. Rox-
alana's malevolence was more refined; she
turned his virtues against him,, and made use
of these as engines for his deftrution. She
often mentioned, in Solyman's pretence, the
fpltpdid qualities of his son i ihe celebrated his

courage,

itdtrage, his liberality, his popular arts, with BooK Xl.
malicious and exaggerated praise. As soon as m 3-
fhe'erceived that the Sultan heard these enco-
iniums, which wete often repeated, with ud-
easiness; that suspicion of. his sori began to
mingle itself with his former efteeri. and
that by degrees he came to view him with
jealousy and fear, she Introduced, as by acci-
dent, some discourse concerding the rebellion of
his father Selim against Bajazet his grandfather:
ihe took notice of the bravery of the veteran
troops under Muftaphais command; and of the
heighboitrhoop of Diarbequir to the territories
bs the Perfiari Sophi, Solyman's mortal enemy.
By these arts, whatevet remained of paternal
tenderness was entirely extinguished, and such
paffiois were kindled in the breast ds the Siltan,
as gave all Rdcalana's malignant suggestions
the colour not only of probability but of truth.
A deep-rooted hatred succeeded, now, to his
suspicions and fear of Muftapha. He appointed
spies to observe, and report all his words and
actions , he watched and stood on his guard
agairift him as his most dangerous enemy,

HAVING thus alienated the Sultan's heart

frbm Mullapha, Roxalana ventured upon ano-
ther ftep. She entreated Solyrnan to allow her
own sons the liberty of appearing at court,
hoping that by gaining acceft to their father'

h 2a they

BOK XI. they might, by their good qualities and dutiful

deportment, infinoate themselves into that place
in his affections which Muftapha had formerly
held; and, though what she demanded was
contrary to the pratice of the Ottoman family
in that age, the uxorious monarch granted her
reqteft. To all these female intrigues Ruftan
added an artifice still more subtle, which com-
pleted the Sultan's delusion, and heightened
hisjealoufy and fear. He wrote to the Bashaws
of the provinces adjacent to Diarbequir, in-
llruaing them to fend him regular intelligence
of Muftapha's proceedings in his government,
and to each of them he gave a private hint,
flowing in appearance from his zeal for their
interest, that nothing would be more acceptable
to the Sultan than to receive favourable ac-
counts of a son whom he destined to sustain the
glory of the Ottoman name. The Bashaws
ignorant of his fraudulent intention, and eager
to pay court to their sovereign at such an easy
price, filled their letters with studied but fatal
panegyricks of Muftapha, representing him as
a Prince worthy to succeed such an illustrious
father, and as endowed with talents which
might enable him to emulate, perhaps to equal
his fame. These letters were industriously
shewn to Solyman, at the seasons when it was
known that they would make the deepest im-

preflien;

pefilon. Every exprellion in recommendation BooK X:
of his son wounded him to the, heart; he sus- 5
peted his principal officers of being ready to
favour the molt desperate attempts of a Prince
whom they were so fond to praise ; and fancying
that he saw them already affiulting his throne
with rebellious arms, he determined, while it
was yet in his power, to anticipate the blow, and
to secure hisown safety by his son's death.

I '..., , ,

. 1 ,

FOR this purpose, though under pretentce of

renewing; the war against Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
if a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
whose life he deemed inconsistent with his own
safety. But that crafty minister did not choose
to be loaded with the odium of having executed
this cruel order. As soon as he arrived in Syria
he wrote to Solyman, that the danger was so
imminent as called for his immediate pretence;
that the camp was full of Mutapha's emissaries;
that many of the soldiers were corrupted; that
the affctions of all leaned towards him; that
he had discovered a negociation which had been
carried on with the Sophi of Persia in order to
marry Muftapha with one of his daughters;
that he already felt his own talents as well as
authority to be inadequate to the exigencies of
such an arduous conjunCture; that the Sultan

L 3 alone
I

apex X. alone had fagacty to discern what rcfoluticq'

"V"~-, fiould he t4kenc in those circumstances, and

power to carry that resolution into execution.

THIS charge of courting the friend4iip of the

Sophi, Roxalana and Ruftan had reserved as
the last and most envenomed of all their calum.
nies. It operated with the violence which they
expected from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence
ps the Persians, and threw him into the wildest
transports of rage. He set out instantly for
Syria, and haRened thither with all'the preci.
pitation and impatience of fear and revenge.
As soon as he joined his army near Aleppo, and
bad concerted measures with Ruftan, he sent
a Chiaus or messenger of the court to his son,
requiring him to repair immediately to his pre-
fence. Muftapha, though no stranger to his
tep-mother's machinations, or to Rqftan's ma-
lice, or tp hit father's violent temper, yet rely-
ing on his own innocence, and hoping to dif-
Fredit the accusations of his enemies by the
promptitude of his obedience, followed the
messenger without delay to Aleppo. The mo-
ment he arrived in the camp, he was introduced
into the Sultan's tent. As he entered it, he
pbferved nothing that could give him any
alarm; no additional crowd of attendants, no
body of armed guards~ but the fame order and

filenc?

a!ence which always reign in the Sultan's apart- BOOK Xr.
;ments. In a few minutes, however, several --.-
mutes appeared, at the fight of whom Mufta-
pha knowing what was his doom, cried with a
loud voice, " Lo, my death 1" and attempted
to fly, The mutes rushed forward to seize him,
he resifted and ftrauggled, demanding with the
utmost earnestness to fee the Sultan; and de-
fpair, together with the hope of finding pro-
tection from the soldiers, if he could escape our
of the tent, animated him with such extra,-
ordinary strength, that, for some time, he baffled
all the efforts of the executioners. Solymaa
{was within hearing of his son's cries, as well as
of the noise which the firuggle occasioned. Im-
patient of this-elay of his revenge, and struck
with terror at the thoughts of Muftapha's efca-
ping, he drew aside the ,curtain which divided
the tent, and thrusting in his head, darted a
fierce look towards the outes, and with wild
and threatening geitures seemed to chide them
for sloth and timidity At fight of his father's
furious and uqrelenting.countenance, Muftaplias
strength failed, and his courage forfoQk him;
the mutes fastened the bow-string about his
neck, and in a moment put an end to his life.

THe dead body was exposed before the Sul-
tan's tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and

L 4 conto-

BOOK XI. contemplating that mourlful objec with aftoa

55i3. · nilhment, and sorrow, and indignations were

ready, if a leader had not been wanting, to
have broke out into the wildest excefes of rage.
After giving vent to.the firlt expreflions of their
grief, they retired each man to his tent, and
fbutting themfelvcs up, bewailed in secret the
Cruel fate of their favourite; nor was there one
of them who taited food or even water during
the remainder of that day. Next morning the
fame solitude and silence reigned in the camp;
and Solyman, being afraid that some dreadful
iaorm would follow this fullen calm, in order to
appease the enraged soldiers, deprived Ruftan
of the feals, ordered him to leave the camp,
and raiied Achmet, a gallant officer much beloved
in the army, to the dignity of Vifier. This
change, however, was made in concert with
Ruftan himself; that crafty minister suggesting
it as the only expedient which could save him-
self or his mailer. But within a few months,
when the resentment of the soldiers began to
subside, and the name of Muflapha to be for-
gotten, Achmet was firangled by the Sultan's
command, and Ruftan reinstated in the office
of Vifier. Together with his former power, he
re-aflumed the plan for exterminating the race
of Muftapha which he had concerted with
Roxalana; and as they were afraid that an only
Ron whom Muftapha had left, might grow up to

avenge

avenge his death, they redoubled their a&ivity, BooK XI.
and by employing the fame arts againt him L53
which they had pra&ised against his father, they
inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and pre-
vailed on him to issue orders for putting to death
that young innocent Prince. These orders.were
executed with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch,
who was dispatched to Bursa, the place where
the Prince resided; and no rival was left to
dispute the Ottoman throne with the sons of
Roxalana '.

SUCH a tragical scene, producive of so deep Chnre.ra,

distress, seldom occurs but in the history of the asa mar-
great monarchies of the East, where the force wten his

son and

of the climate works up and sublimes all the Maryof
paflions of the human mind into the greatest
fury, and the absolute power of sovereigns en.
ables them to a& with uncontroled violence;
while it paired in the court of Solyman, and en-
gaged his whole attention, Charles was pursuing,
with the utmost ardour, a new scheme for ag-
grandizing his family. About this time, Ed-
ward the Sixth of England, after a lhort reign,
in which he displayed such virtues as filled his
fubjets with sanguine hopes of being happy

Augerii Giflcnii Bulbequii Legationis Turcica EpilRo-

la iv. Franc. i61z. p. 37. Thuan. lib. 12. p. 432. Men.
de Ribier, ii. 457. Maurocenl hiflor. Vcncta, lib. vii.
p, 60.

Under

BooK XI. under his government, and made them bear wit',

' ~' ~patience all that they suffered from the weakness,

the dissensions and the ambition of the ministers
who aflumed the administration during his mi-
pnority, was seized with a lingering distemper
which threatened his life. The Emperor no
(ooner received an account of this, than his am-
bition, always attentive ro seize every oppor-
tunity of acquiring an increase of power or of
territories to his son, suggested the thought of
adding England to his other kingdoms, by the
marriage of Philip with the.Princefs Mary, the
heir of Edward's crown. Being apprehensive,
however, that his son, who was then in Spain,
might decline a match with a Princess in her
thirty-eighth year, and eleven years older than
himself"; Charles determined, notwithstanding
his own age and infirmities, to make offer of
himself as a husband to his cousin.

To which BUT though Mary was so far advanced in
I'hilip givte years, and destitute of every charm either of
his content.

person or of manners that could win affetion, or
command esteem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his consent to the match proposed by his
father, and was willing, according to the usual
maxim of Princes, to sacrifice his inclination to
his ambition. In order to ensure success, the

Palav. hill. Concil. Trid. v. U, c. 3. p.
p 5o.

2 Emperor,

Emperor, even before Edward's death, began to BooK Xr.
fake such Reps as might facilitate it. Upon i53!
Edward's demise, Mary mounted the throne of
England; the pretensions of the lady Jane Gray
proving as unfortunate as they were ill founded .
Charles sent immediately a pompous embassy
to London to congratulate Mary on her accession
to the throne, and to propose the alliance with
his son. The Queen,dazzled with the profpet The r.nti-

ments of

ps marrying the heir of the greatest Monarch in May,, d o
Europe; fond of uniting more closely with her th'hEE,l^,
mother's family, to which Ihe had been always to it
warmly attached; and eager to secure the power-
ful aid which she knew would be necelfary to-
wards carrying on her fayourite scheme of re-
fftablilhing the Romish religion in England,
listened in the most favourable manner to the
proposal., Among her subjects, it met with a
very different reception. Philip, it was well
known, contended for all the tenets of the church
of Rome with a sanguinary zeal which exceeded
the measure even of Spanilh bigotry: this
alarmed all the numerous partisans of the Re-
formation. The Caftillan haughtiness and re-
serve were far from being acceptable to the
English, who, having several times seen their
throne occupied by persons who were born sub.
ijdts, had become accustomed to an unceremo-

Carte' hii. of England, iii. 87.

niou^

BooK XI. nious and familiar intercourse with their fove.
-355. reigns. They could not think, without the ut-

most uneasiness, of admitting a foreign Prince
to that influence in their councils, which the
hulband of their Queen would naturally possess.
They dreaded, both from Philip's overbearing
temper, and from the maxims of the Spaniih
monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would
infuse ideas into the Queen's mind, dangerous
to the liberties of the nation, and would intro-
duce foreign troops and money into the king-
dom, to afift her in any attempt against them.

mTh houf FULL of these apprehensions, the house of
fmonft,,t Commons, though in that age extremely obfe.

it quious to the will of their Monarchs, presented

a warm address against the Spaniih match;
many pamphlets were published, representing
the dangerous consequences of the alliance with
Spain, and describing Philip's bigotry and ar.
rogance in the most odious colours. But Mary,
inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard
to the remonitrances of her Commons, or to the
sentiments of the people. The Emperor, hav-
ing secured, by various arts, the ministers whom
She trusted most, they approved warmly of the
mnatch, and large fums were remitted by him in
order to gain the reft of the council. Cardinal
Pole, whom the Pope, immediately upon Mary's
acceflion, had dispatched as his legate into Eng-

land,

land, in order to reconcile his native country BooK XI.
to the fee of Rome, was detained by the Empe- .-
ror's command at Dillinghen in Germany, left
by his presence he should thwart Philip's pre-
tensions, and employ his interest in favour of
his kinsman Courtnay Earl of Devonihire, whom
the English ardently wilhed their sovereign to
choose for a husband Y.

As .the negociation did not admit of delay, The msr:

it was carried forward with the greatest rapidity, ~omdc'T
the Emperor agreeing, without hesitation, to
every article in favour of England, which Mary's
ministers either represented as necessary to sooth
the people and reconcile them to the match, or
that was suggested by their own fears and jealousy
of a foreign malter. The chief articles were,
that Philip, during his marriage with the Queen, , 5-4.
ihould bear the title of King of England, but January i
the entire administration of affairs, as well as
the sole disposal of all revenues, offices, and
benefices, Ihould remain with the Queen; that
the heirs of the marriage flould, together with
the crown of England, inherit the dutchy of
Burgundy and the Low-Countries; that if
Prince Charles, Philip's only son by a former
marriage, ihould die without issue, his children
by the Queen, whether male or female, should
succeed to the crown of Spain and all the Em-

Y Carte, iii. a8.
· w ~' -! ~' ~peror'»

Booi XI. peror's hereditary dominions; that, before thd

consummation of the marriage, Philip ihould
swear solemnly, that he would retain no domcftick
who was not a subjet of the Queenj and Would
bring no foreigners into the kingdom that might
give umbrage td the Englilh; that he would
make no alteration in the coRnfitution or laws
of England; that he would not carry the
Queen, or any of the children born of this mar-
riage, out of the kingdom that if the Queen
Ihould die before him without issue, he would
immediately leave the crown to the lawful heir,
without claiming any right of admihiftration
whatever that in consequence of this mar-
riage, England lhould not be engaged in any
war subsisting between France and Spain; and
that the alliance between France and England
should remain in full force .'

Ditco.tent BUT this treaty, though both the Em'peror
ebn*P of and Mary's ministers employed their utmost ad.
1k E *lls. dress in framing it so as to pleale the Engliifh was

far from quieting their fears and jealousies.
They saw that words and prontifes were a feeble
security against the encroachments of an am-
bitious Prince, who, as soon as be got poffelion
of the power and advantages which lte Queen's
husband must necefarily enjoy, could easily

· Rymer'i Fed, vol. xvd 377. 393. Mtm. de Ribicr, ii.
491.

evade

evade any of the articles which either limited his Bloo Xl
authority or obftruted his schemes. They were ,5*
convinced that the more favourable the con-
ditions of the present treaty were to England,
the more Philip would be tempted to violate
them; and they dreaded that England, like
Naples, Milan, and the other countries annexed
to the Spanish crown, would soon feel the into-
lerable weight of its oppreflive dominion, and
be constrained, as these had been, to wate its
wealth and vigour in wars wherein it had no
interest, and from which it could derive no ad-
vantage. These sentiments prevailed so gene-
rally, that every part of the kingdom was filled
with discontent at the hatch, and with indig-
nation against the advisers of it. Sir Thomas Wyt's, ;-
Wyat, a gentleman of some note, and of good s"Kaw.
intentions towards the publick, took advantage
of this, and roused the inhabitants of Kent to
arms, in order to save their country from a so-
reign yoke. Such numbers resorted in a ihort
time to his ftandaFd; he marched to London
with such rapidity; and the Queen was to ut-
terly unprovided for defence, that the aspect of
affairs was extremely threatening; and if any
nobleman of diftinfion had joined the male-
contents, or had Wyat pofeffed talents equal,
in any degree, to the boldness of his enterprize,
the infurreetion must have proved fatal toy

Mary's

BOOt X, Mary's power. Buc allhis cmafires w.econt.
'si" certed with so little prudence;. and executed with

such irrefolutiow,- that many off -his followers
forsook him; the reft were dispersed by an hand-
ful of men ; and he himself was taken prisoner,
without having made any-effort worthy of-the
cause that he had undertaken, -or suitable tothe
ardour with which he engaged in it. He suffered
the punishment due to his ramhnefs and rebellion.
The Queen's authority was confirmed and in-
creased by her success in defeating this incon-
fiderate attempt to abridge it. The lady Jane
Gray, whose title the ambition of her relations
had set up in opposition to the Queen's, was,
notwithstanding her *youth and innocence,
brought to the scaffold.. The lady Elizabeth,
the Queen's sifter, was observed with the most
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was
ratified by the parliament.

The mar. PHILIP landed in England with .a magni-
^,,.d ficent retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great

solemnity; and though he could not lay alide
his natural severity and pride, .r allume gracious
and popular manners, he endeavoured to con.
ciliate the favour of the Englilh nobility by his
extraordinary liberality. In cafe that should fail
of acquiring him fich influence in the govern-
ment of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining,

the

thb Emperor kept a body of twelve thousand BooK xr.
men on .the coast of Flanirs, in' teadiRifs to ^-
embark for Englandl and to support him in all
his enterprites. .

EMUsLbktzi D by all these favourable cihtulh- MrY,,

stances, Mary pursued the scheme of extirpat- oe,^,,,,'t
ing the Prteftant religion out of her domi- Pel.n,
nions with the most preeipitate zeal. The laws Eg1iand
of Edward the Sixth, in favour of the Reforma-
tion, wert repealed; the 'Protestant clergy eje&-
ed, all the forms and rites of the Popish *or-
ship ,wet re-eftabliihed; the nation iWs so-
lemrly absolved from the guilt which it had
contra&td during the period of its apoftacyi
ahd was: publickly reconciled to the church of
Romn by cardinal Pole, who, immediately after
the Queen's marriage, was permitted to con-
tinue his journey to England, and to exercise
his legantine fun&tions with the most ample
power. Not satisfied with having overturned
the Protestant. church, and having eftablithed
her own system on its ruins, Mary insisted that
all het fubjeCks should conform to the fame
mode of worihip which she preferred; should
profcfs their faith in the fame creed which ihe
had approved; and abjure every pra&ice or
opinion that was deemed repugnant to either of
them. Powers altogether unknown in the Eng,

VOL. IV. M ilhn

BQoi XL. 1i :cniU9iipn, wroPe vctsd in cert:inperforts

54 appoited ts taces cgzancp d1 h1ify, and

they iogQrcedd to eerciri.tihem with pre,. than
inquisitorial severity. The profpef .f danger,
however, did not intimidate the principal teachers
of:.e, Protestant dp.rine, who believed that
they were contendPig fr truths oks :i utmost
co.ncrence to th~ -appiifs of tmaaij. They
boldly avowed their fniaentq , ad

,wrn .con-.

denel C.to that cruel death which the chuoh of
Rome refieres for i cneiqes. 0This oking
pu.nisbment was infli' i wit4h ; brbarity
which. h r:ancour of fe zeal al one can inpire.
The Egfl.fi, who are inferior n hutma.niy to no
people in Europe, and rermarkable for the ild-
ncfs of their publick executions,: beheld, with
aRonilfment and horror, perfpi s who had ól!ed
the most refpetable tations in their church, and
who were venerable on account of their age,
their piety, and their literature, condemned to
cndute, torments to which even the most. atro-
cious criminals were not fpbjeted.:.

Tre oh. THIS extrenle rigour did hot accomplith the
f had to end at which Mary aimed. The patience and
irmount. fortitude with which these martyrs for the Re-

formation submitted to their sufferings, the he-
roick contempt of death expressed by persons of
every rank, and age, and lex, confirmed many

more

iqrce iq ,the Protiftant faith, tha4 the threats of Bo^K Xj
their enraged persecutors could frighten into at P^
poftacy. The business offuch as were entrusted
with trying of herecicks multiplied con;tinualy,
and appeared to be as andlefs as it was odius.,
The Queen's ablest initers becarme. fenfibil
how impolitick, as well as dangerous, it was t0
irritate the people by the frequent fpe&acle of
publick executionss which dty deefted ,as no less
uruft than cruel. Even Philip was Co tho.
roughly convinced of her 'haying run to an ex-
cess of riggur, that oil this occalion he assumed
a part to which he was little accuftQmed, bec.omr,
ing an advocate for moderLation and lenity ,

BUT, nptwithftanding this attempt to ingra- a, htndl

tiate hin.felf with the Engl.lh, they difcovexed Pblip,.
a con.ftapt jealousy and ditruft of all his inten-
tions , and when rome n.icibers, who had been
gained by. be court, ventured to rmove in the
house ps .Cqimons that l e nation ought to
aflift the gmpeaQr the Qyeen's father-in-law,
in his war against France, the propqfal was 're
jected wih gpenergl jii$aisfa(ion. 4A otion
whhich was igde, that the parliament floul4
give its cPfent that Philip might be pubi.cls
crowned as the Queen's hpflwtq r,_ with

Godwin's AnnJis of Q. Mwvy p. Kennet, v. ii p. Jaz
Burnet'6 hit. of Refor. ii. zg8. 30o.

M such

BO'OK XT. fch a cold reception,'that it was infantly
'*rtt.b. withdrawn b .

5 .

-

!ic~ic .; ...

the French THE King of France had observed the pro-
King alarm- '

iedatthe gres of the Emperors negociation in Eng.
twee Phi. and with much uneasiness. The great accef-
^iP and tlon of territories as well as reputation which

his enemy would acquire by the marriage of
his son with the Queen of such a powerful
kingdom, was obvious and formidable. He
eatly iforefaw that the Englilh, notwithstanding
all their fears and precautions, would be soon
drawn ir to take part ini the quarrels on the
continent, and be compelled to a& in subser-
viency to the Emperor's ambitious schemes.
For this rea'on, Henry had given it in charge
t6 his iibaffador at the court of London, to
employ all his address in order to defeat or re-
tard the treaty of marriage ;- and as there was
not, at that time, any Prince of the blood in
Priance, whbom he could propose to the Queen
as a husband, he inftruted fiim to co-operate
with such of the English as wished their fove-
reigti t6 marry one of her own fubje&cs. But
the'Queen's ardour aid precipitation in closing
with the firR overtures in favour of Philip,
having rendered all his endeavours ineftedual,
Henry was so far from thinking it prudent to

h Carte's hist of England, iii. 314.

give

give any aid to the Englilh malecontents, though Boot X.
carneftly solicited by Wyat and their other \.

A554.

leaders, who tempted him to take them under
his prote&tion, by offers of great advantage to
France, that he commanded his ambafiador to
congratulate the Quieen in the warmest terms
upon the fupprelion of the infurre&ion.

BUT, notwithtanding there external profef. ,HIatp'"r,

lions, Henry dreaded so much the consequence vigor.us
of this alliance, which more than compensated
for all the Emperor had loft in Germany, that
he determined to carry on his military ope-
rations both in the Low-Countries, and in Italy,
with extraordinary vigour, in order that he
might compel Charles to accept of an equitable
peace, before his daughter-in-law could'fur-
mount the aversion of her subje&s to a war on
the continent, and prevail on them to assist th
Emperor either with money or troops. For
this purpose, he exerted himself to the utmost
in order to have a numerous army early afItem-
bled on the frontiers. of the Netherlands, and
while one part of it laid waste the open country
of Artois, the main body, under the Conftabld
Montmorency, advanced towards the provinces
of Liege and Hainault by the forcft of Ar-
dennes.

M3 THE

BboK Xl.' THE. campaign was iened ilith the fele Of
i54 . Mariemburgh, a tdin 'Whiih the Queen' of
Tireh ofl Hungary, the govrernefs of the Lo#,Cotintties,
bi. rmsI. had fortified at great expehte; but, bei'ig defi-

tute of a sufficient gartifon, it ftrnndered in
fix days. Henry, elattd with thig ftcefs, put
June is. himself at the head of his army, and investing

Bouvines, took it by assault, after a short re-
fiftance. With equil facility he b&tne miafter
of Dinant; and then turning td the Idft bent

TbeEmpe. his march towards the province of Atois. The
bor littleO vaif fums whlth the Eirperor had remitted ihto
able to ob.
lua it. England, had so exhausted his treasury, as to

render his preparations at this juniure, flower
and more dilatory than iOfua He had nm body
of troops to make head against the FrenCh at
their first entrance into his territ6ries; and
though he drew together all the forceis in the
country in the tm6ft hurry, and gwae the
command of them to Emanual Philibrt of Sa-
voy, they were in no cdndition to fact an enemy
so far foperior in number. The Prinee 'of
Savoy, hdwcVer, byh aftitivty ndd good ton-
dut, made up sot his Want of t~f4;'. By
watching.all the motionrs of the-Frthch at a di.
Rance, and by chufing his own polts with Ikill,
he put it out bs their powet either w form any
sieg of consequence, or to attack him. Want

of

of fubiftence soon. obliged them to fill' bick Boo xr.
towards their own frontiers, after having bWrnt rs,
all the open towns, and having plundered the
country through which they marched 'riti a
~cruelty and licence more becomning a Body of
light troops than a royal arnmy led by a greai
monarch.

BUT Henry, that he might not dfifmifshil Theirnc,

army without atemptingfome conquest adeqouae 'iat
to the vast preparations, as well as fang.ine
hopes, with which he had opened the campaign,
invested Renti, a place deemed in that age of
great importance, as, by its situation on the
confines of Artois and the Roulonnais, it co-
vered the former province, and proteaed the
parties -which made incursions into the latter.
The town, which was strongly fortified.and
provided with a numerous garrison, made a gal-
lant defence; but being warmly pressed by a
powerful army, it nauft soon have yielded. ,The
Emperor, who at that time enjoyed a short in-
terval of ease from the gout, was so solicitous
to save it, that, although he could bear no other
motion but that of litter, he instantly put him-
self at the head of his army, which having ret
ceived several reinifrcements was now strong
enough to approach the enemy. The French
were eager to decide the fate of Renti by a

M 4 battle,

o.~ XI. battle, ad exp4ecd- it fom .the Emperor' u.,
%%,I rival in his camp; but Chasles avoided. a: ge,

reral acion with great industry, and as he had
nothing in view but to save the town, he hoped
to acComplih that, without exposing himself to
the orqfequcices of such a dangerou$ and do.ubt-
fulevent.

Anaio.s 'NOTWITHISTANDINe all his precautions, a
bwo armies, difute, about a post which both armies endea-
.AP. 13, voured to seize, brought on an engagement

which proved almost general. The Duke of
Guise, who commanded the wing of the French
which stood the brunt of the combat, displayed
valour and condu't worthy of the defender of
Metz; the Imperialists after an obstinate ftrug-
gle were repulsed; the French remained masters
of the post in dispute, and if the Constable,
either from his natural caution and slowness, or
from unwillingness to support a rival whom. he
hated, had not delayed bringing up the main
body to second the impreflion which Guise had
made, the rout of the enemy must have been
complete. The Emperor, notwichftanding the
lots which he had sustained, continued in the
fame camp; land the French, being straitened
for provisions, and finding it impoflible to carry
on the siege in the face of an hostile army,
quitted their intrenchments. They retired

openly,

openly, courting the enemy to approach, rather Boos xI.
than Ihunning an engagement., "

BtT Charles, having gained his end, fuffereld The rIpe

them to march off unmolested. As oDon as his '"pePi."
troops entered their own country,- Henry thre*w rdc.
garrisons into the frontier towns, and difmifled
the reft of the army. This encouraged the Im-
perialifts to push forward with a considerable
body of troops into Picardy, and by laying
wafRe the country with fire and sword, they
endeavoured to revenge themselves for the ra-
vages which the French had committed in Hai-
nault and Artois c. But, as they were not able
to reduce any place of importance, they gained
nothing more than the enemy had done' by this
cruel;and. inglorious method of carrying on the
war.

THE arms of Prance were fill more unfuc- Asti, of

cefsful in Italy. The footing which the French Italy
had acquired in Siena, occasioned much urin
easiness to Cosmo di Medici, the most saga-
cious and enterprising of all the Italian Princes.
He dreaded the neighbourhood of a powerful
people, to whom all who favoured the ancient,
republican government in Florence would have
fecourfe, s to their patural protetors against

: ' Tl.a. ,
6 C,. HAir Atmn; Brab. 674.

that

BooK XL that absolute authority which the Emperor had

enabled him to uforp; he knew how odious he

Cormo di was to the French, on account of his attach-
Medici's
fkheme fnent to the Imperial party; and he foresaw
iSc cP.rd that, if they were permitted to gather strength

in Siena, Tuscany would soon feel the effets
of their resentment. For there reasons, he
wished with the utmost solicitude for the expul-
sion of the French out of the Sienefe, before
they had time to establish themselves thoroughly
in the country, or to receive such reinforcements
from France as would render it dangerous to
attack them. As this, however, was properly
the Emperor's business, who was called by his
interest as well as honour to dislodge those
formidable intruders into the heart of his do.
minions, Cosmo laborred to throw the whole
burden of the enterprise on him; and on that
account had given no afiRfance, during the former
campaign, blit by advancing bme small fums
of mohey towards the payment of the Imperial
troops.

Hnegoci. ByT a ithe defene of the Netherlahds en-
Wte with
th*Eme- grossed all the Eniperor's attention and his
"' siremittancei info Ehgland had draited his trea-

hiry, it was obvio't tóhat his.-pcradons in Italy
,would be extremely fteblei aid Cosmo plainly
perceived, that if he himself did not take part

openly

-Sptfily in tl *Satr, tid at iith vigdur, tie BOOK XI.
TFiench *6oild radrcet mntt with any aiioy- L-Y'
anre. As his fitnat1n rendered this tefolutioh
tieceffary and unavoidable, is next care was to
eixeute it in stich a manrher, that he huight de-
'ive frdit it fobrdi other advahtage, beside that
bs drfiing the French ott of his neighbourhood.
With this vtie', he dirpatched an envby to
Charles, offering to detlarte War agaihft France,
'dd to teduce' Slehi at his dwh charges, on
conditioi that he fliould be repaid whatever he
should etpend in he eriteirprife, and be per-
-mitted to retaiti all his conquetr until his de-
mands were fully satisfied. htiares, to whom,
at this junriEtr, thie ar againii Siena was an
intolerable burden, arid who had neither expe-
dient nir feitbdice tliat icoEi en'ble him to carry
it on with l'oper vig6ur, closed gladly with
this overtdf/ei nd ofriio, well acquainted with
the low state of the firiperial finances, flattered
himself that th'e tfiperior, finding it impofible
to reimburfi him, would fiuffer him to keep
quiet pofrelniid of whatever places he should
honquer d

FU'LL of thiee hopes, he made great prepa- Enter.tn

tiatiois for War, and as the Freiili King had Ftc,.h
fthl' tihe' ttefngth of his arms againlt the

d Adr!ani Itoiiade faui teoi ip, vol. i. 662..

' Netherlands,

Bool XI. Netherlands, he did not despair of aflembling

`--, such a body of men as would prove more than

a sufficient match for any force which Henry
could bring into the field in Italy, He eAdea-
voured to obtain afiftance from the Pope, or at
least to secure his remaining neutral, by giving
one of his daughters to that Pontiff's nephew.
He attempted to detach the Duke of Orsini,
whose family had been long attached to the
French party, from his ancient confederates, by
beRlowing on him another of his daughters; and
what was of greater consequence than either of

Cive tbe, there, he engaged John James Medecino, Mar-
ii army to quis of Marignano, to take the command of his
Mcdewo.

army '. This officer, from a very low condition
in life, had raised himself, through all the ranks
of service, to high command, and had displayed
talents and acquired reputation in war, which
entitled him to be placed on a level with the
greatef generals of that martial age. Having
attained a station of eminence so difpropor-
tionate to his birth, he laboured with a fond
solicitude to conceal his original obscurity, by
giving out that he was descended of the family
of Medici, to which honour the casual refem-
blancc of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such
an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point,

Adriani Jloria, vol. i. p. 663.

acknowledged

acknowledged him as a relation, and permitted BOOK XL.
him to assume the arms of his family: Mede- 5S4
cino, eager to serve the head of that family of
which he now confidered himself as a branch,
applied with wonderful zeal and afliduity to raise
troops; and as, during his long service, he had
acquired great credit with the leaders of those
mercenary bands which formed the firength
of Italian armies, he engaged the most eminent
of them to follow Cosmo's standard.

To oppose this able general, and the formi- Peter Str.

dable army which he had assembled, the King with thc
of France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Flo- th "Fnah
rentine nobleman, who had resided long in lyi
France, as an exile, and who had risen by his
merit to high reputation, as well as command
in the army. He was the Ton of Philip Strozzi,
who, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty-feven, had concurred with such ardour
in the attempt to expel the family of Medici,
out of Florence, in order to re-eftablilh the an-
cient republican form of government; and who
bad perished in the undertaking. The son in-
herited the implacable aversion to the Medici,
as well as the fame enthufiaftick zeal for the
liberty of Florence which had animated his
father, whose death he was impatient to revenge.
Henry flattered himself that his army would
make rapid progress under a general whose zeal

to

BooK XI. tp promote his inr¢t.. was. r9pufd. nd fconded
,S: " by such poperfiul pa.ons efpcially as he bad

allotted himt for the fene of &ip4s lhis native
country, in which !ie had many powerful par,
tifans ready to facilitate all his opeations.

The impr"i- BUT how specious foover the motives mi~ht ap-
ence of this ' '

- ' '

-
~bcc. pe.ar which induced tHery to make this choice,

it provYc fatal to the interelts of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as soon as he heard that the mortal enemy
of his family was appointed to take the com-
mand in Tucyany, concluded that the King of
France aimed at something more than the pro-
te&ion of the Sienefe, and saw the necessity of
making extraordinary efforts, not merely to re-
duce Siena, but to lave himself from deftruc*
lion ' At the fame time, the Cardinal of Ser-
rara, who had the entir diyeffion of the French
affairs in Italy, confidered S;rozzi as a formid-
able rival in power, and in order to prevnat his
acquiring any increafi of authority frm. success,
he was extremely retnC ip fqpplying hirnm ither
with money to pay his troop, or with provi-
sions to support them. Str.zi hinmf, bJinded
by his resentment aga3nft the Medici, pftlped on
his operations with the impetuosity qs revenge,
rather than with the caution agd pru4cnce be.
coming a great general,

r Pecci Mcmorie di Sicnas vol. iv, p. lo3j &c.

AT

AT firflt however, he attacked several towns Boou XI.

in the, tOrories of Florence with such vigour ,

-

as obeed Medocino, in order to check his The btt
progress to withdraw the greater part of his Woo.
army frpm Siena, which he had inveRed before
Strozzi's arrival in Italy. As Cosmo fultained
the whole burden of military operations, the
expence of which must soon have exhausted his
revenues; as neither the viceroy of Naples nor
governor of Milan were in condition to afford
him any, cfeBtual aid; and as the troops which
Medecino had left in the camp before Siena
could attempt nothing against it during his a.b
fence; it was Strozzi's business to have pro-
tra&ed the war, and to have transferred the feat
of it into the territories of Florence; but the
hope of ruining his enemy by one decisive blow,
precipitated him into a general engagement not
far from Marciano. The armies were nearly Augu, ,
equal in nrnmbcr ) but a body of Italian cavalry,
in which Strozzi placed great confidence, having
fedwithoutimaking any refitance, either through in which
the treachery or cowardice of the officers who ahc dicaed
commanded it, his infantry remained exposed
to the attacks of all Medecino's troops. En-
couraged, however, by Strozzi's pref;nce and
example, who,after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed
himself at the head of the infantry, and mani-

F selfed

BOK xr. fefled an admirable presence of mind, as well

[lso. as extraordinary valour, they stood their ground

with great firmness, and repulsed such of the
enemy as ventured to approach them. But
those gallant troops being filtrouhded atrlaft on
every fide, and torn in pieces by a battery of
cannon which Medeclno br6ught to bear upon
them, the Florentine cavalry broke in on their
flanks, and a general rout ensued. Strozzi,
faint with the loss of blood, ahd deeply 'ffected
with the fatal consequences of his own rahinefs,
found the utmof difficulty in making his escape
with a handful of men g.

Mededno IMEIECINO returned immediately to. the siege
sinU, of Siena with his victorious forces, and as

Strozzi could not, after the greatest efforts of
aativity, collect as many men as to form the ap-
pearance of a regular army, he had leisure to
carry on his approaches against the town with-

wh.chk out moleRation. But the Sienefe, instead of
pI tly de-
,eod by finking into despair upon this cruel disappoint-
the cirie en
ind Mon- ment of their only hope of obtaining relief, pre.

pared to defend themselves to the utmost extre-
mity, with that undaunted fortitude, which the
love of liberty alone can inspire. This gene-
rous resolution was warmly seconded by Monluc,
who commanded the French garrison in the

* Pecci Memo;ic dcll$ Siena, vol. iv. p. 117.

towns

town. The ative and enterprising courage BooK XI.
which he had displayed on many occasions, had .""
procured him this command and as he had
ambition which aspired at the highest military
dignities, without any pretenfions.to attain them
but what he could derive from merit, he de-
termined to distinguish his defence of Siena by
extraordinary efforts of valour and perfcverance.
For this purpole, he repaired and strengthen.
ed the fortifications with unwearied industry; he
trained the citizens to the use of arms, and ac-
cultomed them to go through the fatigues and'
dangers of service in common with the soldiers
and as the enemy were extremely stria in guard-
ing all the avenues to the city, he husbanded
the provisions in the magazines with the most
parfirnonious ceconomy, and prevailed on the
foldiersi as well as the citizens, to reftri& them-
selves to a very moderate daily allowance for
their subsistence. Medecino, though his army
was not numerous enough to torm the town by
open force, ventured twice to aflault it by fur-
prise; but he was received each time with so
much spirit, and repulled with such loss, as dif-
couraged him from repeating the attempt, and
left him no hopes of reducing the town but by
famine.

VOL. IV. N WITH

r~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

BVOK XI. WITH this view, he fortified his own camp

's 5 with great care, occupied all the posts of strength

rMedrtt round the place, and having entirely cut off the
sieg into besieged from any communication with the ad-

jacent country, he waited patiently until necef-
fity should compel them to open their gates.
But their enthufiaftick zeal for liberty made the
citizens despise the distresses occasioned by the
scarcity of provisions; and even supported them
long under all the miseries of famine; Mon-
luc, by his example and exhortations, taught
his soldiers to vie with them in patience and ab.
tinence; and it was not until they had with-
stood a siege of ten months, until they had
eaten up all the horses, dogs, and other anii
mals in the place, and were reduced almost to
their last morsel of bread, that they proposed a
1,5. capitulation. Even then they demanded honour-

able terms; and as Cosmo, though no firanger
to the extremity of their condition, was afraid
that despair might prompt them to venture
upon some wild enterprize, he immediately
granted them conditions more favourable than
they could have expeted.

April 22, THE capitulation was made in the Emperor's
obliTd by name, who engaged to take the republickofSiena
fitue t: under the, proteftion of the Empire; he pro.

mifed to maintain the ancient liberties of the

cit)',

city, to allow the magistrates the full exercise BOOK XI.
of.their former. authority, to secure the citizens 5.
in the undisturbed pofeffion of their privileges
and property; he granted an ample and unli-
mited pardon to all who had born arms against
him » he reserved to himfeif the right of placing
a garrison in the town, but engaged not to re-
build the citadel without the consent of the citi-
zens. Monluc and his French garrison were
allowed to march out with all the honours of
war,

MEDECINO observed the articles of capitula-

tion, as far as depended on him, with great ex-
actnefs. No violence or insult whatever was
offered to the inhabitants, and theFrench garrison
was treated with all the refpec due to their spirit
and bravery. But many of the citizens fufpeding, Manvofthe
from the extraordinary facility with which they s'e,,rie'tc'
had obtained such favourable conditions, that Alci"oi
the Emperor, as well as Cosmo, would take the
first opportunity of violating them, and disdain-
ing to possess a precarious liberty, which de-
pended on the will of another, abandoned the
place of their nativity, and accompanied the
French to Moht&-Alcino, Porto Ercole, and
other small towns in the territory of the repub.
lick. Tiey eftablified, in Monte-Alcino; the cn.,icfl,'i,
fame model of government to which they had ,;.,t
been accuftomned at Siena, and appointing ma- ti'''.

N 2 giftrates

BOOK XF. giftrates with the fame titles and jurifdicion, so-

laced themselves with this image of their ancient
liberty.

Iardffiipto THE fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate
*hich the
ctizens of of their country were not imaginary, or their
Siena were suspicion of the Emperor and Cosmo ill-founded;

for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken pof-
session of the town, than Cosmo, without regard.
ing the articles of capitulation, not only dif-
placed the magifirates who were in office, and
nominated new ones devoted to his own interest,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up
their arms to persons whom he appointed to
receive them. They submitted to the former
from neceflity, though with all the reluctance
and regret which men accustomed to liberty feel
in obeying the first commands of a master.
They did not yield the fame tame obedience to
the latter; and many persons of diftinEtion, ra-
ther than degrade themselves from the rank of
freemen to the condition of slaves, by surrender-
ing their arms, fled to their countrymen at
Monte-Alcino, and chose to endure all the hard-
ships, and encounter all the dangers which they
had reason to expect in that new ifation, where
they had fixed the feat of their republick.

cormo at CosMO, not reckoning himself secure while

alatis thole
who had rc. such numbers of implacable and desperate cne-
re*11' 'diicS

mics were fettled in his neighbourhood, and re- 1BOK X[.
tained any degree of power, solicited Medecino s55s.
to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their strength
and spirits, after the many calamities which they
had suffered. He prevailed on him, though his
army was much weakened by hard duty during
the siege of Siena, to invest Porto Ercole; and
the fortifications being both flight and incom-
plete, the besieged were soon compelled to open
their gates. An unexpe&ed order, which Me- Ju'e 'I
decino received from the Emperor to detach the
greater part of his troops into Fiedmont, pre-
vented farther operations, and permitted the
Sienefe exiles to reside for some time undisturbed
in Monte-Alcino. But their unhappy coun-
trymen who remained at Siena, were not yet at
the end of their sufferings; for the Emperor,
instead of adhering to the articles of capitula-
tion, granted his son Philip the investiture of
that city and all its dependencies; and Francis
de Toledo, in the name of their new master,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military govern-
ment, treated them like a conquered people,
and fubjeted them to the Spanish yoke, with-
out paying any regard whatever to their privi-
leges or established forms of policy h.

h Sleid. 617. Thuan. lib. xv. 52z. 537. Joan. Came-

raril adnot. rcr. precipuarum ab anno 1550 ad Il6x ap.
Freherum, vol. iii. p. 564. Pecci Memoric dtlla Siena,
iv, a64, &c.

N 3 THE

BOOK XI. THE Imperial army in Piedmont had been

'5~. so feeble, for some time, and its commanders

operations so inacive, that the Emperor, in order to give
in Pied-
moat. vigour to his operations in that quarter, found

it necessary not only to call off Medecino's
troops from Tuscany while in the career of
cpnqueft, but to employ in Piedmont a general
of such reputation and abilities, as might coun-
terbalance the great military talents of the Ma-
rechal Briffac, who was at the head of the French
forces in that coqntry.

cbrIes ap- HE pitched' on the Duke of Alva for that
points the
Dike of purpole; but it was as much the effet of a
Alvd gene.
Triimnmo court intrigue, as of his opinion of the Duke's

merit, which led him to this choice. Alva had
long attended Philip with the utmost assiduity,
and had endeavoured to work himself into his
confidence by all the insinuating arts of which his
haughty and inflexible nature was capable. As
he nearly resembled that Prince in many sea-
tures of his character, he began to gain much
of his good-will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's
favourite, who dreaded the progress which this
formidable rival made in his master's affcctions,
had the address to prevail with the Emperor to
name Alva to this command. The Duke, though
sensible that he owed this diftinAion to the ma-
licious arts of an enemy, who had no other. aim
than to remove him at a distance from court,

was

was of such pun&ilious honour, that he would Bo'r Xr.
not decline a command that appeared dangerous '5;-T
and difficult, but, at the fame time, so haughty,
that he would not accept of it but on his
own terms, infifing on being appointed the
Emperor's Vicar-general in Italy, with the fu-
preme military command in all the Imperial and
Spanish territories in that country. Charles
granted all his demands; and he took pof-
session of his new dignity with almost unlimited
authority.

-IIS first operations, however, were neither Hsoper,-

tions thirfe

proportioned to his former reputation and the inronicL-.
extensive powers with which he was inveRted,
nor did they come up to the Emperor's expec-
tations. Briffac had under his command an
army which, though inferior in number to the
Imperialists, was composed of chosen troops,
which having grown old in service in that
country, where every town was fortified, and
every cattle capable of being defended, were
perfetly acquainted with the manner of carry-
ing on war there, By their valour, and his own
good conduct, BrifTac not only defeated all the
attempts of the Imperialists, but added new con-
quests to the territories of which he was formerly
malter. Alva, after having boasted, with his
usual arrogance, that he would drive the French

N 4 out

BOOK XI. out of Piedmont in a few weeks, was obliged

'. X to retire into winter quarters, with the ignominy

of being unable to preserve entire that part of
the country of which the Emperor had hitherto
kept poffellion .

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
were inconsiderable, neither the Emperor nor
King of France being able to bring into the
field an army strong enough to undertake any

A conrpi- enterprize of moment. But what Charles wanted
racy to be.
tray Metz in force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold
to the im-
cxuiaia's. stratagem, the success of which would have been

equal to that of the most vigorous campaign.
During the siege of Metz, Leonard Father Guar-
dian of a convent of Franciscans in that city,
had insinuated himself far into the esteem and
favour of the Duke of Guise, by his attach-
ment to the French. Being a man of an active
and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
ufiful both in animating the inhabitants to sus-
tain with patience all the hardships of thIfiege,
and in procuring intelligence of the enemies de-
signs and motions. The merit of those impor-
tant, services, together with the warm recom-
mendations of the Duke of Guise, secured him

A Thuan. lib. xv. 529. Guichenon Hill. do Savoye,
tom. i. 670. £,ch

Such

such high confidence with Vieleville, who was Boos X[.
appointed governor of Metz when Guise left the
town, that he was permitted to converse or cor-
respond with whatever persons he chore, and
nothing that he did created any suspicion. This
monk, from the levity natural to bold and pro-
jeating adventurers; or from resentment against
the French, who had not bestowed on him such
rewards as he thought due to his own merit; or
tempted by the unlimited confidence which was
placed in him, to imagine that he might carry
on and accomplifl any scheme with perfect fe-
curity, formed a design of betraying Metz to
the Imperialists.

HE communicated his intention to the The plan

Queen-dowager of Hungary, who governed the of it
Low-Countries in name of her brother. She
approving, without any scruple, an aEt of trea-
chery, from which the Emperor might derive
such signal advantage, aflifted the Father Guar-
dian in concerting the most proper plan for
ensuring its success. They agreed that the
Father Guardian ihould endeavour to gain his
monks to concur in promoting the design; that
he should introduce into the convent a certain
number of chosen soldiers, disguised in the habit
of friars; that when every thing was ripe for
execution, the governor 9f Thionville flould

march

BoG.K XI. march towards Metz in the night with a con-

fiderable body of troops, and attempt to scale
the ramparts; that while the garrison was em-
ployed in resisting the aflailants, the monks
should set fire to the town in different places;
that the soldiers who lay concealed should sally
out of the convent, and attack those who de-
fended the ramparts in the rear. Amidst the
universal terror and confusion, which events so
unexpeced would occasion, it was not doubted
but that the Imperialists might become masters
of the town. As a recompense for this service
the Father Guardian stipulated that he ihould
be appointed bishop of Metz, and ample rewards
were promised to such of his monks as should
be most active in co-operating with him.
ats provrct, THE Father Guardian accomplished what he

had undertaken to perform with great secrecy
and dispatch. By his authority and arguments,
as well as by the profpet of wealth or honours
which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He
introduced into the convent, without being ful
peEted, as many soldiers as were thought fuffi
cient. The governor of Thionville, apprizcd
in due time of the design, had ailembled a
proper number of troops for executing it; aMi
the moment approached, which probably would

haivc

have wrefled from Henry the molt important BOOK XI.
of all his conquests. 555

BUT, happily for France, on the very day that is di;fq

was fixed for ifriking the blow, Vielleville, an v"
able and vigilant officer, received information
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionville,
that certain Franciscan friars resorted frequently
thither, and were admitted to many private
conferences with the governor, who was carry-
ing on preparations for some military enterprize
with great dispatch, but with a most mysterious
secrecy. This was sufficient to awaken Vielle-
ville's suspicions. Without communicating these
to any person, he instantly visited the convent
of Franciscans ; deteted the soldiers who were
concealed there; and forced them to discover
as much as they knew concerning the nature
of the enterprise. The Father Guardian, who
had gone to Thionville that he might put the
last hand to his machinations, was seized at the
gate as he returned; and he, in order to save
himself from the rack, revealed all the circum-
stances of the conspiracy.

VIELLEVILLE not satisfied with having fcized A hodyor

the traitors, and having frustrated their schemes, ',,1'."'n
was solicitous to take advantage of the disco-
veries which he had made, so as to be revenged
prn he Imperialifis. For this purpose, he

marched

BOOK XI. marched out with the belt troops in his garrison,

1555. and placing there in ambush near the road, by

which the Father Guardian had informed him
that the governor of Thionville would 'approach
Metz, he fell upon the Imperialists with great
fury, as they advanced in perseEt security, with-
out fufpe&ing any danger to be near. Con-
founded at this sudden attack, by an enemy
whom they expeced to surprise, they made
little rcfiftance; and a great part of the troops
employed in this service, among which were
many persons of diftin&ion, was killed or taken
prisoners. Before next morning, Vielleville re-
turned to Metz in triumph.

The confpi. No resolution was taken for some time con-
aihaiUd. cerning the fate of the Father Guardian and his

monks, the framers and conductors of this dan-
gerous conspiracy. Regard for the honour of
a body so numerous and respectable as the
Franciscans, and unwillingness to afford a sub-
je& of triumph to the enemies of the Romish
church by their disgrace, seem to have occa-
sioned this delay. But at length, the neceflity
of infliaing exemplary punishment upon them,
in order to deter others from venturing to com-
mit the fame crime, became so evident, that
orders were issued to proceed to their trial.
Their guilt was made apparent by the clearest

evidence

evidence; and sentence of death was pafned BOOK XI.
upon the Father Guardian together with twenty 55
monks. On the evening previous to the day
fixed for their execution, the jailor took them
out of the dungeons in which they had hitherto
been confined separately, and ihut them all up
in one great room, that they might confess
their fins one to another, and join together in
preparing for a future slate. But as soon as
they were left alone, inltead of employing them-
selves in the religious exercises suitable to their
condition, they began to reproach the Father
Guardian, and four of the senior monks who
had been most active in seducing them, for
their inordinate ambition, which had brought
such misery on them, and such disgrace upon
their order. From reproaches they proceeded
to curses and execrations, and at last, in a
frenzy of rage and despair, they fell upon them
with such violence, that they murdered the
Father Guardian on the spot, and so disabled
the other four, that it became necessary to carry
them next morning in a cart, together with the
dead body of the Father Guardian, to the place
of execution. Six of the youngest were par-
doned, the reft suffered the punilhment which
their crime merited .

k Thuan. lib. xv. p. 522. Belcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 866.

Memoires du Marech. Viellevillc, par M. Charloix, tom.
iii. p. 249, &c. p. 347. Par. 1757.

1 louGH

BooK xl. THOUGH both parties, exhausted by the length

155. of the war, carried it on in this languishing

A fruitless
m^oeatlon manner, neither of them flewed any disposition
in order to t liften to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole
eflabliss
p.ce. indeed laboured with all the zeal becoming his

piety and humanity, to re-establish concord
among the Princes of Christendom. He had
not only persuaded his mistress, the Queen of
England, to enter warmly into his sentiments
and to offer her mediation to the contending
powers, but had prevailed both on the Emperor
and King of France to fend their plenipoten-
tiaries to a village between Gravelines and
Ardres. He himflef, together with Gardiner
bishop of Winchester, repaired thither in order
to preside as mediators in the conferences, which
were to be held for adjusting all the points in
differehce. But though each of the monarchs
committed this negociation to some of their mi-
nifters, in whom they placed the gRateft confi-
dence, it was soon evident that they came toge-
,y as. ther with no sincere desire of accommodation.

Each propAfed articles so extravagant that they
could have no hopes of their being accepted.
Pole, after exerting, in vain, all his zeal, ad-
dress, and invention, in order to persuade them to
relinquilh such extravagant demands, and to con-
sent to the substitution of more equal condi-
tions, became sensible of the folly of wafting

tknes

rime, in attempting to reconcile those, whom BOOK XT.
their obstinacy rendered irreconcilable, broke k--
off the conference, and returned into England'.

DURING these tranfa&ions in other parts of Affairs o

Europe, Germany enjoyed such profound tran-Cml
quillity, as afforded the diet full leisure to deli-
berate, and to establish proper regulations con-
cerning a point of the greatest consequence to
the internal peace of the Empire. By the treaty
of Paffau in one thousand five hundred and
fifty-two, it had been referred to the next diet
of the Empire to confirm and perfect the plan
of religious pacification, which was there agreed
upon. The terror and confusion with which
the violent commotions excited by Albert of
Brandenburg had filled the Empire, as well
as the conflant attention which Ferdinand was
obliged to give to the affairs of Hungary, had
hitherto prevented the holding a diet, though it
had been summoned, soon after the conclusion
of the treaty, to meet at Augsburg.

BUT as a diet was now necessary on many ac- Dct hl at

counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this and S'ei.
year had repaired to Auglburg. Though few ncn;d',
of the Princes were present either in person or

' Thuan. lib, xv. p. 523. Men). de Ribier, tom. ii.
?. 613.

by

BoOK xr. by their deputies, he opened the assembly by a

r-' speech, in which he proposed a termination
1555. of the dissensions, to which the new tenets and

controversies with regard to religion had given
rife, not only as the firIf and great business of
the diet, but as the point which both the Em-
peror and he had most at heart. He represented
the innumerable obstacles which the Emperor
had to surmount before he could procure the
convocation of a general council, as well as the
fatal accidents which had for some time retarded,
and had at lalf suspended the consultations of
that assembly. He observed, that experience
had already taught them how vain it was to
expect any remedy for evils, which demanded
immediate redress, from a general council, the
aflembling of which would either be prevented,
or its deliberations be interrupted by the diffen-
sions and hostilities of the Princes of Christen-
dom That a national council in Germany,
which, as tome imagined, might be called with
greater ease, and deliberate with more perfect
security, was an assembly of an unprecedented
nature, the jurifdition of which was uncertain
in its extent, and the form of its proceedings
undefined; That in his opinion there remained
but one method for composing their unhappy
differences, which though it had been often
tried without success, might yet prove effecual

2 if

if it were attempted with a better and more BOOK XI.
pacifick spirit than had appeared on former occa- i- 5.
lions, and that was to choose a few men of
learning, abilities, and moderation, who, by dif-
cufling the disputed articles in an amicable con
ference, might explain them in such a manner
as to bring the contending parties either to unite
in sentiment, or to differ with charity.

THIS speech being printed in common form, Sufpiciddr

ahd dispersed over the Empire, revived the fears of the Prd
and jealousies of the Protestants; Ferdinand, tefrant.
they observed with much surprise, had not once
mentioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty
of Paffau, the stipulations in which they con-
fidered as the great security of their religious
liberty. The suspicions to which this gave rife
were confirmed by the accounts which they
daily received of the extreme rigour with which
Ferdinand treated their Protestant brethren in
his hereditary dominions, and, as it was natural
to confider his ations as the surest indication
of his intentions, this diminilhed their confi-
dence in those pompous profeflions of mode-
tatioh or of zeal for the re-eltablihmnent of
concord, to which his practice was so utterly
)epugnant.

THE arrival of the Cardihal Motone, whom
the Pope had appointed to attend the diet as

VL I V. O his

BOOK Xl. his nuncio, completed their conviction, and

. left them no room to doubt that some dan-

Th., iny gerous machination was forming againIt the
the arrival peace or safety of the Protestant church. Ju-
of01 a nuncio
frotn t.e lius, elated with the unexpected return of the
dieot. Englifn nation from apoftacy, began to flatter

himself that, the spirit of mutiny and revolt ha-
ving now spent its force, the happy period was
come when the church might resume its ancien:
authority, and be obeyed by the people with
the fame tame submission as formerly. Full of
these hopes he had sent Morone to Augsburg,
with inffrutions to employ his eloquence in
order to excite the Germans to imitate the laud-
able example of the Englilh, and his political
addrels in order to prevent any decree of the
diet to the detriment of the catholick faith. As
Morone inherited from his father, the chan-
cellor of Milan, uncommon talents for nego-
ciation and intrigue, he could hardly have failed
of embarrafing the measures of the Protestants
in the diet, or of defeating whatever they aimed
at obtaining in it for their farther security.

Th- 'r-i BUT an unforefcen event delivered them from
ofJu:ius 111.

all the danger which they had reason to appre-
hend from Morone's presence. Julius, by
abandoning himlielf to pleasures and amuse-
menits, no less unbecoming his age than his cha-
rater, having contraced such habits of dilli-

2 pation

pation, that any serious occupation, especially Book xL
if attended with difficulty, became an intole- rzS.
rable burden to him, had long resifted the soli-
citations of his nephew to hold a consistory,
because he expeted there a violent opposition
to his schemes in favour of that young man.
But when all the pretexts which he could invent
for eluding this request were exhausted, and at
the fame time his indolent aversion to business
continued to grow upon him, he feigned indif-
position rather'than yield to his nephew's im-
portunity; and that he might give the deceit a
greater colour of probability, he not only con-
fined himiflf to hi. apartment, but changed his
usual diet and manner of life. By persisting
too long in acting this ridiculous part, he con-
tracted a real disease, of which he died in a few
days, leaving his infamous minion the Cardinal March 23.
de Monte to bear his name, and to disgrace the
dignity which he had conferred upon him" .
As soon as Morone heard of his death, he set Th- nuncio
out abruptly from Augsburg, where he had ltole.f
relided only a few days, that he might be pre-
lent at the election of a new Pontiff.

ONE cause of their suspicions and fears being FerdinanJ's
thus removed, the Protellants soon became fen- tno.'.

flatity the

m Onuphr. Panvinius de vitis Pontificum, p. 320.
Thuan. lib, xv. 517.

0 2 fible

ROOK XT fible that their conjetures concerning Ferd;-

nand's intentions, however specious, were ill-
founded, and that he had no thoughts of vio-
lating the articles favourable to them in the
treaty of Paffau. Charles, from the time that
Maurice had defeated all his schemes in the
Empire, and overturned the great system of
religious and civil defpotifin, which he had
almost effablifhed there, gave little attention to
the internal government of Germany, and per-
mitted his brother to pursue wl!tever measures
he judged most salutary and expedient. Ferdi-
nand, less ambitious and enterprising than the
Emperor, instead of resuming a plan, which
he, with power and resources so far superior,
had failed of accomplishing, endeavoured to
attach the Princes of the Empire to his family
by an administration uniformly moderate and
equitable. To this he gave, at present, par-
ticular attention, because his situation at this
junture rendered it necessary to court their fa-
vour and support with more than usual assiduity.

Ci¢,-lasiti CHARLES had again resumed his favourite
Pimofdal project of acquiring the Imperial crown for his
tcin'gtho son Philip, which the ill reception it had met
thb Empire. with when first proposed had obliged him to

intermit, but had not persuaded him to relin-
quiflh. This led him warmly to renew his

request

request to his brother that he would accept of BooK xr.
some compensation for his prior right of fuc- 5.
ceflion, and sacrifice that to the grandeur of the
house of Austria. Ferdinand, who was as little
disposed, as formerly, to give such an extra-
ordinary proof of felf-denial, being sensible that,
in order to defeat this scheme, not only the
most inflexible firmness on his part, but a vi-
gorous declaration from the Princes of the Em-
pire in behalf of this title, were requisite; was
willing to purchase their favour by gratifying
them in every point that they deemed interest-
ing or essential.

ON the other hand, the Turks, after having The Turks

were read]y

wrested from him great part of his Hungarian to invad
territories, were ready to attack the provinces HUn"l'y.
fill subje&t to his authority with a formidable
-rmy, against which he could bring no equal
force into the field, unless the dit should grant
him immediate and extraordinary aid. For this
he could not hope, if the internal peace of the
Empire were not established on a foundation
solid in itself, and which should appear, even
to the Protestants, so secure and so permanent,
as might not only allow them to engage in a
distant war with fafcty, but encourage them to
act with vigour.

0 3 A STEr

BOOK XI. A STEP taken by the Proreftants themselves,
,L-., a short time after the opening of the diet, ren-
Heis ailrm. dered him still more cautious of giving then
ed at rome
steps taken any new cause of offence. As soon as the pub-
by the Pro.
tftait. lication of Ferdinand's speech awakened the

fears and suspicions which have been mentioned,
the Ele&ors of Saxony and Brandenburg, to-
gether with the Landgrave of Hesse, met at
Naumburgh, and confirming the ancient treaty
of confraternity which had long united their
families, they added to it a new article, by
which the contracting parties bound themselves
to adhere to the confession of Augsburg, and to
maintain the doctrine which it contained in their
refpeaive dominions ".

rerdinand FERDINAND, influenced by all there confide-
^elo,'ton rations, employed his utmost address in con-
dccommo- dueing the deliberations of the diet, so as not

to excite the jealousy of a party on whose friend-
ship he depended, and whose enmity, as they
had not only taken the alarm, but had begun
to prepare for their defence, he had so much
reason to dread. The members of the diet
readily agreed to Ferdinand's proposal of taking
the state of religion into consideration, previous
to any other business. But, as soon as they
entered upon it, both parties discovered all the

"Chytra:i Saxonia, 480.

zeal

zeal and animosity which a fubjeat so interefring BOOK Xr.
naturally engenders, and which the rancour of 155".
controversy, together with the violence of civil
war, had inflamed to the highest pitch.

TrHE Protestants contended, that the security T-repce.n.

o ,nn ot thle
which they claimed in consequence of the treaty cAih.,iiks

and Prote-

of Paffau should extend, without limitation, to fan'..
all who had hitherto embraced the doctrine of
Luther, or who should hereafter embrace it.
The Catholicks, having first of all asserted the
Pope's right as the supreme and final judge with
respeCt to all articles of faith, declared that
though, on account of the present situation of
the Empire, and for the fake of peace, they
were willing to confirm the toleration granted,
by the treaty of Paffau, to such as had adopted
the new opinions; they must insist that this in-
dulgence should not be extended either to
tholt cities which had conformed to the In-
terim, or to such ecclefiallicks as flmould for
the future apostatize from the church of Rone.
It was no easy matter to reconcile luch opposite
pretensions, which were supported, on each lide,
by the most elaborate arguments, and the greatelt
acrimony of expression, that the abilities or zeal
of theologians long exercised in disputation
could fugged. Ferdinand, however, by his
address and perli:verance; by softening some
things on each fide ; by putting a favourable
meaning upon others; by repretcnting incel-

0 4 l;mtly

BooS XI. fantly the necessity as well as the advantages of
-. 55. concord add by threatening, on some occasions,

when all other considerations were disregarded,
to dissolve the diet, brought them at length to
a conclusion in which they all agreed.

Scpt. 25. CONFORMABLY to this, a Recess was framed,
Tbr peace
of religion approved of, and published with the usual for-

malities. The following are the chief articles
which it contained: That such Princes and
cities as have declared their approbation of the
Confeflion of Augsburg, /hall be permitted to
profess the doctrine and exercise the worship
which it authorises, without interruption or mo.
leftation from the Emperor, the King of the
Romans, or any power or person whatsoever;
That the Protestants, on their part, shall give
no disquiet to the Princes and States whq adhere
to the tenets and rites of the Church of Rome;
That, for the future, no attempt shall be made
towards terminating religious differences, but
by the gentle and pacifick methods of persuasion
and conference; That the Popish ecclefiafticks
shall claim no spiritual jurisdiction in such ltates
as receive the Confeflion of Augsburg That
such as had seized the benefices or revenues of
the church, previous to the treaty of Paffau.,
/hall retain poffeflipn of them, and be liable
po no prosecution in the Imperial chamber on
that account; That the supreme civil power in

every

every state shall have right to establish what BooK XI.
form of dotrine and worship it lhall deem pro- isis'
per, and if any of its subje&s refute to conform
to these, lla:l permit them to remove with all
their effects wherever they please; lThat if any
prelate or ecclefiaftick Ihall hereafter abandon
the Romish religion, he {hall instantly relinquish
his diocese or benefice, and it shall be lawful
for those in whom the right of nomination is
vested, to proceed immediately to an election,
as if the office were vacant by death or tranfla-
tion, and to appoint a successor of undoubted
attachment to the ancient system °

SUCH are the capital articles in this famous Rcfeaion,
Recess, which is the basils of religious peace in ghesrofthe

-0. g

* * » s * * nrinciple s

of

Germany, and the bond of union among its poeratilonf
various itates, the sentiments of which are so
extremely different with refpe& to points the
most interesting as well as important. In our
age and nation, to which the idea of Toleration
is familiar, and its beneficial effects well known,
it may seem strange, that a method of termi-
nating their dissensions, so suitable to the mild
and charitable spirit of the Christian religion,
did not sooner occur to the contending parties.
But this expedient, however salutary, was so
repugnant to the sentiments and practice of

P Sleid. 620. F. Paul, 368. Pdllav. P, Ii. 1. .

Chrillians

BOOK XI. Christians during many ages, that it did not
,--- lie obvious to discovery. Among the ancient

heathens, all whose deities were local and tute-
lary, diversity of sentiment concerning the ob-
jet or rites of religious worihip seems to have
been no source of animosity, because the ac-
knowledging veneration to be due to any one
God, did not imply denial of the existence or
the power of any other God; nor were the
modes and rites of worship established in one
country incompatible with those which other
nations approved of and observed. Thus the
errors in their system of theology were of such
a nature as to be productive of concord; and
notwithstanding the amazing number of their
deities, as well as the infinite variety of their
ceremonies, a sociable and tolerating spirit sub-
sifted almost universally in the pagan world.

BUT when the Christian revelation declared

one Supreme Being to be the sole object of re-
ligious veneration, prescribed the form of wor-
ship most acceptable to him, whoever admitted
the truth of it held, of consequence, every other
mode of religion to be absurd and impious.
Hence the zeal of the first converts to the Chris-
tian faith in propagating its doctrines, and the
ardour with which they laboured to overturn
every other form of worship. They employed,
however, for this purpose no methods but such

as

as ftited the nature of religion. By the force BooK Xr.
of powerful arguments, they convinced the un- '" '~
derftandings of men; by the charms of fluperior
virtue, they allured and captivated their hearts.
At length the civil power declared in favour of
Christianity; and though numbers, imitating
the example of their superiors, crowded into the
church, many still adhered to their ancient super-
ftitions. Enraged at their obstinacy, the mini-
fters of religion, whose zeal was itill unabated,
though their fanaity and virtue were much di-
minilhed, forgot so far the nature of their own
mission, and of the arguments which they ought
to have employed, that they armed the Imperial
power against there unhappy men, and as they
could not persuade, they tried to compel them
to believe.

AT the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among Christians themselves, and the fame un-
hallowed weapons which had first been used
against the enemies of their religion, were turned
against each other. Every zealous difpttant
endeavoured to interest the civil magistrate in
his cause, and each in his turn employed the
secular arm to crush or to exterminate his oppo-
nents. Not long after, the bifliops of Rome
put in their claim to infallibility in explaining

articles

BOOK XI. articles of faith, and deciding points in cont-o.

;5 verfy; and, bold as the pretension was, they,

by their artifices and perseverance, imposed on
the credulity of mankind, and brought them to
recognise it. To doubt or to deny any doc-
trine to which there unerring inltrudors had
given the fandtion of their approbation, was
held to be not only a refilling of truth, but an
at of rebellion against their sacred authority;
and the secular power, of which by various arts
they had acquired the absolute direction, was
instantly employed to avenge both.

THUS Europe had been accustomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth, were forgotten,
the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the
idea of toleration, but even the word itself, in
the sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A
right to extirpate error by force, was universally
allowed to be the prerogative of such as poll
sessed the knowledge of truth; and as each party
of Christians believed that they had got poifei-
flon of this invaluable attainment, they all
claimed and exercised, as far as they were able,
the rights which it was supposed to convey.
The Roman catholicks, as their system refted on

the

the decisions of an infallible judge, neverdoubted Boor: XL
that truth was on their fide, and openly called 55.
on the civil power to repell the impious and
heretical innovators who had risen up againit it.
The Protestants, no less confident that their
doctrine was well founded, required, with equal
ardour, the Princes of their party to check such
as presumed to impugn or to oppose it. Luther,
Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, the founders of the re-
formed church in their respective countries, in-
flited, as far as they had power and opportunity,
the fame punishments which were denounced
against their own disciples by the church of
Rome, upon such as called in question any article
in their creeds. To their followers,, and per-
haps to their opponents, it would have appeared
a symptom of diffidence in the goodness of their
caule, or an acknowledgment that it was not
well founded, if they had not employed in its
defence all those means which it was supposed
truth had a right to employ.

IT was towards the close of the seventeenth

century, before Toleration, under its prefcnc
form, was admitted first into the republick of the
United Provinces, and from thence introduced
into England. Long experience of the calami-
ties flowing from mutual persecution, the influ-
ence of free government, the light and humanity
acquired by the progress of Icience, together

with

BoOK XI. with the prudence and authority of the civil nia-
*' "'" giltrate, were all requisite in order to eftablifli a

regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all
the different feds had adopted, from miftakin
conceptions concerning the nature of religion
and the rights of truth, or which all of them
had derived from the erroneous maxims eifa.
bliihed by the church of Rome.

Advantaie THe Recess of Augsburg, it is evident, w.s
-f the reli.
,o',, p:'ce founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti.

'thi'e Lu- ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry

or the nature of Toleration. It was nothing
more than a scheme of pacification, which poli-
tical considerations alone had suggested to the
contending parties, and regard for their mutual
tranquillity and safety had rendered necessary.
Of this there can be no stronger proof than an
article in the Recess itself, by which the benefits
of the pacification are declared to extend only
to the Catholicks on the one fide, and to such as
adhered to the confefion of Augsburg on the
other. The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin
remained, in consequence of that exclusion,
without any protection from the rigour of the
laws denounced against hereticks. Nor did they
obtain any legal security, until the treaty of
Westphalia, near a century after this period,
provided, that they mhould be admitted to enjoy,

iAl

in as ample a manner as the Lutherans, all the BOOK xr.
advantages and protetion which the Recess of 1555
Augsburg affords.

BUT if the followers of Luther were highly acndatothe

pleased with the security which they acquired
by this Recess, such as adhered to the ancient
fyilem had no less reason to be satisfied with
:h:it article in it, which preserved entire to the
Roman catholick church the benefices of such
ecclefiafticks as should hereafter renounce its
doctrines. This article, known in Germany by
the name of the Ecclesiastical Reservation, was
apparently so conformable to the idea and to
the rights of an eftablilhed church, and it
seemed so equitable to prevent revenues, which
had been originally appropriated for the main-
tenance of persons attached to a certain system,
from being alienated to any other purpose, that
the Protestants, though they foresaw its confe-
quences, were obliged to relinquish their oppo-
fition to it. As the Roman catholick Princes of
the Empire have taken care to fee this article
exactly observed in every cafe where there was
an opportunity of putting it in execution, it has
proved the great barrier of the Romish church
in Germany against the Reformation; and as,
from this period, the fame temptation of interest
did not allure eccleliafticks to relinquish the cia-

blifhed

BOOK XI. blifhed system, there have been few of that

;'55 order, who have loved truth with such difin.

terested and ardent affedtion, as for its fake to
abandon the rich benefices which they had in
pofieiioh.

Mlircellus DURING the fitting of the diet, Marcellus
II. cecred
yPope. Cervino, Cardinal of Santa Croce, was ele&ed
Api 9. Pope in room of Julius. He, in imitation of

Adrian, did not change his name on being ex.

;s cha. alted to the papal chair. As he equalled that
aer. Pontiff in purity of intention, while he excelled

him much in the arts of government, and still
more in knowledge of the state and genius of
the papal court; as he had capacity to discern
what reformation it needed, as well as what it
could bear; such regulations were expected
from his virtue and wisdom, as would have re-
moved many of its grossest and most flagrant
corruptions, and have contributed towards re.
conciling to the church, such as from indigna-
tion at these enormities had abandoned its com-
munion. But this excellent Pontiff was only
Ihown to the church, and immediately snatchcd
Hii dcath. away. The confinement in the conclave had

impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious
ceremonies upon his accellion, together with too
intense and anxious application of mind to the
fchcmcs of improvement which he meditated,

exhaulted

exhausted to entirely the vigour of his feeble BooK XI.
constitution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and
died on the twentieth day after his election P'

ALL the refinements in artifice and intrigue, Thte alion

peculiar to conclaves, were displayed in that of au
which was held for electing a successor to Mar-
cellus; the Cardinals of the Imperial and French
factions labouring, with equal ardour, to gain
the necessary number of suffrages for one of
their own party. But, after a itruggle of no
long duration, though conduced with all the
warmth and eagerness natural to men contend-
ing for so great an obje&, they united in chufing May *3"
John Peter Caraffa, the eldest member of the
sacred college, and the son of Count Montorio,
a nobleman of an illustrious family in the king-
dom of Naples. The address and influence of
Cardinal Farnese, who favoured his pretensions,
Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates,
with the near profpea of a new vacancy, con.
curred in bringing about this speedy union of
suffrages. In order to testify his respect for the
memory of Paul III. by whom he had been
created Cardinal, as well as his gratitude to the
family of Parnefe, he assumed the name of
Paul IV.

r Thuan. 520. F. Paul, 365. Oauph. Panvin. z32, &c.
VOL. IV. P Tnt

BOOK Xt. THE choice of a prelate of such a fingtiar

.

. chara&er, and' who had long held a course ex.
His rife and tremely different from that which usually led to

the dignity now conferred upon him, filled the
Italians, who had nearest access to observe his
manners and deportment, with aftonifhmenr,
and kept them in suspense and solicitude with
regard to his future condu&. Paul, though
born in a rank of life which, without any other
merit, might have secured to him the highetf
ecclesiastical preferments, had from his early
years applied to study with all the assiduity of
a man, who had nothing but his personal accorn.
plifhments to render him conspicuous. By
means of this he not only acquired profoundl
skill in fcholaftick theology, but added to that
a considerable knowledge of the learned lan-
guages and of polite literature, the study of
which had been lately revived in Italy, and was
pursued at this time with great ardour. I-Ii.
mind, however, naturally gloomy and severe,
was more formed to imbibe the four spirit ot
the former, than to receive any tincture of ele-
gance or liberality of sentiment from the latter;
so that he acquired rather the qualities and
paflions of. a recluse ecclefiaftick, than the talents
neceflary for the condut. of great affairs. Ac-
cordingly, when he entered into orders, although
several rich benefices were bestowed upon him,
and he was early employed as nuncio in dif-

ferent

felent courts, he soon became disgusted with BOOK XI
that course of life, and languished to be in a ss5.
situation more suited to his tate and temper.
With this view he resigned at once all his eccle-
fiatical preferments, and having instituted an
order of regular priess, whom he denominated
Theatines, from the name of the archbilhoprick
which he had held, he associated himself as a
member of their fraternity, conformed to all the
rigorous rules to which he had subjected them,
and preferred the solitude of a monafick life,
with the honour of being the founder of a new
order, to all the vast objects which the court of
Rome presented to his ambition.

. IN this retreat he remained for many years,
until Paul III. induced by the fame of his
fantity and knowledge, called him to Rome,
in order to consult with him concerning the
measures which might be most proper and
effetual for the suppressing of heresy, and re-
establishing the ancient authority of the church.
Having thus allured him from his solitude, the
Pope, partly by his entreaties, and partly by
his authority, prevailed on him to accept of a
Cardinal's hat, to re-afTume the benefices which
he had resigned, and to return again into the
usual path of ecclefiatical ambition which he
seemed to have relinquished. But, during two
successive Pontificates, under the first of which

P the

BOOK XI. the court of Rome was the most artful and inte-

'z. refted, and under the second the most dissolute

of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his mo-
naftick austerity. He was an avowed and bitter
enemy not only of all innovation in opinion, but
of every irregularity in pra&ice he was the
chief instrument in establishing the formidable
and odious tribunal of the Inquisition in the pa-
pal territories; he appeared a violent advocate
on all occasions for the jurisdiction and difci-
pline of the church, and a severe censurer of
every measure which seemed to flow from mo.
tives of policy or interest, rather than from zeal
for the honour of the ecclesiastical order, and
the dignity of the Holy See. Under a prelate
of such a charaAer, the Roman courtiers ex-
pe&ed a severe and violent Pontificate, during
which the principles of found policy would be
sacrificed to the narrow prejudices of priefily
zeal while the people of Rome were apprehen-
five of feeing the fordid and forbidding rigour
of monaftick manners substituted in place of the
gaiety or magnificence to which they had long
been accustomed in the papal court. These ap-

Trl, fitr prehensions Paul was extremely solicitous to re-
d',i,,^,' 'move. At his first entrance upon the admini.
tion. ftration he laid aside that austerity which had

hitherto distinguished his person and family, and
when the master of his household inquired in
what manner he would chufe to live, he haughti-

ly

ly replied, "As becomes a great Prince." He BoOK XL;:
ordered the ceremony of his coronation to be 5S
conducted with more than usual magnificence;
and endeavoured to tender himself popular by
several afts of liberality and indulgence towards
the inhabitants of Rome q.

His natural severity of temper, however, Theexceft

of his it-

would have soon returned upon him, and would t chm',nt
have justified the conjecures of the courtiers, , hs,"e
as well as the fears of the people, if he had
not, immediately after his eletion, called to
Rome two of his nephews, the sons of his bro.
ther the Count of Montorio. The eldest he
promoted to be governor of Rome. The
youngest, who had hitherto served as a soldier
of fortune in the armies of Spain or France,
and whose disposition as well as manners were
till more foreign from the clerical character
than his profefion, he created a Cardinal, and
appointed him legate of Bologna, the second
office in power and dignity which a Pope can
bestow. These marks of favour, no less sudden
than extravagant, he accompanied with the molt
unbounded confidence and attachment, and for-
getting all his former fivere maxims, he seemed
to have no other objec than the aggrandizing

q Platina, p, 327. Caftaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Rom.
a615. p. 70.

P3 of

BooK XI. of his'nephews. Their ambition, uhfortunately
Lv.5.w for Paul, was too aspiring to be satisfied with
Theirambi. any moderate acquisition. They had seen the
tious pro-
jee4. family of Medici raised by the interest of the

Popes of that house to supreme power in Tuf-
cany; Paul III. had by his abilities and address
secured the dutchies of Parma and Placentia to
the family of Farnese. They aimed at some
eftabliffhment for themselves, no less considerable
and independent; and as they could not expefc
that the Pope would carry his indulgence to.
wards them so far as to secularize any part of
the patrimony of the church, they had no pro-
fpet of attaining what they wished, but by
dismembering the Imperial dominions in Italy,
In hopes offeizing some portion of them. This
alone they would have deemed a sufficient reason
for sowing the feeds of discord between their
uncle and the Emperor,

Rteafceof BUT Cardinal Caraffa had, betides, private
ith the reasons which filled him with hatred and enmity
mpe 'to the Emperor. While he served in the Spanilh

troops he had not received such marks of ho-
nour and diftin&ion as he thought due to his
birth and merit. Diffeied with this ill-ufage,
'he had abruptly quitted the Imperial service;
$nd entering into that of France, he had not
only met with such a reception as fQothed his

vanitys

ramity, and attached him to the French interest, BOOK XL
but by contrating an intimate friendship with ' '
Strozzi, who commanded the French army in
Tulcany, he had imbibed a mortal antipathy to
the Emperor as the great enemy to the liberty
and independence of the Italian f'ates. Nor
was the Pope himself indisposed to receive im-
preflions unfavourable to the Emperor. The
opposition given to his eleEtion by the Cardinals
of the Imperial faction left in his mind deep
refenrment, which was heightened by the re-
membrance of ancient injuries from Charles or
his ministers.

OF this his nephews took advantage, and Theyendea-

employed various devices, in order to exasperate n," thei
him beyond a possibility of reconciliation. They heP'Er.,
aggravated every circumstance which could be tor
deemed any indication of the Emperor's diffa.
tisfactien with his promotion; they read to hin
an intercepted letter, in which Charles taxed the
Cardinals of his party with negligence or inca-
pacity in not having defeated Paul's election:
They pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial minister
and Cosmo di Medici against the Pope's life;
they alarmed him, at another, with accounts of
a plot for afaffinating themselves. By these'
artifices, they kept his mind, which was nani-

P 4 rally

Boot XI. rally violent, ;and become suspicious from old

s55. age, in fuchJperpual agitation, as precipitated

him into measuress, which otherwise he would
have been the sirs person to condemn . He
seized fame of the Cardinals who were most at.
tached to the Emperor, and confined them in
the castle of St. Angelo; he persecuted the Co-
lonnas and other Roman barons, the ancient
retainers to the Imperial fa&ion, with the utmost
severity; and discovering on all occasions his
distrust, fear, or hatred of the Emperor, he
began at last to court the friend(bip of the
French King, and seemed willing to throw him-
self absolutely upon him for support and pro-
tection,

nduce him THIS was the very point to which his nephews
icng ott wilhed to bring him as most favourable to their
racc.' ambitious schemes; and as the accomplilhmenc

of these depended on their uncle's life, whole
advanced age did not admit of lofng a moment
unnecessarily in negociations, instead of treating
at second-hand with the French ambassador at
Rome, they prevailed on the Pope to dispatch
a person of confidence directly to the court of
France, with such overtures on his part as they

r Ripamontii Hill Patriw, lib. iii. 1146. Ap. Grav.

Thef. vol. ii, Mc.m de Ribier, ii. 615. Adriani Illor. ir
gQ6,

hoped

hoped would not be rejeced. He proposed an BOOK Xf
alliance offensive and defensive between Henry 75'-
and the Pope; that they ihould attack the
dutchy of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples
with their united forces; and if their arms
ihould prove successful, that the ancient re-
publican form of government Ihould be re-efta-
blifhed in the former, and the investiture of the
latter ihould be granted to one of the French
King's sons, after reserving a certain territory
which ihould be annexed to the patrimony of
the church, together with an independent and
princely establishment for each of the Pope's
nephews.

THE King, allured by these specious projects, Connable

Montmo-

gave a most favourable audience to the envoy. rency oppo.
But when the matter was proposed in council, f-nc' ,h'1a
the constable Montmorency, whose natural cau- the "Pop
tion and aversion to daring enterprises increased
with age and experience, remonstrated with
great vehemence against the alliance. He put
Henry in mind how fatal to France every expe-
dition into Italy had been during three fucceflive
reigns, and if such an enterprise had proved
too great for the nation even when its strength
and finances were entire, there was no reason to
hope for success, if it should be attempted now
when both were exhautcd by extraordinary

efforts

BOOK X. efforts during wars, which had lasted, with little

5 interruption, almost half a century. He repre-

sented the manifest imprudence of entering into
engagements with a Pope of fourscore, as any
system which refted on no better foundation
than his life, must be extremely precarious, and
upon the event of his death, which could not
be distant, the face of things, together with the
inclination of the Italian States, must instantly
change, and the whole weight of the war be
left upon the King alone. To these confidera-
tions he added the near profpeat which they now
had-of a final accommodation with the Emperor,
who having taken the resolution of retiring from
the world, wished to transmit his kingdoms in
peace to his son; and he concluded with re-
presenting the absolute certainty of drawing the
arms of England upon France, if it should ap-
pear that the re-establishment of tranquillity in
Europe was prevented by the ambition of its
Monarch.

The Duke THESE arguments, weighty in themselves,
ot;,,efa" and urged by a minister of great authority,
yours it.

would probably have determined the King to
decline any connexion with the Pope. But the
Duke of Guise and his brother the Cardinal of
Lorrain, who delighted no lets in bold and
dangerous undertakings than Montmorency

shunned
2

ihunned them, declared warmly for an alliance. BooK Xr.
with the Pope. The cardinal expeted to be 155; .
entrusted with the condu&t of the negociations
in the court of Rome to which this alliance
would give rife; the duke hoped to obtain the
command of the army which would be ap-
pointed to invade Naples; and confidering
themselves as already in these stations, vast pro-
je&s opened to their aspiring and unbounded
ambition. Their credit, together with the in.
fluence of the King's mistress, the famous Diana
of Poitiers, who was, at that time, entirely de-.
voted to the interest of the family of Guise,
more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's
prudent remonstrances, and prevailed on an in-
considerate Prince to liiten to the overtures of
the Pope's envoy.

THE cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expected, Cardinal of

was immediately sent to Rome with full powers torI,"egoiat
to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures wtph he
for carrying it into execution. Before he could
reach that city, the Pope, either from refle&ting
on the danger and uncertain issue of all military
operations, or through the address of the Impe-
rial ambassador, who had been at great pains to
sooth him, had not only begun to lofe'much of
the ardour with which he had let on foot the ne-
gociation with France, blt'even discovered great

unwillingnefa

BOOK xr. unwillingness to continue it. In order to route

.-- him from this fit ofdefpondency, and to rekindle

his former rage, his nephews had recourse to
the arts which they had already pra&ised with
so much success. They alarmed him with new
representations of the Emperor's hostile inten.
tions, with fresh accounts which they had receiv-
ed of threats uttered against him by the Impe-
rial ministers, and with new discoveries which
they pretended to have made of conspiracies
formed, and just ready to take effec against his
life.

Paul nrag. BUT there artifices, having been formerly
ed at the
proceedings tried, would not have operated a second time
of the diet
fAuglburg; with the fame force, nor have made the impref-

sion which they wished, if Paul had not been
excited by an offence of that kind which he
was least able to bear. He received advice of
the recess of the diet of Auglburg, and of the
toleration which was thereby granted to the
Protelfants, and this threw him at once into
fiuch transports of paflion againit the Emperor
and King of the Romans, as carried him head-
long into all the violent measures of his nephews.
Full of high ideas with refpe& to the papal
prerogative, and animated with the fiercest zeal
againit heresy, he confidered the liberty of de.
ciding concerning religious matters, which had

been

been assumed by an assembly compoied chiefly BoOK XI.
of laymen, as a presumptuous and unpardon- Is5.
able encroachment on that jurifdi&tion which
belonged to him alone; and regarded the indul-
gence which had been given to the Protetants
as an impious at of that power which the diet
had usurped. He complained loudly of both
to the Imperial ambassador. He insisted that
the recess of the diet should immediately be
declared illegal and void. He threatened the
Emperor and King of the Romans, in cafe they
ihould either refuse or delay to gratify him in
this particular, with the severest effets of his
vengeance. He talked in a tone of authority
and command which might have suited a pontiff,
of the twelfth century, when a papal decree
was sufficient to have shaken, or to have over-
turned the throne of the greatest Monarch, but
which was altogether improper in that. age,
cfpecially when addressed to the minister of a
Prince who had so often made Pontiffs more
formidable feel the weight of his power. The
ambassador, however, heard all his extravagant
propositions and menaces with much patience,
and endeavoured to 'ooth him by putting him
in mind of the extreme distress to which the
Emperor was reduced at Infpruck, of the en-
gagements which he had come under to the
Protestants in order to extricate himfecf, of the

neceslity

BooK XI. nwceffty of fulfilling these, and of accommo.

Sr dating his condut to the situation of his affairs,

But weighty as these considerations were, they
made no impreflion on the mind of the haughty
and bigotted pontiff, who instantly replied, That
he would absolve him by his apoftolick autho-
rity from those impious engagements, and even
command him not to perform them; that in
carrying on the cause of God and of the church,
no regard ought to be had to' the maxims of
worldly prudence and policy; and that the ill
success of the Emperor's schemes in Germany
might juitly be deemed a mark of the divine
difpleafilre against him, on account of his hav-
ing paid little attention to the former, while he
regulated his conduct entirely by the latter.
Having said this, he turned from the ambaffa-
dor abruptly without waiting for a reply.

end cxarpe. His nephews took care to applaud and cherish
rated by his
aephews, there sentiments, and easily wrought up his

arrogant mind, fraught with all the monkibh
ideas concerning the extent of the papal fupre-
macy, to such a pitch of resentment against the
house of Austria, and to such an high opinion
of his own power, that he talked continually
of his being the successor of those who had de-
posed Kings and Emperors; that he was exalted
as head over them all, .and would trample such

as

as opposed him under his feet. In this difpofi- BooK xr.
tion, the cardinal of Lorrain found the Pope, 155.
and easily persuaded him to sign a treaty, which Dec. S ,
had for its objet the ruin of a Prince against t.rety wit
whom he was so highly exasperated. The fti. Fr
pulations in the treaty were much the fame as
had been proposed by the Pope's envoy at Paris;
and it was agreed to keep the whole tranfaftion
secret until their united forces should be ready
to take the field '.

DURINo the negociation of this treaty at The Empe-

Rome and Paris, an event happened which torergnhis
seemed to render the fears which had given rife Soea.
to it vain, and the operations which were to
follow upon it unnecessary. This was the Em-
peror's resignation of his hereditary dominions
to his son Philip; together with his resolution
to withdraw entirely ,from any concern in bufi-
ness or the affairs of this world, in order that
he might spend the remainder of his days in
retirement and solitude. Though it requires
neither deep refletion nor extraordinary discern-
ment to discover that the state of royalty is not
exempt from cares and disappointment; though
most of those who are exalted to a throne find
solicitude, and satiety, and disgust to be their

a Pallav. lib. xiii. p. 163. F. Paul, 365. Thuan. lib. xv.
5s5. lib. xvi. 540. Mem, de Ribier, ii. 609, &c.

perpetual

Boo XI. perpetual attendants in that envied pre-emi-

sss- nence, yet, to descend voluntarily from the

supreme to a subordinate station, and to relin-
quifh the poffefion of power in order to attain
the enjoyment of happiness, seems to be an effort
too great for the htnan mind. Several inltances,
indeed, occur in history, of Monarchs who have
quitted a throne, and have ended their days in
retirement. But they were either weak Princes
who took this resolution ralhly, and repented of
it as soon as it was taken; or unfortunate
Princes from whose hands some strong rival
had wrested their sceptre, and compelled them
to descend with reluctance into a private flation.
Dioclefian is perhaps the only Prince capable
of holding the reins of government, who ever
religned them from deliberate choice, and who
continued during many years to enjoy the
tranquillity of retirement without fetching one
penitent sigh, or casting back one look of de-
fire, towards the power or dignity which he had
abandoned.

The motive; No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation
f,'tS.. should fill all Europe with aftonilhment, and

give rife, both among his contemporaries, and
among the historians of that period, to various
conjecures concerning the motives which deter-
mined a Prince, whose ruling paflion had been

uniformly

uniformly the love of power, at the age of lffty- BOOK Xl.
fix, when obje&s of ambition operate with full ,;
force on the mind, and are pursued with the
greatest ardour, to take a reTolution bo singular
and unexpected. But while mihy authors have
imputed it to motives so frivolous and fantafti.
cal, as can hardly be supposed to influence any
reasonable mind; while bthers have imagined
it to be the result of some profound scheme of
policy; historians more intelligent, and better
informed, neither ascribe it to caprice, narfearch
for mysterious secrets of state, where simple and
obvious causes will fully account for the Enpe-
ror's conduc. Charles had been attacked early
in life with the gout, and notwithiftanding all the
precautions of the most skilful physicians, the
violence of the distemper Increased as he ad-
vanced in age, and the fits became every year
more frequent, as well as more intolerable. Not
only was the vigour of his constitution broken,
but the faculties of his mind were impaired by
the excruciating torments which he endured,
During the continuance of the fits, he was alto-
gether incapable of applying to blfinefs, and
even when they began to abate, as it was only
at intervals that he could attend to What was fc-
rious, he gave up a great part of his time to
trifling and even childith occupations, which
feived to relieve or to amuse his mihd, ehfeebled
and worn 'out with excetl of pain. Uhder

VOL. IV. Q there

Boox Xl. thefcircumftancS, the condut& of such affairs

4? ,,:curreda, f 9urfe, in governing so many
kipg4oms, was a.burden more than sufficient;
but to push forward and complete the vail
,chemes, which the ambition of his more active
years had formed,,or to keep in view and carry
on the fame great fyffem of policy, extending to
,very nation in Europe, and connected with the
operations of every different court, were sync-
tions which so far exceeded his strength, that
they oppressed and overwhelmed his mind. As
he had been long accustomed to view the bufi-
ness of every department, whether civil, or
military, or ecclefiaflical, with his own eyes, and
to decide concerning it according to his own
ideas, it gave him the utmost pain when he felt
his infirmities increase so fait upon him, that he
was obliged to commit the condut of all affairs
to his'minifters. He imputed every misfortune
which. besel him, and every miscarriage that
happened, even when the former was unavoid-
able, and the latter accidental, to his inability
to take the infpeaion of business himself. He
complained of his hard fortune, in being op-
pored, in his declining years, to a rival, who
was in the full vigour of life, and that while
Henry could take and execute all his resolutions
in pcrfon, he. fould now be reduced, both in
council and in acion, to rely on the abilities of
other men. Having thus grown old before his

time,

tine he wifely judged it more decent to concal BOOKXf
his infirmities in frme folitirde,'than to expose sSgj;
them any longer to the publick eye; and prt-
dently determined not to forfeir the fame, or
lose the acquisitions of his beuttr years, by ftrug;
gling, with a vain obstinacy, .t retain the reths
of government, when he was no longer able to
hold them with steadiness, or to'g ide them with
addrec s *'

'* Ddm Leve(que, in his memoirs ofCardinal Granvelle,
gives a reason for the ihperor's resignation, which, as I re-
collet, is not mentioned by any other historian. He sap;
that the Emperor having ceded the government of the king-
dom of Naples and the dutchy of Milan to his son, upon his
marriage with the Queen of England ; Philip, notwithltand-
'ng the advice and inticaties of his faiheri rembved iim 'i'of
the .miniifers and officers whom he had eiployed in thbof
doustries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill the plajces
which they held. That he aspired openly, and with little
deicacy, to obtain a share in the administration of affairs in
the L6w.C6untOiec. Thai he endeavoured to thwart tie
Emperor's measures, and to limit his autbority, behaving
towards him sometimes with inattention, and fometimen , with
haughtiness. That Charles finding that he mu4 eiter, yield
to his (on, or openly contend with birn, in order to avoid
tbefe, which were both disagreeable and' mortifying to a fa-
thir, ite tobk the refolutibn oftefigiang his crowist, ahd ofb':
tirig from the world vol. i p. . z4 e,..Dom rLevcfqac de-
rived his information concerning these curiou; fats,. wbic ;he
iceltes very brieay, trom the original pa]ers of cardinal Gran-

elle. But as that vait colleflion ot papers, which has been
·pretr6ed and wianged by M. L'Abbe Boizot of Befan5on,
though one of the most valuable hiaftofil monaments of the

. , Qz_ sixteenth

T. T h

I hWid I% iL~a l yeia, ahiad ct6-a

Circuni' fAked it t6 Mis iMters the d6Wiavr Qftcei of
had reordzd Paianic and Hwigiy, ;who ri*t dhly appr4ved

'6vhis hitentimn :bit tflcared '6 ice~ cnpiy himn
to *hateer plaet 6f retreat hte /hold cdihti
*eeral 'things had hithetto prevented his carry-
ing it into eecudton. He could iiot think of
loading his son with the government of so thany
kingdoms, until he should attain such maturity
of age, and of abilities as would enable hi;
to uftain that weighty burden. But as Ilhiip
had now reached his twenty-eighth year, and
had been early accustomed to business, for which
he discovered both inclination and capacity, it
can hardly be imputed to the partiality of pa-
ternal affeion, that his fcrples, with regard
to this point, were entirely removed;, and that
he thought he might place him, without further
befitation or delay, on the throne which he was
about to abandon. His mother's Aiuation had
be_. another obftrution in his way. For al-
though fle had continued almof fifty years in
ton.finement, and under the famc disorder of

fixtenth century, and which cannot fail of throwing audh
light on the tran&afons of Charles V. is not publilhed, 1
annot determine what degree of credit Ibould be given to this
account of Charles's resignation. I have thefor traken no
otice of It in relating is event.

mind

mind wwlh pncera fpo her hulbapd's death Boo. XT,
ad ornogh Won Ihei, ygt. the government of 1sss.
$pain was ft1~ vested in lr jgintly with ehe
.gmpe.ror hei . name was inseted together with
bis, in all the. publick writs iuucd in that l^ing.
dom; and such was the. fond ttachment of the
Spaniards to her, that they would probably haye
fcrqpled to recognise Philip as their sovereign,
unlefts he had consented to aflume him as her
partner on the throne. Her utter incapacity for
bufineft, rendered it impoflible to obtain her cqn-
%ent. But her death, which happened this year,
removed this difficulty; and as Charles, upon
that event, became sole Monarch of Spain, it
left the fucceflion open to his ion. The war
with France had likewise been a reason for re.
tining the adminiftra.tin of affairs in his own
!tfnd, as he was extrernly fblicitous to have
tei'minated it, that he might have given up his
'tingdons to his son at peace with all the world,
*BUt as Henry had discovered no disposition to
d'ose with any of his overtures,, and had even
iejected proposals of peace, which were equal
gnd moderate, in a tone that seemed to indicate
a fixed pprpofe of continuing hostilities, he fiw
,hag i,; was vain to wait lInger in. epedtaiola
ofE an event, which, however defrable, was;
Vpgcthcr uncertain,

Qj3 A

Boot XTr As' tsb' thten' appeared to'; bt t'e proper

5; jutt&ure tfr' exetutitn 'the ftchme'Whith he had

Ti. t.fm lori: imeditated, 'Clarles reflved to resign his
which be kingdorms to hid son, with a folehinity suitable
Iecud it. to ihe ibmportance Of the tranfatioty, and to per-

form this last a&t of fovereignity with such for-
mal pomp, as might leave a lasting impression
on ;the minds not only of his fubje&ts but of
his,:fucceffor. With this view he called Philip
out ;of: England, where the peevish temper of
his QuCet, which increased with her despair of
having issue, rendered him extremely unhappy;
andthe jealoufy.of the Engli(h. left him no
hopes of obtaining the dire&ion of their affairs.
Having aflembled the States of the Low.Coun-
tries at Brtflels, on the twenty-fifth of O&ober,
Charles feated. himself, for the last time, in the
chair of state, oh one fide of which was placed
his son, and on the other his sifter the Queen
of'Hungary, regent of the Netherlands, with
a splendid retinue of the grandees of Spain and
princes of the Empire sanding behind him.
The president of the council of Slanders, by
his cotnmand, explained, in a few words, his
intetion in calling this extraordinary meeting
of the States. He then read the instrument of
efignation, by which Charles surrendered So his
son Philip all his territories, jurifdiCion, and
authority in thp Low-Countries, absolving his,

a · fubjets

fu blPeb-there finm their oath of allegiance o Boo~X XI.
hirmi whieh ,lhe-required them to transfer. to .; s'
Philip his lawful heir, and to serve him with the.
fame loyalty. and zeal which they had manifested.
during si long a course of years, in support of
his government,

'CAtRLES then rose from his feat, and lean.

ing on the %houlder of the Prince of Orange,
because hi was unable to fRand without support,
headdrefled himself to the audience, and from
a paper which he held in his hand, in order to
assist his memory, be recounted, with dignity,
butt without oftehtatioi, all the great things
which he had undertaken and perfornied fineC
the commencement of his administration. He
observed, that from the seventeenth year of his
age, he had dedicated all his thoughts and ata
tention to publick objecs, reserving no porion
of his time for the indulgence of his cafe, and
very little for the enjoyment of private plea-
sure; that either in a pacifick or hostile manner,
he had visited Germany nine times, Spain fix
times, France four times, Italy seven times, the
Wow Countries ten times, England twice, Africa
as often, and had made eleven voyages by.i a;
that while his health permitted him to discharge
his duty, and the vigour of his conftitutionr was
cqual, in any degree, to the arduous office of

Q.4 governing

BoXli gowcrWag fiuch exnfiv, domi'i; o. had

5sssi, qvesr funaedlabour, nor repiredL undtr fatigu;

tht now when his health was brokeni and his
vigour exhau,(e4 by rte rage of an incurable
diflemaper. his. gowipng infirinties adrpopiihed
him to retire, nor was he so fond of reigning,
as to retain the sceptre in an impotent hand,
which was no longer able to prote4t his fubjets,
or re render them happy; that inQe'ad of a so-
vereign worn out with diseases, and scarcely half
alive, he gave them one in. the priwe, of life, ac-
cufomed already to govern, anJ who, added to
the vigour of youth all the attention and saga-
city of maturer years; that if, during the ¢ourfe
of , 19pg adminifthraiion, he had cpommitted any
pngerial eror in gqvernment, or if, under the
pressure of so many and great affairs, and amidst
the attention which he had been obliged tO give
o. them, he had either negleóted or injured any
of his fuhjes, he now implqred their forgive,
nef, that, for his part, he Ihould ever retain a
grateful fpnfe of their fi4elity and attachment,
and wpuld carry the remembrance of it along
with him tq the place of his retreat, as his sweetest
conlaation, as well as the b¢ft reward for all
his, fericcs, and in his las prayers to Almighty
God would pour forth his ardent..wihes for
their welfare.

THnr

Twaxm turning towardsi hilip, who fellon his Boor XI.

knees and kiffd his father's hand, . If, fiys 5.
he, ' had left you by my death this rich inhe-
rita'tce, to, which I have made such large addi-
tions, some regard would have been justly due
to my memory on that account i but now whea
I voluntarily resign to yQu what I might have
still retained, I may well expect the warmest
gexpcflop of thaaks on your part. Wi&
these, hwever, I dispense, and shall confider
your concern for the welfare of your fubjeEts,
and your love of them, as the best and most
acceptable testimony of your gratitude to me.
It is in your power, by a wife and virtuous ad-
ministration, tojuftify the extraordinary proof
which I, this day, give of my paternal affe&ioni
and to demonfitatc that you are worthy of the
confidence which I repof' in, you, PfefWrv an.
inviolable regard for religion; maintain the:
Catholick faith in its purity; let the *IWs of your
country be sacred in your eyes; encroach not
on the rights and privileges of your people i
and if the time ihall ever come, when you lialll
wish to enjoy the tranquillity of private lifi
may you have a son endowed with such quali.
ties, that you can resign your sceptre to bim,
with as. mqch fatisfation as I gie up miae
to you."

BIb X;L., As soons as.Charles had Eniflied this long ad.

,"-r. ' dress to his fubjeas and to their new sovereign,

he funk into the chair, exhausted and ready to
faint with the fatigue of such an extraordinary
effort. During his discourse, the whole audi-
ence melted into tears, rome from admiration
of his magnanimity, others softened by the ex.
ppffions of tenderness towards his son, and of
love to his people; and all were affected with
the deepest sorrow at losing a fbvereign, who
had diftinguilhed the Netherlands, his native
country, with particular marks of his regard
and attachment.

PHILIP then arose from his knees, and after

returning thanks to his father, with a low and
submissive voice, for the royal gift which his
unexampled bounty had bellowed upon him,
he addrefred the assembly of the States, and re-
gretting his inability to speak the Flemirh lan-
guage with such facility as to exprefi what he
felt on this interesting occasion, as well as what
he owed to his good fubjess in the Nether.
lands, he begged that they would permit Gran-
velle bishop of Arras, to deliver what he had
given him in charge to speak in his name.
Granvelle, in a long discourse, expatiated on
the zeal with which Philip was animated for the
good of his fubje6ts, on his resolution to devote
all his time and talents to the promoting of

their

their hiplinefs,: and a his intenti6l; to imitate Boolr. Y
his father's exampe in diftinguilhing the Nether- 5's..
lands'with peculiar hiarks of his regard ' MaEs,
a lawtyer of great' elbquence, replied,' in name
of the'S States, with large profefi6nns' of their
fidelity and Tffcttion to'their nqw fovereiig'.

TBEN Mary, Queen-dowager of Hiungary; ss56.

resigned the regency, with which Ihe had been
entrusted by her brother.during the space of
twenty-five years. Next day Philip, in pre.. JanuaY e.
fence of the States, took the usual oaths to
maintain the rights and privileges, of his sub-
jets; and all the members, in their own name,
and in lha; of their constituents, swore alle-
giance to him '.

A FEW weeks thereafter, Charles, in an

aflembly no less splendid, and with a .ceremo-
nial equally pompous, resigned to his son the
crowns of Spain, with all the territories depeqd-
ing on them, both in the old and in the new
world. 'Of all these vast poffeflions, he reserved
nothing for himself but an annual pension of
an hundred. thousand' crowns, to defray the'
charges of his family, and to afford him a small
fum for a&s of beneficence and charity ".

As

t Godlcveas Relatio Abdicationis Car. V. ap. Goldait.
Polit. Imper. p. 377. Strada do Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

u The Emperor's rcfignation is an event nolhinly of such
Importance, but of such a nature, that the precise date of

it,

i'?i. Spain, h,,ozg thaI theo .dryne. of the ar and
f, hi - warmth of the climate in. that contry might
d" ce wn itigate the viqlence of his disease, which ha4

!ee.n much, incrafed by the pgifture of the air
and the rigour of the wipter8 in the Nether.
lands, he was extremely impatient to embark
for that kingdom, and4 t disengage himself

'entirely

it, one wodld expet, should have been alcertained by hillo.
rians with the, greatefl accuracy. There is, however, an
amazing. and. oaaccontlblo diverOfy among them with re.
gard to this point. All ag, that the deed by which
Charles transferred to his son his dominions in the Nether.
hndl, bears date at Brussels the z2th of Odober. San.
doval fixeson the 28th of OAober as the day on which the
ceremony of resignation happened, and he was present a
the tranfiction, vol. ii. p. S92. Godleveus, who publilhed
* treatise do Abdicatioe aroi V. fixs the publidk 'ccre
msony, v. welt, the date of t. in'rumen.t of rfgpadion,
on the azth. Pere Barre, I kw now t op vwht authority,
.%es it on the 24th of November, Hist. D'Ale,. viii. 976.
Mcrrera agrees with Godteveus in fentimeat, tom. i. 15S.
a. likewifl does Pallavicini, whose audhority with refped
to 4tes, a4 evry thing whee a minumt acuracy is re.
tuiite, is of great weight, Hilf lib, xvi. p, ^68 Hifto.
rianl difhr nd les withJ. regpd t the dy. on wich Charles
resigned the crown of Spain to his Ton. Aqcording to M.
de Trho, it Wars i month after hb having resigned his do.
minions iq the N~iherlands, i. eabout the r2ih of Novem.
her, Thuan, lib. xvi. p. S71. According to Sandovat, it
was on the t6th of Jqnuaty, !556, 8and. ii. 603. Antonio
di Vea agrees with him, Epitome del Vida dlp Car. V.
p. io. According to Pallvidni, it wa on the s7th,

Pal.

abist1.<iIeii'^6^elt d so steials. Bfut O;d'B
htiiL:)i~i edl ^(irtie rai sb ftrbongly against OMidt
hi' rittfing to'i it tat th oldl and boisterous , M

. in the NI,

rfai odf th'e year, 'that he coifented, though thdria
wt 'tllu&ance, to put off his voyage for fotme
mnonths.

BY yielding to their entreaties, he had the Pvoten

fatiafaftion, before he left the Low.Countries b ,it
of taking a considerable tlep towardb a Yece r"^C
4it Frianct . which he aidently wied for, not
only on bis fonis account, but thet he might

Pal, lib. xvi. p. A6l. aia with him Herrera agrees, Vida
del D. Peipe, torn. . p. 233. But Ferrera fixes it on the
kit day of January, Hist. Gener, to*. ix. p. 37 . M7 dc
Beaucaine fuppofea the refignai'on of the crown of Spain
to have been executed a few days after the resignation of
thei Ntherlands, C(6m. de Reb. Gall. p. 87g. It is re-
Jiat&bfe, thit hI the treaty f truce bt Vaueelles, though
Chlrl]s lad iide over all hie domniions to his lbn fb6nt
wkta. previous to the condufon of it, all the fliplioa
re in the Emperor's name, and Philip is only deó4tid
King of England and Naple. It is certain Philip was at
prbolaimed King of Cafile, &c. at Valladolid sooner than
tiei4h of Murch, Sandov. ii. p. 606; and previous to
thit ceremony, he did not chd69, it would seem, to aflume
the tite of King of any of hit Spanih kingdoms, or tb
perfom any as of royal jurifdi~Uon. la * ded Wnbi*d
to the treaty of truce, dated April 19, he alumet the title
of King of CalRile, &c. in the usual flyle of the Spaniih
inonarchs in that age. Corps Dipl, tom. lv Append.

have

BecK XI. have the merit, when quitting the world, of re.

1556 eflabliffling that tranquillity in Europe, which

he had baniffed out of it almost from the time
that he assumed the administration of affairs,
Previous to his resignation, commissioners had
been appointed by him and by the French
King, in order to treat of an exchange of pri-
foners. In their conferences at the abbey ot
Vaucelles, near Cambray, an expedient was
accidentally proposed for terminating hoftilitit;
between ihe contending monarchs, by a long
truce, during the fubfiftance of which, and
without difcufling their refpeaive claims, each
ihould retain what was in his poffeflion. Charles,
sensible how much his kingdoms were ex-
haufled by the expensive and almost cont:i
nual wars in which his ambition had engaged
him, and eager to gain for his son a flort in-
terval of peace, that he might eftablilh hin-
self firmly on his throne, declared warmly foi
closing with the overture, though manildllly
dishonourable as well as disadvantageous; and
such was the relpect due to his wifidnomi and
experience, that Philip, notwithflanding his un-
willingness to purchali: peace by such concef-
sions, did not presume to urge his opinion in
opposition to that of his father.

A tr,,ic HENRY could not have hesitated one momcet
cua'luCtl..

about giving his consent to a truce on lfuei

condciitioisi,

conditions, as would leave him in quiet pof. BOOK X.
fefion of the greater part of the Duke of Savoy's 5-6
dominions, together with the important con-
quests which he had made on the German fron-
tier. But it was no easy matter to reconcile
such a ftep with the engagements which he had
come under to the Pope, in his late treaty with
him. The Constable Montmorency, however,
represented in such a firiking light, the impru-
dence of sacrificing the true interests of his
kingdom to these rash obligations, and took
such advantage of the absence of the Cardinal
of Lorrain, who had seduced the King into his
alliance with the Caraffas, that Henry, naturally
flucuating and unsteady, and apt to be influ-
enced by the advice laif given him, authorized
his ambassadors to sign a treaty of truce with
the Emperor for five years, on the terms which 5th Fdb'
had been proposed. But that he might not
leem to have altogether forgotten his ally the
Pope, who he foresaw would be highly exafpe-
rated, he, in order to sooth him, took care that
he should be expressly included in the truce .

THE Count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and Rtifi. h

both no-

tle Admiral Coligny to Brussels, the former to narchs.
be present when the King of France, and the

Mem. de Ribicr, ii. 6.6. Corps l)iplonm. tom. iv.
A, p. .at

Iatter

BooK tXI. latter when the Emperor and his son, ratified

1ó. the treaty and bound themselves by oath to

The P s observe it. ' When an account of the con-
The Pope's
aioniih- ferences at VaucClles, and of the conditions of
ment and
*irfte. truce which had been propored there, were firit

carried to Rome, it gave tlh Pope no manner
of disquiet. He trusted so much to the honour
of the French monarch, that he would not
allow himself to think that Henry could forget
so soon, or violate so lhamefully, all the ftipu-
lations in his league with him. He had such
an high opinion of the Emperor's wisdom, that
he made no doubt of his refuting his content to
a truce on such unequal terms; and on both
there accounts he confidently pronounced that
this, like many preceding negociations, would
terminate in nothing. But later and more cer-
tain intelligence soon convinced him that in
political affairs no reasoning is more fallacious,
than, because an event is improbable, to con-
clude that it will not happen. The sudden

r One of Admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote

to the court of France an account of what happened while
they rcfided at Bruflfls, takes notice, as an inftancc of
Philip's impoliteness, that he received the French arnbafla-
dor in an apartment hung with tapefry, which represented
the battle of Pavia, the manner in which Francis 1. was
taken prisoner, his voyage to Spain, with all the mortifying
circumstances of his captivity and iniprifonnent at Madrid*
Mem. de Ribier, ii. ój.i,

anJ\

and unexpeted conclusion of the truce filled BOOK XI.
Paul with astonishment and terror. The Car- ,556.
dinal of Lorrain durst not encounter that form
of indignation, to which he knew that he ihould
be exposed from the haughty Pontiff, who had
so good reason to be incensed; but departing
abruptly from Rome, he left to the Cardinal
Tournon the difficult talk of attempting to
tooth Paul and his nephews. They were fully
sensible of the perilous situation in which they
now flood. By their engagements with France,
which were no longer secret, they had highly
irritated Philip. They dreaded the violence of
his implacable temper. The Duke of Alva, a
minister fitted, as well by his abilities as by the
severity of his nature, for executing all Philip's
rigorous schemes, had advanced from Milan
to Naples, and began to assemble troops on
the frontiers of the Ecclesiastical State. While
they, if deserted by France, must not only re-
linquifh all the hopes of dominion and fove-
reignty to which their ambition aspired, but
remain exposed to the resentment of the Spanish
monarch, without one ally to protect them
against an enemy with whom they were so little
able to contend.

UNDER these circumstances, Paul had recourf e , atternmp
to the arts of negociation and intrigue, of which ,^ w1"^.

VOL. IV. R the

BOOK XI. the Papal court knows how well to avail itfcif
-,3- in order to ward off any calamity threatened by

an enemy superior in power. He affected to
approve highly of the truce, as an happy expe-
dient for putting a stop to the eflfion c,
Chritfian blood. He expressed his warmelt
wiflies that it might prove the forerunner of
a definitive peace. He exhorted the rival Princes
to embrace this favourable opportunity of fez-
ting on foot a negociation for that purpose, andl
offered, as their common father, to be mediator
between them. Under this pretext, he ap-
pointed Cardinal Rebiba his nuncio to the court
of Brussels, and his nephew Cardinal CarafFi
to that of Paris. The publick inftrudions given
to both were the fame; that they Ihould ufc
their utnioft endeavours to prevail with the two
monarchs to accept of the Pope's mediation,
that, by means of it, peace might be re-ella-
bliilhed, and meafutrs might be taken for assem-
bling a general council. But under this ipe-
Lious appearance of zeal for attaining objtc's so
desirable in themselves, and lo becoming his
lacred chara&er to pursue, Paul concealed very
different intentions. Caraffa, besides his publick
infruCtions, received a private commiflion to
i,licit the French King to renounce tile treaty
of truce, and to renew his engagements with
tile loly See, and lie was inmpowered to (pare

neither

neither entreaties, nor promises, nor bribes, in BOOK XL
order to gain that point. This, both the uncle 15 6.
and the nephew confidered as the real end of
the embassy; while the other served to amuse
the vulgar, or to deceive the Emperor and his
son. The Cardinal, accordingly, set out in- lith Mar
ftantly for Paris, and travelled with the greatest
expedition, while Rebiba was detained some
weeks at Rome; and when it became necessary
for him to begin his journey, he received secret
orders to protract it as much as possible, that
the issue of Caraffa's negociation might be
known before he should reach Brussels, and ac-
cording to that, proper directions might be
given to him with regard to the tone which he
should assume, in treating with the Emperor
and his son'.

CARAFFA made his entry into Paris with ex- Insn-poc;a.

tions tbr

traordinary pomp; and having presented a con- that pur-
lecrated sword to Henry, as the protector, on -
whose aid the Pope relied in the present exi-
gency, he besought him not to disregard the
entreaties of a parent in cliftrefs, but to employ
that weapon which he gave him in his defence.
This he reprcfented not only as a duty of filial
piety, but as an act of ju{tice. As the Pope,

P.llav. lib. xiii. t. IJ69. lurnct Ilil. of Rcftri. ii.
App. 30o).

K 2 fr'on)

BOOK XI. from. confidence in the assistance and support

,556 which his late treaty with France entitled him

to expet, had taken such steps as had irritated
the King of Spain, he conjured Henry not to
susser Paul and his family to be cru(hed under
the weight of that resentment which they had
drawn on themselves merely by their attachment
to France. Together with this argument ad-
dressed to his generosity, he employed another
which he hoped would work on his ambition.
He affirmed that now was the time, when, with
the most certain prospect of success, he might
attack Philip's dominions in Italy; that the
flower of the veteran Spanish bands had perified
in the wars of Hungary, Germany, and the
Low-Countries; that the Emperor had left his
son an exhausted treasury, and kingdoms
drained of men; that he had no longer to con-
tend with the abilities, the experience, and good
fortune of Charles, but with a monarch icarcely
feated on his throne, unprafifed in command,
odious to many of the Italian ftatcs, and dreaded
by all. Hle promised that the Pope, who had
already levied soldiers, would bring a confider-
able army into the field, which when joined by
a sufficient number of French troops, might,
by one brisk and ludden effort, drive the Spa-
niards out of Naples, and add to the crown of
France a kingdom, the conquest of which had

been

been the great objeA of all his predeceilors du- BooK XI.
ring half a century, 'and the chief motive of 1556.
all their expeditions into Italy.

EVERY word Caraffa spoke made a deep im- Their cf-

preflion on Henry; conscious, on the one hand, Ju:y 31.
that the Pope had just cause to reproach him
with having violated the laws not only of gene-
rofity but of decency, when he renounced his
league with him, and had agreed to the truce
of Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand,
not only to distinguish his reign by a conquefr,
which three former monarchs had attempted
without success, but likewise to acquire an efta-
blifhment of such dignity and value for one
of his sons. Reverence, however, for the oath,
by which he had so lately confirmed the truce
of Vaucelles; the extreme old age of the Pope,
whose death might occasion an entire revolution
in the political system of Italy; together with
the representations of Montmorency, who re-
peated all the arguments he had used against
the first league with Paul, and pointed out
the great and immediate advantages which
France derived from the truce; kept Henry
for some time in fufpence, and might poflibly
have outweighed all Caraffa's arguments. But
the Cardinal was riot such a novice in the arts
of intrigue and negociation, as not to have ex-

R 3 pedients

BOOK XI pedients ready for removing or furmouncing all

6
.^ these obftaclcs. To obviate the King's scruple

with regard to his oath, he produced powers
from the Pope to absolve him from the obli.
gation of it. By way of security against any
danger which he might apprehend from the
Pope's death, he engaged that his uncle would
make such a nomination of Cardinals, as lhould
give Henry the absolute command of the next
election, and enable him to place in the Papal
chair a person entirely devoted to his interest.

IN order to counterbalance the effect of the

Conftablc's opinion and influence, he employed
not only the ative talents of the Duke of Guise,
and the eloquence of his brother the Cardinal
of Lorrain, but the address of the Queen, aided
by the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers,
who, unfortunately fir France, co-operated with
Catharine in this point, though she took plca-
sure, on almost every other occasion, to thwart
and mortify her. They, by their united ioli-
citations, cafily swayed the King, who leaned
of his own accord to that fide towards which
they wished him to incline. All Montmorency's
prudent remonstrances were disregarded; the
nuncio absolved Henry from his oath; and he
signcd a new league with the Pope, which re-

kindled

kindled the flames of war both in Italy and in BooK x .
the Low-Countries. , 6.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew July ~3.

The Plv'S

that there was a fair prospect of his succeeding violen. po.
in this negociation, he dispatched a meflenger ,g4",i,
after the nuncio Rebiba, with orders to return l'lluili
to Rome, without proceeding to Brussels. As
it was now no longer necessary to preserve that
tone of moderation, which suited the character
of a mediator, and which he had affecEed to
assume, or to put ?ny farther restraint upon his
resentment against Philip, he boldly threw off
the mask, and took such violent steps as ren-
dered a rupture unavoidable. He seized nnd
imprisoned the Spanifi envoy at his court. le
excommunicated the Colonnas; and havingr
deprived Mark Antonio, the head of that fa-
mily, of the dukedom of Paliano, he granted
that dignity, together with the territory annexed
to it, to his iicphw the Count of Montorio.
He ordered a legal information to be pire-cnted
in the coniliiory of Cardinals againtt 'Philip,
setting fulor that he, notwithitanding the fidility
and allegiance due by him to the Holy See, of
which he held the crown of Naples, had not
only afforded a retreat in his dominions to the
Colonnas, whom the Pope had excommunicated
and declared rebels, but had furnifllcd thlcn
with arms, and was ready, in conjunition v.ith

B 1,

BOOK XI. them, to invade the Ecclesiastical State in an

1556. hofile manner; that such condut in a vassal

was to be deemed treason against his liege lord,
thepunifhment of which was the forfeiture of
his fief. Upon this the consistorial advocate
requested the Pope to take cognizance of the
cause, and to appoint a day for hearing of it,
when he would make good every article of the
charge, and expect from his justice that sentence
which the heinousness of Philip's crimes merited.
Paul, whose pride was highly flattered with the
idea of trying and pafling judgment on so great
luiy 17. a King, assented to his request; and as if it had

been no less easy to execute than to pronounce
sentence, declared that he would consult with
the Cardinals concerning the formalities requi-
site in conducting the trial .

Phi^lp's u BUT while Paul allowed his pride and resent-
perfiitioua
fcruplcs. ment to drive him on with such headlong im-

petuofity, Philip discovered an amazing mode-
ration on his part. He had becn taught by the
Spaniih ecclefiafticks, who had the charge of his
education, a profound veneration for the H-oly
See. This sentiment, which had been early
infused, grew up with him as he advanced in
years, and took full pofleflion of his mind,
which was naturally thoughtful, serious, and
prone to fuperflition. When he foresaw a rup.

' Pallav. lib. xiii. 171.

cure

ture with the Pope approaching, he had such BOOK XL-
violent scruples with refpe& to the lawfulness 1556.
of taking arms against the Vicegerent of Christ,
and the common father of all Christians, that
he consulted some Spanilh divines upon that
point. They, with the usual dexterity of casuists
in accommodating their refpanfes to the cir-
cumftances of those who apply to them for
diretion, assured him that, after employing
prayers and remonfirances in order to bring the
Pope to reason, he had full right, both by the
laws of nature and of Christianity, not only to
defend himself when attacked, but to begin
hostilities, if that were judged the most proper
expedient for preventing the effects of Paul's
violence and injustice. Philip nevertheless con-
tinued to deliberate and delay, corfisdering it as
a moss cruel misfortune, that his administration
should open with an attack on a person, whose
sacred function and character he so highly
refpeted b.

AT las the Duke of Alva, who, in compli- Thc Duke
ance with his master's scruples, had continued takelh,

rield agasnsl

to negociate long after he Ihould have begun to lthe Poe.
aft, finding Paul inexorable, and that every
overture of peace, and every appearance of
hesitation on his part increased the Pontiffs
natural arrogance, took the field and entered Sept. s.

b Ferrer. IHilt. de Efpagne, ix. 373. Hcrera, i. 308.

the

,Boo XI. the ecclefiafical territories. His army did not

ó..,- exceed twelve thousand men, but it was com-

posed of veteran soldiers, and commanded chiefly
by those Roman barons, whom Paul's violence
had driven into exile. The valour of the
troops, together with the animosity of their
leaders, who fought in their own quarrel, and t,
recover their own estates, supplied the want ol
numbers. As none of the French forces were
yet arrived, Alva soon became master of the
Campagna Romana; some cities being furren-
dered through the cowardice of the garriobn',
which consisted of raw soldiers, ill disciplined,
and worle commanded ; the gates of other;
bking opened by the inhabitants, who were
eager to receive back their ancient masters
Alva, that he might not be taxed with impiety
in Icizing the patrimony of the church, took
polleffion of the towns which capitulated, in
the name of the college of cardinals, to which,
or to the Pope that should be cholen to succeed
Paul, he declared that he would immediately
reltore them.

A Itr"Cle.- THE rapid progress of the Spaniards, wholi
'"i . .'' light troops made inroads to the gates of Rolne,

lilled that city with conlternation. Paul, though
inflexible and undaunted himlclf,; was obliged
to give way lb lar to the fears and solicitations
of the Cardinals, as to fend deputies to Alva ill

order
2

order to propose a cessation of arms. The Pope BooK XI.
yielded the more readily, as he was sensible of '
a double advantage which might be derived
from obtaining that point. It would deliver
the inhabitants of Rome from their prefcnt
terror, and would afford time for the arrival of
the succours which he expected from France.
Nor was Alva unwilling to close with the over-
ture, both as he knew how desirous his master
was to terminate a war, which he had under-
taken with reluctance, and as his army was so
much weakened by garrisoning the great number
of towns which he had reduced, that it was
hardly in a condition to keep the field without
fresh recruits. A truce was accordingly con-
cluded first for ten, and afterwards for forty Nov. ?j.
days, during which, various schemes of peace
were proposed, and perpetual negociations were
carried on, but with no sincerity on the part of
the Pope. The return of his nephew the Car-
dinal to Rome, the receipt of a considerable
fum remitted by the King of France, the alrrival
of one body of French troops, together with
the expectation of others which had begun their
march, rendered him more arrogant than ever,
and banished all thoughts from his mind, but
those of war and revengec'

Pallav. lib. xiii. 177. Thuan, lib. xvii. 588. Mem. de
~ibicr, ii. 664,

T I I!

# BOOK XII.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REI G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK XIL
W HILE there operations or intrigues BooK XII.

kept the Pope and Philip busy and 6

. 556.
attentive, the Emperor disentanglcd himself Charle,'a

new attempi
finally from all the affairs of this world, and set to alter th

for' the, place, ,.  , . ,fucccfion of

out for the place of his retreat. He had hitherto the Empire.
retained the Imperial dignity, not from any un-
willingness to relinquish it, for, after having re-
signed the real and extensive authority that he
enjoyed in his hereditary dominions, to part with
the limited and often ideal jurifdition which
belongs to an elecive crown, was no great facri-
fice. His sole motive for delay was to gain a

few

BOOK XII. few months, for making one trial more, in order

to accomplish his favourite scheme in behalf of
his son. At the very time Charles seemed to be
most sensible of the vanity of worldly grandeur,
and when lie appeared to be quitting it not only
with indifference, but with contempt, the vast
schemes of ambition, which had so long occu.
pied and engrossed his mind, still kept poffefion
of it. He could not think of leaving his son
in a rank inferior to that which he himself had
held among the Princes of Europe. As he had,
some years before, made a fruitless attempt to
Iecture the Imperial crown to Philip, that by
uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the
dominions of the houle of Burgundy, he might
put it in his power to prosecute, with a better
profpeEt of success, those great plans, which his
own infirmities had obliged him to abandon, he
was still unwilling to relinquish this flattering
project as chimerical or unatta;inable.

peoWhkA NOTWITHSTANDING the repulse which he had
provelt O.
"ccdfBl. formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,

he renewed his felicitations with fresh im-
portunity; and during the summer, had tried
every art, and cmployed every argument, which
he thought could iinluce him to quit the Impe-
rial throne to Philip, and to accept of the in-
'efliture of obme p)rovinc. , either in Italy, or

in

in the Low-Countries, as an equivalent'. But BOOK XIr.
Ferdinand, who was bo firm and inflexible with i,5.
regard to this point, that he had paid no regard
to the solicitations of the Emperor, even when
they were enforced with all the weight of autho-
rity which accompanies supreme power, received
the overture, that now came from him in the
Situation to which he had descended, with greater
indifference, and would hardly deign to liften
to it. Charles, ashamed of his own credulity
in having imagined that he might accomplish
that now, which he had attempted formerly
without success, desisted finally from his scheme.
He then resigned the government of the Em-
pire, and having transferred all his claims of
obedience and allegiance from the Germanick
body, to his brother the King of the Romans, Augut R7.
he executed a deed to that effet, with all the
formalities requilite in such an important tranf-
ation. The initrument of resignation he com-
mitted to William Prince of Orange, and em-
powered him to lay it before the college of
eleitors .

NOTHINGc now remained to detain Charles c :,,.i

from that retreat for swhich he languiffid. s, ,,,,'
The preparations for his voyage having been
made for onie time, lht fit out for Zuitburg ill

, Ainbafi'.tcs d ,es N ailles, ton, v. v.356. 1 Go.a!.
Conilit. Iiper. pars i. 576.

Zecland1,

Boo XII. Zealand, where the fleet had orders to rendez.

*S$6. vous. In his way thither he passed through

Ghent, and after stopping there a few days, to in-
dulge that tender and pleasant melancholy, which
arifcs in the mind of every man in the decline
of life, on visiting the place of his nativity, and
viewing the scenes and objecs familiar to him
in his early youth, he pursued his journey, ac-
companied by his son Philip, his daughter the
archdutchefs, his fiters the dowager Queens of
France and Hungary, Maximilian his fon-in-
law, and a numerous retinue of the Flenih
nobility. Before he went on board, he difmillcd
them, with marks of his attention or regard,
and taking leave of Philip with all the tender-
ness of a father who embraced his son for the
last time, he set fail on the seventeenth of Sep-
tember under convoy of a large fleet of Spaniih,
Flemish, and Engliflh ships. He declined a pref-
sing invitation, from the Queen of England, to
land in some part of her dominions, in order
to refresh himself, and that she might have the
comfort of feeing him once more. It cannot
surely, said he, be agreeable to a Queen to re-
ceive a visit from a father-in-law, who is now
nothing more than a private gentleman.

Hiu Iarr;l His voyage was prosperous, and he ar-
nd rcep- rived at Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh
tion theIe.

day after he left Zealand. As soon as he

landed,

landed, he fell prostrate on the ground; and BooK XII.
confidering himself now as dead to the world, i5
he kifed the earth, and said, " Naked came I
out of my mother's womb, and naked I now
return to thee, thou common mother of man-
kind." From Laredo he pursued his journey to
Burgos, carried by his attendants sometimes in
a chair, and sometimes in a horse litter, suffering
exquisite pain at every ftep, and advancing with
the greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish
nobility repaired to Burgos, in order to pay court
to him, but they were so few in number, and
their attendance was so negligent,. that Charles
observed it, and felt, for the first time, that he
was no longer a Monarch. Accustomed from
his early youth to the dutiful and officious refpeft
with which those who possess sovereign power
are attended, he had received it with the cre-
dulity common to Princes, and was weak enough
to be mortified, when he now discovered, that
he had been indebted to his fortune, for much
of that oblequious regard which he had fondly
thought was paid to his personal qualities. But
though he might have soon learned to forget the
levity of his subje6l., or to have defpiled their
neglet, he was more deeply afllicted with his
son's ingratitude, who, forgetting already how
much lie owed to his father's bounty, obliged
him to remain tubc weeks at Burgos, bfolie ie

VOL. IV. S paid

BooK XIl. paid him the first moiety of that friall pension,

which was all that he had reserved of so mans
kingdoms. As without this fum, Charles could
not difmils his domefticks with such rewards
as their services merited, or his generosity had
destined for them, he could not help expressing
both surprise and difatisfaetion c. At last the
money was paid, and Charles having difminfcd
a great number of his domefticks, whose attend-
ance he thought would be superfluous or curm-
berfome in his retirement, he proceeded to Valla-
dolid. There he took a last and tender leave
of his two sifters, whom he would not permit
to accompany him to his solitude, though they
entreated it with tears, not only that they might
have the consolation of contributing by their
attendance and care to mitigate or to sooth his
fulffrings, but that they might reap inftruEtion
and benefit by joining with him in those pious
exercises, to which he had confccrated the re-
mainder of his days.
1r-, ;,!.Iof FROMi Valladolid he continued his journey to

Plazencia in lft-remadura. lie had palkd
through this place a great many years before,
and having been struck at that time with the de-
lightful situation of the monaftcry of St. Jullus,
belonging to the order of St. Jerome, not many

Strada de Bctlo Bclg. lib. i. 9.
2 miles

miles distant from the town, he had then ob- BOOK XII.
served to some of his attendants, that this was a 556.
spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with
pleasure. The impression had remained so strong
on his mind, that he pitched upon it as the
place of his retreat. It was feated in a vale of
no great extent, watered by a finall brook, and
surrounded by rising grounds, covered with lofty
trees; from the nature of the foil, as well as the
temperature of the climate, it was esteemed the
most healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation he had sent
an architect thither, to add a new apartment to
the monastery, for his accommodation; but he
gave flriat orders that the stile of the building
should be such as suited his present station, ra-
ther than his former dignity. It consisted only
of fix rooms, four of them in the form of Friars
cells, with naked walls; the other two, each
twenty feet square, were hung with brown cloth,
and furnished in the most simple manner. They
were all on a level with the ground; with a
door on one fide into a garden, of which Charles
himself had given the plan, and had filled it
with various plants, which he intended to cul-
tivate with his own hands. On the other fide
they communicated with the chapel of the mo-
naftery, in which he was to perform his devo-
tions. Into this humble retreat, hardly Ifufi-
cient for the comfortable accommodation of a

S X private

RooK Xll. private ger.tleman, did Charles enter, with twelve

,- -- domefticks only. He buried there, in folitudie
Fibhiuary2. and silence, his grandeur, his ambition, toge-

ther with all those vast projets, which, during
half a century, had alarmed and agitated Europe,
filling every kingdom in it, by turns, with the
terror of his arms, and the dread of being tlb-.
jeded to his power '.

rontrafn be. THE contrast between Charles's concdut and
t.hn thcf that of the Pope at this juncture, was so ob-
bsh.avio.r es
(h.rl,-sfln vious, that it struck even the most careless ob-

servers; nor was the comparison which they
made much to Paul's advantage. The former,
a conqueror, born to reign, long accustomed to
the splendor which accompanies supreme power,
and to those busy and interesting scenes in which
an active ambition had engaged him, quitted
the world, at an early period of life, that he
might close the evening of his days in tranquil-
lity, and secure some interval for Iober thought,
and lerious recollecion. The latter, a priest,
who had pafled the early part of his life in the
liade of the schools, and in the study of the
pecculitive fcienccs, who was seemingly so de-
tached from the world, that he had shut himfilf
up for many years in the solitude of a cloyletr,

d Sandov. i. 607. & Zuniga, lio. Thuan. lib. xvii.
609.

and

.1

and who was not raised to the papal throne until BooK X1l.
he had reached the extremity of old age, dif- ,Sj
covered at once all the impetuosity of youthful
ambition, and engaged in vast schemes, in order
to accompliflh which, he scrupled not to scatter
the feeds of discord and to kindle the flames of
war in every corner of Europe. But Paul, rc-
gardlefs of the opinion or censures of mankind,
held on his own course with his wonted arro-
gance and violence. Thelc, although thcy
ieemed already to have exceeded all bounds,
rose to still a greater height, upon the arrival of
the duke of Guiie in Italy.

THAT which the two Princes of Lorrain fore- Tic ,,t I

iaw and desired, hlad happened. The duke of (,,"',ll .,
Guise was entrulted with the command of the lnv"V;
army appointed to march to the Pope's alffit-
ance. It consisted of twenty thouland men, of
the bess troops in tlhe ifrvice of France. So
high was the Duke's re!utatinn, and fulch the
general expectation of belhollirig fomc extr;,lr-
dinary exertion of his courage and abilities in a
war into which he had plrecipitated his country,
chiefly with the design of obtaining a field whlere
lie might display his own talents, that many of
the French nobility, wlo had no command iln
the troops employed, accompanied him as volun
teers. This army passed the Alps in a ri.'o'o: s
icafon, aai advanced towards lo::.c, wVLIuut

S3 ;.

BOOK XII. any oppofision from the Spaniards, who, as they

1557 were not itrong enough to aS in different parts,

had colleced all their forces in one body on
the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of that
kingdom.

The Pope EMBOLDENED by the approach of the French,
filitieh the Pope let loose all the fury of his resentment
Phainp. againit Philip, which, notwithstanding the na-

tural violence of his temper, prudential con-
fiderations had hitherto obliged him to keep
under some restraint. He named commission-
ers, whom he empowered to pafsjudgment in
the suit, which the consistorial advocate had
commenced against Philip, in order to prove
that he had forfeited the crown of Naples, by
Sec. ,i. taking arms against the Holy See, of which he

was a vassal. He recalled all the nuncios refi-
dent in the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or of
any of their allies. This was levelled chiefly
Apilg . against Cardinal Pole, the papal legate in the

court of England, whose great merit, in having
contributed so successfully to reconcile that
kingdom to the church of Rome, together with
the expectation of farther services he might
perform, was not sufficient to screen him from
the refcntment which he had incurred by his
zealous endeavours to re-eftablilh peace between
the house of Auitria and France. He com-
manded an addition to be made to the anathe-

mas

mas annually denounced against the enemies of Boo;< XII.
the church on Maundy-Thurfday, whereby he 571
inflicted the censure of excommunication on the
authors of the late invasion of the ecclesiastical
territories, whatever their rank or dignity might
be; and, in consequence of this, the u1ual
prayers for the Emperor were omitted next day
in the Pope's chapel .

BUT while the Pope indulged himself in those H;, ","'l"

wild and childish sallies of rage, either he ne- i.aiacqu".
glected, or found that it exceeeded his power,
to take such meafires as would have rendered his
resentment really formidable, and fatal to his
enemies. For when the duke of Guile entered
Rome, where he was received with a triumphal
pomp, which would have been more suitable if
lie had been returning from having terminated
the war with glory, than when he was going to
begin it with a doubtful chance of success, lie
found none of the preparations for war in fuich
forwardnels as Carafilahad promiled, or h hhad e.-
peaed. The papal troops were far inferior in
number to the quota stipulated; no magazines
sufficient for their filbliflence were formed; nor
was money for paying them provided. The Ve-
netians, agreeably to that cautious maxim which
the misfortunes of their ifate had first led them to

Pal. lib. xiii. i So. Meem. de Ribier, ii. 678.

S 4 adopt,

BOOK XII. adopt, and which was now become a funda-

157. mental principle in their policy, declared their

resolution to preserve an exact neutrality, with.
out taking any part in the quarrels of Princes,
so far superior to themselves in power. The
other Italian fates were either openly united in
league with Philip, or fccretly wilhed fuccels t)
his arms against a Pontiff, whole inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat
of war.

aiPkc of TiHE duke of Guise perceived that the whole
C. ite s o;ic-
,atlon,. weight of the war would devolve on him; and

became sensible, though too late, how impru-
dent it is to rely, in the execution of great
enterprizes, on the aid of feeble allies. Puihed
on, however, by the Pope's impatience for
action, as well as by his own desire of perform-
ing iomething of what he had so confidently un-
Jpril,3. dertaken, he marched towards Naples, and be-

gan his operations. But the success of there
fell far ihort of his former reputation, of what
the world expected, and of what he himself had
promised. He opened the campaign with the
siege of Civitclla, a town of tome importance on
the Neapolitan frontier. But the obltinacy with
which the Spanish governor defended it, basiled
all the inmpetuous efforts of the French valour,
and obliged Guite, after a siege of three weelks,
to retire from the town with disgrace. He en-

dcavourcd

deavoured to wipe off that slain, by advancing BOOK xlr.
boldly towards the duke of Alva's camp, and _57.
offering him battle. But that prudent com-
mander, sensible of all the advantages of tland-
ing on the defensive before an invading enemy,
declined an engagement, and kept within his in-
trenchments; and adhering to his plan with the
steadiness of a Catlilian, eluded, with great ad-
dress, all Guise's stratagems to draw hinl into
actions. By this time sickness beman to wAste
the French army ; violent dissensions had arifeni
between Guile and the commander of the Pope's
forces; the Spaniards renewed their incurlions
into the ecclesiastical state; the Pope, when he
found, instead of the conquests and triumphs
which he had fondly expeEted, that he could
not secure his own territories from depredation,
murmured, complained, and began to talk of
peace. The duke of Guise, mortified to the lalt
degree with having aded such an inglorious part,
not only solicited his court either to reinforce
his army, or to recal him, but urged Paul to
fulfil his engagements; and called on Cardinal
Caraffa, sometimes with reproaches, sometimes
with threats, to make good thoie inagnific: nt
promises, from a rash confidence in which he
had adviicd his matter to renounce the truce of
Vaucelles, and tojoin in league with the Pope .

f IHerrera vila dc l'4'ipe, 18 . g T'huan. lb.
xxviii. 614. Palav. lib xiii. i ,i. Burn.ii. app. 3 7.

I u'r

BooK XII. BUT while the French affairs in Italy were in

1557. this wretched situation, an unexpeAed event

JoIoftilities
in theLow- happened in the Low-Countries, which called
Countrics. the duke of Guise from a station wherein he

could acquire no honour, to the most dignified
and important charge which could be committed
to a subject. As soon as the French had dif-
covered their purpose of violating the truce of
Vaucelles, not only by fending an army into
Italy, but by attempting to surprise some of
the frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though
willing to have avoided a rupture, determined
to prosecute the war with such spirit, as should
make his enemies sensible, that his father had
not erred, when he judged him to be so capable
of government, that he had given up the reins
into his hands. As he knew that Henry had
been at great expence in fitting out the army
under the duke of Guise, and that his treasury
was hardly able to answer the exorbitant and
endless demands of a distant war, he foresaw
that all his operations in the Low-Countries muftl
of consequence, prove feeble, and be confidered
only as secondary to those in Italy. For that
rcafon, he prudently resolved to make his prin-
cipal effort in that place where he expeced the
French to be weakest, and to bend his chief force
against that quarter where they would feel a
blow most sensibly. With this view, he assem-

bled

bled in the Low-Countries an army of about BOOK XII.
fifty thousand men, the Flemings serving him rn
on this occasion with that active zeal, which sub-
jedts are wont to exert in obeying the commands
of a new lbvereign. But Philip, cautious and
provident, even at this early period of life, did
not reft all his hopes of fucceis on that formi.
dable force alone.

HE had been labouring for tome time to pj,;j;p,,

engage the English to espouse his quarrel; and a="'eEg,
though it was manifestly the interest of that ln "thel
kingdom to maintain a ftrid neutrality, and
the people themselves were sensible of the ad-
vantages which they derived from it; though
he knew how odious his name was to the Eng-
lith, and how averse they would be to co ope-
rate with him in any measure, he neverthelfs
did not despair of accomplishing his point. lie
relied on the affecion wherewith the Queen
doated on him, which was so violent, that even
his coldness and negleft had not extinguished
it; he knew her implicit reverence for his
opinion, and her fond desire of gratifying him
in every particular. That he might work on
these with greater facility, and more certain fuc-
cess, he set out for England. 'The Queen who,
during her huiband's absence, had languifhled
in perpetual dejection, relumed frcfh spirits on

his

BoOR XII. his arrival; and without paying the ieaft atten

tion either to the interest or to the inclinations
1557,

of her people, entered warmly into all his
schemes. In vain did her privy council remon-
firate against the imprudence as well as danger
of involving the nation in an unneceflary war;
in vain did they put her in mind of the solemn
treaties of peace fubfilting between England
and France, which the conduct of that nation
had afforded her no pretext to violate. Mary,
toothed by Philip's caresses, or intimidated by
the threats which his afccndant over her em-
boldened him at rome times to throw out, was
deaf to every thing that could be urged in op-
position to his sentiments, and infilted with the
greatest vehemence on an immediate declaration
of war against France. The council, though
all Philip's address and Mary's authority were
employed to gain or overawe them, after ftrug-
gling long, yielded at last, not from convic-
tion, but merely from deference to the will of
juneao. their sovereign. War was declared against

France, the only one perhaps against that king-
dom into which the Englilh ever entered with
reluctance. As Mary knew the aversion of the
nation to this measure, the durst not call a par-
liament in order to raise money for carrying on
the war. She supplied this want, however, by a
strain of prerogative and levied large fums or.

her

her fubjets by her own authority. This enabled BocK XIL
her to assemble a sufficient body of troops, and 7
to fend eight thousand men under the conduct of
the earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army .

PHILIP, who was not ambitious of military Operation

glory, gave the command of his army to Ema- of Pl'in'Ph
nuel Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his L;owcoa.
own residence at Cambray, that he might be
at hand to receive the earliest intelligence of
his motions, and to aid him with his counsels.
The duke opened the campaign with a masterly
firoke of address, which justified Philip's choice,
and discovered such a superiority of genius over
the French generals, as almost ensured success
in his subsequent operations. He appointed
the general rendezvous of his troops at a place
considerably distant from the country which he
destined to be the scene of action and having
kept the enemy in fufpence for a good time
with regard to his intentions, he at last deceived
them so effectually by the variety of his marches
and counter-marches, as led them to conclude
that he meant to bend all his force against the
province of Champagne, and would attempt to
penetrate into the kingdom on that fide. In
consequence of this opinion, they drew all their
fircngth towards that quarter, and reinforcing

h Cate, iii. 337.

the

BOoK XIr. the garrisons there, left the towns on other parts

;57'. of the frontier detitute of troops sufficient to de-

fend them.
Inreas St. EMANUEL, as soon as he perceived that this

feint had its full effc&, turned suddenly to the
right, advanced by rapid marches into Picardy,
and fending his cavalry, in which he was ex-
tremely strong, before him, invested St. Quintin.
This was a town deemed in that age of confi-
derable strength, and of great importance, as
there were few fortified cities between it and
Paris. The fortifications, however, had been
much neglected; the garrison, weakened by
draughts sent towards Champagne, did not
amount to a fifth part of the number requisite
for its defence; and the governor, though a
brave officer, was neither of rank, nor authority,
equal to the command in a place of so much
consequence, besieged by such a formidable
army. A few days must have put the Duke of
Savoy in pofeffion of the town, if the admiral
de Coligny, who thought it concerned his
honour to attempt saving a place of such im-
portance to his country, and which lay within
his jurifdiaion as governor of Picardy, had not
taken the gallant resolution of throwing himfelif
into it, with such a body of men as he could
colleCt of a sudden. This resolution he cxe-

cuted

cuted with great intrepidity, and, if the nature BooK XIl.
of the enterprize be confidered, with no con- -557
temptible success; for though one half of his
small body of troops was cut off, he, with the
other, broke through the enemy, and entered
the town. The unexpeted arrival of an officer
of such high rank and reputation, and who had
exposed himself to such danger in order to join
them, inspired the desponding garrison with cou-
rage. Every thing that the admiral's great ikill
and experience in the art of war could suggest,
for annoying the enemy, or defending the town,
was attempted; and the citizens as well as the
garrison, seconding his zeal with equal ardour,
teemed to be determined that they would hold
out to the last, and sacrifice themselves in order
to save their country '.

THE Duke of Savoy, whom the English The French

_ . . , ., enideavour

under the Earl of Pembroke, joined about this ,torelieve
time, pufled on the siege with the greatest thctuw,
vigour. An army so numerous, and so well
supplied with every thing requisite, carried on
its approaches with great advantage against a
garrison which was still so feeble that it durit
fcldom venture to disturb or retard the enemy's
operations by sallies. The admiral, sensible of
the approaching danger, and unable to avert it,

1 Thuan. lib. xix. 647.

acquainted

BooK XII. acquainted his uncle the constable Montmo-
'-5 rency, who had the command of the French

army, with his situation, and pointed out to
him a method by which he might throw relief
into the town. The constable, solicitous to save
a town, the loss do which would open a passage
for the enemy into the heart of France; and
eager to extricate his nephew out of that peril-
ous fitiation, in which zeal for the publick had
engaged him; resolved, though aware of the
danger, to attempt what he desired. With this
view, he marched from La Fere towards St.
Quintin at the head of his army, which was
not by one half so numerous as that of the
enemy, and having given the command of a
body of chosen men to Coligny's brother Dan-
delot, who was colonel general of the French
infantry, he ordered him to force his way into
the town by that avenue which the admiral had
represented as most pra&icable, while he him-
self with the main army would give the alarm
to the enemy's camp on the opposite fide, and
endeavour to draw all their attention towards
Augun ,o. that quarter. Dandelot executed his orders with

greater intrepidity than conduct. His soldiers,
rushed on with such headlong imnpetuofity, that
though it broke the first body of the enemy
which stood in their way, it threw themselves
into the utmost confusion; and being attacked

by

by fresh troops which closcd in upon them on Boot XII.
every fide, the greater part of them were cut in '557,
pieces, Dandelot, with about five hundred of
the most adventrous, and most fortunate, ma-
king good his entrance into the town.

MEANWHILE the Constable, in executing his Thebattle

part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of s' in.
the besiegers, as rendered it impossible to re-
treat with safety in the face of an enemy so
much superior in number. The Duke of Savoy
instantly perceived Montmorency's error, and
prepared, with the pretence of mind and abili-
ties of a great general, to avail himself of it.
He drew up his army in order of battle, with
the greatest expedition, and watching the mo-
ment when the French began to file off towards
La Fere, he detached all his cavalry, under the
command of the count of Egmont, to fall on
their rear, while he himself, at the head of his
infantry, advanced to support him. The French
retired at first in pcrfe6t order, and with a good
countenance; but when they saw Egmont draw
near with his formidable body of cavalry, the
ihock of which they were conscious that they
could not withstand, the profpec of imminent
danger added to difRruft of their general, whose
imprudence every soldier now perceived, struck
them with general conlternation, They began

VOL. IV. T insensibly

Boio Xll. insensibly to quicken their pace, and thofl in

,s57 the rear presTed so violently on lich as were

before them, that in a short time their march
resembled a flight rather than a retreat. Eg-
mont, observing their confusion, charged them
with the greatest fury, and in a moment all
their men at arms, the pride and strength of
the French troops in that age, gave way and

Total de- fled with precipitation. The infantry, however,
flat , thie
French. whom the Constable, by his presence and autho-

rity, kept to their colours, frill continued their
retreat in good ord'er, until the enemy brought!
some pieces of cannon to bear upon their center,
vwhich threw them into such confusion, that thc
cavalry, rcnewing their attack, broke in, and
the rout became univerlal. About four thoa-
hand of the French fell in the field, and amonpi
these the Duke of Anguyen, a Prince of ti;
blood, together with fix hundred gentlemen.
The Constable, as soon as he perceived the ior.
tune of the day to be irretrievable, ruffed inlto
the thickest of the enemy, with a relolution not
to survive the calamity, wlich his ill-contluit
had brought upon' his counrly; but hiavin' re-
ccived a dangerous wound, and being waited
with the loss of blood, he was furroundecd by
some Flemish officers, to whomn he was known,
who proteEted him from the violence of tile
soldiers, and obliged him to lurrendcr. Beliicis

lic

the Constable, the Dukes of Montpenfier and BooK XII.
Longueville, the Marechal St. Andre, many 157I
officers of diftincion, three hundred gentlemen,
and near four thousand private soldiers were taken
prisoners. All the colours belonging to the in-
fantry, all the ammunition, and all the cannon,
two pieces excepted, fell into the enemy's hands.
The victorious army did not lose above four-
score men k

THIS battle, no less fatal to France than the Thefirafef.

ancient victories of Crecy and Agincourt, gained fcas o i
by the Englifl on the fame frontier, bore a
near resemblance to those disastrous events, in
the suddenness of the rout; in the raflnefs of
the commander in chief; in the number of per-
sons of note slain or taken; and in the fimall
loss fulained by the enemy. It filled France
with equal conlternation. Many inhabitants of
Paris, with the fame precipitancy and trepida-
tion as if the enemy had been already at their
gates, quitted the city, and retired into the in-
terior provinces. The King, by his prelence
and exhortations, endeavoured to console and
to animate such as remained, and applying him-
self with the greatelf diligence to repair the
ruinous fortifications of the city, prepared to

k 1 huan. 65o. Ilar.i A nna!. Brab.nt. ii. 69z. Her.
iera, 291.

'1 2 defnd. ...

BOOK XII. defend it against the attack which he instantly

57 expected. But happily for France, Philip's

caution, tbgether with the intrepid firmness of
the Admiral de Coligny, not only saved the
capital from the danger to which it was exposed,
but gained the nation a short interval, during
which the people recovered from the terror and
dejecion occasioned by a blow no less severe
than unexpected, and Henry had leisure to take
measures for the publick security with the spirit
which became the sovereign of a powerful and
martial people.

Piulip tr;e PHILIP, immediately after the battle, visited
pairs to his
army. the camp at St. Quintin, where he was received

with all the exultation of military triumph;
and such were his transports of joy, on account
of an event which threw so much lustre on the
beginning of his reign, that they softened his
severe and haughty temper, into an unnufual
flow of courtesy. When the Duke of Savoy
approached, and was kneeling to kifs his hands,
he caught him in his arms, and embracing him
with warmth, " It becomes me, fays he, rather
to kifs your hands, which have gained me such
a glorious and alinoft bloodless victory."

k; .Hlikh- As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations

,,,,,,,; on hihty's arrival were over, a council of war
,'ofe .hli n wa
of the we.

was held, in order to determine how they might BooK XIr.
improve their vi&ory to the best advantage. 57
The Duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the
ablest officers formed under Charles V. insisted
that they ihould immediately relinquish the
siege of St. Quintin, the reduction of which
was now an objeA below their attention, and
advance directly towards Paris; that as there
were neither troops to oppose, nor any town of
strength to retard their march, they might reach
that capital while under the full impression of
the astonishment and terror occasioned by the
rout of the army, and take poffefliun of it
without resistance. But Philip, less adventrous
or more prudent than his generals, preferred a
moderate but certain advantage, to an enter-
prize of greater splendour, but of more doubtful
success. He represented to the council the In-
finite resources of a kingdom so powerful as
France; the great number as wellas minrtial spirit
of its nobles , their attachment to their fove-
reign; the vast advantages with which they could
carry on war in their own territories; and the
unavoidable deftru&ion, which must be the con-
sequence of their penetrating too ralllly into the
enemy's country, before they had secured such a
communication with their own, as might render
a retreat safe, if upon any disastrous event that
measure ihould become necessary. On all

T 3 thcti

BooK XI. these accounts, he advised the continuance

1557. of the Siege, and his generals acquiesced

the more readily in his opinion, as they made
no doubt of being masters of the town in
a few days, a loss of time of so little confc-
quence in the execution of their plan, that
they might easily repair it by their subsequent
activity '

St. Qntin THE weakness of the fortifications, and the
deended by small number of the garrison, which could no
Co'igrY, longer hope either for reinforcement, or relief,

seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's
generals. But, in making it, they did not
attend sufficiently to the character of Admiral
de Coligny, who commanded in the town. A
courage undismayed and undifconcerted amidst
the greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in
resources, a genius which roused and seemed to
acquire new force upon every dilafter, a talent
of governing the minds of men, together with
a capacity of maintaining his ascendant over
them even under circumfiances the most ad-
verse and distressful, were qualities which Co-
ligny poflfefed in a degree superior to any ge-
neral of that age. These qualities were pecu-
liarly adapted to the flation in which he was
now placed; and as he knew the infinite im-

I ]elcar. Compmentar. de Rcb, Gallic, 90o.

portancc

portance to his country of every hour which he BooK xlr-
could gain at this junture, he exerted himself ss7.
to the utmost in contriving how to protrat the
ficge, and to detain the enemy from attempting
any enterprize more dangerous toFrance. Such w hich

bt,ken by

were the perseverance and skill with which he a"ldult.
conducaed the defence, and such the fortitude
as well as patience with which he animated the
garrison, that though the Spaniards, the Fle-
mings, and the English, carried on the attack
with all the ardour which national emulation
inspires, he held out the town seventeen days. Au's" 27.
He was taken prisoner, at last, on the breach,
overpowered by the superior number of the
Wemy,

I-H.NRY availed himself, with the utmost adti- " Hny'

vity, of the interval which the Admiral's well for he c-
timed obstinacy had afforded him. I--e appoint- kmrlJni.
.ed officers to colle: the scattered remains of
the Constable's army; he issued orders for lev] -
ing soldiers in every part of the kingdomn; lh
commanded the ban and arriere ban of the
frontier provinces instantly to take the field,
and to join the Duke of Nevers at Laon in Pi-
cardy; he recalled the greater part of the vete-
ran troops which served under the Mareclial
Briffac in Piedmont; he sent courier after cou-
rier to the Duke of Guile, requiring him, to-

T 4 pether

BOOK XII. gether with all his army, to return inflantly for
'5tc , the defence of their country he dispatched one

i557.

envoy to the Grand Signior, to solicit the afifR-
ance of his fleet, and the loan of a film of
money; he sent another into Scotland, to incite
the Scots to invade the north of England, that,
by drawing Mary's attention to that quarter, he
might prevent her from reinforcing her troops
which served under Philip. These efforts of
the King were warmly seconded by the zeal of
his subje&s. The city of Paris granted him a
free gift of three hundred thousand livres. The
other great towns imitated the liberality of the
capital, and contributed in proportion. Several
noblemen of ditlintion engaged at their own
expence, to garrison and defend the towns
which lay most exposed to the enemy. Nor
was this general concern for the publick
confined to communities alone, or to those in
the higher sphere of life, but diffusing itself
among persons of every rank, each individual
seemed disposed to a& with as much vigour as
if the honour of the King, and the safety of
the state, had depended solely on his personal
efforts ".

The vilory PHILIP, who was no firanger either to the
of St. QOin.
tin prodtic prudent measures taken by the French monarch
bnes^iil for the security of his dominions, or to the spirit
Contfqucn.
c,, *' Mem. de Ribier, ii. 70i. 703.

with

wiih which his subje&s prepared to defend them- BOOK Xlr.
selves, perceived, when it was too late, that he ' '
had loft an opportunity which could never be
Retalled, and that it was now vain to think of
penetrating into the heart of France. He aban-
doned, therefore, without much relucance, a
scheme which was too bold and hazardous to
be perfectly agreeable to his cautious temper;
and employed his army, during the remainder'
of the campaign, in the sieges of Ham and
Catelet. Of there, he soon became matier;
and the reduction of two such petty towns, to-
gether with the acquisition of St. Quintin, were
all the advantages which he derived from one
of the most decisive vicories gained in that
century. Philip himself, however, continued
ih high exultatron on account of his ficcefs;
and as all his pafdions were tinged with super-
ftition, he, in memory of the battle of St. Quin-
tin, which had been fought on the day confe-
crated to St. Laurence, vowed to build a church,
a monastery, and a palace, sacred to that faint
and martyr. Before the expiration of the year,
he laid the foundation of an edifice, in which
all there were united, at the Escurial in the
neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame prin-
ciple, which dictated the vow, directed the
building. For the plan of the work was so
formed as to resemble a gridiron, which, accord-

ing

BOK XLI. ing to the legendary tale, had been the inflru-

s ment of St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwith-

landing the vast and expensive schemes, in
which his refllefs ambition involved him, Philip
continued the building with such perseverance
for twenty-two years, and rcferved such vast
fums for this monument of his devotion and va-
nity, that the monarchs of Spain are indebted
to him for a royal residence, which though not
the most elegant, is certainly the most fumptu-
ous and magnificent of any in Europe".

Th French THE first account of that fatal blow which
:',It'tot the French had received at St. Quintin was
taly. carried to Rome by the courier, whom Henry

had feut to recall the Duke of Guise. As Paul,
even with the assistance of his French auxili-
aries, had hardly been able to check the pro-
grefs of the Spanish arms, he foresaw that, as
soon as he was deprived of their protection, his
territories must be over-run in a moment. He
remonstrated therefore with the greatest violence
against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the Duke of Guise for his ill-condut,
which had brought him into fiich an unhappy
situation; and complaining of the King for
deserting him so ungenerously under such cir-
cumftances. Guise's orders, however, were

" Colmenar Annales d' Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

peremptory.

peremptory. Paul, inflexible as he was, found BOOK XII.
it necessary to accommodate his conduct to the ?
exigency of his affairs, and to employ the medi-
ation of the Venetians, and ofCofmo di Medici,
in order to obtain peace. Philip, who had
been forced unwillingly to a rupture with the
Pope, and who, even while success crowned his
arms, doubted so much the justice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of
pacification, listened eagerly to the first propo-
fals of this nature from Paul, and discovered
such moderation in his demands, as could
hardly have been expected from a Prince elated
with victory.

Tit Duke of Alva-'on the part of Philip, A trca'yof

and the Cardinal Caraffa in the name of his Peace b
uncle, met at Cavi, and both being equally t,'-,;''
disposed to peace, they, after a short conference,
terminated the war by a treaty, on the following
terms: That'Paul flould renounce his league
with France, and maintain for the future such
a neutrality as became the common father of
Christendom; That Philip fould instantly re-
store all the towns of the ecclesiastical territory
of which he had taken poffeflion; That the
claims of the Caraffas to the dutchy of Paliano,
and other demefhes of the Colonnas flould be
referred to the decision of the republick of

a1~ ~ Venice;

BOOK XII. Venice i That the Duke of Alva fiould repair

L in person to Rome, and after asking pardon of

Paul in his own name, and in that of his
mailer, for having invaded the patrimony of
the church, ihould receive the Pope's abfolu-
tion from that crime. Thus Paul, through
Philip's scrupulous timidity, finiihed an unpro-
fperous war without any detriment to the Papal
See. The conqueror appeared humble, and
acknowledged his error; while he who had been
vanquished retained his usual haughtiness, and
was treated with every mark of superiority'.
The. Duke of Alva, in terms of the treaty, re-
paired to Rome, and, in the poflure of a fp-
plicant, kissed the feet, and implored the for-
givenefs of that very person, whom his arms
had reduced to the last extremity. Such was
the fuperltitious veneration of the Spaniards for
the papal charater, that Alva, though perhaps
the proudest man of the age, and accuflomed
from his infancy to a familiar intercourse with
Princes, acknowledged that when he approached
the Pope, he was so much overawed, that his
voice failed, and his presence of mind forsook
him P.

Pallay. lib. xiii. 183. P. Paul, 380. Herrera, vol. i.

310. P PaUav. lib. xiii. 185. Summonto Itoria di
Napoli, iv. 226.

BUT

BUT though this war, which at its corn- BooK XI,

mencement threatened mighty revolutions, was --
brought to an end without occasioning any Phflipre,
alteration in those States, which were its imme- centiato

O&avio

diate obje&, it produced efifts of considerable F.nCnf
consequence in other parts of Italy. As Philip
was extremely solicitous to terminate his quarrel
with Paul as speedily as poflible, he was willing
to make any sacrifice in order to gain those
Princes, who, by joining their troops to the
Papal and French army, might have prolonged
the war. With this view, he entered into a
negociation with Otavio Farnese, Duke of
Parma, and, in order to reduce him from his
alliance with France, he restored to him the
city of Placentia with the territory depending
on it, which Charles V. had seized in the year
one thousand five hundred and forty-feven, had
kept from that time in his pofieflion, and had
transmitted together with his other dominions to
Philip.

THIS ftep made such a discovery of Philip's cor,,, di

Me dr< i's

character and views to Cosmo di Medici, the m,,,ure,
most sagacious as well as provident of all the f o t i.ici
Italian Princes, that he conceived hopes of ac-
compli(hing his favourite scheme of adding
Siena and its territories to his dominion:; ini
TuPfcany. As his success in this attempt de-

pended

B OK XII. pended entirely on the delicacy of address with

55.' which it should be conduced, he employed all

the refinements of policy in the negociation
which he set on foot for this purpose. He began
with soliciting Philip, whose treasury he knew to
be entirely drained by the expence of the war,
to repay the great fums which he had advanced
to the Emperor during the siege of Siena.
When Philip endeavoured to elude a demand
which Cosmo was unable to satisfy, he affected
to be extremely disquieted, and making no secret
of his disgust, inftruded his ambassador at
Rome to open a negociation with the Pope,
which seemed to be the effect of it. The ambaf-
fador executed his commission with such dexte-
rity, that Paul, imagining Cosmo to be entirely
alienated from the Spanili interest, proposed to
him an alliance with France, which should be
cemented by the marriage of his eldest son to
one of Henry's daughters. Cosmo received the
overture with such apparent fatisfadion, and
with so many professions of gratitude for the
high honour of which he had the prospeCt, that
not only the Pope's ministers, but the French
envoy at Rome, talked confider.tly, and with
little reserve, of the accellion of that important
ally, as a matter certain and decided. The
account of this was quickly carried to Philip)
and Cofrmo, who forcfaw how much it would
alarm him, had dispatched his nephew Ludovico

de

de Toledo into the Netherlands, that he might BooK XIr.
be at hand to observe and take advantage of .''-

'557.

his consternation, before the firlf impression
which it made should in any degree abate.
Cosmo was extremely fortunate in the choice
of the instrument whom he employed. Toledo
waited, with patience, until he discovered with
certainty, that Philip had received such intel-
ligence of his uncle's negociations'at Rome, as
must have filled his suspicious mind with fear
and jealousy; and then craving an audience,
he required payment of the money which had
been borrowed by the Emperor, in the molt
earnest and peremptory terms. In urging that
point, he artfully threw out ifveral dark hints
and ambiguous declarations, concerning the ex-
tremities to which Colmo might be driven by
a refutal of this just demand, as well as by
other grievances of which he had good reason
to complain.

PHILIP, aftonilied at an address in such a Ther fuc-

strain, from a Prince so far his inferior as the c"''
Duke of Tuscany, and comparing what he now
heard, with the information which he had re-
ceived from Italy, immediately concluded that
Cosmo had ventured to afflume this bold and
unusual tone on the profpetq of his union with
France. In order to prevent the Iope and
I lenry from acquiring an ally, who by his

abilties

Boox XIT. abilities as well as the situation of his dominions.

57. would have added both reputation and ftrergth

to their confederacy, he offered to grant Cosmo
the investiture of Siena, if he would content to
accept of it as an equivalent for the furns due
to him, and engage to furnish a body of troops
towards the defence of Philip's territories in
Italy, against any power who lpould attack them.
As soon as Colfo had brought Philip to make
this conceflion, which was the object of all his
artifices and intrigues, he did not protraft the
negociation by any unneceflary delay, or any
excess of refinement, but closed eagerly with
the proposal, and Philip, in spite of the remon-
fcrances of his ablest counsellors, signed a treaty
with him to that effect q.

As no Prince was ever more tenacious of his

rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquish
any territory which he poffefred, by what tenure
soever he held it, these unusual conceflions to
the Dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he
wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or de-
fending which, his father had employed many
years, and waited much blood and treasure,
cannot be accounted for from any motive, but
his superstitious desire of extricating himself out

I Thunn. lib. xviii. 624. Hcrrcra, i. 263. 275. Palav.
lib. xiii. 180.

ot

of the war which he had been forced to wage BoOa XI.
against the Pope. By these treaties, however, ;'
the balance of power among the Italian States
was poized with greater equality, and rendered
less variable than it had been since it received
the first violent hock from the invasion of Charles
VIII. of France. From this period Italy ceased
to be the great theatre, on which the monarchs
of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for
power or for fame. Their dissensions and hof-
tilities, though as frequent and violent as ever,
being excited by new objects, stained other re-
gions of Europe with blood, and rendered
them miserable in their turn, by the devastations
of war.

THE duke of Guise left Rome on the fame Sept. 29.

The Duke

day that his adversary the Duke of Alva made of Cuife's
his humiliating submission to the Pope. He F,'e'.n
was received in France as the guardian angel
of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy
seemed to be forgotten, while his former ser-
vices, particularly his defence of Metz, were
recounted with exaggerated praise and he was
welcomed in every city through which he pahred,
as the rcftorer of publick security, who, after
having set bounds by his conduc and valour
to the victorious arms of Charles V. returned
now, at the call of his country, to check the

VOL. IV. U formidable

BOOK XII. formidable progress of Philip's power. The res
%."5 ception which he met with from Henry was no

less cordial and honourable. New titles were
invented, and new dignities created, in order to
dittinguiffh him. He was appointed lieutenant-
general in chief both within and without the
kingdom, with a jurifdi&ion almost unlimited,
and hardly inferior to that which was possessed
by the King himself. Thus, through the singular
felicity which attended the Princes of Lorrain,
the miscarriage of their own schemes contributed
to aggrandize them. The calamities of his coun-
try, and the ill condu& of his rival the Confta-
ble, exalted the Duke of Guise to a height of
dignity and power, which he could not have ex-
pected to attain by the most fortunate and most
complete success of his own ambitious projects.

T.ke, the THE Duke of Guise, eager to perform some-
command thing suitable to the high expetations of his
of the army.

countrymen, and that he might jutify the ex-
traordinary confidence which the King had re-
posed in him, ordered all the troops, which
could be got together, to assemble at Com-
piegne. Though the winter was well advanced,
and had set in with extreme rigour, he placed
himself at their head, and took the field. By
Henry's a&ivity and the zeal of his subje&s, so
many foldicrs had been raised in the kingdom,

and

and such considerable reinforcements had been BooK XTl.
drawn from Germany and Swifferland, as formed 557
an army refpe&able even in the eyes of a vi&o-
rious enemy. Philip, Aaramed at feeing it put
in motion at such an uncommon season, began
to tremble for his new conquests, particularly
St. Quintin, the fortifications of which were
hitherto but imperfectly repaired.

BUT the Duke of Guise meditated a more Heinv, f

important enterprize; and after amusing the C.';s.
enemy with threatening successively different Jlanu"y 10
towns on the frontiers of Slanders, he turned
suddenly to the left, and invested Calais with
his whole army. Calais had been taken by the
English under Edward III. and was the fruit
of that monarch's glorious victory at Crecy.
Being the only place that they retained of their
ancient and extensive territories in France, and
which opened to them, at all times, an easy and
secure passage into the heart of thlat kingdom,
their keeping poffeflion of it soothed the pride
of the one nation as much as it mortified the
vanity of the other. Its situation was naturally
so strong, and its fortifications deemed so im-
pregnable, that no monarch of France, how
adventurous soever, had been bold enough to
attack it. Even when the domeftick strength of
England was broken and exhausted by the

U 2 bloody

Boor X'. bloody wars between the houses of York and

155? Lancaster, and its attention entirely diverted

from foreign objets, Calais had remained un-
diLurbed and unthreatened. Mary and her
council, composed chiefly of ecclefiafticks, un-
acquainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy
out of the kingdom, had not only neglected to
take any precautions for the safety of this im-
portant place, but leemed to think that the
reputation of its strength alone was sufficient
for its security. Full of this opinion, they ven-
tured, even after the declaration of war, to
continue a pradice which the low state of the
Queen's finances had introduced in times of
peace. As the country adjacent to Calais was
overflowed during the winteri and the marshes
around it became impassable, except by one
avenue, which the forts of St. Agatha and
Newnham-bridge commanded, it had been the
custom of the English to dismiss the greater part
of the garrison towards the end of autumn, and

ia '.f ... to replace it in the spring. In vain did Lord
its 'rW Wentworth, the governor of Calais, remon-

11rate against this ill-timed parsimony, and re-
present the poflibility of his being attacked fud-
denly, while he had not troops fuifficient to
man the works. The privy-council treated
thefc remonstrances with scorn, as if they had

flowed

flowed from the timidity or the rapaciousness of BooK XlI.
the governor; and some of them, with that is.
confidence which is the companion of ignorance,
boasted that they would defend Calais with
their white rods againit any enemy who should
approach it during winter,. In vain did Philip,
who had passed through Calais as he returned
from England to the Netherlands, warn the
Queen of the danger to which it was exposed;
and acquainting her with what was necessary
for its security, in vain did he offer to reinforce
the garrison during winter with a detachment
of his own troops. Mary's counsellors, though
obsequious to her in all points wherein religion
was concerned, distrusted, as much as the reft
of their countrymen, every proposition that
came from her husband; and fufpeting this to
be an artifice of Philip's, in order to gain the
command of the town, they neglected his in.
telligence, declined his offer, and left Calais
with less than a fourth of the men requisite for
its defence,

IT was his knowledge of this which en- c,,i;rpuf,

the firge

couraged the Duke of Guise to venture on an Wi'o.
enterprize, that furpriCed his own countrymen,
no less than his enemies. As he knew that its
fpccefs depended on conducting his operations

' Carte, iii 34S.

U 3 with

BOOK Xll. with such rapidity as would afford the English

1558. no time for throwing relief into the town by

sea, and prevent Philip from giving him any
interruption by land, he pulhed the attack with
a degree of vigour little known in carrying on
sieges, during that age. He drove the Englifi
from fort St. Agatha at the. first assault. He
obliged them to abandon the fort of Newnham-
bridge, after defending it three days. He took
the castle which commanded the harbour by
form; and on the eighth day after he appeared
before Calais, compelled the governor to fur-
render, as his feeble garrison, which did not ex-
ceed five hundred men, was worn out with the

Takes the fatigue of ftitaining so many attacks, and de-
toW"' fending such extensive works.

andlikewire THE Duke of Guise, without allowing the
Guifnes and
Hames, English time to recover from the conifernation

occasioned by this blow, immediately invested
Guifnes, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and
after standing one brisk assault, gave up the
town. The castle of Hames was abandoned by
the troops potted there, without waiting the
approach of the enemy.

The rpln. THUS, in a few days, during the depth of
ens't of winter, and at a time when the fatal battle of
there con- St.
quefla.

St. Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit BooK xrr.
of the French, that their utmost aim was to sss
protect their own country, without dreaming
of making conquests on the enemy, the enter-
prizing valour of one man drove the English
out of Calais, after they had held it two hun-
dred and ten years, and deprived them of every
foot of land in a kingdom, where their domi-
nions had been once so extensive. This exploit,
at the fame time that it gave an high idea of
the power and resources of France to all Eu-
rope, set the Duke of Guise, in the opinion of
his countrymen, far above all the generals of
the age. They celebrated his conquests with
immoderate transports of joy; while the English
gave vent to all the passions, which animate a
high-fpirited people, when any great national
calamity is maniteftly owing to the ill conduct
of their rulers. Mary and her ministers, for-
merly odious, were now contemptible in their
eyes. All the terrors of her revere and arbi-
trary administration could not restrain them
from uttering execrations and threats againlt
those, who having wantonly involved the nation
in a quarrel wherein it was nowise intcrefted,
had by their negligence or incapacity brought
irreparable disgrace on their country, and loll
the molt valuable poffieifon belonging to the
English crown.

U 4 Ta r

BooK X.I THE French King imitated the condu& of

U'"s' its former conqueror, Edward III. with re-

gard to Calais. He commanded all the Englilh
inhabitants to quit the town, and giving their
houses to his own fubjeas, whom he allured to
fettle there by granting them various immu-
nities, he left a numerous garrison, under an
experienced governor, for their defence. After
this, his vicorious army went into quarters of
refreshment, and the usual inaction of winter
returned.

Feb. »4. DURINo these various operations, Ferdinand
CSrgstisn assembled the college of Electors at Frankfort,
of he m- in order to lay before them the deed whereby
perial ,own. Charles V. had resigned the Imperial crown, and

transferred it to him. This he had hitherto de-
layed on account of some difficulties which had
occurred concerning the formalities requisite in
flpplying a vacancy occasioned by an event, to
which there was no parallel in the annals of the
Empire. These being at length adjusted, the
Prince of Orange executed the commission with
which he had been entrusted by Charles; the
Electors accepted of his resignation; declared
Ferdinand his lawful successor; and put him
in possession of all the ensigns of the Imperial
dignity.

iyt

BUT when the new Emperor sent Gufman BooK Xll.

his chancellor, to acquaint the Pope with this ,
tranfafion, to testify his reverence towards the The P.pe
Holy See, and to signify that, according to acknow.

ledge Ferdi,

form, he would soon dispatch an ambassador a.nd .
extraordinary to treat with his holiness concern- EmPror,
ing his coronation; Paul, whom neither expe-
rience nor disappointments could teach to bring
down his lofty ideas of the papal prerogative
to such a moderate standard as suited the genius
of the times, refused to admit the envoy into
his presence, and declared all the proceedings
at Frankfort irregular and invalid. He con-
tended that the Pope, as the vicegerent of Christ,
was entrusted with the keys both of celeflial
and terrestrial government; that from him the
Imperial jurisdiCtion was derived; that though
his predeceflbrs had authorized the Electors to
chufe an Emperor whom the Holy See con-
firmed, this. privilege was canfined to those cafes
when a vacancy was occasioned by death; that
the instrument of Charles's resignation had been
presented in an improper.court, as it belonged
to the Pope alone to reject or to accept of it, and
to nominate a person to fill the Imperial throne,
that, setting aside all thele objections, Ferdi-
nand's election laboured under two defects
which alone were sufficient to render it void, for
the Proteitant Eletors had been admitted to

vote,

BOOK XII. vote, though, by their apoftacy from the catho-
L-> lick faith, they had forfeited that and every other

privilege of the eletoral office; and Ferdinand,
by ratifying the conceflions of several Diets in
favour of hereticks, had rendered himself un-
worthy of the Imperial dignity, which was in-
ftituted for the protection, not for the deftruc-
tion of the church. But after thundering out
these extravagant maxims, he added with an
appearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand
would renounce all title to the Imperial crown,
founded on the election at Frankfort, make
profeflions of repentance for his past condu&,
and supplicate him, with due humility, to con-
firm Charles's resignation, as well as his affump-
tion to the Empire, he might expect every
mark of favour from his paternal clemency and
goodness. Gufman, though he had foreseen
considerable difficulties in his negociation with
the Pope, little expected that he would have
revived those antiquated and wild pretensions,
which aftonifled him so much, that he hardly
knew in what tone he ought to reply. He pru-
dently declined entering into any controversy
concerning the nature or extent of the papal
jurifdiftion, and confining himself to the poli-
tical considerations, which Ihould determine the
Pope to recognise an Emperor already in pof-
session, he endeavoured to place them in such a

light,

light, as he imagined could scarcely fail to BOOK XII.
strike Paul, if he were not altogether blind to ~57.
his own interest. Philip seconded Gufman's
arguments with great earnestness, by an am-
baffador whom he lent to Rome on purpose,
and besought the Pope to desist from claims To
unseasonable, as might not only irritate and
alarm Ferdinand and the Princes of the Em-
pire, but furnish the enemies of the Holy See
with a new reason for representing its jurifdiation
as incompatible with the rights of Princes, and
subversive of all civil authority. But Paul, who
deemed it a crime to attend to any consideration
suggested by human prudence or policy, when
he thought himself called upon to assert the pre-
rogatives of the Papal See, remained inflexible;
and during his pontificate, Ferdinand was not
acknowledged as Emperor by the court of
Rome '.

WHILE Henry was intent upon his prepara- Henryen

tions for the approaching campaign, he received daitvtl'c"
accounts of the iffu¢ of his negociations in Scot- s,'ig id
land. Long experience having at last taught
the Scots the imprudence of involving their
country in every quarrel between France and
England, neither the solicitations of his ambaffa-
dor, nor the address and authority of the Queen-

' Godleveus de Abeicat. Car. V. ap. Gold. polit. Imp.
392, Palav. lib. xiii, 189. Ribier, ii. 746. 759.

2 regent,

BoorXIr. regent, could prevail on them to take arms

s5s8' against a kingdom, with which they were at

peace. On this occasion the ardour of a mar-
tial nobility and of a turbulent people was re-
strained by regard for the publick interest and
tranquillity, which, in former deliberations of
this kind, had been seldom attenced to by a
nation always prone to rulh into every new war.
But though the Scots adhered with steadiness
to their pacifick system, they were extremely
ready to gratify the French King in another
particular, which he had given in charge to his
ambassador.

.Iarrageof THE young Queen of Scots had been aftfi
thiPh hi anced to the Dauphin in the year one thousand
5Cosof five hundred and forty-eight, and having been

educated since that time in the court of France,
fie had grown up to be the most amiable, and
one of the most accomplished Princesses of that
age. Henry demanded the consent of her sub-
jets to the celebration of the marriage, and a
parliament which was held for that purpose,
appointed eight commiifloners to represent the
whole body of the nation at that solemnity,
with power to sign such deeds as might be re-
quifite before it was concluded. In fettling the
articles of the marriage, the Scots took every
precaution that prudence could ditate, in
order to preserve the liberty and independence

of

of their country; while the French used every BOOK XIr.
art to secure to the Dauphin the conduct of g

1558.

affairs during the Queen's life, and the fuc.
ceiion of the crown on the event of her demise.
The marriage was celebrated with pomp suit- April z.4
able to the dignity of the parties, and the mag-
nificence of a court at that time the most fplen-
did in Eurdpe'. Thus Henry, in the course
of a few months, had the glory of recovering
an important poffeflion which had anciently be-
longed to the crown of France, and of adding
to it the acquisition of a new kingdom. By
this event, too, the Duke of Guise acquired
new consideration and importance; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown,
railing him so far beyond the condition of other
subje&s, as seemed to render the credit which
he had gained by his great actions, no less per-
manent than it was extensive.

WHEN the campain opened, soon after the Theccm.

ptign open

Dauphin's marriage, the Duke of Guise was cd.
placed at the head of the army, with the fame
unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-
ceived such liberal supplies from his subje&s,
that the troops under his command were both
numerous and well appointed; while Philip,

1 Keith's hifory of Scotland, p. 73. Append. 13. Corps.
Diplom. v. 21.

exhaufled

BooK XII. exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of the
t.'' preceding year, had been obliged to dismiss so

many of his forces during the winter, that he
could not bring an army into the field capable of
making head agiridft the enemy. The Duke of
Guise did not lose the favourable opportunity
which his superiority afforded him. He in-
velfed, Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg,
one of the firongeft towns on the frontier of the
Netherlands, and of great importance -to France
by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-
Rfanding the obstinate vslour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege

June i. of three weeks ".

The French BOT the success of this enterprize, which it
f'te 't was expeced would lead to other conquets,
Grvclines, was more than counterbalanced by an event that

happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fition, invested Dunkirk with an army of four-
teen thousand men, and took it by storm on
the fifth day of the siege. Hence he ad.
vanced towards Nieuport, which-muft have soon
fallen into his hands, if the approach of the
Count of Egmont with a fuperibf army had
not made it prudent to retreat. The French

Thuan. lib. xx. 690.

troops

troops were so much encumbered with the BootKXI.
booty which they had got at Dunkirk, or by 5~" '
ravaging the open country, that they moved
slowly; and Egmont, who had left his heavy
baggage and artillery behind him, marched with
such rapidity, that he came up with them near
Gravelines, and attacked them with the utmolt
impetuosity, De Termes, who had the choice
of the ground, having polled his troops to ad-
vantage in the angle formed by the mouth of
the river Aa and the sea, received him with
great firmness. Victory remained for some time
in suspense, the desperate valour of the French,
who foresaw the unavoidable deftrution that
must follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the
Flemings, when one of those accidents to which
human prudence does not extend, decided the
contesl in favour of the latter. A squadron of
Englilh Ihips of war, which was cruizing on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered
the river Aa and turned its great guns againfb
the right wing of the French, with such effe& as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confulion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom afliltance, so unexpected
and so feafonablc, gave fresh spirit; redblubled
their efforts, that they might not lose the ad-

vantage

Boo XII. exhausted by the extraordinary efforts of the

$g, preceding year, had been obliged to dismiss so

many of his forces during the winter, that he
could lot bring an army into the field capable of
making head agirilft the enemy. The Duke of
Guise did not lose the favourable opportunity
which his superiority afforded him. He in-
vested Thionville in the dutchy of Luxemburg,
one of the strongest towns on the frontier of the
Netherlands, and of great importance-to France
by its neighbourhood to Metz; and, notwith-
standing the obstinate vlour with which it was
defended, he forced it to capitulate after a siege

Jn 2. of three weeks u.

The French BUT the success of this enterprize, which it
army de-
featednt was Expeted would lead to other conquests,
Gravelines. wra more than counterbalanced by an event that

happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The Marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppo-
fition, invested Dunkirk with an army of four-
teen thousand mnen, and took it by fiorm on
the fifth day of the siege. Hence he ad-
vanced towards Nieuport, which-muft have loon
fallen into his hands, if the approach of the
Count of Egmont with a fuperibt army had
not made it prudent to retreat. The French

a Thuan, lib. xx. 690.

troops

troops were so much encumbered with the BooK X[I.
booty which they had got at Dunkirk, or by -15 e5
ravaging the open country, that they moved
slowly; and Egmont, who had left his heavy
baggage and artillery behind him, marched with
such rapidity, that he came up with them near
Gravelines, and attacked them with the utmost
impetuosity, De Termes, who had the choice
of the ground, having posed his troops to ad-
vantage in the angle formed by the mouth of
the river Aa and the sea, received him with
great firmness. Vitory remained for some time
in suspense, the desperate valour of the French,
who foresaw the unavoidable destruCtion that
must follow upon a rout in an enemy's country,
counterbalancing the superior number of the
Flemings, when one of those accidents to which
human prudence does not extend, decided the
contest in favour of the latter. A squadron of
Englifl mfips of war, which was cruizing on
the coalt, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered
the river Aa and turned its great guns againfb
the right wing of the French, with such effect as
immediately broke that body, and spread terror
and confusion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom assistance, so unexpected
and so seasonable, gave fresh spirit; redoubled'
their efforts, that they might not lose the ad-

vantage

Boot XII. vantage which fortune had p'efented them, of

C^^& ggive the enemy time-to recover from their con-

fternation, and the rout of the French soon be-
came universal. Near two thousand were killed
on the spot ;. a greater number fell by the hands
of the peasants, who, in revenge for the cruelty
with which their country had been plundered,
pursued the fugitives and massacred them with.
out mercy; the reft were taken prisoners, toge-
ther with De Termes their general, and many
officers of diftintion .

The Duke THIS signal vitery, for which the Count of
fduirceop. Egmont was afterwards so ill requited by Philip,
posed to the
i;orious obliged the Duke of Guise to relinquilh all other

schemes, and to haften towards the frontier of
Picardy, that he might oppose the progress of
the enemy in that province. This disaster re-
fleAed new lustre on his reputation, and once
more turned the eyes of his countrymen towards
him, as the only general on whose arms vi&ory
always attended, and in whose conduct as well
as good fortune they could confide in every
danger. Henry reinforced Guise's army with so
many troops drawn from the adjacent garrisons,
that it soon amounted to forty thousand men.
That of the enemy, after the junction of Egmont
with the Duke of Savoy, was not inferior in

t Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

number

nuWber. They encamped a the distance of a BOOK XIl.
few leagues from one another4 and each mo- ISTs.
namch having joined his refpetiive army, it was
expeted, after the viciffitudesof good and bad
success during this and the ;frmer campaign,
that.a deciive battle would at last determine
which of the rivals should take the ascendant
for the future, and give law to Europe. But
though both had it in their power, neither of
them discovered any inclination to bring the de-
termination of such an important point to de.
pend upon the uncertain and fortuitous issue of
a single battle. The fatal engagements at St.
Quintin and Gravelines were too recent to be
so soon forgotten, and the prospect of encoun-
tering the fame troops, commanded by the fame
generals who had twice triumphed over his
arms, inspired Henry with a degree of caution
whish was not common to him. Philip, of a
genius averse to bold operations in war, natu-
rally leaned to cautious measures, and would ha-
zardi npthing against a general so fortunate and
successful as the Duke of Guite. Both mo-
narcds, as if by agreement, flood on the defen-
five,.and fortifying their camps carefully, avoid-
ed every (kirmifh or rencounter that might bring
on a general engagement.

VOL. IV. X VWIILE

BOOK Xlr. WHI L, the 'armies continued in this inaction,

I .s peace began to be mentioned in each camp, and

Boh mo- both Henry and Philip discovered an inclination
narchs begin
lodrhte to liRen to any overture that tended to re-efta-
pea c. Iblifh it. The kingdoms of France and Spain

had been engaged during half a century in
almost continual wars, carried on at great ex-
pence and produtive of no considerable advan-
tage to either. Exhausted by extraordinary
and unceasing efforts, which far exceeded those
to which the nations of Europe had been ac-
customed before the rivalfhip between Charles V.
and Francis I. both nations longed so much for
an interval of repose, in order to recruit their
strength, that their sovereigns drew from them
with difficulty the supplies necessary for carry-
ing on hostilities. The private inclinations of
both. the Kings concurred with those of their
people. Philip was prompted to wish for peace
by his fond desire of returning to Spain. Ac-
customed from his infancy to the climate and
manners of that country, he was attached to it
with such extreme prediletion, that he was un-
happy in any other part of his dominions. But
as he could not quit the Low-Countries, either
with decency or safety, and venture on a voyage
to Spain, during the continuance of war, the
prospect of a pacification which would put ic

inr

ih hslpower to execute this favourite scheme, BooK Xlf.
was highly acceptable, Henry was no less de- 1558
firous of being delivered from the burden, and
avocations of war, that he might have leisure
to turn all his attention, and bend the whole
force of his government towards fupprefling the
opinions of the Reformers, which were spread-
ing with such rapidity in Paris and other great
towns of France, that they began to grow for-
midable to the eftablified church.

BESIDES there publick and avowed confdera- AnintrIgue

tions arising from the fate of the two hostile f Francr
kingdoms, or from the wishes of their refpec facila"it.ac
tive monarchs, there was a secret intrigue car-
ried on in the court of France, which contri-
buted as much as either of the other, to hasen
and to facilitate the negociation of a peace.
The Constable Montmorency, during his cap-
tivity, beheld the rapid success and growing fa-
vour of the Duke of Guise, with envious soli-
citude. Every advantage gained by his rival
he confidered as a fresh wound to his own repu-
tation, and he knew with what malevolent ad-
dress it would be improved to diminish his
credit with the King, and to augment that of
the Duke of Guise. There arts, he was afraid,
might, by degrees, work on the easy and ductilc
mind of Ilenry, so as to efface all remains of

X 2 his

Roqt XII, hisacient afftcion towards himself. Buthe could

S;not dilcover any remedy for this, unless he were

allowed to return home, that he might try
whether. by his presence he could defeat the
artifices of his enemies, and revive those swarm
and tender sentiment$ which had long attached
Henry to him, with a confidence so entire, as
reifembled rather the cordiality of private friend-
lhip, than the .cold and felfith connexion be-
tween a monarch. and. one of his courtiers.
While Montmorency was forming schemes and
wiflies for his return to France with much
anxiety of mind, but with little hope of success,
an unexpected incident prepared the way for
it.. The Cardiual of Lorrain, who had lhared
with his brother in the King's favour, and par-
ticipated of the power which that confered, did
n)ot bear prosperity with the fame discretion as
the Duke of Guise. Intoxicated with their
good fortune, lie forgot how much they had
been indebted for their preient elevation to their
connexions with the DutchefE of Valentinois,
and vainly ascribed all to ,the extraordinary
merit of their family. This led him not only
to negle& his benefaCtrefc, but to thwart her
schemes, and to talkwith a farcaftick liberty of
her character and person. That singular wo-
man, who, if we may believe contemporary
writers .retained the beauty and charms of

youth

yoeth at the age of threescore, and on whom BooK Xir;
it is certain that Henry still doated with all the 5s.
fondness of love; felt this injury with sensibility,
and set herself with eagerness to revenge it.
As there was no method of supplanting the
Princes of Lorrain so effecually as by a coalition
of interests with the Constable, Ihe proposed the
marriage of her grand-daughter with one of his
sons, as the bond of their future union, and
Montmorency readily gave his consent to the
match. Having thus cemented their alliance,
the dutchess employed all her influence with the
King, in order to confirm his inclinations to-
wards peace, and induce him to take the ftept
necessary for attaining it. She insinuated- that
any overture of that kind would come with great
propriety from the Constable, and if committed
to the condut of his prudence, could hardly
fail of success.

HENRY, long accustomed to devolve all as- Fenrycor.

fairs of importance on the Constable, and need- --itsho'n'le
ing only this encouragement to return to his an. Mo""'o'
cient habits, wrote to him immediately,with his
usual familiarity and affcdion, empowering him
at the fame time to take the first opportunity of
founding Philip and his ministers with regard to
peace. Montmorency made his applicaioti to
Philip by the molt proper channel. He opened

X 3 him-

obiK Xff. himself to the Duke' of Savoy, -who, notwith-

f. anding the height of preferment to which he
had been raised,' and the military glory which
he had acquired in the Spanish service, was
weary of remaining in exile, and languished to
return into his dominions. As there was no
profped of his recovering pofflefion of them by
force of arms, he confidered a definitive treaty
of peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain reftitu-
tion. Being no stranger to Philip's private
wishes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed
on him not only to discover a disposition on his
part towards accommodation, but to permit
Montmorency to return, on his parole, to France,
that he might confirm his own sovereign in his
pacifick sentiments. Henry received the Con-
itable with the most flattering marks of regard;
absence, instead of having abated or extinguifled
the Monarch's friendibip, seemed to have given
it new ardour. Montmorency, from the moment
of his appearance in court, assumed, if poss-
ble, a higher place than ever in his affe&tion, and
a more perfect ascendant over his mind. The
Cardinal of Lorrain and Duke of Guise pru-
dently gave way to a tide of favour too strong
for them to oppose, and confining themselves
to their proper departments, permitted, without
any truggle, the Constable and Dutchess of

Valentinois

Valentinois to dire& publick affairs at their plea- Boox XIr.
sure. They soon prevailed on the King to nomi.-
nate plenipotentiaries to treat of peace. Philip
did the fame. The abbey of Cercamp was
fixed on as the place of congress; and all mili-
tary operations were immediately terminated by
a suspension of arms.

WHILE these preliminary steps were taking Deathof

'ha~ eb V.

towards a treaty which restored tranquillity to
Europe, Charles V. whose ambition had so long
disturbed it, ended his days in the monastery
of St. Juftus. When Charles entered this re-
treat, he formed such a plan of life for himfief,
as would have suited the condition of a private
gentleman of a moderate fortune. His table
was neat but plain; his domefticks few; his
intercourse with them familiar; all the cumber-
some and ceremonious forms of attendance on
his person were entirely abolished, as deftrurcive
of that social ease and tranquillity which he
courted in order to tooth the remainder of his
days. As the mildness of the climate, together
with his deliverance from the burdens and cares
of government, procured him, at first, a cons-
derable remifflon from the acute paihs with
which he had been long tormented, he enjoyed,
perhaps, more complete fatisfaLtion in this
humble solitude, than all his grandeur had ever

X 4 yielded

BooR XI. yielded him. The, ambitious thobughts aid pro-

55B'' jces which had so l~gengrofed 'and disquieted

him, were quite effaced from his mind.; Far
from taking anypart in .the.political tranfaaions
of the Princes of Europe, he retrained his
curiosity even from any inquiry concerning
them; and he seemed to view the busy scene
which he had abandoned with all the contempt
and indifference arising from his thorough ex-
perience of its vanity, as well as from the plea-
sing refleclion of having disentangled himlelf
from its cares.

IH. amuse- O'THR amusements, and other obje&s now
ments in his
,etcat. occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the

plants in his garden with his own hands; romne-
times he rode out to the neighbouring wood
on a little horse, the only one that he kept,
attended by a single servant on foot. When
his infirmities confined him to his apaitment,
which often happened, and deprived him of
there more acive recreations, he either admitted
a few gentlemen who resided near the monaltery
to visit him, and entertained them familiarly at
his table or he employed himself in fludying
mechanical principles and in forming curious
works of mechanism, of which he had always
been remarkably fond, and to which his genius
was peculiarly turned. With this view he had
engaged Turriano, one of the most ingenious

artists

artlftsa6f that tag, to accompahy him in his' BioXIL
rretedt. He laboured bgether 'with him in ,55~
fi~ting models 6f the'nidt ufefol miachifies,
a..wel as' iA maki'ng-e 'ierimients' with' r'egarid
to theirrefpcftive powers, and it was not ejdorn
that die ideas 6f'the monarch amflfed or per-
feftedthfe inbentions of the artist. He relieved
his triid,- at intervals, with flighter and more
fantaftick orks of tnechanifm, in faOihoning
ptppets, which, by the structure of internal
springs, mimicked the geltures and aAions of
men, to the no small aftonilhment of the igno-
rant monks, who beholdiig. movements, which
they could not comprehend, sometimes dif-
trusted their own tenres, and sometimes sus-
peaed Charles and Turriano of being in com-
pa& with invisible powers. He was particularly
curious with regard to the conftrution of clocks
and watCes ' and having found, after repeated
trials, thdtAtbould not bring any two of them
togo exat&y;like, he refle&ted, it is said, with
a mixture 'of surprise as well as regret on his
own folly, in having bestowed 'so much time
and labour on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of fentimnnt
concerning the intricate and mysterious doctrines
of religion.

BUT in what manner soever Charles disposed i;s more
of the reft of his time, he constantly reserved a cUpEoi0.'.

considerable

BPaK XIl. coniderable portion of it for religious teercifes.

15s5- He regularly attended divine service in the

chapel of the. monaitery, every morning and
evening; he took great pleasure in reading
books of devotion, particularly the works of
St. Augustine and St. Bernard . and conversed
much with his confessor, and the prior of the
monastery on pious fubjedts, Thus did Charles
pass the first year of his retreat, in a manner
not unbecoming a man perfc&ly disengaged
from the affairs of the present life, and standing
on the confines of a future world, either in
innocent amusements, which soothed his pains,
and relieved a mind worn out with exceflive ap-
plication to business or in devout occupations,
which he deemed necessary in preparing for
another state.

rhe Caures BUT about fix months before his death, the
of his death#

gout, after a longer intermillion than usual, re-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His Chattered confitution had not vigour enough
remaining to withtand such a lhock. It en-
feebled his mind as much as his body, and from
this period we hardly discern any traces of that
found and masculine understanding, which dif-
tinguifhed Charles among his contemporaries.
An illiberal and timid fuperitition deprelfed his
spirit. He had no reliih for amufemcnts of any

kind.

kind. He endeavoured to conform, in his man- Boot XII.
ner of living, to all the rigour of monaftick au- , '
fterity. He desired no other society than that
of monks, and was almost continually employed
with them in chanting the hymns of the Missal.
As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself
the discipline in secret with such severity, that
the whip of cords which he employed as the
initrument of his punishment, was found after
his decease tinged with his blood. Nor was he
satisfied with these acs of mortification, which,
however revere, were not unexampled. The
timorous and distrustful solicitude which always
accompanies fuperflition, still continued to dif-
quiet him, and depreciating all that he had
done, prompted him to aim at something ex-
traordinary, at some new and singular a&t of
piety that would dilplay his zeal, and merit the
favour of heaven. The at on which he fixed
was as wild and uncommon, as any that super-
itition ever suggested to a weak and dilbrdered
fancy. He resolved to celebrate his own obfe-
quies before his death. He ordered his tomb
to be ereted in the chapel of the monastery.
His domefticks marched thither in funeral pro-
ceflion, with black tapers in their hands. He
himself followed in his (hroud. He was laid
in his coffin, with much solemnity. The ser-
vice for the dead was chanted, and Charles

joined

Boow XIT. joined in the prayers which were offered up for
""-^o the reft of his foul, mingling his tears with

those which his attendants Ihed, as if they had
been celebrating a real funeral. The ceremony
closed with sprinkling holy water on the coffin
in the usual form, and all the assistants retiring,
the doors of the chapel were shut. Then Charles
rose out of the coffin and withdrew to his a-
partment, full of those awful sentiments, which
such a singular solemnity was calculated to in-
spire. But either the fatiguing length of the
ceremony, or the impreflion which this image of
death left on his mind affected him so much, that
next day he was seized with a fever. His feeble
frame could not long resist its violence, and he
expired on the twenty-firft of September, after a
life of fifty-eight years, fix months, and twenty-
five days Y.

;s charac. As Charles was the first prince of the age
t'I in rank and dignity, the part which he ated,

whether we confider the greatness, the variety,
or the success of his undertakings, was the most
conspicuous. It is from an attentive obferva-
tion of his conduct, not from the exaggerated
praises of the Spanish historians, or the undif-

r Strada de Bello Brig. lib. i, p. I . Thuan. 7z3. San-

dov. ii. 6oo, &c. Miniana Contin. Marianx, vol. iv. 216.
V'ra y Zuniga vida de Carlos,;p. 1i.

tinguilhing

tinguilhing censure of the French, that a j.ust Boor XH.
idea of Charles's genius and abilities is to be lS $
colleaed. He pofflffed qualities so peculiar, as
firoogly mark his characer, and not only di,
ftinguiih him from the Princes who were his
contemporaries, but account for that superiority
over them which he so long maintained. In
forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as well
as by habit, cautious and confEderate. Born witl
talents which unfolded tbemfelves slowly, and
were late in attaining maturity, he was accuf.
tomed to ponder every fubjedt that demanded
his consideration with a careful and deliberate
attention. He bent the whole force of his mind
towards it, and dwelling upon it with a serious
application, undiverted by pleasure, and hardly
relaxed by any amusement, he revolved it, in
silence,. in his own breast. He then communi-
cated the matter to his ministers, and after hear-
ing their opinions, took his resolution with a de-
cifive firmness, which seldom follows such flow
and seemingly hesitating consultations. Of con-
lqcuence, Charles's measures, instead of refem-
bling the desultory and irregular sallies of Henry
VIHI. or Francis I. had the appearance of a con-
fiftent system, in which all the parts were arrang-
ed, the eftfets were soresen, and the accidents
were provided for. His promptitude in execu-
tion was no less remarkable than his patience ill

deliberation.

BooK XII. deliberation. He consulted with phlegm, but he

5'.'. acted with vigour; and did not direover greater

fagtcity in his choice of the meafutes which it
was proper to pursue, than fertility of genius in
finding out the means for rendering his pursuit
of them successful. Though he had naturally
so little of the martial turn, that during the
most ardent and bufling prriod of life he re-
mained in the cabinet inacive, yet when he
chose at length to appear at the head of his
armies, his mind was so formed for vigorous ex-
ertions in every direction, that he acquired such
knowledge in the art of war, and such talents
for command, as rendered him equal in repu-
tation and success to the most able generals of
the age. But Charles poflfefed, in the mofi
eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knowing men,
and of adapting their talents to the various de,
partments which he allotted to them. From the
death of Chievres to the end of his reign, he
employed no general in the field, no minister in
the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court, no
governor of a province, whose abilities were in-
adequate to the trust which he reposed in them.
Though destitute of that bewitching affability
of manners, which gained Francis the hearts of
all who approached his person, he was no ftrangcr
to the virtues which secure fidelity and attach-

ment.

snent. He placed unbounded confidence in his BOOK Xl.
generals ; he rewarded their services with muni- s.
ficence; he neither envied their fame, nor dif.
covered any jealousy of their power. Almost
all the generals who condu&ed his armies, may
be placed on a level with those illustrious per-
fonages who have attained the highest eminence
of military glory; and his advantages over his
rivals, are to be ascribed so manifestly to the fu-
perior abilities of the commanders whom he set
in opposition to them, that this might seem to
detract, in some degree, from his own merit, if
the talent of discovering and employing such
instruments were not the most undoubted proof
of a capacity for government.

THERE were, nevertheless, defeEts in his po0

litical charater which must considerably abate
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents.
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed
the chimerical project of eftabliihing an univer-
fal monarchy in Europe, it is certain that his
desire of being distinguished as a conqueror, in-
volved him in continual wars, which not only
cxhaufted and opprefled his fubjeAs, but left
him little leisure for giving attention to the inte.
rior police and improvement of his kingdoms,

the

BOOK XI. the great objets of every Prince who nakes the

·i558. happiness of his, tpclP the end of his govern-

ment., Charles, a; a very early period of life,
having added the Imperial crown tq the king-
doms of Spain, and to the hereditary dominions
of the houses of Austria and Burgundy, this
opened to him such a vas field of enterprize, and
engaged him in schemes so complicated as well
as arduous, that feeling his power to be unequal
to the execution of them, he had often recourse
to low artifices unbecoming his superior talents,
and sometimes ventured on such deviations from
integrity, as were dilhonourable in a great
Prince. His insidious and fraudulent policy
appeared more conspicuous, and was rendered
more odious, by a comparison with the open
and undesigning charactlr of his contemporaries
Francis I. and Henry VIII. This difference,
though occasioned chiefly by the diversity of
their tempers, must be ascribed, in some degree,
to such an opposition in the principles of their
political condu6t, as affords fbme excuse for
this defect in Charles's behaviour, though it
cannot serve as a justification of it. Francis
and Henry seldom ated but from the jmpulfe
of their pafions, and rulhed headlong towards
the object in view. Charles's measures being
the result of cool reflection, were disposed into a
regular system, and carried on upon a concerted
* 2 plan.

plan. Persons who, at in the former manned, BooKXtI,
naturally puffue the end in view, without affum- 5;5.
ingiany disguise, or displaying much address.
Such as hold the latter course, are apt, in form-
ing as well as in executing their designs, to em-
ploy such refinements as always lead to-artifice
in conduct, and often degenerate into. deceit.

TB. circumitances transmitted to us, with

respect to Charles's private deportment and cha-
racer, are fewer and less interesting, than might
have been expeced from the great number of
authors who have undertaken to write an ac-
count of his life, These are not the object of
this history, which aims more at representing
the great tranfadions of the reign of Charles V.
than at delineating his private virtues or
defe&ts.

THE plenipotentaries of France$ Spain, and Conference

England, continued their conferences at Cer-p'., t
camp; and though each of themn with the
usual art of negociators, made at first very high
demands in the name of their refpeative courts,
yet as they were all equally desirous of peace,
they would have consented reciprocally to such
abatements and reftri&ions of their claims, as
must have removed every obstacle to an accom-
nodation, The death of Charles V. was a new

VOL. IV. Y motive

BOOK Xir. motive with Philip to haften the conclusion of

1sg5. a treaty, as it increased his impatience for re-

turning into Spain, where there was now no per-
son greater or more illustrious than himself. But,
in spite of the concurring wilhes of all the par-
ties interested, an event happened which occa-
sioned an. unavoidable delay in their negocia-
tions. About a month after the opening of the
conferences at Cercamp, Mary of England ended

Nov. 17. her lhort and inglorious reign, and Elizabeth
ay (o.f her sifter was immediately proclaimed Queen by
England, the Engliflh with universal joy. As the powers

of the English plenipotentiaries expired on the
death of their mistress, they could not proceed
until they received a commission and infiruc-
tions from their new sovereign.

Henry.ln. [-IENRY and Philip beheld Elizabeth's eleva.
Philip court .
h.,,iabtn tlon to the throne with equal solicitude. As

hers equaf-
hibriccf during Mary's jealous administration, under the

most difficult circurmftances, and in a situation
extremely delicate, that Princess had condu6ted
herself with prudence and address far exceeding
her years, they had conceived an high idea of
her abilities, and already formed expetations of
a reign very different from that of her sifter.
Equally sensible of the importance of gaining
her favour, both monarchs set themselves with
emulation to court it, and employed every art

in

in order to insinuate themselves into her con- BoocXTr.
fidence. Each of them had Something merito- $58.
rious, with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his
own behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat
in his dominions, if the dread of her sifter's
violence ihould force her to fly for safety out
of England. Philip, by his powerful intercef-
sion, had prevented Mary from proceeding to
the molt fatal extremities against her. Each of
them endeavoured now, to avail himself of the
circumstances in his favour. Henry wrote to
Elizabeth soon after her acceflion, with the
warmest exprefifons of regard and friendffiip.
He represented the war which had unhappily
been kindled between their kingdoms, not as a
national quarrel, but as the effe& of Mary's
blind partiality to her husband and fond com-
pliance with all his wiihes. He entreated her
to disengage herself from an alliance which had
proved so unfortunate to England, and to con-
sent to a separate peace with him, without min-
gling her interests with those of Spain, from
which they ought now to be altogether dif-
joined. Philip, on the other hand, unwilling
to lose his connexion with England, the im-
portance of which, during a rupture with France,
he had so recently experienced, not only vied
with Henry in declarations of esteem for Eliza-
beth, and in profeflions of his resolution to cul-

Y 2 tivatc

BooK XII. tivate the ftrideft amity with her, but, in order

8i55 to confirm and perpetuate their union, he

offered himself to her in marriage, and under-
took to procure a dispensation from the Pope
to that effect.

Flizablthi's ELIZABETH weighed the proposals of the two
ilnbsca- Monarchs attentively, and with that provident
c-rning hr discernment of her true interest which was con-
condud.

fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave
some encouragement to Henry's overtdre of a
separate negociation, because it opened a chan.
nel of correspondence with France, which she
might find to be of great advantage, if Philip
should not discover sufficient zeal and solicitude
for securing to her, proper terms in the joint
treaty. But the ventured on this ftep with the
most cautious reserve, that she might not alarm
Philip's suspicious temper, and lose an ally in at-
tempting to gain an enemy =. Henry himself,
by an unpardonable at of indiscretion, pre-
vented her from carrying her intercourse with
him to such a length as might have offended or
alienated Philip. At the very time when he
was courting Elizabeth's friendship with the
greatest assiduity, he yielded with an incon-
liderate facility to the solicitations of the Princes
of Lorrain, and allowed his daughter-in-law

z Sorbes, i. p. 4.

the

the Queen of Scots, to assume the title and BOOKXIr.
arms of Queen of England. This ill-timed -
pretension, the source of many calamities to the
unfortunate Queen of Scots, extinguished at
once all the confidence that might have grown
between Henry and Elizabeth, and left in its
place distrust, resentment, and antipathy. Eli-
zabeth found that she must unite her interests
closely with Philip's, and expect peace only
from negociations carried on in conjunction
with him'.

As she had granted a commiflion, imme- siiepmp.,v

diately after her acceflion, to the fame pleni- r,,ir drsto
potentiaries whom her filter had employed, fle "I '
now inftruaed them to aft in every point in
concert with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and
to take no ftep until they had previously con-
fulted with them b. But though she deemed it
prudent to assume this appearance of confidence
in the Spanish Monarch, she knew precisely
how far to carry it; and discovered no inclina-
tion to accept of that extraordinary propolal of
marriage which Philip had made to her. The
Engliih had exprefled so openly their detestation
of her sifter's choice of him, that it would have
been highly imprudent to have exasperated

' Strype's Annals of the Reformation, i. Il. Carte's

Hilt. of Eng. vol. iii. p. 375. h Sorbes' full View, i.
*37. 4°.

Y j che:

BooK Xl. them by renewing that odious alliance. She

,g5s was too well acquainted with Philip's harfl im-

perious temper, to think of him for a husband.
Nor could ihe admit a dispensation from the
Pope to be sufficient to authorize her marrying
him, without condemning her father's divorce
from Catherine of Arragon, and acknowledging
of consequence that her mother's marriage was
null, and her own birth illegitimate. But though
she determined not to yield to Philip's addresses,
the situation of her affairs rendered it dangerous
to rejec them; he returned her answer, there-
fore, in terms which were evasive, but so tem-
pered with refpe&, that though they gave him
no reason to be secure of success, they did not
altogether extinguilh his hopes.

Wegori». By this artifice, as well as by the prudence
ao', at with which she concealed her sentiments and
Combreli. intentions concerning religion, for some time

after her acceflion, she so far gained upon Philip,
that he warmly espoused her interest in the

, óg. conferences which were renewed at Cercamp,
Fcbuary6. and afterwards removed to Cateca-Cambrefis.

A definitive treaty, which was to adjust the
claims and pretensions of so many Princes, re-
quired the examination of such a variety of in-
tricate points, and led to such infinite and
minute details, as drew out the negociations to

a great

a great length. But the constable Montmo.BooKX!I.
rency exerted himself with such indefatigable 559
zeal and industry, repairing alternately to the
courts of Paris and Brussels, in order to obviate
or remove every difficulty, that all points in
dispute were adjusted at length in such a man-
ner, as to give entire fatisfacion in every par-
ticular to Henry and Philip; and the last hand
was ready to be put to the treaty between them.

THE claims of England remained as the only Diffculi;,

with iceart
obstacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the tothcclJms

of England.

restitution of Calais, in the most peremptory
tone, as an essential condition of her consenting
to peace; Henry refused to give up that im-
portant conquest; and both seemed to have
taken their resolution with unalterable firmness.
Philip warmly supported Elizabeth's preten-
sions to Calais, not merely from a principle of
equity towards the Englilh nation, that he
might appear to have contributed to their reco-
vering what they had loft by espousing his
cause; nor solely with a view of soothing Eliza-
beth by this manifeflation of zeal for her in-
terest; but in order to render France less formi-
dable, by securing to her ancient enemy this
easy access into the heart of the kingdom. The
earnestness, however, with which he fcconded
the arguments of the English plenipotentiaries,

Y 4 loon

Bpor XII. soon began to relax. During the course of the

1$59q negociation, Elizabeth, who now felt herself

firmly feated on her throne, began to take such
open and vigorous measures not only for over-
turning all that her filler had done in favour
ps popery, but for eftabliffing the protestant
church on a firm foundation, as convinced
Philip that his hopes of an union with her had
been from the beginning vain, and were now
desperate. From that period, his interpositions
in her favour became more cold and formal,
flowing merely from regard to decorum, or
from the consideration of remote political in-
terests. Elizabeth, having reason to expe&t such
an alteration in his conduct, quickly perceived
it. But as nothing would have been of greater
detriment to her people, or more inconliftent
with her Ichemes of domeffick administration,
than the continuance of war, she saw the
pecelfity of submitting to such conditions as
the situation of her affairs imposed, and
that she must reckon upon being deferred by
an ally who was now united to her by a very
feeble tie, if she did not speedily reduce her
demands to what was moderate and attainable,
She accordingly gave new inftruCions to her
ambassadors; and Philip's plenipotentiaries at-
ing as mediators between the French and them '

Sorbes, i. 59.

9R

an expedient was fallen upon, which, in some B ocXI.
degree, justified Elizabeth's departing from the L'
rigour of her first demand with regard to Calais.
All lefcr articles were fettled without much
discussion or delay. Philip, that he might not
appear to have abandoned the Englilh, insisted
that the treaty between Henry and Elizabeth
should be concluded in form, before that be-
tween the French monarch and him. The one
was signed on the second day of April, the
other on the day following.

THE treaty of peace between France and Aticle

England contained no articles of real import- p.."n1b
ance, but that which refpeeted Calais. It was France an
stipulated, That the King of France flould retain
pofeffion of that town, with all its dependen-
cies, during eight years; That, at the expiration
of that term, he should restore it to England;
That in cafe of non-performance, he lhould
forfeit five hundred thousand crowns, for the
payment of which fum, seven or eight wealthy
merchants, who were not his subje&s, should
grant security; That five perlbns of ditinóRion
ihould be given as hostages until that security
were provided ; That, although the forfeit of
five hundred thousand crowns should be paid,
the right of England to Calais mhould still remain
entire, in the lame manner as if the term of

2 eight

BooKXII. eight years were expired; That the King and

SS9. Queen of Scotland should be included in the

treaty; That if they, or the French King, should
violate the peace by any hostile action, Henry
lhould be obliged instantly to restore Calais;
That, on the other hand, if any breach of the
treaty proceeded from Elizabeth, then Henry
and the King and Queen of Scots were absolved
from all the engagements which they had come
under by this treaty.

Thev icwsof NOTWITHSTANDING the studied attention with
both parties
With ,rfe which so many precautions were taken, it is

tlef' evident that Henry did not intend the restitution

of Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth ex-
peted it. It was hardly possible that {he could
maintain, during the course of eight years, such
perfect concord both with France and Scotland,
as not to afford Henry some pretext for alleg-
ing that she had violated the treaty. But even
if that term {hould elapse without any ground
for complaint, Henry might then chute to pay
the fum flipulated, and Elizabeth had no me-
thod of asserting her right but by force of arms.
However, by throwing the articles in the treaty
with regard to Calais into this form, Elizabeth
satisfied her fubjefts of every denomination;
she gave men of discernment a striking proof
of her addrcfs, in palliating what The could not

prevent;

prevent; and amused the multitude, to whom BOOK XII.
the ceflion of such an important place would
have appeared altogether infamous, with the
profpea of recovering in a short time that fa-
vourite poffelfion.

THE expedient which Montmorency em- Anexpedi.

ployed, in order to facilitate the conclusion of prntJc'
peace between France and Spain, was the nego- pe, nbe-
ciating two treaties of marriage, one between France an

Spain.

Elizabeth, Henry's eldest daughter, and Philip,
who supplanted his son, the unfortunate Don
Carlos, to whom that Princess had been pro-
mifed in the former conferences at Cercamp;
the other between Margaret, Henry's only sifter,
and the duke of Savoy. For feeble as the ties
of blood often are among Princes, or how little
soever they may regard them when pulhed on
to a6t by motives of ambition, they assume on
other occaflons the appearance of being so far
influenced by ,these domeftick affections, as to
employ them to justify measures and conceiflons
which they find to be necessary, but know to
be impolitick or dishonourable. Such was the
use Henry made of the two marriages to which
he gave his consent. Having secured an ho-
nourable establishment for his sifter and his
daughter, he, in consideration of there, granted
terms both to Philip and the duke of Savoy,

of

BooKiXII. of which he would not, on any other account,

...-. have ventured to approve.

The terms THE principal articles in the treaty between
,fpacfics France and Spain were, That a sincere and
*ion.

perpetual amity should be established between
the two crowns and their refpecive allies; That
the two monarchs should labour in concert to
procure the convocation of a general council, in
order to check the progress of heresy, and re-
Itore unity and concord to the Christian church;
That all conquests made by either party, on this
fide of the Alps, since the commencement of
the war in one thousand five hundred and fifty-
one, ihould be mutually restored; That the
dutchy of Savoy, the principality of Piedmont,
the country of Brefle, and all the other terri-
tories formerly subjef to the dukes of Savoy,
Thould be restored to Emanuel Philibert, imme-
diately after the celebration of his marriage
with Margaret of France, the towns of Turin,
Quiers, Pignerol, Chivaz, and Villanova ex-
cepted, of which Henry should keep poTieffion
until his claims on that Prince, in right of his
grandmother, ihould be heard and decided in
course of law; That as long as Henry retained
these places in his hands, Philip should be at
liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of Ver-
celli and Asti; That the French King fIould

immediately

immediately evacuate all the places which he BooKXlI.
held in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and renounce
all future pretensions to them; that he should
restore the marquisate of Monferrat to the duke
of Mantua; that he ihould receive the Genoese
into favour, and give up to them the towns
which he had conquered in the island of Corsica;
that none of the Princes or fiates, to whom
these ceflions were made, should call their sub-
jecs to account for any part of their conduct
while under the dominion of their enemies, but
ihould bury all past tranfa&ions in oblivion.
The Pope, the Emperor, the Kings of Den-
mark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the King and
Queen of Scots, and almost every Prince and
itate in Christendom, were comprehended in
this pacification as the allies either of Henry or
of Philipd.

THUS, by this famous treaty, peace was re- Which re.

eltablifhed in Europe. All the causes of dif- tralqlity
cord which had so long embroiled the powerful in europe.
monarchs of France and Spain, which had
transmitted hereditary quarrels and wars from
Charles to Philip, and from Francis to Henry,
seemed to be wholly removed, or finally ter-
minated. The French alone complained of the
unequal conditions of a treaty, into which an

a Recucil des Traitez, tom. ii, 187.

ambitious

BoOixlr. ambitious minister, in order to recover his

s-' liberty, and an artful mistress, that she might

gratify her resentment, had seduced their too
easy monarch. They exclaimed loudly againit
the folly of giving up to the enemies of France,
an hundred and eighty-nine fortified places, in
the Low-Countries or in Italy, in return for the
three insignificant towns of St. Quintin, Ham,
and Catelet. They confidered it as an indelible
slain upon the glory of the nation, to renounce
in one day territories so extensive, and so ca-
pable of being defended, that the enemy could
not have hoped to wrest them out of their hands,
after many years of victory and success.

The peace BUT Henry, without regarding the sentiments
between
Frnce and of his people, or being moved by the remon-
fi""n " ftrances of his council, ratified the treaty, and

executed with great fidelity whatever he had
stipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy
repaired with a numerous retinue to Paris, in
order to celebrate his marriage with Henry's
filler. The duke of Alva was sent to the fame
capital, at the head of a splendid embafly, to
cfpoufe Elizabeth in name of his master. They
were received with extraordinary magnificence

Dath of by the French court. Amidst the rejoicings
Jly to. and festivities on that occasion, Henry's days

were cut short by a singular and tragical acci-

dent.

dent. His son, Francis II. a Prince under age, BoOKXII.
of a weak constitution, and of a mind still more 9
feeble, succeeded him. Soon after, Paul ended A"gua ,s.
his violent and imperious Pontificate, at en-
mity with all the world, and disgusted even
with his own nephews. They, persecuted by
Philip, and deserted by the succeeding Pope,
whom they had raised by their influence to the
Papal throne, were condemned to the punilh-
ment which their crimes and ambition had me-
rited, and their death was as infamous as their
lives had been criminal. Thus most of the
personages, who had long sustained the prin-
cipal characters on the great theatre of Europe,
disappeared about the fame time. A more
known period of history opens at this ara;
other actors enter upon the stage, with different
views as well as different passions; new contests
arose, and new schemes of ambition occupied
and disquieted mankind.

UPON reviewing the tranfaftions of any a&ive A general

period in the history of civilized nations, the th'evwol,
changes which are accomplished appear wonder- period.
fully disproportioned to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquests are never very exten-
five or rapid, but among nations whose progress
in improvement is extremely unequal. When
Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant

people,

,OOK XlI. people, of simple manners, and formed to wat
''' - by admirable military institutions, invaded a state

funk in luxury, and enervated by excessive re-
finement; when Genchizcan and Tamerlane,
with their armies of hardy barbarians, poured
in upon nations, enfeebled by the climate in
which they lived, or by the arts and commerce
which they cultivated, there conquerors, like a
torrent, swept every thing before them, fubdu-
ing kingdoms and provinces in as Ihort a space
of time as was requisite to march through them.
But when nations are in a state similar to each
other, and keep equal pace in their advances to-
wards refinement, they are not exposed to the
calamity of sudden conquests. Their acquifi-
tions of knowledge, their progress in the art of
war, their political sagacity and address, are
nearly equal. The fate of states in this situation,
depends not on a single battle. Their internal
resources are many and various. Nor are they
themselves alone interested in their own safety,
or a&ive in their own defence. Other states in-
terpofe, and balance any temporary advantage
which either party may have acquired. After
the fiercest and most lengthened contest, all the
rival nations are exhausted, none are conquered.
At length a peace is concluded, which re-in-
states each in poflelion of almost the fame power
and the fame territories.

SucIh

SUCH was the state of Europe during the reign BooK XlM

of Charles V. No Prince was so much superior Thenation
to the reft in power, as to render his efforts irre- of^,E",oPti
fiftible, and his conquests easy. No nation had flte dxuring
made progress in improvement so far beyond teenth cetl
its neighbours, as to have acquired a very mani-
fest pre-eminence. Each state derived some ad-
vantage, or was fubje& to some inconvenience,
from its situation or its climate; each was dif-
tinguifhed by something peculiar in the genius
of its people, or the constitution of its govern-
ment. But the advantages possessed by one
itate, were counterbalanced by circumstances
favourable to others; and this prevented any
from attaining such superiority as might have
been fatal to all. The nations of Europe in
that age, as in the present, were like one great
family; there were some features common to
all, which fixed a resemblance; there were cer-
tain peculiarities conspicuous in each, which
marked a diftintion. But there was not among
them that wide diversity of character and of ge-
nius which, in almost every period of history,
hath exalted the Europeans above the inhabi-
tants of the other quarters of the globe, and
seems to have destined the one to rule, and the
other to obey.

BUT though the near resemblance and equa-
lity in improvement among the different nations

VOL. IV. 2 of

Bcoo XrI. of Europe, prevented the reign of Charles V.
^Ar-k- from being distinguished by such sudden and

leh^age extensive conquests as occur in some other pe-
ofEurope, riods of history, yet, during the course of his
resin of administration, all the considerable states in Eu-
Lharlk V.

rope suffered a remarkable change in their poli-
tical situation, and felt the influence of events,
which have not hitherto spent their force, but
still continue to operate in a greater or in a less
degree. It was during his reign, and in confe-
quence of the perpetual efforts to which his en-
terprizing ambition routed him, that the differ-
ent kingdoms of Europe acquired internal vi-
gour; that they discerned the resources of which
they were poffefled; that they came both to feel
their own flrength, and to know how to render
it formidable to others. It was during his reign,
too, that the different kingdoms of Europe, for-
merly tingle and disjoined, became so thoroughly
acquainted, and so intimately connected with
each other, as to form one great political system,
in which each took a station, wherein it has re-
mained since that time with less variation than
could have been expected after the events of two
active centuries.

The pro- T'IE progress, however, and acquisitions of
»,(<. of tl the houi: of Aultria, were not only greater than
Auliii. thoie of any other power, but more discernible

3 and

and conspicuous. I have already enumerated Poi XIL.
the vast territories which descended to Charles
from his Austrian, Burgundian, and Spanish
ancestors *. To these he himself added the Im-
perial dignity; and, as if all this had been too
little, the bounds of the habitable globe teemed
to be extended, and a new world was fubjeEted
to his command. Upon his refigntion, the
Burgundian provinces, and the Spanish king-
doms with their dependencies, both in the old
and new worlds, devolved to Philip. But Charles
tranfinitted his dominions to his son, in a con-
dition very different from that in which he had
received them. They were augmented by the
acceflion of new provinces; they were habituated
to obey an administration which was no less vi-
gorous than steady; they were accustomed to
expensive and persevering efforts, which, though
necessary in the contests between civilized na-
tions, had been little known in IEurope before
the sixteenth century. The provinces of Fries-
land, Utrecht, and Overyffel, which he acquired
by purchase from their former proprietors, and.
the dutchy of Gueldres, of which he made him-
self maiter, partly by force of arms, partly
by the arts of negociation, were additions of
great value to his Burgundian dominions. Ser-
dinand and Isabella had tranfnitted to him all

* Vol. ii. p. .

Z 2 the

BOOK XII. the provinces of Spain, from the bottom of the

Pyrenees to the frontiers of Portugal; but as he
maintained a perpetual peace with that king-
dom, amidst the various efforts of his enterpriz-
ing ambition, he made no acquisition of territory
in that quarter.

Prtic. lariy CHA RES had gained, however, a vat accession
n'"'p'" of power in this part of his dominions. By his

success in the war with the commons of Caitile,
he exalted the regal prerogative upon the ruins
of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the
Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it
to be continued, he reduced its authority andju-
rifdiaion to nothing, and modelled it in such a
manner, that it became rather a junto of the ser-
vants of the crown, than an assembly of the repre-
lentatives of the people. One member of the
conffitution being thus lopped off, it was impof-
fible but that the other must feel the stroke, and
susser by it. The fupprelflon of the popular power
rendered the ariftocratical less formidable. The
grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of the
age, or allured by the honours which they enjoy-
ed in tcourt, exhausted their fortunes in military
service, or in attending on the person of their
Prince. They did not dread, perhaps did not
observe, the dangerous progress of the royal au-

thority,

thority, which leaving them the vain diftination BooK X'r.
of being covered in presence of their fovcreign,
Dtripped them, by degrees, of that real power
which they possessed while they formed one body,
and acted in concert with the people. Charles's

luccels in abolishing the privileges of the com-
mons, and in breaking the power of the nobles
of Castile, encouraged Philip to invade the liber-
ties of Arragon, which were still more extensive.
The Castilians, accustomed to subjection them-
selves, affiltted in imposing the yoke on their
more happy and independent neighbours. The
will of the Ibvereign became the supreme law
in all the kingdoms of Spain; and princes who
were not checked in forming their plans by the
jealousy of the people, nor controled in exe-
cuting them by the power of the nobles, could
both aim at great objects, and call forth the
whole strength of the monarchy in order to
attain them.

As Charles, by extending the regal preroga- A;,, in

tive, rendered the monarchs of Spain masters at o'r:,o'"
home, he added new dignity and power to their
crown by his foreign acquisitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet poffeslion of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud,
and held with difficulty. lie united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the molt fertile and populous

Z 3 Italian

BOCKXII. Italian provinces to the Spanish crown; and

..~"v left his successors, even without taking their

other territories into the account, the moll con-
fiderable Princes in Italy, which had been long
the theatre of contention to the great powers of
Europe, and in which they had struggled with
emulation to obtain the superiority. When the
French, in conformity to the treaty of Cateau-
Cambrefis, withdrew their forces out of Italy,
and finally relinquished all their schemes of
conquest on that fide of the Alps, the Spanilh
dominions then roTe in importance, and enabled
their Kings, as long as the monarchy retained
any degree of vigour, to preserve the chief sway
in all the tranfastions of that country. But
whatever accession either of interior authority or
of foreign dominion Charles gained for the mo-
narchs of Spain in Europe, it was inconsiderable
when compared with his acquisitions in the new
world. He added, there, not provinces, but
empires to his crown. He conquered territories
of such immense extent; he discovered such in-
cxhauftible veins of wealth, and opened such
boundless prospects of every kind, as must have
roused his successor, and have called him forth
to aftion, though his ambition had been much
lels ardent than Philip's, and must have rendered
him not only enterprizing but formidable.

WHILE

WHILE the elder branch of the Austrian fa- BooKXII.

mily rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the pr.
younger, of which Ferdinand was the head, grew the Cen,,ln
to be considerable in Germany. The ancient tlc houfc
hereditary dominions of the house of Austria in
Germany, united to the kingdoms of Hungary
and Bohemia, which Ferdinand had acquired by
marriage, formed a refpeatable power; and
when the Imperial dignity was added to thef,
Ferdinand pofeffed territories more extenfivc
than had belonged to any Prince, Charles V.
excepted, who had been at the head of the Em-
pire during several ages. Fortunately for Eu-
rope, the difguit whichPhilip conceived on ac-
count of Ferdinand's refuting to relinquiih the
Imperial crown in his favour, not only pre-
vented for tome time the separate members of
the house of Austria from acting in concert, but
occasioned a visible alienation and rivalnfip. By
degrees, however, regard to the intereit of their
family extinguished this impolitical animnoity.
The confidence which was natural returned ;
the aggrandizing of the house of Aultria be-
came the common object of all their schemes;
they gave and received afliftance alternately t(. -
wards the execution of them ; and each derivec
consideration and importance from the other's
success. A family so great and so aspiring, be-
came the general object of jealousy and terror.

Z 4 All

BooK XII. All the power, as well as policy, of Europe were

exerted during a century, in order to check and
humble it. Nothing can give a more striking
idea of the ascendant which it had acquired,
and of the terror which it had inspired, than that
after its vigour was spent with extraordinary
exertions of its strength, after Spain was become
only the shadow of a great name, and its mo-
narchs were funk into debility and dotage, the
house of Austria still continued to be formidable,
The nations of Europe had so often felt its fu-
perior power, and had been so confantly em-
ployed in guarding against it, that the dread of
it became a kind of political habit, the influence
of which remained when the causes, which had
formed it, ceased to exist.

Aquifitions WHILE the house of Austria went on with
if hen' I such success in enlarging its dominions, France
uring" th made no considerable acquisition of new terri-
Chlres V. tory. All its schemes of conquest in Italy had

proved abortive; it had hitherto obtained no
establishment of confcquence in the new world;
and after the continued and vigorous efforts of
four successive reigns, the confines of the king-
-Jom were much the fame as Louis XI. had left
them. But though France made not fich large
strides towards dominion as the house of Aultria,
it continued to advance by lteps which were

more

more secure, because they were gradual and less BooK Xrr,
observed. The conquest of Calais put it out of -
the power of the English to ihvade France but
at their utmost peril, and delivered the French
from the dread of their ancient enemies, who,
previous to that event, could at any time pene-
trate into the kingdom by that avenue, and
thereby retard or defeat the execution of their
best concerted enterprizes against any foreign
power. The important acquisition of Metz,
covered that part of their frontier which for-
merly was most feeble, and lay most exposed to
insult. France, from the time of its obtaining
there additional securities against external inva-
sion, must be deemed the most powerful king-
dom in Europe, and is more fortunately situ-
ated than any on the Continent either for con-
quest or defence. From the confines of Artois
to the bottom of the Pyrenees, and from the
Britilh channel to the frontiers of Savoy and
the coast of the Mediterranean, its territories
lay compact and unmingled with those of any
other power. Several of the confidcrable pro-
vinces, which had contracted a spirit of inde-
pendence by their having been long fubjct to
the great vassals of tIe crown, who were often
at variance or at war with their master, were
now accustomed to recognize and to obey one
sovereign. As they became members of the

l1lme

BOOK XI. fame monarchy, they assumed the sentiments of
'LT~' that body into which they were incorporated,

and co-operated with zeal towards promoting
its interest and honour. The power and influ-
ence wrested from the nobles were seized by the
crown. The people were not admitted to share
in these spoils; they gained no new privilege;
they acquired no additional weight in the legis-
lature. It was not for the fake of the people,
but in order to extend their own prerogative,
that the monarchs of France had laboured to
humble their great vassals. Satisfied with having
brought them under entire fubjeaion to the
crown, they discovered no solicitude to free the
people from their ancient dependence on the
nobles of whom they held.

Enables A MONARCH, at the head of a kingdom thus
them to as-
tulme, a united at home and secure from abroad, was
bion among entitled to form great designs, because he felt
the powers himself in a condition to execute them. The
otl urope.

foreign wars which had continued with little
interruption from the acceflion of Charles VIII.
had not only cheriflfed and augmented the mar-
tial genius of the nation, but by inuring the
troops during the course of long service to the
fatigues of war, and accustoming them to obe-
dience, had added the force of discipline to
their natural ardour. A gallant and active body

of

of nobles, who confidered themselves as ide and Boos X l
uifrlt's, unless when they were in the field; who
were hardly acquainted with any pastime or
excrcife but what was military; and who knew
no road to power, or fame, or wealth, but war,
would not have suffered their sovereign ti re-
main long in ination. The people, little ac-
quainted with the arts of peace, ande always
ready to take arms at the command of their
superiors, were accustomed by the vast expence
of long wars, carried on in distant countries,
to bear impositions, which, however inconfi-
derable they may seem ifeftimated by the exor-
bitant rate of modern exadions, appear im-
mense when compared with the fums levied in
France, or in any other country of Europe,
previous to the reign of Louis XI. As all the
members of which the state was composed were
thus impatient for action, and capable of great
efforts, the schemes and operations of France
must have been no less formidable to Europe
than those of Spain. T'he liperior advantages
of its situation, the contiguity and comp'.ltncts
of its territories, together with the peculiar
state of its political contlitution at that junntuie,
must have rendered its cntcrprizes still more
alarming and more decisive. The King pof-
fefled such a degree of power as gave him the
entire command of his fubjetls; the people

wvcre

BBoKXII. were strangers to those occupations and habits

C'-*' of life which render men averse to war, or unfit

for it; and the nobles, though reduced to the
subordination necessary in a regular govern-
ment, still retained the high undaunted spirit
which was the effet of their ancient independ-
ence. The vigour of the Feudal times re-
mained, their anarchy was at an end; and the
Kings of France could avail themselves of the
martial ardour which that singular institution
had kindled or kept alive, without being ex-
posed to any of the dangers or inconveniencies
which are inseparable from it when in entire
force.

circumfan- A KINGDOM in such a state is, perhaps, capa-
c S which
pr-vrn- ,i ble of greater military efforts than at any other
the imnme. *
dlate eca period in its progress. But how formidable
ofWea'r soever or fatal to the other nations of Europe

the power of such a monarchy might have been,
the civil wars which broke out in France saved
them at that jun&ure from feeling its effcdts.
These wars, of which religion was the pretext
and ambition the cause, wherein great abilities
were displayed by the leaders of the different
faCtions, and little conduct or firmness were
manifefled by the crown under a fuccefflon of
weak Princes, kept France occupied and em-
broiled for half a century. During there com-

motions

motions the internal strength of the kingdom BooiXIr.
was much wafted, and such a spirit of anarchy - '
was spread among the nobles, to whom rebellion
was familiar, and the restraint of laws unknown,
that a considerable interval became requisite
not only for recruiting the internal vigour of
the nation, but for re-eltablilhing the authority
of the Prince; so that it was long before France
could turn her whole attention towards foreign
tranfaaions, or aat with her proper force in
foreign wars. It was long before she rose to
that ascendant in Europe which she has main-
tained since the administration of Cardinal Rich-
lieu, and which the situation as well as extent
of the kingdom, the nature of her government,
together with the character of her people, en-
title her to maintain.

WHILE the kingdoms on the continent grew progrer,of

into power and consequence, England likewise E hoad,
made considerable progress towards regular go- to" ti""l'

-*- "-·-- - 0 riot |(tc.

vernment and interior strength. Henry VIII.
probably without intention, and certainly with-
out any consistent plan, of which his nature
was incapable, pursued the scheme of deprtf-
sing the nobility, which the policy of his father
Henry VII. had begun. The pride and caprice
of his temper led him to employ chiefly new
men in the administration of affairs, because he

fol ml,

Bo X I. found them most obsequious, or lead fcrupu-

C'" ious; and he not only conferred on them such

plenitude of power, but exalted them to such
pre-eminence in dignity, as mortified and de-
graded the ancient nobility. By the alienation
or sale of the church lands, which were diffi-
pated with a profusion not inferior to the rapa-
cioufnefs with which they had been feiz d, as
well as by the privilege granted to the ancient
landholders of felling their estates, or disposing
of them by will, an immense property, formerly
locked up, was brought into circulation. This
put the spirit of industry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree
of vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition.
A sudden and excessive flow of wealth from the
Weft Indies proved fatal to industry in Spain;
a moderate accefllon in England to the fum in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakened
the ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to
useful enterprize. In France, what the nobles
loft, the crown gained. In England, the com-
mons were gainers as well as the King. Power
and influence accompanied of courfc the pro-
perty which they acquired. They rose to con-
fideration among their fellow-fubjects; they
began to feel their own importance ; and ex-
tending their influence in the legislative body

gradually,

gradually, and often when neither they them- BooKXIr.
selves nor others foresaw all the effee of their ' ~
claims and pretensions, they at lafft attained that
high authority, to which the British constitution
is indebted for the existence, and must owe the
preservation of its liberty. At the fame time
that the English constitution advanced towards
perfection, several circumstances brought on a
change in the ancient system with refpet to
foreign powers, and introduced another more
beneficial to the nation. As soon as Henry
disclaimed the supremacy of the Papal See, and
broke off all connexion with the Papal court,
considerable fums were saved to the nation, of
which it had been annually drained, by remit-
tances to Rome for dispensations and indul-
gences, by the expence of pilgrimages into
foreign countries *, or by payment of annates,
first fruits, and a thousand other taxes which
that artful and rapacious court levied on the
credulity of mankind. The exercise of a jurif-
diction different from the civil power, and

The loss which the nation fultained by nlolt of thcfe

articles is obvious, and mull have been great. Even that
by pilgrimages was not inconliderablc. in the year .14 8,
licence was obtained by no fewer than 9)6 ).prfrons to visit
the shrine of St. James of Compoflilla in Spain. Ryncr,
vol. x.p. . In 1434, the number of pilgrims to the
fame place was 240o, Ibid. p. . In 1445, they were.
2100, vol. xi. p.

clailninlg

BooK XII. claiming not only to be independent but super
,--v. nrior to it, a wild solecism in government, apt

not only to perplex and disquiet weak minds,
but tending directly to disturb society, was
finally abolished. Government became more
simple as well as more refpedable, when no
rank or character exempted any person from
being amenable to the fame courts, from being
tried by the fame judges, and from being ac'
quitted or condemned by the fame laws.

Wth re- By the loss of Calais the English were ex-
spIt" the cluded from the continent. All schemes for
astairs o the
Continrlt. invading France became of course as chimerical

as they had formerly been pernicious. The
views of the English were confined, firit by
neceflity, and afterwards from choice, within
their own ifand. That rage for conquest which
had possessed the nation during many centuries,
and wafted its itrength in perpetual and fruit-
less wars, ceased at length. Those aEtive spirits
which had known and followed no profeflion
but war, fought for occupation in the arts of
peace, and their country benefited as much by
the one as it had fufihred by the other. The
nation, exhausted by frequent expeditions to
the continent, recruited, and acquired new
strength; and. when routed by any extraor-
dinary exigency to take part in foreign opera.

tions,

tions, the vigour of its efforts were proportion. BOOK XfI.
ally great, because they were only occasional and '
of a short continuance.

THE fame principle which had led England Withre-

sped to

to adopt this new system with regard to the Scotland.
powers on the continent, occasioned a change in
its plan of conduct with refpe& to Scotland,
the only foreign slate, with which, on account
of its situation in the fame island, the English
had such a close connexion as demanded their
perpetual attention. Instead of prolecuting the
ancient scheme of conquering that kingdom,
which the nature of the country, defended by
a brave and hardy people, rendered dangerous
if not impracticable; it appeared more eligible
to endeavour at obtaining such influence in
Scotland as might exempt England from any
danger or disquiet from that quarter. The
national poverty of the Scots, together with the
violence and animosity of their facions, rendered
the execution of this plan easy to a people far
flperior to them in wealth. Their popular
leaders were gained; the ministers and favour-
ites of the crown were corrupted; and such
absolute direcion of their councils acquired, as
rendered the operations of the one kingdom de-
pendent in a great measure on the sovereign of
the other. Such perfet& external security added

VOL. IV. Aa to

BooK XII to the interior advantages which England now

CJLT ^- polfeffed, must soon have raised it to new cons

fideration aid importance; the long reign of
Elizabeth, equally conspicuous for wisdom, for
steadiness, and for vigour, accelerated its pro-
grefs, and carried it with greater rapidity to-
wards that elevated itation which it hath since
held among the powers of Europe.

Changes in DURINO the period in which the political state
'te oltih of the great kingdoms underwent such changes,
pwer* in revolutions ofconsiderable importance happened
EuroP4. in that of the secondary or inferior powers.

Those in the papal court are most obvious, and
of most extensive consequence.

The moR IN the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned
cuntidrrable
rtvl tion the rife of that spiritual jurifdiaion which the
tenh cen. Popes claim as Vicars of Jesus Christ, and have
tourrtf' traced the progress of that authority which they
Rome. possess as temporal Princes *. There was no-

thing previous to the reign of Charles V. that
tended to circumscribe or to moderate their
authority, but science and philosophy, which
began to revive and to be cultivated. The
progress of these, however, was still inconfider-
able; they always operate slowly; and it is
long before their influence reaches the people,

Vol. i. p. 149, &c.

or

or can produce any sensible effect upon them. BOOK XI.
They may perhaps gradually, and in a long
course of years, undermine and fiake an efta-
blifhed system of false religion, but there is no
iniftance of their having overturned one. The
battery is too feeble to demoliih those fabricks
which superstition raises on deep foundations,
and can strengthen with the moit consummate
art.

LUTHI R had attacked the Papal rupremacy The general

with other weapons, and with an impetuosity geilth
more formidable. The time and manner of his tdohrinurc
attack concurred with a multitude of circum- of Rome,

and the
fiances, which have been explained, in giving powerof

t0 he Popel,

him immediate success. The charm which had
bound mankind for so many ages was broken
at once. The human mind, which had con-
tinued long as tame and passive, as if it had
been formed to believe whatever was taught,
and to bear whatever was imposed, roused of
a sudden, and became inquisitive, mutinous, and
disdainful of the yoke to which it had hitherto
submitted. That wonderful ferment and agita-
tion of mind, which, at this distance of time,
appears unaccountable, or is condemned as ex-
travagant, was lb general, that it must have
been excited by causes which were natural and
of powerful efficacy. The kingdoms of Den-

A a 2 mark,

BooK XlI. mark, Sweden, England and Scotland, and

*
' almost one half of Germany, threw off their

allegiance to the Pope, abolished hisjurifdiction
within their territories, and gave the fan6tion
of law to modes of discipline and systems of
4odrine which were not only independent of
his power, but hostile to it. Nor was this spirit
of innovation confined to those countries which
openly revolted from the Pope; it spread
through all Europe, and broke out in every
part of it with various degrees of violence. It
penetrated early into France, and made progress
apace. In that kingdom, the number of con-
verts to the opinions of the Reformers was so
great, their zeal so enterprizing, and the abili-
ties of their leaders so distinguished, that they
soon ventured to contend for superiority with
the established church, and were sometimes on
the point of obtaining it. In all the provinces
of Germany which continued to acknowledge
the Papal supremacy, as well as in the Low-
Countries, the Protestant doctrines were secretly
taught, and had gained so many proselytes, that
they were ripe for revolt, and were restrained
merely by the dread of their rulers from imita-
ting the example of their neighbours, and
alerting their independence. Even in Spain
and in Italy, symptoms of the fame dilpofition
to shake off the yoke appeared. The preten-

sions

lions of the Pope to infallible knowledge and BOOK X rT
supreme power were treated by many persons -
of eminent learning and abilities with such
scorn, or impugned with such vehemence, that
the most vigilant attention of the civil magi-
ftrate, the highest itrains of pontifical authority,
and all the rigour of inquifitorialjurifdidion were
requisite to check and extinguilh it.

THE defection of so many opulent and power- This ,lr.;
ful kingdoms from the Papal See, was a fatal e:,ilextent

of the
blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged P,)e's do.

r 1lllins,

the dominions of the Popes in extent, it dimi-
nilhed their revenues, and left them fewer
rewards to beflow on the ecclefiafticks of various
denominations, attached to them by vows of
obedience as well as by ties of interest, and
whom they employed as initruments to establish
or support their usurpations in every part of
Europe. The countries too which now dif-
claimed their authority, were those which for-
merly had been most devoted to it. The em-
pire of fuperfition differs from every other
species of dominion; its power is often greatest,
and mofl implicitly obeyed in the provinces
molt remote from the feat of government; while
such as are situated nearer to that, are more apt
to discern the artifices by which it is upheld, or
the impostures on which it is founded. The
personal frailties or vices of the Popes, the

A a 3 errors

BooK XII errors as well as corruption of their adminiftra-

' tion, the ambition, venality, and deceit which

reigned in their court, fell immediately under
the observation of the Italians, and could not
fail of diminishing that refpeEt which begets
submission. But in Germany, England, and the
more remote countries, there were either altoge-
ther unknown, or being only known by report,
made a flighter impression. Their veneration for
the Papal dignity increased with their distance
from Rome; and that, added to their gross ig-
norance, rendered them equally credulous and
passive. In tracing the progress of the Papal
domination, the boldest and most successful in-
Stances of encroachment are to be found in
Germany and other countries distant from Italy.
In these its impositions were heaviest, and its
exactions the molt rapacious; so that in efti-
mating the diminution of power which the court
of Rome suffered in consequence of the Refor-
mation, not only the number but the charater
of the people who revolted, not only the great
extent of territory, but the extraordinary obfe-
quioufnefs of the fubjets which it loft, mult be
taken into the account,

and oblsged Noa was it only by ithis defe&ion of so many
change the kingdoms and states which the Reformation
spirit of
their .o- occasioned, that it contributed to diminish the
nracnt power of the Roman Pontiffs. It obliged them

to

to adopt a different system of conduct towards the Tro~ XII.
nations which flill continued to recognise their
jurifdi&tion, and to govern them by new maxims
and with a milder spirit. The Reformation
taught them, by a fatal example, what they
seem not before to have apprehended, that the
credulity and patience of mankind might be
overburdened and cxhaufled. They became
afraid of venturing upon any such exertion of
their authority as might alarm or exasperate
their subjects, and excite them to a new revolt.
They saw a rival church established in many
countries of Europe, the members of which
were on the watch to obfcrve any errors in their
administration, and eager to expose them. They
were sensible that the opinions adverse to their
power and usurpations were not confined to
their enemies alone, but had fprcad even among
the people who still adhered to them. Upon
all there accounts, it was no longer pollible to
lead or to govern their flock in the fame man-
ner as in tholi dark and quiet ages, when faith
was implicit, when flibmiffion was unreserved,
and all tamely followed and obeyed the voice
of their shepherd. From the sra of the Re-
formation, the Popes have ruled rather by ad-
dress and management than by authority. The
style of their decrees is the fame, but the effct
of them is very different. Those Bulls and
Interdicts which, Before the Reformation, madl

A a 4 thel

BooK XII. the greatest Princes tremble, have since that
'- ' period been disregarded or despised by the most

inconsiderable. Those bold decisions and adts
of jurifdition which, during many ages, not
only passed uncenfured, but were revered as the
awards of a sacred tribunal, would, since Lu-
ther's appearance, be treated by one part of
Europe as the effec of folly or arrogance, and
be detested by the other as impious and unjust.
The Popes, in their adminiaration, have been
obliged not only to accommodate themselves
to the notions of their adherents, but to pay
some regard to the prejudices of their enemies.
They seldom venture to claim new powers, or
even to insist obstinately on their ancient prero-
gatives, left they should irritate the former
they carefully avoid every measure that may
either excite the indignation or draw on them the
derision of the latter. The policy of the court
of Rome has become as cautious, circumfpe&,
and timid, as it was once adventurous and vio-
lent; and though their pretensions to infallibi-
lity, on which all their authority is founded,
does not allow them to renounce any jurifdidion
which they have at any time claimed or exer-
cifed, they find it expedient to susser many of
their prerogatives to lie dormant, and not to
expose themselves to the rifque of losing that
remainder of power which they still enjoy by ill.

timed

timed attempts towards reviving obsolete pre- BooK XII.
tensions. Before the sixteenth century, the c
Popes were the movers and direcors in every
considerable enterprize; they were at the head of
every great alliance; and being confidered as
arbiters in the affairs of Christendom, the court
of Rome was the center of political negociation
and intrigue. From that time, the greatest ope-
rations in Europe have been carried on inde-
pendent of them; they have funk almost to a
level with the other petty Princes of Italy; they
continue to claim, though they dare not exercise,
the fame spiritual jurifdition, but hardly retain
any shadow of the temporal power which they
anciently polleffed.

BUT how fatal soever the Reformation may TieReror.

mation con-
have been to the power of the Popes, it contri- tributcd to

improve the

buted to improve the church of Rome both in church bot
science and in morals. The desire of equalling in cial
the reformers in those talents which had pro-
cured them refpe&; the neceflity of acquiring
the knowledge requisite for defending their own
tenets, or refuting the arguments of their oppo-
nents, together with the emulation natural be-
tween two rival churches, engaged the Roman
Catholick clergy to apply themselves to theftudy
of useful science, which they cultivated with
such assiduity and success, that they have gra-

dually

IOOK XIT. dually become as eminent in literature, as they

-Y~ were in some periods infamous for ignorance.

The fame principle occasioned a change, no less
considerable in the morals of the Romish cler-
gy. Various causes which havF formerly been
enumerated, had concurred in introducing great
irregularity, and even dissolution of manners
among the popish clergy. Luther and his ad-
herents began their attack on the church
with such vehement invectives againt these,
that, in order to remove the scandal, and silence
their declamations, greater decency of condut
became necessary. The Reformers themselves
were so eminent not only for the purity but
even austerity of their manners, and had ac-
quired such reputation among the people on that
account, that the Roman Catholick Clergy
must have soon loft all credit, if they had not
endeavoured to conform in tome measure to their
standard. They knew that all their actions fell
under the revere infpeEion of the Protestants,
whom enmity and emulation prompted to ob-
f:rve every vice, or even impropriety in their
conduct; to censure them without indulgence,
and to expose them without mercy. This ren-
dered them, of course, not only cautious to
avoid.fuch enormities as might give offence, but
studious to acquire the virtues which might
merit praise. In Spain and Portugal, where the

tyrannical

tyrannical jurifdli&ion of the Inquisition crushed Boor XTI.
the Protestant faith as soon as it appeared, the
spirit of Popery continues invariable; science
has made small progress, and the character of
ecclefiafticks has undergone little change. But
in those countries where the members of the
two churches have mingled freely with each
other, or have carried on any considerable in-
tercourfe, either commercial or literary, an ex-
traordinary alteration in the ideas as well as in
the morals of the Popish ecclefiafticks, is ma-
nifeft. In France, the manners of the Digni-
taries and secular clergy have become decent
and exemplary in an high degree. Many of
them have been diftinguithed for all the accom-
plifhments and virtues which can adorn their pro-
session; and differ greatly from their predecef-
fors before the Reformation, both in their ma-
xims and in their conduct.

NOR has the influence of the Reformation Th'r,,n,

been felt only by the inferior members of the ': it ,'d
Roman Catholick Church; it has extended to P""po' h
the See of Rome, to the sovereign Pontiffs thretnes.
themselves. Violations of decorum, and even
trefpafes againit morality, which paifed without
censure in those ages, when neither the power
of the Popes, nor the veneration of the people
for their character, had any bounds; when

there

Booa XII. there was no hostile eye to observe the errors

i~* in their condut, and no adversaries zealous to

inveigh against them; would be liable now to
the severest animadverlion, and excite general
indignation or horror. Instead of rivalling the
courts of temporal Princes in gaiety, and fur-
palling them in licentiousness, the Popes have
studied to assume manners more severe and
more suitable to their ecclesiastical charater.
The chair of St. Peter hath not been polluted,
during two centuries, by any Pontiff that refem-
bled Alexander VI. or several of his prede-
ceffors, who were a disgrace to religion and to
human nature. Throughout this long fuccelf
sion of Popes, a wonderful decorum of conduct,
compared with that of preceding ages, is ob-
fervable. Many of them have been conspicuous
for the virtues becoming their high station; and
by their humanity, their love of literature, and
their moderation, have made some atonement
to mankind for the crimes of their predecessors.
Thus the beneficial influences of the Reforma-
tion have been more extensive than they appear
on a superficial view; and this great division in
the Christian church hath contributed, in some
measure, to increase purity of manners, to dif-
fuse science, and to inspire humanity. History
recites such a number of {hbcking events, occa-
sioned by religious dissensions, that it must

afford

afford peculiar satisfaction to trace any one fa- BOOK XII.
lutary or beneficial effet to that source, from
which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

THE republick of Venice which, at the begin- State of the

ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so vcnicc.
formidable, that almost all the potentates of
Europe united in a confederacy for its deftruc-
tion, declined gradually from its ancient power
and splendor. The Venetians not only loft a
great part of their territory in the war excited
by the league of Cambray, but the revenues as
well as vigour of the state were exhausted by
their extraordinary and long continued efforts
in their own defence; and that commerce by
which they had acquired their wealth and power
began to decay, without any hopes of its revi-
ving. All the fatal consequences to their re-
publick, which the fagacityofthe Venetian senate
foresaw on the first discovery of a passage to
the Eaft-Indies by the Cape of Good Hope,
took place. Their endeavours to prevent the
Portuguese from establishing themselves in the
Eaf-Indies, not only by exciting the Soldans
of Egypt and the Ottoman monarchs to turn
their arms against such dangerous intruders, but
by affording secret aid to the Infidels in order
to insure their success ", proved ineffectual.

a Freher. Script. Rcr. German, vol. ii. 529.

THE

BOOK XII. The activity and valour of the Portuguese fur-
L- -' mounted every obstacle, and obtained such firm

footing in that fertile country, as secured to
them large poffeflions, together with influence
fill more extensive. Lisbon, instead of Venice,
became the staple for the precious commodities
of the East. The Venetians, after having poPs
sessed for many years the monopoly of that
beneficial commerce, had the mortification to
be excluded from almost any share in it. The
discoveries of the Spaniards in the western world,
proved no less fatal to inferior branches of their
commerce. The original defects which were
formerly pointed out in the conititution of the
Venetian republick continued, and the difadvan-
tages with which it undertook any great enter-
prize, increased rather than diminished. The
iources from which it derived its extraordinary
riches and power being dried up, the interior
vigour of the Itate declined, and of course, its
external operations became less formidable,
Long before the middle of the sixteenth cen-
tury, Venice ceased to be one of the principal
powers in Europe, and dwindled into a fecon-
dary and subaltern slate. But as the Iinate had
the address to conceal its diminution of power,
under the veil of moderation and caution; as
it made no rash effort that could dilcover its
impotence i as the symptoms of political decay

in

in Rates are not loon observed, and are seldom Boos. XIL
so apparent to their neighbours as to occasion i~
any sudden alteration in their conduct towards
them, Venice continued long to be conil-' d
and refpeted. She was treated not according
to her present condition, but according to the
rank which she had formerly held. Ch..ries V.
as well as the monarchs of France his rivals,
courted her assistance with emulation and loii-
citude in all their enterprizes. Even down to
the close of the century, Venice remained not
only an object of attention, but a considerable
feat of political negociation and intrigue.

THAT authority which the first Cosmo di ofTufany.

Medici, and Lawrence, his grandson, had ac-
quired in the republick of Florence by their
beneficence and abilities, inspired their defcen-
dants with the ambition of usurping the fove-
reignty in their country, and paved their way
towards it. Charles placed Alexander di Me-
dici at the head of the republick, and to the A.D. I53.
natural interest and power of the family added
the weight as well as credit of the Imperial
protection. Of these, his furcclffor Colino,
firnamed the Great, availed himself; and efta-
blifhing his supreme authority on the ruins of
the ancient republican constitution, he tranl-
mitted that, together with the title of Grand

l)ukl.-

BOOKXIr. Duke of Tuscany, to his descendants. Their
^l'J ' dominions were composed of the territories

which had belonged to the three commonwealths
of Florence, Pisa, and Siena, and formed one
of the moss respectable of the Italian itates.

Of the TrE dukes of Savoy, during the former part
dukes of
savoy. of the sixteenth century, possessed territories

which were not considerable either for extent or
value; and the French, having seized the greater
part of them, obliged the reigning Duke to
retire for safety to the strong fortress of Nice,
where he ihut himself up for several years;
while his son, the Prince of Piedmont, endea-
voured to better his fortune, by serving as an
adventurer in the armies of Spain. The peace
of Cateau Cambrefis restored to him his paternal
dominions. As these are environed on every
hand by powerful neighbours, all whose mo-
tions the dukes of Savoy muff observe with
the greatest attention, in order not only to guard
against the danger of being surprised and over-
powered, but that they may chute their fide
with discernment in those quarrels wherein it
is impossible for them to avoid taking part, this
peculiarity in their situation seems to have had
no inconsiderable influence on their character.
By routing them to perpetual attention, by
keeping their ingenuity always on the firetch,

2 and

and engaging them in almofi continual acion, BOOK XIT.
it hath formed a race of Princes more sagacious
in discovering their true interest, more decisive
in their resblutions, and more dextrous in avail-
ing themfclves of every occurrence which pre-
lented itself, than any perhaps that can be singled
out in the history of mankind. By gradual ac-
quilltions the Dukes of Savoy have added to
their territories as well as to their own import-
ance and aspiring at length to regal dignity,
which they obtained about half a century ago,
they hold no inconsiderable rank among the
monarchs of Europe,

THE territories which now form the republick of the

of the United Netherlands, were loft during the 'Iovncs.
first part of the sixteenth century, among the
numerous provinces llbject to the house of
Austria; and were then so inconfiderabli, that
hardly one opportunity of mentioning them hath
occurred in all the busy period of this history.
But soon after the peace of Cateau Cambrelis,
the violent and bigotted maxims of lhilip's go-
vernment, carried into execution witl unrelent-
ing rigour by the duke of Alva, exasperatcd
the free people of the Low-countries to such
a degree, that they threw off the Spaninf yoke,
and afterted their ancient liberties and laws.
These they defended with a pcrfevering valour,

VOL. 1V. B b which

BopK Xtr. which occupied the arms of Spain during half

a century, exhausted the vigour, ruined the re-
putation of that monarchy, and at Lift constrain-
ed their ancient masters to recognise and to treat
with them as a free independent state. This
state, founded on liberty, and reared by indcufry
and ceconomy, had grown into reputation, even
while struggling for its exiftcnce. But when
peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views,
and to extend its commerce, it rose to be one of
the most refpeaable as well as enterprizing
powers in Europe.

THE tranfaaions of the kingdoms in the

North of Europe, have been seldom attended
to in the course of this history.
Of Russia, RussiA remained buried in that barbarifin

and obscurity, from which it was called about
the beginning of the present century, by the
creative genius of Peter the Great, who made
his country known and formidable to the reft of
Europe.

Of en. IN Denmark and Sweden, during the reign
swkaend of Charles V. great revolutions happened in

their constitutions, civil as well as ecclcfiaftical.
In the former kingdom, a tyrant being degra-
ded from the throne and expelled the country,

a new

a new Prince was called by the voice of the BooK XI.
people to assume the reins of government. In '
the latter, a fierce people, routed to arms by
injuries and oppreflion, shook off the Danish
yoke, and conferred the regal dignity on its
deliverer Gustavus Ericson, who had all the
virtues of a hero and of a patriot. Denmark,
exhausted by foreign wars, or weakened by the
dissensions between the King and the nobles,
became incapable of fach efforts as were rcqui-
site in order to recover the a!iendant which it
had long possessed in the North of ILurope.
Sweden, as soon as it wa:, freed from the domi-
nion of strangers, began to recruit its strength,
and acquired in a short time such interior vigour,
that it became the first kingdom in the North.
Early in the fubIequeint century, it rofc to such
a high rank among the powers of Europe, that
it had the chief merit in forming as well as con-
ducting that powerful league, which proteeted
not only the Proteflant religion, but the liber-
ties of Germany against the bigotry and ambi-
tion of the house of Austria.

Bb INDEX

# INDEX TO THE SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH VOLUMES.

I N D E X

TO THE
SECOND, THIRD, and FOURTH

VOLUMES.
N. B. The Roman Numerals dire&1 to the Volume, and the

Figures to the Page.

A

dBSOLUTION, the form of that uscd by Father
", Tetzel in Germany, II. i 7.
Adorni, the fallion of, aflifis the Imperial general

Colonna in the reduction of Genoa, 11. 215.
l.drian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. un-

der William de Croy, lord of Chievres, II. 29. His
charater, 30. Sent by Charles with power to
assume the regency of Cafiile on the death of his
grandfather, 39. His claim admitted by Cardinal
Ximencs, and executed in conjunLtion, ib. Autho-
rized by Charles to hold the Cortes of Valencia,
which results to aflcmbll before him, 91. Mlade
viceroy of Caflile on the departure of Char.lcs tor
Gcrmany, 95. His cleaiol remonfitated againit
by the Caflilians, ib. Is chofcni Pop), 211. Re-
trofpet of his condu& in Spain during the absence
of Charles, 227. Sends Ronquillo to reduce the
Segovians, who repulse him, ib. Sends Fonseca to
beficgc the city, who is repulfld by the inhabitants of
Medina dcl Campo, 228. Apologizes for Fonlt''c:t'
conducl to the Ipople, 230. Recals lFonI;ca, arnd

B1 b 3 dlitlitilS

difiniffes his troops, ib. His authority disclaimed by
the Holy Junta, 232. Deprived of power by them,
235. His ill reception on his arrival at Rome on
being chosen to the Papacy, 269. Refiores the ter-
ritories acquired by his predeceflbr, 270. Labours
to unite the contending powers of Europe, 271.
Publishes a bull for a three years truce among them,
272. Accedes to the league against the French
King, ib. His death, 280. The fentimcnts and
behaviour of the people on that occasion, ib. A
retrofpea of his conduct towards the Reformers, 296.
His brief to the diet at Nuremburgh, ib. Receives
a lift of grievances from the diet, 299. His condua
to the Reformers, how efleemed at Rome, 302.
Africa, the Spanish troops sent by Cardinal Ximencs

against Barbarossa, defeated there, II. 52.
Aigues Mortes, interview between the Emperor Charles,

and Francis, there, III. 163.
Atix la (hapelle, the Emperor Charles crowned there,

II. IXl. Ferdinand his brother crowned King of
the Romans there, III. 57.
.flarcon, Don Ferdinand, I rancis I. of France, taken

prisoner at the battle of Pavia, committed to his
cuutody, II. 327. Conducts Francis to Spain, 340.
Delivers up Francis in pursuance of the treaty of
Madrid, 362. Is sent ambassador to Francis to re-
quire the fulfilment of his treaty, 382. Pope Cle-
ment VII. taken prisoner by the Imperialists, is
committed to his cuflody, 408.
Albany, John Stuart, duke of, commands the French

army lent by Francis I. to invade Naples, II. 320.
jlbert, of Brandenburgh, grand mailer of the Tcuto-

nick Order, becomes a convert to the do6trincs of
Luther, II. 375. Obtains of Sigifinund King of
Poland the investiture of Prufia, creaed into a
dutchy, 376. Is put under the ban of the emlnpic,
ib. His family fixed in the inheritance of Pruilila,
ib. Commands a body of troops in behalf of V\ au-
rice of Saxony, but endeavours to aflert an indepcn-
dcncy, IV. 89. Defeats and takes the 1u)Lkc
d'Auinale prifoier, and joins the Emperor at Metz,

1X8.

tig. Is condemned by the Imperial Chamber so;
his demands on the bishops of Bamberg and Worti
burg, 130 A league formed against him, 132.
Is defeated by Maurice, t33. Is again defeated by
Henry of Brunswick, 135. Is driven out of Ger-
many, and diet in exile, ib. His territories restored
to his collateral heirs, 136.
Albert, eleflor of Mctz, the publication of indulgences

in Germany, committed to him, II. i x6.
Alexander V1 Pope, remarks on the pontificate of,

II 149.

Alexander di Medici. See MEDICI.
Algiers, how it was seized by Barbarossa, III. 98. Is

seized by the brother of the fame name, on the death
of the former, Ioo. Is taken under the protetion
of the Porte, ib. Is governed by Hafcen Aga in the
absence of Barbarofia, 239. Is bcfiegcd by the Em-
peror Charles V. 243. Charles forced to rc-imbark
by bad weather, 248
Alryajhid, brother ol Muley Hafcen King of Tunis,

solicits the prottClion of !Barbarofia against himn, III.
102 His treacherous treatment by Barbarofla, ib.
Alva, Duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in

his dispute with the Archduke Philip concerning the
regency of Ca.tile, II. 12. Forces the Dauphin to
abandon the siege of Perpignan, IIl. 259 Presides
at the court-martial which condemns the Elector of
Saxony to death, 443. Detains the Landgrave
prisoner by the Emperor's order, 456. Commands
under the Emperor, the army dtltinced agaii ft France,
IV. 16. Is appointed commlander i chief in Pied-
mont, 1x8. Enters the ecclcfiaflical territories and
seizes the Camlpagna Rlomana, 250. Concludes a
truce with the Pope, 25r. Negociatcs a peace bc-
tween Philip and the Pope, with Cardinal Caraffi,
283. GoLs to Rome to ask pardon of the Pope for
his hostilities, 284. Is sent to Paris in the name of
Philip to elfoul: the Princess Elizabeth, 334
Anmetjiorf, a nobleman of Holland, alfuciated hy

Charles V. with Cardinal Xincnes, in the regency
of Castile, 11.49.

13 b 4 /4nabaitis,

.nalaptlns, the origin of that fed deduced, III. 76.

Their principal tenets, 77. Their settlement at
Munfler, 79. Characer of their principal leaders,
ib. They seize the city of Munster, 80. They
eflablifh a new form of government there, ib.
Chufe Bocold King, 84. Their licentious practices,
85. A confederacy of the German Princes formed
against them, 87. Are blockaded in Munster by
the bishop, ib. The city taken, and great slaughter
made of them, 89. Their King put to death, oo.
Charader of the fed since that period, ib. Sec
Matthias and Bocold.
ALngleria, his authority cited in proof of the extortions

of the Flemish ministers of Charles V. II. 64.
.nhalt, Prince of, avows the opinions of Martin Lu-

ther, II. 295.

.nnats to the court of Rome, what, II. I65.
Aragon, how Ferdinand became possessed of that king-

dom, II. 2. The cortes of, acknowledges the
Archduke Philip's title to the crown, 74. Ancient
enmity between this kingdom and Castile, 9. Na-
varre added to this crown by the arts of Ferdinand,
26. Arrival of Charles V. 65. The cortes not
allowed to assemble in his name, 66. The refrac-
tory behaviour of the Aragonians, ib. They refute:
reffitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 67. Don
John Lanuza appointed regent, on the departure of
Charles for Germany, 95. Who composes the dif-
turbances there, 265. The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 268.
See Spain.
Ardres, an interview there between Francis I. and

Henry VIII. of England, II. o19.

fflurias, Charles son of Philip and Joanna, acknow-

ledged Prince of, by the Cortes of Castile, II. 19.
Atugurg, a diet called there by Charles V. III. 5c.

His publick entry into that city, ib. The confession
of faith named from this city, drawn up by Melanc-
thon, ib. Rcfolute behaviour of the Protcftant
Princes at, 52. Its form of government violently
altered, and rendered submissive to the Emperor,

492.

492. The diet reassembled there, IV. x0. The
diet takes part with the Emperor against the city of
Magdeburg, 20. Is seized by Maurice of Saxony,
73. Another diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 191.
Cardinal Morone attends the diet as the Pope's
nuncio, 193. Morone departs on the Pope's death,
195. Recess of the diet on the fulject of rcligion,
200. Remarks on this recess, 206. The diet agail
alThmblcd there, III. 467. Is intimidated by being
;surrounded with the Emperor's Spaniih troops, ih.
The Emperor re-ctablifics the Romifli worship, in
the churches of, ib. The diet, by the Enperor's
order, petitions the Pope for the return of the coun-
cil to Trent, 476. A fyficm of theology laid before
the diet by the Emperor, 482. The archbishop of
Mentz declares, without authority, the diet's ac-
ceptance of it, 283.
Avila, a convention of the malecontents in Spain held

there, I1. 232. A confederacy termed the Holy
Junta, formed there, ib. Which disclaims the au-
thority of Adrian, 233. The Holy Junta removed
to Tordefillas, 234. Sec 'zut!a.
A.uflria, by what means the house of, became so for-

nidable in Germany, II. .

4 The extraordinary

acquiftionsof the house of, in the person of the Em-
peror Charles V. IV. 339, 343.

B
PBarolari, Horuck, his rife to the kingdoms of Algiers

and T'unis, II. 52. Defeats the Spanifl troops fiint
against him by Cardinal Ximenes, ib. His parent-
age, III. 97. Commences pirate with his brother
Hayradin, ib. Iow he acquired pulltflion of Al-
giers, 98. Infeits the coasts of Spain, 99 Is re-
duced and killed by Comares the Spanifl governor
of Oran, ib.
BarbarofJii, Hayradin, brother to the former of the

fanme name, takes poflfffion of-Algiers on hi, biI,-
ther's death, III. ioo. Puts his dominionrs unldel the
protection of the Grand Signior, ib. Obtains the

2 command

command of the Turkish fleet, ib. His treacheious
treatment of Alrafchid, brother to the King of Tu-
nis, 102. Seizes Tunis, I04. Extends his depre-
dations by sea, ib Prepares to resist the Emperor's
armament against him, io6. Goletta and his fleet
taken, 108. Is defeated by Charles, ixo. Tunis
taken, III. Makes a descent on Italy, III. 272.
Burns Rheggio, ib. Besieges Nice in conjuna ion
with the French, but is forced to retire, 273. Is
dismissed by Francis, 288.
Barbary, a summary view of the revolutions of, III.

96. Its division into independent kingdoms, ib.
Rife of the piratical States, 97 See Barbarojja.
Barcelona, the publick entry of the Emperor Charles V.

into that city as its count, III. 39. The treaties of
Charles with the Italian States, published there, 43.
Bayard, chevalier, his character, II. 135. His gal-

lant defence of Mezieres, beficged by the Imperialifss,
ib. Obliges them to raise the siege, ib. His noble
behaviour at his death, 291. His refpe&ful fune-
ral, 292.
Balley, M. his erroneous account of the education of

Charles V. correced, II. 30. Note. His account
of the disastrous retreat of the Emperor Charles V.
from his invasion of Provence, 111. 148.
Bible, a translation of, undertaken by Martin Luther,

and its effe:ts in opening the eyes of the people,
II. 294.
Bicocca, battle of, between Colonna, and Marcchal

Lautrec, II. 213.
Bocoldor lBeukels, John, a journeyman taylor, becomes

a leader of the anabaptifis, at Munster, lII. 79.
Succeeds Matthias in the direction of their affairs,
83. His enthusiastic. extravagances, ib. Is chofcn
King, 84. Marries fourteen wives, 85. Beheads
one of them, 88. Is put to a cruel death at the
taking of Munlter, 90. Sec Analbafptrs.
Bohemia, the archduke Ferdinand cholen King of, If.

4Io. Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties of the
Bohemians, Ill. 463. The Reformation introduced
by John Huss and Jerome of Prague, 464. Raifei an

army

army to no purpose, ib. Is closely confined in the
citadel of Mechlin, IV. 25.
Bonnivet, admiral of France, appointed to command

the invasion of Milan, II. 280. His character, ib.
Enables Colonna to defend the city of Milan by his
imprudent delay, 282. Forced to abandon the
Milanese, 290. Is wounded and his army defeated
by the Imperialists, ib. Stimulates Francis to an
invasion of the Milanese, 313. Advises Francis to
besiege Pavia, 316. Adviles him to give battle to
Bourbon who advanced to the relief of Pavia, 323.
Is killed at the battle of Pavia, 325.
Bologna, an interview between the Emperor Charles V.

and Pope Clement VII. there, III. 39. Another
meeting between them there, 64.
Bouillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares war

against the Emperor Charles, at the instigation of
Francis II. I94. Is ordered by Francis to disband
his troops, 195. His territories reduced by the
Emperor, ib.
Boulogne, besieged by Henry VIII. of England, III.

296. Taken, 306.
Bourbon, Charles Duke of, his characer, II. 274.

The causes of his discontent with Francis I. 275.
His duchess dies, 276. RejeAs the advances of
Louise the King's mother, ib. His cfate fcqucftered
by her intrigues, 277. Negociatcs ficretly with the
Emperor, ib. Is included in a treaty between the
Emperor and Henry VIII. of England, 278. Is
taxed by the King with betraying him, which he
denies, 279. Efcapcs to Italy, 280. Direcs the
measures of the Imperial army under Lannoy, 289.
Defeats the French on the banks of the Seflia, 290.
Instigates Charles to an invasion of France, 3o8.
Advances to the relief of Pavia, 32I. Defeats
Francis, and takes him prisoner, 325. Haflens to
Madrid to eccure his own intereits in the interview
between Charles and Francis, 343. His kind re-
ception by Charles, 352. Obtains a grant of the
duchy of Milan, and is made general ol the Impe-
rial army, 353. Obliges Sforza to furrcnder Milan,

386.

386. Is forced to oppress the Milanese to satisfy
his troops mutinying for pay, 292. Sets Morone at
liberty, and makes himhis confident, ib. Appoints
Lcyva governor of Milan, and advances to invade
the Pope's territories, 394, 395. His disappointed
troops matiny, ib. He determines toplunder Rome,
400. Arrives at Rome, and afFaultsit, 40I. Is
killed, ib.
Brandenburgh, Elector of, avows the opinions of Lu-

ther, II. 295.

- Albert of. See Albert.
Bruges, a league concluded there between the Em-

peror and Henry VIII. of England, against France,
II. 199.
Brunswick, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 295.
-- - 29-Henry, Duke of, driven from his dominions
by the Protestant Princes ofthe leagueof Smalkalde,
IlI. 280. Raises men for Francis, but employs
them to recover his own dominions, 322. Is taken
prisoner, ib.
Buda, siege of, by Ferdinand King of the Romans,

III. 235. Is trcachcioufly fcized by Sultan Soly-
man, 236.

C
Crjetan, Cardinal, the Pope's legate in Germany, ap-

pointed to examine the dotrines of Martin Luther,
I. 129. Requires Luther peremptoiily to retra&
his errors, ib. Requires the Elcdtur of Saxony to
furrenider or banifll Luther, 131. His conductjuf-
tified, 133.
(Clais, an iineffelual congress there, between the Em-

peror and Francis, under the mediation of Henry
VIII. t1. 197. The careless manner in which
it was guarded in the reign of Mary Queen of Eng-
land, IV. 292. Inefficeual remon trances ofPhilip,
and Lord Wentworth the governor, concerning its
defclncelefs tate, ib. Is inveited and taken by the
Duke of Guile, 294. The Englinh inhabitants

turned

turned out, 496. Stipulations concerning, in the
treaty of Chateau Cambrcfis, 330.
Cambray, articles of the peace concluded there, between

the Emperor Charles, and Francis of France, 1II.
33. Remarks on this treaty, ih.
Caamc, peace of, between Henry VIII. and Francis,

III. 361.
Campcgegic, Cardinal, made legate from Pope Clement

VII. to the second diet at Nurembcrg, 11. 303.
Publishes articles for reforming the interior clergy,
305. Adviies Charles to rigorous mcafures against
the Protestants, Ill. 53.
Capitulation of the Germanick body, signed by Charles

V. and prescribed to all his fucceflbrs, II. 86.
Caraja, Cardinal, his precipitate ele~ion, IV. 213.

Is appointed legate to Bologna, ib. Rcafons of his
diigult with the Emperor, 2I4. Persuades the
Pope to solicit an alliance with France againit the
Emperor, 215, 219, 222. His insidious commil-
lion to the court of St-ance, 242. 1- Hs publick entry
into Paris, 243. E1xhort: ilenry to break his truce
with the Emperor, 244. Ablolvcs Henry from his
oath, 246. Negociates a peace between the Pope
and Philip, with the Duke d'Alva, 283. The fate
of him and hiL biother on the death of Pope Paul,
335-
Carlofladius, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,

at Wittciilburg, II. 142. His intemperate zeal,
293. Awed by the rlpioc(f; of Luther, ib.
Caricnan, beficgdd by the count d'Engtluien, and de-

fended by the marquis dc Gualfo, 111. 288. Guafto
defeated in apitched battle, 291. The town takcn,
293.

C(rialdlo, Marquis of Piadeno. See Piadseno.
La/lilre, how Labhlla becanme pollcicd of that king-

doni, 11. 2. T'he Arclhuke Philip's title acknow-
ledged by tie Cortes of that kingdom, 4. I1abella
lies, and leaves her hulband Ferdinand.of Aragon,
regent, 8. lFedinand resigns the crown of, ib.
Fcldlinand acknowledged regent by the Cortes, 9.
Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon, ib.

The

The particular dislike of the Castilians to Ferdinand,
ib. The regency of, jointly vetted in Ferdinand,
Philip and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, 15.
Declares againit Ferdinand, 16. The regency of,
resigned by Philip to Ferdinand, 17. Philip and
Joanna acknowledged King and Queen by the
Cortes, I9. Death of Philip, ib. The perplexity
of the Castilians on Joanna's incapacity for govern-
ment, ib. Ferdinand gains the regency and the good
will of the Castilians by his prudent adminiitration,
24. Oran and other places in Barbary annexed to
this kingdom by Ximenes, 25. Ximenes appointed
regent by Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of
Charles V. 35. Charles assumes the regal title, 40.
Ximenes procures its acknowledgment, 41. The
nobility depressed by Ximenes, 43. The grandees
mutiny againfi Ximenes, 45. The mutiny sup-
prefled, ib. Ximenes resumes the grants made by
Ferdinand to the nobles, 46. The bold reply of
Ximenes to the discontented nobles, 48. Other
aflociates in the regency appointed with Ximenes at
*the instigation of the Flemish courtiers, 49. Ximenes
dies, 6x. Charles acknowledged King by the
Cortes, on his arrival, with a reservation in favour
of his mother Joanna, 62. The Castilians receive
unfavourable imprcffions of him, 63. Disgusted by
his partiality to his Flemish ministers, 64. Sauvage
made chancellor, ib. William de Croy, appointed
archbishop of Toledo, 65. The principal cities
confederate, and complain of their grievances, 68.
The clergy of, refuse to levy the tenth of benefices
granted by the Pope to Charles V. 89. Interdicted,
but the interdict taken off, by Charles's application,
ib. An insurrection there, 92. Increase the difaf-
fe&ion, 93. Cardinal Adrian appointed regent, on
the departure of Charles for Germany, 95. The
views and pretensions of the commons, in their in-
furrections, 230. The confederacy called the Holy
Junta formed, 232. The proceedings of which arc
carried on in the name of Queen Joanna, 234.
Receives circulatory letters from Charles for the in-

furgents

furgents to lay down their arms, with promises of
pardon, 236. The nobles undertake to fupprels
the insurgents, 243. Raifie an army against them
under the Conde de Haro, 246. Haro gets pof-
fellion of Joanna, 247. Expedients by which they
raile money for their tro )ps, 250. Unwilling to
proceed to ex:remities with the Junta, ib. The
army of the Junta routed and Padilla executed, 255,
256 Diflnlution ofthe Junta, 258. The modera-
tion of Charles toward the insurgents on his arrival
in Spain, 2b8. He acquires the love of the Ca-
ftilian.; ib. Sec Spain.
Cats!' 'i ..(f Aragon, is divorced from Henry VIII. of

Engliiad, III. 73 Dies, I7I.
Catherine a Boria, a nun, flies from her cloister, and

marries Martin Luther, 11. 373.

Catherine d! iledici. See MEDICI.
Cavi, peatcc concluded there between Pope Paul IV.

and Philip I. of Spain, IV. 283.
Cercamp, negociations for peace entered into there be-

tween Philip II. of Spain, and Henry 11. of France,
IV. 31 , 321. The negociations removed to Cha-
teau Cambrefis, 326. See Chateau Cambrefis.
Charailers of men, rules for forming a propel estimate

of them, 111. 338. Applied to the caie of Lu-
ther, ib
Charles IV. Emperor of Germany, his observations on

the manners of the clergy, in his letter to the arch-
bifliop of Mentz, 11. 152. Note.
Charles V. Emperor, his delcent and birth, II. I. How

he came to inherit such extenlive dominions, ib.
Acknowledged Prince of Asturias, by the Cortes of
Castile, 19. Hs father Philip dies, ib. Jealousy
and hatred of his grandfather Ferdinand toward him,
26. Left heir to his dominions, '9. I)cath of
Ferdinand, ib. His education coinmittild to Wil-
liam de Croy, lord of Chievrcs, ib. Adrian of
Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor, 30. Tlhe
first opening of his character, 32. Aflumes the
government ot I'landers, and attends to bulircli., ;b.
sends Cardinal Adrian to be regent of Castile, wno

executes

executes it jointly with Ximenes, 38. Affumcs the
regal title, 40. His title admitted with difficulty
by the Castilian nobility, 41. Perfundcd to add
associate regents to Ximcnces, 49. His Flemifl
court corru;,tcd by the avarice of Chievres, 52.
Pctfuadcd by Ximcnis to visit Spain, but how that
journey is retarded, 54. The present slate of his
aff.:irs, ib. Concludes a peace at Noyen with Fran-
cis I. of France, and the conditions of the treaty,
55 Arrives in Spain, 58. I-s ungrateful treat-
mcnt of Ximencs, 6o. His publick entry into Val-
ladolid, 6.. Is a;cknowlcdged King by the Cortes,
who vote him a free gift, ib. The Castilians re-
ceive unfavourable inipreflions of him, 64. Difguils
them by his partiality to his Flemifll ministers, ib.
S'.ts out for Aragon, ib. Sends his brother Ferdi-
nand to \:fit their grandfather Maximilian, 65.
C.nnot alTemble the Cortes of Aragon in his own
lian , 66. The opposition made by that aflembly
to his Jfires, ib. Refules the application of Francis
1. for reflitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 67.
Ncgiect! the remonstrances of the Caffilians, e8.
I)c:th the E,,l. er'ror Maximilian, 69. View of
the prtc-.l, itate o!' Europe, ib. How Maximilian
vas obliructed in iiliriug the Empire to him, 70.
Francis 1. aspires to thl' imlrial crown, i . Cir-
ciinmfi:':csc favourable to the prctcnfions of Charles,
ib. 72 The Swiis C.atons esp u r. his cause, 76.
Appe!ihcnllons dl( coiniuct of Pope Leo X. on the
occlaioii, 78. Ailhnbling of the diet at Franrfort,
Xo. Frederick duke of Saxony rcfufes the offer of
the empire and votes for him, 82. And refufcs the
prctf'cits offircd by his anmba.llldors, 83. Concurring
circumrfanccs which favourcd his elc.tion, 84.
1Iis elction, 85. Signs and confirms the capitula-
tion of the Germanick body, 86. ''he clection
notified to him, ib. Afllitncs the title of Majelty, ib.
Accepts the Imperial dignity offered by the count
Palatine ambalfador from the Electors, 88. The
clergy of Cafiile refuft the tenth of benefices granted
him by the Pope, 89. Procures the interditl the

kiniigdim

kingdom is laid under for refusal, to be taken off, 8d.
Empowers Cardinal Adrian to hold the Cortes of
Valencia, 91. The nobles refute to assemble with-
out his presence, ib. Authorises the insurgents
there to continue in arms, Ib. Summons the Cortes
of Castile to meet in Galicia, 92. Narrowly escapes
with his Flemish ministers from an insurrection on
that accouht, 93. Obtaihs a donative from the
Cortes, 95. Prepares to leave Spain, and appoints
regents, ib. Embarks, 96. Motives of this jour-
ney, 97. Rife of the rivalfhlp between him and
Francis I. 98. Courts the favour of Henry VIII. of
England and his minister Cardinal Wolfey, lo5.
Visits Henry at Dover, io8. Promises Wolfey his
Interest for the papacy, o09. Has a second inter.
view with Henry at Gravelines, IIo. Offers to
submit his differences with Francis to Heriry's arbi-
tration, it . His magnificent coronation at Aix-
la-Chapclle, ib. Calls a diet at Worms, to check
the reformers, 113. Causes which hindered his
cfpoufing the party of Martin Luther, 176. Grants
Luther a safe conduEt to the diet of Worms, 177.
An edia published againit him, 179. His embar-
raffment at this time, 184. Concludes an alliance
with the Pope, i89. The conditions of the treaty,
ib. Death of his minister Chievres, and its advan-
tages to him, 190. Invasion of Navarre by Francis,
192. The French driven out, and their general
L'Efparre taken priforler, 194. War declared
againit him by Robert de la Marck, lord of Bouillon,
who ravages Luxemburg, i94, 195. Reduces
Bouillon, and invades France, ib. His demands at
the congress at Calais, i98. Has an interview with
Cardinal Wolfcy at Bruges, and concludes a league
with Henry VIII. againf France, 199. Pope Leo
declares for him agaift France, 204. The French
driven out of Milan, 2o8, 213. Visits England in
his palsage to Spain, 217. Cultlvates the good-will
ofCardinal WVolfey, and creates the Earl of Surrey
his high admiral, 2 18. Grants the island of Malta
to theKnights uo St. John, expelled from Rhodes by

VCL. IV. C c Solyrlan

Solymnan the Magnificent, 222. Arrives in Spain,
223. A retrospect of his proceedings in relation to
the infurredions in Spain, 236. Iifues circulatory
letters for the infurgenta to lay down their arms,
with promises of pardon, ib. His prudent mode-
ration toward the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain,
268. Acquires the love of the Castilians, 269.
Enters into a league with Charles Duke of Bourbon,
278. Why he did not endeavour to get Wolfey
elctd Pope, 284. Invades Guienne and Burgundy
but without success, 287. His troops in Milan
mutiny for want of pay, but are pacificd by Morone,
289. Undertakes an invasion of Provence, 308.
Orders Pclcara to besiege Marseilles, 309. Pescara
obliged to retire, 3Io. Disconcerted by the French
over-running the Milanese again, 315, The rc-
venues of Naples mortgaged to raise money, ib.
His troops defeat Francis and take him prisoner at
the battle of Pavia, 326. His affected moderation
at receiving the news, 328. Avails himself of a
treaty concluded between Lannoy and Pope Clement,
but refutes to ratify it, 335. His army in Pavia
mutiny, and are obliged to be disbanded, 336. His
ldeliberations on the proper improvement of his dif-
aiv.;lnt~acs, 337. His propofitiols to Francis, 338.
After nrany delays grants Sforza the inveffiture of
Mlilan, 342. Moronc's intrigues betrayed to him
by Pclcara, 347. Orders Pcecara to continue his
icgoci.itioni with Moronie, 348. His rigorous treat-
nient of Francis, 349. Vilits Flrancis, 351. Hi:;
kind rtccption of the )uke of Bourbon, 352.
( rants iBourbon the dutchy of Milan, and appoints
him general in chlicfof the ImpeLial army there, 35 ,.
1i uitlcfs negociations for the delivery of ]'ranc[.,
354. 'l'reaty of Madrid, with lralci., 356. Ie-
livers up Francis, 362. Marries Ifabclla of Portu-
gal, ib. An alliance formed against him at Cognac,
379. Sends ambaflahdors to Prancis to require the
i ltlimcent of the treaty of Madrid, 382. ircparc
fbr war againfli Fiancis, 384. The Pope reduced
to all ccoillillodativlu wVlb hlui, 3S8. The ex-

.. I .....~~~~~j~ll...I

h.::fted state of his finances, 391. His troops under
Bourbon diftrefed and mutinous for want of pay,
ib. Bourbon assaults Rome, and is slain but the
city taken, 404. The Prince of Orange general
on Bourbon's death, takes the castle of St. Angelo,
and the Pope prisoner, 407. The Emperor's con-
duc on that occasion, 403. His dissensions with
the Pope, how far favourable to the reformation,
41 r. His inftrutions to the diet at Spires, ib.
His manifelto againit the Pope, and letter to the
Cardinals, 412. France and England league against
him, III. 3. Is refused filpplies by the Cortes of
Castile, 9. Delivers the Pope Ibr a ransom,
10. His overtures to Henry and Francis, 12.
Their declaration of war against him, 14. Is chal-
lenged by Francis to tingle combat, ib. Andrew
Doria revolts from Francis to him, 22. His forces
defeat the French in Italy, 25, 28. His motives
for desiring an accommodation, 29. Concludes a
separate treaty with the Pope, 30. Terms of the
peace of Cambray concluded with Francis by the
mediation of Margaret of Austria and Louise of
France, 32. Remarks on the advantages gained by
him in this treaty, and on his condud of the war, ib.
Visits Italy, 38. I-is policy on his publick entry into
Barcelona, 40. Has an interview with the Pope at
Bologna, ib. Motives for his moderation in Italy,
ih. His treaties with the states of, 41. Is crowned
King of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 43.
Summons a diet at Spires to confider the slate of
religion, 46. His deliberations with the Pope, re-
1]edting the expediency of calling a general council,
48. Appoints a diet at Augsburg, 50. Makes a
publick entry into that city, ib. His endeavours to
check the reformation, ib. Resolute behaviour of
the Protestant Princes toward him, 52. His fevcre
decree againtl the Protcltants, ib. Proposes hi;
brother Ferdinand to be ele6ted King of the Romans,
55. Is oppoled by the Proteflants, 56. Obtains
his election, 57. Is dclirous of an accommodation
with the l'rotctltnts, 60. Concludes a treaty witl

C c A than

them at Nuremburg, 6I. Raifesan army to oppose
the Turks under Solyman, and obliges him to retire,
63. Has another interview with the Pope, and
preses him to call a general council, 64. Procure.
a league of the Italian States to secure the peace ot
Italy, 67. Arrives at Barcelona, ib. His endea-
vours to prevent the negociations and meeting be-
tween the Pope and Francis, 71. Undertakes to
expell Barbarossa from Tunis, and restore Mulcy
Hafcen, og5. Lands in Africa, and besieges Go-
letta, I07. Takes Goletta, and seizes Barbarossa's
fleet, o09, 0lo. Defeats Barharoflf, and takes
Tunis, Iil, 112. Restores Muley Hafcen, and
the treaty between' them, 1r3. The glory acquired
by this enterprize, and the delivery of the Chriflian
captivcs, 114. Seizes the dutchy of Milan onr the
death of Franeis Sforza, 130. His policy with
regard to it, ib. Prepares for war with Francis,
132. His inveCtive against Francis at Rome before
the Pope in council, 133. Remarks on this tranf-
adtion, 136. Invades France, 139. Enters Pro-
vence and finds it desolated, 144. Besieges Mar-
feillcs and Aries, 146. His miserable retreat from
Provence, 148. His invasion of Picardy defeated,
50o. Is accused of poisoning the Dauphin, 152.
Improbability of its truth, ib. Conjedure concern-
ing the Dauphin's death, ib. Slanders invaded by
Francis, 155. A (ufpenfion of arms in Slanders,
how negociat(d, ib. A truce in Piedmont, 156.
Motives to these truces, ib. Negociation for peace
with Francis, t6i. Concludes a trucefor ten years at
Nice, 162. Remarks on the war, ib. His inter-
view with Francis, i64. Courts the friendship of
Henry VIII. of England, 172. Indulges the Protef-
tant Princes, 173. Q!tiets their apprehenions of
the Catholick league, 178. His troops mutiny,
18x. Afleinbles the Cortes of Cafile, 18.8. Dc-
firoys the ancient constitution of the Cortes, 184.
Jnitanceof the haughty spirit of the Spanish grandees,
185. Defircs pcrmiflion of Francis to pass through
Fiance to tih Nethcrlands, 195. His rccptio ill

l'rauce,

France, 196. His rigorous treatment of Ghent,
200. Refuses to fulfil his engagements to Francis,
202. Appoints a friendly conference between a
deputation of Catholick and Protestant divines before
the diet at Ratifbosl, 227. Result of this confer-
ence, 230. Grants a private exemption from op-
prefiions to the Protestants, 231. Undertakes to
reduce Algicrs, 239. Is near being cast away by a
violent storm, 243. Lands near Algiers, ib. His
soldiers exposed to a violent tempefr and rain, 245.
His fleet (fattered, 246. His fortitude under thcfe
diaflters, 248, 249. Leaves his enterprize and
embarks again, ib. Is diftrcflhd with another ftorn
at sea, ib. Takes advantage of the French invasion
of Spain to obtain subsidies from the Cortes, 261.
His treaty with Portugal, ib. Concludes a league
with Henry VIII. 263. Particulars of the treaty,
265. Over-runs Cleves, and his barbarous treat-
ment of the town of Duren, 269. His behaviour
to the Duke of Cleves, 270. Besieges Landrecy,
ib. Is joined by an Engl fli detachment, ib. Js
forced to retire, 271. Courts the favour of the
Protestants, 280. His negociations with the Pro-
teftants, at the diet of Spires, 281. Procures the
concurrence of the diet in a1 war against Francis,
286. Negociates a l;parate peace with the King ot
Denmark, ib. Invades Champagne, and invcfts St.
Difiere, 294. Want of concert between his opc;;i-
tions and those of Henry, who now invades France,
296. Obtains St. Difiere by artifice, 297. I-is
diftrefles and happy movements, 299. Concludes a
fcparate peace with Francis, 3ol. His motives to
this peace, 302. Hlis advantages by this treaty,
305. Obliges himself by a private article to extcr-
minate the Protestant hcrefy, 306. Is cruelly at-
sliced with the gout, 309. Diet at Worms, 311.
Arrives at Worms and alters his condua toward the
Protestants, 314. His contduc: on the death of the
Duke of Orleans, 319. His difliftulatiou to tbic
Landgrave of HicTe, 341. Concludes a tiuce witli
;olyman, 346. Holds a diet at Ratisbon, 347.

C c 3 Ilis

His declaration to the Proteltant deputies, 352. HIs
treaty with the Pope, concluded by the Caldinal of
Trent, ib. His circular letter to the Protestant
membersof the Germanick body, 354. Thl Pro-
teftants levy an army against him, 364.. Is unpre-
pared againfl them, 365. Puts them under the ban
of the Empire, 367. The Protcfiants declare war
against him, 369. Marches to join the troops ilint
by the Pope, 372. Farnefc, the Pope's lecate,
returns in disgust, 374. His prudent dcclefioli of
an adtion with the Protestants, 378. Is joined by
his Flemiib troops, ib. Proposals of peace madc by
the Proteffants, 391. Their army diiperfle, 392.
His rigorous treatment of the Protestant Princes,
395. Difnifilcs part of his armv, 398. The Pope
recals his troops, 399. His rcflecSion on Fiefco's
infurredion at Genoa, 417. Is alarmed at the hof-
tile preparations of Francis, 423. Death of Francis,
425. A parallel drawn between him and Francis,
426. Consequences of Francis 's death to him, 430.
Marches against the elctor of Saxony, 431. PaflCs
the Elbe, 434. Defeats the Saxon army, 438.
Takes the Eledtor prisoner, ib. His harsh reception
of him, 439. Invcits Wittemberg, 44x. Con-
demns the Elecor to death, by a court-martial,
443. The Eledor by treaty furrendcrs the elcEo-
rate, 446. 'I'he harsh terms iimpofcd by him on the
Landgrave of Hefle, 450. His ihaughty reception
of the Landgrave, 454. Detains him prisoner, 456.
Seizes the warlike flores of the league, 462. His
cruel exa&ions, ib. Aflemblcs a diet atAugfburg, 466.
Intimidates the diet by his Spanilh troops, ib. Rc-
eftablihfes the Romish worship in the churches of
Augiburg, 467. Seizes Placentia, 473. Orders
the diet to petition the Pope for the return of the
council to Trent, 476. Protecs against the council
of Bologna, 479. Causes a fytni. of faith to be
prepared for Germany, 48oJ Lays it before the
diet, 482. The Interim opposed, 488. And re-
jeced by the Imperial cities, 490. Reduces the city
ds Augblurg to lubmifion, 492. Repeats the fame

violence

violence at Ulm, ib. Carries the Elecor and I,and-
grave with him into the Low-Countries, 494. Pro-
cures his son Philip to be recognized by the States of
the Netherlands, 496. Establishes the Interim
there, 497. Reassembles the diet at Augsburg,
under the influence of his Spanish troops, IV. ic.
The city of Magdeburg refuses to admit the Interi:r,
and prepares for rcfiftance, 20. Appoints Maurici
Eletor of Saxony to reduce it, 21. Promifcs to
protet the Protestants at the council of Trent, 2'}.
Arbitrarily releases Maurice and the Eie;tor of
Brandenburg, from their engagements to the Land-
grave for the recovery of his liberty, 24. Endea-
vou:s to secure the Empire for his son Philip, 26.
His brother Ferdinand refuses to resign his preten-
sions, 27. Besieges Parma, but is repulsed, 36.
Proceeds rigorously against the Protestants, 38.
Endeavours to support the council of Trent, 39.
Puts Magdeburg under the ban of the Empire, 40.
Absolves the city, 46. Is involveidin disputes be-
tween the counc.l and the Protestant deputies, con-.
cerning their safe conduct, 49. Begins to suspect
Maurice of Saxony, 66. Circumifances which
contributed to deceive him with regard to Maurice,
68. Maurice takes the field against him, 70.
Maurice seconded by Henry II. of France, 72. His
diflrefs and consternation, 73. An inefflctual nego-
ciation with Maurice, 75. Flics from Inlpriuck,
80. Releases the Elceor of Saxony, 82. Is Ifol-
cited to satisfy the demands of Maurice, 9r. His
prefentdifficulties, 93. Refuses any direa compli-
ance with the demands of Maurice, 97. Is diipofLd
to yield, by the progress of Maurice's operatiols, q8.
Makes a .pace with Maurice at Paflau, i o. Rc-
flecions on this treaty, 103. Turns his arms
against France, 112. Lays siege to Metz, I]G.
Is joined by Albert of Brandenburg, 117. His army
difrefled by the vigilance of the Duke of Guili,

19. Raises the siege and retires in a shatterel
condition, 122. Cosmo di Medici asserts his indc-
pendency against him, 124. Siena revolts againfll

C c 4niln,

him, 124. Is deje&ed at his bad success, 128. Takes
Terrouane, and demolishes it, 138. Takes Hefden,
ib. Proposes his son Philip as a husband to Mary
Queen of England, 155. The articles of the mar-
riage, 157. Marches to oppose the French opera-
tions, i67. Is defeated by Henry, 168 Invades
Picardy, x69. Grants Siena, subdued by Cosmo di
Medici, to his son Philip, 181. A diet at Augsburg
opened by Ferdinand, 191. Leaves the interior
administration of Germany to Ferdinand, 196.
Applies again to Ferdinand to resign his pretensions
of fucceflion to Philip, but is refused, 197. Recess
of the diet of Augiburg on the fubje6 of religion,
200. A treaty concluded between Pope Paul IV.
and Henry II. of France against him, 223. Resigns
his hereditary dominions to his fan Philip, ib. His
motives for retirement, 224. Had long meditated
this resignation, 228. The ceremony of this deed,
230. His speech on this occasion, 23I. Resigns
allb the dominions of Spain, 235. His intended
retirement into Spain retarded, 236. A truce for
five years concluded with France, 239. Endeavours
in vain to fecurethe Imperial crown for Philip, 254.
Resigns the Imperial crown to Ferdinand, 255.
Sets out for Spain, 256. His arrival and reception
in Spain, 257. Is difirefied by his son's ungrateful
negle& in paying his pension, 258. Fixes his retreat
in the monastery of St. Juftus in Plazencia, ib. The
situation of this monafiery, and his apartments,
described, 25q. Contrast between the conduct of
Charles and the Pope, 260. His manner of life in
his retreat, 311. His death precipitated by his
monaflick severities, 315. Celebrates his own fune-
ral, ib. Dies, 316 His charater, 317. A re-
view of the slate of Europe during his reign, 337.
His acquisitions to the crown of Spain, 341.
C(hateau Cambr/Jfis the conferences for peace between

Philip II. of Spain, and Henry II. of France, re-
moved thither from Cercamp, IV. 326. The peace
retarded by the demand of Elizabeth of England for
efftitution of Calais, 327. Particulars of the treaty

fignch

fined there between England and France, 329. Terms
of the pacification between Philip and Henry, 332.
Cheratgto, nuncio from the Pope to the diet at Nurem-

burgh, his inftruttions, II. 296. Opposes the as;
fembling a general council, 298.
Chicvres, William de Croy, lord of, appointed by

Maximilian to superintend the education of his
grandson Charles II. 29. Adrian of Utrecht made
preceptor under him, 30 His direcion of the
fludies of Charles, 32. His avarice corrupts the
Flemish court of Charles, 52. Negociates a peace
with France, 55. Endeavours to prevent an intcr-
view between Charles and Xinicnes, 57. Attends
Charles to Spain, 58. His alccndancy over Charles,
63. His extortions, 64. His death and the sup-
posed causes of it, 19o.
Chriflians, primitive, why averse to the principles of

toleration, IV. 202.
Clement VII. Pope, his elcetion, II. 283. His cha-

radter, ib. Grants Cardinal XVolfcy a legatine
commiflion in England for life, 284. Results to
accede to the league against Francis, 288. Labours
to accommodate the differences between the con-
tending parties, ib. His proceedings with regard to
the reformers, 303. Concludes a treaty of neu-
trality with Francis, 319. Enters into a fcparate
treaty with Charles after the battle of Pavia, and
the consequences of it, 335. Joins in an alliance
with Francis Sforza, and the Venctians, agaiuat the
Emperor, 379. Absolves Francis from his oath to
observe the treaty of Madrid, 380. Cardinal Co-
lonna seizes Rome, and invefls him in the caltle of
St. Angelo, 389. Is forced to an accommodation
with the Imperialists, ib. His revenge against the
Colonna family, 394. Invades Naples, ib. H-is
territories invaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity
on the occasion, 397. Concludes a treaty with
Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 398. His conftcrnation
on Bourbon's motions towards Rome, 402. Rome
taken, and himself bcficgcd in the cafle of St. An-
gelo, 405. Surrenders himlclf prifoncr, 407. ''he

Florentincs

Florentines revolt against him, III. 4. Pays
Charles a ransom for his liberty, with other flipula-
tions, Io. Makes his escape from confinement,
I . Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec, ib. Is
jealous of the intentions of Francis, and negociates
with Charles, 19. His motives and steps towards
an accommodation, 29. Concludes a separate
treaty with Charles, 31. His interview with the
Emperor at Bologna, 40. Crowns Charles, King
of Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, 43.
His representations to the Emperor against calling a
general council, 48. H-s another interview with
Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties raised by
him to the calling a general council, 64. Agrees
to a league of the Italian States for the peace of
Italy, 66. His interview and treaty with Francis,
71. Marries Catharine di Medici to the Duke of
Orleans, ib. His protraction of the affair of the
divorce solicited by Henry VIII. 72. Reverses
Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, 73. Henry renounces his fu-
premacy, ib. His death, 74. Refle&ions on his
Pontificate, 75.
Clergy, Romilh, remarks on the immoral lives of, and

how they contributed to the progress of the Refor-
mation, II. 150. The facility with which they
obtained pardons, 152. Their usurpations in Ger-
many, during the disputes concerning investitures,
155. Their other opportunities of aggrandizing
themselves there, I56. Their personal immunities,
157. Their encroachments on the laity, I58.
The dreadful effecs of spiritual censures, 159.
Their devices to secure their usurpations, x60. The
united effe& of all thece circupimances, 166. Op-
pofc the advancement of learning in Germany, 17 i.
Clcves, invaded and over-run by the Emperor Charles

V. III. 269. Cruel treatmentof Duren, ib. Hu-
miliating fubmiflion of the Duke, ib.
Cnipperdoling, a leader of the Anabaptists at Munfler,

an account of, III. 80. 83. See dnabaptils.

Cognac,

Cognac, an alliance formed there against Charles V.

by the Pope, the Venetians, the DuKe of Miilan,
and Francis I. II. 379.
Ccligni, admiral, governor of Picardv, defends St.

Q(lintin ;gainft the Spanish general Emmanuel
Phillibert Duke of Savoy, IV. 270. His brother
D'Andelot defeated in an endeavour to join the gar-
rifon, 272. But D'Andelot enters the town, 273.
His character, 278. The town taken by aflault,
and himself taken prisoner, 279.
Colgne, Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bohcmia,

brother to the Emperor Charles V. elected King of
the Romans by the college of Eledors there, III. 57.

Herman, Count de Wied, archbilhop and

clector of, inclines to the Reformation, and is op-
posed by his canons, who appeal to the Emperor
and Pope, III. 316. Is deprived and excommuni-
cated, 344. R(figns, 396.
Colonna, Cardinal Pompco, his characer, and rival-

flip with Pope Clement VII. II. 388. Sci/es
Rome, and invcfts the Pope in the cattle of St.
Angelo, 389. Is degraded, and the reft of the fa-
mily excommunicated by the Pope, 394. Is pre-
vailed on by the Pope when prisoner with the Impc-
rialifts to solicit his delivery, III. Io.
-- -Profpcr, the Italian general, his charaRr,

II. 204. Appointed to command the troops in the
invasion of Milan, ib. Drivcs the French out of
Milan, 208. His army how weakened at the death
of Pope Leo X. 209. D)ccats Mareclhal de Lau-
trec, at Bicocca, 213. Reduces (Genoa, 216.
'The bad tate of his troops when the French invade
Milian, 281. Is enabled to defend the city b;, the
ill conduct of Bonnevit the French conimna;idcr,
282. Dies, and is fuccceded by Lannoy, 289.
Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Fcl-

dinand of Aragon, to obtain Joanna's conlent to
his regency ol Castile, 11. 12. 'Thrown into a
dungeon by the Archduke Philip, ib.
Cotf;ij/on of Augsburg, drawn up by Mclalntilon,

11, 51.

Ln/lancej

Con/jance, the privileges of that city taken away by the

Emperor Charles V. for difobedicnce to the Interim,
Ill. 497.
Corsairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of, III. 9g.

See Algiers. IBarbamrota.
Cortes of Aragon, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, II. 4. Not allowed to affienble
in the name of Charles V. 66. Their opposition to
his desires, ib. Is prevailed on by the Emperor to
recognize his Ton Philip as fuccefibr to that kingdom,
III. 261. See Spain.
Cortes of Castile, acknowledges the Archduke Philip's

title to the crown, II. 4. Is prevailed on to ac-
knowledge Ferdinand regent, according to Isabella's
will, 9. Acknowledges Philip and Joanna King and
Queen of Castile, and their son Charles, Prince of
Asturias, 19. Declares Charles King, and votes
him a free gift, 62. Summoned by Charles to meet
at Compoftella in Galicia, 92. Tumultuary pro-
ceedings thereupon, 93. A donative voted, 95.
Loses all its influence by the dissolution of the Holy
Junta, 262. Its backwardness to grant supplies for
the Emperor's wars in Italy, 391. Refuses his
pressing solicitations for a supply, III. 9. Assembled
at Toledo to grant supplies to the Emperor, 182.
The remonstrances of, ib. The ancient conftitu-
tion of, subverted by Charles, 183. See Spain.
-- of Valencia, prevailed on by the Emperor

Charles V. to acknowledge his son Philip fucceifor
to that kingdom, III. 261. See Spain.
Cortona, Cardinal di, governor of Florcnce for the

Pope, expelled by the Florentines, on the Pope's
captivity, III. 4.

Coi;no di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmner, archbishop of Canterbury, annuls the mar-

riage of Henry VIII. with Catharine of Aragon,
which was refused to Henry by the Pope, Il. 77.
His sentence reversed by the Pope, 73.
Cr'/j), peace of, between the Emperor and Francis,

lii. 3C1.

Cr'o)'

Cry, VWilliam de, nephew to Chievres, made arch-

bishop of Toledo, by Charles V. II. 65. Dies,
261.

D
D'Albert, John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre

by Ferdinand of Aragon, II. 26. Invades Navarre,
but is defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 50.
D'AIembert, M. his ohfervation on the order of Je-

suits, III. 218. Note.
D'Andlelt, brother to Coligni, is defeated by the

Duke of Saxony in an endeavour to succour St.
Quintin, IV. 272. But enters the town with the
fugitives, 273. The town taken by aflault, 279.
Dauphin of France, eldest son of Francis I. is delivered

tup with the Duke of Orleans, to the Emperor
Charles V. in exchange for his father, as hoftagcs
for the perfomance of the treaty of Madrid, II.
362. His death imputed to poison, 11. 151. The
most probable cause of it, 152.

late Duke of Orleans, second son of Francis I.

commands an army and invades Spain, III. 258. Is
forced to abandon the siege of Pcrpignan, 259. Is
difratisfied at the peace of Crefpy, .07. Makes a
secret protestation against it, 308.
--- of France, son of Henry II. contratled to

Mary the young Queen of Scotland, Ii. 475. Is
married to her, IV. 300.
Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions in,

during the fixtecnth century, III. 371.
---- King Of, joins the 'rotethnt league at
Smalkalde, 111. 177.
De Retz, Cardinal, writes a history of Ficfco's con-

fpiracy while a youth, III. 416. Note.
Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of France,

affilts the Guises in persuading Henry to an alliance
with Pope Paul IV. against the Empercr, IV. 219.
Induces Henry to break the treaty of Vauccllcs, 24).
Marries hergrand-daughter to one of Montmiorclliy',

Ull ,

sons, 309. Joins Montmorcncy againfl the
Guicls, ih.
Dcria, Andrew, aflifts Lautrec in subduing Genoa,

III. 7. Conquers and kills Moncada in a sea en-
gagement before the harbour of Naples, 18. His
char;ater, 20. Is difgufled with the behaviour of
the French, 21. Revolts to the Emperor, 22.
(pens to Naples a communication by sea, 23.
Rcfcues Genoa from the French, 25. Rcftores
the government of, to the citizens, 26. The
Jefpedt paid to his memory, 27. Attends the Em-
peror Charles in his difaltrous expedition againfl
Algiers, 242. Hiis partial fondness for his kiniman
Giannetino, 402. His narrow escape in Lavagno's
infurreation, 413. Returns on Lavagno's death,
and the difperlion of his party, 416. See Genoa
and Lavagno.
--.-- - Giannetino, his charaictr, III. 402. Is

murdered by Lavagno's conspirators, 413.
Dover, an interview there between Henry VIII. and

the Emperor Charles V. II. Io8.
D'auLt, a corsair, commands the Turkish fleet which

ravages the coasts of Naples, IV. I28.
1)!, Prat, chancellor of France, his character, II. 277.

Commences a law-suit against Charles Duke of
Bourbon, for his eftatc, at the instigation of Louifi
the King's mother, ib.
Du,'lling, the custom of, how rendered gclera;l, 111.

16. ItJ influence oni manicrs, ib.
Dlorr in CIoVCs, taken by the Emperor Charles V.

the inll;ilit.llts put to the sword, and the town burnt.,
111. 469.

E
l',-i.r, nn allvelr.lry of Luther's, holds a publick dif-

puilliion with hilm a;t leipfic, on the validity of the
P)a;lil authorlitty, 11. 1 37.
'L,/,Jia//iIaI, cinitrc(s of the Romifli church, the dread-
ful cLHtis of, 1. 159.

L' .lf.w. _'? .

Ecckfla/fical Reservation, in the recess of the diet of

Augsburg, remarks on, III. 6i.
Edinburgh, plundered and burnt by the Earl of Hert-

ford, JII. 295.

Edward VI. of England, his characer, IV. I54.
Egmont, count of, commands the cavalry at the battle

of St. Quintin, and puts Montmorency's troops to
flight, 1V. 272. Engages Marelhal de Tcrmes,
and defeats him by the casual arrival of an English
squadron, 303.
Egypt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman Em-

pire, II. 72.
Ehrenburg, the castle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony,

IV. 78.
Eignotz, a faction in Geneva so termed, an account of,

I11. 126.
Elizabeth fifler of Mary, her accession to the crown of

England, IV. 322. Her charactcr, ib. Is addril-
ed by Philip of Spain, and Henry of France, fr
marriage, ib. Her prudent condudt between them,
324. How determined againit -Henry, 325. Her
motives for reje&ing Philip, 326. Retuins Philip
an cvafive answer, ib. Demands refcitution of
Calais at the conferences at Chateau Cambrelis,
327. Eflabliihes the Proteitant religion in Eng-
land, 328. Treaty between her and Henry signcd
at Chateau Cambrefis, 329.

Emnmanuel Phillibert, Uuke of Savoy. See Savoy.
England, by what means that kingdom was treed from

the Papal supremacy, and received the doctrines of
the Refornation, III. 73. Mary, Queen of, mar-
ried to Prince Philip, son of the Emperor Charles V.
contrary to the fenle of the nation, IV. 156. 'The
marriage ratified by parliament, i6o. Is rclutantly
engaged by Philip, now King of Spain, in the war
agaiilt} Flancc, 268. Mary levies money by her
prerogative, to carry on the war, 269. Calais taken
by the Duke of Guise, 294. Guilnes and Hamc;
taken, lb. DLcath of Mary and accession of Eliz.a-
beth, 322. The Protestant religion eltabliflied by
Elizabeth, 328. Treaty with France ligncd ;Lt

Clhatcau

Chateau Cambrcfis, 329. Its interior strength how
increascd by the conduc of Henry VIII. 349. Its
power no longer fruitlessly wafted on the continent,
352. Alteration of its conduc toward Scotland,
35.3.
Enguien, the count de, besieges Carignan, Ill. 28q.

Desires of Francis, permission to engage Guafto,
290. Defeats Guaflo in a pitched battle, 291.
Erard de la Mark, ambafadot of Charles V. to the

diet of Frankfort, his private motives for thwarting
the pretensions of Francis I. of France, to the Im-
perial crown, II. 84. Signs the capitulation of tho
Germanick body, on behalf of Charles, 86.
lit', ;us, some account of, II. 172. Preceded Luther

in his censures against the Romish church, ib. Con-
curs with him in his intentions of reformation, 173.
Motives which checked him in this, ib.
Esjurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in memory of

the battle of St. Quintin, IV. 281.
Furopr, a short view of the slate of, at the death of

the Emperor Maximilian, II. 69. The contem-
porary monarchs of, all illuflrious, at the time of
Charles V. 112. The method of carrying on war
in, how improved beyond the practice of earlier
aes, II. 285. T'he fntimcnnts of, on Charles's
treatment of the Pope, 111. i. A review ofthe rate
of, during the reign of the Emperor Charles V.
IV. 336. The remarkable change in, at this
period, 8.1. How naflced by the revolt of Luther
;! iinft the chijrch of R ome, -}56.
E:Itcmi, Kinag of Algicr , engages Bib)rarolfa in his

fcrvice, and is Inurdered by him, II. 98, 99.
E.vxcoanmuUiicio7n in the Romish chuich, the original

inlittution of, andl the ulc made of it, II. r59.

F
Farnese, Alexander, his unanimous clecion to the

Papacy, III. 74. See Parudl Il[.
--- Cardinil, accompanies the troops sent by the

Pope to the Emperor, againlft the arriy of the Pro.

tcftant

teftant league, III. 373. Returns difguAed, 374.
Leads the troops home again by the Pope's order,
399 Contributes to the eleation of Cardinal di
Monte to the Papacy, IV. 6.
Parnefe, Otavio, grand Con of Pope Paul III. endea-

vours to firprifeParma, and enters into treaty with
the Emperor, IV. 3. Is confirmed in Parma, by
Julius, 32. Procures an alliance with France, 35.
Is attacked by the Imperialists, but successfully pro-
tected by the French, ib. Placentia restored to
him by Philip II. of Spain, 285.
S----- Peter Lewis, natural son of Pope Paul III.

obtains of his father the dutchies of Parma and
Placentia, III. 320. His character, 470, 471. Is
afliafinated, 472.
Ferdinand King of Aragon, how he acquired his king-

doms, II. 2. Invites his daughter Joanna, and her
husband, Philip Archduke of Austria, to Spain, 3.
Becomes jealous of Philip, 4. Carries on his war
with France vigorously, notwithstanding Philip's
treaty with Lewis, 6. His Queen liabella dies%
and leaves him regent of Castile, under reftriftions,
8. Resigns the kingdom of Castile, and is acknow-
ledged Regent by the Cortes, ib. His character,
9. His maxims of government, odious to the Caf-
tilians, ib. Required by Philip to resign his regency,
IT, Joanna's letter of consent procured by him,
intercepted by Philip, and herself confined, 12. Is
deserted by the Castilian nobility, ib. Determines
to exclude his daughter from the fucceflion by mar-
rying, 13. Marries Germaine de Foix, niece to
Lewis Xll. of France, 14. A treaty between him
and Philip at Salamanca, by which the regency oi
Castile is jointly veled in them, and Joanna, 15.
Prevails on Henry VII. of England to dctain Philip
for three months, when driven on that coast, ib.
The Castilians declare against him, ib. Resigns the
regency of Caltilc, by treaty, 17. Interview between
him and Philip, ib. Is ablsllt, at Naples, when
Philip died, 23. Returns and gains with tlhe Ic-
gcIcy of Cafile, the good will ot the natives by hli

VOL. IV. I) d pruldent

prudent adminifiration, 24. Acquires by difho-
nourable means the kingdom of Navarre, 26. How
he destroyed his conltitution, 27. Endeavours to
diminifl his grandson Charles's power, by a will in
favour of Ferdinand, ib. Alters his will in favour
of Charles, 29. Dies, ib. Review of his admi-
niitration, 34. Ximenes appointed by his will,
lcgent of Castile, until the arrival of Charles V.
35. Fer;dinand, second son of Philip Archduke of Austria

born, II. 6. Left regent of Aragon, by his grand-
father Ferdinand, 27. This revoked by a fubfe-
quent will, by which he obtains only a pension, 29.
Dilfontented with his disappointment, he is taken to
Madrid under the eye of Cardinal Ximenes, 39.
Sent by Charles V. to visit their grandfather Maxi-
rmilian, 65. Is eleEted King of Hungary and Bo-
hemia, 410. Signs a deed called the Reverse, ib.
'The Emperor endeavours to get him elected King of
the Romans, III. 55. He is opposed by the Pro-
teftants, 56. Is crowned King of the Romans, 57.
Forms a confederacy against the Anabaptists at Mun-
fter, 87. Opposes the restoration of Ulric Duke of
Wurtemberg, 91. Recognizes his title and con-
cludes a treaty with him, 92. His kingdom of
Hungary wrested from him by John Zapol Scaepius,
232. Besieges the young King Stephen and his
mother in Buda, but is defeated by the Turks, 235.
His mean offers of fubmiflion to the Porte, ib.
Which are rejected, 237. Courts the favour of the
Proteftanta, 279. Opens the diet at Worms, 311.
Requires it to submit to the decisions of the council
of Trent, 312. Agrees to pay a tribute to Soly-
nan for -lungary, 34i6. Encroaches on the liberties
of Bohemia, 463. His rigorous treatment of Prague,
465. Disarms the Bohemians, ib. Obtains the
Iovcreignty of the city of Constance, 497. Invades
Tranlylvania by invitation of Martiiuzzi, IV. 52.
()btains the rcfignation of Transylvania from Queen
lfubella, 54. Orders Martinuzzi to be afaflinatcd,
57. Enters into negociation with Maurice on behalf

as

bs the Emperor, 90. His motives for promoting
the Emperor's agreeing with Maurice, 96. Isabella
and her son Stephen, recover pofeflion of Tranfyl-
tania, 14r. Opens a diet at Augsburg, and excites
rfupicions in the Protcftants, 192. The Emperor
leaves the internal adminifiration of German affairs
to him, I96. Is again applied to by the Emperor
to rcfign his pretenlions of fucceflion to Philip, but
rcfufes, 197. Endeavours therefore to gain the
friendship of the diet, 198. Again refules the Em-
peror's solicitations, 254. Charles resigns the Im-
perial crown to him, 255. Assembles the college
of Electors at Frankfort, which acknowledges him
Emperor of Germany, 296. The Pope refuits to
acknowledge him, 297.
Feurlal government, a view of, as it existed in Spain,

Il. 230.

Feifo, Count of Lavagna. Sec Lavagna.
--- Jerome, engages in his brother's conspiracy,

and fails in securing Andrew Doria, III. 412. IHis
imprudent vanity on his brother's death, 414.
Shuts himself up in a fort on his eitate, 417. Is
reduced and put to death, 425.

Slanders. See Netherlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt againit Pope Cle-

ment VII. on the news of his captivity, and recover
their liberty, Ill. 4. Arc reduced to fubjetion to
Alexander di Medici, by the Emperor, 43. Alex-
ander di Medici, Duke of, aflhalnatedby his kinfinan
Lorcnzo, 166. Cofino di Medici advanced to the
fovcreignty, 167. Cofrfo, supportcd by the Emperor,
defeats the parti fans of Lorenzo, 69. Colino atflcl t
his independency on the Emperor, IV. 124.
Ionf;ca, Antonio de, commander in chief of the forces

in Spain, ordered by Cardinal Adrian to bcficgc the
insurgents in Segovia, II. 22.. Is denied liberty ot
taking military fIores, by the inhabitants of Mclirla
del Campo, ib. Attacks and almolt burns the
whole town, ib. Is repulfid, ib. His huutf at
Valladulid burnt, 229.

1) d, , France,

France, the acquisitions of that kingdom, during the

reign of the Emperor Charles V. IV. 344. The
character of the people of, 346. The good confe-
quences of the civil wars in that kingdom to the
reft of Europe, 348.
Francis I. King of France, concludes a peace with

Charles V. and the conditions of the treaty, Il. 55.
Sends a fruitless embassy to Charles for the reftitu-
tion of Navarre to the young King, 67. Aspires
to the Imperial crown at the death of Maximilian,
7 r. Reasons by which he supported his pretensions,
72. Remarks on the equipages of his ambafladors
to the German States, 75. His pretensions adopted
by the Venetians, 76. Loses the election, 85.
Rife of the rivalfhip between him and Charles, 98.
Courts the favourof Cardinal Wolfey, o16. Pro-
mises Wolfey his interest for the Papacy, zo1. Has
an interview with Henry VIII. of England, o19.
Wreffles with Henry, and throws him, ib. Note.
His advantages over Charles, at the commencement
of hostilities between them, I84. Concludes an
alliance with the Pope, i88. Invades and reduces
Navarre, in the name of Henry D'Albert, son of
John, the former King, 192. The French driven
out by the imprudence of L'Efparre their general,
who is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, 193. Re-
takes Moufon from the Imperialifls, 197. Invades
the Low-Countries, but loses the opportunities of
success by imprudence, ib. Rejeds the demands of
Charles at the congress at Calais, 198. A league
concluded between Charles and Henry VIII. againit
him, 199. His imprudent appointment of the
Marechal de Foix to the government of Milan, 202.
De Foix attacks Reggio, but is repulsed by the go-
vernor Guicciardini the historian, 203. The Pope
declares against him, ib. His embarrassments on the
invasion of Milan, 205. His mother seizes the
money appointed for payment of the Milanese troops,
206. Milan taken, and the French driven out,
208. Levies a body of Swiss, 213. Who infill

2 o01

on giving a precipitate battle to the Imperialists,
which is loft, 214. War declared against him by
Henry VIII. 216. His expedients to supply his
treasury, 217. The plan pursued by him to refilf
the incursions of the English, 219. Picardy invaded
by Henry, ill. The Venetians league with the Empe-
ror against him, 272. To which PopeAdrian accedes,
ib. His expeditious movement against the Milancfe,
274. Disconcerted by the Duke of. Bourbon's con-
fpiracy, ib. Taxes him with betraying his cause,
which Bourbon denies, 279. Bourbon escapes to
Italy, and Francis returns, ib. Appoints the admiral
Bonnivet to command against the Milancfe, 280.
Picardy invaded by the d'uke of Suffolk, who is driven
back, 286. Repulses the invasion of Guienne and
Burgundy by Charles, 287. His successful close of
the campaign, ib. His prudent care to disappoint
the Imperialists in their invasion of Provence, 3I0.
Assembles an army, which caufcs the Imperialists to
retire from Marfcilles, ib. Determines to invade
the Milanese, 313. Appoints his mother Louise
regent during his abfencc, ib. Enters Milan, and
takes pofueffion of the city, 314. Advised by Bon-
nivct to besiege Pavia, 316. His vigorous attacks
on Pavia, 317. Concludes a treaty of neutrality
with Pope Clement, 319. His imprudent invasion
of Naples, 320. Relolves by Bonnivct's advice to
attack Bourbon's army, advanced to the relief of
Pavia, 323. Is routed at the battle of Pavia, 324.
Is taken prisoner, 326. Is sent to the Cafile of
Pizzitchitone under the custody of Don Ferdii;iald
Alarcon, 327. Refutes the propositions made to
him by Charles, 339. Is carried to Spain on his
delire of a perbonal interview with Charles, 340.
Is rigorously treated in Spain, 349. Falls danger-
oufly ill, 350. Is visited by Charles, 351. Re-
iolves to relign his kingdom, 355. Is delivered
from his captivity by the treaty of Madrid, 357.
His secret protefiations against the validity of this
treaty, 359. Marries the Queen of Portugal, 360.
Rccovers his liberty, and the Dauphin and the Duke

Dd 3 of

of Orleans delivered up hofiages to Charles for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, 362. Vrites
a letter of acknowledgment to Henry V I. of Eng-
land, 376. His reply to the Imperial ambafl'dors,
377. Enters into a league with the PopC, the Ve-
netians and Sforza, against Charles, 379 Is ah-
solved from his oath to obfcrve the treaty of Madrid,
380. His behaviour to the iEmperor's fccond cm-
bafl', 383. Is dispirited by his former ill success,
384. Enters into a trea;ty with Hcnry VIII. of
England againfl the Emperor, III. ?. Succeics of
his general Lautrec in Italy, 7. His reply to the
Emperor's overturcs, 13. Declares war against
him, and challenges him to tingle combat, I4.
'Treats Andrew Doria ill, who revolts from him to
the Emperor, 22. His army, under Saluces, driven
out of Italy, 24. His troops in Milan routed, 28.
His endeavours toward an accommodation, 29.
Terms of the peace of Cambray, concluded by the
mediation of his mother Louise and Margaret of
Aufsria, 32. Remarks on the sacrifices made by
him in this trenty, and on his conduct of the war,
33. Leagues fecrctly with the Proteflant Princes,
57. His measures to elude the treaty of Cambray,
68. His negociations with the Pope, 69. His
interview and treaty with the Pope, 71. Gives the
Duke of Orleans in marriage to Catherine di Medici,
il. Negociates a treaty with Francis Sforza, Duke
of Milan, 116. His envoy Mcrveille cxccuted at
Milan for murder, 17. Is disappointed in his
endeavours to negociate alliances against the Em-
peror, i 8. Invites Melamnithon to Paris, 119.
Evidences his zeal for the Romish religion, 120.
Causes of his quarrel with the Duke of Savoy, 123.
Seizes the Duke's territories, 124. His prctenfions
to the dutchy of Milan, on the death of Francis
Sforza, 130. The Empcrol's invective againfthim
before the Pope in council, 133. Is invaded by
Charles, 138. His prudent plan of defence, 142.
Joins the army under Montmorency, 148. Death
of the Dauphin, 150. Obtains a decree of the par-

liamcnt;

liament of Paris, agaiift the Emperor, 153. Invades
the Low Countries, 154. A suspension of arms in
Slanders, and how negociated, 155. A truce il
Piedmont, 156. Motives to these truces, I57.
Concludes an alliance with Solyman the Macrn.li-
cent, 158. Ncgociations for a peace with the Em-
peror, 160. Concludes a truce for ten years at
Nice, 162. Reflections on the war, ib. His inter-
view with Charles, It3. Marries Mary of Guile
to James V. of Scotland, 17r. Refutes the offers
of the deputies of Ghent, 192. Informs Charles of
the offer made by them, 193. Grants the Em-
peror leave to pats through France to the Nether-
lands, 195. His reception of the Emperor, 197.
Is deceived by the Emperor in refpcd to Milan, 201.
His ambassador to the Porte, Rincon, murdered by
the Imperial governor of the Milanese, 253. Pre-
pares to resent the injury, 254. Attacks the Em-
peror with five armies, 257. His firt attempts
rendered abortive, by the imprudence of the Duke
of Orleans, 259. Renews his negociations with
Sultan Solyman, 26-. Invades the Low Countries,
268. Forces the Emperor to raise the liege of
Landrecy, 271. Dismisses Barbarofl a, 288. Gives
the count d' Enguien permiflion to engage Guaflt,
290. Relieves Paris, in danger of being furpried
by the Emperor, 300 Agrees to a separate peace
with Charles, 301. Henry's haughty rcturnl to li;
overtures of peace, 307. DI'ath of the Duke of
Orleans, 319. Peace of Canipe, 381. Pcrccivcs
a necefity of checking the Emperor's an:bitious
designs, 420. Forms a general leagute aganllt himl,
ib. Iies, 425. His life and clllracrer summarily
compared with those of Charles, 4.26. ConfequcnCes
of his death, 430.
Francis 11. his acceflion to the crown of France, alnd

charadter, IV. 335.
Francfort, the diet of, assemblcd for the choice of

an Emperor at the death of Maximilian, II. 8o.
Names and views of the Electors, ib. The Empire
pffered to Frederick of Saxony, 81. Who rtjects

Dd 4 it,

it, with his rcafons, 82. ChoofesCharles V. Em-
peror, 85. His confirmation of the Germanick pri-
vileges required and agreed to, 8b. City of, em-
braces the reformed religion, 295. The college of
Elecors assembled there by Ferdinand, who is ac,
knowledged Emperor of Germany, IV. 296.
fI'ederick Duke of Saxony, assembles with the other

Electors at the diet of Frankfort, to choose an Em-
peror, II. 8o. The Empire offered to him, 81.
Rejeds it, and votes for Charles V. 82. Refuses
the presents of the Spanish ambaffadars, 83. This
disinterested behaviour confirmed by the testimony
of historians, ib. Note. Choofes Martin Luther phi-
lofophical profeflbr at his university of Wittcmberg,
120. Encourages Luther in his opposition to indul-
gences, 123. Proteds him againit Cajctan, I31.
Causes Luther to be seized at his return from the
diet of Worms, and conceals him at Wartburg,
180. Dies, 374.
Fregofo, the French ambassador to Venice, murdered

by the Marquis del Guafto, the Imperial governor
of the Milanese, III. 253.
Frandfperg, George, a German nobleman, tome ac-

count of, he joins the army of Charles V. II. 390.

G
General of the Jesuits, an inquiry into his office and

defpotick authority, III. 208.
Geneva, an account of its revolt againfi the Duke of

Savoy, III. 125.
Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, III. 7.

The French endeavour toprejudice its trade in favour
of Savona, 21. Is rescued from the French by An-
drew Doria, 25, The government of, fettled by
the difinterefRednefs of Doria, 26. The honour paid
to Doria's memory, 27. Is visited by the Emperor,
39. A scheme formed to overturn the conflitu-
tion of, by Fiefco, count of Lavagno, 404. He
assembles his adherents, 408. The conspirators
rally forth from Lavagno's palace, 412. Deputies
C(at to know LavagnQ's terms, 4!3. Lavagno

drowned?

drowned, 414. The infurreeion ruined by the im-
prudence of his brother Jerome Ficfco, ib. The
conspirators disperse, 415. Jerome reduced and
put to death, 425.
Germanada, an afbociation in Valencia, so termed, on

what occasion formed, II. 263. Refuse to lay
down their arms, ib. Their resentment levelled at
the nobility, who raise an army against them, 264.
Defeat the nobles in several ations, 265. But are
routed and dispersed by them, ib.
Germany, state of, at the death of the Emperor Maxi-

milian, II. 69. Charles V. of Spain, and Francis I.
of France, form pretensions to the Imperial crown,
71. Their refpetive reasons offered in favour of
their claims, 72, 73. Views and interests of the
other European States in relation to the competitors,
75. Henry VIII. of England, advances a claim, 76.
But is discouraged from prosecuting it, 77. How
the Papacy was likely to be affected in the choice of
an Emperor, 78. Advice of Pope Leo X. to the
German Princes, ib. Opening of the diet at Frankfort,
80. In whom the election of an Emperor is vefled, ib.
Views of theElcdors, ib. The Empireoffered to Fre-
derick of Saxony, 8 I.Who rejects it, and his reasons,
ib. Charles V. chosen, 85. The capitulation of the
Germanick privileges confirmed by him, 86. Charles
sets out for, 96. Charles crowned at Aix-la-Cha-
pclle, i x. Commencement of the Reformation
there, by Martin Iuther, I 3. Treatment of the
bull of excommunication publihecd againfit Luther,
140. The usurpations of the clergy there, during
the difputcs conccrning inveftiturcs, 155. The
clergy of, mofly foreigners, 16i. The benefices
of, nominated by the Pope, 162. The expedient
of the Emperors for refiraining this power of the
Pope, ineffectual, 163. The great progrcfs of
Luther's dotlrincs in, 295. Grievances of the
peasants, 364. InfurreEtion in Suabia, 365. The
memorial of their grievances, 366. h'Ie infurrec-
tion quelled, 367. Another infurrcqtion in Thurin-
gia, ib. How the houfc of Austria became so for-

midable

midable in, 411. Proceedings relating to the Re-
formation there, ib. Great progress of the Re-
formation there, III. 44. Ferdinand King of Hun-
gary and Bohemia, brother to Charles V. eletcd
King of the Romans, 57. The Protestant religion
eftabliihed in Saxony, 179. The Protestant religion
eltablifhed in the Palatinate, 323. The league ot
Smalkalde raise an army againfl the Emperor, 363.
Are put under the ban of the Empire, 367. The
Protestant army dispersed, 391. The Interim en-
forced by the Emperor, 4.92. Maurice of Saxony
raises an army, and declares in favour of the Pro-
teitants, IV. 71. Maurice favoured even by the
Catholick princes, and why, 92. Treaty of Pas-
fau, between the Emperor and Maurice of Saxony,
102. Truce between the Emperor and Henry of
France, 239. Charles resigns the Imperial crown
to his brother Ferdinand, 256.
Ghent, an infurrction there, IlI. x86. The preten-

sions of the citizens, 187. Form a confederacy
against the Queen-dowager of Hungary, their go-
vernefs, 188. Their deputies to the Emperor, how
treated by him, ib. Offer to submit to France, 189.
Is reduced by Charles, 199.

Ghiheline faction, in Italy, a view of, II. 387.
Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of

the army of the Holy Junta, II. 24.5. Resigns his
commission, and Padilla replaced, 278.
Goletta in Africa, taken by the Emperor Charles V.

III. 107.
Gonzaga, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures

Cardinal Farnese to be affafllnated,and takes pofleflion
of Placcntia for the Emperor, III. 472. Prepares to
seize Parma, IV. 32. Is repulsed by the French, 36.
Goffier, sent by Francis I. King of France, to nego-

ciate a peace with Charles V. II. 55.
Granvelle, Cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the count

de Sancerrc to surrender St. Dificre to the Emperor,
II. 297. Endeavours to lull the Protestants into
security with regard to the Emperor's conduc to-
ward them, 332. Is commiflioned by Philip to ad-

dress

dress the aflembly at the Emperor's refignationof his
hereditary dominilons, IV. 234.
Grdivlirs, ;n intervicw there between the Emperor

Charles V. and ilenry VIII. of England, 11. Jio.
Gropper, canon of Cologne, is appointed a manager of

the Protcffant and Catholick conferences before the
diet at Ratifion, 111. 227. Writes a treatire to
comport the difeircnccs betwecn them, ib. The
ientinents of both parties on this work, 2?.8.
Granada, archbishop of, prelident of the council of

Catfilc, his impi udcnt advice to Cardinal Adrian,
rclatinr to the inflirrcetion in Segovia, 11. 227.
Guqa/, the Marquis dcl, appointcd governor of Milan,

by the Emperor, 111. 149. Procures Rincon the
French an baflidor to the Porte, to be murdered oli
his journey thither, 253. Defends Carignan againit
the French, 289. Defeated by d'Enguicn in a pitched
battle, 292.
Guiccia'rdlini, his account of the publication of Indul-

gences contradicted, 1I. 25. Defends Reggio againfl
the French, 203. Repulles an attack upon Parma,
by the French, 210o. His sentiments of the Pope's
treaty with Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 398.
(Ii/f, Francis of Lorrain, Duke of, is made governor

of Metz by Henry II. of France, IV. 113. His
characer, ib. Prepales to defend it against the Em-
peror, lb. His bother d'Aumale taken prisoner by
the Imperialists, i 18. The Emperor railes the ficgc,
122. His hunmnic treatment of the difreffcd and
sick Germans left behind, 123. Perfuadcs I-nrv to
.a alliance with Pope Paul IV. 219. Marclhs with
troops into Italy, 261. Is unable to cfl;ct any thing,
262. I:, recalld from Italy after the dcfea.t of St.
(ilintin, 284. Ilis rcc'letionl iln Franice, 289.
'1 akcs the liuld aginlt llhilip, lb. Inverts and
takes Calais from the E ii'lifh, 294. Takcs ;lfo
Guilfes and Il.:imcs, lb. T1'akes T'hlionvillc in Lux-
emnbourg, }32.
6'ui/, AMaiy ol, mnarried to James V. of Scotland, III.

17 I. Fir'lhtrates the intended marriage between her
daughter Mary, and pi ince idward of England, 287.

Gurk,

Gurk, Cardinal de, why he favoured the elefion of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 84. Sign;,
the capitulation of the Germanick body on behalf of
Charles, 86.
Gufnan, chancellor to the Emperor Ferdinand, is tent

to Pope Paul IV. to notify the election, who refuses
to fee him, IV. 297.

H
J-amburgh, city of, embraces the reformed religion,

It. 295.
f/aio, the conde de, appointed to command the army
of the Caffilian nobles againfi the Holy Junta, II.
?47. Attacks Tordefillas, and gets pofEeflion of
K:cn Joatnna, ib. Routs the army of the Junta,
;id tak.c Padilla prifoncr, who is executed, 256.
tH"'en Aga, deputy governor of Algiers, his piracies
,aainfl the Chrittian fates, III. 239. Is besieged in
Alticis by the Emperor Charles V. 243. Makes a
fiucccfsful f'ly, 245. The Emperor forced by bad
wcather to return back again, 248.
H]ayradin, a potter's Ton of Lesbos, commences pirate,

1 1. 97. See BarbaroQa.
J-Ieatics, ancient, why the principles of mutual tolera-

tioli were generally admitted among them, IV. 2C2.
h.ie/do, vice-chancellor to Charles V. attends the Pope's

,nucio to Smalkalde, III. I74. Forms a Catholick
league in opposition to the Protcftant one, 177.
lenhry II King of France, his motives for declining an
alliance with Pope Paul III. against the Emperor,
1;1 475. Procures for Scotland a peace with Eng-
landl, IV. 34. The young Queen Mary contracted
to the 1)auphin, and sent to France for education,
ib. Enters into an alliance with Otavio Farncle:
Duke of Parma, 35. Protcfts against the council
of Trent, 36. Makes a'liance with Maurice Elec-
tor of Saxony, 60. Seconds the operations of Mau-
rice, 72. His army marches and seizes Mctz, 75.
Attempts to surprise Strafburgh, 86. Is strongly
Eolicited to fparc it, 87. Returns, 88. The Em-

peror

peror prepares for war against him, 112. Infligates
the Turks to invade Naples, 127. Terrouane taken
and demolished by Charles, 138. Hefdin taken, ib.
Leads an army into the Low-Countries against
Charles, 139. Endeavours to obftrud the marriage
of Mary of England with Philip of Spain, 164.
The progress of his arms against the Emperor, 166.
Engages Charles, i68. Retires, ib. Cosmo di
Medici, Duke of Florence, makes war against him,
I71. Appoints Peter Strozzi commander of his
army in Italy, 173. Strozzi defeated, 176. Siena
taken, 178. Pope Paul IV. makes overtures to an
alliance with him against the Emperor, 217. Mont-
morency's arguments against this alliance, ib. Is
persuaded by the Guises to accept it, 218. Sends
the Cardinal of Lorrain with powers to conclude it,
219. The Pope signs the treaty, 223. A truce for
five years concluded with the Emperor, 239. is
exhorted by Cardinal Caraffa, to break the truce,
24?. Is ab(olved from his oath, and concludes a
new treaty with the Pope, 246. Sends the Duke of
Guise into Italy, 264. The Conitable Montmo-
rency defeated and taken prisoner at St. Qiintin, 273.
-Henry prepares for the defence of Paris, 276. St.
Quintin taken by assault, 279. Collects his troops
and negociates for afiftance, ib. His kind reception
of the Duke of Guise, 289. Calais taken by
Guifc, 294. Impowers Montmorcncv to ncgociate
a peace with Philip, 309. Honours him highly on
his return to France, 310. Writes to Queen Eli-
zabecth with proposals of marriage, 323. How he
failed in his suit, 324. His daughter married to
Philip, and his fifler to the Duke of Savov, 331.
Terms of the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis, 332.
The marriage of his lifter and daughter celebrated
with great pomp, 334. His death, il,.
Ilenry VII. of England, detains the archduke Philip

and his duchess when driven on his coalt, three
months, at the instigation of t'cidilinnd, 11. 16.
Henry VIII. of England, fends an ambassador to Ger-

many to propose his claims to the Imperial crowin,

11.

II. 77. Is discouraged from his pretcnfions, and
takes no part with the other competitors, ib. His
personal character and political influence in Europe,
102. Entirely guided by Cardinal Wolfey, 104.
Receives a visit from the Emperor Charlcs V. yo8.
Goes over to France to visit Francis, lo9. WVreftes
with Francis, and is thrown by him, ib. Note. Has
another interview with Charles at Gravclincs, l o.
Charles offers to submit his differences with Francis
to his arbitration, Ii . Publifhcs a treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, against Martin Luther, 182.
Obtains of the Pope the title of Defender 6f the Faith,
183. Takes part with Charles againfl Francis,
185. Sends Wolfey to negociate an accommodation
between the Emperor and Francis, 197. Concludes
a league with Charles against Francis, 199. His
avowed reasons for this treaty, ib. His private mo-
tives, 200. Declares war against Francis, 216. Is
visitcd by Charles, 217. Makes descents upon the
coast of France, 218 Advances with an army into
Picardy, 219. Obliged to retire by the Duk- de
Vend6me, ib. Enters into a treaty with the Em-
peror and Charles Duke of Bourbon, 277. How
he raised supplies for his wars beyond the grants of
his parliament, 286. Sends the Duke of Suffolk to
invade Picardy, who penetrates almost to Paris, but
is driven back, 287. Engages to aflift Charles in
an invasion of Provence, 308. Causes of his not
supporting the Imperialifis, 311. Ecffe,; of the
battle of Pavia, and captivity of Francis, on him,

i1. Particulars of his embafly to Charles, 333.

(oncludes a defensive alliance with France, 341.
Is declared Prottctor of the league of Cognac againflt
the Emperor, 379. Hiis motives for aflifiing the
Pope againf the Emperor, II. 2. Enters into a
league with Francis, ald renounces the Englilh
claim to the ciowni of France, 4. I)eclares war
against the Emperor, 14. Concludes a truce with
the governels of the Low-Countries, 20. Projecs
his divorce from Catharine of Aragon, 36. Motives
which withheld the Pope from granting it, 37. Ac-

quictCcs

quiefces in the peace of Cambray, 38. Sends a sup-
ply of money to the Proteflant league in Germany,
59. Procures his marriage to be annulled by Cran-
mer archbishop of Canterbuary, 72. The divorce
reversed by the Pope under penalty of excommuni-
cation, 73. Renounces the Papal supremacy, ib.
Refuses to acknowledge any council called by the
Pope, 94. Opposes James V. of Scotland mar-
rying Mary of Guise, I71. His disgusts with
Francis and intercourse with the Emperor, ib. Con-
cludes a league with Charles, 263. Makes war
with Scotland, 264. Particulars of his treaty with
Charles, 265. Invades France and invefis Bou-
logne, 296. Refuses the Emperor's plan of opera-
tions, 300. Is deserted by the Emperor, 306.
Takes Boulogne, ib. His haughty proposals to Fran-
cis, 307. Peace of Campe, 361. Is succeeded by
his son Edward VI. 422. A review of his policy,
IV. 349.
Icrtfordt, earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, TIT.

295. Joins Henry after, in his invasions of France,
ib.
Hjer, the Landgrave of, procures the restoration of

his kinsman, Ulric Duke of Wurtemberg, III. 9r.
His views compared with those of the Elector of
Saxony, 329. The Emperor's deceitful profcifiois
to him, 341. Quiets the apprehensions of the Pro-
tefiant league with regard to the Emper6r, ib. Is
appointed joint commander of the amy of the league
with the Eleor of Saxony, 37 . 'heir charac-
ters compared, ib. Urges an attack of the Empe-
ror, but is oppofid by the Eletor, 376. His lettcr
to Maurice Duke of Saxony, 387. The army of
the league difperfc, 391. Is reduced to accept harfl
terms from Charles, 450. His humiliating reception
by the Emperor, 454. Is detained in conlfincmcint,
456. His offers of lubmifliot flighted by the Em-
peror, 4o9. Is carried by the Emperor with hiln
into the Netherlands, 494. Renews his endeavouls
for liberty, IV. 25. Charles rclcafes aubitrnrily the
Elector of Brandenburg, and Maaurice, fronl thelr

cligI '>c: nIl1 t >

engagements to him, ib. Obtains His liberty bythe
treaty of Pafrau, 102. Is arrefled by the Queen of
Hungary, but freed by the Etperor, 109. The
effects of his confinement on him, ib.
Hieuterus, his account of Lewis Xll. fIewn to contra-

di& the relations given by Bellay and other French
historians of the education of Charles V. II. 30. Note.
roly Junta. See Junta.
Holy League, against the Emperor Charles V. formed

at Cognac, under the protection of Henry VIII. of
England, 1I. 379.
Horuc, a potter's son of Lefbo,, commences pirate,

with his brother Hayraydin, Ill. 97. See Barbearoga.
Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnificent, and

its King Lewis II. killed, Il. 409. His successes,
and the number of prisoners carried away, ib. The
archduke Ferdinand elected King of, together with
Bohemia, 4I0. John Zapol Scaepius wrests it from
Ferdinand, 232. Stephen succeeds on the death of
his father John, 233. Is treacherously seized by
Solyman, 236. See Iflbella, and Martinuzzi.
7aires V. of Scotland, levies troops to afift Francis in

Provence, but his intention frustrated, III. 170.
His ncgociations for marriage with Francis's daugh-
ter, ib. Marries MaLry of Guise, 171. Dies, and
leaves Mary his infant daughter to succeed him, 264.
See Alary. ,
Jfruits, the order of, by whom founded, It. i92.

CharaCtrc of that order, ib. Character of Ignatio
Loyola their founder, III. 204. The order con-
firined by the Pope, 205. An examination into the
constitution of the order, 206. Office and power of
their general, 208. The rapid progress of the or-
der, 212. Engage in trade, and eftablilh an empire
in South Americia, 214. Bad tendency of the order,
216. Arc rcfponfible for most of the pernicious es-
foEts of Popery since their ilfitttion, 2-17. Ad-
vantages.refulting from their institution, ib. Civilize

the

the natives of Paraguay, 219. Their precautions
for the independency of their empire there, 221.
How the particulars of their government and infli-
tution came to be disclosed, 224. Summary of their
charadter, 225.
Indulgences, in the Romish church, the dotrine of, ex-

plained, II. xIS. By whom first invented, rx6.
Martin Luther preaches against them, 121. Writes
againfi them to Albert Elecor of Mentz, 122. A
bull issued in favour of, 135. The sale of, opposed
in Switzerland by Zuinglius, 137.
Infantado, Duke of, his haughty relentment of a casual

blow on his horse, III. 185. Is prote&ed by the
Constable of Castile, ib.
Innocent, a your. domeftick of Cardinal di Monte, ob-

tains his Cardinal's hat, on his election to the Pa-
pacy, IV. 7.
Interim, a system of theology To called, prepared by

order of.the Emperor Charles V. for the use of
Germany, III. 48I. Is disapproved of, both by
Protestants and Papists, 485.
Inveflitures, usurpations of the Romish clergy in Ger-

many, during the disputes between the Emperors
and Popes, concerning, II. 155.
J7atmn, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother of Charles

V. visits Spain with her husband Philip Archdukeof
Aufiria, II. 4. Is flighted by her husband, 5. Her
characer, ib. Is abruptly left in Spain by her hus-
band, ib. Sinks into melancholy on the occasion,
and is delivered of her fccond on Ferdinand, 6. Her
letter of content to her father's regency of Caflile
intercepted, and herself confined, i1. .i.'! ;il nt
regent of Castile with Ferdmland and Philip, by the
treaty of Salamanca, 15. Sets out for Spain with
Philip, are driven on the coast of England and d:-
tained three months by Henry VII. i6. Acknow-
ledged Qucen by the Cortes, 19. Her tenderness to
her husband in his sickness, and extraordinary at-
tachment to his body when dead, 20. ls incapable
of government, 21. Her son Charles affums the
crown, 40. The Cortes acknowledge her (on

VOL. 1IV. E King,

King, with a rcfervation in her favour, 66. lier
reception of Padilla the chief of the Spaniih male-
contents, 233. The holy Junta removed to Tor-
defillas, the place of her residence, 234. Relapse-
into her former melancholy, ib. The proceedings
of the Holy Junta carried on in her name, 235. 1'
seized by the Conde de Haro, 247. Dies, after near
fifty years confinement, IV. 229.
John Zapol Scaepius, by the aflifianceof Sultan Soly-

man, establishes himself in thekingdom of Hungary,
1II. 232. Leaves the kingdom to his son Stephen,
233. See Hungary, Isabella and Martinuzzi.
Isabella, daughter of John II. of Castile, and wife of

Ferdinand King of Aragon, her history, II. 2. Her
concern at the archduke Philip's treatment of her
daughter Joanna, 5. Her death and character, 7.
Appoints Ferdinand regent of Castile under refiric-
tions, 8.
---- daughter to Sigismund Kingof Poland, mar-

ried to John King of Hungary, III. 233. Her cha-
raiter, 234. Is treacheroully carried with her in-
sant son into Transylvania by Sultan Solyman, 236.
The government of this province and the education
of her son committed to herjointly with Martinuzzi,
IV. 51. Is jealous of Martinuzzi's influence, and
courts the Turks, ib. Is prevailed on to resign
Transylvania to Ferdinand, 54. Retires to Silesia,
ib. Recovers possession of Transylvania, i4I.
---of Portugal, married to the Emperor Charles

V. 11. 362.
Italy, consequences of the league between Pope Leo X.

and the Emperor Charles '. to, II. 201. The cha-
raacrs of the Italians, Spaniards, and French, con-
trafted, ib. State of, at the accession of Clement
VII. to the Papacy, 288. Views of the Italian
States with refped to the Emperor and Francis on
the expulsion of the French fromr Genoa and the Mi-
laiefe, 307. Their apprehensions on the battle of
Pavia and captivity of Francis, 334. The principal
States join in the Holy league against the Emperor,
379. Arc dilguftcd at the tardinllfs of Francis, 386.

A view

A view of the Ghibeline fa&ion, 387. Sentiments
of the States of, on the peace of Cambray, III. 35.
Is visited by the Emperor Charles, 28. The mo-
tives of his moderation toward the States of, 40. A
league among theStates of, formed by Charles, 67.
Placentia granted to Otavio Farnese by Philip II.
of Spain, IV. 285. The invefiiture of Siena given
by Philip to Cosmo di Medici, 288. The confe-
quence of there grants, ib.
Junta, Hbly, a view of the confederacy in Spain, so

termed, 113. 3 The authority of Adrian disclaimed
by, 232. Removed to Tordefillas, where Queen
Joanna resided, 234. Their proceedings carried on
in the name of Joanna, 235. Receives letters
from Charles to lay down their arms, with pro-
mises of pardon, 236. Remonstrance of grievances
drawn up by, 237. The particulars of this re-
monstrance, 238. Remarks on the spirit of it,
242. Are intimidated from presenting it to Charles,
244. Propose to deprive Charles of his royalty
during the life of Joanna, ib. Take the field,
245. Characer of their army, ib. The Queen
seized by the Conde de Haro, 247. How they
obtained money to support their army, 249. Lose
time in negociating with the nobles, 250. Propose
to make their peace with Charles at the expence of
the nobles, 252. Their irresolute conduct, 253.
Their army defeated by Haro, and Padilla taken
prifoncr, 255. Padilla executed, 256. His letters
to his wife, and the city of Toledo, 257. The
ruin of the confederacy 258.
Julius 11. Pope, observations on the pontificate of, II.

149.
--- III. Pope, his character, IV. 6. BeIfows his

Cardinal's hat infamously, 7. Is avcrle to the call-
ing a council, 9. Summons one at Trent, io.
Asserts his supreme authority peremptorily in the bull
for it, 22. Repents confirming Otavio Farnelb in
Parma, 32. Requires Ottavio to relinquill his al-
liance with France, 35. The nannei of his ,dath,
194.

E e 2 L.

L
La (.Cbau. Flemish gentleman, aflociatcd by Charles

V. with Cardinal Ximenes in the regency of Castile,
11.49.
Landrecy, siege of, by the Emperor Charles V. III.

270. Is abandoned by him, 27w.
Lannoy, mortgages the reytentes of Naples, tofupply

the exigences of the Emperor, It. 315. Francis
furrendcrs himself prisoner to him at the battle of
Pavia, 3z6. His cautious disposal of him, 2.
Delivers him up in pursuance of the treaty of Ma-
drid, and receives the Duke of Orleansand the Dau-
phih, as hostages in exchange, 362. Is sent ain-
bafador to Francis to require his fulfilment of the
treaty of, 382. Concludes a treaty with the Pope,
398. Marches to join the Imperialists at Rome,
where the troops refuse to obey him, III. 5.
Lanuza, Don John de, made viceroy of Aragon, on

the departure of Charles V. for Germany, 11. 95.
Compotes the diflurbances there, 265.
Lavagna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his characer,

III. 403. Meditates subverting the government of
Genoa, 404. His preparations, 405. His artful
method of assembling his adherents, 408. His ex-
hortation to them, 409. His interview with his
wife, 41o. Sallies forth, 412. Andrew Doria
escapes, 413. Deputies sent to know his terms, ib.
Is drowned, 414. His brother's vanity ruins their
defiln, ib. See Fiefco.
Lautrec, Odet de Foix, marschal de, the French go-

vernor of Milan, his charetcr, II. 202. Alienates
the affections of the Milanese from the French, ib.
Inveits Regglo, but is repulsed by Guicciardini the
hifiorian, then governor, 203. Is excommunicated
by the Pope, 204. 'he money for paying his
troops, seized by Louise of Savoy, o26. Is left by
his Swiss troops, 207. Is driven out of the Mila-
nefe territories, 209. A new body of Swiss under
him insist on giving battle to the Imperialists, who
defeat him, 214. The Swiss leave him, 215.

2 Rctireu

Retires into France with the residue of his troops, ib.
Delivers up theDauphin and Duke of Orleans, inex-
change for Francis I. as hostages for the performance
of the treaty of Madrid, 262. Is appointed genera-
liflimo of the league against the Emperor, III. 6.
His successes in Italy, 7. Motives which withheld
him from subduing the Milanese, 8. Obliges the
Prince of Orange to retire to Naples, 17. Blockades
Naples, x8. His army wafted, and himself killed
by the pestilence, 24.
Learning, the revival of, favourable to the reformation

of religion, II. 169.
ripfic, a publick disputation held there by Martin Lu-
ther, and Eccius, on the validity of the Papal au-
thority, II. 137.
Leo X. Pope of Rome, his charaAer, If. 78. His

apprehensions on the eletion of an Emperor of
Germany, at the death of Maximilian, ib. His
counsel to the German Princes, 79. Grants
Charles V. a tenth of all ecclesiastical bene-
sices in Castile, 89. Lays Castile under an inter-
di&, but takes it off, at the initance of Charles,
ib. His condut on the profpea of war between
Charles and Francis, loo. Situation of the Papacy
at his acceflion, and his views of policy, x 15. His
inattention to Martin Luther's controversy with the
Dominicans, concerning indulgences, I27. Is in-
figated against him, and summons him to Rome, ib.
Delires thke Eletor of Saxony not to protet.him,
128. Is prevailed on topermit Luther's do&rines to
be examined in Germany, ib Cardinal Cajetan
appointed to try him, 129c. lflues a bull in favour
of Indulgences, 135. A suspension of proceedings
against Luther, and why, 136. Publishes a bull of
excommunication againlt hir, 139. The political
views of his condu& between Charles and Francis,
186. Coucludes a treaty with Francis, i88. Con-
cludes a treaty alb with Charles, 189. Th con-
ditions of the treaty with Charles, ib. Its confe-
quences to Italy, 201. 19 disappointed in a scheme
formed by Mcrond, chancellor of Milan, for attack-

E c $ ir.g

ing that dutchv, 203. Excommunicates Marechal
de Foix for his attack of Reggio, and declares
againit France, 204. 'Fakes a body of Swiss into
pay, ib. The French driven out of the Milanece,
209. He dies, ib. The spirit of the confederacy
broken by his death, ib.
L'Efparre, Foix de, commands the French troops in

Navarre for Henry D'Albert, II. 192. Reduces
that kingdom, ib, His imprudent progress into
Castile, I93. Is taken prisoner by the Spaniards,
and the French driven out of Navarre, 194.

Leonard, father, forms a scheme of betraying Metz
- to the Imperialifis, IV. x85. Introduces soldiers

clad like friars, ib. Isdetected, 187. Is murdered
by his monks, 189.
Levefque, Don, his account of the motives which in-

duced the Emperor Charles V. to resign his heredi-
tary dominions, IV. 227. Note.
Lewis II King of Hungary and Bohemia, his charac-

ter, I1. 409. Is invaded and killed by Solyman the
Magnificent, ib.
--- XII. King of France, receives homage of the

Archduke Philip, for the earldom of Slanders, 11. 3.
Concludes a treaty with him, while at war with
Ferdinand of Aragon, 6. bestows his niece, Ger-
maine de Foix, on Ferdinand, and concludes a
peace with him, 14. Loses the confidence of Phi-
lip on that occasion, 29, Note. Bellows his eldest
daughter, already betrothed to Charles V. on the
count of Angoulime, ib.
Leyva, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the Emperor

against Francis, II. 317. His vigorous defence, 318.
Sallies out at the battle of Pavia, and contributes
to the defeat of Francis, 325. Is left governor of
Milan by the puke of Bourbon, 394. Defeats the
forces there, III. 28. Is appointed generaliffimoof
the Italian league, 67. Dire&ts the operations of the
invasion of France, under the Emperor, 138. Dies,
148.
Literature, its obligations to the order of Jesuits, IlI.

218re

.orenzq

Lorenzo di Medici. See Medici.
Louise of Savoy, mother of Francis I of France, her

chara&er, II. 205. Her motives for seizing the
money appointed for payment of Marechal Lautrec's
troops, 206. Cause of her aversion to the house of
Bourbon, 275. Her advances toward a marriage
with Charles Duke of Bourbon, rejected by him,
276. Determines to ruin him, ib. Inftigatcs a
law-suit against him for his estates, 277. Goes to
difluade Francis from his intended invasion of the
Milanese, who will not wait for her, 313. Is ap-
pointed regent during his absence, ib. Her prudent
condut& on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of her
son Francis, 33o. Concludes a defensive alliance
with Henry VIIl. 341. Ratifies the treaty of Ma-
drid for the recovery of her son's liberty, 361. Un-
dertakes, with Margaret of Savoy, to accommodate
the differences between the Emperor and Francis,
III. 30. Articles of the peace of Cambray, 32.
Loyola, Ignatio, commands the castle of Pampeluna in

Navarre, and is wounded in its defence, II. 192.
His enthufiaftick turn of mind, ib. The founder of
.the society of Jesuits, ib. Prevails on the Pope to
citablifh the order, IlI. 205. An examination into
the conltitution of the order, 206. Office and power
of the general, 208. The rapid progress of the or-
der, 212. See Jesuits.
Lorrain, Cardinal of, persuades Henry II. of France,

to accept the offered alliance with Pope Paul IV.
and is Tent to Rome to negociate it, IV. 219. His
imprudent behaviour towards the ducllhs of Va-
lentinois, 308.
Lunenburgh, Duke of, avows the opinions of Luther,

II. 295.
Luther, Martin, the happy consequences of, the opi-

nions propagated by him, II. 113. Attacks In-
dulgences, 1 19. His birth and education, ib.
Chosen philosophical profelfor at the univcrfity of
Wittemberg, 120. Inveighs against the publi hcrs
of Indulgences, 121. Writes to Albert Elector of
Mcntz, againfl them, 122. Compoles theses against

E e 4 Indulgences,

Indulgences, ib. Isfupportedby the Augufmiaru,
and. encouraged by Frederick Elector of Saxony,
123. Is fumimoned to Rome by Pope.Leo, 127.
Obtains of the Pope leave to have his doctrines ex-
amined in Germany, 129. Appears before Cardinal
Cajetan at Augsburg, ib. His resolute reply to the
peremptory order of Cajetan, to retraE his prin-
ciples, 130. Withdraws from Auglbur, and ap-
peals from the Pope ill-informed, to the Pope when
better informed concerning him, 131. Appeals to
a general council, 134.. The death of Maximilian,
how of service to him, I35. Quefions the Papal
authority in a publick disputation, 137. His opinions
condemned by the universities of Cologne and Lou-
vain, 138. A bull of excommunication publifled
against him, 139. Pronounces the Pope to be An-
tichriff, and burns the bull, i40, 141. Reflec-
tions on the condut of the court of Rome, toward
him, 142. Reflctions on his condut, 144.
Causes which contributed to favour his opposition to
the church of Rome, 147. Particularly the art of
printing, x68. And the revival of learning, 16q.
He is summoned to appear at the diet of Worms,
177. A safe conduEt granted him thither, lb. His
reception there, 178. Refuses to rctrat his opinions,
179. Departs, ib. An edia publilhed against him,
lb. He is seized and concealed at Wartburg, 180.
Progress of his do6trines, i8a. The university of
Paris publishes a decree against him, ib. Wrote
againi by Henry VIII. of England, ib. Answers
both, 182. Withdraws from his retreat to check
the ihconfiderate zeal of Carlofiadius, 293. Un-
dertakes a tranlation of the Bible, 294. His doc-
trines avowed by several of the German Princes,
295. His moderate and prudent. conduct, 373.
Marries Catharine a Boria, a nun, ib. The great
progress of his doctrines among the Germanick
States, III. 44. Encourages the Proteflants difpi-
rited by the Emperor's decree againf him, 54. His
concern at the praaices of the Anabaptists at Mun-
ier, 87. Is invited to Lcipfick, by Henry Duke

of

of Saxony, i 80. ' His opinion of Gropper's treatise
to unite the Protestants and OCtholicks, 228. Dies,
334. Summary of his charaSter, 335. Extrat
from his last will, 339, Note. See Proate/ants. A
view of the extraordinary efics of his revolt from
the church of Rome, on that court and on Europe
in general, IV. 355.
Luxemburg, invaded by Robert de la Marck, lord of

Bouillon, II. 195. Invaded and over-run by the
Duke of Orleans, II. 258. Is again invaded by
Francis, 269.

M
Madrid, treaty of, between the Emperor Charles V.

and his prisoner Francis I, King of France, II. 357.
Sentiments of the publick with regard to this treaty,
358.
Magdeburg, the city of, refuses to admit the Interim

enforced by Charles V. and prepares for defence,
IV. 2o. Maurice E1etdor of Saxony appointed to
reduce it, 21. Is put under the ban of the Empire
4o. The territories of, invaded by George of
Mecklenburg, ib. The inhabitants defeated in a
fatly, 41. Maurice of Saxony arrives and besieges
the city, 42; Surrenders, 43. The senate clefts
Maurice theif burgrave, 45.

Afabmed, Kingof'iTunis, hifory of his sons, III. rot.
Majorca, an infurrelionn there, If. 266. Which is

queHed With dificulty, ib. The moderation of
Charles toward the irfurgents, onhis arrival in Spain,
268.
Majt4ty, the appellation of, aflumed by Charles V. on

his election to the Imperial crown, and taken by all
the other'mbiarchs of Europe, I'. 87.

Malilnes, connrei of, an account'of, lIT. 89.
AlIalta, the ifand of, granted by the Emperor Charles

V. tothkenights of St. John, expelled from Rhodes
by the Turksj II 222.
iMamatrudis extirpated by Sultan Selim II. IT. 72.

Mammluitt,

Mammelukes, a faaion in Geneva, so termed, some

account of, III. 126.
Manuel, Don John, Ferdinand's ambassador at the

Imperial court, pays his court to the archduke Phi-
lip on Queen Isabella's death, II. l . Intercepts
Joanna's letter of conient to Ferdinand's regency of
Castile, 12. Negociates a treaty between Ferdi-
nand and Philip, 15. Declares for Maximilian's
regency on Philip's death, 22. Is made Imperial
ambaflador at Rome, and concludes an alliance be-
tween Charles V. and Leo X. 189. The condi-
tions of the treaty, ib. Procures Adrian of Utrecht
to be elcCted Pope, 212.
Marcellus II. Pope, his character, IV. 208. Dies,

209.
Marciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi, and the

marquis de Marignano, IV. 175.
AMargaret of Austria, and Dowager of Savoy, aunt to

Charles V. undertakes with Louise, mother of Fran-
cis I. of France, to accommodate the differences
between those two monarchs, 111. 30. Articles of
the peace of Cambray, 32.
Marignano, marquis of, appointed commander of the

Florentine army, acting against the French, IV.
172. Defeats the French army under Peter Strozzi,
176. Lays siege to Siena, ib. Converts the siege
into a blockade, 178. Siena surrenders, ib. Re-
duces Porto Ercole, 18i. His troops ordered into
Piedmont by the Emperor, 182.
Marck, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon, declares war

against the Empergr Charles V. II. 194. Ravages
Luxemburg with French troops, 195. Is com-
manaded to disband his troops by Francis, ib. His
territories reduced by the Emperor, i;.
MnrJfilles, besieged by the Imperialists, I. 309. Re-

fcued by Francis, 310. Interview and treaty there
between the Pope and Francis, III. 7x.
Martinuzzi, bishop of Waradin, is appointed guardian

to Stephen, King of Hungary, II. 233. His
charadcr, 234. Solicits the aflifiance of Sultan
,Solyman against Ferdinand, 235. Solyman (cizes

the

the kingdom, 436. Is appointed to the government
of Tranfylvanla and the education of the young
King, jointly with the Queen, IV. 5r. Negociates
with Ferdinand, 52. Prevails on the Queen to re-
sign Transylvania to Ferdinand, 54. Is appointed
governor of Transylvania, and made a Cardinal, 55.
Is affaflinated by Ferdinand's order, 57.
Maatyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the ex-

tortions of the Flemith ministers of Charles V.
II. 64.
Mary of Burgundy, contracted to Lewis XII. of

France, but married to the Emperor Maximilian,
II. 2.
Mary of England, her acceflion, IV. 154. Receives

proposals from the Emperor Charles V. of marrying
his Ton Philip, z55. The English averse to this
union, ib. The house of commons remonstrates
against the match, 156. The articles of marriage,
157. The marriage ratified by parliament, and
completed, 160. Re-establishes the Romiih reli-
gion, I61. Persecutes the Reformers, 162. In-
vites Charles to England on his rcfignation and
paffige to Spain, which he declines, 256. Is en-
gaged by Philip to afift him in his war againfl
France, 268. Levies money by her prerogative to
carry on the war, 269. Her neglec in the security
of Calais, 292. Calais invested and taken by the
Duke of Guise, 294. Dies, 322.
Mary, daughter of James V. of Scotland, succeeds to

the crown an infant, 11. 264. Is contracted to the
Dauphin of France, 474. Is educated at the court
of France, IV. 34, 300. The marriage com-
pleted, ib. Aflumes the title and arms of England
on the death of Mary, 324.
Matthias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the

Anabaptirfs, at Munlter, III. 79. Seizes the city
and establishes a new form of government there, 80.
Repilfcs the bishop of Munter, 82. Is killed, ib.
See Bocold and Anabaptifs.
Mauricet duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceding

to the Protestant league of Smalkalde, III. 275.

Marches

Marches to the afiftance of Fcrdinand in Humgary,
276. His difference with his cousin the Eledor, ib.
His condut atthe diet of Worms, 3T5. Joins the
Emperor agAinst the Protestants, 364. His motives,
382. His insidious: condut toward the Eleetor,
384. Seites the elesorate of Saxony, 388. Saxohy
recovered by the Elector, 396. His ineffeaual eh-
deavours to reduce Wittemberg, for the Emperer,
442. Obtains poflfflionof the ele&orate, 448. Is
formally invefied at the diet of Augsburg, 484. Be-
comes difitisfied with the Emperor, IV. »i. His
motives to discontent explained, t3. His address
and caution in his conduE, 15. Enforces the In-
ttrim in his territories, 16. Makes, neverthelef,-
crofeflions of his attachment to the Reformation, 17.
Undertakes to reduce Magdeburg to submit to the
Interim, 18. Protests against the council of Trent,
19. Is commissioned by the Emperor to reduce
Magdeburg, 21. Joins George of Mecklenburg
before Magdeburg, 40. The city eapitulates, 43.
Begins to intrigue with Count Mansfekt, 44. Is
ele&ed Burgrave of Magdeburg, 45. Di~ iflfe his
troops, 47. His address in amusing the Emperor,
48. Makes an alliance with Henry II of Frane,
to make war on the Emperor, 59 Makes a formal
requisition of the Landgrave's liberty, 63. Joins
his troops, and publishes a manifefo, 7*. Takes
poRelion of Auglburg and other cities, 73. An in-
cfftei negociation with Charles, 75. Defeats
a body of the Emperor's troops, 78. Takes the
caftleof Ehrenburg, ib. I» retarded by a mutiny in
his troops, 79. Enters Infpruck, and narrowly
miffes taking Charles, gl. A negociation betwaen
him and Ferdinand, 91. Besieges Frankfcrt t n6the
Maine, 99. Hia inducements to an accommodntion,
ioo. Signs atreaty with the Emperor at Paf'a, o .
Reoe.ions on his conduc in thi war, 103.
Marches into Hungary to oppose the TurF1 10o7.
Ih placed at the headof the league againf Albrt of
Brandenburg, 132. Defeats Albertt but i klilted

in

in the battle, 133. His charaier, x34. Is ftc-
ceeded by his brother Augustus, 136.
Maximilian, Emperor of Germany, claims the regency

of Castile on his son Philip's death, II. 22. Is sup-
ported in his claim by Don John Manuel, ib.
Loses it, 24. Obtains the government of the Low-
Countries by the death of Philip, 29. Appoints
William de Croy, lord of Chievres to superintend
the education of his grandson Charles, ib. Con-
cludes a peace with France and Venice, 56. Dies,
69. State of Europe at this period, ib. His en-
deavours to secure the Imperial crown to his grand-
son Charles, 70. How obftru6ted, ib.
Meaklenburg, George of, invades the territories of

Magdeburg for the Emperor, IV. 40. Defeats the
Magdeburghers who tally out on him, 41. Is
joined by Maurice of Saxony, who assumes the fu-
preme command, ib.

AJledne, John James; fee Marignano.
MAedici, Alexander+ restored to the dominions of Flo-

rence, by the Emperor Charles III. 43. Is aflaffi-
nated, I65.
JMediti, Cardinal de, eleted Pope, and assumes the

title of ClementVII. II. 283. See Clment VII.
.Medici, Catherine di, is married to the Duke of Or-

leans, III, 71. Is conjectured, by the Emperor
Charles V. to have poisoned the Dauphin, 152.
Medici, Cosmo de, made Duke of Florence, Ill. r67.

Is supported by the Emperor, and defeats the parti-
allUs of Lorenzo, 169. Aiferts his independency
againit the Emperor, IV. £24. Offers to reduce
Sicna for the Emperor, 171. Enters into a war
with France, ib. See Marignano. His address in
procuring the investiture of Siena from Philip If. of
Spain, 286. It is granted to him, 288.
Mtdici, Lorenzo de, alafflinates his kinsman Alexan-

der III. 166. Flies, 167. Attempts to oppose
Cosmo, but is defeated, 168.
Medina del Campo, the inhabitants of, refute to let

Fonseca take the military itores there, for the iirge
of the inlurgents in Segovia, II. 228j. The town

ilmoft

almost burnt by Fonseca, ib. The inhabitants re-
pulse him, ib. Surrenders after the battle of Villalar,
and dissolution of the Holy Junta, 258.
Melanthon, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther,

II. 142. Is employed to draw up a confellion of
faith by the Protestant Princes at the diet of Aug-
fburg, III. 5 . Is dejected by the Emperor's decree
against the Protestants, but comforted by Luther,
54. Is invited to Paris by Francis, 119. His
conference with Eckius, 226. Is prevailed on to
favour the Interim enforced by the Emperor, IV.
16.
Melito, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia, on the

departure of Charles V. for Germany, II. 95. Ap-,
pointed to command the troops of the nobles against
the Germanada, 264. Defeated by them in several
actions, 265. Defiroys the association, ib.
Mtntz, archbishop of, artfully declares before the

Emperor, the diet of Augsburg's acceptance of the
Interim, without being authorised by it, III. 483.
,Merville, a Milanese gentleman employed as envoy

from Francis I. to Francis Sforza, Duke of Milan,
his fate, III. 116, 117.
AMetz, seized by Montmorency the French general,

IV. 75. The Duke of Guise made governor ofy
113. Is besieged by the Emperor, I16. The
Emperor defifis, and retires in a diitreffed condition,
122. A scheme formed by father Leonard to betray
the city to the Imperialiss, 185. The conspiracy
detected by the governor, 187. ,Lonard murdered
by his monks, and his aflbciatcs executed, x89.
Mezieres, in France, besieged by the Imperialifis, II.

196. Gallant defence of, by the chevalier Bayard,
ib. The liege raised, ib.
Milan, marechal de Foix appointed to be the French

governor of, II. 202. His character, ib. The
Milanese alienated from the French by his oppref-
sions, ib. Invaded by the ccclefiaflical troops under
Prosper Colonna, 204. The French driven out,
207. Opprclld by the Inipcrial troops, 272. In-
vadcd by the French, 280. Who are driven out by

Colonna,

Colonna, 282. The Imperial troops there mutiny
for pay, but are appeased by Morone, 289. Aban-
doned by the French, 290. Over-run again by
Francis, who seizes the city, 314. The French
retire on news of the battle of Pavia, 327. The
investiture of, granted to Sforza, 342. Taken
from him and granted to the Duke of Bourbon, 354.
Disorders committed by the Imperial troops there,
378. Oppreflfive measures of Bourbon to supply his
mutinous troops, 392. The French forces there,
defeated by Antonio de Leyva, III. 28. Is again
granted by the Emperor to Sforza, 42. Death of
Sforza, 129. The pretensions of Francis to that
dutchy, 130. Is seized by the Emperor, ib. The
marquis del Guaflo appointed governor, I49.
Mohacz, battle of, between Solyman the Magnificent

and the Hungarians, II. 409.
Monafiick orders, enquiry into the fundamental princi-

ples of, III. 206. Peculiar confitution of the or-
der of Jesuits, 207.
Moncada, Don Hugo di, the Imperial ambafador at

Rome, his intrigues with Cardinal Colonna, against
Pope Clement 11. 388. Reduces the Pope to an
accommodation, 389. Is defeated and killed by
Andrew Doria in a naval engagement before the har-
bour of Naples, III. i8.
Monluc, is lent by the count d'Enguien to Francis for

permission to give battle to the marquis del Guafto,
III. 2.9. Obtains his suit by his spirited argu-
ments, 290. Commands in Siena, when bcficged
by the marquis de Marignano, IV. 176. His vi-
gorous defence, 177. Is reduced by famine, and
capitulates, 178.
.·Wonte Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena retire

thither after the reduction of that city by the Floren-
tines, and cfablifh a free government there, IV.
179. /Irontecuculi, Count of, accuscd and tortured for poi(fn-

ing the Dauphin, charges the inmperor with inlh-
gatilg it, 111. 151.

lIZit,'tm.'*'*' ";:,

1s4m w rency, marefchal, his character, III. 143.
Francis adopts his plan for refining the Emperor,
and commits the execution to him, ib. His pre-
cautions, ib. His troops despise his conduAt, 146.
Observations on his operations, 149. Is disgraced,
2S6. Conducts the army of Henry II. to join
Maurice of Saxony, and seizes Metz, 75. Dif-
fuades Henry from accepting the offered alliance with
Pope Paul IV. IV. 217. Commands the French
army againfi the Duke of Savoy, 272. Detaches
D'Andelot to relieve St. Quintin, ib. Exposes him-
self imprudently to an aCtion, and is defeated, 273.
Is taken prisoner, 274. Negociates a peace between
Philip and Henry, 309. Returns to France, and is
highly honoured by Henry, 310. His afliduity in
forwarding the negociations, 327. His expedient
for promoting the treaty of Chateau Cambrefis,
,33I. Montpel;er, a fruitless conference held there for the

rcfitution of the kingdom of Navarre, II. 67.
Moron4, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his charater,

1I. 202. Retires from the French exactions in
Milan to Francis Sforza, 203. His intrigues, how
rendered abortive, ib. Quiets the mutiny of the
Imperial troops in Milan, II. 289. Is disgusted
with the behaviour of Charles, 342. Intrigues
againif the Emperor with Pescara, 344. Is be-
trayed to the Emperor by Pescara, 346. Is arrested
at his visit to Pescara, 348. Is set at liberty by the
Duke of Bourbon, and becomes his confident, 392.
MoAufon in France, taken by the Imperialists, II. 196.

Retaken by Francis, 197.
Mulhaujen, battle of, between the Emperor Charles

V. and the Eletor of Saxony, llI. 437.
AulIfy Hafcen, King of Tunis, his inhuman treat-

ment of his father and brothers, III. iox. Is ex-
pelled by Barbaroffia, log. Engages the Emperor
Charles V. to restore him, o1 . Is established
again by the surrender of Tunis, x12. His treaty
with Charlcs, 113.

Murncir,

Atunctr, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, oppofeshirn

with fanatical notions, II. 369. Heads the Infur-
rcetion of the Peasants in Thuringia, 370. His
extravagant schemes, ib. Is defeated and put to
death, 372.
NMunjhcr, the first settlement of the Ariabaptifts in that

city, III. 79. The city seized by them, 80. They
cftablifh a new form of governmcnt there, ib. Is
called Mount Sion, 8I. The bishop of, repulscd
by them, 82. Is blockaded by the bishop, 87.
The city taken, 89. See Anabaptifs.
1Murder, the prices of composition for, by the Romish

clergy, II. 153.
Mafljlaph)a, the declared heir to Sultan Solvman the

Magnificent, is invested with the adminintration of
Diarbequir, IV. 146. His father rcndcred jealous
of his popularity, by the arts of Roxalana, 147.
Is strangled by his father's order, I5i. His only
son murdered, 153.

N
Naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to

supply the Emperor in his exigencies, II. 315. In-
vaded by the French under the Duke of Albany,
320. Invaded by Pope Clement VII. 394.. Treaty
between the Pope and Lannoy viceroy of, t98.
The Prince of Orange retreats thither before Lati-
trec, III. 17. Is blockaded by Lautrec, 18. Sea
engagement in the harbour of, between Andrew
Doria and Moncada, ib. Causes which disappointed
the French operations against, 19. Doria revolts,
and opens the communication by fca again, 22, 23.
Opprcffld by the Spaniih viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, becomes dihaffeced to the Emperor Charles
V. IV. 127. Is harassed by a Turkish fleet, a18.
Nafau, Count of, invades Bouillon at the head f the

Impcrialifts, 11. I96. Invades France, takes Mou-
son, and besieges Mezicres, but is repulsed, ib.
Ntvvarre, the kingdom of, unjustly acquired by Ferdi-

nand of Aragon, 11. 26. D'Albcit's invasion ol,

VoL. IV. F f defeated

defeated by Cardinal Ximenes, 51. Its caftlcs dWi
mantled, except Pampeluna, which Ximcncs
itrengthens, ib. Invaded by Prancis I. in the nani:
of Henry D'Albret, I92. Reduced by L'Efparre,
the French general, 193 The French driven out
by the Spaniards, and L'Elparre taken prisoner,
194.
Netherlands, the government of, first assumed by

Charles V. I. 32. The Flemings averse to Charles's
ooing to Spain, 56. Invaded by Francis I. King of
France, 197. A truce concluded with, by Henry
VIII. of England, III. 20. Invaded by Francis
again, 154. A suspension of arms there, 155. An
infurreation at Ghent, I86. See Ghent. Is once
more invaded by Francis, 268. Resigned by the
Emperor to his son Philip, IV. 230. A review
of the alterations in, during the sixteenth century,
IV. 369, 370.
jiter, a truce for ten years concluded there between the

Emperor and Francis, III. I62. Besieged by the
French and Turks, 273.
iNo)en, treaty of, between Charles V. and Francis I.

of France, II. 55. The terms of, neglected by
Charles, 98.
Nyuremburtk, the city of, embraces the reformed reli-

gion, II. 295. Diet of, particulars ofPope Adrian's
brief to, relipeding the reformers, 296. 'he reply
to, 298. Proposes a general council, ib. Presents
a lift of grievances to the Pope, 299. The recess,
or edict, of, 300. This diet of great advantage
to the refornlers, 301. Proceedings of a lfcond diet
there, 304. ReceCs of the diet, 305. An accom-
niodtiou agreed to there, between the Emperor
Charles V. and the Proteilants, 111. 61.

0
Oran, and other places in Barbary annexed to the

clown of Caflile, by Ximenes, II. 25.
(trage, Phillibert de Chalons, Prince of, general of

the Impcl ial army on the death of the Duke of

Bourbon,

Bourbon, takes the castle of St. Angeln, and Pope
Clement VII. prisoner, II. 407. Retires to Naples
on the approach of Lautrec, III. 17. Takes his
fiscceffor the marquis de Saluces, priloner at Averfa,
24.
,Orleans, Duke of, delivered up to the Emperor

Charles V. with tile Dauphin, as hostages for the
performance of the treaty of Madrid, II. 362. Is
married to Catherine di Medici, III. 7I. Becomes
Dauphin by the death of his brother, 152. See
Dauphin.
*----- Duke of, brother to the former, commands

the army appointed by Francis I. for the invalion of
Luxembourg, III. 258. Is prompted by envy to
abandon hisconqueits, and join his brother the Dau-
phin in Roufillon, 259. Dies, 319.

p
Pacheco, Donna Maria, wife to Don John de Padillo,

her artful scheme to raise money to supply the army
of the Holy Junta, II. 249. Her husband takeni
prisoner and executed, 256. His letter to her, 257.
Raises forces to revenge his death, 260. Is reduced
and retires to Portugal, 261.
Padtil'a, I)on John de, his family and charanLcr, If.

224. Heads the ifilirrcction at Toledo. ib. Routs
the troops under Ronquillo, 297. Calls a convciin-
tion of the malecontlets at Avila., 232. Sorns the
contfdcracy called tie Holy Junta, ih. lii:li ii
Adrian's authority, it. Gets ponflclion ot Q! n
J(anild, 233. Removes the 'lloly Junta to 'I orJ-
sillas, the place ot her residence, 2 4+. Sent wiith
troops to Valladolitl, and deprives Ad ilan ot all )povc r
of goveirn- cnt, 235. 1Is ii crli.dcd ill the cui iiiiiild
of thel ilrily of tlw Junta, by Donl Pedro de (1. liln,
245. Is appointed coinnmander at the r< lin. til
of (;iron, 248. Iis army fiipplied withi I,,II ly
an expedient of his wife, 749. Bti,'.:; ''ol to-
batm, 2753. 'akes ali plunders it, i,. C'ncliti.l
a truce wvith the nocbles, il. 1, wouiilcd ,iir t.ta:

1' 2 pr.l li.r

prisoner in an ation with the Conde de Haro, 255.
Is put to death, 256. His letter to his wife, ib.
His letter to the city of Toledo, ib.
Palatinate, the Reformation eflablifhed there by the

Elecor Frederick, IfI. 323.
Palatine, Count, ambalrador from the diet at Frankfort,

brings Charles V. the offer of the Imperial crown,
which he accepts, II. 88.
Pampeluna, cafile of, in Navarre, its fortifications

:irengthened by Cardinal Ximenes, II. 51. Taken
by L'Efparre, the French general for Henry D'AI-
bret, 193. Retaken by the French, I94.
Papacy, how liable to be affected by the disposal of the

Imperial crown, 1I. 78.
Paraguay, a sovereignty established there, by the order

of Jesuits, II. 219. The inhabitants of, civilized
by them, 220. Precautions used by the Jesuits to
preserve the independency of their empire there, 221.
Paris, a decree published by the university of, againti

Martin Luther the Reformer, lI. 18I. A decree of
the parliament of, published against the Emperor
Charles V. III. 153.
Parma, the dutchy of, confirmed to O&avio Farnese,

by Pope Julius III. IV. 32. Is attacked by the
Imperialiits,and successfully protected by the French,
35.
Palfau, a treaty concluded there between the Emperor

Charles V. and Maurice of Saxony, IV. Iox. Re-
flcdtions on this peace and the conduEt of Maurice,
103.
Pavia, besieged by Francis I. of France, II. 316.

Vigorously defended by Antonio de Leyva, 318.
Battle of, between Francis and the Duke of Bourbon,
324. The Imprrial troops in that city mutiny,
33).
Paul III. Pope, lected, III. 75. His charater, ib.

Propoecs a general council to be held at Mantua, 94.
Negociates personally between the Emperor and
Francis, 160. Ilfues a bull for a council at Mantua,
173. Prorogues and transfers it to Vicenza, 175.
A partial reformation of abulcs by, 176. Summons

the

the council of Trcnt, 278. Prorogues it, 279.
Summons it again, 310. Grants the dutchies of
Parma and Placentia to his illegitimate son, 320.
Deprives and excommunicates the eletoral bishop of
Cologne, 343. Prefles the Emperor to declare
again{t the Protestants, 345. Concludes an alli-
ance with him against the Protestants, 352. Indif-
creetly publishes this treaty, 356. His troops join
the Emperor, 372. Rccals them, 399. Removes
the council from Trent to Bologna, 469. Refuses
the Emperor's request to carry the council back to
Trent, 470. His resentment against the Emperor
for the murder of his son Cardinal Farnese, 473.
Is petitioned by the diet of Augsburg for the return
of the council to Trcnt, 475. Eludes the comply-
ing with this request, 477. His sentiments of the
Interim publiihed by Charles, 487. Dilfmifles the
council of Bologna, 494. Annexes Parma and
Placentia to the Holy See, IV. 2. Dies, 3. The
manner of his death inquired into, 4.
Paul 1V. Pope, ele&ed, 1V. 209. His charater and

hiflory, 20o. Founds the order of Theatines, 2I 1.
Is the principaloccafionofeftablifhing the inquisition
in the Papal territories, 212. Lays aside his aufte-
rity on his elction, ib. His partiality to his ne-
phews, 213. Is alienated from the Emperor by
his nephews, 216. Makes overtures to an alliance
with France, 217. Is cnraged by the recels of the
diet of Augsburg, 220. Signs a trc;ty with France,
223. Is included in the truce for five years, con-
cluded between the Emperor and Henry, 239. His
infidlous artifices to deftat this truce, 242. Ab-
solves Henry from his oath, and concludes a new
treaty with him, 24+). His violent procccdilngs
against Philip, now King of Spain, 247. 'l'he
Campagna Romana fcized by the l)uke d'Alv.i,
250. Concludes a truce with Alva, 251. Con-
traft between his condult and that of Charles, 260.
Renews his hostilitics against Philip, 262. 1!; un-
provided for military operations, 263. Is rcedtced
uo make peace with Philip, by the rccal of the Duke

F f oof

of Guise after the defeat of St. Quintin, 283. Re-
ceives an ambafTador from the Emperor Ferdinand
to notify his clection, but refties to fee him or to
acknowledge the Emperor, 297. Dies, 335.
Paielin, a French officer, fcnt ambaflador from Francis

I. to Sultan Solyman, 11l. 267. His successful nc-
gociations at the Porte, ih.
Pembroke, carl of, sent by Quren Mary of England

with a body of men to ioin tihe Spanish army in the
Low-Countries, IV. 269.
Per;pinlan, the capital of Roussillon, bcfiered bv the

Dauphin of France, Ill. 253. The siege raised,
259.
Pefira, marquis de, takes Milan bhv nitult, II. 208.

Drives Bonnivet back to France, 2o0. His gene-
rous care of the chevalier Bayard, 291. Commands
in the invasion of Provence, 309. Bcfieges Mar-
feilles, 310. His army retires toward Italy, on the
appearance of the French troops, ib. Rcfigns
Milan to the French, 314. Prevails on his Spanifi
troops not to murmur at prclint for their pay, 316.
Contributes to the defeat of Francis at the battle of
Pavia, 325. Is disgusted at Francis being taken to
Spain, without his concurrence, 343. His rcfent-
nient inflamed by Moroni, 344. IBetrays Moron 's
dcfins to the Emperor, 347. A:re'ts Morone,
348. Dies, 353.
Philip, Archduke; of Austria, and father of Charles V.

visits Spain, with his wife Joanna, I1. 4. I)rc
homage by the way to Lewis Xll. of France for tie
earldom of Slanders, ib. His title to the crcwn ac-
knowlcdged by the Cortes, ib. Is difgulted with the
formality of the Spanifl court, ib. Ferdinand be-
comcs jealous of his power, ib. Slights his wife, 5.
Ilis abrupt departure from Spain, ib. Paflcs through
Fraince, and enters into a treaty with Lewis, 6. His
lentiments on Fcrdinand's obtaining the regency of
Cafrile, 1o. Requires Ferdinand to retire to Ara-
gon, and resign his regency of Castile, li. The
Regcncy of Cafiile veiled jointly in him, Ferdinand
and Joann;a, by the treaty of Salaniancha, 15. Sets

out

out for Spain, and is driven on the coast of England,
where he is detained three months by Henry VII.
l6. Arrives at Corunna, ib. The Caltilian nobi-
lity declare openly for him, ib. Ferdinand resigns
the regency of Castile to him, 17. Interview b,-
tween them, ib. Acknowledged King of Castile b
the Cortes, 19. Dies, ib. Joanna's cxtraordi-
nary conduLt in regard to his body, 20. See
Yoanna.
I'/ilip, Prince, son to the Emperor Charles V. his

right of fucceflion recognized by the Cortes of.
Aragon and Valencia, 11[. 261. Is acknowledged
by the States of the Netherlands, 407. His deport-
ment difgults the Flemings, ih. His character,
IV. 30. Is married to Mary Queen of England,
157, x6o. The English parliament jealous of him,
163. His father resigns his hereditary dominions to
him, 223. Is called by his father out of England,
230. The ceremony of investing him, i,'. His
father's address to him, 233. Commifflons Cardinal
Granvelle to address the atmbly in his name, 234.
Mary Queen dowager of Hungary resigns ler re-
gency, 235 The dominions of Spain refincd to
him, ib. His unpolitcnefs to the French ambafrador
Coligni, 240, Note. The Pope's violent proceed-
ings against him, 247. His crtiples concernini
commencing hollilities against the Pope, 248. 1-1;
ungrateful neglcct in payilng his father's pcnfioi,
258. The Pope renews h ftilties agaiiiflhim, 262.
Afitembles an army in the l ,w-Countries against
France, 267. Goes over to England to engage that
kingdom in the war, i/,. Vilits the camp at St.
Qilitin, after the vi2try, 276. Oigp,)l; s the
fclieee of penetrating to Paris, and orders the fi.gc
of St. Qiintin to he protecuted, 27X. St. Qtintll
taken by aflult, 27(, 'I'l',: frlill advantagecs lie
reaped by there fulccclcs, 281. Builds the l.icurial
in memory of the battle of St. (Qlintin, il'. Con-
eludes a peace with the Pop,:, ?: 3. Retore l'l.i-
centia to O6ftvio Farnefl, 285. t;rants the invcf-
titurc us Siena to Colno di Medici, 288. E'lters into

F f 4 ncgociatioila

negociations for peace with his prifoncr .Montrno-
rency, 309. Death of Queen Mary, 322. Ad-
dresses her fucceflor Elizabeth for marriage, 323.
Elizabeth's motives for rcjeEling him, 325. Her
evasive answer to him, 326. Supplants his son Don
Carlos, and marries Henry's daughter Elizabeth,
331. Articles of the treaty of Chateau Cambrcfis,
33..

Phillibert, Emmanuel, Duke of Savoy. See Savoy.
Phillipino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats Moncada

in a Tea engagement before the harbour of Naples,
III. i8.
Piadena, marquis de, invades Transylvania for Ferdi-

nand, IV. 52. Mifreprefcnts Cardinal Martinuzzi
to Ferdinand, and obtains a commiflion to aflTflinate
him, 57. Is forced to abandon Transylvania, 141.
Pitardy, invaded by Henry VIII. II. 218. Henry

forced by the Duke de Vend6me to retire, 2I9.
Invaded again under the Duke of Suffolk, 286.
Who penetrates almolt to Paris, but is driven back,
287. IneffeAual invasion by the Imperialists, III.
150.
Placentia, the dutchy of, granted together with that

of Parma by Pope Paul III. to his natural son, Car-
dinal Farnefc, III. 320. Farnese afflainated there,
472. Is taken possession of by the Imperial troops,
473. Restored to Oqtavio Farncfe, by Philip II.
of Spain, IV. 285.
Pole, Cardinal, arrives in England with a legantine

commiflion, IV. x6r. Endeavours to mediate a
peace between the Emperor and the King of France,
without fucccfs, 9go. Is recalled from the court of
England by Pope Paul IV. 262.
Prihtilg, its cffets on the progrcfs of the Reformation,

II. 168.
Prague, its privileges abridged by Fcrdinand King of

Bohemia, Ill. 465.
ProtcJfants, the derivation of the name, III. 48. Of

whom they originally consisted, ib. A severe decree
published against them by the Emperor, 53. They
enter into a league, 54, See Smalalale. Renew

their

their league, and apply to Francis King of France,
and Henry VIII. of England, for protctfion, 57.
Are secretly encouraged by Francis, 58. Receive a
supply of money from Henry, 59. Terms of the
pacification agreed to between them and the Empe-
ror at Nuremburg, 6x. Aflift the Emperor against
the Turks, 62. Their negociations with the Pope,
relative to a general council, 65. Renew the league
of Smalkalde for ten years, 95. The motives for
refusing to afffit the king of France against the Em-
peror, 121. Refuse to acknowledge the council
summoned by the Pope at Mantua, 174. A con-
ference between their principal divines and a depu-
tation of Catholicks, at Ratisbon, 227. This con-
ference how rendered fruiitlef;, 229. Obtain a pri-
vate grant from Charles in their favour, 231. Drive
the buke of Brunlwick from his dominions, 280.
All rigorous edicts againfi them fulpcnded by a recels
of the diet of Spires, 285. Their rcmonltrances to
Ferdinand at the diet of Worms, 313. Their in-
flexible adherence to the recess of Spires, ib. Dif-
claim all connexion with the council ot Trent, 315.
Are firengthened by the accession of Frederick Elec-
tor Palatine, 323. Are alarmed at the proceedings
of the Emperor, 327, 351. The Emperor leagues
with the Pope againit them, 353. Prepare to resist
the Emperor, 358. Levy an army, 363. The opera-
tions of the army diffrac'ted by thejoint commanders,
371. The army dispersed, 391. 1The Elector of
Saxony reduced, 439. The Landgrave uilccived by
treaty, and confined, 455, 456. The Emperor's
cruel treatment of him, 461. The /ntr'rin, a sys-
tem of theology recommended by the Emlperor to
the diet at Augsburg, 482. Are promilfed protection
by the Emperor at the council of Trent, iV. 23.
The Emperor proceeds rigorously against them, 38.
I'heir deputies obtain a itle conduct from the Em-
peror, hut are rcfilld by the council, 49. Maurice
of Saxony raites ;un armiy in their caule, 70. See
Mauri e. Treaty of PalFau, 102. The Protefiant
Princes again unite to fircngthcn the Protcfant in-

tercft,

terest, 198. Recess of the diet of Augsburg on
the subjed of religion, 200. Why originally averse
to the principles of toleration, 205.
Provence, is laid waste by the Marefchal Montmorency

on the approach of the Emperor Charles V. IlI. 143.
Is entered by the Emperor, 144. The disastrous
retreat of the Emperor from, 148.
Pru3jia, when conquered by the Teutonick order, 11.

375. Is erected into a dutchy, and finally into a
kingdom, and enjoyed by the house of Branden-
burgh, 376.

R
Rdti/Jln, a conference between a deputation of Pro-

ttfiant and Catholick divines, before the Emperor
and diet there, 1II1 226. This conference how
rendered fruitless, 229. A diet opened theresby the
Emperor, 347. The Catholick members of, aflert
the authority of the council of Trent, 348. The
Protestants present a memorial against it, 350. The
Protestant deputies retire, 352.
Reformation in religion, the rife of, explained, II. 113.

The diet at Worms called by Charles V. to check
the progress of, ib. Account of Martin Luther, the
Reformer, 119. Beginning of in Switzerland by
Zuinglius, 137. State of, in Germany, at the ar-
rival of Charles V. 141. Refletion on the conduct
of the court of Rome toward Luther, 142. And on
Luther's conduct, 144. Inquiry into the causes
which contributed to the progress of, 147. Obfer-
vations on the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. 149. The immoral lives of the Romish
clergy, 150. The progress of, ft.voured by the in-
vention of printing, 168. And the revival of learn-
inpg, 169. The great progress of, in Germany,
295. Advantages derived to, from the diet at Nu-
rcmbiilrih, 3ol. Its tendency ill favour of civil
lihcrty, 0)8. The dissensions between the Emperor
and the Pope, favourable to, 411. The great Ipread
of, amionii the German l'inces, II. 44. ''he

coulfcflion

confcflion of Auigfburg drawn up l.y Mclandhon,
51. Causes which led to that of England, 72.
The cxccfies it gave rile to, 76. See Protjtaants,
.Mfaurice, and Smlalalde. Is eliablifhed in Saxony,
180. The great alteration occasioned by, in the
court of Rome, IV. 356. Contributed to improve
both the morals and learning of the Romifli church,
361.
Reygio, invested by the French, who are repulscd by

the governor Guicciardini the historian, 11. 203.
Remonjirance of grievances drawn up by the Holy Junta,

the particulars of, 11. 238. Remarks on, 242.
Reverfr, a deed so called, signed by the archduke Ser-

dinand on being eledcd King of Bohemia, II. 41o.

Rheggio, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, III. 272.
Rhodes, the island of, hcficged by Solyman the Mag-

nificent, I!. 220. Taken by him, 222. The island
of Malta granted to the knights of, by the Emperor
Charles V. ib.
Richlice, Cardinal, his remarks on Dc Rctz's history

of Fiefco's conspiracy, 111. 416. Note.
Rir-on, thc French ambanlador at the Porte, the mo-

tives of his return to France, Ill. 252. Is murdered
in his journey back to Constantinople, by order of
the Imperial governor of the \lilanee, 253.
Rome, reflections on the conduct of the court of, re-

fpcting the proceedings againlt Martin Luther, II.
143. The exorbitant wealth of the church ot, pre-
vious to the Reformation, 154. Venality of, 165.
How it drained other countries of their wealth, ib.
The city fr'ized by Cardinal Colonna, and Pope
Clement VII. befrctld in the cattle of St. Anoelo,
389. The city taken by the Imperialists, and lBour-
bon killed, ib. Is plundered, ib. The great re-
volution in the court of, during the fixtccnth cen-
tury, 111. 354. l-ow affleted by the revolt of Lu-
ther, 355. The fi)lnt of its government changed
by, 359.
Ronquillo, sent by C:ardiial Adrian with troops to sup-

press the infulicErlcin in Segovia, 11. 227. Is routed
by the iilurgenlts, ib.

Rover..

Rover}, Francesco Maria de, restored to his dutchyof

Urbino by Pope Adrian, II. 270.
Roxalana, a Rufan captive, becomes the favourite

mistress ofS ultan Solyman the Magnificent, IV. 142.
Her only daughter married to Ruftan the Grand Vi-
zier, 143. Procures herself to be declared a free
woman by the Sultan, 144. Is formally married to
him, I45. Renders Solyman jealous of the virtues
of his son Muftapha, 146. Muftapha strangled,
151.
Ruflan, Grand Vizier to Solyman the Magnificent, is

married to his daughter by Roxalana, IV. 143.
Enters into Roxalana's scheme to ruin Solyman's
son Muflapha, ib. Is sent with an army to destroy
him, 149. Draws Solyman to the army by falli
reports, ib.

S
Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon,

and his fon-in-law Philip, II. 15.
Salerno, Prince of, heads the difaffeted Neapolitans,

against the oppreflions of the viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, IV. 127. Solicits aid from Henry II. of
France, who infiigates the Turks to invade Na-
ples, ib.
Saluces, marquis de, succeeds Lautrec in the command

of the French army before Naples, III. 24. Retires
to Averfa, where he is taken prisoner by the Prince
of Orange, ib. Betrays his charge in Piedmont,
141.
Sancerre, count de, defends St. Difiere, against the

Emperor Charles, 1II. 294. Is deceived into a fur-
render by the Cardinal Granvelle, 297.
Sauvage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Castile by

Charles, on the death of Ximenes, II. 64. His ex-
tortions, ib.
Savona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by the

French, to favour its rivalfhip with Genoa, III.
21.

Savo',

Savoy, Charles Duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal,

fiter to the Emperor Charles V. III. 123. The
cause of Francis's displeasure agai.ft him, ib. His
territories over-run by the French troops, 124. Ge-
neva recovers its liberty, 125. His situation by
the truce at Nice, between the Emperor and Francis,
163. Is besieged at Nice, by the French and
Turks, III. 273.
-----EmmanuelPhillibert Dukeof, appointed by Phi-

lip of Spain to command his army in the Low-Coun-
tries, IV. 269. Inveffs St. Quintin, 270. Defeats
D'Andelot in an endeavour to join the garrison,
273. But does not hinder him from entering the
town, ib. Defeats the Conflable Montmorency, and
takes him prisoner, 274. Is graciously visited in the
camp by Philip, 277. Takes St. Quintin by as-
fault, 279. Aflifts Montmorency in negociating peace
between Philip and Henry, 310. Marries Henry's
fifler Elizabeth, 331, 334.
Saxony, Eleaor of, appointed joint commander of the

army of the Protestant league, with the Landgrave of
Hesse, III. 371. Their charaaers compared, ib.
Opposes the Landgrave's intention of giving battle to
the Emperor, 376. His eletorate seized by Mau-
rice, 388. The army of the league disperse, 391.
Recovers Saxony, 396. Is amused by Mauriccwith
a negociation, 397. Raises an army to defend him-
self against the Emperor, 432. Is irresolute in his
measures, 433. Charles pafIes the Elbe, 434. Is
attacked by the Tmperialiffs, 438. Is taken prisoner
and harshly received by the Emperor, 439. Is con-
demned to death by a court martial, 443. His refo-
lution on the occasion, 445. Is induced by regard
to his family to furrendcrhis elecorate, 447. Ke
fufcs the Emperor's desire of his approving the Inte-
rim, 488 The rigour of his confinement increascd,
489. Is carried by the Emperor with him into the
Netherlands, 494. Is released by the Emperor on
Maurice's taking arms against him, but choofes to
continue with the Emperor, IV. 82. Obtains his
liberty after the treaty of Paftau, o9.

iS" n "!y,

Saony, George Duke of, an enemy to the Reforma-

tion, III. 179. His death an advantage to the Re-
formation, ib. The Protestant religion eftablilhed
by Henry Duke of, 180. Henry is succeeded by
his son Maurice, 275. His motives for not acced-
ing to the league of Smalkalde, ib. Marches to the
afliftance of Ferdinand in Hungary, 276. Joins the
Emperor against the Protestants, 364, 383. See
Maurice.
Schertel, Sebastian, a commander in the army of the

Protefant league, his vigorous commencement of
hostilitics, IIl. 369. Is injudiciously recalled, 370.
Is expelled from Augsburg on the dispersion of the
Protestant army, 393.
Scotland, James V. of, married to Mary of Guise,

duchcfs-dowager of Longucville, III. 171. Death
of James and acceflion of his infant daughter Mary,
264. Mary contraced to the Dauphin of France,
474. The marriage celebrated, IV. 300. Mary
assumes the title and arms of England on the death
of Mary of England, 325. Included in the treaty
of Chateau Cambrefis, 330. Alteration in the con-
duct of England toward, 353.

Sells in religion, reflections on the origin of, III. 76.
Segovia, an infurrcótion there, on account of their re-

prefcntative Tordcfillas voting for the donative to
Charles V. II. 225. Ite is killed by the populace,
ib. The infurgcnts there defeat Ronquillo, sent to
suppress them by Cardinal Adiian, 227. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, 258.
Slilm 11. Sultan, extirpates the Mainalukes, and adds

Egypt and Syria to his empire, II. 72. Confidered
as fornidable to the European powirs, ib.
Sfo'rza, obtains of Charles V. the invdltittire of Milan,

II. 343. Forfeits the dutchy, by his intrigues with
Morloll, 348. Joills in a lcatlc ;laiainFl Charles for
the rcvcly of MIil; ln, 379. l 1' ltr'd to furriculer
Mlil.i to the Ilmipiri:lills, 386. ()b.tins a:aiin of
tlhc i inlcror the iinvlliture of Milan, 111. 42. E'I-
teIs ilto a pl)ivate treaty with ;Fr ICi, 16. Mer-

vcille

veille Francis's envoy executed for murder, Ix7.
Dies, 129.
SN'a, the inhabitants of, implore the affiltance of the

Emperor Charles V. to defend them against their
nobles, IV. 124. The Imperial troops endcavour
to enslave them, ib. Regain pofffflion of their city,
126. Rcpulfe an attack of the Germans, 140. 'a
besieged by the marquis de Marignano, 176. Thw
commander Monilic repulses the aflaults vigorously,
177. The town reduced by famine, 178. Num-
bers of the citizens retire, and cftablifh a free go-
vernment at Monte Alcino, 179. The remaining
citizens oppressed, 180. And flock to Monte Al-
cino, ib. Is granted by the Emperor to his son Phi-
lip, 18I. The investiture given by Philip to Cos-
mo di Medici, 288.
Sieverhaufen, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony

and Albert of Brandenburg, IV. 132.
Sir, Cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French

army in the Milanese, II. 207. Leaves the Imperial
army to attend the conclave on the death of Leo X.

210.
S,,nilkalLd, the Protestants enter into a league there, for

their mutual support, III. 54. The league renewed
at a second meeting there, 57. The league of, re-
newed for ten years, 95. A maniflfto, iefufing to
acknowledge a council called by the Pope, 174.
'I'he King of )enmark joins the league, 177. The
Princes of, protest against the authority ot the In -
perial chamber, and the rcclf of the diet at Nuurcl-
burg, 281. Publifll a mnailcor:( againll: the pro-
ceedings of the council of T'rent, 327. Are .dl;iii'mi
;t the proceedings of the Emperor, il. A w.!nit ul
unity among the members, 329. ']'he views o01 Ili
Elector of Saxony, and the l,andgraxc, explaiied,
il. Appear at the diet of Ratiibon by deputies, 34S.
'Their deputies protest againit the council of'l-ci;t,
350. Their deputies, alarmed at the Ilpci tl'.
pioceedings and declarations, lea\e the diet, :;1.
'1'(: Emplleror leahiues with the Pope ..,:n ll llt;;,
353. Prepare to ,clifl the Enilprcoi, ;; . Ai

di. i,.jq, ,iiilnt

disappointed in their application to the Venetians and
Swiss, 359. As also with Henry VIII. and Francis,
361. Aflemble a large army, 363. Are put under
the ban of the Empire, 367. Declare war against
the Emperor, 368. HoStilities begun by Schertel,
369. They recal him, 370. The Elector of Sax-
ony and Landgrave of Hesse appointed joint com-
manders of their army, 371 The characers of
the two commanders compared, ib. Their opera-
tions diftraced by this joint command, 372. Can-
nonade the Emperor's camp, 377. Make overtures
of peace to the Emperor, 390. Their army dif-
perse, 391. The Elector ot Saxony reduced, 439.
rhe Landgrave deceived and confined, 455. Their
warlike ftorcs seized by the Emperor, 462. See
Maurice.
Solyman the Magnificent, ascends the Ottoman throne,

11. 112. Invades Hungary and takes Belgrade, 220.
Takes the island of Rhodes, ib. Defeats the Hun-
garians at Mohacz, 409. His fucccfls, and the
numlber of pliloners he carried away, 410. Beficges
Vienna, 111. 41. Enters I-ungary again with a vast
army, but is forced to retire by the Emperor Charles,
63. Takes Barbarofla the pirate under his pro-
tection, ico. Concludes an alliance with Francis
King of France, 158. Prepares to invade Naples,
ib. Protcts Stephen King of Hungary, and defeats
Ferdinand, 235. Seizes Hungary for himself, 236.
Over-runs Hungary again, in fulfilment of his treaty
with Francis, 272. Concludes a truce with the
Emperor, 346. Loses Transylvania, IV. 55. Ra-
vages the coalts of Italy, 95, 128. Carries a mighty
army into Hungary, 97. Re-eftablifles Isabella
and her son in Trantylvania, 141. His violent at-
tachment to his concubine Ruxalana, 142. Is pre-
vailed on to declare her a free woman, 144. For-
mally marries her, 145. Is rendered jealous of the
virtues of his foil Muftapha, by the arts of Roxalana,
147. ()rders him to be strangled, 15i. Orders
the murder of M{uftapha's son, 155.

ea'irts

Spain, the fate of, at the death of Ferdinand of Ara-

gon, II. 33. Charles King of, aspires to the Impe-
rial crown on the death of Maximilian, 70. Is elea-
ed Emperor, 85. Refle&ions of the Spaniards on
that event, 88. Charles appoints viceroys, and
departs for Germany, 95. Infurrefions there, 224.
A view of the feudal system in, 230. An account
of the confederacy, termed the Holy Junta, 232.
Causes which prevented an union of the malcontents
in the refpetive provinces, 267. The moderation
of Charles toward them on his arrival, 268. In-
fianceof the haughty spirit of the grandees, III. 185.
Is invaded by the Dauphin, 258. The dominions
of, resigned by Charles to his 'on Philip, IV. 235.
The arrival of Charles, and his reception there, 257.
The place of his retreat described, 259. The regal
power in, how enlarged by Charles, 340. The
foreign acquisitions added to, 341. See Aragon,
CaJfile, Galicia, yalencia, Cortes, Germanada, and
H-oly unta.
Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative to the Reforma-

tion, II. 412. Another diet called there by the
Emperor, III. 46. Another diet at, 281. Recess
of, in favour of the Protestants, 285.
Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the dreadful

effects of, II. 159.
St. Difier, in Champagne, invefled by the Emperor,

III. 294. Is obtained by the artifice of Cardinal
Granvelle, 297.
St. JuJfus, monaftcry of, il Plazencia, is chosen by

the Emperor Charles V. for his rctrcat after his
resignation, IV. 259. His lituation dcfcribed, ib.
His apartments, ib.
St. Quintin, invested by the Spaniil troops, and de-

fended by admiral Coligni, IV. 270. D'Andelot
defeated in an endeavour to join the garriiun, 272.
But enters the town, 273. Montnorcncy defeated
by the duke of Savoy, ib. The town taken by
alsault, 279.
Strozzi, Peter, fomeaccountof, IV. 173. Is intrust-

ed with the command of the French armuy in Italy,

VOL. IV. G g i.

ib. Is defeated by the marquis de Marignann,
176.
Suabia, an infurrecfion of the peasants against the nobles

there, II. 366. They publish a memorial of their
grievances, ib. The insurgents dispersed, 367.
The Protefant religion suppressed there by the Em-
peror Charles V. IV. 39.
Suffolk, duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates almost to

Paris, but is driven back, II. 287.
Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to the Emperor

Charles V. II. 218. Obliged to retire out of Pi-
cardy by the Duke de Vendome, 219.
Sweden, a summary view of the revolutions in, during

the sixteenth century, IV. 370, 371.
Switzerland, the Cantons of, elpoufe the pretensions of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, II. 76. Com-
mencement of the Reformation there by Zuinglius,
137. The regulation under which they hire our
their troops, 207. The precipitate battle, infifled
on by their troops under Lautrrc, loft, 214.
Syria, how and by whom added to the Ottoman Em-

pire, II. 72,

T
Terrnes, marefchal de, governor of Calais, takes Dun-

kirk by florm, IV. 302. Engages the count of Eg-
mont, and is defeated by the accidental arrival of an

1nglifh squadron on the coast, 303, Is taken pri-

soner, 304.
Terrouane, taken and demolilhed by the Emperor

Charles V. IV. 138.
Tctzel, a Dominican friar, his shameful condut in the

faleof Indulgences in Germany, II. 116. His form
of absolution, and recommendation of the virtues of
Indulgences, ib. Note. His debauched course of
life, Ir9. Publihies theses againff Luther, 124.
Teutonicorder, a character of, Il. 374. Conquer the

province of Piuflia, 375. Their grand master Al-
bert made duke of Prussia, 376.
Theatines, the order of, by whom founded, IV. 21 r.

'hionvillk,

9bitonvzwle, in Luxembourg, taken by the Duke of

Guise, IV. 302.
turingia, an infurredion of the pealants there, againfi

the nobility, II. 368. The fanatical notions inspired
into them by Thomas Muncer, 370. Their difor-
derly army defeated, 372.
Toledo, infurresion in, at the departure.of Charles V.

for Germany, 96, 224. The cathedralof, firipped
of its riches to support the army of the Holy Junta,
249. Padillo's lettet to, at his execution, 256. Is
instigated to continue in arms by Padillo's wife,
259. Is reduced, 261.
Toledg, Ludovico de, nephew to Comno di Medici,

'ent by his uncle to negociate with Philip II. of
Spain, for the investiture of Siena, IV. 287.
'oledo, Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, opprefles the
Neapolitans, IV. 127. And occasions the Turks to
ravage the coasts of Naples, ib.
Toleration, refletions on the progress of, in Germany,

IV. 201. Why mutually allowed among the ancient
Heathens, 202. How the primitive Chriitians be-
came averse to, ib.
Tomorri, Paul, a Franciscan monk, archbifiop of Go-

locza, is made general of the Hungarian army againll
Solyman the Magnificent, and is defeated by him,
II. 409.
Tordefillas, the residence of Queen Joanna, the confe-

deracy of malcontents called the Holy Junta, re-
moved thither, II. 234. The Queen taken there by
the Conde de Haro, 247.
--- one of the rcprclentatives of Segovia, killed

by the populace for voting the donative to Clli:lts
V. at theCortes aircmbled in Galicia, 1I. 226.
TratnJ]lvania, is furrcndered to Ferdinand King of the

Romans, by Qeieen Ilabella, IV. 55.
Tremouille, La, drives the Englifli under the duke of

Suffolk, out of Picardy, 11. 287.
Trtnt, tie council of, fimmoned, Ill. 278. Prorogued,

279. Airain flimmoned, 310. Is opened, 324. I)'-
clarcs the lapocryllil criptures c:lnollical, 342. Es a-
blilhcs the authority of tle church ti.d litili, iT 'I'he

G- 2 council,

council, on rumours of an infetion in the city, is
translated to Bologna, 469 Henry II. of Franco
proteits against the council, IV. 36. The council
breaks up on the approach of Maurice of Saxony,
82. Historical remarks on this council, 83. Cha-
racers of its historians, 85.
Trent, Cardinal of, sent by the Emperor Charles V.

to conclude an alliance with the Pope, III. 351.
The nature of this treaty, 352.
Tunis, the means of its coming under the power of Bar-

baroffa, traced, III. ioI. The Emperor and other
ChrifRian powers unite to expel Barbarossa, and re-
store Muley Hafcen, o15. Is taken by the Empe-
ror, iI . Muley Hafcen restored, and his treaty
with Charles, 112.
TfOany, a review of the itate of, during the sixteenth

century, IV. 367.

V
Yalencia, an infurreaion in, II. 90. The people there

greatly oppressed by the nobles, ib. The noblesre-
fuse to assemble the Cortes except the King is pre-
sent, 91. Charles authorises the people to continue
in arms, ib. They expel the nobles, 92. Associate
under the Germanada, and appoint their own magi-
ftrates, ib. Don Diego de Mendora, Conde de
Melito, appointed regent, on the departure of Charles
for Germany, 95. The Germanada refuse to lay
down their arms, 263. Defeat the nobles in several
actions, 265. Are at length routed by the Conde
de Melito, ib. The moderation of Charles to-
ward the insurgents on his arrival, 268.

Yalentinois, Duchess of. See Diana of Poitiers.
Valladolid, the firfr publick entry of Charles V. to that

city, 11. 62. The inhabitants rife, burn Fonseca's
house, and fortify the town, 1I. 229. Surrenders
after the battle of Villalar, and diflblution of the
Holy Junta, 258.
"vaucdlles, treaty of, between Charles V. and Henry II.

of France, IV. 238.

KYndomt,

Ptndobme duke of, his plan of operations in opposing,

the progress of the invasion of Picardy by Henry
VIII. II. 219. Obliges him to retire, ib.
Ytica, the republick of, incline in favour of the pre-

tensions of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial
crown, II. 76. Their views and apprehensions on
the approaching rupture between the Emperor
Charles V. and Francis, xo1. Leagues with the
Emperor againit Francis, 272. A final accommo-
dation between,and the Emperor, III. 42. Refufcs
to enter into the league of the Italian fates, formed
by the Emperor, 67. A review of the state of
that republick during the sixteenth century, IV.
365.
1errina, the confident of the Count of Lavagno, en-

courages him in his scheme of overturning the go-
vernment of Genoa, III. 404. Is protected by
Francis on the ruin of that conspiracy, 424.
Vielleville, the French governor of Metz, detedts Father

Leonard's conspiracy to betray the city to the Impc-
rialills, IV. 187. Executes the conspirators, 189.
'ienna, is besieged by Sultan Solyman the Magnificent,

III. 4I.
Villalar, battle of, between Padilla and the Conde de

Haro, II. 254.
Villena, marquis de, his spirited reply to the request of

the Emperor to lodge Bourbon in his palace, II. 252.
Ulm, the government of that city violently altered, and

its reformed ministers carried away in chains, by the
Emperor Charles V. III. 492.
United Provinces, of the Netherlands, a brief view of

their revolt againit the dominion of Spain, IV. 369.
Urbino, restored by Pope Adrian to Franccfco Maria de

Roverc, II. 270.

W
Wallop, Sir John, joins the Emperor Charles V. at the

siege of Landrecy, with a body of Engliih tloc(p,
Il1. 271.

It ar,

*ar, the method of carrying on in*Europe, how itr
proved at this period from the practice of earlier
ages, II. 285. General reflctions on the vicissitudes
of, IV. 336.
Wartburg, Martin Luther concealed there by the

EleAor of Saxony, 11. i o.
t"entworth, Lord, governor of Calais, remonitrates in

vain with the English privy-council to provide for
its security, IV. 292. Is attacked by the Duke of
Guise, and forced to capitulate, 294.
WYittemberg, invested by the Emperor Charles V. and

defended by Sybilla of Cleves, wife to the Elecor
of Saxony, III. 441.
I'olfey, Cardinal, his rife, characEer, and influence

over Henry VIII. of England, II. Io4. Receives
a pension from Francis 1. of France, 1o6. And
from the Emperor Charles V. ib. Detached front
the French interest by the latter, o18. Inclines
Henry to join the Emperor againfi Francis, I85.
Sent by Henry to Calais, to negociate an accommo-
dation between the Emperor and Francis, 197.
Has an interview with Charles at Bruges, and con-
cludes a league with him on the part of Henry,
against France, 199. Meditates revenge against
Charles on his second disappointment of the Papacy
by the clction of Clement VII. 284. Obtains of
Clement a legatine commission in England for life,
ib. Negociates a league with Francis against the
Emperor, III. 3.
IYorms, a diet called there by Charles V. to check the

progress of the Reformers, II. II3. Proceedings
of, 176. Martin Luther cited bcfure it, 177. Re-
fufcs to rctraA his opinions, 178. An cdia pub-
lifhed against him, 179. Diet at, opened, 1II.
311- Ituritrmerg, Ulric Duke of, why expelled his domi-

nions, 111. 9 . Recovers his dominions by the
afliftance of Francis King of France, and receives
the Prottelant religion, 92.

I'yat

Y'yat, Sir Thomas, raifcs an infurrtEtion in Kent

against Queen Mary of England, on account of the
Spanish match, IV. 159S Isfubdued and punished,
T60.
Kimenes, archbishop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinand

of Aragon, in his dispute with the Archduke Philip
concerning the regency of Caflile, II. 12. Espouses
Ferdinand's claim to the regency of Castile on Phi-
lip's death, 24. Conquers Oran, and other places
in Barbary, for the crown of Caflile, 25. Ap-
pointed regent of Caffile, by Ferdinand's will, until
the arrival of Charles V. in Spain, 35. His rife
and character, ib. Admits the claim to the regency
of Cardinal Adrian, sent with that commiflion by
Charles, and executes it jointly with him, 38.
Takes the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under
his own eye, 39. Procures Charles, who aflurned
the regal title, to be acknowledged by the Christian
nobility, 41. Schemes to extend the regal preroga-
tive, 42. Depresses the nobility, 43. Frees the
King from the feudal limitations, and eflablifhes a
regal army to check the Barons, 44. Suppreflis a
mutiny headed by the grandees, 45. Resumes the
grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, 46. His prudent
application of the revenue, 47. His bold afertion
of his authority to the difcotented nobles, 48.
Other aflociates in the regency appointed at the
instigation of the Flemish courtiers, 49. Retains
the superior managcment, 50. Defeats John
I)'Albert's invasion of Navarrc, ib. Difijantles all
the caHles there, except Painpeluia, which he
ltrcngthens, 51. 'Ihe troops tient by him againfl
Barbarofla defeated, and his equaniimity on that
occasion, 52. Alarmed at the corruption of the
Flemiih court, he persuades Charles to visit Spain,
53. Falls tick on his journey to meet Charles at
his arrival, 59. Hlis letter of council to Charles,
ib. Requfcts an interview, 60. The ingratitude
of Charles to him, ib. His death, 61. His cha-

ra;tcr,

rafter, b. Reverence paid to his memory by the
Spaniards, ib.

Z
Zamora, bishop of, raises a regiment of priefis to defend

Tordefillas, for the Holy Junta, which is forced by
the Conde de Haro, II. 247.
Zuinglius, attacks the ale of Indulgences at Zurich in

Switzerland, II. 137.

F I N I S.
