THE
HISTORY

OF T H E
RE IGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL 1.

A

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
RE I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and

HISTORIOGRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VOL. II,

DUBLIN:
Printed for W. and W. SMITH, A. LEATHLEY,

G. FAULKNER, S. POWELL, P. and W. WILSUN,
J. ExsHAW, H. SAUNDERS, W. WHITESTONE,
W. SLEATER, L. FLIN, B. GRIERSON, E. LYNCH,
D. CHAMBERLAINE, J. POTTS, J. HOEY, jun.
J. WILLIAMS, J. MITCHELL, W. COLLES, J. MIL-
LI ICN, C. INGHAM, and J. PORTER, Bookfcllers.

MDCCLXX,

# BOOK I.

THE

H I S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.
C H HARLES V. was born at Ghent on BooK I

the twenty-fourth day of February, in ----
the year one thousand five hundred. His Cmhi'f^
father, Philip the Handsome, Archduke

of Auttria, was the son of the Emperor Maximi-
lian, and of Mary, the only child of Charles the
Bold, the last prince of the house of Burgundy.
His mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of
lerdinand and Iabclla, king and queen of Castile
and Aragon.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened Hi domini-

tlle way for this young prince, to the inheritance of n's"n nd th
nore extensive dominions, than any European mo- whichheac-

VOL. II. B narch, quir'cdchm.

BOOK I. narch, since Charles the Great, had pofleffed. Each
AV ~ of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or provin-

ces, towards which their prospect of succession was
extremely remote. The rich pofleflions of Mary
of Burgundy were destined for another family, she
having been contracted by her father to the only son
of Lewis XI. of France; but tlat capricious mo-
narch, indulging his hatred to her family, chore
rather to strip her of part of her territories by force,
than to fecuie the whole by marriage; and by this
mitonduct, fatal to his polterity, threw all the
Netherlands and Franche Compte into the hands of
a rival. Iiabella, the daughter of John II. of Caf-
tile, far from having any profpedt of that noble in-
heritance which The transmitted to her grandson,
paifed the early part of her life in obscurity and in-
digence; but the Callilians, exasperated against
her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious
prince, publickly charged him with impotence, and
his queen with adultery; and upon his demise, re-
jeding Joanna, whom the King had uniformly, and
even on his death-bed, owned to be his lawful
daughter, and whom an assembly of the flates had
acknowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed Ifa-
bella on the throne of Castile. Ferdinand owed the
crown of Aragon to the unexpected death of his
elder brother, and acquired the kingdoms of Na-
ples and Sicily by violating the faith of treaties,
and dificgarding the ties of blood. To all there
kingdoms, Chriilopher Columbus, by an effort of
genius and of intrepidity, the boldest and moit fuc-
cefsful that is recorded in the annals of mankind,
added a new world, the wealth of which was one
considerable Iburce of the power and grandeur of
the Spanilh monarchs.

JPhiip and" DON JOHN, the only Con of Ferdinand and Iai-
tath.r and bella, and their eldeit daulter, the queen ofPor-
motllhe, vi- ouga ,
fil Spain. .; tugal,

,:,; F .,.!e'

tugal, being cut off in the flower of youth, all ROOK I.
their hopes centered in Joanna and her posterity. ~V~
But as her husband, the Archduke, was a Rfranger
to the Spaniards, it was thought expedient to invite
him into Spain, that by reliding among them, he
might accuflom himself to their laws and manners;
and it was expected that the Cortes, or affimbly of
fates, whole authority was then so great in Spain,
that no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless
it received their fan-tion, would acknowledge his
right of fuccefion, together with that of the Infan-
ta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing through
France in their way to Spain, were entertained in s02.
that kingdom with theutmoft magnificence. The
Archduke did homage to Lewis XII. for the earldom
of Slanders, and took his feat as a peer of the realm
in the parliament of Paris. They were received in
Spain with every mark of honour that the parental
affection of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the refped
of their subjects, could devise; and their title to the
crown was soon after acknowledged by the Cortes
of both kingdoms.

BUT amidst these outward appearances of satis- Ferdinand

faction and joy, rome secret uneasiness preyed upon Philip's
the mind of each of there princes. The fiately rower
and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish court, was
so burdenrome to Philip, a prince young, gay, as-
fable, fond of bsciety and of pleasure, that lie soon
began to express a desire of returning to his native
country, the manners of which were more suited to
his temper. Ferdinand, observing the declining
health of his queen, with whose life his right to the
government of Castile must cease, ealily foresaw,
that a Prince of Philip's disposition, and who al-
ready discovered an extreme impatience to reign,
would never conf:nt to his retaining any degree of
authority in that kingdom ; and the prolpcet of this

B 2 diminution

BOOK I. diminution of his power, awakened the jealousy of
v'. that ambitious monarch.

l.i'Jella's ISABELLA belheld, with the sentiments natural to
with retpe a mother, the indifference and neglect with which
to him and the Archduke treated her daughter, who was defti-
erdaugh- tute of all these beauties of person, and all those

accomplilhments of mind, which fix the affedlions
of an husband. Her underflanding, always weak,
was often disordered. She doated on Philip with
such an excels of childish and impertinent fondneis,
asexcited dilguft rather than affetdion. Her jca-
louly, for which her hulband's behaviour gave her
too much cause, was proportioned to her love, and
often broke out in the mofi extravagant actions.
Ilabella,. though sensible of her defects, could not
help pitying her condition, which was soon render-
ed altogether deplorable, by the Archduke's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle of winter
for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella
intreated him not to abandon his wife to grief and
melancholy, which might prove fatal to her, as she
was near the time of her delivery. Joanna con-
jured him to put off his journey for three days on-
ly, that she might have the pleaiire of celebrating
the festival of Christmas in his company. Ferdi-
nand, after representing the imprudence of his leav-
ing Spain, before he had time to become acquainted
with the genius, or to gain the affedions of the peo.
ple who were one day to be his subjects, beibuglit
him, at leafl, not to pats through France, with which
kingdom he was then at open war. Philip, with-
out regarding either the dictates of humanity, or
the maxims of prudence, perlifted in his purpose,
and on the twenty-ltcond of December let out lor
the Low Countries by the way of France .

Petri Martyris Anglerii Epifolx, 25o, 253.

FROM

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna BOOK I.
funk into a deep and iullen melancholy b, and while i

Dilbrder of

fie was in that situation bore Ferdinand her second Joalnna's
son, for whom the power of his brother Charles as- mind.
terwards procured the kingdoms of Hungary and Fctiinand,
Bohemia, and to whom he at last tranfinitted the 'aftperwr'
Imperial lceptre. Joanna was the only person in
Spain who discovercd no joy at the birth of thlis
prince. Insensible to that, as well as to every other
pleasure, the was wholly occupied with the thoughts
of returning to her huffband ; nor did fle, in any
degree, recover tranqt i'lity of mind, till the arrived
at Brufels next year:. '504

PHILIP, in palling through France, had an inter-

view with Lewis theXII. and signed a treaty with
him, by which he hoped that all the differences be-
tween France and Spain would be finally terminated.
But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at that time, were
extremely prosperous in Italy, where the superior
genius of Gonfalvo de Cordova, the great captain,
triumphed on every occasion over the arms of
France, did not pay the least regard to what his son-
in-law had concluded, and carried on hoflilities with
greater ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken rtea1ot

any part in the affirs of Spain, waiting in quiet,
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of there events was not far distant.
The untimely death of her children had made a
deep imprellion on the mind of Isabella, and as she
could derive but little consolation for the losses lhe
had fliftained. either from her daughter Joanna,
whose infirmities daily increased, or from her fun-

I Id. Epift. 255.
c Maariana, lib. 27. c. 1 , 14. Flechier Vie de Ximcn . i. 19.

B 3 in-law,

Boos I. in-law, who no longer preserved even the appear-

ance of a decent respect towards that unhappy prin-
cess, her spirits and health began gradually to de-
cli.ie, and after languishing some months, fie died
at Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of No-
vember, one thousand five hundred and four. She
was no less eminent for virtue, than for wildom;
and whether we confider her behaviour as a queen,
as a wife, or as a mother, she is justly entitled to
the high encomiums bestowed on her by the Spa-
nifh historiansd.

Her will, A FEW weeks before her death, she made her las
appointing will, and being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to
Ferdinand
ree: t of assume the reins of government into her own hands,
Cailile. and having no inclination to commit them to Philip,

with whose conduct she was extremely dissatisfied,
Ahe appointed Ferdinand regent or administrator of
the affairs of Caflile, till her grandson Charles at-
tained the age of twenty; she bequeathed to him
likewise one half of the revenues that should arise
from the Indies, together with the grand master-
ships of the three military orders; dignities, that
rendered those who possessd them almost indepen-
dent, and which ISabella had, for that reason, an-
nexed to the crown c. But before ihe signed a deed
so favourable to Ferdinand, she obliged him to
fvear that he would not, by a second marriage, or
by any other means, endeavour to deprive Joanna
or their posterity of their right of fuccefflion to any
of his kingdoms.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdi-

nand religned the title of king of Cafile, and com-
manded Joanna and Philip to be publickly pro-

dP. Mart. Ep. 279. e P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hifl-. lib.
.28 c. I . Fcrrcra's lift. Gcncr, d'Efpagne, ton. viii. 263.

f Mar. Hih. lib. 28, c. 1.t,

claimed

claimed the Ibvereigns of that kingdom. But, at BOOK I.
the fame time, lie aliumed the character of Regent, rFedina
in conilequiitce of Isabella's teftainent, and not long acknowled-
afLer he prevailed on the Cortes of CalliV- to ac-ged ast'he
knowledge his.right to that office. This, however, Corts.
he did not procure without difficulry, nor without IS'05
diicovering liich 1t mptoms of alitnation and di:'uit
among the Caitilians as filled him with great unca-
linels. The union of Castile and Aragoni, for al- The c.ifili.
most thirty years, had not so entirely ext.rpatdi t lt "tif.Lti
ancient and hereditary enmity which fublil.ted be-
tween the natives of these kingdoms, that the Caf-
tilian pride could submit, without murmuring, to
the government of a king of Aragon. Ferdinand's
own character, with which the Castilians were well
acquainted, was far from rendering his authority
desirable. Suspicious, discerning, severe and par-
fimonious, he was accustomed to observe the mofr
minute actions of his fubjets with a jealous attenti-
on, and to.reward their highest services with lit-
tle liberality; and they were now deprived of Ifa-
bella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjeds, often tempered his auflerity, or
rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his govern-
ment were especially odious to the Grandees; for
that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous privi-
leges conferred upon them by the Feudal inftituti-
ons, had endeavoured, by extendlg the royal ju-
rifdition, by proteting their in tiired vdallas, by
increasing the immunities of cities, and hy other
measures equally prudent, to curl) thlir corbitant
power . From all there causes, a bformidable par-
ty among the Castilians united againif Ferdi. 'IJ,
and though those who composed it, had. not hii'.;e -
to taken any publick ftep in opposition to him, I:e
plainly saw that upon the Icaft encouragement lrom
their new king, they would proceed to the mult rio
lent extremities.

g Marian. lib. 2S. C. i-

B 4 No

BooK . NOR was there less agitation in the Netherlands
hiip en- upon receiving the accounts of Isabella's death, and
deavors to of Ferdiliand's having assumed the government of

vernment Catfile. Philip was not of a temper tamely to sus-
of canile ser himself to be supplanted by the unnatural am-

bition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities,
and the nonage of Charles rendered them incapable
of government, he, as a hulband, was the proper
guardian of his wife, and as a father, the natural
tutor of his son. Nor was it sufficient to oppose to
thefejuft rights, and to the inclination of the peo-
ple of Castile, the authority of a testament, the
genuineners of which was perhaps doubtful, and
its contents certainly iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's resentment, and new vigour
infused into his councils by the arrival of Don John
Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambassador at the
Imperial court, but upon the first notice of Isabel-
la's death repaired to Brussels, flattering himself
that in the court of a young and liberal prince, he
might attain to power and honours, which he could
never hope for in the service of an old and frugal
master. He had early paid court to Philip during
his residence in Spain, with such afliduity as entire-
ly gained his confidence; and having been trained
to business under Ferdinand, could oppose his
schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not in-
ferior to those for which that monarch was diftin-
gushed h

He requires BY his advice, ambassadors were dispatched to
Ferdinand _ ..
to resign the require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to re-
rgency. sign the government of Castile to those persons whom

Philip should entrust with it till his arrival in that
kingdom. Such of the Castilian nobles as had dilf
covered any diffatisfadcion with Ferdinand's admi-
niftration, were encouraged by every method to

' Zurita Anales de Aragon; tom. vi. p. 12.

oppo(e

oppose it. At the fame time a treaty w: s conclud- ;o('K
ed with Lewis XII. by which Philip flatteic d limililf -i
that lie had tecured the friendflhip and allilhlnce of
that monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the ants

of address and policy, in order to retait the powvvr
of which lie had got pofeflion. By means of Co:i-
chillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entercd into a
private negotiation with Joanna, and i)revailcd on
that weak princess to confirm, by her authority, his
right to the regency. But this intrigue did not
elcape the penetrating eye of Don John Manuel
Joanna's letter of content was intercepted ; Conchil-
los was thrown into a dungeon ; and lie heriflfcon-
fined to an apartment in the palace, and all her
Spanish domeiticks fccluded from her prelence'.

THE mortification which the discovery of this rFcninnd

scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much increal 'l. thlo(alli-
ed by his oblerving the progrels that Philip's emif- 1;li'j ll -
saries made in Caflile. Some of the nobles retired
to their caflles; others to the towns in which they
had influence; they formed themielves into confe-
deracies, and began to assemble their vflhils. Ser-
dinand's court was almost totally delerted; nc:t
a person of diiinction but Ximenes, ar-chbill),i)
of Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the inaiqlis
of Denia, remaining there; while the houlcs of 'lhi-
lip's ambassadors were daily crowded with thoi: of'
the highest rank.

ExASPERATED at this univerfll dt(fcdlio., and r,-,.,lli l

piqued, perhaps, at feeing all his dlihlees ddclttcd ,t,;ny,ior-
by a younger politician, Ferdinand rctlolved, in te- ';I', ix-
fiance of the law of nature, and of decency, to dc ..1i.!,i,:
prive his daughter and her polirrity of the crown 'l'"'l'"

I
p. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Alalc: vi. 1p il.

Bo OK I. of Caflile, rather than renounce the regency of that

L' - kkingdom. His plan for accomplishing this was no

less bold, than the intention itself was wicked.
He demanded in marriage Joanna, the supposed
daughter of Henry IV. on the belief of wholi: illegi-
timacy. Isabella's right to the crown of Castile was
fouinded; and by reviving the claim of this princess,
in opposition to which he himself had formerly led
armies, and fought battles, he hoped once more to
get pofieltion of the throne of that kingdom. But
Emanuel, King of Portugal, in whose dominions
Joanna resided, being married to one of Ferdinand's
daughters by Ilabella, refused his confe it to that
unnatural match; and the unhappy princess herself,
having loft, by being long immured in a convent,
all relith for the objects of ambition, diScovered no
less aversion to it .

Marries a THE resources, hwvever, of Ferdinand's ambi-
'nieceo the tionl were notexhausled. Upon meeting with a re-
French
Kills. pulle in Portugal, he turned towards France, and

fiught in marriage Germaine de Foix, a daughter
of the viscount of Narbonne, and of Mary, the lifter
of Lewis Xll. The war which that monarch had
carried on against Ferdinand in Naples, had been so
unfortunate, that he listened with joy to a propoSal,
which filrnifled him with an honourable pretence
ofconcluding peace: And though no prince was
ever more remarkable than Ferdinand for making
all his paflions bend to the maxims of intereit, or
become fibfervient to the purposes of ambition, yet
lb vehement was his resentment against his bon-in-
law, that in order to be revenged of him, by
detaching Lewis from his interest, and in order
to gain a chance of cxcluding him froin his heredi-
tary throne of Aragon, ;aid the dominions an-
nexed to it, he was ready once more to divide Spain

k Sndov. Hist. of Civil Wars in Caflile. Lond. 165. p. 5.
Zurilta Al , Is ie Aragon, 'tol. vi. p. 213.

into

into fcparate kingdoms, though the union of there PooK I.
was the great glory of the reign, and had been t!le v
chief object of his ambition ; he consented to restore
the Neapolitan nobles of the French fadion to
their poilelions and honours; and submitted to the
ridicule of marrying, in an advanced age, a princels
of eighteei n.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived

Philit, of his only ally, and threatened him with the
lo-ts of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful alarm to
lhi, and convinced Don John Ma;iuel that there
was now a neceflity of taking other meaftres with
regard to the affairs of Spain ". He accordingly
in!ttructed the Flemish ambafiadors in the court of
Spaii, to testify the strong desire which their mai-
ter had of terminating all differences between him
and Ferdinand in an amicable manner, and his wil-
lingnefs to consent to any conditions that would re-
eftabllifh the friendship which ought to fubfifl be-
tween a father and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though A trctybc
he had made and broken more treaties than any twecn Ser-

,,-. ,- , -

·' r dinarid ald

prince of any age, was apt to confide 1o far in thle l, li,
sincerity of other men, as to be always extremely
fond of a negotiation. He litened with eagernels
to these declarations, and soon concluded a treaty
at Salamanca ; in which it was stipulated, that the
government of Castile should be carried on in Io...4.
tle joint names of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of
Philip; and that the revenues of the crown, and the
right of conferring offices, should be shared betwccn
Ferdinand and Philip by an equal division".

NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's ic6.
thoughts than to observe this treaty. His lole inten- Phil"il, and

Jrrannit fcr

tion in proposing it was to anufe Ferdinand, and to i.iil ior
prcveit hiln from taking any mcalircs for obftrudt- srpail

P. Mart. Ep. 290.29z. Mariana lib. 28. C 16, 17.
' P. Mlnrt. .p. 293.
" Ziilta Aialei dtc Aragon, vi. 19. P Mart. Fp. 293,294.

ing

Boox I. ing his voyage into Spain. It had that effet. Ser-
'" ~' ddina!d, sagacious as he was, did not for lome time

fili)eet his delig ; and though when he perceived
it, il- prevailed on the king of France not only to
icmonftrate against the archduke's journey, but to
threaten hoffilities if he undertook it; though he
lblicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his lon-in-
law's domininions in the Low Countries, Philip and
his contlrt neverrhelefs set fail with a numerous
fleet, arid a go;,t1 body of land forces. They were
obliged by a violent tempest to take ihelter in En-
gland, where Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdi-
nand's folicltations, detained them upwards of three
months ; at last they were permitted to depart,
and after a more prosperous voyage, they arrived in
Api1 2-. Iafety at Corunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand

attempt, as he had once intended, to oppose their
landing by force of arms.

The roTli;!- THE Caftiiian nobles, who had been obliged hi-
tOclal, e so therto to conceal or difnemble their lentiments, now
P1h'ip. declared openly in favour of Philip. From every

corner of the kingdom, persons of the highest rank,
with numerous reti ues of their vassals, repaired to
tleir new king. The treaty of Salamanca was uni-
verlally condemned, and all agreed to exclude from
the government of Castile a prince, who by con,
ienting to disjoin Aragon and Naples from that
crown, ditcovered so little concern for its true inte-
refts. Ferdinand, mean while, abandoned by al-

iofl- all the Caflilians, difconccrted by tleir revolt,
and uncertain whether he would peaceably relin-
quifh his power, or take arms in order to maintain
it, earneilly lolicited an interview with his lfn-in-
law, wlho by advice of Manucl studiously avoided it.
Convinced at last, by ieeing the number and zeal
of Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was in
vaili to think of rclifting (lchl a torrent, lie confcnt-

o Fcrier. Ilill. viii. 285.

cd

ed by a treaty, to resign the regency of Caffile into BooK I.
the hands of Philip, to retire into his hereditary do- 'v --
minions of Aragon, and to r(ft satisfied with the Fleit.an
macferthit;s of the military orders, and that lhare 'leign' tl
of the revenue of the Indies, which Isabella had be- c:tile, r.nd
queathed to him. Though an interview between rcl ile to
the princes was no longer ncceffary, it was agreed °Ara,
to on both fides from motives of decency. Philip
repaired to the place appointed with a splendid re-
tinue of the Castilian nobles, and a considerable bo-
dy of armed men. Ferdinand appeared without
any pomp, attended by a few followers, mounted
on mules, and unarmed. On that occasion Don
John Manuel had the plealure of displaying before
the monarch whom he had delerted, the extensive
influence he had acquired over his new master:
while Ferdinand suffered in pretence of his former
fubjeds the two most cruel mortifications which an
artful and ambitious prince can feel; being at once
over-reached in conduct, and Ltripped of power P.

NoT long after, he retired into Aragon, and JulI.

hoping that some favourable accident would soon
open the way for his return into Cafiile, he took
care to protest, though with great secrecy, that the
treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being extort-
ed by force, ought to be deemed void of all obli-
gations q.

PIr LIP took pofftflion of his new authority with Plii;p =nd

a youthful joy. The uLihappy Joanna. from whom iJ,';.,l,..
he derived it, remained, during all tllefe contlcs, , king =l.,
under the dominion of a deep melancholy; Ihe was n,"Lt, L.)
seldom allowed to appear in piiblick: her father,
though he had often delired it, was refulid accels

1' Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19, 20. P.
Mart. cp 304, 30o, &c.

q Zurita Anaies de Arng. vi. p. 68. Ferrcr. Ilil. viii. 290.

to

Boo I. to ier; and Philip's chief objet was to prevail or

----' the Cortes to declare her incapable of government,

that an undivided power might be lodged in his
hands, till his son should attain to full age. But
itch was the partial attachment of the Castilians to
their native princess, that though Manuel had the
addrels to gain ibme members of the Cortes afTem-
bled at Valladolid, and others were willing to grati-
fy their new sovereign in his firit request, the great
body of the representatives refured their consent to
a declaration which they thought so injurious to the
bluod of their monarchsr. They were unanimous,
however, in acknowledging Joanna and Philip,
Qten and King of Castile, and their son Charles
prince of Asturias.

Deih of THIS was almost the only memorable event du-
h'..ip. ring Philip's administration. A fever, occalioned

by a dcbauch, put an end to his life in the twenty-
ve t. 25. eighti year of his age, not having enjoyed the regal

dignity, which he had been bo eager to obtain, full
three months'.

THE whole royal authority in Castile ought of

The ;ror- cotnrl to have devolved upon Joanna. But the
der of Joan-

,', mind ihock occ:.fioned by a difafetr so unexpeced as the
irtl..c*. death of her husband, compleated thediforder of her

understanding, and her incapacity for government.
During all the time of Philip's fickielts, no intreaty
could prevail on her, though in the sixth month of
her pregnancy, to leave him for a moment. When
lie expired, however, she did not shed one tear,
or utter a lingle groan. Her grief was tilent and
fettled. She continued to watch the dead body with
the limc tendernets and attention as if it had been
alive', and tlough at lasts heallowed it to be buri-
ed, hfe loon removed it from the tomb to her own
apartment. There it was laid upon a bed of state,
in a 1'plendid drel s; and having heard from obme

r Zurira Ana:iles de Arag. vi p. . r Maiian. lib, 28. c. 23.
'P. M.ut. E) 316

monk

monk a legendary tale of a king who revived after BooK I.
ihe had becen dead fourteen years, she kept her eyes"'v "
almost constantly fixed on tile body, waiting for the
happy moment of its return to life. Nor was this
capricious affection for her dead husband leTs tinc-
tured with jealouly, than that which (he had borne
to him while alive. She did not permit any of her
female attendants to approach the bed on which his
corpse was laid; (he would not susser any woman
who did not belong to her family to enter the
apartment ; and rather than grant that privilege to a
midwife, tho' a very aged one had been chosen of
purpole, fie bore the princess Catherine without
any other afilftance than that of her own domestics ".

A WOMAN in such a state of mind was little ca-sl s,' i"c-

pablc oi go-

pable of governing a great kingdom ; and Joanna, vernmnent.
who made it her tole employment to bewail thelofs,
and to pray for the foul of 1her husband, would have
thought her attention to publick affairs an impious
neglect of those duties which the owed to him. But
though the declined affuniing the administration
herlelf, yet, by a strange caprice of jealousy, she
reluled to commit it to any other per'on; and no
intreaty of ler fubjets could perilade her to name
a regent, or even to sign Iuch1 papers as were necef-
Iary for the execution of juitice, and the security of
the kingdom.

THEi death of Philip threw the Castilians into

the greatest perplexity. It was necicfary to appoint
a regent, both on accoulnt of Joann;a's treizy, and
the ilnancy of her ion ; and as there was not amiong
the nobles, any person so eminently difiii;gnirfhcd
as to be called by the publick voice to that high

"Mar. Hilt. lib. 29. c.3 & 5. P. Malt. ES. 318, 324,328, 332.

oficce,

BooC I. office, all naturally turned their eyes either to Ser-
v-,/)- dinnad, or to the EnLperor Maximilian. The for-
therr pr~ n mer climnd tlat dignity as adminiltrator for his
nd F.,:l- dautghter, and by virtue of lhetcftamentof Ilabella;
rt" "nor tlif latter thouglht himillf the legal gu.ardian of his
th reni ). grandiun, whom on account of his mother's infir-

miry, he already conlidered as king ofCattile. Thole
1n ho a;d lately compelled Ferdinand to rclign the
governmeint of the kingdom, trembled at the
ithloghts of his being reftorld lo soon to his former
d;gnily. They dreaded the return of a monarch,
rot apt to forgive, and vwho to thole defeCts with
which they were already acquainted, added that re
lentinent which the remembrance ot their behavi-
(c:-r, and refleCtion upon his own diSgrace, muff na-
turally have excited. Ihoiugh none of thele objecti-
(os held against Maximilian, he was a stranger to
the laws and manners of Callile, and deititute of
troops and money to liupport his pretenlions; nor
could his claim be admitted without a public decla-
ration of Joanna's incapacity for government, an
indignity, to which, notwithflanding the notoriety
or her distemper, the delicacy of the Castilians
would never consent.

DON JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of the

nobles, who confidered themselves as most obnoxi-
ous to Ferdinand's dilpleafirc, declared for Maxi-
milian, and offered to lupport his claim with all
their interest. Maximilian, always enterprizing and
decilive in council, though feeble and dilatory in
txecution, eagerly embraced the offer. IBu a fc-
ries of inicfletual negotiations was the only conle-
(qunce of this tranlaction. The emperor, as uliial,
allerted his rights in a high firain, promiiLd a great
deal, and performed nothing "

A fE w days bC!ore the death of Philip, Ferdi-
nand had lct cut lbr Naples, that, by his own prc-

Mariana, liLb 2). c -. Zulita Analcs iec Arng. \i. 93.

IUI;Ce

fence, he might put an end, with the greater de- BOOK I.
cency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain, .riand
whuie important services, and cautious condut, abient, on a
did not screen him from tile suspicions of hisjea-kifgdohiof
lous mailer. Though an account of his fon-in-law'sNapics.
death reached him at Porto-fino, in the territories
of Genoa, he was so solicitous to dicfover the secret
intrigues which he luppofed the great captain to
have been carrying on, and to eftablilh his own
authority on a firm foundation in the Neapolitan
dominions, by removing him from the fiupreme
command there, that rather than discontinue his
voyage, he chose to leave Castile in a state of anar-
chy, and even to rilque, by this delay, his obtain-
ing poffellion of the government of that kingdom y.

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent

conduct of his adherents, could have prevented
the bad effects of this absence. At the head of A cquire
these was Ximenes, archbiflop of Toledo, who, tbe reg-nv'
though he had been railed to that dignity by Ifa- chieily
bella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand,
and though he could have no expectation of en- cardinal
joying much power under his jealous adminiftra- Xnmllee'
tion, was nevertheless lb dilintcrefled, as to prefer
the welfare of his country before his own grandeur,
and to declare, that Castile could never be Io hap-
pily governed as by a prince, whom long experi-
ence rendered thoroughly acquainted with its true
interest. His zeal to bring over his countrymen
to this opinion, induced him to lay afidc lomewhat
of his ulual austerity and haughtinels. He condc-
scended, on this occasion, to court the dihftafeted
nobles, and employed address, as well as argu-
ments, to perliade them. Ferdinand fccondcd his
endeavours with great art; and by concellions to
fonme of the grandees, by proinift:s to others, and
by lcttters fuill of complaiance to all, he gained

Y Zurita Anales de Arng. vi. p. 85.
VOL. Il. C many

BOOK I. many of his moit violent opponents Z. And though

1. many cabals were formed, and some commotions

Aug. 1. excited, yet when Ferdinand, alter having fettled
Feidinand the affairs of Naples, arrived in Caffile, he entered
Spain. upon the administration, without opposition. The

prudence with which he exercised his authority in
that kingdom, equalled the good fortune by which

His prudent he had recovered it. By a moderate, but steady ad-
tionr". ministration, free from partiality and from resent-

ment, he entirely reconciled the Caffilians to his
person, and secured to them, during the remainder
of his life, as much domeflic tranquillity, as was con-
iiftent with the genius of the feudal government,
which still sublisted among them in full vigour '.

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his

hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation which
the archduke Charles owed to the wife regency of
his grandfather; he had the fatisfation, during
that period, of feeing very important acquisitions
added to the dominions over which he was to

conquest of reign. On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and other
Oran. conquests of no small value, were annexed to the

crown of Castile by cardinal Ximenes, who, with
a spirit very uncommon in a monk, led in person
1509. a numerous army against the Moors of that coun-

try; and, with a generosity and magnificence still
more singular, defrayed the whole expence of the
expedition out of his own revenues b. While in Eu-
rope, Ferdinand, under pretences both frivolous
and unjust, and by artifices the moss shameful and
treacherous, expelled John d' Albert, the lawful
Acquiritovereign, fiom the throne of Navarre; and feiz-

ing on that kingdom, extended the limits of the
Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees on the one
hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on the other '

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandizing
the Archduke, which influenced Ferdinand in this

a Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 87. 94. 0o9.
a Mariana, lib. 29. c. lo. b Mariana, lib. 29. c. 18.
c Mar. lib. 30, C. c 2. 12. 9.24.

or

or in any other of his actions. He was more apt to BOOK I.
confider that young prince as a rival, who might 'V
one day wrest out of his hands the government of
Castile, than as a grandson, for whose behoof he
was entruited with the adminiflration. Thisjea- Fcrdinand

jealous of

lousy loon begot aversion and even hatred, the his grandon
symptoms of which he was at no pains to conceal. chailes.
Hence proceeded his immoderate joy when his
young queen was delivered of a Ton, whose life
would have deprived Charles of the crowns of
Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon
the untimely death of that prince, he discovered,
for the fame reason, an exceflive solicitude to have
other children. This impatience of his haitened,
in all probability, the accession of Charles to the 1509.
crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure
a blessing, of which, from his advanced age, and
the intemperance of his youth, he could have little
profpedt, had recourse to his physicians, and by
their prescription took one of those potions, which
are supposed to add vigour to the conititution,
though they more frequently prove fatal to it. 15'3.
This was its effect on a frame so feeble and ex-
haufted as that of Ferdinand; and though he fur-
vived a violent disorder which it at firit occasion-
ed, it brought on luch an habitual languor and de-
jection of mind, as rendered him averse from any
serious attention to public affairs, and fond of fri-
volous amusements, on which he had not hitherto
beflowed much timed. Though he now derpair-
ed of having any ;on of his own, his jealousy of the
Archduke did not abate, nor could he help view-
ing him with that aversion, which princes often
bear their successors. In order to gratify this un-
natural paflion, he made a will, appointing prince
Ferdinand, who having been born and educated '5sl
in Spain, was much beloved by the Spaniards, to
be regent of all his kingdoms, till the arrival of the

d Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 531. Argen-
sola Analcs de Aragon, lib. I. p. 4.

C z Arch-

BOOK I. Archduke his brother; and by the Came deed he
deavours fettled upon him the grand-maiterfhip of the three

to exclude military orders. The former of these grants might
thi Spa have put it in his power to have disputed the throne
kingdoms, with his brother; the latter would, in any event,
byvou i i have rendered him almost independent.
Ferdinand.

FE RDI A NAN retained to the last that jealous love

of power, which was so remarkable through his
whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at the
approach of death, he removed continually from
place to place, in order to fly from his distemper,
or to forger it; and though his strength declined
every day, none of his attendants durst mention
his condition; nor would he admit his father con-
feffor, who thought such silence criminal and un-
christian, into his pretence. At last the danger
became so imminent, that it could be no longer
concealed. Ferdinand received the intimation with
a decent fortitude; and touched, perhaps, with
compuncion at the injuffice he had done his grand-
son, or influenced by the honest remonstrances of
Carvajal, Zapata and Vargas, his most ancient and
faithful counsellors, who represented to him that
by inveffing prince Ferdinand with the regency,
he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bestowing on him the grand
mastership of the military orders, would ifrip the
crown of its noblest ornament and chief strength,

Iq persuaded heconfented to alter his will in both there parti-
t.il. culars. By a new deed he left Charles the sole

heir of all his dominions, and allotted to prince
Ferdinand, instead of that throne of which lie
thought himself almost secure, an inconsiderable
eftablifllment of fifty thoiliand ducats a year '. He
and dice. died a few hours after signing this will, on the

twenty-third day of January, one thouland five
hundred and sixteen.

e Mar. Hilt. lib. 30. c. ult. ZuritaAnales deArag. vi. 40o
P. MIat. Ep, 565, 566, Argenfola Analc de Arag. lib. I.p. . 1.

C11ARLIES

CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance BOOK I.

d!eicrded by his dt;ath, was near the full age of'- -'
sixteen He had hitherto resided in the Low-r ,iucati)n
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret of c.IiS-
Aullria, his aunt, and Margaret of Yolk, the
ilcr of Edward IV. of England, and widow of
Charl s the Bold, two princeses of great virtue
and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, Phiiip, the
F lkmings committed the government of thel Low-
Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor Maxi-
milian, with the name rather than the authority of
regent . Maximilian made choice of William
de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the edu-
cation of the young prince his grandon g. That
nobleman pofirTfed, in an eminent degree, t'e talents
which fitted him for such an important office, and
dilcharged the duties of it with great fideli-
ty. Under Chievres, Adrian of Utrechlt act-
td as preceptor. This preferment, which open-
ed his way to the hightit diglities an ecclcliaflic
can c:'.in, he owed not to his bilth, f;r that

was

f Pontius HeuterusRerum Aufiriacarunm, lib. xv. I.ov. 1649.
lib. 7. c. z. p. 155.

I'The Fiench hitorians, upon the authority of AM Je Bel-

lay, Mem, p. 1 . have unanizmoufly afFerred that I iiip, hy hii
htit will, having appointed the king of France to have the li-
eation of his lon's education, Louis XTI. with a difliereilcd-
ness, fuilable to the confidence reposed in hlin, nniaed (.ijievrt.s
for that office. Even the prcfident Henaul hals adi(,,p,, this
opinion. Abreg: Chron. A. D. 1507. Varil:is, in his tibal
manner, pretends to have seen Phili,'s teflamcnt. PI'it. de l'
education des Princes, p. 16. Hu the Spanifli, Geriin and
Fleiifh hiflorians concur in contradicting this aflerti.,l of tl:h
French authors. It appears fiom Hcuterus, a corilemiporarv
Fleiiili hiltorian of great auttlloiry, that Louis XII. by cor.
senting to the marriage of Gerniaine de Foix with lei'r!inajii
had lolt much of that confidence which Philip once plnceld i
hiil; that this difgult was increased by the French Kin rg' giv
ing in marriage to the count of Angoulene his cldekl daughter
whom ho had formerly betrothcd to Charles. Heuter. Her. Auflr
lib. v. i 5 ; That the French, a flort time before Philip'sdeath,
had violated the peace, which fubifled between themn ann the

C 3 I'l i:miin:

BOOK I. was extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he

was a stranger to the arts of a court; but to the
opinon which his countrymen entertained of his
learning. He was indeed no inconsiderable pro,
ficient in those frivolous sciences which, during
several centuries, affiimed the name of Philofo-
phy, and published a commentary, which was
highly efleemed, upon The Book of Sentences, a
famous treatire of Petrus Lombardus, and confi-
dered at that time, as the standard system of
metaphysical theology. But whatever admiration
there procured him in an illiterate age, it was
soon found that a man accustomed to the retire-
ment of a college, unacquainted with the world,
and without any tincture of taste or elegance, was
by no means qualified for rendering science agree-
able to a young prince. Charles, accordingly,
discovered an early averiion to learning, and an
excellive fondness for thole violent and martial

Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury, and was
ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All there circumflances ren-
der it improbable that Philip, who made his will a few days be-
fore he died, Heuter. p. 1 52, should commit the education of
his son to Louis XII. In confirmation of there plaufibleconjec-
tures, positive testimony can be adduced. It appears from
Heuterus, that Philip, when he set out for Spain, had entrust-
ed Chievres both with the care of his son's education, and with
the government of his dominions in the Low-Countries. Heu-
ter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon after
Philip's death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed re-
gent, during the minority of his grandson, but that being op-
posed, Chievres seems to have continued to discharge both the
offices which Philip had committed to him. Heut. ibid. 153.
155. That in the beginning of the year 50o8, the Flemings
invited Maximilian to accept of the regency, to which he con-
sented, and appointed his daughter Margaret, together with a
council of Flemings, to exercise the supreme authority, when
he himself should, at any time, he absent. He likewise named
Chievres, as governor, and Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to
his son. Heut. ibid. 155. 157. What Heuterus relates with
refpe6t to this matter is confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani,
apud AnaleEta Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. 0o; by Barlan-
dus, Chronic. Brabant, ibid, p. 25; and by Haraus Annal. Brab.
vol. ii. 50o, &c.

exercises,

exerci(es, to excel in which was, at that time, tile BooK I.
chief pride, and almost the only study of persons r
of rank. Chievres encouraged this taste, either
from desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence,
or from too flight an opinion of the advantage of
literary accomplishments h. He inftruded him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; lie made him study the history not only of
his own kingdoms, but of those with which they
were connected; he accustomed him, from the
time of his assuming the government of Slanders
in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, 'T1e fi:t
to attend to business; he persuaded him to peruse his chaia-
all papers relating to public affairs; to be present at ta.
the deliberations of his privy counsellors, and to
propose to them himself those matters concerning
which he required their opinion i. From such an
education, Charles contracted habits of gravity
and recollection which scarce luited his time of
life. The first openings of his genius did not indi-
cate that superiority which its maturer age dilplay-
ed k. He did not discover in his youth that impe-
tuolity of spirit which commonly ushers in an active
and enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early ob-
fequioufnefs to Chievres, and his other favourites,
promise that capacious and decisive judgment,
which afterwards directed the affairs of one half of
Europe. But his subjects, dazzled with the exter-
nal accomplishments of a graceful figure and man-
ly address, viewing his character with that partiali-
ty which is always ihewn to princes during their
youth, entertained sanguine hopes of his adding
lustre to those crowns which descended to him by
the death of Ferdinand.

TIHE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from the
view which I have given of their political confti-

h Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hist. Germ. ii.
967. P. Heuter, Rer. Auflr. lib. 7. c. 3. p. 1 57.

i Memoires de Bellay, Svo Par. 1 573. P. i l. Heuter. lib. viii.
C . p. 184. k Martyr, Ep. 569. 655.

C 4 tution,

BBOoK I. tution, were, at that time, in a situation, which
-'-V" ')required an adminiitration, no less vigorous than
Spain re- prudent. The feudal inffitutions, which had been
qirus adi- introduced into all its different provinces by the
miniftiation.Gotlis, the Suevi, and the Vandals, fillibftcd in

great force. The nobles, who were powerful and
warlike, had long poifeffed all the exorbitant privi-
leges, which thele inflitutions veiled in their order.
The cities in Spain were more numerous and more
considerable, than the genius of feudal govern men t,
naturally an enemy to commerce, and to regilar
police, seemed to admit. The perfbnal rights,
and political influence, whilch the inhabitants of
these cities had acquired, were extensive. The
royal prerogative circumifribed by the privileges of
the nobility, and by the pretentions of the people,
was confined within very narrow limits. Under
iuhh a form of government, the principles of dif-
c rd were many; the bond of union was extreme-
lyfeeble; and Spain felt not only all the inconveni-
encies occasioned by the defects in the feudal
system, but was exposed to disorders arising from
the peculiarities in its own contitu.tion.

DURING the long adminiflration of Ferdinand,

no internal commotion, it is true, had arisen in
Spain. His superior abilities enabled him to restrain
the turbulence of the nobles, and to moderate the
jealousy of the commons; and by the wisdom of
his domestic government, by the sagacity with
which he conducted his foreign operations, and by
the high opinion that his filbjedts entertained of
both, he preserved among them a degree of tran-
quillity greater than was natural to a constitution, in
which the feeds of discord and disorder were tb co-
piously mingled. But, by the death of Ferdinand,
these restraints were at once withdrawn; and faction
and discontent, from being long reprefed, were
ready to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN

IN order to prevent thlelc evils, Ferdinand had in BooK f.

his lalt will taken a m,;t prudent precaution, by ,1'--'.
ai;poil;ing Cardinal Ximelnes, archb;fhop of To- hd apli,,-
ledo, to be lole rege;t of Caflile, till the arrival ; ,dai:,1"
of his grandson in Spain. tig

si la; c!,harater cnt.

of this man, and the extra ordinary qualitis wliicii
marked him out lor that office, at fi!lh a juiinitle,
merit a particular detlcriplonl. ie

' as dte'c i-

sH-

of an hononrable, not of a wealtly Ifar.ii v; andl lt}d ' :''"
cilc:n.n!lanct; of liis parents, as well as Il; ow)\n iil-
cii arions, having cictt-rinincld liin to enitcr ino t!he
clurch, he early obtained becLefic s (4f

( reat va-

lue, and which placed him in the way of the high-
eft preferment. All thelc, however, he rcno(inctd
at o;ce; and a'ter u:;lcdrgin;g a very Ilevre n,,i-
ciate, afnimed tle habit ot St. Flancis in a niii.ii-
tery of Obliervaij-tine fiiars, one of the mIn(.ft rig;d
orders in the Romifl Church. There he: iLo:' bie-
came eminent for his unconmmon ifletritv (,f . :
nets, and for those excesses of fulperiil'tll.s (i; -
tion, which are the proper characterilics of tlhe
monastic life. But notwithllanding tlile' extriaa-
gancies, to which weak and enthifiaftic rii;lis
alone are usually prone, his underltandding, natur-a.-
ly penetrating and deciive, retained its il!l vi j:.,u
and acquired him in ch great authority amo!;(- hs
own order, as raiied him to be their pr;)vi;(i:I.
His reputation for lanctity, loon procured him the
office of father conlfflor to the queen Ilibi.la,
which he accepted with the utmost rlui:ta,-c-. He
prelerved inl a court the fame aullcrity ft mn;;nners,
which had diftinguilled him in the c!oillcr. l:e
continued to make all his journics on foot; lie ill-
sised only upon alms; his acts of monrt.' ic a:io(
.'eFe as levere as ever; and his penance as is i-
gorous. Isabella, pleated with her chlice, conli.-
rcd on h;m, not long after, the Archbillhoprick of
Toledo, whlch, next to the Papiacy, is the ticheJt
dignity in the churclh of Rotme. ' '!i:;. heller he
declincd with a firmncis, \hlich notiii.; In t tli;:

;,l11 lir II.alti' i:

BOOK I. authoritative injuntinion of the Pope was able to

overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change
his manners. Though obliged to display in public
that magnificence which became his station, he
himself retained his montiftic severity. Under his
pontifical robes he constantly wore the coarse frock
of Sr. Francis, the rents in which he used to patch
with his own hands. He at no time used linen
but was commonly clad in hair-cloth. He slept
always in his habit, most frequently on the ground,
or on boards, rarely in a bed. He did not taste
any of the delicacies which appeared at his table,
but satisfied himfilf with that simple diet which
the rule of his order prescribed k. Notwithstanding
these peculiarities, so opposite to the manners of
tihe world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his fla-
tion, and by the high opinion which Ferdinand and
Isabella entertained of him, to take a principal
share in the adminifiration, than he displayed ta-
lents for business, which rendered the fame of his
wisdom equal to that of his fandity. Bold and
original in all his plans, his political conduct flow-
ed from his real character, and partook both of
its virtues and its defects. His extensive genius
fuggcfled to him schemes, vast and magnificent.
Conlcious of the integrity of his intentions, he
purfled these with unremitting and undaunted
firmnels. Accustomed from his early youth to
mortify his own paflions, he thewed little indul-
gence towards thlfe of other men. Taught by
his system of religion to check even his most inno-
cent dcires, he was the enemy of every thing to
which he could affix the name of elegance and
pklafire; and, though free from any suspicion of
cruelty, ie dilcovcred in all his commerce with the
world a severe inflexibility of mind, and austerity
of character, peculiar to the monastic profession,

k lHifloire de I'adminiftr.ation du Card. Ximen. par Mich.
Baudier, 4to. 1635. p. 13.

and

and which can scarce be conceived in a country BoOK I.
where that is unknown. ' -

SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand cornm- Car,'
mitted the regency of Castile, and though lie was A'!in" ap-

t:>,~~~~~~ 0r~~~~

r

i <(i n,&

r1 it-

then near fourlcore, and pertfetly acquainted with '-? by
the labour and difficulty of the office, his natural 1Carlc-
intrepidity of mind, and zeal for the public good,
prompted him to accept of it without hefitarion:
And though Adrian of Utrecht, who had been ient
into Spain a f. w months before the death of Ser-
dinand, produced full powers from the archduke
to assume the name and authority of regent upon
the demise of his grandfather; such was the aver-
sion of the Spaniards to the government of a ftran-
ger, and so unequal the abilities of the two com-
petitors, that Adrian's claim would at once have
been rejeEted, if Ximenes himself, from complai-ximrn',
fance to his new mafler, had not con tfnted to ac- olet dircli-
knowledge him as regent, and to carry on the go-o"'" raai'
vernment in conjunition with him. By this, how-
ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal;
and Ximenes, though he treated him with great
decency, and even refpeat, retained the whole
power in his own hands'.

THE Cardinal's first care was to obfcrve the i;s .rrca-,

motions of the Infant Don Ferdinand, wlho havingtl :'i,'::'"':
been flattered with lo near a prolitpet of tlhe ifl- Don Fcrai-
preme power, bore the diappointmnent of his hopt s ".:a.
with greater impatience than could have been ex-
peted of a prince fb young. Ximenes, under pr,-
tence of providing more etSedtually fbr his flicty,
removed him from Guadalupe, the place in which
he had been educated, to Madrid, where lie fix-
ed the residence of the court. There he was un-
der the Cardinal's own eye, and his condirt, with
that of his domestics, were watched with the ut-
monft attention 1.

i Gonietis de r(b. geR. Ximenii. p. 15. fnl. Compl. T ;69.
m Miniana Coitin. lvlarial:s , lib. i.c. 2. Baudicr, Hill. tie
Ximenes, p. 118.

Till:

r',oKc 1. THE first intelligence he received from the Low-
,* t-- Cou:.,trics, gave ltylat dtilquiet to thet Cardinal,

and colivincccd hiiii how difiicult a talk it would
be to) condud.i tle affaiis of a young prince, under
t'le infllucilc of counliellors unacquai.itcd with the

, -.,:. ns- hl\s alnd Imanllners of' Spain. No Iooner did the ac-
L"-t l". c utnt of Ferdin;anl's death reach Brulil s, than

tCha;:i', by ili advice of his Flcmilh mii;ificrs,
'tlulvcd to afluinc Ih rittle of king. By tle laws
of Sta i, it: lol;e rigit to 'tle crowns both of
('a!lil:' and ot' Arag )n, belnged to Joanna; and
tlhoi;, hier inliiii, tes di.qualified her from go-
,vlrnli,,, this incapicity had not been declared by
any ptilic act of the Cortes of cither kingdom ; lo
t',.tt t,;e Spi::iaids confidercd this rctolution, not
on:ly as a direct violation of their privileges, but as
a; u

1 naiural a:urpation in a son on the preroga-

tiCS ft' a nother, towards whom, in her present
li!l'aply situation, lie manifLfted a less delicate re-
gard ti:ha her iitbjets had always exprefied ". The
i'.;:iilh[ court, however, prevailed botl on the Pope
and on the Emperor to address letters to Charles
as king of Castile; the former of whom, it was
pre tended, had a right, as head of the church;
;;id the latter, as head of the empire, to confer
tiis title; and initructions were sent to Ximenes,
to prevail on the Spaniards to acknowledge it Xi-
menes, though he had earneifly remonstrated
againfl- the measure, as equally unpopular and un-
ncceflary, reiolved to exert all his authority and
credit in carrying it into execution, and immedi-
ately alTcnbled liich of the nobles as were then at
c,,irJt. What Charles required was laid before
thein; and when, initead of.complying with his
demand;s, they began to murmur against fich an
unitrecedented encroachment on their privileges,
and to talk high1 of the rights of Joanna, and their

R(,":ri7el ,ath of allegiance to her, Ximenes haifily interpo-
I,,'lHl ,' . d, and with that firm and decilive tone which
Xiinti,!. vwa.i natlral to hli lm, told tlelir, that they were

" 1. Mart. Ep. 568. not

not now called to deliberate, but to cobey; tiat CioK .
their foveelign did not apply to item for advice,' v-.
but expected libmijlion; and " this day, ai:ltd A,-:! J.
lie, Charles shall be procli;med King of Cattile in
Madrid, and tile rcit of thie cities will fullow its
example." On tlie i[ot lie gavc order. for tli.t
purpose°; and ncttwithlitandia, the nov ity of the
practice, and the 1kcret dilcoiitets oft n!aiiy pcr-
lbns of diltinction, Charles's title was u,,ii.;crki
recognized. In Aragon, where tite priviitc.st, il'e
fuijcct were moie cxtlnfive, a;id lie ahlti.th a:.
authority of the archbishop (', Sarag,!)il, w! ,ni
Ferdinand had appointed rcenrt, wvere fr int'iour
to thole of Ximncies, tihe laine obtcq;l;i) tiie's t,.
the will of Charles did not appear, nor was hc a;c-
knowledged there under any otlher chlracter but
that of Prince, till his arrival in Spai1i,.

XIMENES, though pofiefctl only of delegatcd i-ni.,;:h,',.

power, whici, froml his advanced age, 11h c)uld '"

::i .

-:r.

not expect long to enjoy, assumed, togetiher wvith i',l...''
the characer of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and ad pted fchemcs f(!r extending the
regal authority, which he puirii d wi li as ;ijili
intrepidity and ardour, as if he hliilmili' had been
to reap the advantages refiiliing froin tihetirlU' ic .
The exorbitant privileges of the Ca.lli.an ino: s,
circumscribed the prerogative of the p:'ince w' ith:;
very narrow limits. Thecf tihe Cardinlal c'lid:.rc.
as ft mnany unluft extortions fronii lti ciic, w, a,.t,
determined to reduce them. )ange: Ous as tic
attempt was, there were circunift.lal es in his situ-
ation which promised him greatcr /iiccilsi than a::v
king of Caltile could have cxp-ctcd. 1- is fliict a;,d
prudent cxconomy of' lis archicpilc.opal re:venlt ;,
firnifhed him witli more ready money, than tih-
crown could at any time cilommand ; thei l;itiiy
of his manners, his charity and muiuiliuuncc i.n-
dcred him the idol of the people; and tile nol,ls

o Gomnetius, p. 152, &c.Biaudier, i-il. dc Xijiom p. 12i.
P P. Mart. Ep. 573. lll'jil-

r,-rK 1. 7TaE- frlt intesli';ence he received from the I.ow-
* ~-"- C"ol:.itries, 'gave icat dtiiquit to the Cardinal,

andl c(nvin:cd himi h1ow ditlicutlt a ialk it would
)b ts, cO)ici(iei [l afliils of a young prince, under
thr< influeacc of (outiiellors uiiacquai.,tcd with the

-1 n,.. :- li\ s allnd iia.nners of Spain. No Iooner did tie ac-
.. '... ',. c ui t oft Ferdiina ,l's death reach Brlru1i Is, than

navil V?, by Ilhe advice of his Flcmilh mi;riftcrs,
i-tulved to alii nc the title of king. By the laws
O)t '.Sl ia, ill lole rigiht to the crowns botli of
(.!~iiti;i:nd of Ari-:g i, bI!,'1gedl to Joanna; and
thrl;t ,1! lr ini eii res (ii.quilified her fronm go-
VL-crllni., thliS i,!caipl(ity lhad not been declared by
aly p atAlic at of tlhe Cortes of cither kingdom ; b
ti,.i tie Spa::iaids confidercd this rclolution, not
o,lh i1as a direCt violation of their privileges, but as
a;; 11u ,ni:uir'l tI:urpattn in a son on the preroga-
i .ics of a nmother, towards wliom, in her present
1!l .aijply ituation: , lie manifcited a less delicate re-
,,ardt tihanl hier liUtbjects had always exprelled ". The
Pi: :;l:llh court, however, prcvai!cd both on the Pope
and on the Emperor to address letters to Charles
as king of Caflile; the former of whom, it was
prt tended, had a right, as head of the church;
n;id the latter, as head of the empire, to confer
tnis title; and inftuctions were sent to Ximenes,
to prevail on the Spaniards to acknowledge it Xi-
menes, though lie had earnelfly remonifrated
againf- the meaijire, as equally unpopular and un-
nrccciary, resolvcd to exert all his authority and
credit in carrying it into execution, and immedi-
ately afl'lnbled ilch of the nobles as were then at
cirtl. What Charles required was laid before
thtm; and when, inflead of-complying with his
demandii;, they began to murmur against filch an
unircecedcnted encroaclhment on their privileges,
and to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their

Rc,,L:ni?7.l oath ot f allegiance to her, NXimenes hastily interpo-

, '.~,',: ,,i, and with that firm and decilive tone which
xi,,,,.. v ,ils natu'al to hlilm, told them, that they were

" 1. Mart. Ep. 568. not

not now called to deliberate, but to obey; tliat nolK .
their foveleiga did not apply to tihem for advice, -v-
but expected libmiliion; and " this (ay, a:lti d;,:! ,.
he, Charles flall be prociaimed King of Castile inl
Madrid, and the reit of the cities will fjllw i's
example." On tile i,ot lie gave order for llti.
purpole°; and nitVitlillandi,'ig the nlov..ity of th!-:
practice, anid tle lIcrelt cdiloiitents of n!aiiy ptr-
blns of dillinction, Charles's title was u,,i;l.llJ'V
recognized. In iAragon, where the priviict k,.i i! i
iuljcct were moie ':xtc(fiive, a;-d lhe alliti.s ;::.4i
authority of the arcliiliop l ' S;arag(,l., \vi:,l
Ferdinand had appointed regent, were ftr il ifrior
to tholf of Ximclnes, the tlinL oblc(liil,]!lcs, to
the will of Charles did not appear, nor was liu ;;c-
knowlcdged tlcre under any other ch:racter but
that of Prince, till his arrival in Spaiip'.

XIMENES, though poffefiel only of d(lcegated li, il;h<rr

power, which, from his advanced age, he co'id t : r-::
not expect long to enjoy, afftlmed, togethelr with l,;. ..'"
the characler of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and ad pted schemes f(r extending the
regal authority, which he plrlfild wit h

as Inlli

intrepidity and ardour, as if' he hliimfeli had be.el
to reap the advantages refllking fromn litr luICCi.
The exorbitant privileges of the Catllia.n nJ:is,
circumscribed the prerogative of tlhe 5:'iic \it:i
very narrow limits. 'lhefe the Car-iirial c:lJ;tiderc.d
as lo many iunuft extortions Iromi] tlhe croiw, a,.I
determined to reduce them. l)angclois as tiic
attempt was, there were circulniflances in his situ-
ation which promired him greater filCC(is than a:;v
king of Caltile couid have expctcd. -lis fiI ct a;'.(t
prudent cLconomy of his archliepicopal lvclnu .,,
firnifhed him with more ready money, than ithe
crown could at any time command ; the tiIrtity
of his manners, his charity and muu:ilici'nce i.n-
dcred him the idol of the people; and tli no!,lus

0 Gometius, p. 152, &c.Blaudicr, H-lit. de Xiujin. p. 121.
P P. Mart. Ep. 57 ill-

BooK I. themselves, not suspecting any danger from him,
.'"-w
" did not observe his motions with the fame jealous

attention, as they would have watched those of
one of their monarchs.

By Ip-Eref- IMMEDIATELY upon his accefflon to the regen-
fiIg )h. cy, lkveral of the nobles, fancying that the reins

of government would of consequence be somewhat
relaxed, began to allemble their vafTals, and to pro-
ftcute, by torce of arms, animofities and pretenfi-
ons which the authority of Ferdinand had obliged
them to diiicmble, cr to relinquish. But Ximenes,
vwho had taken into pay a good body of troops,
opposed and defeated all their designs with unex-
pected vigour and facility; and though he did
not treat tile authors of there disorders with any
cruClty, he forced them to acts of fiibmiffion, ex-
tremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of Catli-
lian grandees.

By fornmiig BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were confined
*~'""Yl'1 to individuals, and every aS of rigour was jufti-
r'.,!ilg on fled by the appearance of necellity, founded on
tl co.o;n. tile forms of justice, and tempered with a mixture

of lenity, there was scarce room for jealouiy or
complaint. It was not so with his next meafiire,
which, by ftfiking at a privilege effintial to the
nobks, gave a general alarm to the whole order.
By tle feudal conltitution, the military power was
lodged in the hands of the nobles, and men of an
inferior condition were called into the field only
as their vassals, and to follow their banners. A
king with scanty revenues, and a limited preroga-
tive, depended on there potent barons in all his
operations. It was with their forces lie attacked
his enemies, and with them he defended his own
kingdom; and while at the head of troops attach-
cd only to their own lords, and accuflomed to
obey no other commands, his authority was preca-
uious, and his efiTrts feeble. From this state Xi-
ncnits rclfved to deliver the crown ; and as mer-
rt:lnary Htanding armies were unknown under tile

feudal

feudal government, and would have been odious to Boo I.
a martial and generous people, he iflued a prc(cia- ---
mation, commanding every city in Castile to enroll
a certain number of its burgefles, in order that they
might be trained to the ule of arms on Sundays and
holidays; he engaged to provide officers to com-
mand them at the public expence; and as an en-
couragement to the private men, promiicd them
an exemption from all taxes and impositions. The
frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa, and
the necessity of having fbme force ready to oppose
them, firnilhed a plausible pretence for this innova-
tion. The object really in view was to lecure the
king a body of troops independent of his barons,
and which might serve to counterbalance their pow-
er q. The nobles were not ignorant of his intenti-
on, and saw how effedtually the scheme he had
adopted would accomplish his end; but as a mea-
fuire which had the pious appearance of resitting the
progress of the Infidels was extremely popular, and
as any opposition to it arising fiom their order alone,
would have been imputed wholly to interested mo-
tives, they endeavoured to excite the cities thcm-
selves to refute obedience, and to remonflrate
against the proclamation, as inconsistent with their
charters and privileges. In conlequence of their
instigations, Burgos, Valladolid, and several other
cities, rose in open mutiny. Some of the grandees
declared themselves their protectors. Violent re-
monstrances were presented to the King. His Fle-
milh counsellors were alarmed, Ximenes alone con-
tinued firm and undaunted; and partly by terror,
partly by intreaty; by force in some inltances, and
by forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the
refradtory cities to comply '. During his adminiifra-
tion, he continued to execute his plan with vigour,
but soon after his death it was entirely dropt.

9 Minianx Continuatio Marianz fol. Hag. 1733. p. 3.
P. Mart. Ep. 556, &c. Goimetius, p. 16, &c.

HIs

BOOK I. His fuccelfs in this scheme for reducing the exor-
''-""-'bitant power of the nobility, encouraged him to at-
F> recaliingt
iL. giant b otemlpt a diminution of their pofiellions, which were
t<,rrmr mo-no le! exorbitant. During the contests and difor-
;': ;lui.ders inseparable from the feudal government, the

nobles, ever attentive to their own interest, and
taking adva :tage of the weaknels and diftrels oF
their monarchs, had seized some parts of the royal
demelhes, obtained grants of others, and gradually
wrelted al.off the whole out of the hands of the
prince, and annexed tlem to their own estates.
'The rights, by which umoft of the grandees held
tlhele lands, were extremely defedive; it was from
some luccelsful usurpation, which the crown had
been too feeble to dilpute, that many derived their
only title to pokfelion. An enquiry carried back
to the origin of these encroachments, which were
almost coeval with the feudal system, was imprac-
ticable; and as it would have stripped every no-
bleman in Spain of great part of his lands, it muff
have excited a general revolt. Such a ftep was too
bold, even for the enterprizing genius of Ximenes.
He confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand ; and
beginning with the pensions granted during that
time, refused to make any farther payment, be-
cau!e all riglt to them expired with his life. He
then called to account those who had acquired
crown lands under the administration of that mo-
narch, and at once refiumed whatever he had alie-
nated. The effects of there revocations extended
to many pcrfons of great rank; for though Ferdi-
nand was a prince of little generosity; yet he and
ilahella having been raised to the throne of Caflile
by a powerful faction of the nobles, they were ob-
liged to reward the zeal oi'tlihir adherents with great
liberality, and the royal dcmefles were their only
fuld for that purpole. TiLt addition in;.de to the
revenue of the crown by thlel revocation:;, together
with lis own frugal (xconomy, enaled Ximenes
not only to discharge all the debts vwhich Ferdinand

had

had left, and to remit considerable fums to Flan; BOOK I.
ders, but to pay the officers of this new militia, and"'"
to establish magazines more numerous, and better
furnished with artillery, arms, and warlike stores,
than Spain had ever pofleffed in any former age '.
The prudent and disinterested application of these
fums was a full apology to the people for the rigour
with which they were exacted.

THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks The nob!es

. '

* r oppose his

thought it necessary to take precautions for the safe- me,,ures.
ty of their order. Many cabals were formed, loud
complaints were uttered, and desperate resolutions
taken; but before they proceeded to extremities,
they appointed forre of their number to examine
the powers in consequence of which the Cardinal
exercised ads of such high authority. The admi-
ral of Cartile, the duke de Infantado, and the Con-
de de Benevento, grandees of the first rank, were
entrusted with this commission. Ximenes received
them with cold civility, and in answer to their de-
mand produced the testament of Ferdinand, by
which he was appointed regent, together with the
ratification of that deed by Charles. To both
there they objected; and he endeavoured to efta-
blifh their validity. As the conversation grew
warm he led them insensibly towards a balcony,
from which they had a view of a large body ofB"' withoti
troops under armss and of a formidable train ofe'
artillery. " Behold," fays he, pointing to there
and raising his voice, " the powers which I have
received from his catholick majeily. With there I
govern Castile; and with there I will govern it,
till the king your master and mine takes pofFeflion
of his Kingdom '." A declaration so bold and
haughty silenced them, and aftonilhed their affoci-
ates. To take arms againit a man aware of his
danger, and prepared for his defence, was what def-
pair alone would diCtate. All thoughts of a gene.

r Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 60o.
Flech. ii. 551. Ferreras, Hit. viii. 433.
VoL. 1. D) ral

BoOK I. ral confederacy against the Cardinal's adminifirati-
* o n- on were laid aside; and except from some flight com-

motions, excited by the private resentment of par-
ticular noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered
no interruption.

Thwarted IT was not only from the opposition of the Spa-
Fbemim nifh nobility that obifacles arose to the execution of
nitmers, the Cardinal's schemes; he had a constant struggle

to maintain with the Flemilh ministers, whopre-
fuming upon their favour with the young king, aim-
ed at directing the affairs of Spain, as well as thole
of their own country. Jealous of his great abili-
ties, and independent ipirit, they confidered him
rather as a rival who might circumscribe their pow-
er, than as a minister who by his prudence and vi-
gour was adding to the grandeur and authority of
their master. Every complaint against his admi-
nifiration was listened to with pleasure by the cour-
tiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary obftruc-
tions were thrown by their means in the way of all
his'meafures, and though they could not, either with
decency or safety, deprive him of the office of re-
gent, they endeavoured to lessen his authority by
dividing it. They Toon discovered that Adrian of
Utrecht, already joined with him in office, had
neither genius or spirit sufficient to give the least
check to his proceedings; and therefore Charles by

An additi- their advice added to the commission of regency
f rege La Chau, a'Flemifh gentleman, and afterwards Am-
appointed. erftorf, a nobleman of Holland; the former diftin-

guifhed for his address; the latter for his firmness.
Ximenes, though no stranger to the malevolent in-
tention of the Flemish courtiers, received them
with all the external marks of diftintion due to
the office with which they were invested; but when
they came to enter upon business, he abated no-
thing of that air of superiority with which he had
treated Adrian, and still retained the sole direcion
of affairs. The Spaniards, more averse, perhaps,

hllan

than any other people to the government of firan- BooK I.
gers, approved of all his efforts to preserve his au- x.-
thority ; and even the nobles, influenced by this tains the di-
national paflion, and forgetting their jealousies and reiron of
discontents, chore rather to fee the supreme power
in the hands of one of their countrymen, whom
they feared, than in those of foreigners whom they
hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great schemes His fuccef.

of domeRlic policy, and embarrassed by the artifices Nlae.
and intrigues of the Flemish ministers, had the
burden of two foreign wars to support. The one
was in Navarre, invaded by its unfortunate mo-
narch, John d'Albret. The death of Ferdinand,
the absence of Charles, and the discord and difaf-
fetion which reigned among the Spanish nobles,
seemed to present him with a favourable opportuni-
ty of recovering his dominions. The Cardinal's
vigilance, however, defeated a measure so well
concerted. Foreseeing the danger to which that
kingdom might be exposed, one of his first ads of
administration was to order thither a considerable
body of troops. While the king was employed
with one part of his army in the liege of St. Jean
Pied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great experi-
ence and courage, attacked the other by furprize,
and cut it to pieces. The king instantly retreated
with precipitation, and an end was put to the war'.
But as Navarre was filled at that time with towns
and cafles, slightly fortified, and weakly garrison-
ed, which being unable to resist an enemy, served
only to furnish him with places of retreat; Xi-
menes, always bold and decisive in his measures,
ordered every one of these to be difinantled, ex-
cept Pampeluna, the fortifications of which he pro-
posed to render very strong. To this uncommon
precaution Spain owes the poffeflion of Navarre.

VP Mart. Ep 570,

D 2 ' The

BooK I. The French, since that period, have often entered,

L*^- ^ and have as often over-run the open country; but

while they were expoled to all the inconveniencies
attending an invading army, the Spaniards have
easily drawn troops from the neighbouring provin-
ces to oppose them; and the French, being defti-
tute of strong towns to which they could retire,
have been obliged to abandon their conquest with as
much rapidity as they gained it.

His operat- THE war which he carried on in Africa, against
ons in Afri-.
ca less for-the famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, how,
tunate. from a private corsair, railed himself by his fingu-

lar valour and address, to be king of Algiers and
Tunis, was far from being equally successful. The
ill conduct of the Spanish general, and the rash va-
lour of his troops, presented Barbaroira with an easy
victory. Many perished in the battle, more in the
retreat, and the remainder returned into Spain co-
vered with infamy. The magnanimity, however,
with which the Cardinal bore this disgrace, the only
one he experienced during his administration, ad-
ded new lustre to his charader". Great com-
pofure of temper under disappointment, was not
expeted from a man so remarkable for the eager-
ness and impatience with which he urged on the ex-
ecution of all his schemes.

Corruption THIS difaffer was Coon forgotten; while the con.
iof tmrnhe dut of the Flemish court proved the cause ofcon-
ters, parti- tfant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal, but to the
cuh,,te whole Spanish nation. All the great qualities of

Chievres, the prime minister and favourite of the
young king, were sullied with an ignoble and bordid
avarice. The acceflion of his master to the crown
of Spain, opened a new and copious source for the

w Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.

gratification

gratification of this pafilon. During the time of BooK J.
Charles's residence in Slanders, the whole tribe of~"'
pretenders to offices or to favour resorted thither.
They soon dicovered that, without the patronage
of Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing him. Vast furns of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal,
and disposed of to the highest bidder. After the
example of Chievres, the inferior Flemish ministers
engaged in this traffick, which became as general
and avowed, as it was infamous . The Spaniards
were filled with rage when they beheld offices of
great importance to the welfare of their country,
let to sale by strangers, unconcerned for its honour
or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his
whole administration, and a stranger, from his na-,
tive grandeur of mind, to the paflion of avarice,
inveighed with the utmost boldness against the ve-
nality of the Flemings. He represented to the King
in strong terms, the murmurs and indignation
which their behaviour excited among a free and
high-fpirited people, and besought him tofetout
without loss of time for Spain, that, by his presence,
he might diflipate the clouds which were gathering
all over the kingdom '.

CHARLES was fully sensible that he had delayed Charles per-

too long to take possession of his dominions in Spain. Xmed byo
Powerful obtlacles, however, flood in his way, and viit Spain.
detained him in the Low-Countries. The war
which the league of Cambray had kindled in Italy,
still subsisted; though, during its course, the ar-
mies of all the parties engaged in it, had taken di'-
ferentdiredions. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years car-

' Miniana, Contin. 1. i. c. 2. r P. Mart. Ep. 576.

D 3 rieC.

BOOK I. ried on hostilities against France, their original ally,
.. aJ to the valour of whose troops the confederacy owed

all its success. Together with his kingdoms, Ser-
dinand transmitted this war to his grandson; and
there was reason to expect that Maximilian, always
fond of new enterprizes, would persuade the young
monarch to enter into it with ardour. But the Fle-
mings, who had long possessed an extensive com-
merce, which during the league of Cambray, had
grown to a great height upon the ruins of the Ve-
netian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and
Chievres, sagacious to discern the true interest of
his country, and not warped on this occasion by his
love of wealth, warmly declared for maintaining
peace with the French nation. Francis I. destitute
of allies, and solicitous to secure his late conquets
in Italy by a treaty, listened with joy to the first
overtures of accommodation. Chievres himself
conducted the negociation in the name of Charles.
Gouffier appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis.
Each of them had presided over the education of
the prince whom he represented. They had both
adapted the fame pacific system; and were equally
persuaded that the union of the two monarchs was
the happiest event-for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negociation did

A peace not languish. A few days after opening their con-
withFance. ferences at Noyon, they concluded a treaty of con-.

federacy and mutual defence between the two moQ

Aug. 13, narchs; the chief articles in which were, thatFran-
1516. cis should give in marriage to Charles his eldest

daughter, the princess Louila, an infant of a year
old, and as her dowry, should make over to him
all his claims and pretensions upon the kingdom of
Naples; that in consideration of Charles's being
already in pofeflion of Naples, he should, till the
accompliflment of the marriage, pay an hundred
tloufand crowns a year to the French king ; and

the

the half of that Tum annually, as long as the prin- BOOK I.
cess had no children i that when Charles shall arrive , ~
in Spain, the heirs of the King of Navarre may
represent to him their right to that kingdom; and
if he do not give them fatisfadcion, Francis shall be
at liberty to aflift them with all his forces'. This
alliance not only united Charles and Francis, but
obliged Maximilian, who was unable alone to cope
with theFrench and Venetians, to enter into a trea-
ty with those powers, which put a final period to
that bloody and tedious war which the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a few
years of universal tranquillity, and was indebted for
that blessing to two princes, whose rivalfhip and
ambition kept it in perpetual discord and agitation
during the remainder, of their reigns.

BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe The Flem.

passage into Spain. It was not, however, the in- togChavrles
terest of his Flemiih ministers, that he should visit vlit to
that kingdom soon. While he resided in Slanders, pain.
the revenues of the Spanish crown were spent there,
and they engrossed, without any competitors, all
the effects of their monarch's generosity; their
country became the feat of government, and all
favours were dispensed by them. Of all these ad-
vantages, they ran the rifque of feeing themselves
deprived, from the moment that their fovereigr
entered Spain. The Spaniards would naturally as-
fume the direction of their own affairs the Low
Countries would be confidered only as a province of
that mighty monarchy; and they who now difiri-
buted the favours of the prince to others, mufft then
be content to receive them from the hands of ftran-
gers. But what Chievres chiefly wished to avoid Afraid ot
was, an interview between the king and Ximenes. Xlments.
On the other hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and

' Lonard Recucil desTraitez, tom. ii. 69.

D 4 the

BooK I. the magnanimity of that prelate, gave him a won-

'rderful ascendant over the minds of men; and it

was extremely probable, these great qualities, ad-
ded to the reverence due to his age and office,
would command the refped of a young prince,
who capable of noble and generous sentiments him-
self, would, in proportion to his admiration of the
Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference towards per-
sons of another charater. Or, on the other hand,
if Charles should allow his Flemish favourites to
rctai:: all the influence over his councils which they
a, .- ,ent possesed, it was easy to foresee that the
Ca'dinal would remonstrate loudly against fuchan
indignity to the Spanish nation, and vindicate the
rights of his country with the fame -intrepidity and
success, that he had asserted the- prerogatives of the
crowp. For there reasons, all his Flemish counsel-
lors combined to'retard his departure; and Charles,
unfufpicious, from want of experience, and fond
of his native country, suffered himself to be unne-
ceflarily detained in the Netherlands a whole year
after signing the treaty of Noyon.

,s17. THE repeated intreaties of Ximenes, the advice

Charles erh-
Cbarksfor of his grandfather Maximilian, and the impatient
Spain. murmurs of his Spanish fubjeets, prevailed on him

at last to embark. He was attended not only by
Chievres, his prime-minifter, but by a numerous
and splendid train of the Flemish nobles, fond of
beholding the grandeur, or of sharing in the boun-
Sept. ,3. ty of their prince. After a dangerous voyage, he

landed at Villa Viciofa, in the province of Asturias,
and was received with such loud acclamations of
joy, as a new monarch, whose arrival was so ar-
dently desired, had reafbn to exped. The Spanish
nobility resorted to their fuvereign from all parts of
the kingdom, and displayed a magnificence which
the Flemings were unable to emulate '.

v P. Mart. Ep. E599, 60.

XIMENES,

XIMENES, who confidered the presence of the BooK I

sling as the greatefl blessing to his dominions, was Hi Veh
'advancing towards the coait, as fast as the infirm miniters
irate of his health would permit, in order to receive pendevaourto
him. During his regency, and notwithflanding his interview
extreme old age, he abated, in no degree, the rigour ith Xim, -
or frequency of his mortifications; and to there he
added fich laborious afliduiry in business, as would
have worn cut the mofl youthful and vigorous con-
ititution. Every day he employed several hours in
devotion; he celebrated mass in person ; he even al-
lotted some space for study. Notwithitanding there
occupations he regularly attended the council; he re-
ceived and read all papers presented to him; he dic-
tated letters and initrutions; and took under his in-
fpeftion all business, civil, ecclefiaflical, or milita-
ry. Every moment of his time was filled up with
some serious employment. The only amuleement
in which he indulged himself, by way of relaxation
after business, was to canvass, with a few friars and
divines, some intricate article in fcholaflic theology.
Wafted by such a course of life, the infirmities of age
daily grew upon him. On hisjourney, a violent dilbr-
der seized him at Bos Equillos, attended with uncom-
mon symptoms; which his followers confidered as
the effect of poilbn', but could not agree whether
the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemilh
courtiers. This accident obliging him to stop ihort,
he wrote to Charles, and with his ufull bolJinet ad- cliaiei
vistd him to dilinils all the flrangels in his trail, n"il
whose numbers and credit gave offence already to
the Spaniards, and would cre long alienate the assec-
tions of the whole people. At the lame time, he ear-
neftly desired to have an interview with the king, that
he might inform him of the state of the nation, and
the temper of his fubjcdts. To prevncilt this, Lot only
the Flemings, but the Spanilll grandees, employcd

' Miniana, Contin. lib, i, c. 3

all

B,,oi I. all their address, and industriously kept Charles at
^'-.v-. a distance from Aranda, the place to which the

Cardinal had removed. Through their fuggellions,
every meafilre that he recommended was rejected;
the utmost care was taken to make him feel, and
to point out to the whole nation, that his power was
on the decline; even in things purely trivial, such a
choice was always made, as was deemed most dilf
agreeable to him. Ximenes did not bear this treat-
ment with his usual fortitude of spirit. Conscious
of his on integrity and merit, he expeCed a more
grateful return from a prince, to whom he delivered
a kingdom more flourishing than it had been in any
former age, and authority more extensive and bet-
ter established, than the most illustrious of his an-
ceftors had ever possessed. He could not, therefore,
on many occasions, refrain from giving vent to his
indignation and complaints. He lamented the fate
of his country, and foretold the calamities it would
susser from the insolence, the rapaciousness, and ig-
norance of strangers. While his mind was agita-
ted by these passions, he received a letter from the
king, in which, after a few cold and formal expref-
sions of regard, he was allowed to retire to his dio-
cefe; that after a life of such continued labour, he
His deth. might end his days in tranquillity. This message

proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is
probable, would not survive disgrace; perhaps his
generous heart could not bear the profped of the
misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Which-
soever of there opinions we embrace, certain it is
o,". 8. that he expired a few hours after reading the

letter'. The variety, the grandeur, and the success
of his schemes, during a regency of only twenty
months, leave it doubtful, whether his sagacity in
council, his prudence in conduEt, or his boldness il

a Marfallier Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gometius lib. vii. p.
zo6, &c. Baudier His. de Ximnen. p. z08.

execution,

execution, deserve the greatest praise. His reputa- BOOK 1.
tion is flill high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but --
for fandity; and he is the only prime minister
mentioned in history, whom his contemporaries re-
verenced as a faint', and to whom the people under
his government ascribed the power of working mi-
racles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made isls.

his public entry, with great pomp, into Valladolid, Co""e h(ld
whither he had summoned the Cortes of Caffile. lid.
Though he aifumed on all occasions the name of
king, that title had never been acknowledged in the
Cortes. The Spaniards confidering Joanna as possess-
ed of the sole right to the crown, and no example of
a son's having enjoyed the title of king during the life
of his parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refped for ancient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which are
conspicuous in popular assemblies. The pretence,
however, of their prince, the address, the artifices,
and the threats of his ministers, prevailed on them
at last to declare him king, in conjunction with his Declare
mother, whole name they appointed to be placed khlrl $.
before that of her son in all publick atds; and de-kig.
clared that, if at any future period she should reco-
ver the exercise of reason, the whole royal authori-
ty (hould return into her hands. At the fame time,
they voted a free gift of fix hundred thoutlnd du-
cats to be paid in three years, a fum more conlider-
able than had ever been granted to any former
jmonarch b.

NOTWITHSTANDING this obfequiouinefs of the Lilrcontent

Cortes to the will of the king, the most violent la,, ,,a,,
symptoms of diflatisfaation with his government 'he caul of
began to break out in the kingdom. Chievres had "

8 Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 746. Mniana, Con-
tin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 6o8. Sandov. p. 1z.

acquired

o OK I. acquired over the mind of the young monarch the
'-'~~ atcendant not only of a tutor, but of a parent.

Charles seemed to have no sentiments but those
which his miniffter inspired, and scarce uttered a
word but what he put into his mouth. He was
constantly surrounded by Flemings; no person got
access to him without their permission; nor was any
admitted to audience but in their pretence. As h:
spoke the Spanish language very imperfcEtly, his
answers were always extremely short, and often
delivered with hesitation. From all these circum-
stances, many of the Spaniards were led to believe
that he was a prince of a flow and narrow gCnius;
some pretended to discover a strong resemblance be-
tween him and his mother, and began to whisper
that his capacity for government would never be far
superior to hers; and though they who had the best
opportunity of judging concerning his character,
maintained, that notwithstanding such unpromising
appearances, he possessed a large fund of know-
ledge and sagacity '; yet all agreed in condemning
his partiality towards his countrymen, and his at-
tachment to his favourites as unreasonable and im-
moderate. Unfortunately for Charles, these fa-
vourites were unworthy of his confidence. To
amass wealth seems to have been their only aim ;
and as they had reason to fear, that either their
maiter's good sense, or the indignation of the Spa-
niards, might soon abridge their power, they ha-
ftened to improve the present opportunity, and their
avarice was the more rapacious, because they ex-
pedted their authority to be of no long duration.
All honours, offices and benefices, were either en-
grossed by the Flemings, or publickly fold by them.
Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles,
on the death of Ximenes, had imprudently raised
to be chancellor of Castile, vied with each other
in all the refinements of extortion and venality.

'pdov.1, p. 3'. P. Mart. Ep. 655.

Not

Not only the Spanish historians, who, from resent- BooK I.
ment, may be fufpeeted of exaggeration, but Pe-c""-'
ter Martyr Angleria, an Italian, who resided at that
time in the court of Spain, and who was under no
temptation to deceive the persons to whom his let-
ters are addressed, give a delcription which is al-
most incredible, of the infitiable and fharelefs co-
vetculneis of the Flemings. According to Angle-
ria's calculation, which he asserts to be extremely
moderate, they remitted into the Low-Countries,
in the ipace of ten months, no less a fnlm than a
million and one hundred thousand ducats. The
nomination of William de Croy, Chievres' nephew,
a young man not of canonical age, to the Arch-
bilhoprick of Toledo, exasperated the Spaniards
more than all these exaCtions. They conlidered
the elevation of a itranger to the head of their
church, and to the richest benefice in the kingdom,
not only as an injury, but as an inuhlt to the whole
nation; and both clergy and laity, the former from
interest, the latter from indignation, joined in ex-
claiming against it .

CHARLES leaving Castile thus difgffted with hishll ,,,

administration, set out for Saragossa, the capital ofCorte,' (
Aragon, that he might be present in the Cortes of Ar'u"l
that kingdom. On his way thither, he took leave
of his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent into Ger-
many on the pretence of viliting their grandfather,
Maximilian, in his old age. To this prudent pre-
caution, Charles owed the preservation of his Spa.
nifh dominions. During the violent commotions
which arose there soon after this period, the Spani-
ards would infallibly have offered the crown to a
prince, who was the darling of the whole nation;
nor did Ferdinand want ambition, or counlfllors,

d Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep. 6oS, 611, 63, 614, 622,
623, 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8.

that

. BOOK I. that would have prompted him to accept of the
'-*-- offer '.

Thec Arago- THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged
untratable Charles as king, nor would they allow the Cortes
than the to be assembled in his name, but in that of the
ailians. Juftiza, to whom, during an interregnum, thispri.

vilege belonged f. The opposition Charles had to
struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more
violent and obstinate than that which he had over-
come in Castile; after long delays, however, and
with much difficulty, he persuaded the members to
confer on him the title of king, in conjunction with
his mother. At the fame time he bound himself
by that solemn oath, which the Aragonefe exacted
of their king, never to violate any of their rights
or liberties. When a donative was demanded, zh,
members were still more intractable; many months
elapsed before they would agree to grant Charles
two hundred thousand ducats, and that fum they
appropriated so ftriEtly for paying debts of the
crown, which had long been forgotten, that a very
finall part of it came into the King's hands. What
had happened in Castile taught them caution, and
determined them rather to satisfy the claims of their
fellow citizens, how obsolete soever, than to fur-
nilh itrangers the means of enriching themselves
with the Spoils of their country g

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, am-

baffadors arrived at Saragossa from Francis I. and
the young king of Navarre, demanding the refti-
tution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty of
Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Castilian no-
bles whom he consulted on this occasion, discover-
ed any inclination to part with this acquisition. A

P!. Martyr, Ep. 619. Fcrreras, viii. 46o.
r P Martyr, Ep. 6o. g P. Martyr, Ep. 615-634.

conference

conference held soon after at Montpelier, in order to BooK I.
bring this matter to an amicable iluile, was altoge- '
ther fruitless and while the French urged the in-
justice of the usurpation, the Spaniards were atten-
tive only to its importance b

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia, 15,9.

where he wafted as much time, encountered more
difficulties, and gained lets money. The Flemings
were now become so odious in every province of
Spain by their exactions, that the delire of morti-
fying them, and of disappointing their avarice,
augmented the jealousy with which a free people
usually conduct their deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the Combinati

weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes car-cafljhian
ried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer to Tub- against the
mit with a tameness fatal to themselves, and which FlWmfli m;-
rendered them the objects of scorn among the reft
of the Spaniards. Segovia, Toledo, Seville, and
several other cities of the firfl rank, entered into a
confederacy for the defence of their rights and pri-
vileges; and notwithstanding the silence of the no-
bility, who, on this occasion, discovered neither
the publick fpirir, nor the resolution which became
their order, they laid before the king a full view
of the state of the kingdom, and of ihe mal-ad-
ministration of his favourites. The preferment of
strangers; the exportation of the current coin;
the increase of taxes, were the grievances of which
they chiefly complained; and of there they de-
manded redress with that boldness, which is natural
to a free people. These remonstrances, prcifLntcd
at first at Saragossa, and renewed afterwards at Ba;r-
celona, Charles treated with great neglect. The

h P Martyr, Ep. 605, 633, 640.

confede racy,

BooK I. confederacy, however, of there cities at thisjunc-
' ~-. ture, was the beginning of that famous union a-

mong the commons of Caflile, which not long as-
ter threw the kingdom into such violent convulfi-
ons, Ihook the throne, and almost overturned the
conflitution .

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he re-

ceived the account of an event which interested
him much more than the murmurs of the Caftili-
ans, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia.

Death eor This was the death of the Emperor Maximilian;
the Emperor
Maximilian. an occurrence of small importance in itself, for he
January 12. was a prince conspicuous neither for his virtues, his

power, nor his abilities; but rendered by its conle-
quences more memorable than any that had hap-
pened during e.veral ages. It broke that profound
and universal peace which then reigned ill the Chris-
tian world; it excited a rivalfhip between two
prinoes, which threw all Europe into agitation, and
kindled wars more general, and of longer duration,
than had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of

the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had in-
spired the European princes with new ideas concern-
ing the importance of the Imperial dignity. The
claims of the Empire upon Ibme of the Italian
flates were numerous; its jurifdiition over others
was extensive; and though the former had been al-
most abandoned, and the latter seldom exercised,
tinder princes of no abilities, and of little influ-
ence, it was obvious, that in the hands of an Em-
peror possessed of power and genius, they would
be employed as engines for ftrctching his dominion
over the greater part of that country. Even Maxi-
milian, feeble and unsteady as his conduct always

:P Martyr, rEp. 63o. Fctrcras, viii. 464.

was,

was, had availed himself of the infinite pretenfi- BOOK I.
ons of the Empire, and had reaped advantage from >
every war and every negociation in Italy during
his reign. These considerations, added to the dig-
nity of the station, confessedly the first among
Christian prnces, and to the rights inherent in the
office, which, if exerted with vigour, were far
from being inconsiderable, rendered the Imperial
crown more than ever an object of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had dif Maximiliia

covered great solicitude to preserve this dignity in had ended.
the Austrian family, and to procure the king offecure the
Spain to be chosen his successor. But he himfelfimPri'l hi
having never been crowned by the Pope, a cere-grandfoo.
mony deemed essential in that age, was confidered
only as Emperor eleli; and though historians did
not attend to that diftinCion, neither the Italian
nor German chancery bestowed any other title up-
on him than that of King of the Romans; and no
example occurring in history of any person's be-
ing chosen a successor to a King of the Romans,
the Germans, always tenacious of their forms,
and unwilling to confer upon Charles an office for
which their constitution knew no name, obstinate-
ly refused to gratify Maximilian in that point k.

BY his death, this difficulty was at once re-Charle and

moved, and Charles openly aspired to that dignity F,'ncit1.
which his grandfather had attempted, without tuc- for the em-
cess, to secure for him. At the fame time, Francis pir'
I. a powerful rival, entered the lifts against him;
and the attention of all Europe was fixed upon this
competition; no less illuflrious from the high rank
of the candidates, than from the importance of
the prize for which they contended. Each of them
uiged his pretenlions with sanguine expectati-
ons, and with no unpromising ,rofpect of luccefs.

k Guicciardini, lib. 13. p. 15. Hist. Gener. d'Allemagne, par

P. Barre, toin. vi. i. part. i. p. 1087. P. Heutcr, Rer. Aultr.
lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. 2. p. 18j.

VOL. II. E Charles

BOOK I. Charles confidered the Imperial crown as belong-
t~ein^ ing to him of right, from its long continuance in
and hopes of the Austrian line; he knew that none of the Ger-
Chares. man princes possessed power or influence enough

to appear as his antagonist he flattered himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives of
Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity,
which during fb many ages had been deemed pe-
culiar to their own nation ; and least of all, that
they would confer this honour upon Francis I. the
sovereign of a people whose genius, and laws, and
manners differed so widely from those of the Ger-
mans, that it was scarcely possible to establish any
cordial union between them: he trusted not a lit-
tle to the effect of Maximilian's negociations,
which though they did not attain their end, had
prepared the minds of the Germans for his eleva-
tion to the imperial throne; but what he relied on
as his chief recommendation, was the fortunate
situation of his hereditary dominions in Germany,
which served as a natural barrier to the Empire
against the encroachments of the Turkish power.
The conquests, the abilities, and the ambition of
Sultan Selim II. had spread over Europe, at that
time, a general and well founded alarm. By his
victories over the Mamalukes, and the extirpati-
on of that gallant body of men, he had not only
added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but had fe-
cured to it such a degree of internal tranquillity,
that he was ready to turn againit Christendom the
whole force of his arms, which nothing had hi-
therto been able to refit : The most effectual ex-
pedient for tfopping the progress of this torrent,
leemed to be the election of an Emperor, possessed
of extensive territories in that country, where its
first impreflion would be felt, and who, betides,
could combat this formidable enemy with all the
forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the
wealth furnilhed by the mines of the new world,
or the commerce of the Low-Countries. These

were

were the arguments by which Charles publickly BooK f.
supported his claim; and to men of integrity and -"
refle&ion, they appeared to be not only plausible,
but convincing. He did not, however, trust the
success of his cause to there alone. Great fums of
money were remitted from Spain; all the refine-
ments and artifice of negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops kept on foot by
the flates of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly ta-
ken into his pay. The venal were gained by pre-
sents; the objections of the more scrupulous were
atlfwered or eluded; and some feeble princes were
threatened and over-awed .

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim of rancis.

with equal eagerness, and no less confidence of its
being well founded. His emiflaries contended, that
it was now high time to convince the Princes of
the house of Aufiria that the Imperial crown was
elective, and not hereditary; and that other per-
sons might aspire to an honour which their arro-
gance had come to regard as the property of their
family; that it required a sovereign of mature
judgment, and of approved abilities, to hold the
reins of government in a country where such un-
known opinions concerning religion had been pub-
lifhed, as had thrown the minds of men into an
unc6mmon agitation, which threatened the molt
violent effects; that a young prince, without ex-
perience, and who had hitherto given no fpeci-
mens of his genius for command, was no equal
match for Selim, a monarch grown old in the art
of war, and in the course of victory; whereas a
king, who, in his early youth had triumphed over
the valour and discipline of the Swils, till then
reckoned invincible, would be an antagonist not
unworthy of the Conqueror of the East; that the

I Guic. lib. zi. 9;. Sleidan, Hild. of the Reformat, 14.
Struvii Corp. Hil. German. ii. 971. Not. z0.

E 2 fire

gooK I. .fire and impetuosity of the Frenchcavalry, added
-'`1to the dircipline and stability of the German in-

-fantry, would form an army ib irresistible, that in-
stead of waiting the approach of the Ottoman
forces, it might carry hostilities into the heart of
their dominions ; that the elecion of Charles would
be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution,
by which the person who holds the crown of Na-
ples, is excluded from aspiring to the Imperial
-dignity; that his elevation to that honour would
Coon kindle a war in Italy, on account ot his pre-
tensions to the dutchy of Milan, the effects of
which could not fail of reaching the Empire, and
might prove fatal to it m. But while his ambaffa-
dors enlarged upon there and other topicks of the
fame kind, in all the courts of Germany, Francis,
sensible of the prejudices entertained against him
as a foreigner, unacquainted with the German lan-
guage or manners, endeavoured to overcome
there, and to gain the favour of the princes by
immense gifts, and by infinite promises. As the
expeditious method of transmitting money, and
the decent mode of conveying a bribe by bills of
exchange was then little known, the French am-
baffadors travelled with a train of horses loaded
with treasure, an equipage not very honourable
for that prince by whom they were employed, and
infamous for those to whom they were lent .

Views and THE other European princes could not remain
intercft of indifferent fpetators of a contest, the decision of

which so nearly affeCted them. Their common
interest ought naturally to have formed a general
combination, in order to disappoint both compe-
titors, and to prevent either.of them from obtain-
ing such a pre-eminence in power and dignity, as
might prove dangerous to the liberties of Europe.

o Guic. lib. i3.i6o. Sleid. p. 16. Geor. Sabini de elec
Car. V. Hiftoria apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.

Memoires dc Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296.

But

But the ideas with 'refpe& to a proper distribution. BoK I.
and balance of power. were so lately introdduced"' '
into the fyllem of European policy, that they'were'
not hitherto objetds of sufficient attention. The
paflions of some princes, the want of foresight in
others, and the fear of giving offence to the candi-
dates, hindered fluch a salutary union of the powers
of Europe, and rendered them either totally negli-
gent of the publick uafety, or kept them from'ex-
erring themselves with vigour in'its behalf.

THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded: the Ofihesvif:

elevation of either of the contending monarchs,
and though they wished to hav.e'.feen Come prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whole
power was more moderate, feated on the Imperial
throne, were prompted, however, by their hatred
of the French nation, to give an openi preference to
the pretensions of Charles, while they used their
utmost influence to frustrate Wi'ofe'of FranciS*

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the of lit,

interest of their republick to have both the rivalsne ~n'
set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Au-
stria, whose ambition and neighbourhood had been
fatal to their grandeur, would not permit them to
act up to their own ideas, and led them haltily to
give the sanction of their approbation to the claim
of the French king.

IT. was equally the interest, and more in the orfHe;

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent el- v"'
ther Francis or Charles from acquiring a dignity
which would raise them To far above other mo-
narchs. But though Henry often boasted, that he
held the balance of Europe in his hand, he had
neither the steady attention, the accurate discern-
ment, nor the dilpaHlionate temper which that de-
licate funtion required. On this occasion it mor-
tified his vanity so much, to fee himself excluded

° Subinu, p. 6.

E 3 from

Bo o I.: frorn4hat noble competition which refleted such

'' hon'our.upon the two antagonists, that he took the

refolurion of fending an ambassador into-Germany,
and of declaring himself a candidate for the Im-
perial throne. The ambassador, though loaded
with caresses by the German princes and the Pope's
nuncio, informed his master, that he could hope
for no fuccels in a claim which he had been so late
in preferring; and Henry, imputing his disappoint-
ment to that circtftance alone, and soothed with
this ostentatious display of his own importance,
seems to have taken no farther part in the matter,
either by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or
to promote one of them P.
of Leo X. LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his po-

litical abilities, than for his love of the arts, was
the only prince of the age who observed the moti-
ons of the two contending monarchs with a pru-
dent attention, or who discovered a proper folici-
tude for the public safety. The Imperial and Pa-
pal jurifdidiont interfered in so many inflances, the
complaints of ufurpbtion were so numerous on both
fides, and the territories of the -church owed their
safety. so entirely .to the weakness of their neigh-
bours, and so little to their own force, that no-
thing was so formidable to the court of Rome as
an Emperor of extensive power, or of enterpriz-
ing genius. Leo trembled at the prospect of be-
holding the Imperial crown placed on the head of
the king of Spain and of Naples, and the mailer
of the new world; nor was he less afraid of fee-
ing a king of France, who was duke of Milan
and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He
foretold that the election of either of them would
be fatal to the independence of the holy fee, to
the peace of Italy; and perhaps to the liberties of
Europe. To oppofethem, however, required ad-
dress and caution in proportion to the greatness of

P Memoires de Pieurnges, 314. Herbert, Hifi. of Henry VIII.

their

their power, and their opportunities of taking re- BooK I.
venge. Leo was defective in neither. He secretly ''
exhorted the German princes to place one of tleir
own number on the Imperial throne, which many
of them were capable of filling with honour; he
put them in mind ;of the constitution by which the
Kings of Naples were for ever excluded from that
dignity q; he warmly exhorted the French king to
persist in his claim, not from any delire that he
Ihould gain his end, but as he foresaw that the
Germans would be more disposed to favour the
king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself,
when he discovered his own chance of success to
be desperate, would be stimulated by resentment
and the (pirit of rivallhip, to concur with all his
interest in railing some third person to the head of
the Empire; or on the other hand, if Fratnqi
should make unexpedted progress, he did not doubt
but that Charles would be induced by similar moo,
tives to aft the fame part; and thus by prudence
and attention, the. mutual jealousy of the two ri-
vals might be so dextroufly managed, as to dif-
appoint both. But this (cheme, the only one
which a prince in Leo's fituati,(n could adopt,
though concdrted with great wisdom, was executed
with little diCcretion. The French ambassadors in
Germany fed their mailer with vain hopes; the
pope's nuncio, being gained by them, altogether
forgot the inftrudions he had received; and Fran-
cis persevered so long and so obstinately in urging his
own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's mealures
abortive .

SucH were the hopes of the candidates, and Thediet

the views of the different princes, when the diQt a 't,nbk,
was opened according to form at Frankfort. 'IThe
right of choofing an emperor had long been vIt'cl

qGoldafti Contitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673. vol. 1.
439 r Guicciar. lib. 13. 161.

E 4 i1

BOOK J. in {even great princes, distinguished by the name of

v`E t
Elecors, the origin of whose office, and the nature

and extent of their powers, have already been ex-
plained. There were, at that time, Albert of Bran-
denburgh, archbishop of Mentz; Herman count de
Wied, archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Grief-
fenklau, archbifhopofTreves; Lewis, king of Bo-
hemia; Lewis, count Palatine of the Rhine; Frede-
rick, duke of Saxony; and Joachim I. marquis of
Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding the artful argu-
ments produced by the ambalfadors of the two
kings, in favour of their refpedive masters, and
in spite of all their solicitations, intrigues, and pre-
viewof the'fents, the Ele&ors did not forget that maxim on

which the liberty of the German constitution was
thought to be founded. Among the members of
the Germanick body, which is a great republick
compored of states almof: independent, the first
principle of patriotism is to depress and limit the
power of the Emperor; and of this idea, so natu-
ral under such a form of government, a German
politician seldom loses fight. No prince of confider-
able power, or extensive dominions, had for rome
ages been raised to the imperial throne; and to this
prudent precaution many of the great families in
Germany owed the splendor and independence
which they had acquired during that period. To
elect either of the contending monarchs, would have
been a gross violation of that salutary maxim;
would have given to the Empire a mailer, instead
of an head; and would have reduced themielves
from the rank of equals, to the condition of fubjecAs.

Offer the FULL of these ideas, they all turned their eyes
rownl t towards Frederick, duke of Saxony, a prince of Iuch
Frederik of eminent virtue, and abilities, as to be diflinguifhed
.Jxon), by the name 'of the Sage, and with one voice offer-

ed him the Imperial crown. He was not dazzled

with

with that object, which monarchs so far superior Boot T.
to him in power courted with such eagerness; and V
after deliberating upon the matter a short time,
he rejeted it with a magnanimity and disinterested- who rejea
ness, no less singular than admirable. Nothing'
he obierved, coud be more impolitic, than an ob-
fiinate adherence to a maxim which, though found
and just in many calfs, was not applicable to all.
In times of tranquillity, said he, we wilh for an
Emperor who has not power to invade our liber-
ties; times of danger demand one who is able to
secure our safety. The Turkish armies, led by a
gallant and viEtorious monarch are now assembling.
They are ready to pour in upon Germany with a
violence unknown in formerages. New conjunc-
tures call for new expedients The Imperial fcep-
tre mufft be committed to tome hand more power-
ful than mine, or that of any other German
prince. We possess neither dominions, nor reve-
nues, nor authority which enable us to encounter
such a formidable enemy. Recourse must be had in
this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each
of them can bring into the field forces fifficient for
our defence. But as the king of Spain isos German
extraction, as he is a member and prince of the em-
pire by the territories which descend to him from
his grandfather; as his dominions stretch along that
frontier which lies most exposed to the enermy; his
claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of a
itranger to our language, to our blood, and to our
country; and therefore I give mny vote to confer on
him the Imperial crown'.

THIS opinion, ditrated by such uncommon ge- And rrruie

ncrofity, and lilpported by arguments so plausible, "y prec'. r
made a deep imprefflon on the Electors. The chlTes. '
king of Spain's ambassadors sensible of the im- tmbIrC lo:s.
portant service which Frederick had done their
matter, lent him a considerable lum of money, as

the

BooKc T. the firfl token of that prince's gratitude. But he
L'.---who had greatnels of mind to refute a crown, dif-

dained to receive a bribe; and upon their intreat-
ing that, at least, he would permit them to dif-
tribute part of that fum among his courtiers, he re-
plied, that he could not prevent them from accept-
ing what Ihould be offered, but whoever took a fin-
gle florin should be dismissed next morning from
his service'.

Firher de- No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dig-
o: the elec- nity, which Frederick had declined for reasons ap-
tors' plicable to them all. It remained to make a choice

between the two great competitors. But besides
the prejudice in Charles's favour, arising from his
birth and the situation of his German dominions, he
owed not a little to the abilities of the cardinal de
Gurk, and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bilhop of
Liege, two of his ambassadors who had conduted
their negociations with more prudence and address,
than thole entrusted by the French king. The for-
mer, who had long been the minister and favourite
of Maximilian, was well acquainted with the art of
managing the Germans; .and the latter having
been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by Francis,
employed all the malicious ingenuity with which

r P Daniel, an hifforian of considerable name, seems to call

in question the truth of this account of Frederick's behaviour,
becanfe it is not mentioned by Georglus Sabinus in his history of
the election and coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no
great ftrcfs ought to be laid on an omiflion in a superficial author,
whose treatise, though dignified with the name of history, con-
tains only fiich an account of the ceremonial of Charles's elec-
tion as is ufially published in Germany on like occasions. Scaid.
Rer. Germ. Script. v. 2. p. i. The teftimonyofErafinus, lih.
12. epifi. 4. and that of bleidan, p. 18. are express. Secken-
dorf in hi:, Coinmentarius Hifloricus & Apologeticus de Luthe-
ranifmno, p. 121, has examined this taQ witl his usual indufiry,
and has eflablifhed its truth by the inofi undoubted evidence.
To these tetimronies which he has collefted, I may add the de-
cifive one (4 cardinal CRjetln, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in
his letter July 5sh, 1519. Epilrcs au princes, &c. reculclics
par Rufcclli, tiaduicts par Belfuirefl. Par. 1572 p. 6o.

the

the desire of revenge inspires an ambitious mind, in Boox .
thwarting the meaflires of that monarch. The '-"'
Spanish party among the Electors daily gained
ground; and the Pope's nuncio, being convinced
that it was vain to make any farther opposition, en-
deavoured to acquire rome merit with the future
Emperor, by offering voluntarily, in the name of
his master, a dispensation to hold the Imperial
crown in conjunction with that of Nai.les .

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months and

ten days after the death of Maximilian, this impor-
tant contest, which had held all Europe in suspense,
was dec:ded. Six of the Electors had already de- Theychonft
dared for the king of Spain, and the archbishop of0 peCs cm-
Treves, the only firm adherent to the French inte-
reft, having at last joined his brethren, Charles was
by the unanimous voice of the Electoral college raif-
ed to the Imperial throne '.

BuT though the EleEtors consented, from various They are

motives, to promote Charles to that high station, aPP'ehen-
they discovered at the fame time great jealoufypowe,, id
of his extraordinary power, and endeavoured, ake p'-
with the utmost solicitude, to provide against his a.iiUi it.
encroaching on the privileges of the Germa-
nick body. It had long been the custom to de-
mand of every new Emperor a confirmation of
there privileges, and to require a promise that lie
would never violate them in any inflance. While
princes who were formidable, neither fiom extent
of territory, nor of genius, pofl'elcd the Imperial
throne, a general and verbal engagement to this
purpose was deemed fuifficient security. But under
an Emperor so powerful as Charles, other precauti-
ons seemed necessary. A Capitulation or claim

r Frehcri. Rer. German. Scriptores, vol. iii. 172. cur. Struvii,
Argent. 1717. GianoncHil. of Naples, 2. 498.

Jac. Aug.Thuan. Hit.fui temporis. Edit Bulkley, li i. c. 9.

of

BooK I. of rights was formed, in which the privileges and
'-v' immunities of the Eletors of the princes of the em-

pire, of the cities, and of every other member of
the Germanick body are enumerated. This capi-
tulation was immediately signed by Charles's am-
baffadors in the name of their master, and he him-
self at his coronation confirmed it in the most so-
lemn manner. Since that period, the Eledtors have
continued to pre(cribe the fame conditions to all his
fiucceflors; and in Germany the capitulation or mu-
tual contrad between the Emperor and his subjects,
is confidered as a firong barrier againit the progress
of the imperial power, and as the great charter of
their liberties to which they often appeal .

The eleti- THE important intelligence of his eledion was
cn notified conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to Barcelo-

na, where Charles was frill detained by the obfti-
nacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had not hi-
therto brought to an iflue any of the affairs that
came before it. He received the account with the
joy natural to a young aspiring mind, on an accef-
sion of power and dignity which raised him so far
above the other princes of Europe. Then it was
that those vast prospeCts which allured him during
his whole administration began to open, and from
this aera we may date the formation, and are able
to trace the gradual progress of a grand system of
enterprizing anbition, which renders the hiRfory of
his reign so worthy of attention.

it!efre. A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the es-
o·him. feets of this great elevation upon the mind of

Charles. In all the publick writs which he issued
as king of Spain, he assumed the title of Majely,
and required it from his fubjets as a mark of their
refped. Before that time, all the moriarchs of
Europe were satisfied with the appellation of

u Pfefel Abregd de ' His. de Droit Publique d'Alleinagne,

590. Litnnei Capitulat. Iarper. Epifres des Princes par Rucel-
ii, p. 60.

J-igknefs,

Highness, or Grace; but the vanity of other courts BooK I.
loon led them to imitate the example of the' '
Spanish. The epithet of Majesty is no longer a
mark of pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable
monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and the arrogance of
the greater potentates has invented no higher deno-
mination ".

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the pro- Thde pni

motion of their king to the Imperial throne with tsfied with
the fame fatisfation which he himself felt. To be thi' ev
deprived of the preSence of their fivereign, and to
be liibjeted to the government of a viceroy and his
council, a species ofadminifration often oppressive,
and always disagreeable, were the immediate and
necessary consequences of this new dignity. To
fee the blood of their countrymen shed in quarrels
wherein the nation had no concern, to behold its
treasures watled in supporting the splendour of a
foreign title, and to be plunged in the chaos of Ita-
lian andGerman politics, were effets of this event
almost as unavoidable. From all these considerations,
they concluded, that nothing could have happened
more pernicious to the Spanish nation ; and the for-
titude and publick spirit of their ancestors, who, in
the Cortes of Castile, prohibited Alfonzo the Wife
from leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the
Imperial crown, were often mentioned with the
highefl praise, and pronounced to be extremely
worthy of imitation at thisjunturew.

BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments

or murmurs of his Spanilh lublecs, accepted of
the Imperial dignity which the count Palatine, at
the head of a sblemn embafly, offered him in the
name of the Eledtors; and declared his intention
of setting out soon for Germany, in order to take
poffellion of it. This was the more necessary,

uMinianx Contin. Mar. p. 13 Ferreraa, viii. 475. Memoires
Hifi. de la Houffaie, tom. i. p. 53, &c.

w Sandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. 14.

because,

Boo I. because, according to the forms of the German con-
'-"I fitution, he could not, before the ceremony of a
November. publick coronation, exercise any at of jurifdidtion

or authority .

THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution aug-

mented the diiguft of the Spaniards; and a fullen
and refraEtory spirit prevailed among persons of all

Their dif- ranks. The pope having granted the king the
Sten i.'"n' tenths of all eccleliaftical benefices in Castile, to aflift

him in carrying on war with greater vigour against
the Turks, a convocation of the clergy unanimous-
ly refuied to levy that fum, upon pretence that it
ought never be exacted but at those times when
Christendom was actually invaded by the Infidels;
and though Leo, in order to support his authority,
laid the kingdom under an interdict, so little regard
was paid to a censure which w as universally deemed
unjust, that Charles himfelfapplied to have it taken
off; and thus the Spanilh clergy, besides their me-
rit in opposing the usurpations of the pope, and dif-
regarding the influence of the crown, gained the
exemption which they had claimed .

THE commotions which arose in the kingdom of

Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon,
were more formidable, and produced more dange-

An infur- rous and lasting effects. A seditious monk having
raitn in by his sermons excited the citizens of Valencia,

the capital city, to take .arms, and to punish cer-
tain criminals in a tumultuary manner, the people,
pleased with this exercise of power, and with such
a discovery of their own importance, not only re-
filed to lay down their arms, but formed them-
selves into troops and companies that they might
be regularly trained to martial exercises. To ob-
tain Ibme security against the oppression of the
grandees was the motive of this association, and
proved a powerful bond of union; Ibr as the arifto-

Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. 1085.
y P. Martyr, Ep. 462. Fen eras viii. 473.cr

cratical

cratical privileges and independence were more BOOK 1.
complete in Valencia than in any other of the'yv'"
Spanilfi kingdoms, the nobles, being scarce ac-
countable for their conduct to any superior, treat-
ed the people not only as vassals but as slaves.
They were alarmed, however, at the success of
this unexpected infurredtion, as it might encou-
rage the people to attempt shaking off the yoke;
but as they could not repress them without tak-
ing arms, it became neceflary to have recourse to
the Emperor, and to desire his permission to at-
tack them. At the fame time the people made I,ss.
choice of deputies to represent their grievances, lIs progr" s
and to implore the protection of their sovereign.
Happily for the latter, they arrived at court when
Charles was exasperated to an high degree against
the nobles. As he was eager to visit Germany,
where his pretence became every day more necef-
fary, and as his Flemish courtiers were frill more
impatient to return into their native country, and
to carry thither the spoils they had amassed in Caf-
tile, it was impossible for him to hold the Cortes
of Valencia in person. He had for that reason
empowered the cardinal Adrian to represent him
in that assembly, and in his name to receive their
oath of allegiance, to confirm their privileges with
the utfial Solemnities, and to demand of them a
free gift. But the Valencian nobles, who confider-
ed this measure as an indignity to their coun-
try, which was no less entitled, than his other
kingdoms, to the honour of their Ibvereign's pre-
tence, declared that by the fundamental laws of
the conflitution they could neither acknowledge a
person who was ablent as king, nor grant him any
subsidy, and to this declaration they adhered with
an haughty and inflexible obstinacy. Charles,
piqued by their behaviour, decided in favour
of the people, and rafily authorized them to con-
tinue in arms. Their deputies returned in tri-
umph, and were received by their fellov citizens

as

BooK I. as the deliverers of their country; and the info-
-v lence of the multitude increasing with their success,

they expelled all the nobles out of the city, com-
mitted the government to magistrates of their own
election, and entered into an allociation diftinguith.
ed by the name of Germnanada or Brotherbood,
which proved the iburce not only of the wildest dil:
orders, but of the most fatal calamities in that king-
dom .

The Cores MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was agi-
et caiile tated with no less violence. No sooner was the
lammoned

meet i Emperor's intention to leave Spai: made known,
GLcia. than several cities of the si fit rank resolved to re-

monftrate against it, and to crave redress once
more of thole grievances which they had formerly
laid before him. Charles artfully avoided ad-
mitting their deputies to audience; and as he saw
from this circumstance how difficult it would be
at thisjundure to restrain the mutinous spirit of
great r cities, he summoned the Cortes of Callile
to meet at Compoftllla in Galicia. His only rea-
fin for calling that aflembly, was the hope of ob-
taining another donative; for as his treasury had
been exhaIited in the fame proportion that the
riches of his ministers increaled, he could nor,
without some additional aid, appear in Germany
with splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in Jo remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before the
time for paying the former was expired, were inno-
vations of a inoft dangerous tendency ; and among
people jealous of their liberties, and accustomed to
supply the wants of their tovercigns with a very
frugal hand, excited an iuniverfal alarm. The ma-
giftrates of Toledo remoniratcd against both theie
measures in a very high tone; the inhabitants of
Valladolid, who expected that the Cortes ilhuld
have been held in that city, were lb enraged that

P. Martyr. Ep. 651. Ferrcras viii. 476. 485.

they

they took up arms in a tumultuary manner; and if BooK I.
Charles with his foreign counsellors had not fortunate- '" 1
ly made their escape during a violent tempest, they
would have massacred all the Flemings, and have
prevented him from continuing hisjourney towards
Compoftella.

EVER Y city through which they pafled, petition- The PQo

ed against holding a Cortes in Galicia, a point with that assem-
regard to which Charles was inflexible. But bly
though the utmoff influence had been exerted by
the ministers, in order to procure a choice of repre-
fcntatives favourable to their designs, such was the
temper of the nation, that at the opening of the
assembly, there appeared among many of theApril
members unufial iymptoms of ill humour, which
threatened a fierce opposition to all the measures
of the court. No reprelentatives were sent by To-
ledo; for the lot, according to which, by ancient
cuflom, the detion was determined in that city,
having fallen upon two persons devoted to the
Flemish ministers, their fellow-citizens refuted to
grant them a commiflion in the usual form, and in
their flead made chuice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compoflella, and to
protest against the lawfulnels of the Cortes affelm-Thedfaf-
bled there. The representatives of Salamanca re- cafilins
fused to take the usual oath of fidelity, unlefsincreafes.
Charles consented to change the place of meeting.
Thote of Toro, Madrid, Cordova, and several
other places, declared the demand of another do-
native to be unprecedented, unconflitutional, and
unnecessary. All the arts, however, which influ-
ence popular assemblies, bribes, promises, threats,
and even force, were employed in order to gain
inemLers. The nobles, toothed by the relpetful
afliduity with which Chicvres and the other Flemings
paid court to them, or infligated by a mean jca-
lou(y of that spirit of independence which they saw
iiling among the commons, openly favoured the

VOL. II. F prete;l';u s

Boo. I. pretensions of the court, or at the utmost did not
"~vr-' oppose them; and at last, in contempt both of the

sentiments of the nation, and of the ancient forms
of the conititution, a majority voted to grant the
donative for which the Emperor had applied *. To-
gether with this grant, the Cortes laid before Charles
a reprefentafion of those grievances whereof his peo-
ple craved redrels; but he, having obtained from
them all he could expect, paid no attention to this
ill-timed petition, which it was no longer dangerous
to disregard b.

Charles ap- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he
points re- disclosed his intention with regard to the regency of
hisa'bfrcce, Castile, during his absence, which he had hitherto

kept secret, and nominated cardinal Adrian to that
office. The vice-royalty of Aragon he conferred
on Don John de Lanuza; that of Valencia on Don
Diego de Mendoza Conde de Melito. The choice
of the two latter was universally acceptable ; but
the advancement of Adrian, though the only Fle-
ming who had preserved any reputation among the
Spaniards, animated the Caitilians with new hatred
againit foreigners; and even the nobles, who had
so tamely suffered other inroads upon the conftituti-
on, felt the indignity offered to their own order
by his promotion, and remonfirated against it as
illegal. But Charles's desire of visiting Germany,
and the impatience of his miniiters to leave Spain,
were now so much increased, that without regard-
ing the murmurs of the Castilians, or even taking
time to provide any remedy againit an insurrection
in Toledo, which at that time threatened, and as-

And em- terwards produced molt formidable effeAs, he fail-
brkstorth ed from Corunna on the twenty-fecond of May;
,ow-Co u n- .

i r "

* r- l l ' r\ s
tries. and by setting out so abruptly in quest of a new

crown, he endangered a more important one of
which he was already in poffellion c.

P. Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c. bSandoval, 84
e P. Martyr. Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.

THE

# BOOK II.

THE

H I S T 0 R Y
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BO O K II.
M A ANY concurring circumstances, not only BooK II.

called Charles's thoughts towards the affairs -----

of Germany, but rendered his pretence in that Chprlessi
country necessary. The Eletors grew impatientGermany
of so long an interregnum ; his hereditary domini- ecc"ary.
ons were disturbed by intestine commotions; and
the new opinions concerning religion, made such
rapid progress as required the most lerious confide-
ration. But above all, the motions of the French
king drew his attention, and convinced him that it
was neceflary to take measures for his own defence,
both with speed and with vigour.

WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts as Rife and
candidates for the Imperial dignity, they conduct- Pogrcof

the rivalchip

ed their rivalfhip with many profeiTions of regard between
for each other, and with repeated declarations that chnah,'^nd
they would not susser any tincture of enmity to
mingle itself with this honourable emulation. " We
both court the fame mistress," said Francis, with
his usual vivacity, " each ought to urge his suit

F 2 with

BOOK II. with all the address of which he is master; the
'--v-' rmoft fortunate will prevail, and the other must reit

contented d." But though two young and high-fpi-
rited princes, and each of them animated with the
hopeof success, might be capable of forming such
a generous resolution, it was soon found that they
promised upon a moderation too refined and difin-
terested for human nature. The preference given to
Charles in the fight of all Europe, mortified Fran-
cis to the highest degree, and inspired him with all
the paflions natural to dilappointed ambition. To
this was owing the personal jealousy and rivalfhip
which fubfilted between the two monarchs during
their whole reign; and the rancour of these, ad-
ded to a real opposition of interest, and to many
unavoidable causes of discord, involved them in
almost perpetual hostilities. Charles had paid no
regard to the principal article in the treaty of Noy-
on, by refusing oftener than once to do justice to
John d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Navarre,
whom Francis was bound in honour, and prompted
by interest, to restore to his throne. The French
king had pretensions to the crown of Naples, of
which Ferdinand had deprived his predeceflor by a
most unjustifiable breach of faith. The emperor
might reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of the
empire, which Francis had seized, and still kept in
poffelfion, without having received investiture.
Charles confidered the dutchy of Burgundy as the
patrimonial domain of his anceflors, wrested fron
them by the unjust policy of Lewis XI. and obferv-
ed with the greatest jealousy the ftritt connections
which Francis had formed with the duke of Guel-
dres, the hereditary enemy of his Family.

Tbertions WHEN the sources of discord were To many and
previous to various, peace could be of no long continuance,
the even between princes the mot exempt from ambi-
mencemn,,t even between princes the moil exempt

from ambi-
ofhoftilities. tion or emulation. But as the shock between two

dGuic. lib. 13. p. 159.

such

such mighty antagonilts could not fail of being both BooK 1.
desperate and dangerous, they both discovered no
fnall solicitude about its consequences, and took
time not only to collet, and to weigh their own
itrength, and to compare it with that of their ad-
verfary, but to secure the friendship or assistance of
the other European powers.

THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two ri- They Mngo.

vals, a -d saw that he who prevailed, would become the Pope.
absolute malter in Italy. If it had been in his
power to engage them in hostilities, without ren-
dering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing
would have been more agreeable to him than to fee
them waite each other's strength in endless quarrels.
But this was impossible. Leo foresaw that on the
firfl rupture between the two monarchs, the armies
of France and Spain would take the field in the
Milanese, and while the scene of their operations
was so near, and the subjed for which they con-
tended so interesting to him, he could not long re-
main neuter. He was obliged therefore to adapt his
plan of conduEt to his political situation. He court-
ed and soothed both the Emperor and king of
France with equal industry and address; and tho'
warmly solicited by each of them, he affimed all
the appearances of entire impartiality, and attempt-
ed to conceal his real sentiments under that profound
diflimulation which seems to have been asseted by
most of the Italian politicians in that age.

THE views and interest of the Venetians were not Wvidh tL

different from those of the Pope; nor were they
leTs Solicitous to prevent Italy from becoming the
feat of war, and their own republick from being
involved in the quarrel. But through all Leo's ar-
tifices, and notwithstanding his high pretensions to
a perfed neutrality, it was visible that he leaned
towards the Emperor, from whom he had both
more to fear and more to hope than fiom Francis;
and it was equally manifest, that if it became ne-

F 3 ceffary

Boox I. ceflary to take a fide, the Venetians would, frorh
'"*1 motives of the fame nature, declare for the king of

France. No considerable afliflance, however, was
to be expelled from the Italian states, who werejea-
lous to an extreme degree of the Transalpine pow-
ers, and careful to preserve the balance between
them, unless when they were reduced to violate this
favourite maxim of their policy, by the certain
profpet of great advantage to themselves.

With BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of
Henry VIII. Francis, was employed in order to gain the king of

England, from whom each of them expected allifl-
ance more effectual, and afforded with less political
caution. Henry VIII. had ascended the throne of
that kingdom in one thousand five hundred and
nine, with such circumitances of advantage, as
promised a reign of diRinguihfed felicity and fplen-

The gret dour. The union in his person of the two contend-
phoa rof ing titles of York and Lancaster, and the alacrity
narch. and emulation with which both faEtions obeyed

him, not only enabled him to exert in his domestic
government a degree of vigour and authority which
none of his predecessors could have safely afflumed;
but permitted him to take a share in the affairs of
the continent, from which the attention of the Eng-
lifh had long been diverted by their unhappy divi-
sions. The immense treafires which his father had
amassed, rendered him the most wealthy prince in
Europe. The peace which had subsisted under the
cautious administration of that monarch, was of
sufficient length to recruit the nation after the defo-
lation of the civil wars, but had not enervated its
spirit; and the English, ahaimed of having so long
rendered their own country a scene of discord and
bloodshed, were eager to display their valour in
some foreign war, and to revive the memory of the
vitories gained by their ancestors. Henry's own

His charac- temper perfectly suited the fRate of his kingdom,
tcr. and the disposition of his fubjeds. Ambitious, ac-

tive,

tive, enterprizing and accomplished in all the mar-BOOK II.
tial exercises which in that age formed a chief part-
in the education of persons of noble birth, and in-
spired them with an early love of war, he longed
to engage in real ation, and to signalize the begin-
ning of his reign by tome remarkable exploit. An
opportunity of this kind roon presented itself; and
the victory at Guinegate, and the successful sieges
of Teroiienne and Tournay, though of little utili-
ty to England, reflected great luffre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes en-
tertained of his power and importance. So many
concurring causes, added to the happy situation of
his own dominions, which recured them from so-
reign invasion; and to the fortunate circumflance
of his being in poffeflion of Calais, which served
not only as a key to France, but opened an easy
passage into the Netherlands, rendered the King of
England the natural guardian of the liberties of
Europe, and the arbiter between the Emperor and
French monarch. Henry himself was sensible of
this singular advantage, and convinced, that in or-
der to preserve the balance even, it was his office to
prevent either of the rivals from acquiring such
superiority of power as might be fatal to the other,
and formidable to the reft of Chriffendom. But he
was destitute of the penetration, and still more of
the temper, which such a function required. In-
fluenced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment, by
affection, he was incapable of forming any regular
and extensive system of policy, or of adhering to it
with fleadinefs. His measures seldom resulted from
attention to the general welfare, or from a delibe-
rate regard to his own interest, but were didtated
by paflions which rendered him blind to both, and
prevented his gaining that ascendant in the affairs
of Europe, or from reaping such advantages to
himself, as a prince of greater art, though with in
ferior talents, might have eafilf secured,

F 4 AL.,

BOOK II. ALL the impolitic fleps in Henry's adminifiration

do"shi must not, however, be imputed to defedts in his

rniniftercar.own character; many of them were owing to the
,inal Wol- violent pallions and insatiable ambition of his prime

minister and favourite, cardinal Wolley. This man,
frpm one of the lowest ranks in life, had risen to
an height of power and dignity, to which no Eng-
lifh ifubjeCt ever arrived; and governed the haugh-
ty, presumptuous and untradable spirit of Henry
with absolute authority. Great talents, and of ve-
ry different kinds, fitted him for the two opposite
stations of minister, and of favourite. His pro.
found judgment, his unwearied induifry, his tho-
rough acquaintance with the state of the kingdom,
and his extensive knowledge of the views and inte-
refts of foreign courts, qualified him for that uncon-
trouled direction of affairs with which he was in-
trusted. The elegance of his manners, the gaiety
of his conversation, his insinuating address, his love
of magnificence, and his proficiency in those parts
of literature of which Henry was fond, gained
him the affection and confidence of the young mo-
narch. Wolfey was far from employing this vai:
and almost royal power, to promote either the true
interest of the nation, or the real grandeur of his
master. Rapacious at the fame time, and profure,
he was insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundlels
ambition, he aspired after new honours with an ea-
gernefs unabated by his former success; and being
rendered presumptuous by his uncommon elevation,
and the ascendant he had gained over a prince, who
scarce brooked advice from any other peron, lihe
discovered in his whole demeanour the most over-
bearing haughtiness and pride. To there paflions he
himself sacrificed every consideration; and who-
ever endcavourcd to obtain his favour, or that of
his mailer, found it necefiary to sooth and to grati-
fy them.

As

As all the ltates of Europe fought Henry's friend- BOOK If.

flip at that time; all courted his minister with in- T '"'"
credible attention and obl(quioutfi:es, and Ltrove by paidtoWrl-
preleuts, by promises, or by flattery to work upon feyby FiaL-
his avarice, his ambilion, or his pjidee. Francis had
in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighteen
employed Bonnivet, admiral of France, one of his
niolt accomplished and artful courtiers, to gain the
haughty prelate. He himftlf bestowed on him every
mark of refpedt and confidence. He consulted him
with regard to his moit important alfairs, and re-
ceived his responses with implicit deference. By thele
arts, together with the grant of a large pension,
Francis ftcured the Cardinal, who pellfuaded his ma-
fter to surrender Tournay to France, to conclude a
treaty of marriage between his daughter the prin-
cess Mary, and to content to a personal interview
with the French king . From that time, the most
familar intercourse lubfifted between the two courts;
Francis, sensible of the great value of Wolsey's
friendship, laboured to secure the continuance of it
by every possible expression of regard, bestowing
on him in all his letters the honourable appellation
of Father, Tutor, and Governor.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union w itl And by

the utmost jealou y and concern. His near relation cl"
to the king of England gave hinm bme title to his
fiiendfhip, and soon after his acceilion to the throne
of Castile, he attempted to ingratiate himself with
Wolicy, by fettling on him a pension of three thou-
sand livres. His chief folicituie at prcient was to
prevent the intended interview, the el:Tects of u hicll
tipon two young p;iices, whole hearts were no kils
illiceptible of fricnidlhip than their manners were of
inlpiring it, he extremely dreaded. But afier mnany
delays occasioned by difficulties about the cercnic-
nial, and by the anxious precautions of btih court.;
fur the fafcty of their refpectivc lovereigns, tile tillm

Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 166. Rynimr's Foeclra, xiii. -is.
s Herbeit's Hist. of lHenrv VIII. 30. Rvmr, miii. 6:4

?.. ld

Boor II. and place of meeting were at last fixed. Messengers

-v_-' had been sent to different courts inviting all comers,

who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, against the two monarchs and their
knights; and both Francis and Henry loved the
splendour of these fpedtacles too well, and were too
nmch delighted with the graceful figure they made
on such occasions, to forego the pleafire or glory
which they expected from stich a lingular and bril-
liant atlembly. Nor was the Cardinal less fond of
displaying his magnificence in the pretence of two
courts, and of discovering to the two nations the ex-
tent of his influence over both their monarchs.
Charles finding it impoflible to prevent the inter-
view, endeavoured to disappoint its effects, and to
pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch and
his minister, by an adt of complaisance frill more

Charles vi- flattering and more uncommon. Having failed from
fitsEngland Corunna, as has already been related, he fleered his

course direStly towards England, and relying wholly
May 26th. on Henry's generosity for his own safety, landed at

Dover. This unexpeted visit furprized the nation.
Wolley, however, was well acquainted with the
Emperor's intention. A negociation, unknown to
the hiforians of that age, had been carried on be-
tween him and the court of Spain, this visit had been
concerted, and Charles granted the Cardinal, whom
he calls his inIJfJincerefriend, an additional pension
of seven thouland ducatsg. Henry, who was then
at Canterbury, in his way to France, immediately
dii'patched Wolfey toDover, and being highly pleal:
ed with an event so soothing to his vanity, hastencd
to receive, with filitable rcfpeEt, a guest who had
placed in him such unbounded confidence. Charles,
to wlom time was precious, flaid only four days
in England: But during that lhort space, he had tile
addrel's not only to give Henry favourable imprefli-
ons of his charadter and intentions, but to detach

g Rymer, xiii. 714.

Wolfcy

Wolfey entirely from the interest of the French BooK. I.
king. All the grandeur, wealth and power, which ~ ~

.

, , ,Insinuates

the Cardinal poetlisd, did not fatibfy his ambitious himilf ilto
mind while there was itill one ftep higher to which favour bthe
aln ecclesiastic could ascend. The papal dignity had King and
lor some time been the object of Iis wilhes, and wl'ey-
Francis, as the most effectual method of fecurina his
fiiendfhip, had promised to favour his pretensions,
on the first vacancy, with all his interest. But as
the Emperor's influence in the college of cardinals
was greatly superior to the French king's, Wolfey
graspcd eagerly at an offer which that artful prince
had made him, of exerting it vigoroully in his be-
half; and allured by this profpeet, which under the
pontificate of Leo, still in the prime of his life,
was a very distant one, heentered with warmth into
all the Emperor's schemes. No treaty, however,
was concluded at that time, between the two no-
narchs; but Henry, in return for the honour which
Charles had done him, promiled to visit him in some
place of the Low-Countries, immediately after
taking leave of the French king.

His interview with tlat prince was in an open June rii.

plain between Guifles and Ardrcs, where the two t.''r'
kings and their attendants displayed their m.gJiiifi- Heny

H ;il

cence with inch emulation and proflf-: cxpence, as F t
procured it the name of the Fieldof lhe Clol/ of Gold.
Feats of chivalry, parties of gallantry, and fich cx-
erciles and pastimes as were in that age icik .ned
manly or elegant, rather than lerious b)linicls, occtu-
pied both courts during eighteen days tlhat they con-
tinued together h. Whatever imprcilion the engag-

ing

h The French and Englifl hiflorians describe the pomp of

this interview, and the various fptdacles with great ininilenels.
One circumllance mentioned by the nmarechal d Fileurages, who
was present, and which appears singular in the piefent age, is
coMiiinoily omitted. " Atier the tourlanlcntis," lays he, " the
Fiench and Englifli wrestlers made their appearance, and wref-
lted in the presence of the Kings, and the ladies; ai.l as there

weIr

BOoK II. ing manners of Francis, and the liberal and unfufpi-
.~-.- cious confidence witl which he treated Henry, made

on the mind of that monarch, was loon effaced by
Wollicy's artifices, or by the interview which he
July o. had with the Emperor at Gravelines; which was

conducted by Charles with less pomp than that
near Guities, but with greater attention to his poli-
tical interelt.

Henry's ide-
asofhi. own THIS assiduity with which the two greatest mo-
miportnce. narchs in Europe paid court to Henry, appeared to

him a plain acknowledgment that he held the ba-
lance in his hands, and convinced him of the jut-
nefa of the motto he had chosen, " That whoever
he favoured would certainly prevail." In this opi-
nion he was confirmed by an offer which Charles
made of submitting any difference that might arise
between him and Francis to his sole arbitration.
Nothing could have the appearance of greater can-
dour and moderation, than the choice of a judge
who was reckoned the common friend of both. But
as the Emperor had now attached Wolfey entirely
to his interest, no proposal could be more insidious,
nor, as appeared by the sequel, more fatal to the
French king .

C'orona ion
of the Em- CHAR LES, notwithstanding his partial fondness

for the Netherlands, the place of his nativity, made
no long Rlay there; and after receiving the homage
and congratulations of his countrymen, hastened to

were many flout wretlers there, it afforded excellent pafiime;
lut as the King of France had neglected to bring any wrefilers
out of Bretagne, the Englifl gained the prize.- After this,
the Kings of Fiance and England retired to a lent, where they
drank together, and the King of England 'iizing the King of
France by the collar, said, ' 1y brolher, I muji wreltfe zwit
you," and endeavoured once or twice to trip up his heels; but
the King of France, who is a dextrous wrefiler, twilled hinm
round, and threw him on the ground with prodigious violence.
'I'he King of England wanted to renew the combat, but was
prevented." Menioirca de Flurages, 12°. Paris, 1753. P. 329.

Herbert, 37.

Aix-

Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed by the golden BOOK II.
bull for the coronation of the Emperor. There, in b
pretence of a:n assembly more numerous and fplen-
did than had appeared on any former occasion, the
crown of Charlemagne was placed upon his head,
with all the pompous solemnity which the Germans
affect in their publick ceremonies, and which they
deem essential to the dignity of their empire k.

ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Magni-solyman the

ficent, one of the most accompliihed, enterprizlng, alc"nds the
and victorious of the Turkilh princes, a constant Ottoman
and formidable rival to the Emperor, ascended the throne-
Ottoman throne. It was the peculiar glory of that
period to produce monarchs the most ilulftrious, that
have at any one time appeared in Europe. Leo,
Charles, Francis, Henry and Solyman were each of
them pofeffed of talents which would have render-
ed any age, in which they happened to flourish, con-
fpicuous. But such a constellation of great princes
lied uncommon lustre on the lixteenth century. In
every contest, great power and great abilities were
let in opposition; and the efforts of valour and con-
duEt on one fide, counterbalanced by an equal exer-
tion of the fame qualities on the other, not only oc-
cafioned such a variety of events as renders the hist
tory of that period intereffing, but served to check
the exorbitant progress of any of those princes, and
to prevent their attaining such pre-eminence in pow-
er as would have been fatal to the liberty and hap-
piness of mankind.

T HE first aCt of the Emperor's adminiitrntion was Diet cal!ee

to appoint a Diet of the empire to be held at Worms '^ m't '
on the sixth of January, one thousand five hundred
and twenty-one; and in his circular letters to the dif-
ferent princes, he informed them that he had called
this afflembly in order to concert with them the molt

k Hartman. Maurus Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldaft.
Polit Imperial. Franc. 1614. fol. p. 26+.

proper

BOOK II. proper measures for checking the progrels of those

- new and dangerous opinions, which threatened to

ditlurb the peace of Germany, and to overturn the
religion of their ancestors.

Rie of the CHARLES had in view the opinions propagated
toimati- by Luither and his disciples lince the year one thou-

fiand five hundred and leventeen; and as these led
to that happy reformation in religion which rescued
one part ol Europe from the papal yoke, mitigated
its rigour in the other, and productd a revolution in
the featiments of mankind, the greatest as well as
the most beneficial that has happened fiice the pub-
licatio) ofChi iftianity, the events which at first gave
birth to there opinions, and the caules which ren-
dlcred their progrefso l rapid and successful, delerve
to be conlidered with minute attention.

To overturn a fyftern of religious belief founded

on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by
power, and defended with art and industry; to
eftablilh in its room docrines of the most contrary
genius and tendency; and to accomplish all this, nut
by external violence or the force of arms, are ope-
rations which historians the least prone to credulity
and tfperilition, mufft ascribe to that Divine Provi-
dence which can, with infinite eale, bring about e-
ventsihat to human figacity appear impoflible. The
interposition of Heaven in favour of the Christian
rtligion at its firfl publication, was manifi-fted by
n: iracles and prophecies wrought and uttered in con-
firmation of it: And though none of the refonrmers
pociilied, or pretended to poflfrs, thee supernatural
g!tis, yet th.it wonderful preparation of circumitan-
ces whicl dilposled tie minds of men for receiving
llcir doftrines, that lingular combination of canles
which (lictired their fuccels, and enabled men dctli-
ture of power and of policy to triumph over thole
who employed both against them, may be conlidcr-
td as no fiihlt pro',f that the fame hand which plant-

ed the Chriltian religion, prote&ted the reformed BOOK II.
faith, and reared it, from beginnings extremely fee- -
ble, to an amazing degree of itrength and maturity.

IT was fiom causes, seemingly fortuitous, and Fromincon-

fiom a fburce very inconsiderable, that all the migh- filerabe be-
ty effects of the reformation flowed. Leo X. when
railed to the papal throne, found the revenues of the
church exhausted by the vait projecs of his two am-
bitious predecessors, Alexander VI. and Julius II;
and his own temper, naturally liberal and enterpriz-
ing, rendered him incapable of that severe and pa-
tient oeconomy which the situation of his finances
required.. On the contrary, his schemes for aggran-
dizing the family of Medici, his love of splendour,
his'tatle for pleatire, and his magnificence in re-
warding men of genius, involved him daily in new
expences, in order to provide a fund for which, eve-
ry device, that the fertile invention of priests had
fallen upon to drain the credulous multitude, was
tried. Among others, he had recourse to a sale of A ale of in.
Indulgences. According to the doctrine of the Ro- dublecy
nifh church, all the good works of the Saints, over Leo X.
and above those which were necessary towards their
own justification, together with the infinite merits of
Jelils Christ, are deposited in one inexhaustible trea-
iury. The keys of this were committed to St. Peter
and to his successors the Popes, who may open it at
pleasure, and by transferring a portion of this fu-
pcrabundant merit to any particular person, for a
ium of money, may convey to him either the par-
don of his own fins, or a release for any one in whom
he is interested, firom the pains of purgatory. Such
indulgences were first invented in the eleventh cen-
tury by Urban II. as a recompense for thoie who
went in person upon the wild enterprize of conquer-
ing the Holy Land. They were afterwards granted
to those who hired a soldier for that purpose; and
in process of time were bestowed on filch as gave

nwiley

BOOK II. money for accompliihing any pious work enjoined
-'''' by tie Pope'. Julius I. had bestowed Indulgelces

on all who contributed towards building the church
of St. Peter at Rome; and as Leo was carrying on
that magnificent and expensive fabric, his grant was
founded on the tiame pretence "
so conduc- THE promulgating of these Indulgences in Ger-

,;t, il -ve any, together with a share of the profits arising
,teawc. from the lale of them, was alfigned to Albert,

elector of Mentz and archbishop of Magdebilg,
who, as his chief agent for retailing them in
Saxony, etnployed 'letzcl, a Dominican friar,
of licentious morals, but of an adcive spirit, aud
remarkable for his noily and popular eloquence.
H., aliifted by the monks of his order, executed
the commtillion with great zeal and success, but
with little dis-retion or deceicy ; and though by
magnifying excellively the benefit of their Indil-
gtnczs", and by dilFofing of them at a very low
price, they carried on for tome time an extensive

and

' History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p 4.
,' Pallavic. Hilt. Cone. Trident. p. 4.
' As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits which

they were supposed to convey are unknown in protestant coun-
tries, and little understood, at present, in several places where
the Roman catholic religion is eitablifhed, I have, for the intor-
miation of my readers, translated the form ofabbolution uscd by
l'etzel. " May our Lord Jetils Christ have mercy upon thee,
and absolve thee by the merits of his most holy pafion. And I
by his authority, that of his blefled apoitles Peter and Paul, and
of the iloft holy Pope, granted and committed to me in there
parts, do absolve thee, firit from all ecclesiastical censures in
whatever manner they have been incurred, and then from
all thy fins, tranfgrelions and excesses, how enormous bo-
ever they inay be, even fronl such as are reserved for the
cognizance of the holy Ife, and as far as the keys of the holy
church extend, I rcmit to you all punilhment which you
deserve in Purgatory on their account, and I restore you to
the holy sacraments of the church, to the unity of the faith-
ful, and to that innocence and purity which you poflefled at
bap:fii;, If th.at ,vhcn1 you die the gates of punilhuient shall

be

and lucrative traffic among the credulous multitude, BooK II.
the extravagance of their assertions, and the irregu- -
larities in their conduct, came at last to give general
offence. The princes and nobles were irritated at
fceing their vafials drained of so much wealth, in
order to replenish the treasury of a profuife pontiff.
Men of piety regretted the delusion of the people,
who beingtaughtto rely for the pardon of their fins
on the indulgences which they purchased, did not
drink it incumbent on them either to abound in faith,
or to pradife holiness. Even the most unthinking
were [hocked at the scandalous behaviour of Terzel
and his associates, who often squandered in drunk-
cnnefs, gaming, and low debauchery, those fums
which were piously bestowed in hopes of obtaining
be (hut, and the gates of the paradise of delight Thall be opened,
and if you shall not dieat present, this grace shall remain in full
force when you are at the point of death. In the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. Seckend. Conm
uent. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in whichTetzel and his aflbciates described the be-

nefits of Indulgences, and the neceffriy of purchasing them are
Ib extravagant, thatthey appear to be almost incredible. If any
man (said they) purchases letters of indulgence, his foul may
reft secure with respect to its salvation. The fouls confined in
purgatory, for whose redemption indulgences arc purchased, as
soon as the money tinkles in the chelt, inlmantly cfcape fiom
that place of torment, and ascend into heaven. 'That the effi-
cacy of indulgences was so great, that the most heinous fins,
even if one fliould violate (which was impolible) the mother of
God, would be remitted and expiated by them, and the person
be freed both from punifirment and guilt. That this was
the ulfpeakable gift of God, in order to reconcile mien
to hiinfelf That the cross erected by the preachers of in-
dulgences, was as efficacious as the cross of Christ itself. Lot
the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will you en-
ter? For twelve-pence you may redeem the foul of your father
out of purgatory ; and are you lb ungratefu', that you will not
recueyour parent from torment ? If you had bur one coat, you
ought to strip yourself instantly, and fell it, in older to purchail»
lilchbenefits, &c. These, and many flich xtt:lvp:;it !

expicili-

ons, are feleted out of Luther's works by Chcninitius in his
Examen Concilii Tridentini apud Heri. Vonder Hardt. Hist.
.iter. Refora. pars iv. p. 6. The fame author has publillhed
fcvcral of Tetzel's Difcourfcs, which prove that there exprefli
ons were neither singular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p 14.

VOL. II. G eternal

Booc II. eternal happiness; and all began to wilh that some

check were given to this commerce, no less detri-
mental to society than deftrutive to religion.

FirRapper. SUCH was the favourable juneture, and so dif-
ther, and his posed were the minds of his countrymen to liften to
charater. his discourses, when Martin Luther first began to

call in quefiion the efficacy of indulgences, and to
declaim against the vicious lives and false doctrines
of those who promulgated them. He was a native
of Eifleben in Saxony, and though born of poor
parents, had received a learned education, during
the progress of which he gave many indications of
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As his
mind was naturally susceptible of serious impreflions,
and tinEtured with somewhat of that religious me-
lancholy which delights in the solitude and devotion
of a monastic life, he retired into a convent of
Augustinian friars, and without suffering the intrea-
ties of his parents to divert him from what he
thought his duty to God, he afumed the habit of
that order. There he acquired great reputation,
not only for piety, but for his love of knowledge,
and unwearied application to study. He had been
taught the scholastic philosophy and theology which
were then in vogue by very ablemafters, and want-
ed not penetration to comprehend all the niceties
and distinctions with which they abound; but his
underffanding, naturally found, and superior to
every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted with
these subtile and uninftruEive sciences, and fought
for some more solid foundation of knowledge and
of piety in the holy scriptures. Having found a
copy of the Bible, which lay neglected in the libra-
ry of his monastery, he abandoned all other pursuits,
and devoted himself to the study of it, with such ea-
gernefs and afliduity, asaftonifhed the monks, who
were little accustomed to derive their theological
notions from that source. The greatprogrefs which
he made in this uncommon course of study, aug-

mented

mnented so much the fame both of his san&ity andBoot I.
of his learning, that Frederick, Elector of Saxony
having founded an university at Wittemberg on the
Elbe, theplace of his residence, Luther was chosen
first to teach philosophy, and afterwards theology
there, and discharged both offices in filch a manner,
that he was deemed the chief ornament of that so-
ciety.

WHI LE Luther was at the height of his reputation He oppose,
and authority, Tetzel began to publish Indulgences thedlenfs;
in the neighbourhood of Wittemberg, and to ascribe
to them the fame imaginary virtues, which had,
in other places, imposed on the credulity of the
people. As Saxony was not more enlightened
than the other provinces of Germany, Tetzel met
with prodigious success there. It was with the ut-
most concern, that Luther beheld the artifices of
those who fold, and the simplicity of those who
bought Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas
Aquinas and the other fchoolmen, on which the
doctrine of indulgences was founded, had already
loft much of their authority with him; and the
Scriptures, which he began to confider as the great
standard of theological truth, afforded no coul,te-
nance to a practice, equally subversive of faith and
of morals. His warm and impetuous temper did
not susser him long to conceal such important dif-
coveries, or to continue a silent fpedator of the delu-
sion of his countrymen. From the pulpit in the
great church of Wittemberg he inveighed bitterly
against the irregularities and vices ot those who
published Indulgences; he ventured to examine
the doctrines which they taught, and pointed out
to the people the danger of relying for lalvation
upon any other means than those appointed by
God in his word. The boldness and novelty of
these opinions drew great attention, and being re-
commended by the authority of Luther's perlonal

G 2 charaiter,

BooK II. character, and delivered with a popular and perfua-
~V-"five eloquence, they made a deep impreflion on his

hearers. Encouraged by the favourable reception
of his doctrines among the people, he wrote to Al-
bert, elector ofMentz, and archbiihop of Magde-
burg, to whose jurisdiCtion that part of Saxony was
fubjett, and remonstrated warmly against the false
opinions and wicked lives of the preachers of Indul-
gences; but he found that prelate too deeply inte-
refted in their success to correct their abuifs. His
next attempt was to gain the suffrage of men of

He publihes learning. For this purpose, he published ninety-
his theses
against five theses, containing his sentiments with regard to
them. Indulgences. These he proposed, not as points fully

established, or of undoubted certainty, but as sub-
jedts of inquiry and disputation; he appointed a day,
on which the learned were invited to impugn them
either in person, or by writing; and subjoined to
the whole, solemn protestations of his high refpet
for the apostolic fee, and of his implicit fubmilfion
to its authority. No opponent appeared at the time
prefixed; the theses spread overGermany with afto-
nifhing rapidity; they were read with the greatest
eagerness ; and all admired the boldness of the man
who had ventured to call in question the plenitude
of papal power, and to attack the Dominicans,
armed with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority '.

Supported THE Friars of St. Augufline, Luther's own
order. order, though addicted with no less obfequi-

oufnefs than the other monastic fraternities to
the papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
these uncommon opinions. Luther had by his piety
and learning acquired extraordinary authority
among his brethren; he professed the highest re-
gard for the authority of the Pope; his profeflions

' Lutheri Opera Jena, 1612. vol. i. iprfat. 3. p. a. 66. Hit.
of Counc. of Trent by F. Paul, p. 4. SecLcnd. Corm. Apol. p. 16.

were

were at that time sincere; and as a secret enmity, Boox II.
excited by interest and emulation, subsists among '
all the monastic orders in the Romish church, the
Auguffinians were highly pleated with his invec-
tives against the Dominicans, and hoped to fee
them exposed to the hatred and scorn of the people.
Nor was his sovereign, the Eletor of Saxony, the
wisest prince at that time in Germany, dissatisfied
with this obftrution which Luther threw in the way
of the publication of indulgences. He secretly en-
couraged the attempt, and flattered himself that
this dispute among the Ecclefiafticks themselves,
might give rome check to the exactions of the court
of Rome, which the secular princes had long,
though without success, been endeavouring to op-
pose.

MANY zealous champions immediately arose to Many en-

defend opinions on which the wealth and power f confute him
the church were founded, against Luther's attacks
In opposition to his theses, Tetzel published coun-
ter-thefes at Francfort on the Oder; Eccius, a cele-
lebrated Divine of Augsburg, endeavoured to re-
fute his notions; and Prierias, a Dominican friar,
master of the sacred palace and Inquisitor general,
wrote against him with all the virulence of a Tcho.
laftic disputant. But the manner in which they
conducted the controversy, did little service to
their cause. Luther attempted to overturn indul-
gences by arguments founded in reason, or derived
from scripture; they produced nothing in support
of them but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the con-
clufions of the canon law, and the decrees of Popes b.
The decision of judges so partial and interested, did
not satisfy the people, who began to call in quefti-
on the authority even of thele venerable guides,

b F. Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p. 40. Pallavic. p. 8,

G 3 when

Boox II. when they found them handing in diret opposition

to the dicates of reason, and the determinations of
the divine law A.*

c Seckend. p. 3o.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the sirs pro-

mulgation of indulgences ; 1. That Leo beflowed a gift of the profits
arising from the sale of indulgences in Saxony, and the adjacent pro-
vinces of Germany, upon his sifter Magdalen the wife of Francefcetto
Cibo. Guic. lib. 3. i68. a. That Arcembolde, a Genoese ecclesias-
tic, who had been bred a merchant, and fill retained all the ar sos that
profeflion, was appointed by her to collec the money which /hould
be iaifed. F. Paul has followed him in both these particulars, and
adds that the Auguftisians in Saxony had been immemorially em-
pla'oed in preaching indulgences, but that Arcemboldo and his de-
puties, hoping to gain more by commiting this trut to the Domini-
cans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was
prompted at firif to oppose Tetzel and his associates, by a desire of
taking revenge for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5.
Almost all the historians since their time, popish as well as proteltant,
have, without examination, admitted there assertions to be true upon
their authority. But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of
two authors so eminent both for exatnefs and veracity, we may obf¢rve,

Y. That Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical archives on

purpose, could not find his pretended grant in any of those registers
where it mulf necessarily have been recorded, Pallav. p. c.-z. That
the profits arising from indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent coun-
tries, had been granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbishop
of Mentz, who had the right ofnominating those who published them.
Seek. p. iz. Luth. Oper. i. praf. p. i. Pallav. p. 6.-3. That Ar-
cemboldo never had concern in the publication of indulgences in Sax-
ony; his difiriA was Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine,
Seck. p. z4. Pallav. p. 6.-4. That Luther and his adherents never
mention this grant of Leo's to his sifter, though a circumstance of
which they could 'carce have been ignorant, and which they would
have been careful not to suppress.--5. The publication of indulgences
in Germany was not usually committed to the Augustinians. The
promulgation of them at three different periods under Julius II. was
granted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans had been employed in
thefa me office a short time before the present period. Pailav. p. 46.-6.
The promulgation of those indulgences which first excited Luther's
indignation was entrusted to the archbishop of Mentz in conjun&ion
with the guardian of the Franciscans; but the latter having declined
accepting of that trust, the sole right became vetied in the archbishop.
Pallav. 6. Seek. 16, I7.-7. Luther was not instigated by his fupe-
riors among the Augustinians to attack the Dominicans their rivals,
or to depreciate indulgences because they were promulgated by them
his oppolition to their opinions and vices proceeded fiom more lauda-
blemotives. Seck. p. 15, 3i.Lutheri Opera i. p. 64. 6.-8. A di-
plomaof indulgences is published by Herm. Vonder Hardt, from
which it appears that the name of the Guardian of the Franciscans Is
retained together with that of the archbifiop, although thefdriner did
not aft. The limitsof the country to which their commiflions extend-
ed, viz. the dioccfes of Mentz, Magdeburg, Halherftadt, and the
territories of the marquis of Brandenburg, are mentioned in that di-
ploma. HiR. Literaria Reformat. pars iv. p. 14.

MEAN WHILE,

MEANWHILE, there novelties in Luther's doc- BOOK 11.

trines which interested all Germany, excited little .l-"'
attention and no alarm in the court of Rome. Leo, of Rome at
fond of elegant and refined pleasures, intent upon first difre-
great schemes of policy, a stranger to theological
controversies, and apt to despise them, regarded
with the utmost indifference the operations of an
obscure Friar, who, in the heart of Germany, car-
ried on a scholastic disputation in a barbarous tile.
Little did he apprehend, or Luther himself dream,
that the effets of this quarrel would be so fatal to
the papal fee. Leo imputed the whole to monastic
enmity and emulation, and seemed inclined not to
interpose in the contest, but to allow the Augufti-
nians and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter
with their usual animosity.

THE solicitations, however, of Luther's adverfa- The pro-

,refs of L,-

ries, exasperated to an high degree by the boldness thes opin
and severity with which he animadverted on their ons
writings, together with the furprizing progress
which his opinions made in different parts of Ger-
many, rouzed at last the attention of the court of
Rome, and obliged Leo to take measures for the
security of the church, against an attack that appear-
ed now too serious to be despised. For this end,
he summoned Luther to appear at Rome, within He is fum-
sixty days, before the auditor of the chamber, and moned to
the fame Prierias who had written against him, a'me,. a
whom he empowered to examine his doctrines, and
to decide concerning them. He wrote, at the fame
time, to the EleAor of Saxony, beseeching him not
to protect a man whose heretical and profane tenets
were so Ihocking to pious ears; and enjoined the
Provincial of the Augustinians to check, by his au-
thority, the rashness of an arrogant monk, which
brought disgrace upon the order of St. Augustine,
and gave offence and disturbance to the whole
church,

G 4 FROM

BOOK II. FROM the firain of these letters, as well as from

T'They P the nomination of a judge Co prejudiced and par-

The Pope J
empowers tial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what sentence he
his legate tomight expet at Rome. He discovered, for that
try him in
Germany. reason, the utmost solicitude, to have his cause tri-

ed in Germany, and before a less fufpeAed tribu-
nal. The university of Wittemberg, anxious for
the safety of a man who did Co much honour to
their Cociety, wrote to the Pope, and after employ-
ing several pretexts to excuse Luther from appear-
ing at Rome, intreated Leo to commit the exami-
nation of his doctrines to some persons of learning
and authority in Germany. The Elector requested
.the fame thing of the Pope's legate at the diet of
Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that
time, was so far from having any intention to dif-
claim the papal authority, that he did not even en-
tertain the smallest suspicion concerning its divine
original, had written to Leo a most fubmiflive let-
ter, promising an unreserved compliance with his
will, the Pope gratified them To far as to empower
his legate in Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Domi-
nican, eminent for scholastic learning, and paflion-
ately devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and deter-
mine the cause.

ear beie LUTHER, though he had good reason to de-
the legate. cine a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries,

did not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan,
and having obtained the Emperor's fafe-conduct,
immediately repaired to Augsburg. The cardinal
received him with decent refpet, and endeavoured
at first to gain upon him by gentle treatment:
But thinking it beneath the dignity of his station to
enter into any formal dispute, he required him,
by virtue of the apostolic powers with which he was
cloathed, to retract the errors he had uttered with
regard to indulgences, and the nature of faith; and
to abstain, for the future, from the publication of

newV

new and dangerous opinions. Luther, fully per-BooK 11.
fuaded of the truth of his own tenets, and confirm- Gv
ed in the belief of them by the approbation they
had met with among persons conspicuous both for
their learning and piety, was furprized at this ab-
rupt mention of a recantation before any endeavours
were used to convince him that he was mistaken.
He had flattered himself, that in a conference con-
cerning the points in dispute, with a prelate of fuich
distinguished abilities, he would be able to remove
many of those imputations with which the ignorance
or malice cf his antagonists had loaded him; but the
high tone of authority which the cardinal atuimed,
extinguffed at once all hopes of this kind, and cut
off every prospect of advantage f. om the interview.
His native intrepidity of mind, however, did notHi, intrepid
desert him. He declared, with the utmost firm-btha'iour.
ners, that he could nor, with a fate conscience, re-
nounce opinions which he believed to be true; nor
should any consideration ever induce him to do
what would be so base in itself, and so offensive to
God. At the fame time, he continued to express
no less reverence than formerly for the authority of
the apostolic fee d; he signified .his willlngnels to
submit the whole controversy to certain universities
which he named, and promiled neither to write
nor to preach for the future concerning indulgences,
provided his adversaries were likewise enjoined to
be silent with respect to them". All there offers
Cajetan disregarded or rejected, and frill insisted
peremptorily on a simple recantation, threatening
him with ecclesiastical cenfurcs, and forbidding him
to appear again in his pretence, unless he relblved
instantly to comply with what he required. This
haughty and violent manner of proceeding, as well
as other circumftanccs, gave Luther's friends such
ftrongreafons to fufpeet, that even the imperial

Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. * Ibid. p. 16,.

Iltac-

Boos II. fafe-conduEt would not be able to protect him from
-3v-' the legate's power and resentment, that they pre-

vailed on him to wvithdraw secretly from Augsburg,
and to return to his own country. But before his
departure, according to a form of which there had
His appeal. been some examples, he prepared a solemn appeal,

from the Pope, ill-informed at that time concerning
his cause, to the Pope, when he ihould receive more
full information with refpet to it .

He is sup CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,
ported by

e, Elenor and the publication of his appeal, wrote to the
ot Saxony. Eledtor of Saxony, complaining of both; and re-

quiring him, as he regarded the peace of the church,
or the authority of its head, either to fend that fe-
ditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or to banish him
out of his territories. It was not fiom theological
considerations that Frederick had hitherto counte-
nanced Luther; he seems to have been much a
stranger to controversies of that kind, and to have
been little interested in them. His protection flow-
ed almost entirely, as hath been already observed,
from political motives, and was afforded with
great iecrecy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of his
books; and though all Germany resounded with his
fame, he had never once admitted him into his pre-
ience . But upon this demand which the Cardinal
made, it became necessary to throw off somewhat
of his former reserve. He had been at great ex-
pence, and had bestowed much attention on found-
ing a new university, an object of considerable im-
portance to every German prince; and foreseeing
how fatal a blow the removal of Luther would be to
its reputation , lie, under various pretexts, and

I Sleid. Hit. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45. Luth.Oper.i.163.

<eeckend. p. 27. Sleid. Hist. p. i z.
b Seckend. p. 59.

with

with many profefiions of esteem for the cardinal, Boos II.
and of reverence for the Pope, declined complying '"
with either of his requests, and openly discovered
great concern for Luther's safety '.

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan infifbt Motives of

ed on a simple recantation, gave great offence to he leg'ate'
Luther's followers in that age, and hath since been
cenlured as imprudent, by several popish writers.
But it was impossible for the legate to ad another
part. The judges before whom Luther had been
required to appear at Rome, were so eager to dif-
play their zeal against his errors, that, without
waiting the expiration of the sixty days allowed him
in the citation they had already condemned him
as an heretick k, Leo had in several of his brieves
and letters, fiigmatized him as a child of iniquity,
and a man given up to a reprobate sense. Nothing
less, therefore, than a recantation could save the ho-
nour of the church, whose maxim it is, never to
abandon the smallest point it has established, and
which is even precluded, by its pretensions to infal-
libility, from having it in its power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, mean while, was such asLutherspe-

would have filled any other person with the mofitn fit
disquieting apprehensions. He could not expeEt
that a prince 1b prudent and cautious as Frederick,
would, on his account, (et at defiance the thunders
of the church, and brave the papal power which had
crushed rome of the moif powerful of the German
Emperors. He knew what veneration was paid, at
that time, to ecclesiastical dccilions; what terror
ecclesiastical censures carried along with them, and
how easily there might intimidate and lhake a prince,

Sleid. HiR. p. io. Luth. Oper. i. 172.
k Luth. Oper. i. i6i.

who

BOOK II. who was rather his protector from policy, than his

d-- disciple from convidlion. If he ihould be obliged
to quit Saxony, he had no profpef of any other
asylum, and must stand exposed to whatever pu.
nifhment the rage or bigotry of his enemies could
inflit. Though sensible of his danger, he dicover-
ed no symptoms of timkiity, or remiflnefs, but con-
tinued to vindicate his own condut and opinions,
and to inveigh against those of his adversaries with
more vehemence than ever'.

He appeals BuT as every ftep taken by the court of Rome,
to a general
ccuncil. particularly the irregular sentence by which he had

been so precipitately declared an heretick, convinced
Luther that Leo would soon proceed to the most
violent measures againfl him, he had recourse to the
only expedient in his power, in order to prevent
the effect of the papal censures. He appealed to a
general council, which lie affirmed to be the repre-
lentative of the catholic church, and superior in pow-
er to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might
err, as St. Peter, the most perfect of his predecef-
fors, had erred ".

A new blf Ir soon appeared, that Luther had not formed
in favour of ,
indulgence. rash conjectures concerning the intentions of the

Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his ap-
peal, was issued by the Pope, in which he magni-
fies the virtue and efficacy of indulgences, in terms
as extravagant as any of his predecessors had ventur-
ed to use in the darkest ages; and without applying
such palliatives, or mentioning such conceflions as the
junture seemed to call for, he required all Chrifti-
ans to affcnt to what he delivered as the doctrine of
the Catholic church, and fubjeted those who should
hold or teach any contrary opinion to the heaviest ec-
clcliaftical cenflires.

S Scckcnd. p. 5j. "SIcidl. Iif. 12. Luth. Oper. i. 179

AMONG

BooK IL

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which they M-i-

confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the Pope in an's death
order to preserve that rich branch of his revenue tofge dtvn
which arose from Indulgences, produced little es-ther.
feet. But among the reft of his countrymen, such
a clear decision of the Ibvereign Pontiffagainit him,
and enforced by such dreadful penalties, must have
been attended with consequences very fatal to his
cause, if these had not been prevented in a great
measure by the death of the Emperor Maximilian,
whom both his principles and his interest prompted
to support the authority of the holy fee. In confe-
quence of this event, the vicariat of that part of Ger-
many which is governed by the Saxon laws, was
committed to the Elector of Saxony; and under the
shelter of his friendly administration, Luther not
only enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions were sus-
sered, during the inter-regnum which preceded
Charles's election, to take root in different places,
and to grow up to some degree of strength and firm-
ness. Leo too, to whom the election of an Emperor
was a point more interesting than a theological con-
troverfy, which he did not understand, and of
which he could not foresee the consequences, being
extremely solicitous not to irritate a Prince of such
considerable influence in the elecoral college as Fre-
derick, discovered a great unwillingness to pronounce
the sentence of excommunication againit Luther,
which his adversaries continually demanded with
the most clamorous importunity.

To there political views of the Pope, as well as Surpenfrn

to his natural aversion from revere measures, was ing against
owing the suspension of any further proceedings Lulh'il
against Luther for eighteen months. Perpetual ne-
gociations, however, in order to bring the matter
to rome amicable iflue, were carried on during that
space. The manner in which thele were conlduCed
having given Luther many opportunities of oblcr-

viuJg

Bqot II. ving the corruption of the court of Rome; its ob-
_'--..' ftinacy in adhering to established errors; and its
to call id indifference about truth, however clearly proposed,
que or ongly proved;

he rongl pr began to utter rome doubts

papa tho. .
rity. with regard to the divine original of the Papal au-

thority. A publick disputation was held upon this
important question at Leipfie, between Luther and
Eccius, one of his most learned and formidable an-
tagonifts but it was as fruitless and indecisive as such
icholaftic combats usually prove. Both parties boast.
ed of having obtained the victory; both were con-
firmed in their own opinions; and no progress was
made towards deciding the point in controversy '.

ReformSat- NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doc-
on in Swit- i
zerlad. trines and usurpations of the Romish church, break

out in Saxony alone; an attack no less fierce, and
occasioned by the fame causes, was made upon
them about this time in Switzerland. The Fran-
cifcans being entrusted with the promulgation of
Indulgences in that country, executed their com.
mission with the fame indiscretion and rapaciousness,
which had rendered the Dominicans so odious in
Germany. They proceeded, nevertheless, with un-
interrupted success till they arrived at Zurich. There
Zuinglius, a man not inferior to Luther himself in
zeal and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them; and
being animated with a republican boldness, and free
from those reflraints which fubjetion to the will of
a Prince imposed on the German reformer, he ad-
vanced with more daring and rapid steps to over-
turn the whole fabric of the established religion'.
The appearance of such a vigorous auxiliary, and
the progress which he made, was, at firif, matter
of great joy to Luther, though on the other hand,
the decrees of the universities of Cologne and Lou-
vain, which pronounced his opinions to be errone-
ous, afforded great cause of triumph to his adveri'a-
ties.

"Luth Oper. i,. 99 Sleid. Hit. 2a. Seckcnd. 59.

BuT

BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther, acquired BooK II.
fresh vigour from every initance ofoppofition ; and '

. ..~~~~

.- I * * * * . ~Luther's

pulhing on his inquiries and attacks from one doc- boldnef,
trine to another, he began to lhake the firmest "d p,'
foundations on which the wealth or power of the gef
church were eflablifhed. Leo came at last to be con-
vinced, that all hopes of reclaiming him by forbear-
ance were vain ; several prelates of great wildom
exclaimed no less than Luther's personal adversaries,
against the Pope's unprecedented lenity in permit-
ting an incorrigible heretick, who during three years
had been endeavouring to subvert every thing fa-
cred and venerable, still to remain within the bo-
fim of the church; the dignity of the papal fee ren-
dered the most vigorous proceedings necessary; the
new Emperor, it was hoped, would support its au-
thority; nor did it seem probable that the EleCtor of
Saxony would so far forget his usual caution, as to
fit himself in opposition to their united power. The
college of cardinals was often assembled, in order
to prepare the sentence with due deliberation, and
the most able canons were consulted how it might
be expressed with most unexceptionable formality.
At last, on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five Bull of r-
hundred and twenty, the bull so fatal to the church c"mm"u`..
of Rome, was issued. Forty-one propositions, ex- d( againo
traded out of Luther's works, are therein con-.him
demned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to pi-
ous ears; all persons are forbidden to read his wri-
tings, upon pain of excommunication; lilch as had
any of them in their custody, are commanded to
commit them to the flames; and he himself, if he
did not, within sixty days, publickly recant his er-
rors, and burn his books, is pronounced an oblli
nate heretick; is excommunicated, and delivered
unto Satan for the deftrudtion of his flesh; and all
lecular Princes are required, under pain of inciur in:g
the fame censure, to seize his perlbn, that he miglit
be punilhed as his crimes deserved P.

1 Pallavic. 27. Lutb. Oper. i. 423.

TILI

Boos I.

THE publication of this bull in Germany excited

The c ff'c:st"'t
of this in various pallions in different places Luther's ad-
C"many, verfaries exulted, as if his party and opinions had

been crushed at once by such a decisive blow. His
followers, whose reverence for the papal authority
daily liminilfhed, read Leo's anathemas with more
indignation than. terror. In iome cities, the people
violently obftruEted the promulgation of the bull;
in otliers, thoie who attempted to publiSh it were
initil;ed, and the bullitefdc torn in pieces, and trod-
den under foot q.

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time ex-
o7 ,7. peetcd, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to a general council, he
published remarks upon the bull of excommunicati-
on; and being now persuaded that Leo had been
guilty both of impiety and injustice in his prceed-
ings agaiift him, he boldly declared the Pope to be
that mrin of fin, or Antichrist, whose appearance is
foretold in the New Teflamenlt; he declaimed
against his tyranny and usurpations with greater vio-
lence than ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes
to Ilake off such an ignominious yoke; and boasted
*of I!S own happiness in being marked out as the ob-
ject of ecclellaftical indignation, because he had
ventured to atiert the liberty of mankind. Nor did
he confine his expreliions of contempt for the papal
power to words alone; Leo having, in execution of
the bull, appointed L.uther's books to be burnt at
Rome, he, ey way of letaliation, assembled all the
pi ofcllcrs and students in the university of \\ ittem-
berg, an:d with great pomp, and before a vafi mul-
titudle ofipetators, cast the volumes of the canon
l.w, together with the bull of excommunication in-
to the lnames; and his example was imitated in le-
veral cities of Germany. IThe manner in which he
juftiticd this action was fill more provoking thaa

'A Seek. p. i.i6.

tlhi

the ation itself. He collected from the canon law BooK II.
rome of the most extravagant propositions with re-
gard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the Pope's
power, and subordination of all secular jurisdiction
tohis authority, and published there with a com-
mentary, pointing out the impiety of fiuch tenets,
and their evident tendency to subvert all civil go-
vernment '.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, State of the

and such the state of his party, when Charles arriv- Reforhmti-
ed in Germany. No secular Prince had hitherto Charles ar.
embraced Luther's opinions; no change in the efta- i,,'d n
blifhed forms of worship had been introduced;
and no encroachments made upon the poffefiions
orjurifdition of the clergy ; neither party had yet
proceeded to action; and the controversy, though
conduced with great heat and passion on both fides,
was still carried on with its proper weapons, with
theses, disputations, and replies. A deep impreffi-
on, however, was made upon the minds of the peo-
ple; their reverence for ancient institutions and
doctrines was Ihaken; and the materials were alrea-
dy scattered which produced the combustion that
loon spread all over Germany. Students crowded
from every province of the Empire to Wittemberg ;
and under Luther himself, MelanAthon, Carloftadi-
us, and other masters, then reckoned eminent, im-
bibed opinions, which, on their return, they pro-
pagated among their countrymen, who listened to
them with that fond attention, which truth when
accompanied with novelty naturally commands .

DURING the course of there tranfaations, theReflecions

court of Rome, though under the direction of one of nduof
its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its schemes with the court of
that profound sagacity, nor executed them with that R"ome
steady perseverance, which had long rendered it

I Luth. Oper. ii. 316. f reckend. 59.
VOL. II. H the

BoOK II. the most perfect model of political wisdom to the
'-.v-. reft of Europe. When Luther began to declaim

against Indulgences, two different methods of treat-
ing him lay before the Pope; by adopting one of
which the attempt, it is probable, might have been
crushed, and by the other it might have been ren-
dered innocent. If Luther's firtl departure from
the doctrines of the church had instantly drawn up-
on him the weight of its censures, the dread of
these might have restrained the Eledor of Saxony
from protecting him, might have deterred the peo-
ple from listening to his discourses, or have over-
awed Luther himself; and his name, like that of ma-
ny good men before his time, would now have been
known to the world only for his honest but ill-timed
effort to correEt the corruptions of the Romilh
church. Or, on the other hand, if the Pope had
early testified some displeasure with the vices and
excefTes of those who had been employed to publith
Indulgences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses, addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the disputants on both
lides to be silent; if he had been careful not to
rifque the credit of the church by defining articles
which had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther
would, probably, have ftopt short at his first dit:
coveries: He would not have been forced in felf-de-
fence to venture upon new ground, and the whole
controversy might poflibly have died away infenfi-
bly; or being confined entirely to the schools,
might have been carried on with as little detriment
to the peace and unity of the Romish church, as
that which the Francilcans maintain with the Domi-
nicans, concerning the immaculate conception, or
that between the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning
the operations of grace. But Leo, by fluctuating
between these opposite systems, and by embracing
them alternately, defeated the effets of both. By
an improper exertion of authority, Luther was ex-

afperated,

afperated, not restrained. By a mistaken exercise BOOK II.
of lenity, time was given for his opinions to spread, '--
but no progress made towards reconciling him to
the church ; and even the sentence of excommuni-
cation, which at another juncture might have been
decisive, was delayed To long, that it became at
last scarce an object of terror.

SUCH a series of errors in the measure of a court, andupon the

seldom chargeable with mistaking its own true in- Lut.'he
terest, is not more aftonilhing than the wildom
which appeared in Luther's conduce. Though a
perfect firanger to the maxims of human prudence,
and incapable, from the impetuosity of his temper,
of observing them, he was led naturally by the
method in which he made his discoveries, to carry
on his operations in a manner which contributed
more to their success, than if every ftep he took
had been prescribed by the most artful policy. At
the time when he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he
was far from intending that reformation, which he
afterwards effeEted; and would have trembled
with horror at the thoughts of what at last he glo-
ried in accomplilhing. The knowledge of truth
was not poured into his mind, all at once, by any
special revelation; he acquired it by industry and
meditation, and his progress, of consequence, was
gradual. The doctrines of Popery are To closely
connected, that the exposing of one error conduct-
ed him naturally to the detection of others; and
all the parts of that artificial fabrick were To linked
together, that the pulling down of one loosened
the foundation of the reft, and rendered it more
easy to overturn them. In confuting the extrava-
gant tenets concerning Indulgences, he was obli-
ged to inquire into the true caule of our justification
and acceptance with God. The knowledge of that,

H 2 discovered

Boo II. discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pilgrim-

ages and penances; the vanity of relying on the
intercession of faints; the impiety of worshipping
them; the abuses of auricular confession ; and the
imaginary existence of purgatory. The detection
of to many errors, led him of course to confider
the character of the clergy who taught them; and
their exorbitant wealth, the severe injunction of ce-
libacy, and the intolerable rigour of monastic vows,
appeared to him the great sources of their corrupti-
on. From thence, it was but one ftep to call in
question the divine original of the papal power,
which authorized and supported such a system of er-
rors. As the unavoidable result of the whole, he
disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope, the decifi-
ons of fichoolmen, or any other human authority,
and appealed to the word of God as the only stand-
ard of theological truth. To this gradual progress
Luther owed his success. His hearers were not
shocked at first by any proposition too repugnant to
their ancient prejudices, or too remote from efta-
blifhed opinions. They were conducted insensibly
from one doctrine to another. Their faith and con-
viction were able to keep pace with his discoveries.
To the fame cause was owing the inattention, and
even indifference, with which Leo viewed Luther's
first proceedings. A dire&t or violent attack upon
the authority of the church, would have drawn up-
on him at once the whole weight of its vengeance;
but as this was far from his thoughts, as he conti-
nued long to profess great refpet for the Pope, and
made repeated offers of fubmiflion to his decisions,
there seemed to be no reason for apprehending that
he would prove the author of any desperate revolt;
and he was suffered to proceed ftep by ftep, in un-
dermining the constitution of the church, till the
remedy applied at last came too late to produce
any effet.

BUT

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause derived 3o o II.
either from the mistakes of his adversaries, or from .--. '

An inquiry

his own good conduct, the sudden progrers and intothe
firm eftahlifhment of his doctrines, mutt not be ca^oufhich
ascribed to there alone. The fame corruptions in to the pro-
the church of Rome which he condemned, had been gRef of the

Reformati-

attacked long before his appearance, and the fame on.
opinions which he now propagated, had been pub-
lifhed in different places, and were supported by the
fame arguments. Waldus in the twelfth century,
Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of Popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more inge-
nuity and learning than could have been expeEted in
those illiterate ages in which they flourished. But
all there premature attempts towards a reformation
proved abortive. Such feeble lights, incapable of
dispelling the darkness which then covered the
church, were soon extinguished; and though the
doctrines of there pious men produced some efferts,
and left Come traces in the countries where they were
taught, they were neither extensive nor considerable.
Many powerful causes contributed to facilitate Lu-
ther's progress, which either did not exist, or did
not operate with full force in their days; and at the
critical and mature junture when he appeared, cir-
cumftances of every kind concurred in rendering
each ftep he took successful.

THE long and scandalous schism which divided Tile .ner

the church, during the latter part of the fourteenth, the four-
and the beginning of the fifteenth centuries, had a ,htecth
great effect in diminishing the veneration with which ,r'.
the world had been accustomed to view the papal
dignity. Two or three contending Pontiffs roam-
ing about Europe at a time; fawning on the Princes
whom they wanted to gain; squeezing the countries
which acknowledged their authority; excommuni-

H 3 catulg

BooR Il.cating their rivals, and cursing those who adhered
C^ --. to them, discredited their pretensions to infallibili-

ty, and exposed both their persons and their office
to contempt. The laity, to whom all parties ap-
pealed, came to learn that some right of private
judgment belonged to them, and acquired the ex-
ercire of it so far as to choose, among these infalli-
ble guides, whom they would please to follow. The
proceedings of the councils of ConRtance and Basil,
spread still wider this difrefpedt for the Romish fee,
and by their bold exertion of authority in deposing
and electing Popes, taught -the world that there
was in the church a jurisdiction superior even to the
papal power, which they had long believed to be
supreme.

The pontifi. THE wound given on that occasion to the papal
cites of
Alexander authority was scarce healed up, when the pontifi-
Vl. and f cates of Alexander VI. and Julius UI. both able

princes, but detestable eccleliaftics, raised new
icandal in Christendom. The profligate morals of
the former in private life; the fraud, the injuflice
and cruelty of his publick adminifiration, place
him on a level with those tyrants, whose deeds are
the greatest reproach to human nature. The latter,
though a stranger to these odious paflions which
prompted his predecefflr to commit so many unna-
tural crimes, was under the dominion of a reftlels
and ungovernable ambition, which scorned all con-
fiderations of gratitude, of decency, or of juifice,
when they obstruCted the execution of his Ichernes.
It was scarce possible to be firmly persuaded that
the infallible knowledge of a religion, whose chief
precepts are purity and humility, was deposited in
the breafis of the impious Alexander, or the over-
bearing Julius. The opinion of those who exalted
the authority of a council above that of the Pope
spread wonderfully under their pontificates: And
as the Emperor and French Kings, who were

alternately

alternately engaged in hostilities with these afiveBOOK
pontiffs, permitted and even encouraged their sub-
jects to expose their vices with all the violence of
inveetive, and all the petulance of ridicule, men's
ears being accustomed to these, were not shocked
with the bold or ludicrous diltcourtes of Luther and
his followers concerning the papal dignity.

NOR were fiuch excesses confined to the head ofral liveo

the church alone. Many of the dignified clergy, the clergy.
both tecular and regular, being the younger ions of
noble families, who had assumed the ecclefiaflical
character for no other reason but that they found in
the church stations of great dignity and affluence,
were accustomed totally to neglect the duties of
their office, and indulged themselves without re-
serve in all the vices to which great wealth and idle-
nets naturally give birth. Though the inferior
clergy were prevented by their poverty from imitat-
ing the expensive luxury of their filperiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them as
contemptible as the other were odious'. The severe
and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were
equally fiubjedt, occasioned such irregularities, that
in several parts of Europe the concubinage of priests
was not only permitted, but enjoined. The em-
ploying of a remedy so contrary to the genius of
the Chriltian religion, is the firongeft proof that
the crimes it was intended to prevent were both
numerous and flagrant. ..ong before the sixteenth
century, many authors of great name and authority

t The corrupt state of the church prior to the Reformation,

i, acknowledged by an author, who was both abundantly able to
judge concerning this matter, and who was not over forward to
contefs it. " For some years (fays he) before the Lutheran and
Calvinillic heretics were publiflied, there was not (as contempo-
rary authors testify) any fevetity in ecclefialfical judicatories, any
dilcipline with regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred lite-
ialure, any reverence for divine things, there was not alioft
any religion remaining." BWllarminus Concio. xxviii. Oper. tom.
vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. apud Gerdefii Hil. Evarg.
Renovati. vol. i. p. 25.

H 4 give

BooK IJ. give such descriptions of the dissolute morals of the

"v ' clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present

age . The voluptuous lives of ecclesiastics occa-
sioned great scandal, not only because their manners
were inconsistent with their sacred character; but
the laity being accustomed to fee several of them
raised from the lowest itations to the greatest
affluence, did not shew the fame indulgence to
their excesses, as to those of persons poffeled of
hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing their
condition with more envy, they censured their
crimes with greater severity. Nothing, therefore,
could be more acceptable to Luther's hearers, than
the violence with which he exclaimed against the
immoralities of churchmen, and every person in
his audience could, from his own observation, con-
firm the truth of his invectives.

The facility THE scandal of there crimes was greatly increased
thee immo-by the facility with which those who committed
raliieswere them, obtained pardon. In all the European king-
pardoned.

u CentumGravamina. Nat. German. in Fafciculo Rer. Expen-
tend. & Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i. 361. See
innumerable paflages to the fame purpose in the appendix, or second
volume, published by Edw. Brown. See also Herm. Vonder Hardt,
HiRf. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and the vail collections of Walchius in
his four volumes of Monumenta medii aevi. Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the clergy.

When they ventured upon crimes, they would not be scrupulous with
refpe&t to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly their neglec of
the decent conduct suitable to their profeflion, seems to have given
great offence. In order to illufirate this I fliall transcribe one paftage,
because it is taken not from any author whose profefled purpose it was
to describe the improper conduA of the clergy; and who from preju-
dice or artifice may be supposed to aggravate the charge against them.
The Emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbilhop of Mentz, A.
D. 1359. exhorting him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thus
cxprefls himself: " De Chrili patrimonio, ludos, haftilutlia & tor-
neamenta exercent ; hahitum militarem cum pratextis aureis & argen-
teis geftant, & calceos militares; comam & barbam nutriult, &
nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiafticim fpetat, ofltndunt.
Militaribus fe diintaxat & lecularibus aftibus, vita & moribus, in lila
falutis dilpcndium, & generale populi fcandalum, immifcent. Codex
Diplomaticus Anccdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudenuin. 4to. vol.
iii. p. 438.

domn,

lorns, the impotence of the civil magistrate, underBooK IT.
forms of government extremely irregular and tur---'"
bulent, made it necessary to relax the rigour of
justice, and upon payment of a certain fine or com-
position prescribed by law, to remit farther punilh-
ment, even of the most atrocious crimes. The
court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, imitated this practice,
and by a preposterous accommodation of it to reli-
gious concerns, granted its pardons to flch tranl:
greffors as gave a fum of money in order to pur-
chafe them. As the idea of a compofitioni for
crimes was then familiar, this strange traffick was
to far from shocking mankind, that it soon became
general; and to prevent any imposition in carrying
it on, the officers of the Roman chancery publilh-
ed a book, containing the precite fum to be exaded
for the pardon of evey particular lin. A deacon
guilty of murder was absolved for twenty crowns.
A bishop or abbot might affaflinate for three hun-
dred livres. Any ecclesiastic might commit unclean-
nels, though with the most aggravating circum-
stances, for the third part of that umrn. Even such
Ihocking crimes, as occur feldoin in human life,
and perhaps exist only in the impure imagination
of a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perfect mode of dilpen-
sing justice came to be introduced into civil courts,
the practice of paying a comp)fition for crimes
\ent gradually into dilife; and mankind having
acquired more accurate notions concerning rtli iri)
and morality, the conditions on which the cornrt o1
Rome bestowed its pardonis appeared impious, lanl
were confidered as one great louicc of cccleliatical
corruption .

x Fafcicul. Rer. Exper. & Fug. i. 5;S. J. G. Schclhornii

Amclnit. Literar. Francof. 1725. vo. ii. 369. Dittion.de s aylc.
Artic. Banck & Tuppius, 'axa Canceliar. Roiiinna, Ilit.
Flancf. 165 1. pafliti.

'1 HI

BooK It.

'Z-' THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy

The exorbi-
tant wealth might, perhaps, have been tolerated with greater
,h the indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power
church,

had not enabled them at the fame time, to oppress
all other orders of men. It is the genius of ifper-
ftition, fond of whatever is pompous or grand, to
set no bounds to its liberality towards perfbns whom
it efieems sacred, and to think its expretlions of re-
gird defeEtive unlels it hath rai.ed themr to the
height] of wealth and authority. Hence flowed
the extensive revenues and juriFdidtion pofeffed by
the church in every country of Europe, and which
were become intolerable to the laity from whose un-
diflerning bounty they were at first derived.

particularly THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical oppref-
n Germa- sion had fallen with fucl] peculiar weight on the Ger-

mans, as rendered them, though naturally exempt
from levity, and tenacious of their ancient customs,
more inclinable than any people in Europe to liften
to those who called on them to assert their liberty.
During the long con eft between the Popes and
Emperors concerning the right of investiture, and
the wars which these occasioned, mofl: of the con-
fiderable German eccleliaftics joined the papal sac-
tion ; and wh:le engaged in rebellion against the
head of the Empire, they seized the Imperial reve-
nues, and ufiirl ed the Imperial jurifit.tion within
their own dioccles Upon the re-eftablilhment of
tranquillity, they flill retained there uliirpations, as
if by the length of an unjust pofleflion they had ac-
quired a legal right to them. The Emperors, too
feeble to wrest them out of their hands, were ob-
liged to'grant them fiefs of these vast territories,
and they enjoyed all the immunities and honours
which belonged to t'eudal barons. By means of thele,
manJy biflho s and abbots in Germany were not o oly

eclcfi.aflicis,

ecclkfiaftics, but princes, and their charaEtcr and BooK IT.
manners partook more of the license, too f equent '-"
among the latter, than of the anctity which became
the former J.

THE unsettled state of government in Germany, ',here, t

and the frequent wars to which that country wasrpedg a.at
exposed, contributed in another manner towards pa'e",.'he
aggrandizing ecclcfiaftics. The only property du-
ring thele times of anarchy, which enjoyed Iecurity
1inm the opprellion of the great, or the ravages of
war, was that. which belonged to the church. Ilhis
was owing, not only to the great reverence for the la-
cred charader prevalent in thole ages, but to a fl-
perititious dread of the sentence ot excommunica-
tion, which the clergy were ready to denounce
againfl all who invaded their polfellions. Many ob-
1erving this, made a surrender of their lands to the
ecclesiastics, and consenting to hold them in'see of
the church, obtained as its vassals a degree of fafcty,
which without this device they were unable to pro-
cure. By such an increase of the number of their
vassals, the power of ecclesiastics received a real and
permament augmentation; and as lands, held in
fee by the limited tenures common in thole ages,
often returned to the perfbns on whom the fief' de-
pended, considerable additions were made in this
way to the property of the clergy ".

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the 'lt 'lv.
i!ety of tleir own perlbons, wvas ill grerater than) tliat itiiiitiii;ie
which they dilflayed in securing their p;fic'llijns. ,t1 "1."i-
and their efforts to attain it were It ill 1-onru licccl:iifil.
As they were conlecrated to thu pilicflly oilice with
much outward solemnity; were ditil gs ilh:'ld i'ioI
the reft of mankind by a peculiar drels and Inanlcr

Y F. Paul, Iliftory of Frccclfiall. Benefices, p. Io7.
' F'Paul, .

Paul, Hi. of Ecclcf tH.ilt p. (5. Boul;in';1l.:c;s,
Etat de Fiance; tomi. i. 016(. Lond. 1j77.

Boos. II. of life; and arrogated to their order many privileges

v-- ' which do not belong to other Chriltians, they natu-

rally became the objects ofexceffive veneration. As
a fuperititious spirit spread, they were regarded as
beings of a superior species to the profane laity, whom
it would be impious to try by the fame laws, or to
subject to the fame punishments. This exenrption
from civil jurifdidion, granted at first to ecclesias-
tics, as a mark of respect, they soon claimed as a
point of right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is asserted, not only in the decrees of Popes
and councils, but was confirmed in the most ample
form by many of the greatel Emperors a. As long
as the clerical character remained, the person of an
ecclesiastic was sacred; and unless he were degraded
from his office, the unhallowed hand of the civil
judge durst not touch him. But as the power of
degradation was lodged in the spiritual courts, the
difficulty and expence of obtaining such a sentence,
too often secured offenders of absolute impunity.
Many assumed the clerical charaCter for no other
reason, than that it might screen them from the
punishment which their actions deserved b. The
German nobles complained loudly, that there anoint-
ed malefaEtors, as they call them c, seldom fijffer-
ed capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes;
and their independence on the civil magistrate is
often mentioned in their remonstrances, as a privi-
lege equally pernicious to society, and to the mo-
rals of the clergy.

ThIeir en- WHILE the clergy asserted the privileges of their
. olchments
n,, thi jurir- own order with filch zeal, they made continual en-
rddlion o croachmcnts upon those of the laity. All causes rela-
te lity. tive to matrimony, to teflaments, to ufilry, to legi-

timacy of birth, as well as those which concerned

Goldafti Conflityt. Imperial Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92, 1o7.
b R1yer'E} Fadera, vol. xiii. 532. c Centun Gravam. § 31.

ecclefi flical

ecclesiastical revenues, were thought to be so con-BooK 11.
neded with religion, that they could be tried only "v
in the spiritual courts. Not satisfied with this am-
plejurifdiktion, which extended to one half of the
lubjees which give rife to litigation among men, the
clergy, with wonderful industry, and by a thousand
inventions, endeavoured to draw all other causes
into their own courts d; and as they had engrossed
the whole learning known in the dark ages, the fpi-
ritual judges were commonly so far superior in
knowledge and abilities to those employed in the fe-
cular courts, that the people at first favoured any
stretch that was made to bring their affairs under the
cognizance of a judicature, on the decisions of
which they could rely with superior confidence.
Thus the interest of the church, and the inclination
of the people, concurring to elude the jurifdidion
of the lay-magiftrate, soon reduced it almost to
nothing'. By means of this, valt power accrued
to ecclesiastics, and no inconsiderable addition was
made to their revenue by the fums paid in those
ages to such as administered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts ensor- .he. rell-

ced their sentences, added to them great weight fr^rituai
and terror. The censure of excommunication cen"frc"s
was inflituted originally for preserving the purity of
the church, that obstinate offenders, whose im-
pious tenets or profane lives were a reproach to
Chriltianity, might be cut off from the society
of the faithful: This, ecclesiastics did not scruple
to convert into an engine for promoting their
own power, and inflided it on the most frivolous
occasions. Whoever despised any of their decifi-
ons, even concerning civil matters, immediately in-
curred this dreadful censure, which not only exclu-
ded them from all the privileges of a Christian, but

i Giannone I-lit. of Naples, book xzi. § 3. c Centum Gra-
vam. 9. 56. 64.

deprived

BdoK II. deprived them of their rights as men and citizens'
"---' and the diead of this rendered even the noft fierct

and turbulent Ipirirs oblequious to the authority ul
the church.

Theiv;ce, NOR did the clergy negle&t, the proper methods
ofi 'l. i- of preferviing tllt wealth and power which they had
U--t: !hi, acqllired with fiich indutlryand address The po:.

U!tuneiiiols of the church, being consecrated to God,

were declared to be unalienable; lb that the funds
of a lbcicty which was daily gaining, and could ne-
ver lose, grew to be immense. In Germany, it
was computed that the ecclesiastics had got into
their hands more than one half of the national pro-
perty g. In other natioyns, the proportion varied;
but the flhare belonging to the church was every
where prodigitous. 'hefce vail poffellions were not
subject to the burdens imposed on: the lands of the
laity. The German clergy were exempted by law
'ro:n all taxes h; and if, on any extraordinary emer-
gence, Eccleliattics were pleated to grant any aid
towards supplying the:publick exigencies, this was
confidered as a free gift flowing from their own ge-
neiolity, which the civil magistrate had no title to
demand, far less to exadt. In consequence of this
firange lolecifm in government, the laity in Germa-
ny had the mortification to sii;d themselves loaded
with exceflive rnpofitions, because those who pol:
fcif'ed the greatest property were freed from any
obligation to support, o.r to defend the slate.

hs', ,-!; GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth
uiti.. ,.,.,.iv and lniku.erous privileges of the clerical order were

to tihe oltcr miembers ot the Ger-manick body, they
would have reckoned it lume miligation of the evil,
if thcfe had been *pofTcffed only by eccleliallics

f Centurm Gravam. § 34.

§ Centumn Gravnm. § 28. 1 Con-

titm Ginvamil, lii. Col.lalti Conft. lnper. ii. 79. o08. Ptfflcl

}il LUt.
d U i)l'i P 1. 3 ~o, ", 4.

residing

residing among themselves, who would have been BOOK IT.
lels apt to make an improper use of their riches, or -
to exercise their rights with unbecoming rigour.
But the bishops of Rome having early put in a
claim, the boldest that ever human ambition ilg-
gested, of being supreme and infallible heads of
the Christian church; they, by their profound po-
licy and unwearied perseverance, by their address
in availing themselves of every circumstance which
occurred, by taking advantage of the Iuperftition
of some princes, of the necelfities of others, and of
the credulity of the people, at length eftablilhed
their pretenlions in oppolition both to the interest
and common sense of mankind. Germany was the
country which these ecclesiastical sovereigns govern-
ed with most absolute authority. They excommu-
nicated and deposed some of its most illustrious Em-
perors, and excited their fubjedEs, their ministers,
and even their children to take arms agaiinft them.
Amidst these contests, the Popes continually ex-
tended their own immunities, and spoiled the fecu.
lar princes of their molt valuable prerogatives, and
the German church felt all the'rigour of that op-
preilon which flows from subjeCtion to foreign do-
minion, and foreign exactions.

THE right of conferring benefices, which theNomined,

Popes usurped during that period of confusion, was by the Pu"
an acquilition of great importance, and exalted the
ecclefiallical power upon the ruins of the temporal.
The emperors and other princes of Germany had
long been in pofeflion of this right, and it served
to increase both their authority and the revenue.
But by wresting it out of their hands, the Popes
were enabled to fill the Empire with their own
creatures; they accustomed a great body of every
prince's fubjedts to depend not upon him but upon
the Roman lee; they beflowed the richest benefi-
ces in every country upon strangers, and drained

their

nBoo II. their wealth to filpply the luxury of a foreign court.

v' ' Even the patience of the most superstitious ages mu-

tinied under such opprellion; and so loud and fre-
quent were the complaints and murmurs of the
Germans, that the Popes, afraid of irritating them
too far, contented, contrary to their usual practice,
to abate fbniewhat of their pretensions, and to reil
satisfied with the rightof nomination to those bene-
sices which happened to fall vacant during fix months
in the year, leaving the disposal of the remainder
to the princes and other legal patrons .

Th eh,'i BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients
ents for re-
liraining for eluding an agreement which put such reftrairts
thri Po"en on its power. The practice of reserving certain be-
i;-tifcau.l. nefices in every country to the Pope's immediate

nomination, which had been long known, and of-
ten complained of, was extended far beyond its an-
cient bounds. All the benefices possessed by Cardi-
nals, or any of the numerous officers in the Roman
court; thole held by persons who happened to die
at Rome, or within forty miles of that city on their
journey to or frdon it; those which became vacant
by tranllation, with many others, were included in
that number; and Julius II. and Leo firetching the
matter to the utmost, often collated to benefices
where the right of reservation had not been declared,
on pretence of having mentally reserved this privi-
lege to themselves. The right of reservation, how-
ever, even with this extenlion, had certain limits,
as it could be exercised only where the benefice was
actually vacant; and therefore, in order to render
the exertion of papal power unbounded, exprail!v
graces, or mandates nominating a person to hilcceed
to a benefice upon the first vacancy that Ihouid
happen, were brought into use. By means ol

F. Paul, Hiit. of Eccl. Benef. 204. Gold. Conft. Imper. i.
4. 8.

there,

there, Germany was filled with persons depending BooK I.'
on the court of Rome, from which it received there ""*
reversionary grants; princes were defrauded, in a
great degree, of their prerogatives, and the rights
of lay-patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered al-
most entirely vain k.

THE manner in which these extraordinary pow- Venality of

ers were exercised, rendered them still more odious Rome.
and intolerable. The avarice and extortion of the
court of Rome were become exceflive almost to a
proverb. The Sale of benefices was so notorious
that no pains were taken to conceal, or to disguise
it. Companies of merchants openly purchased the
benefices of different dilfricts in Germany from the
Pope's ministers, and retailed them at an advanced
prices. Pious men beheld with deep regret these
limoniacal tranfadtions, so unworthy the ministers
of a christian church; while politicians complained
of the loss fiutained by the exportation of so much
wealth in that irreligious traffick.

THE rums indeed, which the court of Rome t drained

drew by its lated and legal impositions from alli Of theCir
the countries that acknowledged its authority, were wealth.
so considerable, that it is not strange that they mur-
mured at the smallet addition made to them by un-
necefrary or illicit means. Every ecclesiastical person,
upon his admillion to his benefice, paid annats or
one year's rent of his living to the Pope, and as that
tax, was extated with great rigour, its amount was
prodigious. To this mult be added the frequent
demands made by the Popes of free-gifts from the
clergy, together with the extraordinary levies of
tenths upon ecclesiastical benefices, on pretence of

Ctnturn Gravam. 3 1. Fa/cic. Rer. Exper. &c. 334. Gold.

Cons. Inper. i, 439 4, 40. F. Patu. -His. of Eccl. Bcncf.
'67, 199. J Fafcc. Rer. Faet. i. 359.

VOL. II. I expeditions

Boor II. expeditions against the Turks, seldom intended, or
'cv carried into execution; and from the whole, the

vast proportion of the revenues of the church which
flowed continually to Rome, may be estimated.

The united SUCH were the difiolute manners, the exorbitant
thefecaufe.l wealth, and power, and privileges of the clergy be-

fore the reformation; such the oppreflive rigour of
that dominion which the Popes had established over
the christian world; and such the sentiments con-
cerning them that prevailed in Germany, at the
beginning of the sixteenth century. Nor has this
iketch been copied from the controversial writers of
that age, who, in the heat of disputation, may be
fufpeded of having exaggerated the errors, or of
having misrepresented the conduct of that church
which they laboured to overturn; it is formed upon
more authentick evidence, upon the memorialsand
remonstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them.
Diffatisfadtion muff have arisen to a great height
among the people, when there grave assemblies ex-
pressed themselves with such acrimony; and if
they demanded the abolition of there enormities with
so much vehemence, the people, we may be affur-
ed, uttered their sentiments and desires in bolder
and more virulent language.

Men pre- To men thus prepared for Ihaking off the yoke,
pared toIm- Luther addressed himself with certainty of success.
the:rs opini- As they had long felt its weight, and borne it with
°"e: Iimpatience, they listened with joy to the first propo-

fal for procuring deliverance. Hence proceeded the
fond and eager reception that his doctrines met with,
and the rapidity with which they spread over all

rd t le- the provinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity
rate iis de- and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidence in
fras. aflerting his own cpiliions, and the arrogance and

contempt

contempt wherewith he treated all who diffcred BooK II.
from him, which, in ages of greater moderation Y
and refinement, have bteen reckoned defects in the
character of that reformer, did not appear excef-
five to his contemporaries, whose minds were
firongly agitated by thore interefring controversies
which he carried on, and who had themselves en-
dured the rigour of papal tyranny, and seen the cor-
ruptions in the church against which he exclaimed.

NOR were they greatly offended at that grois fcur-

rility with which his polemical writings are filled,
or at the low buffoonery he sometimes introduces
into his gravest ditcouries. No dispute was ma-
naged, in those rude times without a large portion
of the former, and the latter was common, even
on the most solemn occasions, and in treatingthe
most sacred fubjefts. So far were either of them
from doing hurt to his cause, that invective and ri-
dicule had rome effect, as well as more laudable ar-
guments, in exposing the errors of popery, and in
determining mankind to abandon them.

BESIDES all there causes of Luther's rapid pro- The effet

of the inven-

grefs, arising from the nature of his enterprize, andsionofprint
the junture at which he undertook it, he reapedingoathe
advantage from some foreign and adventitious cir- the refor
cumftances, the beneficial influence of which nonemati"o.
of his forerunners in the fame course had enjoyed.
Among there may be reckoned the invention of the
art of printing, about half a century before his time.
By this fortunate discovery, the facility of acquiring
and of' propagating knowledge, was wonderfully
increased, and Luther's books, which mutt other-
wife have made their way slowly and with uncer-
tainty intodiftant countries, spread at once all over
Europe. Nor were they read only by the rich and
the learned, who alone had accsfs to books before

I a. that

Bods II. that invention; they got into the hands of the peo-
V''' pie, who, upon this appeal to them as judges,

ventured to examine and to rejeE many doctrines,
which they had formerly been required to believe,
without being taught to underfiand them.

And of the THE revival of learning at the fame period was a
revival of
eawring. eircumftance extremely friendly to the reformation.

The fludy of the ancient Greek and Roman au-
thors, and the discovery of that liberal and found
knowledge which they contain, rouzed the human
mind from the profound lethargy in which it had
been funk during several centuries. Mankind seem,
at that period, to have recovered the powers of in-
quiring and of thinking, facultiesof which they had
long loft the use; and fond of the acquisition, they
exercised them with great boldness upon all subjects.
They were not now afraid of entering an uncommon
path, or of embracing a new opinion. Novelty ap-
pears, at this time, rather to have been a recom-
mendation to a doctrine; and inflead of being
startled when the daring hand of Luther drew aside,
or tore the veil which covered established errors,
the genius of the age applauded and aided the at-
tempt. Luther, though a stranger to elegance in taste
or composition, zealously promoted the cultivation
of ancient literature; and sensible of its being ne-
ceffary in studying the scriptures, he himself had
acquired confiderableknowledge both in theHebrew
and Greek tongues. Melandthon, and some other
of his disciples, were eminent proficients in the po-
lite arts; and as the fame barbarous monks who
opposed the introduction of learning into Germany,
fit themselves with equal fierceness against Luther's
opinions, and declared the good reception of the
one to be the effoet of the progress which the other
had made, the cause of learning and of the refor-
mation came to be confidered as closely conneeted,
as, 'in Ye'ery country, had the fame friends and the

fame

fame enemies. This enabled the reformers to car; BooK II.
ry on the contest at first with great fuperiority.%"v"u -
Erudition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity
of composition, and even wit and raillery, were
wholly on their fide, and triumphed with 'ease
over illiterate monks, whore rude arguments, 'ex-
pressed in a perplexed and barbarous tfile, were
found insufficient for the defence of a Iyftem, the
errors of which, all the art and ingenuity ofits later
and more learned advocates have not been able to
palliate.

THAT bold rpirit of inquiry, which the revival

of learning excited in Europe, was so favourable to
the reformation, that Luther was aided in his pro-
grefs, and mankind were prepared to embrace his
docrines, by persons who did not wish success to
his undertaking. The greater part of the ingenious
men who applied to the study of ancient literature,
towards the close of the fifteenth century, and the
beginning of the sixteenth, though they had no in-
tention, and perhaps no wish to overturn the efla-
blifhed sysem of religion, had discovered the ab-
furdity of many tenets and practices authorised by
the church, and perceived the fitility of there ar-
guments, by which illiterate monks endeavoured
to defend them. Their contempt of these advo-
cates for the received errors, led them frequently to
expose the ignorance which they supported, anid to
ridicule their opinions with the utmost freedom and
severity. By this men were prepared for the more
serious attacks made upon them by Luther, anA
their reverence both for the doctrines and persons
against whom he inveighed, was considerably aba-
ted. This was palticularly the cafe in Germany.
W hen the first attempts were made to revive a taste
for ancicnt learning in that country, the Ecclfiafics
there, who were still more ignorant than their
brethren on the other sidle of the Alps, fct them-

I 3 selves

BooK II. selves to oppose its progress with more active zeal;
=';" and the patrons of the new fludies, in return, at-

tacked them with great violence. In the writings
of Reuchlin, Hutten, and the other revivers of learn-
ing in Germany, the corruptions of the church of
Rome are censured with an acrimony of flyle, lit-
tle inferior to that of Luther himself'.

FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent

ftridures of Erarmus upon the errors of the church,
as well as upon the ignorance and vices of the cler-
gy. His reputation and authority were so high in
Europe at the beginning of the sixteenth century,
and his works were read with such universal admira-
tion, that the effeEt of these deserves to be menti-
oned as one of the circumstances, which contributed
towards Luther's success. Erafnus having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of Ecclefiaflical literature, applied him-
self more to theological inquiries than any of the re-
vivers of learning in that age. His acute judgment
and vait erudition, enabled him to discover many
errors, both in the doctrine and worship of the Ro-
mifh church. Some of these he confuted with great
solidity ofreafoning, and force of eloquence. Others
he treated as objeds of ridicule, and turned against
them that irrefilible torrent of popular and latiri-
cal wit, of which he had the command. There
was scarce any opinion or practice of the Romish
church which Luther endeavoured to reform, but
what had been previously animadverted upon by
Erasmus, and had afforded him subject either ofcen-
sure or of raillery. When Luther first began his
attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to applaud
his conduA ; he courted the friendlhip of several of
his disciples and patrons; and condemned the be-

f Gerdefius Hist. Evang. renov. vol. i. p. 141, 57. Seckend.
lib. i. p. Ip3. Vonder Hardt. HiR. Literar. Reform. para ii.

haviour

haviour and spirit of his adversaries'. He concur- RooK II.
red openly with him in inveighing against the'"
fchool-divines, as the teachers of a system equally
unedifying and obscure. He joined him in endea-
vouring to turn the attention of men to the study of
the holy scriptures, as the only standard of religious
truth b.

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented

Erasmus from holding the fame course with Luther.
The natural timidity of his temper; his want of
that force of mind which alone can prompt a man
to aflume the character of a reformer ; his excef-
five deference for persons in high station; his dread
of.lofing the pensions and other emoluments which
theirliberality had conferred upon him; his extreme
love of peace, and hopes of reforming abuses gra-
dually, and by gentle methods; all concurred in de-
termining him to repress and to moderate the zeal,
with which he had once been animated againit the
errors of the church k; and to assume the character
of a mediator between Luther and his opponents.
But though Erasmus Coon began to ceniure Luther as
too daring and impetuous, and was at last prevailed
upon to write against him, he must, nevertheless,
be confidered as his forerunner and auxiliary in this
war upon the church. He first scattered the feeds,
which Luther cherished and brought to maturity.
His raillery and oblique cenfires, prepared the way

S Seckend. lib. i. p. 40, 96.
h Vonder Hardt. Hiltor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdea. Hid,
Evang. Renov. i. 147.

1 Erasmus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:
Luther, fays he, has given us many a wholesome doctrine,
and many a good counsel. I wilh he had not defeated the es-
te't of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every
thing in the molt unexceptionable manner, 1 had no inclination
to die for the fake ot' truth Every man hath not the courage
requisite to make a martyr; and I am afraid, that if I were put
to the trial, I should imitate Sr. Peter." Epilf. Erafmi in Jortin's
Life of Erafinus, vol. i. 273.

h Jortin's Life of Erafinus, vol. i. p. 258.

I 4 for

BooK II, for. Luther's invectives and more direc attacks. In

C- rv this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous defenders

of the Romish church in his own times'. In this
light he must be confidered by every person conver-
sant in the history of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumitances

which combined in favouring the progress of Luther's
opinions, or in weakening the resistance of his ad-
verfaries, I have avoided entering into any difcufii-
on of the theological doctrines of popery, and have
not attempted to shew how repugnant they are to
the spirit of Christianity, and how destitute of any
foundation in reason, in the word of God, or in the
pra&tice of the primitive church, leaving there to-
pics entirely to ecclesiastical historians, to whose
province they peculiarly belong But when we add
the effec of there religious considerations to the in-
fluence of political causes, it is obvious that the uni-
ted operation of both on the human mind, mut
have been sudden and irresistible. And though, to
Luther's contemporaries, who were too near per-
Haps to the scene, or too deeply interested in it, to
trace causes with accuracy, or to examine them
with coolness, the rapidity with which his opini-
ons spread appeared to be so unaccountable, that
some of them imputed it to a certain uncommon
and malignant position of the flars, which scat-
tered the fpitit of giddiness and innovation over
the world a, it is evident, that their success was
the natural- effet of many powerful causes
prepared by peculiar providence, and happily
conspiring to that end. This attempt to invef-
tigate the caures, and to throw light on an event

Vonder Hardt. Hist. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. 2.
Jovii Hitoria, L.ut. 15 53 f01. . .134. . .

so singular and important, will not, perhaps, be Boox II.
deemed an unleceffary digreflion.-I return from
it to the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worms conduted its deliberations Proceedig

with that flow formality peculiar to fich assemblies. at Wornn-,
Much time was spent in eflablifhing some regulati-
ons with regard to the i.ternal police of the Empire.
The jurifdidion of the Imperial chamber was con-
firmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered
more fixed and regular. A council of regency was
appointed to aflift Ferdinand in the government of
the Empire during his brother's absence; which,
from the extent of the Emperor's dominions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that
might be frequently expected n. The slate of reli-
gion was then taken into consideration. There were
not wanting rome plausible reasons which might
have induced Charles to have declared himself the
proteCtor of Luther's cause, or at least to have con-
nived at its progress. If he had possessed no other The Ermpe-

ror's views

dominions but those which belonged to him in Ger- with regard
many, and no other crown beside the imperial, heto Luther.
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a man,
who asserted Co boldly the privileges a:d immunities
for which the Empire had struggled so long with
the Popes. But the vas: and dangerous schemes
which Francis I. was forming against him, made it
necefliary for him to regulate his conduct by views
more extensive than those which would have suited
a German prince; and it being of the utmost im-
portance to secure the Pope's fniendfhip, this deter-
mined him to treat Luther with great severity, as
the most effectual method of soothing Leo into a

" Pont. Heuter. Rer. Autr. Lib. viii. c. gl. p. 19i. Pfeffl
Abrege Chronol. F. 598.

concurrence

Boon II, for Luther's invectives and more diret attacks. In
^--- this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous defenders

of the Romish church in his own times'. In this
light he must be confidered by every person conver-
sant in the hiilory of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumstances

which combined in favouring the progress of Luther's
opinions, or in weakening the resistance of his ad-
verfaries, I have avoided entering into any difcufi-
on of the theological doctrines of popery, and have
not attempted to shew how repugnant they are to
the spirit of Christianity, and how destitute of any
foundation in reason, in the word of God, or in the
praftice of the primitive church, leaving these to-
pics entirely to ecclesiastical historians, to whose
province they peculiarly belong. But when we add
the effect of there religious considerations to the in-
fluence of political causes, it is obvious that the uni-
ted operation of both on the human mind, muift
have been sudden and irresistible. And though, to
Luther's contemporaries, who were too near per-
haps to the scene, or too deeply interested in it, to
trace causes with accuracy, or to examine them
with coolners, the rapidity with which his opini-
ons spread appeared to be so unaccountable, that
some of them imputed it to a certain uncommon
and malignant position of the stars, which scat-
tered the spirit of giddiness and innovation over
the world a, it is evident, that their success was
the natural effect of many powerful causes
prepared by peculiar providence, and happily
conspiring to that end. This attempt to invef-
tigate the caures, and to throw light on an event

a VonderHardt. Hist. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. 2.
a Jovii Hiltoria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134.

so singular and important, will not, perhaps, be BooK II.
deemed an unieceffary digreflion.-I return from '-
it to the course of the history.

THE Diet at Worrns conduced its deliberations Proceed g;

with that flow formality peculiar to flich assemblies.s t Worin
Much time was spent in establishing some regulati-
ons with regard to the i.ternal police of the Empire.
The jurifdidion of the Imperial chamber was con-
firmed, and the forms of its proceeding rendered
more fixed and regular. A council of regency was
appointed to aflift Ferdinand in the government of
the Empire during his brother's absence; which,
from the extent of the Emperor's dominions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that
might be frequently expeEted ". The slate of reli-
gion was then taken into consideration. There were
not wanting Come plausible reasons which might
have induced Charles to have declared himself the
protedor of Luther's cause, or at least to have con-
nived at its progress. If he had possessed no other The Emp,-

ror s views

dominions but those which belonged to him in Ger- with regard
many, and no other crown betide the imperial, heto Luther.
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a man,
who asserted so boldly the privileges a:d immunities
for which the Empire had struggled so long with
the Popes. But the vast and dangerous schemes
which Francis I. was forming against him, made it
neceflary for him to regulate his conduct by views
more extensive than those which would have suited
a German prince; and it being of the utmost im-
portance to secure the Pope's friendfllip, this deter-
mined him to treat Luther with great leverity, as
the most effeatual method of soothing Leo into a

"Pont. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. Lib. viii, c. t . p. '9,. Pfffel
Abrege Chronol. r. 598.

concurrence

Boo I. concurrence with his meafufres. His eagerness to

-..- accomplish this, rendered him not unwilling to gra-

tify the Papal legates in Germany, who insisted
that, without any delay or formal deliberation, the
diet ought to condemn a man whom the Pope had
already excommunicated as an incorrigible heretick.
Such an abrupt manner of proceeding, however,
being deemed unprecedented and unjust by the
members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's

He is rum- appearing in person, and declaring whether he ad-
moned to dcai
appear. hered or not to those opinions, which had drawn up-

on him the censures of the church °. Not only the
Emperor, but all the princes through whole territo-
ries he had to pars, granted him a fate-conduct; and
March 6. Charles wrote to him at the fame time, requiri;,g

his immediate attendance on the diet, and rieew-
ing his promises of protection from any injury or
violence . Luther did not hesitate one moment
about yielding obedience, and set out for Worms
attended by the herald who had brought the Empe-
ror's letter and rafe-conduct. While on hisjourney,
many of his friends, whom the fate of Huss, under
similar circumstances, and notwithstanding the fame
security of an Imperial fafe-condud, filled with
solicitude, advised and intreated him not to rush

Hindaunt- wantonly into the midst of danger. But Luther,
Ct' spirit. superior to such terrors, silenced them with this re-

ply, " I am lawfully called," said he, " to appear
in that city, and thither will I go in the name of the
Lord, though as many devils as there are tiles on
the houses, were there combined against me"."

THE reception he met with at Worms, was such

tion ae as he might have reckoned a full reward of all his
Worms. labours, if vanity and the love of applause had been

the principles by which he was influenced. Great-

a P. Mart. Ep 722. P Luth. Oper. ii. 411.
1 Luth. Oper. ii. 412.

er

er crowds assembled to behold him, than had ap- Boor II.
peared at the Emperor's publick entry; his apart-
ments were daily filled with princes and perfolages
of the highest rank', and he was treated with all
the respect paid to those who poffels the power of
direEting the understanding and sentiments of other
men; and homage, more fircere, as well as more
flattering, than any which pre-eminence in birth or
condition can command. At his appearance before The mn-
the diet, he behaved with great decency, and with ner o" hi
equal firmness. He readily acknowledged an excefsaparane.
of vehemence and acrimory in his controversial
writings, but refused to retraCt his opinions unlels he
were convinced of their falfhood ; or to consent to
their being tried by any other rule than the word of
God. When neither threats nor entreaties could
prevail onl him to depart from this resolution, forne
of the ecclesiastics propoled to imitate the exam-
ple of the council of Conflance, and by punishing
the author of this pestilent heresy, who was now in
their power, to deliver the church at once from such
an evil. But the members of the diet refuting to
expose the German integrity to fresh reproach by a
second violation of publick faith; and Charles be-
ing no less unwilling to bring a alain upon the begin-
ning of his administration by iuch an ignominious
action, Luther was permitted to depart in safety '. April 6.
A few days after he left the city, a levere cdit wasdi
publilhed in the Emperor's name, and by authority ai.n bhim.
of thediet, depriving him as an obitinate.and ex-
communicated criminal of all the privileges he en-
joyed as a subjet of the Empire, forbidding any
prince to harbour or protect him, and requiring all
to concur in seizing his person as Toon as the term
specified in his fafe-conduCt was expired'.

r Seckend. 156. Luth. Oper. ii. 414. r F. Paul. Hii. of
Counc. p. 1. Seckend. 160. Gold. Cons. Imperial. ii. 408.

Bur

BooK II.
H-c~sdB BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable e-s
He is feizted, -
*ndconceal, fed, the execution of it being prevented partly by
`d a Wan- the multiplicity of occupations which the commoti-
barg.

ons in Spain, and the wars in Italy and the Low-
Countries, created to the Emperor; and partly by
a prudent precaution employed by the elector of
Saxony, Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on
his return from Worms, was pafiing near Altenitein
in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in masks rush-
ed suddenly out of a wood, where the Elector had
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and surround-
ing his company, carried him, after diififfing all
his attendants, to Wartburg, a strong castle not
far diflant.' There the Elector ordered him to be
supplied with every thing necessary or agreeable,
but the place of his retreat was carefully concealed,
until upon a change in the political situation of Eu-
rope, the fury of the present storm against him
began to abate. In this solitude, where he remain-
ed nine months, and which he frequently called his
Patmos, after the name of that illand to which the
apostle John was banished, he exerted his usual
vigour and industry in defence of his doctrines, or
in confutation of his adversaries, publishing several
treatises, which revived the spirit of his followers,
astonished to a great degree, and dilheartened at
the iudden disappearance of their leader.
his opiiofn Du Ri NG his confinement, his opinions continued

to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant in almost
every city of Saxony. At this time, the Augufti.
nians of Wittemberg, with the approbatioA of the
university, and the connivance of the Elector, ven-
tured upon the first ftep towards an alteration in
the eftablilhed forms of publick worflip, by abo-
lifhing the celebration of private mastes, and by
giving the cup as well as the bread to the laity in
admuflitring the sacrament of the Lord's fuipper.

WHATEVER

BOOK II.
WHATEVER consolation the courage and success" -

. Decree of

of his disciples, or the progreli of his doctrines in the univer-
his own country afforded Luther in his retreat, he si"'rs Paris

. · . condemning

there received information of two events which hem.
considerably damped his joy, as they seemed to lay
insuperable obstacles in the way of propagating his
principles in the two most powerful kingdoms of
Europe. One was, a solemn decree, condemning
his opinions, published by the university of Paris,
the most ancient, and at that time the most refpeta-
ble of the learned societies in Europe. The other
was, the answer written to his book concerning the
Babylonifh captivity by Henry VIII. of England.
That young monarch, having been educated under Henry VIII.
the eye of a suspicious father, who, in order to pre- gawit t he
vent his attending to business, kept him occupied
in the study of literature, still retained a greater
love of learning, and stronger habits of application
to it, than are common among Princes of so adtive
a disposition, and such violent passions; and being
ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well
as zealously attached to the Romish church, and
highly exasperated against Luther, who had treated
Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author, with great
contempt, he did not think it enough to exert his
royal authority in opposing the opinions of the re-
former, but resolved likewise to combat them with
scholastic weapons. With this view he published
his treatise on the Seven Sacraments, which, though
forgotten at present, as books ofcontroverfy always
are, when the occasion that produced them is palt,
is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acuteuefs,
and was reprelented by the flattery of his courtiers
to be a work of such wonderful science and learning,
as exalted him no leTs above other authors in merit,
than he was distinguished among them by his rank.
The Pope, to whom it was presented with the great-
eft formality in fill consistory, spoke of it in lilch

termns,

BOOK II. terms, as if it had been ditated by immediate in-
-v~-' fjpiration; and as a teffimony of the gratitude of the

church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him
the title of Defender of the Faith, an appellation
which Henry loon forfeited in the opinion of those
from whom he derived it, and which is still the title
of his successors, though the avowed enemies of
those opihions, by contending for which he merited

Luthe'.s e- that honourable diftindion. Luther, who was not
plyto both. overawed either by the authority of the Univerlity,

or the dignity of the monarch, soon published his
animadversions on both, in a stile no less vehement
and severe than he would have u!ed in confuting his
meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness, iu-
itead of shocking his contemporaries, was confider-
ed by them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit;
a controversy managed by disputants so illustrious,
drew more general attention; and such was the
contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the doctrines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite
both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers combin-
ed against them, they daily gained converts bothin
France and in England.

State of as- HOW EVER desirous the Emperor might be to put
twveeii a stop to Luther's progress, he was often obliged,
Charles and during the diet at Worms, to turn his thoughts to

matters still more interesting, and which demanded
more immediate attention. A war was ready to
break out between him and Francis in Navarre, in
the Low-Countries, and in Italy; and it required
either great address to avert the danger, or timely
and wife precautions to resist it. Every circum-
flance, at that junCdure, inclined Chailes to pr ser
the former meaire. Spain was turn with inteflinc
conirotions. I: Italy, he had not hitherto secured
the afliftuice off any one ally. In the Low-Coun-

tries,

tries, his fubjeds trembled at the thoughts of a rup- Book It.
ture with France, the fatal effets of which on their
commerce they had often experienced. From there
considerations, as well as from the solicitude of
Chievres during his whole adminiifration to main-
tain peace between the two monarchs, proceeded
the Emperor's backwardness to commence hoftili-
ties. But Francis and his ministers did not breathe
the fame pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that con-
cord could not long subsist, where interest, emula-
tion, and ambition conspired to difuolve it; and
he possessed several advantages which flattered him
with the hopes of surprising his rival, and of over-
powering him before he could put himself in a pof-
ture of defence. The French King's dominions,
from their compa& situation, from their fubje&ion
to the royal authority; from the genius of the peo-
ple, fond of war, and attached to their sovereign by
every tie of duty and affe&ion, were more capable
of a great or sudden effort, than the larger but dif-
united territories of the Emperor, in one part of
which the people were in arms against his ministers,
and in all his prerogative was more limited than
that of his rival.

THE only princes, in whose power it was to have Henry VIT.

kept down, or to have extinguished this flame on Empero'.
its first appearance, either negleted to exert them-
selves, or were active in kindling and Spreading it.
Henry VIII. though he affected to assume the name
of mediator, and both parties made frequent ap-
peals to him, had laid aside the impartiality which
Iuited that character. Wolfey, by his artifices,
had cftranged him so entirely from the French
King, that he secretly fomented the discord which
he ought to have compored, and waited only for
some decent pretext to join his arms to the- Empe-
rot's *.

a Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 358.

LEo'F

Boor II. LEo's endeavours to excite discord between tile
~'-"^ Emperor and Francis were more avowed, and had
I.co heflit.tcs S 
hr.ween ihe greater influe::ce Not only his duty, as the com-
gival. Imon father of Christendom, but his interest as an

htalian potentate, called upon the Pope to adt as the
guaidialn of the public tranquillity, and to avoid
any miealure that mightoverturn the system, which
aitei much bloodlhcd, and many negociations, was
novw ettabiiihcd ia Italy. Accordingly Leo, who
iitantdy dilLetrned the propriety of this condut,
had fourned a chlieme upon Charlcs's promotion to
tiic Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the
umpire between the rivals, by footbing them alter-
nately, while he entered into no close confederacy
with either; and a Pontifflels ambitious and enter-
prizing, might have laved Europe from many cala-
mities, by adhering to this plan. But this high-
spirited prelate, who was iill in the prime of life,
longed pafliol:ately to diftinguilh his pontificate. by
tome splendid action. He was impatient to walh
away the infamy of having loll Parma and Placen.
tia, the acquisition of which refleded so much lustre
on the adminiltration of his predecessor Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians in
that age, the domnilion which the Transalpine, cr
as they in imitation of the Roman arrogance deno-
minated them, the barbarous nations, had attained
in Italy. He flattered himself, that after allifting
the one monarch to firip the other of his poffeliions
in that country, lie might find means of driving
out the vicoor in his turn, and acquire the glory of
leftoring Italy to the liberty and happiness it enjoy-
ed before the invalion of Charles V ll. when every
ilate was governztd by its native princes, or its own
laws, and unacqlallmied with a foreign yoke. Ex-
triavgant and hll;nerical as this prjlet may fe.rn,
it was the favouiite object of ahinlf every Italian
cliilelent for genius or enterprize during great part
ol tile lixitclll cenLty i they vainly hoped, that
ly liipcnior ikill ii the artifices and refinements of

negociation,

negotiation, they would be able to baffle the efforts BooK II.
of nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but much '- '
more powerful and warlike. So alluring was the
profped of this to Leo, that notwithstanding the
gentleness of his difpoirion, and his fondness for
the pleasures of a refined and luxurious ease, he
hastened to disturb the peace of Europe, and to
plunge himself in a dangerous war, with an impe-
tuofity scarce inferior to that of the turbulent and
martial Julius b

IT was in Leo's power, however, to choose

which of the monarchs he would take for his con-
federate against the other. Both of them courted
his friendship; he wavered for some time between
them, and at first concluded an alliance with
Francis. The object of this treaty was the conquest
of Naples, which the confederates agreed to divide
between them. The Pope, it is probable, flattered
himself that the brilk and active spirit of Francis,
seconded by the fame qualities in his fubjedts, would
get the flart of the flow and wary councils of the
Emperor, and that they might over-run with ease
this detached portion of his dominions, ill provided
for defence, and always the prey of every invader.
But whether the French King, by discovering too
openly his bufpicions of Leo's linccrity, disappoint-
ed there hopes; whether the treaty was only an
artifice of the Pope's, to cover the more serious
negotiations he was carrying on with Charles;
whether he was enticed by the profpet of reaping
greater advantages from an union with that prince;
or whether he was toothed by the zeal which Charles
had manifested for the hoinour of the church in con-
demning Luther; certain it is, that he lbon desert- Concludet
ed his new ally, and made overtures of friendlhip, treaty with
though with great secrecy, to the Emperor c. Don Clale':.

b Guic. . 14. p. 173. c Guic. lib. 14 p. 175. Mem. de
Bellay, Par. 15 3. P. 24.

VOL I1I. K John

BOOK nI. John Manuel, the fame man who had been the fa.
'-t ^' vouritc of Philip, and whose address had difcon-

certed all Ferdinand's schemes, having been deliver-
ed, upon the death of that monarch, from the
prison to which he was confined, was now the Im-
perial ambaflador at Rome, and fully capable of
improving this favourable disposition in the Pope to
his master's advantage d. To him the conduct of
this negotiation was entirely committed, and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion
from a war with France would have prompted him
May 8. to retard or defeat it, an alliance between the Pope

and Emperor was quickly concluded '. The chief
articles in this treaty, which proved the foundation
of Charles's grandeur in Italy, were, that the Pope
and Emperor fhculd join their forces to expel the
French out of the Milanese, the possession of which
ihould be granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludo-
vico the Moor, and who had resided at Trent since
the time his brother Maximilian had been difpoffef-
fed of his dominions by the French King; that
Parma and Placentia should be restored to the
church; that the Emperor should aflift the Pope in
conquering Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by
the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See should be
increased; that the Emperor ihould take the family
of Medici under his protection; that he should
grant to the Cardinal of that name a pension of ten
thousand ducats upon the archbifhoprick of Toledo;
.and fettle lands in the kingdom of Naples to the
fame value upon Alexander the natural fbn of Lo-
renzo de Medici.

Death of THE tranfa&ing an affair of such moment witl-
tieEmpe- out his participation, appeared to Chievres 1o deci-
tor's fvoI. five a proof of his having loft the ascendant which
,inifcer. he had hitherto maintained over the mind of his

d Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 8. e Guic . 14. I81. Mem.
de Bellay, p. 24. Du Mont Corps Diplom. tonl. iv. suppl. p. 96.

pupil,

pupil, that his chagrin on this account, added to the BOOK 11.
melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on '
taking a view of the many and unavoidable cala-
mities attending a war against France, is said to
have Shortened his days . But though this, per-
haps, may be only the conjedture of historians,
fond of attributing every thing that befalls illuitrious
personages to extraordinary caures, and of ascribing
even their diseases and death to the effect of political
passions, which oftener disturb the enjoyment than
they abridge the period of life, it is certain that his
death at this critical juncture extinguished all hopes
of avoiding a rupture with France g. This event,
too, delivered Charles from a minister, to whose
authority he had been accuflomed from his infancy
to submit with such implicit deference, as checked
and depressed hisgenius, and retained him in a state
of pupillage, unbecoming both his years and his
rank; but this refiraint being removed, the native
powers of his mind were allowed to unfold them-
ielves, and he displayed such great talents, both in
council and in execution, as exceeded the hopes of
his contemporaries h, and command the admiration
of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, Commence,

in consequence of their secret alliance, to attack tnltofho'
Milan, hostilities commenced in another quarter. The Navarre.
children of John d'Albret King of Navarre having
often demanded the restitution of their hereditary
dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noyon, and
Charles having as often eluded their request upon
very frivolous pretexts, Francis thought himself au.
thorized by that treaty to aflifi the exiled family.
The juncture appeared extremely favourable for
fuchl an enterprize. Charles was at a diflance from

f Bclcarii Comment. de reb. Gallic. 483. 8 P. Heuter. Rcr.
\uftiiac, lib. viii. c. I . p. 107. b P. Mart, Ep. 735.

K 2 that

BOOK II. that part of his dominions; the troops usually fla-

t"i otioned there had been called away to quell the com-

motions in Spain; the Spanish malecontents warmly
filicited him to invade Navarre ', in which a conli.
derable faction was ready to declare for the defcen.
dants of their ancient monarchs. But in order to
avoid, as much as poflible, giving offence to the
Emperor, or King of England, Francis directed
forces to be levied, and the war to be carried on,
not in his own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret.
The conduct of these troops was committed to An.
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his near alliance to-the unfortunate King
whose battles he was to fight, and what was fifll
more powerful, the interest of his filser, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite miitrefs, re-
commended to that important trufl, for which he

Progress of had neither talents nor experience. But as there was
the French. no army in the field to oppose him, he became

mailer, in a few days, of the whole kingdom of
Navarre, without meeting with any obftruetion but
from the citadel of Pampeluna. The additional
works to this fortress begun by Ximenes, were
still unfinished; nor would its flight resistance have
deserved notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bilcayan gen-
tleman, had not been dangerously wounded in its
defence. During the progress of a lingering cure,
Loyola happened to have no other amulement than
what he found in reading the lives of the faints:
The effect of this on his mind, naturally enthu.
fiaftic, but ambitious and daring, was to in-
spire him with such a desire of emulating the glory
of these fabulous worthies of the Romish church,
as led him into the wildest and most extravagant
adventures; which terminated at lafl in inftitut-
ing the society of Jesuits, the most political and
belt regulated of all the monastic orders, and from

'P. Mart. Ep. 721.

which

which mankind have derived more advantages, and BOOK II.
received greater hurt, than from any other of these '--
religious fraternities.

IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Efparre Thy enter

had been satisfied with taking proper precautions
for securing his conquest, the kingdom of Navarre
might fill have remained annexed to the crown of
France, in reality, as well as in title. But, pushed
on by youthful ardour, and encouraged by Francis,
who was too apt to be dazzled with luccels, he ven-
tured to pass the confines of Navarre, and to lay
siege to Logrogno, a small city in Castile. This
rouzed the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the
rapid progress of his arms with great unconcern;
and the diflenfions in that kingdom being almost
composed, both parties exerted themselves with
emulation in defence of their country; the one that
it migh efface the memory of palt mifcondua by
their present zeal; the other that it might add to
the merit of having subdued the emperor's rebelli-
ous fubjeAts, that of repulsing his foreign enemies.
The sudden advance of their troops, together
with the gallant defence made by the inhabitants of
Logrogno, obliged the French general to abandon
his rash enterprize. The Spanish army, which in-fthre
creased every day, harafling him during his retreat, and driven
he instead of taking shelter under the canon of°t of Na-
Pampeluna, or waiting the arrival of some troops
who were marching to join him, attacked the Spa-
niards, though far superior to him in number, with
great impetuosity, but with so little conduct, that
his forces were totally routed, he himself, together
with his principal officers, was taken prisoner, and
Spain recovered possession of Navarre in still shorter
time than the French had spent in the conquest of
its.

h Mer. de Bellay, p. 21. P. Mart. Ep. 72z.

K 3 WHILE

BOOK Il. WHILE Francis endeavoured tojuftify his invafi-
t"i". ofn Navarre, by carrying it on in the name of
begun in theHenry D'Albret, he had recourse to an artifice much
L-Coun- of the fame kind, in attacking another part of the

Emperor's territories. Robert de la Marck, lord of
the small but independent territory of Bouillon, si.
tuated on the frontiers of Luxemburg and Cham-
pagne, having abandoned Charles's service on ac-
count of an encroachment which the Aulic council
made on hisjurifdiation, and having thrown him-
self upon France for proteEtion, was easily perfuad.
ed, in the heat of his resentment, to fend a herald
to Worms, and to declare war in form against the
Emperor. Such extravagant insolence in a petty
prince furprized Charles, and appeared to him a
certain proof of his having received promises of
powerful support from the French King. Thejuft-
ness of this conclusion soon became evident. Ro-
bert with troops levied in France, by the King's
connivance, though seemingly in contradiction to
his orders, entered Luxemburg, and after ra-
vaging the open country, laid siege to Vireton. Of
this Charles complained loudly, as a direct violati-
on of the peace fubfiting between the two crowns,
and summoned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty
concluded at London in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms against
France as the first aggrefror; and though Francis
pretended that he was not answerable for Robert's
condue, whose army fought under his own itan-
dards, and in his own quarrel, and who, contrary
to an express prohibition, had seduced some sub-
je6ts ofFrance into his service; Henry paid To little
regard to this evasion, that the French King, ra-
ther than irritate a prince whom he flill hoped to
gain, commanded de la Marck to disband his
troops'.

! Mem. de Bellay, p. 2i, &c. Mem. de Fleuranges, p. 33 ;, &C

THE

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was afembling an BooK I.

army to chastise Robert's insolence. Twenty thou- '"
sand men under the count of Nassau invaded his lit-,
tie territories, and in a few days became masters of
every place in them but Sedan. After making him
feel fb sensibly the weight of his master's indigna-
tion, Naflau advanced towards the frontiers of
France; and Charles knowing that he might pre-
ihnle so far on Henry's partiality in his favour, as
not to be over-awed by the fame fears which had
retrained Francis, ordered his general to besiege
Moufon. The cowardice of the garrison having
obliged the governor to surrender almost without
resistance. Nassau invested Mezieres, a place atsiegeofMe-
that time of no considerable strength, but so advan- mpresrby'hte
tageoufly situated, that by getting poffeflion of it,
the Imperial army might have penetrated into the
heart of Champagne, in which there was scarce any
other town capable of obttruCting its progrets.
Happily for France, its monarch, fenrfible of the
importance of this fortress, and of the danger to
which it was exposed, committed the defence of it
to the chevalier Bayard, distinguished among his
contemporaries by the appellation of The Knight
without fear, and without reproach ". This man,
whose prowess in combat, whose punctilious ho-
nour, and formal gallantry, bear a nearer reifem
blance, than any thing recorded in history, to the
charater ascribed to the heroes of chivalry, pof.
sessed all the talents which form a great general.
These he had many occasions of exerting in the de-
fence of Mezietes; partly by his valour, partly by
his conduct, he protracted the siege to a great
length, and in the end obliged the Imperialists to
raile it, with infamy and lots". Francis at the head RariJ
of a numerous army soon retook Moufon, and en-
tering the Low-Countries, made several conquests
of small importance. In the neighbourhood of Va-

"' Oeuvres de Brantome, tom. vi. 114. " Mem. de Bellay, p.
75. &c.

K 4 lenciennes,

BOOK II. lenciennes, through an excess of caution, an error
'-v-' with which he cannot be often charged, he loft

an opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial
army °; and what was filll of more consequence,
he disgusted the constable Bourbon, by giving the
command of the van to the duke D'Alencon, though
this post of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a pre.
rogative of his office.

August. DURING these operations in the field, a congress

Congress at
Calaisunderwas held at Calais under the mediation of Henry
the mediati- VIII. in order to bring all differences to an amicable
on of En-
gland, issue; and if the intentions of the mediator had cor-

responded in any degree to his profeflions, it could
scarce have failed of producing some good effetl.
Henry committed the sole management of the ne-
gotiation, with unlimited powers, to Wolfey; and
this choice alone was sufficient to have rendered it
abortive. That prelate, bent on attaining the pa-
pal crown, the great objeCt of his ambition, and
ready to sacrifice every thing in order to gain the
Emperor's interest, was so little able to conceal
his partiality, that if Francis had not been well ac-
quainted with his haughty and vinditive temper,
he would have declined his mediation. Much time
was spent in inquiring who had begun hostilities,
which Wolfey affected to represent as the principal
point; and by throwing the blame of that on Fran-
cis, he hoped to justify by the treaty of London,
any alliance into which his master should enter with
ithout any Charles. The conditions on which hostilities might

be terminated, came next to be confidered; but
with regard to there, the Emperor's proposals were
such as discovered either that he was utterly averse
from peace, or that he knew Wolfey would ap-
prove of whatever should be offered in his name.
He demanded the restitution of the dutchy of Bur-
gundy, a province, the poffeflion of which would

° P. Mart. Ep. 747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.

have

have given him access into the heart of the king-BOOK II.
doa; and required a discharge of the homage due - ~
to the crown of France for the counties of Slanders
and Artois, which none of his ancestors had ever
refused, and which he had bound himself by the
treaty of Nnyon to renew. These terms, to which
an high-fpirited prince would Icarce have listened,
after the dilalters of the most unfortunate war,
Francis rejected with great diidain; and Charles
(hewing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and moderate propositions of the French mo-
narch, that he Ihould restore Navarre to its lawful
prince, and withdraw his troops from the liege of
Tournay, the congress broke up without any other
effet, than that which attends unfuccefsftl negotia-
tions, the exasperating of the parties, whom it was
intended to reconcile P.

DURING the continuance of the congress, Wol- Leaze

fey, on pretence that the Emperor himself would an"ce b.-
be more willing to make reasonable conceflionstweenthe
than his minilters, made an excursion to Bruges, to and Henry
meet that monarch. He was received by Charles, V'l.
who knew his vanity, with as much refped and
magnificence as if he had been King of England.
But instead of advancing the treaty of peace by this
interview, Wolfey, in his master's name, conclud-
ed a league with the Emperor against Francis; in
which it was stipulated, that Charles should invade
France on the fide of Spain, and Henry in Picardy,
each with an army of forty thousand men; and
that, in order to strengthei their union, Charles
should espouse the P-incels Mary, Henry's only
child, and the apparent heir of his dominions'
Henry produced no better reasons for this meafiire,
equally unjust and impolitic, than the article in the
treaty of London, by which lie pretended that he

P P. Mart. Ep. 739. Herbert. q Rymer, Feeder. xiii. Herbert.

was

BOOK II. was bound to take arms againfi the French King as

c-yJ
^ the first aggreflbr and the injury which he alledg-

ed Francis had done him, in permitting the duke
of Albany, the head of a fadtion in Scotland which
opposed his interest, to return into that kingdom.
he was influenced, however, by other confiderati-
ons. The advantages which accrued to his fiub-
jedts from maintaining an exad neutrality, or the
iY)nour that resulted to himself from acting as the
arbiter bktween contending princes, appeared to
his youthful imagination so inconsiderable, when
compared with the glory which Charles and Francis
reaped from leading armies or conquering provin-
ces, that he determined to remain no longer in a
state of inactivity. Having once taken this refoluti-
on, his inducements to prefer an alliance with
Charles were obvious. He had no claim upon any
part of that Prince's dominions, nmoft of which
were so situated, that he could not attack them
without great difficulty and disadvantage; whereas
several maritime provinces of France had been long
in the hands of the Englilh monarchs, whose pre-
tensions, even to the crown of that kingdom, were
not altogether forgotten; and the poffelion of Calais
not only gave him easy access into some of there pro-
vinces, but afforded him, in care of any difaftere a
secure retreat. While Charles attacked France up-
on one fron;tier, Henry flattered himself that he
would find little resistance on the other, and that
the glory of re-annexing to the crown of England
hle ancient inheritance of its monarchs on the conti-
nelnt, was reserved for his reign. Wolfey artfully
encouraged there vain hopes, which led his master
into flich measures as were most lifbfervient to his
own secret schemes; and the English, whose here-
ditary anim:lity against the French was apt to re-
kindle on every occasion, did not disapprove of the
martial spirit of their sovereign.

MEANWHILe

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope and BooK II.

Emperor produced great effects in Italy, and ren-H,,---
dered Lombardy the chief theatre of war. There in Italy.
was, at that time, filch contrariety between the
character of the French and Italians, that the latter
fiibmitted to the government of the foimer with
greater impatience, than they exprelfed under the
dominion of other foreigners. The phlegm of the
Germans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their
jealous temper and ceremonious manners better
than the French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and
too little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII. howe-
ver, by the equity and gentleness of his adminiftra-
tion, and by granting the Milanese more extensive
privileges than they had enjoyed under their native
princes, had overcome, in a great measure, their
prejudices, and reconciled them to the French go-
vernment. Francis, on recoveringthat dutchy, did
not imitate the example of his predecessor; and
though too generous himself to oppress his people,
his confidence in his favourites, and his negligence
in examining into the conduct of those whom he en-
trusted with power, emboldened them to venture
upon many acts ofoppreflion The government The Mila.
of Milan was committed by him to Odet de Foix, neediguft-
Marechal de Lautrec, another brother of Madame French go-
de Chateau-briand, an officer of great experienceverl"'m.
and reputation, but haughty, imperious, rapacious,
and incapable either of listening toadvice, or bear-
ing contradiction. His insolence and exactions to-
tally alienated the affetions of the Milanlc2e from
France, drove many of the considerable citizens
into banishment, and forced others to retire for
their own safety. Among the last was Jerome
Merone, vice-chancellor of Milan, a man whose
genius for intrigue and entcrprizediftinguifhed him
in an age and country, where violent factions, as
well as frequent revolutions, affordling great scope
for such talents, produced or called them forth in
great abundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza,

whole

Boor II. whose brother Maximilian he had betrayed; and

- fufpe&ing the Pope's intention of attacking the

Milanese, although his treaty with the Emperor was
not yet made publick, proposed to him in the name
of Sforza, a scheme for surprising several places in
that dutchy by means of the exiles, who, from ha-
tred to the French, and from attachment to their
former maflers, were ready for any desperate at-
tempt. Leo not o.:ly encouraged the attempt, but
advanced a considerable fum towards the execution
of it; and when through unforeseen accidents it
failed of success in every part, he allowed the exiles
who had affenmbled in a body, to retire to Reggio,
which belonged at that time to the church. The
jne 4. Marechal de Foix, who commanded at Milan in

absence of his brother Lautrec, who was then in
France, tempted with the hopes of catching at once,
as in a snare, all the avowed enemies of his master's
government in that country, ventured to march in-
to the ecclefialfical territories, and to invest Reggio.
But the vigilance and good conduct of Guicciardini
the historian, governor of that place, obliged the
French general to abandon the enterprize with dif-

The Pope grace'. Leo, on receiving this intelligence, with
declares which he was highly pleated, as it furnished him a
against Francis. decent pretext tor a rupture with France, immedi-

ately aifembled the confiltory of Cardinals, and
complaining bitterly of the hostile intentions of the
French King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal
for the church, of which he had given a recent
proof by his proceedings against Luther, declared
that he was constrained in lelf-defence, and as the
only expedient for the security of the ecclesiastical
state, to join his arms to thofeof that prince. For
this purpose, he now pretended to conclude a treaty
with Don John Manuel, although it had been signed
some months before this time; and he publickly
excommunicated De Foix, as an impious invader
of St. Peter's patrimony.

Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Mem. de Belliy, p. 38, &c.

LEO

LEO had already begun preparations for war by BOOK IT.

taking into pay a considerable body of Swiss; butar
the imperial troops advanced so slowly from Naples Milanese.
and Germany, that it was the middle of autumn
before the army took the field under the command
of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of the Italian
generals, whose long experience and extreme cauti-
on were opposed with great propriety to the impe-
tuofityof the French In the mean time, De Foix
dispatched courier after courier to inform the King
of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low-
Countries, or assembling on the frontiers of Spain,
and who did not expeA so sudden an attack in that
quarter, sent ambassadors to his allies the Swiss, to
procure from them the immediate levy of an additi-
onal body of troops; and commanded Lautrec to
repair forthwith to his government. That general,
who was well acquainted wi4h the great negleA of
cconomy in the administration of the King's sinan-
ces, and who knew how much the troops in the
Milanese had already suffered from the want oftheir
pay, refused to set out, unless the fum of three hun-
dred thousand crowns was immediately put into his
hands. But the King, Louise of Savoy, his mother,
and Semblancy, the luperintendant of finances, ha-
ving promired, even with an oath, that on his ar-
rival at Milan he should find remittances for the fum
which he demanded; upon the faith of this, he de-
parted. Unhappily for France, Louise, a woman
deceitful, vindiCtive, rapacious, and capable of fa-
crificing any thing to the gratification of her pafi-
ons, but who had acquired an absolute ascendant
over her fort by her maternal tendernels, her care
of his education, and her great abilities, was reloli
ved not to perform this promise. Lautrec having
incurred her displeasure by his haughtinels in ne-
gleeting to pay court to her, and by the freedom
with which he talked concerning tome of her ad-

\vcntules

BOOK IT. ventures in gallantry, she, in order to deprive him of
-' . the honour which he might have gained by a fuc-

cefsful defence of the Milanese, fiized the three
hundred thousand crowns destined for that service,
and detained them for her own use.

Progre Trof LAUTREC, notwithstanding this cruel disappoint-
,i! ts. ment, found means to assemble a considerable ar-

my, though far inferior in number to that of the
confederates. He adopted the plan of defence
most suitable to his situation, avoiding a pitched bat-
tle with the greatest care, while he harassed the
enemy continually with his light troops, beat up
their quarters, intercepted their convoys, and co-
vered or relieved every place which they attempted
to attack. By this prudent conduct, he not only
retarded their progress, but would have soon weari-
ed out the Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost
the whole expence of the war, as the Emperor whose
revenues in Spain were dilsipated during the com-
motions in that country, and who was obliged to
support a numerous army in the Netherlands, could
not make any considerable remittances into Italy.
But an unforeseen accident disconcerted all his mea-
hfres, and occasioned a fatal reverie in the French
affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swils served in
their army under the banners of the republick, with
which France was in alliance. By a law, no lets
political than humane, established among the can-
tons, their troops were not hired out by publick au-
thority to both the contending parties in any war.
This law, the love of gain had fometimies eluded,
and private pcrfons had been allowed to enlist in
what ltrvice they plea(Ed, though not under the
puiblick banners, but under those of their officers.
The Cardinal of Sion, who still preserved his inte-
reft aitnunghis country men, and his enmity toFrance,
hiving prevailtd on them to permit a levy of this

kind,

kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of the BooK II.
confederates. The cantons, when they saw so ma-""
ny of their countrymen marching under hostile
standards, and ready to destroy each other, became
sensible of the infamy to which they would be ex-
pored, as well as the lots they might susser, and
dilparched couriers, commanding them to leave
both armies, and to return into their own country.
The Cardinal of Sion, however, Mld the addrels,
by corrupting the messengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent its being delivered to the
Swiss in the service of the confederates; but being
intimated in due form to those in the French army,
they, fatigued with the length of the campaign,
and murmuring for want of pay, instantly yielded
obedience in spite of Lautrec's remonstrances and
intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed the

strength of his army, Lautrec durst no longer face
the confederates; and turning towards Milan, en-
camped on the banks of the Adda, and placed his
chief hopes of safety in preventing the enemy from
pafling the river; an expedient for defending aBecome
coutntry lb precarious, that there are few examples of oltr
its being employed with success against any general
of experience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna,
notwithflanding Lautrec's vigilance and activity,
passed the Adda with little lots, and obliged him to
Ihut him(lelf up within the walls of Milan, which
the confederates were preparing to besiege, when aa
unknown person, who never afterwards appeared
either to boast of this service, or to claim a reward
for it, came from the city and acquainted Morone,
that if the army would advance that night, the Ghi-
belline or Imperial faction would put them in pof-
flellion of one of the gates. Colonna, though no
friend to rafl enterprizes, allowed the marquis de
Pcfcara to advance with the Spanish infantry, and
he himlfef followed with the reft of his troops.

Abuut

BooK It. About the beginning of night, Pescara arriving at
'- ^~ the Roman gate in the suburbs, furprized the ibl.

diers whom he fouid there; thole posted in the
foirtifications adjoining to it, immediately fled ; the
marquis, seizing the works which they abandoned,
and puilling forward inceflantly, though with no lets
caution than vigour, became master of the city
with little bloodlhed, aild almost without resistance;
the victors beilg as much aitonifhed as the van-
quifhed at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Venetian
territories with the remains of his shattered army;
the cities of the Milanese following the fate of the
capital, surrendered to the confederates; Parma
and Placentia were united to the eccleliaftical state,
and of their conquests in Lombardy, only the town
of Cremona, the catfle of Milan, and a few incon-
liderable forts remained in the hands of the French b

Death of LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc-
Leo X. ceflion of prosperous events with such transports of

joy, as brought on (if we may believe the French
hiltorians) a flight fever, which being negleded,
occalioned his death on the second of Dtcember,
while he was frill of a vigorous age, and at the
height of his glory. By this unexpected accident,
the Ipirit of the confederacy was broken, and its
operations fulpended. The Cardinals of Sion and
Medici left the army that they might be pre-
sent in the conclave; the Swiss were recalled
,by their superiors; Tome other mercenanits
disbanded for want of pay ; and only the Spa-
niards, and a few Germans in the Emperor's Itr-
vice, remained to defend the Milanese. But Lau-
trec, deftituie both of men and of money, wis
unable to improve this favourable opportunity in

b Guc. 1. xiv. g9o, &c. Memr. de Bellay, 42, &c. Galcacii

Capella (te rcb. gfli pro. reflitut. Fran. Solia:e .'onilmenl r
Scardium, vol. i; 18o, &c.

the

the manner he would have wished. The vigilance BooK If.
of Morone, and the good conduct of Colonna, dif- '
appointed his feeble attempts on the Milanese; and
Guicciardini, by hisaddrefs and valour, repulsed as5.
bolder and more dangerous attack which he made
on Parma c.

MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the con- Adrian

clave, which followed upon Leo's death, and all pl'ed
the arts natural to men grown old in intrigue, when
contending for a prize bl valuable, were pradtiied.
Wolsey's name, notwithstanding all the Emperor's
magnificent promises to favour his pretensions, of
which that prelate did not fail to remind him, was
scarce mentioned in the conclave. Julio Cardinal
de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent
than any other member of the sacred college for his
abilities, his wealth, and his experience in transact-
ing great affairs, had already secured fifteen voices,
a number sufficient, according to the forms of the
conclave, to exclude any other candidate, though
not to carry his own election. All the old cardinals
combined against him, without being united in fa-
vour of any other person. While there facions
were endeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary
out each other, Medici and his adherents voted one
morning at the scrutiny, which according to form
was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian of
Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain in the
Emperor's name. This they did merely to pro-
trat time; but the adverse party intfantly doling
with them, to their own amazement and that of
all Europe, a stranger to Italy, unknown to the
persons who gave their fiffrages in his favour, and
unacquainted with the manners of the people, or
the interest of the fRate, the government of which
they conferred upon him, was unarimnuufly railed

c Guic. !. xiv. 214.
VOL. 1. IL to

BooK II. to the papal throne, at ajuncure so delicate and
;1^^ critical, as would have demanded all the sagacity

nuy and experience of one of the most able prelates in

the sacred college. The Cardinals themselves, un-
able to give a reason for'this 4trange choice, on ac-
count of which, as they marched in procession
from the conclave, they were loaded with insults
and curses by the Roman people, ascribed it to an
immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may be
imputed with greater certainty to the influence of
Don John Manuel, the Imperial ambalfador, who
by his address and intrigues facilitated the election
of a person devoted to his master's service, from
gratitude, from interest, and from inclination'.

War renew- BESIDES the influence which Charles acquired
ed in the
Milanese. by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lutre on his

administration. To bestow on his preceptor such
a noble recompense, and to place on the papal
throne a creature whom he had raised, were adts of
uncommon magnificence and power. Francis ob-
served, with the sensibility of a rival, the pre-emi-
ence which he was gaining, and resolved to exert
himself with fresh vigour, in order to wrest from him
his late conquests in Italy. The Swiss, in order to
make some reparation to the French King, for ha-
ving to unfealbnably withdrawn their troops from his
army, which had occasioned the loss of the Mila-
nefe, permitted him to levy ten thousand men in
the republick. Together with this reinforcement,
Lautrec received from the King a finall turn in mo-
ney, which enabled him once more to take the field,
and after seizing by furprize, or force, several pla-
ces in the Milanese, to advance within a few miles
of the capital. The confederate army was in no

d Ger. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman. in Analce.
de Hadr. p. 52. Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p. 144, &c.

condition

condition to obftruEt his progress; and though the BOOK II.
inhabitants of Milan, inflamed by the artifices of" ""'
Morone, and by the popular declamations of a
monk whom he employed, with the most enthufi-
aftic zeal against the French government, consented
to raise extraordinary contributions. Colonna must
soon have abandoned the advantageous camp he
had chosen at Bicocca, and have dismissed his troops
for want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service
had not once more extricated him out of his diffi-
culties.

THE insolence and caprice of that people were of- The French

ten no less fatal to 'their friends, than their valour thebattle of
and discipline were formidable to their enemies. Bicocca.
Having now served two months without pay, of
which they complained loudly, a fum destined for
their use was sent from France under a convoy of
hore ; but Morone, whose vigilant eye nothing es-
caped, posted a body of troops in their way, so that
those who escorted the money durfl not advance.
On receiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all
patience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding
around Lautrec, threa:ened with one voice instantly
to retire, if he did not either advance the pay which
was due, or promire to lead them next morning to
battle. In vain did Lautrec remonstrate against
these demands, representing to them the impollibi-
lity of the former, and the rashness of the latter,
which muff be attended with certain dcftruqion, as
the enemy occupied a camp naturally of great
strength, and which by art they had rendered al-.
most inacceifible. The Swiss, deaf to reason, and
persuaded that their valour was capable rifurmount-
ing every obstacle, renewed their demand with
greater fierceners, offering themselves to form the
van-guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec, un-
able to overcome their obstinacy, complied with
their request, hoping, perhaps, that some of those
unforeseen accidents which so often determine the

L 2 fate

BOOK II. fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprize

- v- with undeserved success; and convinced that the

effects of a defeat could not be more fatal than those
which would certainly follow upon the retreat of a
May. body which composed one half ol his army. Next

morning the Swiss were early in the field, and
marched with the greatest intrepidity against an
enemy deeply intrenched on every fide, surround-
ed with artillery, and prepared to receive them.
As they advanced, they sustained a furious canon.
152s. ade with great firmnels, and without waiting for

their own artillery, rulhed impetuously upon the
intrenchments. But after incredible efforts of va-
lour, seconded with great spirit by the French, hav-
ing loft their bravest officers and best troops, and
finding that they could make no impression on the
enemy's works, they founded a retreat; leaving
the field of battle, however, like men repulsed,
but not vanquished, in close array, and without re-
ceiving any molestation from the enemy.

oD^ihen oI NEX T day, such as survived set out for their own
of the Mila-
,efe. country; and Lautrec, despairing of being able to

make any farther resistance, retired into France,
after throwing garrisons into Cremona, and a few
other places; all which, except the citadel of Cre-
mona, Colonna soon obliged to surrender.
LofCGenc,. GENOA, however, and its territories, remaining

fubjedt to France, frill gave Francis conliderable
footing in Italy, and made it easy for him to exe-
cute any scheme for the recovery of the Milanese.
But Colonna, rendered enterprizing by continual
success, and excited by the solicitations of the tadti-
on of the Adorni, the hereditary enemies of the Fre-
gofi, who under the protedtion of France poeiifed
the chief authority in Genoa, determined to at-
tempt the reduction of that tate ; and accomplifli-

ed

ed it with amazing facility. He became master of Boox II.
Genoa by an accident as unexpected as that which '-.V-
had given him poffefion of Milan; and almost
without opposition or bloodshed, the power of the
Adorni and the authority of the Emperor were efta-
blilhed in Genoa '.

SUCH a cruel fucceflion of misfortunes asseted Heory VII.

Francis with deep concern, which was not a little against
augmented by the unexpected arrival of an English France.
herald, who, in the name of his Sovereign, de- M 19.
dared war in form against France. This ftep was
taken in consequence of the treaty Wolfey had con-
cluded with the Emperor at Bruges, and which had
hitherto been kept secret. Francis, though he had
reason to be furprized with this denunciation, after
having been at such pains to sooth Henry anu to
gain his minister, received the herald with great
composure and dignity f; and without abandoning
any ofthe schemes he was forming againif the Em-
peror, began vigorous preparations for refitfing this
new enemy. His treasury, however, being ex-
haufted by the efforts which he had already made,
as well as by the rums he expended on his pleaCures,
he had recourse to extraordinary expedients for sup-
plying it. Several new offices were created, and
exposed to sale; the royal demesnes were alienated;
unusual taxes were imposed'; and the tomb of St.
Martin was stripped of a rail of mailive silver, with
which Lewis XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had
encircled it. By means of thele expedients he was
enabled to levy a considerable army, and to put the
frontier towns in a good posture of defence.

' Jovii Vita Ferlin. Davali. p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.
fJournal de Louile de Savoie, p. 199.

L3 THB

BooK Ir. THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous
co---- "to draw as much advantage as possible from the ac-
Charles vi-
fitsEngland. celoion of such a powerful ally ; and the prosperous

situation of his affairs, at this time, permitting him
to set out for Spain, where his pretence was ex-
tremely necessary, he visited the court of England
in his way to that country. He propored by this
interview not only to strengthen the bonds of friend-
ship which united him and Henry, and to excite
him to push the war against France with vigour,
but hoped to remove any disgust or refenrment
Wolfey might have conceived on account of the
cruel disappointment which he had met with in the
late conclave. His success exceeded his most fan-
guine expectations; and by his artful address, dur-
ing a residence of fix weeks in England, he gained
not only the king and the minister, but the nation
itself. Henry, whose vanity was sensibly flattered
by such a visit, as well as by the fludied refpet
with which the Emperor treated him on every oc-
cafion, entered warmly into all his schemes. The
Cardinal, foreseeing from Adrian's age and infirmi-
ties, a sudden vacancy in the papal lee, dissemblcd
or forgot his resentment; and as Charles augment-
ed the pensions which he had already fettled on
him, and renewed his promise of favouring his pre-
tensions to the papacy, with all his interest, he en-
deavoured to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplifliment of the latter, by fresh services.
The nation, sharing in the glory of its monarch,
and pleased with the confidence which the Emperor
placed in the English by creating the earl of Surrey
his high-admiral, discovered no less inclination to
commence hostilities than Henry himself.

TheEnglifh IN order togive Charles, before he left England,
invade a proof of this general ardour, Surrey failed with

such forces as were ready, and ravaged the coafis
of Normandy. He then made a dcfcent on Bre-

tagne,

tagne, where he plundered and burnt Morlaix, and BOOK II
some other places of lets consequence. After thele - '
flight excursions, attended with greater dishonour
than damage toFrance, he repaired to Calais and
took the command of the principal army, confiff-
ing of sixteen thousand men; with which having
joined the Flemish troops under the count de Buren,
he advanced into Picardy. The army which Fran-
cis had assembled, was far inferior in number to
these united bodies. But during the long wars be- with iltI
tween the two nations, the Frenchl had discovered fuccs.
the proper method of defending their country
againil the English. They had been taught by
their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with the
utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing gar.
rilons into every place capable of resistance, by
watching all the enemy's motions, by intercepting
their convoys, attacking their advanced posts, and
liarafling them continually with their numerous ca-
valry, to ruin them with the length of the war, or
to beat them by piece-meal. This plan the duke
of Vendome, the French general in Picardy, pur-
sued with no less prudence than success; and not
only prevented Surrey from taking any town of im-
portance, but obliged him to retire with his army
greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of provisions,
and by the lofa it had sustained in several unsuccess-
ful skirmishes.

THUS ended the second campaign in a war the

most general that hitherto had been kindled in
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's ill-
timed resentment, by the disgusting insolence of his
general, and the caprice of the mercenary troops
he employed, had loft his conquests in Italy, yet
all the powers combined against him had not been
able to make any imprellon on his hereditary domi-
nions; and wherever they either intended or at-
tempted an attack, he was well prepared to receive
them.

L 4 WHILE

BOOK II.

WHILE the Chriitian princes were thus wailing

,o¥7i ,^ each other's strength, Solyman the Magnificent
Rhodes. entered Hungary with a numerous army, and in-

veit)g Belgrade, which was deemed the chief
barrc!¢ of that kingdom againif the Turkish arms,
soon fol-' d it to surrender. Encouraged by this
success, he lirned his victorious arms against the
island of Rhodes, the feat, at that time, of the
knights of St. Jolh: of Jerusalem. This small state
he attacked with iucn a numerous army, as the lords
of Alia have been accufomecd 11 every age to bring
into the field. Two hundred thousand men, and a
fleet of four hundred fail appeared against a town
defended by a garrison conlifting of five thousand
soldiers,. and fix hundred knights, under the com-
mand of Villiers de L'isle Adam, the grand master,
whose wildom and valour rendered him worthy of
that f ation at such a dai;gerousjundcure. No sooner
did he begin to fulpedt the destination of Solyman's
vast armaments, than he dispatched messengers to
all the Christian courts, imploring their aid against
the common enemy. But though every prince in
that age, acknowledged Rhodes to be the great bul-
wark of Christendom in the east, and trusted to the
gallantry of its knights as the best security against
the progress of the Ottoman arms; and though
Adrian, with a zeal which became the head and
father of the church, exhorted the contending
powers to forget their private quarrels, and by
uniting their arms, to prevent the Infidels from
deltroying a society which did honour to the Chrifti-
an name; yet so violent and implacable was the
animosity of both parties, that, regardless of the
danger to which they exposed all Europe, and un-
moved by the intreaties of the grand master, or the
admonitions of the Pope, they fuflered Solyman,
without diRturbance, to carry on his operations
againit Rhodcs. The grand master, after incredible

efforts

effortsof courage, of patience, and ofmilitarv con- Boot I!.
duct during a liege of fix months; after sustaining
many allaults, and disputing every post with amaz-
ing obstinacy, was obliged at last to yield to num- '5.
bers, and having obtained an honourable capitulation
from the Sultan, who admired and refpeted his
virtue, he surrendered the town, which was redu-
ced to a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every
resource E. Charles and Francis, ashamed of hav-
ing occasioned such a loss to Christendom by their
ambitious contests, endeavoured to throw the blame
of it on each other, while all Europe, with greater
justice, imputed it equally to both. The Emperor,
by way of reparation, granted the knights of St.
John the small iflandof Malta, in which they fixed
their residence, retaining, though with less power
and splendour, their ancient spirit, and implacable
enmity to the Infidels.

g Fontanus de Bello Rhodio ap Scard. Script. Rer. German.
Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. Hitt. d'Allem. tom. viii. 57.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BO O K III.

Book III. f H A R LE S, having had the fatisfaaion of
Civil war feeing hoflilities begun between France and
Catl'e. England, took leave of Henry, and arrived in

Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found that
country just beginning to recover order and strength
after the miserics of a civil war to which it had
been exposed during his absence; an account of
the rife and progress of which, as it was but little
connected with the other events that happened in
Europe, hath been reservcd to this place.

Inifirreaion No sooner was it known that the Cortes assembled
ok lr.Tdo. in Galicia had voted the Emperor a/free-gift, with-

(AIt

out obtaining the redress of any grievance, thanBloo It.l
it excited universal indignation. The citizens of'-'
Toledo, who confidered themselves, on account of
the great privileges which they enjoyed, as guardi-
ans of the liberties of the Caffiiian commons, find-
ing that no regard was paid to the remonstrances of
their deputies againif that unconflitutional grant,
took arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing
the gates of the city which were fortified, attacked
the al-cazar, orcafile, which they Toon obliged the
governor to surrender. Emboldened by this fuc-
cess, they deprived of all authority every perion
whom they iifDpet.ed of any attachment to the
court, established a popular form of government,
cormpoed of deputies from the several parifhcs in
the city, and levied troops in their own defence.
The chief leader of the people in there infirredtions
was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of the
commendador of Castile, a young nobleman of a
generous temper, of undaunted courage, and pof-
lessed of the talents as well as of the ambition which
in times of civil discord raile men to power and
eminence .

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia pro- or Scgvia,

duced effeds itill more fatal. Tordefillas, one of .,
their representatives in the late Cortes, had voted
for the donative; and being a bold and haughvy
man, ventured upon his return, to call together inis
fellow citizens in the grent .church, that he mIight
give them, according to cuftoil, an (acCOunt of his
conduct in that assembly. But the multitude, una-
ble to bear his inlblenc, in attempting to Jlulily
what they thought inexclfable, hbnft op'en thle
gates of the church with the utrl-ofl fuiry, a;'d leiz-
ing the unhappy 'Tordefillas, t(digged him tihrougit
the ftrects, with a thoulfnd cuiles and illil]ts, to-

Sal;dov. p. 77

w·arc!^

BOOK III. wards the place of public.execution. In vain did
'.-'-'- the dean and canons come forth in procefiiion with

the holy ficrament, in order to appease their rage.
In vain did the monks of those monasteries by which
they passed, conjure them on their knees to fparc
his life, or at least to allow him time to confels, and
to receive absolution of his fins. Without litlenitig
to thediktates either of humanity or of religion, they
cried out, " That the hangman alone could al)-
solve fich a traitor to his country," hurried himn
along with greater violence, and finding that he
had expired under their hands, they hung him up
with his head downwards on the common gibbct b.
The fame spirit seized the inhabitants of Buigos,
Zamora, and several other cities; and though ticir
representatives, taking warning from the late ,f
Tordefillas, had been so wife as to iave themitlves
by a timely flight, they were burnt in effigy, their
houses razed to the ground, and their effects con-
fumed with fire; and such was the horror the peo-
ple had conceived against them as betrayers of the
public liberty, that not one in those licentious mul-
tit!des would touch any thing, however valuabl,
which had belonged to them c.

M(euis of ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain. had scarce

Adrian, in
orir tn fixed the feat of his government at Valladolid,
pun",them. when he was alarmed with an account of there infur-

Junee s,
iso.5 rections. He immediately assembled the council

to deliberate concerning the proper method of hlp-
prflling them. The counsellors differed in opinion;
lorne insisting it was necessary to check this audaci-
ous spirit in its infancy by a severe execution ofjuf-
tice ; others advising to treat with lenity a people
who had tome refon to be incensed, and not to

b P. Martyr. Ep. 671. c Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep.674,

drive

drive them beyond all the bounds of duty by anBooK III.
ill-timed rigour. The sentiments of the former be- ,".-v
ing warmly supported by the arch-bishop of Grana-
da, prelident of the council, a perlbn of great autho-
rity, but cholerick and impetuous, were approved
of by Adrian, whose zeal to support his master's
authority hurried him into a measure, to which,
from his natural caution and timidity, he would
otherwise have been averse. He commanded Ron-
quillo. one of the King'sjudges, to repair instantly
to Segovia, which had let the first example of mu-
tiny, and to proceed against the delinquents accor-
di;;g to law; and left the people should be so out-
ragcous as to refifl his authority, a considerable body Hi troorp
of troops was appointed to attend him. The Se- ,.pl,,lit
-:ov ans, foreseeing what they might expe&t from aScg'"va,
: ' ,so well known for his austere and unforgiving

. ook arms with one content, and having
i. .! twelve thousand men, shut their gates
it him. Ronquillo, enraged at this inlult, de-

,, .ed them rebels and outlaws; and his troops
ft.li.., all the avenues to the town, hoped that it
would Ibon be obliged to surrender for want of pro-
visions. The inhabitants, however, defended them-
selves with vigour, and having received a conlider-
able reinforcement from Toledo, under the com-
mand of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo, and forced
him to retire, with the lots of his baggage and mi-
litary chest d.

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, a,,,n at Mc-

whom the Emperor had appointed commander in ca,;l,.
chief of the forces in Spain, to anemble an army,
and to besiege the city in form. But the inhabi-
tants of Medina del Campo, where Cardinal Xime-
nes had established a vast magazine of military
stores, would not fhffer him to draw from it a train
of battering cannon, or to detlroy their country-

i Sandov. l z. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Contin. p. r5.

men

EOOK IIT. men with those arms which had bee- prepared
*-"' against the enemies of the kingdom. Fonseca, who

could not execute his orders without artillery, dc-
Aug ti. termined to seize the magazine by force, and the

citizens standing on their defence, he assaulted the
town wlth great brilknels: But his troops were o
warmly received, that despairing of carrying the
place, he stt fire to oIme of the houses, in hopes
that the citizens would abandon the walls in order
to save their families and effcds. L;ftead of that,
the expedient to which he had recourse served only
to increale their fury, and he was repulled with
great infamy, while the flames spreading from street
to street, reduced to amhes almost the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufactures of Segovia,
and several other cities. As the warehouses were
then filled with goods for the approaching fair, the
loss was immenle, and was felt univtrlally; and
this, added to the im.predion which .Iuiica cruel ac-
tion made on people long tmaccuftomed to the hor-
rors of civil war, enraged the Castilians aimoft to
madness. Son eca became the object of general in-
dignation, and .was branded with the narne (f in-
cendiary and enemy to his country; and even the
citizens of Valladolid, v/wlom the prelence of the
Cardinal bad hitherto jeftrained, declared that they
cold no longer remain iuattive 'pectators of the lut-
ferings of their countrymen, and takingnmsw i ti !lo
less fury than the other cities, they burnt Sonic.'s
house to theground, eleted new magiffrates, rail d
ioldiers, appointed officers to command them, all
guarcid their walls with as much diligence, as if an
enemy had been ready to attack them.

,it,.in .;ir- THE Cardinal, who though virtuous and difinte-
tl ts '. refted, and capable of governing the kingdonl with

honour in times of tranquillity, possessid neither the

cour;igc

courage nor sagacity necessary at such a dangerousBooK IIL
jundure, finding himself unable to check thete out-
rages committed under his own eye, attempted to
appease the people, by protesting that Fonseca had
exceeded his orders, and had by his rash conduce
offended him, as Inuch as he had injured them.
This condfcenfion, the effed of irresolution and
timidity, rendered the malecontents bolder and
more insolent; and the Cardinal having soon after
recalled Fonseca, and difmifled his troops, which
he could no longer afford to pay, as the treasury
had been drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemish
ministers, and received no supply from the great
cities which were all in arms, the people were left
at full liberty to a& without controul, and scarce
any shadow of power remained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the The viewt

effecs merely of popular and tumultuary rage; finod Proth
they aimed at obtaining redress of their politicalcommons f
grievances, and an effablifhment of publick liberty CatlJe.
on a secure basis, objects worthy of all the zeal they
discovered in contending for them. The feudal go-
vernment in Spain, was at that time in a state more
favourable to liberty than in any other of the great
European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to
the number of great cities. in that country, a cir-
cumftance of which I have already taken notice,
and which contributes more than any other to mi-
tigate the rigour of the feudal institutions, and
to introduce a more liberal and equal form of
government. The inhabitants of every city
formed a great corporation with valuable immu-
nities and privileges; they were delivered from a
state of fibjedtion and vaiTalage; they were admit-
ted to a considerable share in the legislature; they
acquired the arts of indufiry, without which cities
cannot ftbfift; they accumulated wealth, by en-
gaging in commerce; and being free and indepen-

dent

BooK III. dent themselves, were the guardians of the pub-

'- lick freedom and independence. The genius of the

internal government established in cities, which,
even in countries where despotic power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the
idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their
representatives in the Cortes were accustomed to
check with equal spirit the encroachments of the
King, and the opprellion of the nobles. They en-
deavoured to extend the privileges of their own or-
der; they laboured to shake off the remaining en-
cumbrances with which the feudal tyranny had bur-
dened them; and conscious of being one of the
most considerable orders in the slate, were ambiti-
ous of becoming the most powerful.

The;r con- THE present jundure appeared favourable for
federacy by
the name ofpufhing any new claim. Their sovereign was absent
the Holy from his dominions; by the ill-conduc of his mini-

i' ers he had loft the esteem and affection of his sub-
jeds; the people exasperated by many injuries had
taken arms, though without concert, almost by
general consent; they were animated with fury ca-
pable of carrying them to the most violent extremes;
the royal treasury was exhausted; the kingdom de-
flitute of troops; and the government committed
to a stranger, of great virtue indeed, but of abilities
unequal to lilcl a truss. The first care of Padilla,
and the other popular leaders who observed and de-
termined to improve these circumstances, was to
establish tome form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might at with greater
regularity and purfie one common end; and as the
different cities had been prompted to take arms
by the fame motives,. and were accustomed to con-
fider themlelves as a diflin& body from the reft ot
the fubjecds, they did not find this difficult. A general
convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Depu-

ties

ties appeared there in name of almost all the ci- ooK III.
ties entitled to have representatives in the Cortes.''"
They all bound themtelves by solemn oath, to
live and die in the service of the King, and in de-
fence of the privileges of their order; and affum-
ing the name of the holy funta or aflociation,
proceeded to deliberate concerning the slate of the
nation, and the proper method of redressing its
grievances. The first that naturally presented it-They die.

claim Adri-

elf, was the nomination of a foreigner to be re-.n'8 auho.
gent; this they declared, with one voice, to be arity.
violation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved to fend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him in their name to lay
aside all the ensigns of his office, and to abstain
for the future from the exercise of a jurisdiction
which they had pronounced illegal k.

WHILE they were preparing to execute thisGtffe,,Pe

bold resolution, Padilla accomplished an enterprizeJoanna.
of the greatest advantage to the cause. After
relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tor- Ag. l9
defillas, the place where the unhappy Queen Jo-
anna had resided since the death of her husband,
and being favoured by the inhabitants, was ad-
mitted into the town, and became master of her
person, for the security of which Adrian had ne.
gklced to take proper precautions'. Padilla wait-
ed immediately upon the Queen, and accofling
her with that profound respect, which she exacted
from the few persons, whom The deigned to admit
into her pretence, acquainted her at large with the
miserable condition of her Cafilian fubjecls under
the government of her son, wlo bing defitute of
experience himself, permitted his foreign ministers
to treat them with luch rigour, as had obliged them
to take arms in defence of the liberties of their coun-

k P. Mart. Ep. 691. ' Vita dtll' Inper. Carl. V.
dall Als. Ulloa Ven. 1 509. p, 67. Miniana. Contin, p, 17.

VOL. II. M try.

BooK III. dent themselves, were the guardians of the pub-

v- -'lick freedom and independence. The genius of the

internal government established in cities, which,
even in countries where delpotic power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the
idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their
representatives in the Cortes were accustomed to
check with equal spirit the encroachments of the
King, and the opprelflon of the nobles. They en-
deavoured to extend the privileges of their own or-
der; they laboured to shake off the remaining en-
cumbrances with which the feudal tyranny had bur-
dened them; and conscious of being one of the
most considerable orders in the state, were ambiti-
ous of becoming the moil powerful.

Their con- THE present jundure appeared favourable for
federacy by ...
the name ofpufhing any new claim. Their sovereign was absent
the Holy from his dominions; by the ill-conduCt of his mini-

iters he had loft the efteern and affection of his sub-
jets; the people exasperated by many injuries had
taken arms, though without concert, almost by
general consent; they were animated with fury ca-
pable of carrying them to the most violent extremes;
the royal treasury was exhausted; the kingdom de-
flitute of troops; and the government committed
to a firanger, of great virtue indeed, but of abilities
unequal to ulch a trust. The first care of Padilla,
and the other popular leaders who observed and de-
termined to improve there circumstances, was to
establish some form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might as with greater
regularity and purfie one common end; and as the
different cities had been prompted'to take arms
by the fame motives,, and were accustomed to con-
iiler tlemfelves as a diftind body from the reft of
the fubjedts, they did not find this difficult. A general
convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Depu-

ties

ties appeared there in name of almost all the ci- BooK II.
ties entitled to have representatives in the Cortes. ~
They all bound themselves by solemn oath, to
live and die in the service of the King, and in de-
fence of the privileges of their order; and affum-
ing the name of the holy 7unta or aflociation,
proceeded to deliberate concerning the slate of the
nation, and the proper method of redressing its
grievances. The first that naturally presented it-Theydir

claim Adri-

self, was the nomination of a foreigner to be re-,an' autho-
gent; this they declared, with one voice, to be arity.
violation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved to fend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him in their name to lay
aside all the ensigns of his office, and to abstain
for the future from the exercise of a jurisdiction
which they had pronounced illegal k

WHILE they were preparing to execute thison ofQueen

bold resolution, Padilla accomplished an enterprizeJoann.
of the greatest advantage to the cause. After
relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tor-Aug' 9'
defillas, the place where the unhappy Queen Jo-
anna had resided since the death of her husband,
and being favoured by the inhabitants, was ad-
mitted into the town, and became mafler of her
person, for the security of which Adrian had ne.
glkted to take proper precautions'. Padilla wait-
ed immediately upon the Queen, and accosting
her with that profound respect, which ihe exacted
from the few persons, whom she deigned to admit
into her pretence, acquainted her at large with the
miserable condition of her Castilian fubjeis under
the government of her ion, wiho being destitute of
experience himself, permitted his foreign minilters
to treat them with luch rigour, as had obliged them
to take arms in defence of the liberties of their coun-

k P. Mart. Ep. 691. I Vita dell' inper. Carl. V.
dall Als. Ulloa Ven. 1509. p. 67. Miniana. Contin. p. 17.

VOL. II. M try.

Book III. try, The Queen, as if (he had been awakened out
'--v-- of a lethargy, expressed great astonishment at what

he said, and told him, that as ihe had never heard
till that moment, of the death of her father, or
known the sufferings of her people, no blame
could be imputed to her, but that now she would
take care to provide a sufficient remedy; and in
the mean time, added she, let it be your concern
to do what is necessary for the public welfare.
Padilla, too eager in forming a conclusion agree-
able to his wilhes, mistook this lucid interval of
reason for a perseEt return of that faculty; and
acquainting the Junta with what had happened,
advised them to remove to Tordefillas, and to hold
their meetings in that place. This was instantly
done; but though Joanna received very graciously
an address of the Junta, beseeching her to take
upon her the government of the kingdom, and in
token of her compliance, admitted all the depu-
ties to kifs her hand; though she was present at a
tournament held on that occasion, and seemed
highly satisfied with both these ceremonies, which
were conducted with great magnificence in order
to please her, she soon relapsed into her former
melancholy and sullenness, and could never be
brought by any arguments or intreaties, to sign
any one paper necessary towards the dispatch of
business .

gorynment THE Junta concealing as much as poflible this
ahername, last circumstance, carried on all their deliberati-

ons in her name; and as the Castilians, wlo ido-
lized the memory of Isabella, retained a wonderful
attachment to her daughter, no 'ooner was it
known that (he had consented to aflume the reins
of government than the people expressed the most
universal and immoderate joy; and believing her
recovery to be compleat, ascribed it to a miracu-

Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.

lons

lous interposition of heaven, in order to refcueBooK III.
their country from the oppreflion of foreigners. dde1i
The Junta, conlcious of the reputation and pow- Adrian of
er they had acquired by teeming to aat under the all power
royal authority, were no longer satisfied with re-
quiring Adrian to resign the office of regent, they
detached Padilla to Valladolid with a confidera-
ble body of troops, ordering him to seize such
members of the council as were still in that city,
to conduEt them to Tordefillas, and to bring away
the feals of the kingdom, the public archives and
treasury books. Padilla, who was received by
the citizens, as the deliverer of his country, exe-
cuted his commiflion with great exatnefs; per-
mitting Adrian, however, still to reside in Valla-
dolid, though only as a private person, and with-
out any shadow of power n.

THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of The Empe-

i r^ ~ r as /~ .*~ .>~

..i~ *ror alambed.

there tranfations were transmitted while he was
still in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-
dence and that of his ministers, in having despised
too long the murmurs and remontfrances of
the Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern,
a kingdom the most valuable of any he poffefred,
and in which lay the strength and sinews of his
power, just ready to disown his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the miseries of ci-
vil war. But though his pretence might have
averted this calamity, he could not,. at that time,
visit Spain without endangering the imperial crown,
and allowing the French King full leisure to exe-.
cute his ambitious schemes. The only points now fures with
to be deliberated upon, were whether he ihould rfpea to
attempt to gain the malecontents by indulgence conte,.
and concefflons, or prepare diretly to lupprefs
them by force; and he resolved to make trial of
the former, while at the fame time, if that should

a Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

M 2 fail

BooK III fail of success, he prepared for the latter. For
~''-' this purpose, he issued circular letters to all the

cities of Castile, exhorting them in moit gentle
terms, and with affiirances of full pardon, to lay
down their arms; he promised luch cities as had
continued faithful not to exact from them the
subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offered the
fame favour to those who returned to their duty;
he engaged that no office should be conferred for
the future upon any but native Castilians. On the
other hand, he wrote to the nobles exciting them
to appear with vigour in defence of their own
rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbi-
tant claims of the commons; he appointed the
high admiral, Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the
high coniftable of Castile, Don Inigo de Velafco,
two noblemen of great abilities and influence, re-
gents of the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian;
and he gave them. full power and inftrudions,
if the obstinacy of the malecontents should ren-
der it necessary, to vindicate the royal authority
by force of arms°.

The large THE concessions he was willing to make, which,
ftmrn o at the time of his leaving Spain, would have ful-
the Junta ly satisfied the people, came now too late to pro-
concerning
theirgri. duce any effect. The Junta, relying on the una-
vances. nimity with which the nation submitted to their

authority, elated with the success which hitherto
had accompanied all their undertakings, and feeing
no military force collected to defeat or obstruct their
designs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been, employed for
some time in preparing a remonstrance containing
a large enumeration not only of the grievances, ol
which they craved redress, but of such new regu-
lations as they thought necessary for the security
of their liberties. This remonstrance, which is

o P. Heutcr. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 188.

dividec

divided into many articles relating to all the dif-BooK III.
ferent members of which the constitution was'"-'
conpofed, as well as to the various departments
in the administration of government, furnishes us
with more authentic evidence concerning the in-
tentions of the Junta, than can be drawn from the
teftiinony of ::le later Spanifhl historians, who liv-
ed in times when it became fashionable and even
necef'ary to represent the condutt of the malecon-
tentAs in the worst light, and as flowing from the
worst motives. After a long preamble concern-
ing the various calamities under which the nation
groaned, and the errors and corruption in govern-
ment to which there were to be imputed, they
take notice of the exemplary patience wherewith
the people had endured them, till felf-prefervati-
on, and the duty which they owed to their coun-
try, had obliged them to aflemble in order to pro-
vide in a legal manner for their own safety, and
that of the constitution: For this purpose they de-
manded that the King would be pleated to return
to his Spanish dominions, and reside there, as all
their former monarchs had done; that he would
not marry but with content of the Cortes; that
if he should be obliged at any time to leave the
kingdom, it shall not be lawful to appoint any so-
reigner to be regent; that the present nomination
of Cardinal Adrian to that office shall instantly be
declared void; that he would not, at his return,
bring along with him any Flemings or other
firangers; that no foreign troops shall, on any
pretence whatever, be introduced into the king-
dom; that none but natives shall be capable of
holding any office or benefice either in church or
state; that no foreigners shall be naturalized; that
free quarters shall not be granted to soldiers, nor
to those of the King's houfhold for any longer
time than fix days, and that only when the court
is in a progress; that all the taxes (hall be reduced
to the fame state they were in at the death of Queen
labella; that all alienations of the royal demesnes

M 3 or

BoOK III. or revenues since that Queen's death ihall be re-
'v"V3 fumed; that all new offices created since that pe-

riod be abolished; that the subsidy granted by the
late Cortes in Galicia shall not be exacted; that in
all future Cortes each city shall fend one reprefen-
tative of the clergy, one of the gentry, and one
of the commons, each to be electei by his own
order; that the crown shall not influence or direct
any city with regard to the choice of its reprefen-
tatives; that no member of the Cortes shall re-
ceive an office or pension from the King, either for
himself or for any of his family, under pain of
death, and confiscation of his goods; that each
city or community (hall pay a competent salary to
its representatives for his maintenance during his
attendance on the Cortes; that the Cortes shall as.
femble once in three years at leaf, whether fim.
moned by the King or not, and shall then inquire
into the observation of the articles now agreed up-
on, and deliberate concerning public affairs; that
the rewards which have been given or promised
to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia,
shall be revoked; that no gold, silver, or jewels,
Thall, upon pain of death, be sent out of the
kingdom; that judges shall have fixed salaries
assigned them, and shall not receive any share of
the fines and forfeitures of persons condemned by
them; that no grant of the goods of persons ac-
cufed ihall be valid, if given before sentence was
pronounced against them; that all privileges which
the nobles have at any time obtained, to the pre-
judice of the commons, shall be revoked; that the
government of cities or towns shall not be put into
the hands of the nobles; that the lands of the no-
bles shall be fibject to all public taxes in the fame
manner as those of the commons; that an inquiry
be made into the conduct of those who have been en-
trusted with the management of the royal patrimo-
ny since the accession of Ferdinand; and if the King
do not within thirty days appoint persons properly

qualified

qualified for that service, it (hall be lawful for the Boox IIb
Cortes to nominate them; that Indulgences shall .-.
not be preached or dispersed in the kingdom until
the cause of publilhing them be examined and ap-
proved of by the Cortes; that all the money arising.
from the sale of Indulgences, (hall be faithfully
employed in carrying on war against the Infidels;
that such prelates as do not reside in their dioceses
fix months in the year, (hall forfeit their revenues
during the time they are absent; that the ecclefiafti-
cal judges and their officers shall not exac greater
fees than those which are paid in the secular courts;
that the present archbishop of Toledo, being a
foreigner, be compelled to resign that dignity,
which (hall be conferred upon a Castilian; that the
king (hall ratify and hold as good service done to
him and to the kingdom all the proceedings of the
Junta, and pardon any irregularities which the cities
may have committed from an excess of zeal in a
good cause: That he shall promise and swear in the
moR solemn manner to observe all there articles,
and on no occasion attempt either to elude, or to
repeal them; and that he shall never solicit the
Pope or any other prelate to grant him a difpenfa-
tion or absolution from this oath and promise '.

SucH were the chief articles presented by the The spirt

Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal institutions hh i
in the several kingdoms of Europe were originally breathed.
the fame, the genius of those governments which
arose from them bore a strong resemblance to each
other, and the regulations which the Castilians at-
tempted to establish on this occasion, differ little
from those which other nations laboured to procure
in their struggles with their monarchs for liberty.
The grievances complained of, and the renmcdies
proposed by the Englilh commons in their contests
with the princes of the House of Stuart, particu-

Sandov. ao6. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

M 4 lary

BooK III.larly resemble those upon which the Junta now in-
'-'""fiffed. But the Spaniards had already acquired ideas

of their own liberty and independence, had formed
bold and generous sentiments concerning govern-
ment, and discovered an extent of political know.
ledge, to which the Engliff did not attain till more
than a century afterwards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit

of reformation among the Castilians, hitherto un-
restrained by authority, and emboldened by fuc-
cess, became too impetuous, and prompted the
Junta to propose innovations which, by alarming the
other members of the constitution, proved fatal to
their cause. The nobles, who, instead ofobftrut-
ing, had favoured or connived at their proceed-
ings, while they confined their demands of redress
to such grievances as had been occasioned by the
King's want of experience, and by the imprudence

Irritates the and rapaciousness of his foreign ministers, were filled
nobles. with indignation when they began to. touch the

privileges of their order, and plainly saw that the
meafiures of the commons tended no lets to break
the power of the aristocracy, than to limit the pre-
rogatives of the crown. The resentment which
they had conceived on account of Adrian's promo-
tion to the regency, abated considerably upon the
Emperor's railing the constable and admiral to a
joint power with him in that office; and as tlcir
pride and dignity were less hurt by filffering the
prince to possess an extensive prerogative, than by
admitting the high pretensions of the people, they
determined to give their sovereign the afliftance
which he had demanded of them, and began to as-
femble their valfals for that purpose.

'rredepu- THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with impati-
ties of th ence the Emperor's antver to their remonifrance,
Junta dare
not preoent which they had appointed some of their number
their re- tO
mnonftranc.

to present. The members entrusted with this cornm- BooK I1.
mi:lrion set out immediately for Germany, but '-"'
having received at different places certain intelli-
gence from court, that they could not venture to
appear there without endangering their lives,
they ftopt short in their journey, and acquainted
the Junta of the information which hnd been
given them . This excited sIch violent pallions
as tranlpoited the whole paity beyond all bounds
of prudence, or of moderation. lhat a Ca!tilian
King should deny his ulbjects access into his pre-
fence, or refuse to liften to their humble petitions,
was represented as an ac of tyranny 16 unprece-
dented and intolerable, that nothing now remain-
ed but with arms in their hands to drive away that
#ravenous band of foreigners which encompassed
the throne, who after having devoured the wealth
of the kingdom, found it neceifary to prevent the
cries of an injured people from reaching the ears of
their sovereign. ' Many infirled warmly on approv-Vilent plo-
ing a motion which had formerly been made, for Tif'iunt
depriving Charles, during the life of his mother,
of the regal titles and authority which had been too
raflly conferred upon him, from a falie lippolition
of her total inability for government Some pro-
posed to provide a proper perf)n to aftifl her in the
adminiftiation of public affairs, by marrying the
Qeen to the Prince of Calabria, the heir of the
Aragonefe Kings of Naples, who had been de-
tairtd in prioin since the time that Ferdinand
had di!'poflefed his anceltors of' thir crow-. All
agreed that, as the hopes of obtaining redrels
and security merely by presenting their reqqief-s
to their sovereign, had kept them too long in :1
irate of inadion, and prevented them from taking
advantage of the unanimity with which the nation
declared in their favour, it was now necef.ary to
colled their whole force, and to exert themselves

Sanlov. 143.

w ith

BOOK III. with vigour, in opposing this fatal combination of
'-v ' the ki -g and nobles against their liberties A.

Take the THEY soon took the field with twenty thoufani
field.

men. Violent dinputes arote concerning the com-
mand of this army. Padilla, the darling of the
people and soldiers, was the only person whom
they thought worthy of this honour. But Don
Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the CondO de
Uruena, a young nobleman of the first order,
having lately joined the commons out of private re-
fentment against the Emperor, the refped due to
his birth, together with a secret desire of difap.
pointing Padilla, of whose popularity many of the
Junta had become jealous, procured him the office
of general; though he Goon gave them a fatal proof,
that he possessed neither the experience, the abili-
ties, nor the steadiness which that important itati-
on required.

The regents THE Regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco
arm. *as the place of rendezvous for their troops, which,

though far inferior to those of the commons
in number, excelled them greatly in discipline
and in valour. They had drawn a confidera-
ble body of regular and veteran infantry out of
Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the chief
ltrength of their army, consisted mostly of gen-
t!emen accustomed to the military life, and ani-
mated with the martial spirit peculiar to their or-
der in that age. The infantry of the Junta was
formed entirely es citizens and mechanics, little
acquainted with the use of arms. The small body
of cavalry they had been able to raise, was com-
polfd of persons of ignoble birth, and perfect
strangers to the service into which they entered.
'The character of the generals differed no lets than
than that,of their troops. The royalists were com-

m P. Mart. Ep. 688.

manded

manded by the Conde de Haro, the conftable'sBoox II.
eldest son, an officer of great experience, and of dif- '- '
tingui(hed abilities.

GIRON marched with his army directly to Rio- mprudence
feco, and seizing the villages and palses aroundd illfuc-

I0~v~ urru ·-·l·--t~ cers of the

it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged either gneral of
to surrender for want of provisions, or to fightthe JuL"'a
with disadvantage before all their troops were
assembled. But he had not the abilities, nor his
troops the patience and dilcipline necessary for the
execution of filch a scheme. The Conde de Haro
found little difficulty in conducting a considerable
reinforcement through all his poRts into the town;
and Giron despairing of being able to reduce it,
advanced suddenly to Vila-panda, a place belong-
ing to the Conflable, in which the enemy had their
chief magazine of provisions. By this ill-judged
motion, he left Tordefillas open to the royalists,
whom the Conde de Haro led thither in the night, Decemb. 5.
with the utmost secrecy and dispatch; and attack-
ing the town, in which Gir.n had left no other
garrison than a regiment of priests raised by the
bishop of Zamora, he, by break of day, forced his
way into it after a desperate resistance, became
master of the queen's person, took prisoners many
members of the Junta, and recovered the great
feal, with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loll.all the reputa-

tion and authority which they derived from seeming
to aft by the queen's commands; fich of the nobles
as had hitherto been wavering or undetermined in
their choice, now joined the regents with all their
forces; and an universal consternation ieized the
partizans of the commons. This was much in-
creased by the suspicions they began to entertain of
Giron, whom they loudly accused of having be-
trayed Tordefillas to the enemy; and though that
charge seems to have been destitute of foundation,

the

BooK III. the filccefs of the royaliifs being owing to Giron's

C*'Y * ill-coillutt rather ;han to his treachery, he so entirely

loft credit with his party, that he reiigned his com-
mitfon, and retires to one of his cafles ".

The junta SUCH members of the Junta as had escaped the
adhere to
,hciTfrrty. enemy's hands at Tordelillas, fled to Valladolid;

and as it would have required long time to supply
the places of those who were prioiners, by a new
election, they made choice among themselves of a
small number of persons to whom they committed
the' fipreme diretion of affairs. Their army,
.which grew stronger every day by the arrival of
troops from different parts of the kingdom,
marched likewise to Valladolid; and Padilla being
appointed commander in chief, the spirits of the
soldiery revived, and the whole party forgetting the
late misfortune, continued to express the fame ar-
dent zeal for the liberties of their country, and the
fame implacable animosity againfl their oppref-

ibos.

Their lre- WHAT they flood most in need of, was money
rfingrr:c- to pay their troops. A great part of the'current
"'n. coin had been carried out of the kingdom by the

Fltmings; the fRated taxes levied in times of peace
were inconsiderable; commerce of every kind be-
irg interrupted by the war, the rum which they
yielded decreased daily ; and the Junta were afraid
of difg!iting the people by burdening them with
new impositions, to which, in that age, they were
little atcuftomed. But from this difficulty they
were extricated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's
wife, a woman of noble birth, of great abilities,
of boundless ambition, and animated win the most
ardent zeal in fuipport of the cause of the Junta.
She, with a boldnels superior to those superstitious

Miscellaneous Tra»ts by Dr. Mich. Gedde, vol. i. 278.

fears

fears which often influence her sex, proposed toBoo ill.
seize all the rich and magnificent ornaments in the'----v '
cathedral of Toledo; but left that action, by its
appearance of impiety, might offend the people,
the and her retinue marched to the church in so-
lemn procelfion, in mourning habits, with tears in
their eyes, and beating their breasts, and falling on
their knees, implored the pardon of the faints whole
shrines (he was about to violate. By this artifice,
which screened her from the imputation offacri-
,lege, and perfiladed the people that necessity and
zeal for a good cause had constrained her, though
with reluctance, to venture upon this action, ihe
procured a considerable supply of money for the
Junta°. The regents, no less at a loss how to
maintain their troops, the revenues of the crown
having either been dilfipated by the Flemings, or
being seized by the commons, were obliged to take
the queen's jewels and the plate belonging to the
nobility, and apply them to that purpolie; and
when these failed, they obtained a small lum by way
of loan from the king of Portugal P.

THE nobility discovered great unwillingness tLoreti,

proceed to extremities with the Junta. They in negoti-
were animated with no lets hatred than the com-"h aolity.
mons againfl the Flemings; they approved much
of several articles in the remonstrance; they
thought the jundure favourable, not only for re-
drelling pal: grievances, but so' rendering the con-
flitution more perfec and secure by new regu-
lations; they were afraid that while the two orders
of which the legislature was compored, wafted
each other's strength by mutual hostilities, the crown
would rife to power on the ruin or weakness of
both, and encroach no less on the independence
of the nobles, than on the privileges of the com-

o Sandov. 08. DiE. de Bayle, Art. Padilla.
PP. Mart. Ep. 718.

moIlS.

BOOK Jpl mons. To this disposition were owing the fre-

.---.-- quent overtures of peace which the regents made

to the Junta, and the continual negotiations they
carried on during the progress of their military
operations. Nor were the terms which they offer-
ed unreasonable; for on incondition that the Junta
would pais from a few articles most fuibverfive of
the royal authority, inor consistent with the rights
of the nobility, they engaged to procure the Em-
peror's content to their other demands, which, if
lie, through the ifluence of evil counsellors, should
refuse, several of the nobles promired to join with
them in order to extort it . Such divisions, lhow-
ever, prevailed among the members of the Junta,
as prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging
vwit prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with that
mean jealousy and diftrutt of each other, which ri-
vallhip in commerce or in grandeur is apt to inspire;
the constable, by his influence and promiles, had
prevailed on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon
the Junta, and other noblemen had shaken the
fidelity of tome of the lesser cities; no person had
arien among the commons of such superior abili-
ties or elevation of mind, as to acquire the direc-
tion of their affairs; Padilla, their general, was
a man of popular qualities, but distrusted for that
reason by those of highel: rank who adhered to
the Junta; the concduct of Giron led the people to
view with luli)iciol every person of noble birth
who joined their party ; so that the strongest marks
of irrelolution, mutual distrust, and mediocrity of
genius, appeared in all their proceedings at this
tine. Alter many confultaticins held concerning
the terms propo(ed by the regents, they suffered
themlelves to be so carried away by resentment
against the nobility, that rejecting all thoughts of
accommodation, they threatened to strip them of

i P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713. Gcddes'sTrads, i. 261.

the

the crown-lands, which they or their anceltors hadBooK III.
usurped, and to re-annex them to the royal domain;
And on this preposterous scheme, which would at
once have annihilated all the liberties for which
they had been itruggling, by rendering the kings
of Castile ablolute and independent on their people,
they were so intent that they exclaimed with less
vehemence against the exations of the foreign mi-
nifrers,than against the immense power and wealth
of the nobles, and leemed to hope that they might
make peace with Charles, by offering to enrich him
with their spoils.

THE success which Padilla had met with in fe- Elated with

veral small encounters, and in reducing rome in- in ffmccs
considerable towns, helped to precipitate them in- fl ren-
to this measure, filling them with such confidenceco°'nt
in the valour of their troops, that they hoped for
an easy vicory over the royalilts. Padilla, that his
army might not remain inactive, while flushed with
good fortune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place
of greater itrength and importance than any he
had hitherto attacked, and which was defended by
a filfficient garrison; and though the besieged
made a desperate resistance, and the admiral at-
tempted to relieve them, he took the town by M'ch,
storm, and gave it up to be plundered by his fol- 5S
diers. If he had marched instantly with his vieto-
rious army to Tordefillas, the head quarters of the
royaliits, he could scarce have failed of making an
effectual imprefflion on their troops, furprized at
the brilknels of his operation, and far fiom being
of lufficient strength to give him battle. But the
fickleness and imprudence of the Junta prevented Imprudence
his taking this ftep. Incapable alike of carrying cn'oa.
on war, or of making peace, they listened again
to overtures of accommodation, and even agreed
to a short fiifpenfion of arms. This negotiation
terminated in nothing; but while it was carrying

on,

BOOK In. on, many of Padilla's soldiers, unacquainted with

"y (lIthe restraints of di;cipline, went off with the booty

they had got at Torrdobaton; and others, weari-
ed out by the uinufi.l length of the campaign, de-
ferted r The conflable too had leisure to assemble
his forces at Burgos, and to prepare every thing
for marching, and as soon as the truce expired, he
effeted a junEtion with the Co:.de de Haro, in
1pite of all Padilla's efforts to prevent it. They
advanced immediatcly towards Torrelobaton, and
Padilla finding the number of his troops lb diminish.
ed that he duii not risk a battle, attempted to re-
treat to Toro, which if hle could have accomplibh.
ed, the invasion of Navarre at thatjuncture by the
Freach, and the necellity which the regents must
have been under of detacling men to that kingdom,

The nnbles might have laved liim from danger. But Haro,
-ttack the
a.:i or'the feniible how fatal the coniequences would be of sus-
JUit2, ferinig him toefcape, marched with such rapidity at
Apr" i the head ot his cavalry, that he came up with him

near Villalar, and without waiting for his infantry,
advanced to the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued
and disheartened by their precipitate retreat, which
they could not dillinguiih from a flight, happened
at t!:at time to be paliing over a ploughed field, on
'hich fiich a viole-nt rain had fallen, that the fol-
dici s suL;k almnoft to the knees at every ftep, and
remained exposcd to the fire of lome field-pieces
xwhich the rcyyall;s had brought along with them
tn(d et' iXil these circiinlfanclcs fb dilconcerted and intimi-

dated raw illdiers, that without facing the enemy,
or Inaki ig any reliflance, they fled in'the utnoll:
coiifulion. Piadilla exerted himfclf with extraordi-
nary courage and a 'tivity in order to rally them,
tholigh in viin ; fear rendering them deaf both to
his thieats and intreaties: Upon which, finding
tiiitiels irlrt-iitIvble, and resolving not to furvile
tie dailigract of that day, and the iuin of his party,

T andov 336

fie

he rushed into the thickest of the enemy; but be- BOOK II.
ing wounded and dismounted, he was taken pri-"'"
toner. His principal officers shared the fame fate;
the common soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt,
the nobles being too generous to kill men who
threw down their arms'.

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser

Padilla to linger long in expeEtatidn of what Ihould
befall him. Next day he was condemned to lose
his head, though without any regular trial, the
notoriety of the crime being supposed sufficient to
filperfede the formality of a legal process. He was Pdill,
led instantly to execution, together with Don John thir gput
Bravo, and Don Francis Maldonada, the former death.
commander of the Segovians, and the latter of the
troops of Salamanca. Padilla viewed the approach
of death with calm but undaunted fortitude; and
when Bravo, his fellow-fufferer, exprefed some in-
dignation at hearing himself proclaimed a traitor,
he checked him, by observing, " That yesterday
was the time to have displayed the spirit of gentle-
men, this day to die with the meekness of Chrifli-
ans." Being permitted to write to his wife and to
the community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and virtuous
tenderness, and the latter with the exultation na-
tural to one who confidered himself as a martyr for

t Sandov. 345, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin.

p. 26. Epitome de la vida y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V. pei
D.Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, 4to. Madr. 1627. p. 19.

VOL. II. N the

BOOK III. the liberties of his country u. After this, he sub-
- _--' mitted quietly to his fate. Most of the Spanish his-

torians, accuflomed to ideas of government, and

of

u The strain of these letters is so eloquent and high spirited
that I have translated them for the entertainment of my readers.

ihe Letter of Don John Padilla to his Wife.

SEN NORA,

4' IF your grief did not afflic me more than my own

death, I ihould deem myelf perfectly happy. For the end of
life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a mark of
diftinguilhing favour upon that pe 'on, for whom he appoints a
death such as mine, which though lamented by many, is ne-
verthelefs acceptable unto him. It would require more time
than I now have to write any thing that could afford you
consolation. That my enemies will not grant me, nor do I
wish to delay the reception of that crown which I hope to en-
joy. You may bewail your own loss, but not my death, which,
being so honourable, ought not to be lamented by any. My foul,
for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to you. You will
receive it, as the thing in this world which you valued molt. I
do not write to my father Pedro Lopez, because I dare not, for
though I have lhewn myself to be his son in daring to lose my
life, I have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not
attempt to fay any thing more, that I may not tire the executi-
oner who waits for me, and that I may not excite a fulpicion,
that in order to prolong my life, I lengthen out my letter. My
servant Soffa, an eye witness, and to whom I have communi-
cated my mofi secret thoughts, will inform you of what I can-
not now write; and thus I reft, expecting the instrument of
yourgrief, and of my deliverance."

His Letter to the city of Toledo.

"To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole

world, free from the time of the mighty Goths; to thee, who
by sledding the blood of frangers, as well as thy own blood,
hall recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neighbouring cities.
Thy legitimate Ton Juan de Padilla gives information, how by
the blood of his body, thy ancient victories are to be refreshed.
If fate hath not permitted nv actions to be placed among your
successful and celebrated exploits, the fault hath been in my ill
fortune not in my good will. This I requet of thee as of a
mother, to accept, since God hath given me nothing more to

lose

of regal power very different from those upon Boot Ill.
which he ated, have been so eager to testify their ' 9
disapprobation of the cause in which he was en-
gaged, that they have neglected, or have been afraid
to dojuftice to his virtues; and by blackening his
memory, have endeavoured to deprive him of that
pity, which isfeldom denied to illustrious Sufferers.

THE vitory at Villalr proved as decisive as it Ruinortc

was compleat. Valladolid, the most zealous of all Prty.
the aflociated cities, opened its gates immediately
to the conquerors, and being treated with great
clemency by the Regents, Medina del Campo,
Segovia, and many other cities followed its exam-
ple. This sudden dissolution of a confederacy,
formed not upon flight difgufRs or upon trifling
motives, into which the whole body of the people
had entered, and which had been allowed time to
acquire Come degree of order and confidence by
eftablilhing a regular plan of government, is the
itrongeft proof of the inability of its leaders, or of
some secret discord reigning among the members.
Though part of the army by which they had been
subdued, was obliged, a few days after the battle,
to march towards Navarre, in order to check the
progress of the French in that kingdom, nothing
could prevail on the dejeded commons of Castile

lose for thy fake, than that which I am now to relinquish. I
am more solicitous about thy good opinion than about my own
life. The fliiftings of fortune which never fland fill, are ma-
ny. But this I fee with infinite consolation, that I, the lealf of
thy children, susser death for thee: and that thou haft ntrfed
at thy breats such as may take vengeance for my wiongs Ma-
nv tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which I am
dill ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end will teflify
what was my desire. My foul I recommend to thee as to the
patrolnef of Chriflianity. Of my body I fay nothing, for it is
not mine. I can write nothing more, for, at this very moment,
I feel the knife at my throat with greater dread of thy difplea-
lure, thanapprehenfionof my own,pain." Sandov. Hilt. vol. i.
P. 478.

N2 .to

BOOK Ill. t take arms again, and to embrace such a favoura-
'..v'm ble opportunity of acquiring thole rights aud privi-
Padilia'c wifedefends leges for which they had appeared so zealous. The
Toledo with city of Toledo alone, animated by Donna Maria
great rpirit. Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who, instead of bewail-

ing her husband with a womanish sorrow, prepared
to r.venge his death, and to prosecute that caule in
defence of which he had suffered, must be except-
ed. Refpedt for her iex, or admiration of her
courage and abilities, as well as sympathy with her
misfortunes, and veneration for the memory of her
husband, secured her the fame ascendant over the
people which he had possessed. The prudence and
vigour with which she acted, justified the confi-
dence they placed in her. She wrote to the French
general in Navarre, encouraging him to invade
Cattile by the offer of powerful afiftance. She en-
deavoured by her letters and emissaries to revive the
spirit and hopes of other cities. She railed soldiers,
and exaced a great fum from the clergy belonging
to the cathedral to defray the expence of keeping
them on foot'. She employed every artifice that
could interest or inflame the populace. For this
purpose the ordered crucifixes to be uted by her
troops inflead of colours, as if they had been at
war with infidels, and enemies of religion; she
marched through the streets of Toledo with her
son, a young child, clad in deep mourning, feated
on a mule, having a standard carried before him
representing the manner of his father's execution '.
By all there means the kept the minds of the peo-
ple in such perpetual agitation as prevented their
passions from fubtiding, and rendered them insen-
fible of the dangers to which they were exposed by
flanding alone in opposition to the royal authority.
While the army was employed in Navarre, the
Regents were unable to attempt the rcdudtion of

P. Mart. Ep. 727. Sandov. 3 75. Tole

Toledo

Toledo by force; and all their endeavours either BooK Iir.
to diminish Donna Maria's credit with the people, ?
or to gain her by large promises and the folicita-
tions of her brother the Marquis de Mondeair,
proved ineffectual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army returned
into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even this made
no impreflion on the intrepid and obstinate cou-
rage of Donna Maria. She defended the town
with vigour, her troops beat the royalists in several
iallies, and no progress was made towards reducing
the place, till the clergy, whom Ihe had high-
ly offended by invading their property, having
received information of the death of William
de Croy archbishop of Toledo, whose poffeflion
of that fee was their chief grievance, and that the
Emperor had named a Castilian to succeed him,
began to turn against her. They persuaded the
people that she had acquired such influence over
them by the force of enchantments, that she was
atlilted by a familiar demon which attended her
in the form of a Negro-maid, and that by its
suggestions she regulated every part of her con-
duCt . The credulous multitude, whom their im-
patience of a long blockade, and despair of obtain-
ing succours either from the cities formerly in con-
federacy with them, or from the French, rendered
delirous of peace, took arms againfi her, and
driving her out of the city surrendered it to the Odober :6.
royaliffs. She retired to the citadel, which the de-
fended with amazing fortitude four months longer;
and when reduced to the last extremities, she
made her escape in disguise, and fled to Portugal, Feb. ,o.
where she had many relations'. sa2.

P. Mart. Ep. 727.
'Sandov. 37. P. Mart. Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

N 3 UPON

BOOK III. UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered
t-1 ese Tranquillity was re-established in Castile; and this
Fatal effests , ' -
of thil civil bold attempt of the commons, like all uniuccefs-
war. ful infurreAions, contributed to confirm and ex-

tend the power of the crown, which it was in-
tended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes
fill continued to make a part of the Castilian con-
itiution, and were summoned to meet whenever
the king flood in need of money; but inltead of
adhering to their ancient and cautious form of ex-
amining and redieffing public grievances, before
they proceeded to grant any supply, the more
courtly custom <,f voting a donative in the first
place was introduced, and the Sovereign having ob-
tained all he wanted, never allowed them to enter
into any scrutiny, or to attempt any reformation
injurious to his authority. The privileges which the
cities had enjoyed were gradually circumscribed or
abolished; their commerce began from this period
to decline; and becoming less wealthy and less po-
pulous, they loft that power and influence which
they had acquired in the Cortes.

The pro. WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities of
grf of the civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn by
in Valencia. intestine commotions still more violent. The at-

fociation which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty, and which was distinguished by the name
of the Germanada, continued to sublist after the
Emperor's departure from Spain; and the mem-
bers of it, upon pretext of defending the coasts
againit the descents of the Corsairs of Barbary,
and under fanrion of that permiflion, which
Charles had rashly granted them, refused to lay
down their arms. But as the grievances, which the
Valencians aimed at redrefling, proceeded from the
arrogance and exactions of the nobility, rather

than

than from any unwarrantable exercise of the royal Boo III.
prerogative, their resentment turned chiefly againfti
the former. As soon as they were allowed the use
of arms, and became conscious of their own
itrength, they grew impatient to take vengeance
of their oppressors. They drove the nobles out of
most of the cities, plundered their houses, wafted
their lands, and assaulted their castles. They then
proceeded to eledt thirteen persons, one from each
company of tradesmen established in Valencia, and
committed the administration of government to
them, under pretext that they would reform the
laws, establish one uniform mode of dispensing jus-
tice without partiality, or regard to the diftindion
of ranks, and thus restore men to some degree of
their original equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in fel'-

defence. Hostilities began, and were carried on
with all the rancour, with which resentment at
opprefiion inspired the one party, and the idea of
insulted dignity animated the other. As no person
of honourable birth, or of liberal education join-
ed the Germanada, the councils as well as
troops of the confederacy were conducted by
low mechanics, who acquired the confidence of an
enraged multitude chiefly by the fierceness of their
zeal, and the extravagance of their proceedings.
Among such men, the laws introduced in civiliz-
ed nations, in order to restrain or moderate the
violence of war, were unknown or despised; and
they committed the wildest acts of cruelty and
outrage.

THE Emperpr occupied with fupprefling the infur-

reCtion in Castile, which more immediately threat-
ened the subversion of his power and prerogative,
was unable to give much attention to the tumults

N 4 in

BOOK III. in Valencia, and left the nobility of that kingdom

to fight their own battles. His viceroy, the Con-
de de Melito, had the supreme command of the
forces which the nobles raised among their vassals.
The Germanada carried on the war during the years
1520 and 21, with a more persevering courage,
than could have been expected from a body so tu-
multuary, under the conduct of such leaders. They
defeated the nobility in several aEtions, which,
though not considerable, were extremely sharp.
They repulsed them in their attempts to reduce dif-
ferent towns. But the nobles, by their superior
skill in war, and at the head of troops more accuf-
tomed to service, gained the advantage in most of
the rencounters. At length, they werejoined by a
body of Castilian cavalry, which the regents dif-
patched towards Valencia, soon after their victory
over Padilla at Villalar, and by their assistance they
acquired such superiority, that they entirely broke
and ruined the Germanada. The leaders of the
party were put to death, almost without any forma-
lity of legal trial, and suffered such cruel punish-
ments, as the sense of recent injuries prompted the
nobles to inflict. The government of Valencia was
re-established in its ancient form b.

Appear- IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame spirit
ancefofdif.of disaffection and mutiny, which reigned in the
affe&tion in
Aragon. other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear; but by

the prudent conduct of the viceroy, Don John de
Lanuza, they were so far composed, as to prevent
their breaking out into any open infurredtion.
But in the island of Majorca, which was annexed

b Argenfola Anales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 118. Sayns

Anales de Aragon, cap. 5, 1z, &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib. 33. &
34. pafliIn. Ferrer. Hist. d'Efpagne. viii. 542, 564, &c.

to

to thecrown of Aragon, the fame causes that had BooK IIT
excited the commotions in Valencia produced `' -'
effects no less violent. The people, impatient iniurreaion
of the hardflips which they endured under te in Majorca.
rigid jurifdidtion of the nobility, took arms in March ,
a tumultuary manner; deposed their viceroy; 51
drove him out of the island; and mafiacred every
gentleman who was so unfortunate as to fall into
their hands. The obstinacy with which the peo-
ple of Majorca persisted in their rebellion, was
equal to the rage with which they began it. It
required no inconsiderable effort to reduce them
to obedience; and tranquillity was re-eftablilfed
in every part of Spain before they could be brought
to submit to their sovereign d.

WHILE the spirit of difaffedion was so general Cau1res

r . & which prC-

among the Spaniards, and so many caules con-vented the
curred in precipitating them into such violent "ni°"Ef the
measures, in order to obtain the redress of their tens.
grievances, it may appear strange, that the
malecontents in the different kingdoms should
have carried on their operations without any
mutual concert, or even any intercourle with
each other. By uniting their councils and arms,
they might have acted both with greater force,
and with more effect. The appearance of a
national confederacy would have rendered it no
lets relpedtable among the people, than formida-
ble to the crown; and the Emperor, unable to
refiff such a combination, mlff have complied with
any terms which the members of it thought fit
to prescribe. Many things, however, prevented
the Spaniards from forming themflllves into
one body, and pursuing common mealures. The

d Argenfola Anales de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. Ilif. viii.

q42. Sayas Anales de Aiagon, cap. 7, Il, 14, 76, 81.
lcerreras Hilt. d'Erfagnc, viii. 5 9, &c. 609.

people

BOOK III. people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though

c'vc". they were become the fubjedts of the fame fove

reign, retained, in full force, their national anti.
pathy to each other. The remembrance of their
ancient rivalfhip and holtilities was still recent,
and the sense of reciprocal injuries so entire, as to
be incompatible with their adting with confidence
and concert. Each nation chore rather to depend
on its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle
alone, than to implore the aid of neighbours,
whom they diftrufled and hated. At the fame
time, the forms of government in the several
kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the
grievances of which they complained, as well
as the alterations and amendments which they at-
tempted to introduce, so various, that it was not
easy to bring them to unite in any common plan.
To this disunion Charles was indebted for the
preservation of his Spanish crowns; and while
each of the kingdoms followed separate measures,
all of them were obliged at last to conform to
the will of their Sovereign.

rThe Epre- THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled
dentand his fubjeds who had been in arms against him
geneoutbe- with deep apprehensions; from which he soon
wards the delivered them by an ad of clemency, no less
ten.on" prudent than generous. After a rebellion so gene-

ral, scarce twenty perlbns, among so many crimi-
nals obnoxous to the law, had been punished ca-
pitally in Castile. Though strongly solicited by
his council, Charles refused to ihed any more
blood by the hands of the executioner; and pub-
oa. 28. lifhed a general pardon, extending to all crimes

committed since the commencement of the infur-
redions, from which only fourscore were excepted.
Even there he seems to have named, rather with
an intention to intimidate others, than from
any inclination to seize them; for when an offi-
cious courtier offered to inform him where one of

the

the most considerable among them was concealed, BOOK III.
he avoided' it by a good-natured pleasantry; ;-

Go," fays he, " I have.now no reason to be

afraid of that man, but he has some cause to keep
at a distance from me, and you would be better
employed in telling him that I am here, than in
acquainting me with the place of his retreat ."
By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as
by his care to avoid every thing which-had dif-
gusted the Castilians during his former residence
among them; by his address in afluming their
manners, in speaking their language, and in com-
plying with all their humours and customs, he
acquired an ascendant over them which scarce any
of their native monarchs had ever attained, and
brought them to support him in all his enterprizes,
with a zeal and valour to which he owed much
of his success and grandeurf.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adlian rtl-

Adrian set out for Italy to take poifelion of his R om, ad
new dignity. But though the Roman people long. his ill recep
ed extremely for his arrival, they could not, on
his first appearance, conceal their furprize and dif-
appointment. After being accustomed to the
princely magnificence of Julius, and the elegant
splendor of Leo, they beheld with contempt an
old man of an humble deportment, of austere
manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of taste
in the arts, and unadorned with any of the
external accomplishments which the vulgar ex-
pe& in those raied to eminent Rtations g. Nor
did his political views and maxims esem less
strange and aftonilhing to the pontifical mini-
fters. He acknowledged and bewailed the cor-

e Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del. Emper. Carlos por Don Juan
Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. p. 30.

f Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 85.
e Guic. 1. 5. 238. Jovii Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor. Epitr.
des Princ. 84,

ruptions

Boor III. ruptions which abounded in the church, as well

as in the court of Rome, and prepared to reform
both; he dilcovered no intention of aggrandizing
his family; he even rcrupled at retaining such ter-
ritories as some of his predecessors bad acquired
by violence and fraud, rather than by any legal
title, and for that realbn he inveffed Francclco
Maria de Rovere anew in the dutchy of Urbino,
of which Leo had firipped him, and 'urrendered
to the duke of Ferrara (everal places wrested from
him by the church h. *To men little habituated to
fee princes regulate their con.duct by the maxims of
morality and the principles of juflice, these adtions
of the new Pope appeared inconteflable proofs of
his weakness and inexperience; and Adrian, who
was a perfect firanger to the complex and intri-
cate fyttem of Italian politics, and who could
place no confidence in perlb;is whose fiibtilty and
refinements in buiirefs fiuited so ill with his r.atu-
ral simplicity and candour, being often embarrafled
and irrebolute in his deliberations, the opinon of
his incapacity daily increased, until both his person
and government became objects of ridicule among
his subjects '.

He endea- ADRI AN, though devoted to the Emperor, en-
vouS tsre-deavoured to aflume the impartiality which be-
in Europe. came the common father of Christendom, and la-

boured to reconcile the contending princes, that
they might unite in a league againit Solyman, whole
conquest of Rhodes rendered him more formida-
ble than ever to Europe k But this Was an under-
taking far beyond his abilities. To examine such
a variety of pretensions, to adjust such a num-
ber of interfering interests, to extinguish the
paflions which ambition, emulation, and mu-
tual injuries had kindled, to bring so many

h Giiic. lib. v5. 240.
t Jov. Vita Adr. 1 8. P. Mart. Ep. 774. Rufcelli Lettere de
Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, lo0. b Bellefor. Epitr. p. 66.

hlloile

hostile powers to pursue the fame fchemre with BooK II.
unanimity and vigour, required not only upright-'^v-'
nels of intentions, but a great superiority both of
understanding and address.

'THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace
than the Pope. The Imperial army under Colonna
was still kept on foot i but as the Emperor's reve-
nues in Spain, in Naples, and in the Low-Countries,
were either exhaulted, or applied to some other
purpose, it depended entirely for pay and sub-
fiftence on the Italians. A great part of it was
quartered in the ecclefiaflical state, and monthly
contributions were levied upon the Florentines, the
Milanese, the Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the vice-
roy of Naples; and though all exclaimed against
such oppression, and were impatient to be delivered
from it, the dread of worse consequences from the
rage of the army, or the resentment of the Empe-
ror, obliged them to submit'.

So much regard, however, was paid to the A',ew
Pope's exhortations, and to a bull which he issued league

againi the

requiring all Chriflian princes to content to a truce French
for three years, that the Imperial, the French, and King.
Englilh ambalfadors at Rome were impowered to
treat of that matter; but while they wafted their
time in fruitless negotiations, their masters conti-
nued their preparations for war. The Venetians,
who.had hitherto adhered with great firmness to
their alliance with Francis, being now convinced
that his affairs in Italy were in a desperate ritu-
ation entered into a league against him with June B.
the Emperor; to which Adrian, at the infti-
gation of his countryman and friend, Charles de
Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who persuaded him
that the only obstacles to peace arose from the

A Guic. i. 15. 238.

ambition

BOOK IIT. ambition of the French King, soon after acceded
-' Y * The other Italian states followed their example,

and Francis was left without a single ally ; to resist
the efforts of so many enemies whose armies
threatened, and whose territories encompassed his
dominions on every fide m.

Francir;s - THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it
xorous mel-
lures in op. was thought, would have obliged Francis to keep
plAiionto'' wholly on the defensive, or at least have prevent-

ed his entertaining any thoughts of marching into
Italy. But it was. the character of that prince,
too apt to become remiss, and even negligent on
ordinary occasions, to rouze at the approach of
danger, and not only to encounter it with spirit
and intrepidity, qualities which never forsook him,
but to provide against it with diligence and in-
duftry. Before his enemies were ready to exe-
cute any of their schemes, Francis had assembled
a numerous army. His authority over his own
fubjeets was far greater than that which Charles
or Henry poffefled over theirs. They depended
on their parliaments for money, which was ulially
granted them in small rums, very slowly, and
with much reluctance. The taxes he could im-
pose were more considerable, and levied with
greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on
other occasions, his army was in the field while
they were devising ways and means for railing
theirs. Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped
to disconcert all the i inperor's lchemes by march-
ing in person into the Milanee ; arid this bold
measure, the more formidable, because unex-
pected, could scarce have failed of producing

,,,r,,nlicJ that effect. The vanguard of his army hal a!-
~l,,,~~ ofrcady reached Lions, and he himfdf was hallcn-
i, ... .:i- ing after it with the lecond division of his troops,
,.r.. -
lr&y, nY C'Guic, 1. I , 2.1, :4S.

w laI?

when the discovery of a domestic conspiracy which BooK III.
threatened the ruin ot the kingdom, obliged him to
flop short, and to alter his measures.

THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles His charac.

duke of Bourbon, lord high conifable, whose no-ter
ble birth, vast fortune, and high office, raised him
to be the molt powerful subjed in France, as his
great talents, equally suited to the field or the
council, and his signal services to the crown,
rendered him the moist illustrious and deserving.
The near resemblance between the king and him
in many of their qualities, both being fond of war,
and ambitious to excel in ative and manly exer-
cifes, as well as their equality in age, and their
proximity of blood, ought naturally to have fe-
cured him a considerable share in that Monarch's
favour. But unhappily Louise, the king's mother ThecuLe c
had contra&ted a violent aversion to the house offcaion.
Bourbon, for no better reason than because Anne
of Bretagne, the queen of Lewis the Twelfth, with
whom she lived in perpetual enmity, discovered a
peculiar attachment to that branch of the royal fa-
mily; and she had taught her son, who was too
susceptible of any impreflion she gave him, to view
all the constable's actions with a mean and unbe-
coming jealousy. His distinguished merit at the
battle of Marignano had not been sufficiently re-
warded; he had been recalled from the govern-
ment of Milan upon very frivolous pretences, and
had met with a cold reception, which his prudent
condut in that difficultflation did not deserve; the
payment of his pensions had been fifpended with-
out any good cault; and during the campaign of
one thousand five hundred and twenty-one, the
king, as has already been related, had affronted
him in the presence of the whole army, by giving
the command of the van to the duke ofAlencon.

The

BOOK IlI.The constable, at first, bore there indignities with
''--- greater moderation than could have been expected

from an high-fpirited prince, conscious of what
was due to his rank, and to his services. Such a
multiplicity of injuries, however, exhausted his pa-
tience; and inlpiring him with thoughts of revenge,
he retired from court, and began to hold a secret
correspondence with some of the Emperors mi-
nifters.

ABOUT that time the Dutchess of Bourbon hap-

pened to die without leaving any children; and
Louise, los a disposition no less amorous than vin-
diclive, and still susceptible of the tender paflions
at the age of forty-fix, began to view the Conita-
ble, a prince as amiable as he was accomplished,
with other eyes; and notwithstanding the great
disparity of their years, she formed the scheme of
marrying him. Bourbon, who might have ex-
peaed every thing to which an ambitious mind
can aspire, from the doating fondners of a woman
who governed her son and the kingdom, being
incapable either of imitating the queen in her sudden
transition from hatred to love, or ofdiffembling
so meanly as to pretend affetion for one who had
prosecuted him so long with unprovoked malice,
not only rejected the match, but embittered his
refusal by some severe raillery on Louife'sperfon and
charader. She finding herself not only contemned,
but insulted, her disappointed love turned into ha-
tred, and since fie could not marry,,fhe resolved
to ruin Bourbon.

FOR this purpose she consulted with the chan-

cellor du Prat, a man, who, by a base prostitution
of great talents and of superior skill in his profeifion,
had ri'en to that high office. By his advice a law.fiiit
was commenced against the constable, for the

whole

whole estate belonging to the house of Bourbon. BooK III.
Part of it was claimed in the king's name, as"""
having fallen to the crown; part in that of Louise, 53
as the nearest heir in blood of the deceased
Dutchess. Both there claims were equally defti-
tute of any foundation in justice; but Louise, by
her solicitations and authority, and Du Prat by
employing all the artifices and chicanery of law,
prevailed on the judges to order the estate to be
'equeitred. This unjust decision drove thelis secret
Constable to despair, and to measures which de-with the
fpair alone could have dictated. He renewed his Emrror.'
intrigues in the Imperial court, and flattering him-
fIls that the injuries he had suffered would justify
his having recourse to any means in order to ob-
tain revenge, he offered to transfer his allegiance
from his natural sovereign to the Emperor, and to
alfft him in the conquest of France. Charles, as
well as the king of England, to whom the secret
was communicated ", expecting prodigious advan-
tages from his revolt, were ready to receive him
with open arms, and spared neither promires nor
allurements that might help to confirm him in his
resolution. The Emperor offered him in marriage
his fitter Eleanor, the widow of the King of Por-
tugal, with a vast portion. He was included as a
principal in the treaty between Charles and Henry.
The counties of Provence and Dauphine were to be
fettled on him, with the title of King. The Em-
peror engaged to enter France by the Pyrenees,
and Henry, supported by the Flemings, to invade
Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied
at their common charge, were to penetrate into
Burgundy, and to act in concert with Bourbon,
who undertook to raifl fix thousand men among his
friends and valhals in the heart of the kingdom.

ilhe execution of this deep-laid and dangerous
plot was suspended, until the king should crols the

Rymner's Fa'der. xiii. 794.
VOL. II. 0 Alps

BOOK III. Alps with the only army capable of defending his
'v`' dominions; and as he was far advanced in his march

'523 for that purpose, France flood on the brink of

deftrution °.
Discovered. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negotiation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conduEted with the most profound
secrecy, and communicated only to a few chosen
confidents, could not altogether escape the obferva-
tion of the reft of the Constable's numerous retain-
ers, rendered more inquisitive by finding that they
were distrusted. Two of these gave the king some
intimation of a mysterious correspondence between
their mafler and the Comte de Roeux, a Flemifll
nobleman of great confidence with the Emperor.
Francis, who could not bring himfelfto suspect that
the firfi prince of the blood would be o' base as to
betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediate-
ly repaired to Moulins, where the constable was in
bed, feigning indisposition, that he might not be
obliged to accompany the king into Italy, and ac-
quainted him of the intelligence which he had re-
ceived. Bourbon, with great solemnity and the
most imposing affectation of ingenuity and can-
dour, asserted his own innocence; and as his health,
he said, was now more confirmed, he promised to
join the army within a few days. Francis, open and
candid himself, and too apt to be deceived by the
appearance of those virtues in others, gave fiuch
credit to what he said, that he refuted to arrest
him, although advised to take that precaution by
his wisest counufllors, and as if the danger had been
over, he continued his march towards Lyons.
September. The Constable let out soon after, seemingly with

an intention to follow him; but turning ltiddcnly to

Flies toIta- the left, he crolfed the Rhone, and after infinite
ly.

Thuani 1-ilt. lib. i. c, 0o. Heutr. Rcr. Auftr. lib. viii.
c. 18. p. 207.

sati gCS

fatigues and perils escaped all the parties which theBooK III
king, sensible too late of his credulity, sent out to ,3.
intercept him, and reached Italy in safety P

FRANCIS took every possible precaution to pre-

vent the bad effects of the irreparable error he had
committed. He put garrisons in all the places of
strength in the Constable's territories. He seized
all the gentlemen whom he could fufpea of being
his associates, and as he had not hitherto discover-
ed the whole extent of the conspirator's schemes,
nor knew how far the infection had spread among
his fubjeds, he was afraid that his absence might
encourage them to make some desperate attempt,
and for that reason relinquished his intention of lead-
ing his army in person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design onFrenchia.

vadcthe

the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet to Milanese.
take the supreme command in his Htead, and to
march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this pre-
ferment to his abilities as a general; for of all
talents requisite to form a great commander, he
possessed only personal courage, the lowest and the
most common. But he was the most accomplish-
cd gentleman in the French court, of agreeable
manners, an intinuating address, and a Iprightly
conversation; and Francis who lived in great
familiarity with his courtiers, was so charmed with
there qualities, that he honoured him, on all occafi-
ons, with the molt partial and cdiftinguilhing marks
of his favour. He was, betides, tile implacable
enlemy of Bourbon; and as the king scarce knew

Mcen. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Paiquiecr Recherchcs de la
France, p. 481.

0 2 whom

BOOK III. whom to trust at that junEture, he thought the

--" chief command could be lodged no where so safely

as in his hands.

Their ill COLONNA, who was entrufled with the defence
conduc. of the Milanese, his own conquest, was in no con-

dition to resist such a formidable army. He had
scarce money sufficient to pay his troops, re-
duced to a small number by sickness or desertion,
and had, for that reason, been obliged to neglect
every precaution necefiary for the security of the
country. The only plan he formed was to defend
the passage of the river Tefino against the French;
and as if he had forgotten how easily he himself
had disconcerted a similar scheme formed by Lau-
trec, he promised with great confidence on its be-
ing effectual. But in spite of all his caution, it fuc-
ceeded no better with him than with Lautrec.
Bonnivet passed the river without loss, at a ford
which had been negleEted, and the Imperialists
retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town as
Loon as the French should appear before it. By an
unaccountable negligence which Guicciardini im-
putes to infatuation ', Bonnivet did not advance
for three or four days, and loft the opportunity with
which his good fortune presented him. The citi-
zens recovered from their conifernation: Colonna
still aCtive, at the age of fourscore, and Morone,
whose enmity to France was indefatigable, were
employed night and day in repairing the fortifica-
tions, in amafing provisions, in collecting troops
from every quarter, and by the time the French
approached, had put the city in a condition to ifand
a siege. Bonnivet after Tome fruitleis attempts on
the town, which hararfed his own troops more
than the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of
the season, to retire into winter-quarters.

q Guic. lib. 15. 254.

DURING

DURING there tranfations, Pope Adrian died; BooK III.

an event so much to the fatisfaAion of the Roman L
people, whose hatred or contempt of him aug- Death of
mented every day, that the night after his decease, Adrian VI.
they adorned the door of his chief physician's
house with garlands, adding this inscription, TO
THE DELIVERER OF HIS COUNTRY'.
The Cardinal di Medici instantly renewed his pre-
tensions to the papal dignity, and entered the
conclave with high expectationson his own part,and
a general opinion of the people that they would be
successful. But though supported by the imperial
faction, possessed of great personal interest, and ca-
pable of all the artifices, refinements, and cor-
ruptions, which reign in those afIemblies, the ob-
itinacy and intrigues of his rivals protracted the
conclave to the unusual length of fifty days. The Eleion of
address and perseverance of the Cardinal, surmount- Clemnt
ed at last every obstacle. He was raited to the
head of the church, and assumed the government
of it by the name of Clement VII. The choice Nov. 28.
was universally approved of. High expectations
were conceived of a Pope, whose great talents, and
long experience in business, seemed to qualify him
no less for defending the spiritual interests of the
church, exposed to imminent danger by the pro-
grefs of Luther's opinions, than for conducting its
political operations with the prudence requisite at
such a difficult juncure; and who, betides there
advantages, rendered the ecclesiastical slate more
respectable, by having in his hands the government
of Florence, and the wealth of the family of Me-
dici '

CARDINAL WOLSBY, not disheartened by the woireyir-

disappointment of his ambitious views at the for- ,""I'"
mer election, had entertained more sanguine hopes with lercnt
of success on this occasion. Henry wrote to the ment.

Jovii Vit. Adr. 127. C Guic. lib. 15. 263.

0 3 Emperor

BOOK III. Emperor, reminding him of his engagements

to second the pretensions of his minister. Wol-
'523. fey beftirred himself with activity ui table to

the importance of the prize for which he con-
tended, and inftruted his agents at Rome to
spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain
his end. But Charles had either anused him with
vain hopes, which he never intended to gratify, or
he judged it impolitic to oppose a candidate who
had such a profpea of succeeding as Medici; or
perhaps the cardinals durst not venture to provoke
the people of Rome, while their indignation against
Adrian's memory was frill fresh, by placing ano-
ther Ultramontane in the papal throne. Wolfey,
after all his expeEtations and endeavours, had the
mortification t) fee a Pope eleced, of such an age,
and of so vigorous a constitution, that he could
not comfort himself much with the chance of
surviving him. Wolfey, by this second proof,
was fully convinced of the Emperor's insincerity,
and it excited in him all the resentment which an
haughty mind feels on being at once disappoint-
ed, and deceived; and though Clement endea-
voured to tooth his vindictive nature by granting
him a commiflion to be legate in England during
life, with such ample powers as veiled in him
almost the whole papal jurifdition in that king-
dom, the injury he had received entirely diffolv-
ed the tie which had united him to Charles, and
from that moment he meditated revenge. It was
necessary, however, to conceal his intention from
his master, and to suspend the execution of it,
until by a dexterous improvement of the incidents
which might occur, he should be able gradually
to alienate the king's affections from the Empc-
ror. For this reason, he was To far from expressing
any uneasiness on account of the rcpulfe lie had

met

met with, that he abounded on every occasion, BOOK III
private as well as public, in declarations of his'""
high fatisfadion with Clement's promotion . 3

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled Henry's

operations

with great sincerity whatever he was bound to n France.
perform by the league againit France, though
more slowly than he could have wished. His
thoughtless profusion, and total negleft of oeco-
nomy reduced him often to great firaits for mo-
ney. The operations of war were now carried
on in Europe in a manner very different from that
which had long prevailed. Instead of armies fud-
denly assembled, which under diftinA chieftains
followed their prince into the field for a short space,
and served at their own coff; troops were now le-
vied at a great charge, and received regularly
considerable pay. Instead of impatience on both
/ides to bring every quarrel to the issue of a bat-
tle, which commonly decided the fate of open
and defenceless countries, and allowed the barons
together with their vassals to return to their ordi-
nary occupations; towns were fortified with great
art, and defended with much obstinacy; war,
from a simple, became a very intricate science;
and campaigns grew of course to be more tedious,
and lels decisive. The expence which there alte-
rations in the military fyltem necessarily created,
appeared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccuftom-
ed to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence proceed-
ed the frugal, and even paifimonious 1pirit of the
English parliaments in that age, which Henry,
with all his authority, was Ieklom able to over-
come. The commons, having refilled at this
time to grant him the filpplies he demanded, h
had recourle to the ample and .luloft unlinit

t Fiddes's Iife of Wolfey, 294, &c. Herbert.

0 4 prroog

BOOr III. prerogative, which the Kings of England, then,

poffefled, and by a violent and unulual exertion

Sep't5b.2o.of it, raised t he
mone he wanted This, how-

ieptwnb.zo.of it. raised the y wanted. h

ever, wafted so much time, that it was late in
the season before his army, under the duke of
Suffolk, could take the field. Being joined by a
considerable body of Flemings, Suffolk marched
into Picardy, and Francis from his extravagant
eagerness to recover the Milanese, having left that
frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far as
the banks of the river Oyfe, within eleven leagues
of Paris, filling that capital with consternation. But
the arrival of some troops detached by the King,
who was still at Lyons; the active gallantry of.
the French officers, who allowed the allies no
November. respite night or day; the rigour of a most unnatu.

ral season, together with scarcity of provisions,
compelled Suffolk to retire, and La Tremouille,
who commanded in those parts, had the glory of
having, with an handful of men, checked the
progress of a formidable army, and of having
driven them with ignominy out of the French
territories U.

And those THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and
mans and Guienne, were not more fortunate, though in both
Spaniards. these provinces Francis was equally ill prepared to

resist them. The conduct and valour of his ge-
nerals supplied his want of foresight; the Ger-
mans who made an irruption into one of there
provinces, and the Spaniards who attacked the
other, were repulsed with great disgrace.

End of the THUS ended the year 1523, during which
ampaign. Francis's good fortune and fuccels had been flch,

as gave all Europe an high idea of his power
and resources. He had discovered and dikcon-

? Herbert. Mertm de Bcllay, 73, &c.

certed

certed a dangerous conspiracy, the author ofBooK IIl
which he had driven into exile, almost without'" '
an attendant; he had rendered abortive all the 154.
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him; he had proteted his dominions when
attacked on three different fides; and though his
army in the Milanese had not made such progrels
as might have been expedted from its fuiperiority
to the enemy in number, lie had recovered and
still kept poffellion of one half of that dutcly.

.THE ensuing year opened with events more dif-1,;' tinel
afcrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by the cowar- Pope.
sdice or treachery of its governor. In Italy, the allies re. 27.
resolved on an early and vigorous effort in order to
dispossess Bonnivet of that part of the Milanese
which lies beyond the Tefino; Clement, who,
under the pontificates both of Leo and Adrian, had
discovered an implacable enmity to France, be-
gan now to view the power which the Emperor
was daily acquiring in Italy, with so much jealousy,
that he refused to accede, as his predecessors had
done, to the league against Francis, and forget-
ing private paflions and animofities, laboured with
the zeal which became his character, to bring
about a reconciliation among the contending par-
ties. But all his endeavours were ineffectual; almperial ar-
numerous army, to which each of the allies filr-^my ',dy Lt
nilhed their contingent of troops, was afiembled ticld ,aly
at Milan by the beginning of March. Lannoy,
viceroy of Naples, took the command of it upon
Colonna's death, though the chief direction of
military operations was committed to Bourbon, and
the marquis de Pescara; the latter, the ablest and
most enterprizing of the Imperial generals; the
former inspired by his resentment with new activity
and invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with

the

BOOK III. the characters of the French commanders, the
%'-' genius of their troops, and the strength as well as

15 4. weakneis of their armies, as to be of infinite I'er

vice to the party which he joined But all thele
advantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raise money sufficient for executing
the various and extensive plans which he had form-

Retarded by Aed. Xhen his troops were commanded to march,
the troops. they mutinied againfl their leaders, demanding

the pay which was due to them for some montis;
and disregarding both the menaces and intrcaties
of their officers, threatened to pillage the city of
Milan if they did not inflantly receive satisfaction.
Out of this ditfculty the generals of the allies
were extricated ny Morone, who, prevailing on his
countrymen, over whom his influence was prodi-
gious, to advance the fum that was requisite, the
army took the field. '.

The French BO:NNIVET was destitute of troops to oppose
Iti,'nthe this army, and fill more of the talents that could
MllAneie. render him an equal match for its leaders. As-

tr various movements and encounters, described
with great accuracy by the contemporary hiflo-
ria:;s, a detail of which, at this distance of time,
would be equally uninterefling and uninftruCtive,
he was forced to abandon the strong camp in which
he had entrenched himlelf at Biagraffa. Soon as-
ter, partly by his own misconduct, partly by the
activity of the enemy who harafed and ruined
his army by continual tkirmifhes, while they care-
filliy declined a battle which he often offered
th!in; and partly by the caprice of 6000 Swits,
who refuled to join his army though within a day's
march of it; he was reduced to the neccility ot
attcmpting a retreat into France through the
valley of Aoft. Just as he arrived on the banks

Guic. 1. xv. 267. Capella, 19o.

of

of the Seffia, and began to pass tile river, Bourbon BOOK 1I'.
and Pescara appeared with tile vanguard of the al- ~
lies, and attacked his rear with great fury. At the Iz4
beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exerting
himself with much valour, was wounded io dan-
geroufly as obliged him to quit the field; and the
ccndu't of the rear was committed to the che-
valier Bayard, who, though so much a firangcr
tothe arts of a court that he never roie to the
dhief command, was always called, i.i times us
real danger, to the pofis of dificulty and impor-
tance. He put himself at the head of the men
at arms, and animating them by his prelence and
example to sustain the whole Ih1ock of the enc-
my's troops, he gained time for the refl of his
countrymrnc to make good their retreat. But in Deathoflr-,
thils service he received a wound which he imme- chvalier
diately pereeived to be mortal, and being unable Bnayard, t'
to continue any longer on horseback, he ordered French r-
one of his attendants to place him u;ider a tree,"y'
with his face towards the enemy; then fixing his
eyes on the guard of his sword, which he held up
instead of a cross, he addrefled his prayers to
God, and in this posture, which became his cha-
racter both as a soldier and as a Christian, he
calmly waited the approach of death. Bourbon,
wvho led the foremost of the enemies troops, bound
him in this situation, and exprefled regret and pity
at the fight. " Pity not me," cried the high-
spirited chevalier, " I die as a man of honour
"ought, in the discharge of my duty: They
"indeed are objects of pity, who fight againit
"their King, their country, and their oath."
The marquis de Pescara, palling loon after, ma-
nifefled his admiration uss Bayard's virtues, and
his sorrow for his fall, with the generolity of a
gallant enemy; and finding that he could not be
removed with lafety from that spot, ordered a

tent

BoOK III. tent to be pitched there, and appointed prope

v--^' persons to attend him, He died, notwithftandinl
'514 their care, as his anceflors for several generation

had done, in the field of battle. Pescara orderec
his body to be embalmed, and sent to his relati.
ons; and such was the respeCt paid to military me
rit in that age, that the duke of Savoy command
ed it to be received with royal honours in all the
cities of his dominions; in Dauphine, Bayard's
native country, the people of all ranks came out
in a solemn procession to meet it '.

BONNIVET led back the shattered remains of

his army into France; and in one short campaign,
Francis was stripped of all he had possessed in Italy,
and left without one ally in that country.

Progrefsof WHILE the war kindled by the nulation ol
the Re~or-
mation in Charles and Francis spread over so many coun-
Germany. tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound

tranquillity, extremely favourable to the reforma-
tion, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his retreat at
Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples, ani-
mated with the fame zeal, but possessed of leTs
prudence and moderation than his master, began
to propagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly
among the lower people. Encouraged by his
exhortations, they rose in several villages of Sax-
ony, broke into the churches with tumultuary
violence, and threw down and destroyed the ima-
ges with which they were adorned. These irre-
gular and outrageous proceedings were so re-
pugnant to all the Elector's cautious maxims,

Y Bellefor.Epitr. p. 73. Merm. de Bellay, 75. Oeuv. de
Brant. tom. vi. to8, &c. Pafquier Recherches, p. 526.

that

that if they had not received a timely check, they BooK III.
could scarce have failed of alienating from the re-"'

1524.

formers that prince, jealous to a great degree of
his own authority, and afraid of giving offence to
the Emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. Luther, sensible of the danger, immedi-
ately quitted his retreat, without waiting for Frede-
ric's permission, and returned to Wittemberg.
Happily for the reformation, the veneration for his March
person and authority were still so great, that his ap- '52'
pearance alone suppressed that spirit of extravagance
which began to seize his party. Carloftadius and
his fanatical followers struck dumb by his rebukes,
declared that they heard the voice of an angel,
not of a man z.

BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun Luther

to translate the Bible into the German tongue, an translate
undertaking of no less difficulty than importance, te 1ible
of which he was extremely fond, and for which
he was well qualified: He had a competent know-
ledge in the original languages; a thorough ac-
quaintance with the style and Sentiments of the in-
spired writers; and tho' his compositions in Latin
were rude and barbarous, he was reckoned a great
masser of the purity of his mother tongue, and
eould express himself with all the elegance of which
it is capable. By his own alliduous application, to-
gether with the aliftance of Melanchon and fe-
veral other of his dilciples, he finished part of the
New Testament this year; and the publication of
it proved more fatal to the church of Rome, than
that of all his own works. It was read with won-
derflil avidity and attention by persons of every
rank. They were aftonilhed at discovering how
contrary the precepts of the author of our religion
are, to the inventions of thole who pretended to be
his vicegerents; and having now in their hand the

Sleid. I-ift. 51. Seckend. 195.

rule

Boo, rIT. rule of faith, they thought themselves qualified by
'--'--' applying it to judge of the established opinions,

1542' and to pronounce when they were conformable to

the flandard, and when they departed from it.
The great advwntage arising from Luther's tranfla.
tion of the Bible, encouraged the advocates for re-
formation, in the other countries of Europe, to
imtate his. example, and to publish vcrfions of the
Scriptures in their respective languages.

Sc.:cral c- ABOU T this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, Ham.
ht, ;benlo burg, and several other cities in Germany of the
Ie":'1rifl firit rank, openly embraced the reformed religion,
chu'ch. and by the authority of their magistrates abolilhed

tlie mars, and the other 1ihperftitious rites of Po-
pery a. The elector of Brandenburgh, the Dukes
of Brunswick and Lunenburgh, and prince of An.
halt, became avowed patrons of Luther's opinions,
ahd countenanced the preaching of them among
their fubjecCs.

Mcafures THE court of Rome beheld this growing de-

y
, yieid fe~tion with great concern; and Adrian's first
illor<derto care after his arrival in Italy, had been to deli-
.igc'2f berate with the Cardinals, concerning the proper
e reiornia- means of putting a flop to it. This Pope was

profoundly skillcd in fcholaflic theology, and ha-
ving been early taken notice of on that account,
lie lfill retained such an excellive admiration of the
sic nce to which he owed his reputation and fuccils
in lif', that le conidlered Luther's invcdtivcs
aglaiiift the fchloolmen, partictilarly Thomas
Aqulinas, as little lels than blasphemy. All thle
t, i e ot t;hat doólu.r appeared to him so clear and

a Scckend. 241. CliytTci Contin. Krantzii, zo;.

irrerfiagablc,

irrefragable, that he fuppoied every person whoBooK 11I.
called in question or contradicted them, to be""'"
either blinded by ignorance, or to be atting in op-
position to the conviction of his own mind: Of
course, no Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible
with regard to points of doctrine than Adrian ; he
not only maintained them as Leo had done, [-Fcaufe
they were ancient, or because it was dangerous for
the church to allow of innovations, but he adhered
to them with the zeal of a theologian, and with
the tenacioulhefs of a disputant. At the fame time
his own manners being extremely limple, and unin-
feded with any of the vices which reigned in the
court of Rome, he was as sensible of its corrupti-
ons asthe reformers themselves, and viewed them
with no less indignation. The brief he addreiled November.
to the Diet of the Empire assembled at Nuremberg,
and the intirultions he gave Cheregato, the nuncio,
whom he sent thither, were framed agreeably to
these views. On the one hand, he condemned
Luther's opinions with more asperity and rancour of
expreflion than Leo had ever tufed; he severely
centured the princes of Germany for suffering him
to spread his pernicious tenets, by their neglecting
to execute the edid of the Diet at Worms, and re-
quired them, if Luther did not instantly retraat his
errors, to destroy him with fire as a gangrened and
incurable member, in like manner as Dathan and
Abiram had been cut off by Motes, Annanias and
S:ipphira by the apofiles, and John Huls and Jerom
(,l Prague by their ancestor- b. On the other
lhad, he, with great candour, and in the moil cx-
plicit terms, acknowledged the conluptions of the
Roman court to be the source from which had
flowed all the evils that tlhe churcl, now Iflt or
dreaded; he promired to exert all his authority to-
wards reforming these abufls, with as much diI-

b Fafcic. Rer. Expct. & Fuicnd. 342.

patch

BooK III. patch as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
' --', would admit; and he requested of them to give

' him their advice with regard to the most effectual

means of fiupprelling that new heresy which had
sprung up among them c.

Dietof Nu- THE members of the Diet, after praising the
iTt. fR Pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused them-

prcrole a
.re.lli fclves for not executing the edict of Worms, by
c'ui-.ul nsi allegin g that the prodigious increase of Luther's
the p,--per 't o
remrtdy. lollowers, as well as the aversion to the court of

Rome among their other fubjeets, on account of
its innumerable exacions, rendered such an attempt
not only dangerous, but impossible. They affirm-
ed that the grievances of Germany, which did rot
arise from imaginary injuries, but from impositions
no less real than intolerable, as his Holinels would
learn from a catalogue of them which they intended
to lay before him, called now for some new and
ericaciousremedy; and in their opinion, the only
remedy adequate to the difeate, or which afforded
them any hopes of feeing the church reflored to
soundness and vigour, was a general council. Such
a council, therefore, they advised him, after ob-
taining the Emperor's consent, to afemble without
delay, in one ofthe great cities of Germany, that all
who had a right to be present might deliberate with
freedom, and propose tleir opinions with such bold.
ness, as the dangerous lituation of religion at this
juncture required .

,.tficeF rs T'i E. nuncio, more artful than his maffcr, and bct-
tiludc' it. tcr acquainted with the political views and intcrcfls

of the Roman court, was fiartled at the propoli-
tion of a cou,;cil; and cafily foresaw how dange-
rous such an aetml:ly might prove at a time whcn

c Fnfic. Rer. Expct. & Fugiend p. -,.
d Ibid. p. 346.

mil!a.'

many openly denied the papal authority, and the BooK II.
reverence and futbmillion yielded to it visibly de- "-''
dined among all. For that reason he employed
his utmost address, in order to prevail on the
members of the Diet to proceed themfclves with
greater severity against the Lutheran heresy, and
to relinquilh their proposal concerning a general
council to be held ii Germany. They, perceiv-
ing the nuncio to be more solicitous about the in-
terests of the Roman court, than the tranquillity of
the Empire, or purity of the church, remained in-
flexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue of
their grievances to be presented to the Pope*.
The nuncio; that he might not be the bearer of a
remonstrance so disagreeable to his court, left Nu-
remberg abruptly, without taking leave of the Diet.

THE secular princes accordingly, for the eccle- The Diet

fiafticks, although they gave no opposition, did not or perenn li
think it decent to join with them, drew up the lift dred griev-
(so famous in the German annals) of an hundred apope.
grievances which the Empire imputed to the ini-
quitous dominion of the papal fee. This lift con-
tained grievances much, of the fame nature with
that prepared under the reign of Maximilian f It
would be tedious to enumerate each of them; they
complained of the rurns exated for dispensations,
abbfoltions, and indulgences; of the expencearif-
ing from the law-fiits carried to Rome; of the in-
numerable abuses occasioned by reservations, conm-
mendains, and atnates; of the exemption from
civil jurisdiction which the clergy had obtained ; of
the arts by which they brought all secular caulks un-
der the cognisance of the eccleliaftical judges; of
the indecent and profligate lives which not a few; of
the clergy led; and of various other particulars,
many of which have already been mentioned among
the circumnftances which contributed to tle favour-

Fafcic. Rcr. Expet. & Fugiend. 349 Ilid. 376.
VoL. . . P able

BOOK III able reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's
.-- doctrines. In the end they concluded, that if the

holy fee did not speedily deliver them from tholi
intolerable burdns, they had determined to endure
them no longer, and would employ the power aid
authority with which God had entrusted them, in
order to procure relief g.

The recess INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and
March 6, his followers as the nuncio had recommended, the

1523. recess or edict of the Diet contained only a general

injundion to all ranks of men, to wait with patience
for the determinations of the council which was to
be assembled, 'and in the mean time not to publish
any new opinions, contrary to the established doc-
trines of the church; together with an admonition
to all preachers to abstain from matters of cQntro-
verfy in their discourses to the people, and to con-
fine themselves to the plain and inftrudive truths of
religion h.

The Diet of THE reformers derived great advantage from
greatbenefit
t the Re- the tranfadions of this Diet, as they afforded them
formation. the fullest and moif authentic evidence that gross

corruptions prevailed in the court of Rome, and
that the Empire was loaded by the clergy with in-
supportable burdens.. With regard to the former,
they had now the teflimony of the Pope himself,
that their invectives and accusations were not mali-
cious or ill-founded As to the latter, the repre-
fentatives of the Germanic body, in an assembly
where the patrons of the new opinions were far
from being the most numerous or powerful, had
pointed out as the chief grievances of the Empire,
those very practices of the Romish church againtt
which Luther and his disciples were accustomcd to
declaim Accordingly, in all their controversial
writings after this period, they often appealed to

g Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 354 b Ibid. 348.

Adrian's

Adrian's declaration, and to the hundred grievan- BooK Ir.
ces, in confirmation of whatever they advanced 4''d
concerning the dissolute manners, or insatiable am-
bition and rapaciousness of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's condu-t was confidered as Adrin's

conduc:

a proof of the mofft childish simplicity and impru- censured t
dence. Men trained up amidst the artifices and Rome.
corruptions of the papal court, and accustomed to
judge of actions not by what was just, but by what
was useful, were astonished at a Pontiff, who, de-
parting from the wife maxims of his predecessors,
acknowledged disorders which he ought to have
concealed; and forgetting his own dignity, asked
advice of those, to whom he was entitled to pre-
scribe. By such an excess of impolitic sincerity,
they were afraid that instead of reclaiming, he
would render the enemies of the church more pre-
sumptuous, and infsead ofextinguifhing heresy, would
weaken the foundations of the papal power, or
flop the chief sources from which wealth flowed into
the church . For this reason they industriously op-
posed all his schemes of reformation, and by throw-
ing objections and difficulties in his way, enda-
voured to retard or to defeat the execution of them.
Adrian, amazed on the one hand, at the obstinacy
of the Lutherans, disgusted, on the other, with
the manners and maxims of the Italians, and find-
ing himself unable to correct either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and often
looked back with pleasure on that period of his life
when he was only dean of Leuvain, a more hum-
ble but happier station, in which little was expetled
firom him, and there was nothing to frustrate his
good intentions k.

i F. Paul. I-lif. ofCounc. p. 28. Pallavic. Hil. 58.
h Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 1i8.

P 2 CLEMEN'r

BooK IlI. CLEMENT VII. his fucceflor, excelled Adrian

as much in the arts of godwrnment, as he was infe.

Clement's riour to him in the purity of life, or uprightness of
mel9ures intention. He was animated not only with the
ther, and his aversion which all Popes naturally bear to a coun.
dreadofa cil, but having gai ea his own election by means
council. very uncanonical, he was afraid of an affemhly

that might subjet it to a scrutiny which it could
not stand. He determined therefore, to elude by
every poflible means the demands of the Gernmans,
both with refpet to the calling of a council, and
reforming abuses in the papal court, which the rash
ness and incapacity of his predecessor had brought
upon him. For this purpose he made choice of
cardinalCampeggio, an artful man, often entrust-
ed by the Popes with negotiations of importance,
as his ntlncio to the Diet of the Empire assembled
again at Nuremberg.

T'e begi- CAMPEGCIO, without taking any notice of what
ations of his had passed in the lass meeting, exhorted the Diet in
nu~:cio in a
iecondi Diet a long discourse, to execute the edit of Worms

Nurem- with vigour, as the only cffectual means of sup-

t prefing Luther's doctrines. The Diet, in return,

desired to know the Pope's intentions conccrning
the council, and the redrels of the hundred gric-
vances. The former, the nu;;cio endeavoured to
elude by general and unmeaning declarations oftlhe
Pope's relslution te purfiue such measures as would
be for the greatest good of the church. With re-
gard to the latter, as the catalogue of griev.!imccs
did not reach Rome till after Adian's death, and
of consequence had not been regularly la;d
before the present Pope, Campeggio took :d-
vantage of this circumstance to decline making
any definitive answer to them in Clement's
name; though, at the fame time, he obirtvLd
that their catalogue of grievances contained ma-
ny particulars extremely indecent and undutitul,

aiu!

that the publishing it by their own authority was BooK !I.
highly difrefpedful to the Roman fee. In the end, ,""
he renewed his demand for their proceeding with Attended
rigour against Luther and his adherents; but tho' .ith little
an ambassador from the Emperor, who was at that e.
time very solicitous to gin the Pope, warmly fe-
conded the Nuncio, with many profeflions of his
mister's zeal for the honour and dignity of the pa-
pal fee, the recess of the diet was conceived in April S.
terms of almost the fame import with the former,
without enjoining any additional severity against
Luther and his party'.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order
to amuse and tooth the people, published certain
articles for the amendment of rome disorders and
abuses which prevailed among the inferior clergy;
but this partial reformation, which fell so far short
of the expecations of the Lutherans, and of the
demands of the Diet, gave no 'fatisfation, and
produced little effect. The nuncio, with a tender
hand, lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed
a deeper blow, and by firiking at the root wished to
exterminate the evil .
i Seckend. z86. Sleid. Hilt. 65. Seckend. 292.

P ' H 1

# BOOK IV.

H STHE
HISTORY

OF THE

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.
,: B 'O O K IV.

.BOOK IV. rHE expulsion of the French, both out of the
-Tvhc e I Milanese, and the. republic of Genoa, was
ItaiianItates confidered by the Italians, as the conclusion of the
with refpea war between Charles and Francis ; and as they be-
andFranis. gan immediately to be apprehensive of the Empe-

ror, when they saw no power remaining in Italy
capable either to controul or oppofi him, they
longed ardently for the re-eftablifhmcnt of peace.
Having procured the restoration of Sforza to his
paternal dominions, which had been their chif'
motive for entering into a confederacy with Charles,

they

they plainly discovered their intention to contributeBooK IV.
no longer towards increasing the Emperor's fuperi- '--'
ority over his rival, whi.h was already the obje&t 5 4
of their jealousy. The Pope especially, whose na-
tural timidity increased his suspicions of Clarles's
designs, endeavoured by his ambassadors and re-
monstrances to inspire him with moderation, and
incline him to peace.

BUT the Emperor, intoxicated with fuccels, and Charlesre-

urged on by his own ambition, no less than by vadeFrane.
Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Clement's
admonitions, and declared his refulution of order-
ing his army to pass the Alps, and to invade Pro-
vence, a part of his rival's dominions, where he
least dreaded an attack, and was least prepared to
refif. it. His most experienced minilters diflTuaded
him from undertaking luch an enterprize with a fee-
ble army, and an exhausted treasury: But he reli-
ed so much on having obtained the concurrence of
the king of England, and on the hopes which Bour-
bon, with the confidence and credulity natural to
exiles, entertained of being joined by a numerous
body of his partisans as loon as the Imperial troops
should enter France, that he persisted obstinately in
the measure. Henry undertook to furnish an
hundred thousand ducats towards defraying the ex-
pence of the expedition during the first month,
and had it in his choice either to continue the pay-
nient of that fum monthly, or to invade Picardy bc-
fore the end of July with a powerful army. The
Emperor engaged to attack Guienne at the fame
time with a considerable body of men, and if there
enterprizes proved fuccelsful, they agreed that Bour-
bon, betides the territories he had loft, should be
put in poffeflion of Provence, with the title of king,
and should d homage to Henry as the lawful1 king
ofFrance, for his new dominions. Of'all the piats

P4 4f

;~~~~~j

BOOK IV. of this extensive but extravagant projec, the inva-

-'v'"'fion of Provence was the only one which was exe-
5 4- cured. For although Bourbon, with a scrupulous

delicacy, altogether unexpected after the part he
had acted, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby
absolved him from any obligation to promote the
enterprize, Charles's eagerneis to carry his own
plan into execution did not in any degree abate.
The army he employed for that purpose amounted
only to eighteen thousand men; the supreme
command of which was given to the Marquis de
Pe.cara, withi inftrutions to pay the greater
deference to Bourbon's advice in all his operations.

The Impe- Pcfcara passed the Alps without opposition, and en-
Prio ente tering Provence, laid siege to Marseilles. Bourbon
Auuft 19. had advised him rather to march towards Lyons, in

the neighbourhood of which city his territories were
situated, and whereof course his influence was molt
extensive: But the Emperor was so desirous to get
possession of a port, which would, at all times,
Secure him easy access into France, that by his au-
thority he over-ruled the Constable's opinion, and
directed Pelcara to make the reducion of Marseilles
his chief objet '.

Prudent FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to pre-
meafuresof vent this attempt, took the most proper precau-

tions to defeat it. He laid wafse the adjacent
country, in order to render it more difficult for the
enemy to subsist their army; he razed the
suburbs of the city, itrengthened its fortifications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the
command of brave and experienced officers. To
there, nine thousand of the citizens, whom their
dread of the Spanish yoke inspired with contempt
of danger, joined themselves; by their united

' Guic.. 1. 5. 273, &c. Mem. de Bellay, p. 80.

courage

courage and industry, all the efforts of Pefcara'sBoox Iv.
military skill, and of Bourbon's acivity and re-
venge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean- 1524
while, had leiiire to aflemble a powerful army un-
der the walls of Avignon, and no sooner began to
advance towards Marseilles, than the Imperial Imperilifn
troops, exhausted by the fatigues of a siege which toiced to
had lafled forty days, weakened by dileafes, and'""'
almost deflitute of provisions, retired with preci-
pitation towards Italy b. SeFt. 1.

IF during these operations of the army in Pro-

vence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projected,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the molt
imminent danger. But on this, as well as on many
other occasions, the Emperor found that the ex-
tent of his revenues was not adequate to the
greatness of his power, or the ardour of his am-
bition, and the want of money obliged him,
though with much relucdance, to circumscribe his
plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted Henry,
dilgufted at Bourbon's refusing to recognize his
right to the crown of France; alarmed at the
motions of the Scots, whom the felicitations of
the French King had persuaded to march towards
the borders of England; and no longer incited
by his minifler, who was become extremely
cool with regard to the Emperor's interests; took
no measures to support an enterprize, of which,
as of all new undertakings, he had been at first
excelfively fond '.

IF the King of France had been satisfied witfl hav- Francis it-

ing delivered his fubjedts from this formidable invafi- tCd with lia
on, and having (hewn all Europe the facility with
which the internal flrength of his dominions enabled
him to rfillt the impreflions of a foreign enemy,

b Guic. 1. 5. 277. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 9;.
Fiddes's Life of Wollcy. Append. No. 7o, 71, 7z.

even

BOOK IV. even when seconded by the abilities and powerful

C^"- refforts of a rebellious fibject, the campaign, not-
1524. withstanding the lots of the Mi!anele, would have

been far from ending ingloriously. But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enterprlz-
ing rather than considerate; and too apt to be
elated with success; was fond of every undertak-

rotfovesto ing that seemed bold and adventurous. Such an
i^vade the undertaking, the situation of his affairs; at that

jundure, naturally presented to his view. Fle had
under his command one of the most powerful and
belt appointed armies France had ever brought
into the field, which he could not think of disband-
ing without having employed it in any lervice.
The Imperial troops had been obliged to retire
almost ruined by hard duty, and disheartened with
ill success; the Milanese had been left altogether
without defence; it was not impoflible to reach
that country before Pescara, with his flattered
forces, could arrive there; or if fear should add
speed to their retreat, they were in no condition
to make head againfl his fresh and numerous
troops; and Milan would now, as in former in-
stances, iubmit without refiefance to a bold in-
vader. Those considerations, which were not de-
ftitute of plausibility, appeared to his sanguine
temper to be of the utmost weight. In vain did
his wisest ministers and generals represent to him
the danger of taking the field at a feafbn so far
advanced, with an army comnpoed chiefly of Swiss
and Germans, to whole caprices he would be filb-
jet in all his operations, and on whose fidelity his
safety muffl absolutely depend. In vain did Louifc
of Savoy advance by haffy journies towards Pro-
vence, that fle might exert all her authority in
diflTiading her fun from lilch a rash enterprize.
Francis disregardcd the remonstrances of his sub-
iclts; and that he might five himself the pain

of

of an interview with his mother, whoie counfelsBooK IV.
he had determined to rejet, he began his march r--
before her arrival; appointi;ng her, however, by
way of atonement fur that neglet, to be regent
of the kingdom during his absence. Bonnivet, by Ap;,-ir
his persuasions, contributed not a little to confiirm ,grn, , .
Francis in this reilution. That favourite, wlol; 1 --- i.-
firongly resembled his master in all the defectiveta'"^'
parts of his character, was led by his natural im-
petuofity, warmly to approve of lIch an e tcrprize;
and being prompted besides by his impatience to
revfiit a Milan. Ie lady, of whom he had been deep-
ly enam(,ured during his late expedition, he is l:id,
by his flattering delcriptions of her beauty and ac-
complifhments, to have inspired Francis, who was
extremely fuIceptible of such pailions, with all
equal detlre of feeing her .

THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis; Opratin

and as their fuccels depended on dilpatci, they ad- ne..
vanced with the greatest diligence. Pelcara, who
had been obliged to take a longer and more diffi-
cult rout by Monaco and Final, was loon informed
of their intention; and being sensible that nothing
but the presence of his troops could save the Mila-
nefe, marched with iinch rapidity, that he reached
Alva on the fame day that the French army ar-
rived at Vercelli. Francis, iufiructcd by Bonni-
vct's error in the former campaign, advanced
direaly towards Milan, where the lunexpFcted ap-
proach of an enemy fl powerful, occalioncd luch
conflernation and cdirder, that although Iefcara
entered the city with frome of is bcLi troops, he
found that the defi-e;c of it could not be uLder-
taken with any probability of lilcctls; and having
thrown a garrifbn into the citadcl, retired throughl
one gate, while the French were adi:iti.d at aiio-,
tlier '.

d OCuv. dc lirant. sorn. vi. 2 .
'Mem. de Bclay, p.. (1. G ic. !.. zx , '.

^~~~~~T!L

BOOK IV. THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch
--^- disconcerted all the Ichemes of defence which the
!Sz4. Embarafing Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did ge-
tate of the nerals attempt to oppose a formidable invasion un-
mperialil der such circurmftances of disadvantage. Tho'

Charles pofleffed dominions more extensive than
any other Prince in Europe, and had, at this time,
no other army but that which was employed in
Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteen thou-
sand men, his prerogative in all his different flates
was so limited, and his fubjets, without whoti:
content he could raise no taxes, discovered fich
uawillingaefs to burden themselves with new and
extraordinary impositions, that even this small bo-
dy of troops was in want of pay, of ammunition, of
provisions, and of cloathing. In such a situation,
it required all the wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepi-
dity of Pescara, and the implacable resentment of
Bourbon, to preserve them from finking under def-
pair, and to inspire them with resolution to attempt,
or sagacity to discover what was elle:ntial to their
safety. To the efforts of their genius, and the ac-
tivity of their zeal, the Emperor was more indebt-
ed for the preservation of his Italian dominions
than to his own power Lannoy, by mortgaging
the revenues of Naples, procured fonie money,
which was immediately applied towards providing
the army with whatever was moit necessary f. Pel-
cara, beloved and almost adored by the Spanish
iroops, exhorted them to shew the world, by
their engaging to serve the Emperor, in that
dangerous exigency, without makingany imme-
diate demand of pay, that they were animated
with sentiments of honour very different from those
of mercenary soldiers, to which proposition, that
gallant body of men with an unexampled generosity

fGuic. 1i. i5.280.

gave

gave their consent g. Bourbon having railed a confi- BOOK IV.
derable turm, by pawning his jewels, set out for"
Germany, where his influence was great, that by
his pretence he might haften the levying of troops
for the Imperial iervice b.

FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the Empe-Francis be-

ror's generals time to derive advantage from ali'ie'¢"s"v;
theie operations. Instead of purluing the enemy,
who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable
post, which Peicara had resolved to abandon on his
approach, he in compliance with the opinion
of Bonnivet, though contrary to that of his other
generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Telil;o; aOloberz8.
town, indeed, of great importance, the pofllffion
of which would have opened to him all the fertile
country lying on the banks of that river. But the
fortifications of the place were firong; it was dan-
gerous to undertake a difficult siege, at so late a
leain ; and the Imperial generals, lenfible of its
consequence, had thrown into the town a garrison
of fix thousand veterans, under the command of
Antonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank; of
great experience; of a patient but enterprizing
courage; fertile in reolurces; ambitious of diftin-
guifhing himlelf; and capable, for that reason, as
well as from his having been long accuflomed both
to obey and to comma d, of luff.ring or perform-
ing any thing in order to procure iuccels.

FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obflinacylliivii,,.

equal to the rafhnels with which lie had Lundertakeln 'ous ,i'r
it. During three mouths, every thing known to
the engineers of that ag:o, or that could be effected

g Jovii Vit.Divali. lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. ;. 621. Ulloa

Vita dell Carlo V. p 94, &c. Vida dell L ,per. Cailos V.
per Vera y Zuniga. p. 36. h VMeIn. de Bicla), p. 83.

by

Boo: IV. by the valour of his troops, was attempted in order

- to reduce the place; while Lannoy and Pescara,
4''4 unable to obstruct his operations, were obliged to

remain in such an ignominious slate of inaction,
that a Pasquinade was published at Rome, offering
a reward to any perfbn who could find the Imperial
army, loft in the month of Odober in the moun-
tains between France and Lombardy, and which
had.not been heard of since that time'.

The town LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties
' '""lyde- under which his countrymen laboured, and the

impolfibility of their facing, in the field, such a
powerful army as formed the liege of Pavia, placed
his only hopes of fafe:y in his own vigilance and
valour. 1 he efforts of both were extraordinary,
and in proportion to the importance of the place,
with the defence of which he was entrusted. He in-
terrupted the approaches of the French by frequent
and furious Iallies. Behind tie breaches which
their artillery made, he erected new works, that
appeared to be icarce inferior in strength to the
urigi:;al fortifications. He repulsed the besiegers in
all their afilults; and by his own example, brought
not on.ly the garrison, but the inhabitants to bear
the molt into:zrable fatigues, and to encounter the
greatest dangers without murmuring. The rigour
of the season conipired with his endeavours in re-
tarding the progrels of the French. Francis at-
tempting to bccoi:e nmalcer of the town, by divert-
ing the courli of the Tefino, which is its defence
o;i one fide, a uidden inundation iss the river de-
llroycd, in one day, the labour of many weeks,
and wc-pt away all thle mIounds which his army had
raii;'d withl infinite toil, as well as at great ex-

S ,c: ntv. i. 60o.
1, i Cui.c, .a. ;o. Ulloa Vila di Carlo V. p. 95.

NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the BooK IV.

besiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired by ' -'
his gallant defence, it was not doubted but that the The Pope
town would at last be obliged to surrender. The oncluies
Pope, who already confidered the French arms asneurality.
superior in Italy, became impatient to disengage
himself from his conneetions with the Emperor, of
whose designs he was extremely jealous; and to en-
ter into terms of friendship with Francis. As
Clement's timid and cautious temper rendered him
incapable of following the bold plan which Leo
had formed of delivering Italy from the yoke of
both the rivals, he returned to the more obvious
and practicable scheme of employing the power of
the one to balance and to restrain that of the other.
For this reason, he did not dissemble his fatisfadion
at feeing the French king recover Milan, as he
hoped that the dread offiuch a neighbour would be
some check upon the Emperor's ambition, which
no power in Italy was now able to controul. He
laboured hard to bring about a peace that would
secure Francis in poffefiion of his new conquests;
and as Charles, who was always inflexible in the
prosecution- of his schemes, rejected the proposition
with disdain, and with bitter exclamations against
the Pope, by whose persuasions, while Cardinal di
Medici, he had been induced to invade the Mila-
nefe, Clement immediately concluded a treaty of
neutrality with the king of France, in which the
republic of Florence was included'.

FRANCIS having, by this tranfadion, deprived Frdantiin

the Emperor of his two molt powerful allies, and at Nla.
the fame time having secured a paflage for his own
troops through their territories, formed a scheme
of attacking the kingdom of Naples, hoping either

Guic. 1. 15. 282. 285.

to

BooR IV. to over-run that country, which was left altogether
.-'*-- without defence, or that at least such an unexpect.

154-' ed invasion would oblige the viceroy to recall part of

the Imperial army out oftheMilanele. For this pur-
,pose he ordered fix thousand men to march under
the command of John Stuart duke ofAlbany. But
Ptfcara forcfi-eing that the effect of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations of the
armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to dil-
regard Albanv's motions m, and to bend his whule
force against the king himself; so that Francis nor
only weakened his army very unseasonably by this
great detachment; but incurred the reproach of en-
gaging too ralhly in chimerical and extravagant
projects.

Eiertiof ME A N W H ILE the garrison of Pavia was reduced
Pt.la.;ia and
toLbG. to extremity ; their ammunitions and provisiuns

began to fail; the Germans, of whom it was
chiefly composed, having received no pay for
seven months", threatened to deliver the town into
the enemies hands, and could scarce be retained
trom mutiny by all Leyva's address and authority.
The Imperial generals, who were no Itrangers to
his situation, law the neceflity of marching
without lois of time to his relief. This they hadl
now in their power: Twelve thousand Germans,
whom the zeal and activity of Bourbon taught to
move with unuliial rapidity, had entered ,Lombar-
dy under his command, and rendered the Imierial
army nearly equal to that of the French, greatly
diminifled by the ablence of the body under Albt-
nv, as well as by the fatigues of the liege, Cand
the rigour of the fIalin. But the more Iheir trol s
increaled in number, the more fenlitly did they ted
the diitrels arising from want of moniey. Far liuin

n GuicC. 1. I 528. n G(old. Polit. I pferial. 875

ha'vi'g

having funds for paying a powerful army, they had BOOK IV.
scarce what was sufficient for defraying the charges ' ~~
of conducting their artillery, and of carrying their
ammunition and provisions. The abilities of the
generals, however, supplied every defect. By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promises in
the name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the
troops of all the different nations which composed
their army, to take the field without pay; they en-
gaged to lead them directly towards the enemy;
and flattered them with the certain prospect of vic-
tory, which would at once enrich them with such
royal spoils as would be an ample reward for all their
services. The soldiers, sensible that by quitting the
army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due to
them, and eager to get poffeflion of the promised
treasures, demanded a battle with all the impatience
of adventurers who fought only for plunder '.

rHE Imperial generals, without suffering the ar- They march

dour of their troups to cool, advanced immediately to attackthc
towards the French camp. On the first intelli- February 3.
gence of their approach, Francis called a council
of war, to deliberate what course he ought to take.
All his officers of greatest experience were unani-
mous in advising him to retire, and to decline a
battle with an enemy who courted it from de-
fpair. The leaders of the Imperialists, they ob-
served, would either be obliged in a few weeks
to disband an army, which they were unable to
pay, and which they kept together only by the
hope of pillage, or the soldiers, enraged at the
non-performance of the promires to which they had
trusted, would rife in some furious mutiny which
would allow them to think of nothing but their own
safety: That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some

m Eryci Peuteani His. Cifalpina ap. Grevii Thef: Antiquit.
Ital. iii. p. 1 70, 1179.

Vo.. II. Q_ firong

BOOK IV. ffrong post, and waiting in safety the arrival of fiefh
'-~ stroops from France and Switzerland, might, before

'152' the end of spring, take polfeffion of all the Mila-

nefe, without danger, or bloodshed. But in op-
position to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was
to give counsels fatal to France during the whole
campaign, represented the ignominy it would re.
fleA on their sovereign if he should abandon a
siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn his
back before an enemy to whom he was itill superior
in number; and insisted on the necessity of fighting
the Imperialists rather than relinquish an undertak-
ing, on the success of which the King's future fame
depended. Unfortunately, Francis's notions of
honour were delicate to an excess that bordered on
what was romantic. Having often said that he
would take Pavia, or perish in the attempt, he
thought himself bound not to depart from that re-
solution; and rather than expose himself to the
slightest imputation, he chore to forego all the ad-
vantages which were the certain contequences of a
retreat, and determined to wait for the Imperialists
before the walls of Pavia ".

Battle of THE Imperial generals found the French so
Pavia. strongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the pow-

erful motives which urged them on, they hesitated
long before they ventured to attack them; but at
last the neceflities of the besieged, and the murmurs
of their own Ibldiers,obliged them to put every thing
rebru. 24. to hazard. Never did armies engage with greater

ardour, or with an higher opinion, of the impor-
tance of the battle they were going to fight;
never were troops more firongly animated with
emulation, national antipathy, mutual resentment,
and all the passions which inspire obltinate brave-
ry. On the one hand, a gallant young Monarch,

"Guic 1. 15, 291.

seconded

seconded by a generous nobility, and followed by BOOK IV-
fubjeets to whose natural impetuosity, indignation '---'
at the opposition they had encountered, added new 5s
force, contended for vidory and honour. On the
other fide, troops more completely disciplined, and
conduEted by generals of greater abilities, fought
from neceflity, with courage heightened by de-
fpair. The Imperialists, however, were unable to
resist the first efforts of the French valour, and
their firmest battalions began to give way. But the
fortune of the day was quickly changed. The
Swiss in the Service of France, unmindful of the
reputation of their country for fidelity and martial
glory, abandoned their polt in a cowardly manner.
Leyva, with his garrison, sallied out and attacked
the rear of the French, during the heat of the
adion, with such fury as threw it into confusion;
and Pescara falling on their cavalry, with the Im-
perial horse, among whom he had prudently in-
termingled a considerable number of Spanish foot,
armed with the heavy muskets then in use, broke
this formidable body by an unusual method of
attack against which they were wholly unprovid-
ed. The rout became universal; and refiftanceTheFrench
ceased in almost every part, but where the King "rmy"t'
was in person, who fought now, not for fame or
victory, but for fafcty. Though wounded in fe-
veral places, and thrown from his horse, which
was killed under him, Francis defended himself
on foot with an heroic courage. Many of his
bravest officers gathering round him, and endea-
vouring to save his life at the ex)cncc of their
oun, fell at his feet. Among there was Bonni-
ve:, the author of this great calamity, who alone
(iid unlamented. 'The King, cxha lit:d with fa-
tigue, and scarce capable of tarther resistance, was
left almost alone, exposed to the fury ol Llne Spa-
nifh Iildiers, fitrangers to his rank, and enraged at

Qz2 his

BOOK IV. his obitinacy. At that moment came up Pompe-

rant, a French gentleman, who had entered toge-
S26' ther with Bourbon into the Emperor's service, and

placing himself by the fide of the Monarch against
whom he had rebelled, aflifted in protecting him
from the violence of the soldiers; at the fame time
beseeching him to surrender to Bourbon, who was
not far diltant. Imminent as the danger was which
now surrounded Francis, he rejected with indigna-
tion the thoughts of an action which would have
afforded such matter of triumph to his traiterous
fubjecd; and calling for Lannoy, who happened
likewise to be near at hand, gave up his sword to

taken him; which he, kneeling to kifs the King's hand,
priolner. received with profound refpet; and taking his own

sword from his fide, presented it to him, faying,
That it did not become so great a Monarch to re-
main disarmed in the presence of one of the Em-
peror's fubjets *.

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of

the most fatal France' had ever seen. Among
these were many noblemen of the highest diftinc-
tion, who chore rather to perish than to turn their
backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken
prisoners, of whom the most illufirious was Henry
D'Albret, the unfortunate King of Navarre. A
small body of the rear-guard made its escape under
the command of the duke Alenfon ; the feeble gar-
rifon of Milan, on the first news of the defeat, re-
tired without being pursued, by another road; and
in two weeks after the battle, not a'Frenchman re-
mained in Italy.

o Guic. 1. 15. 292. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 355. Menm. de

Bellay, p. 9o. Sandov. Hist. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 805.
81o. Rufcelli Lettere de Principi ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita dell
Carlo V. p. 98.

LANNOY1

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all the BOOK IV.

outward marks of honour due to his rank and cha- "V
rader, guarded him with the utmost attention. He
was solicitous, not only to prevent any possibility
of his escaping, but afraid that his own troops
might seize his person, and detain it as the best fe-
curity for the payment of their arrears. In order
to provide against both there dangers, he conduted
Francis, the day after the battle, to the ftrongcaftle
of Pizzichitone near Cremona, committing him to
the custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of
the Spanith infantry, an officer of great bravery,
and of firiA honour, but remarkable for that severe
and scrupulous vigilance which such a trust required.

MEANWHILE Francis, who formed a judgment

of the Emperor's dispositions by his own, was ex-
tremely desirous that Charles should be informed of
his situation, fondly hoping that from his generosity
or sympathy, he would obtain speedy relief. The
Imperial generals were no less impatient to give
their sovereign an early account of the decisive vic-
tory which they had gained, and to receive his in-
ftrutions with regard to their future condut. As
the most certain and expeditious method of con-
veying intelligence to Spain, at that season of the
year, was by land, Francis gave the Commendador
Pennalofa, who was charged with Lannoy's dif-
patches, a passport to travel through France.

CHARLES received the account of this signal rr'ict of

and unexpeced success that had crowned his arms, upon
with a moderation, which if it had been real, would clar,:l"
have done him more honour than the greatest vic-
tory. Without uttering one word exprcflive of exul-

CQ_ tation,

BOOK IV.tation, or of intemperate joy, he retired imme-
"-" "diately into his chapel, and having spent an hour in

'5' offering up his thanksgivings to heaven, returned

to the prelence-chamber, which by that time was
filled with grandees and foreign ambassadors, at.
fembled in order to congratulate him: He accepted
of their compliments with a modest deportment;
he lamented the misfortune of the captive King,
as a striking example of the fad reverse of fortune,
to which the most powerful monarchs are subjet ;
he sorbad any public rejoicings, as indecent in a
war carried on among Christians, reserving them
until he should obtain a victory equally illustrious
over the infidels; and seemed to take pleasure in
the advantage he had gained, only as it would prove
the occasion of restoring peace to Christendom P.

The CHARLES, however, had already begun to form
fhemeshem schemes in his own mind, which little suited such
began to
os, , external appearances. Ambition, not generolity,

was the ruling passion in his mind; and the vicory
at Pavia opened such new and unbounded prols
peds of gratifying it, as allured him with irrefiftibic
force: But it being no easy matter to execute the
vast designs which he meditated, he thought it nc-
ceffary, while proper measures were taking for that
purpose, to affect the greatest moderation, hoping
under that veil to conceal his real intentions from
the other Princes of Europe.

MEANWHILE France was filled with confieriia-

confernati- tion. The King himcilf had early transmittcd ;1
on inFrance account of the rout at l'avia in a letter to his mothli

delivered by Pennalofa, which contained only
there words, " Madam all is loft except our

P Sandov. Hilt. 6i . . Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. i o.

" honour,"

' honour." Those who survived, when they ar- BOOK IV.
rived from Italy, brought such a melancholy detail '---"
of particulars, as made all ranks of men sensibly feel
the greatnels and extent of the calamity. France,
without its sovereign, without money in her treasury,
without an army, without officers to command it,
and encompalfed on all fides by a victorious and
active enemy, seemed to be on the very brink of
deftrution. But on that occasion the great abili-'Thc pu-
lities of Louise the regent saved the kingdom, which duent of .
the violence of her pallions had more than once Recnt.
exposed to the greatest danger. Inflead of giving
herself up to such lamentations as were natural to a
woman so remarkable for her maternal tenderness,
file discovered all the foresight, and exerted all the
activity of a consummate politician. She affembld
the nobles at Lions, and animated them by her ex-
ample, no lets than by her words, with such zeal in
defence of their country as its present situation re-
quired. She collected the remains of the army
which had served in Italy, ransomed the prisoners,
paid their arrears, and put them in a condition to
take the field. She levied new troops, provickd
fr the security of the frontiers, and raised
fu:ms sufficient for defraying these extraordi-
nary expences. Her chief care, however, was to
appease the resentment, or to gain the si iendntip of
the King of England; and from that quarter, the
fiirft ray of comfort broke in upon the French as-
fairs.

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliainces witrllr

Charles or Francis, seldom followed any regulars, lJi',,,.
or concerted plan of policy, but was influeiicedilyll i''l
chiefly by the caprice of temporary pallions, ficlh
occurrences often happened as recalled his atten-
tion towards that equal balance of power which
it was ncceflary to keep between Cti two con-
tending patcntates, the prefervationof which he

Q 4 always

BOOK IV.always boasted to be his peculiar office. He had

expeded that his union with the Emperor might
afford him an opportunity of recovering some part
of those territories in France which had belonged to
his ancestors, and for the fake of such an acquilition
he did not scruple to give his assistance towards
railing Charles to a considerable pre-eminence above
Francis. He had never dreamt, however, of any
event so decisive and so fatal as the victory at Pavia,
which seemed not only to have broken, but to have
annihilated the power of one of the rivals; so that
the profpeEt of the sudden and entire revolution
which this would occasion in the political system,
filled him with the moll disquieting apprehensions.
He saw all Europe in danger of being over-run by
an ambitious prince, to whose power there now re-
mained no counterpoise; and though he himself
might at first be admitted, in quality of an ally, to
some share in the spoils of the captive Monarch, it
was easy to discern that with regard to the manner of
making the partition, as well as his security for
keeping poffeflion of what should be allotted him,
he must absolutely depend upon the will of a con-
federate, to whose forces his own bore no propor-
tion. He was sensible that if Charles was per-
mitted to add any considerable part of France
to the vast dominions of which he was already
mailer, his neighbourhood would be much more
formidable to England than that of the ancient
French Kings; while, at the fame time, the
proper balance on the continent, to which Erg-
land owed both its safety and importance, would
be entirely loft. Concern for the situation of the
unhappy Monarch co-operated with theie political
considerations; his gallant behaviour in the battle
of Pavia had excited an high degree of admira-
tion, which never fails of augmenting sympathy;
and Henry, naturally fiufceptible of generous

fcntimcnts,

sentiments, was fond of appearing as the deliverer BOo' IV-
of a vanquilhed enemy from a slate of captivity. "~ '
The pafirons of the English minister seconded the
inclinations of the Monarch. Wolfey, who had
not forgot the disappointment of his hopes in two
successive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly to
the Emperor, thought this a proper opportunity of
taking revenge; and Lonife courting the fiiendfhip
of England with such flattering fubmiflions as were
no lets agreeable to the King than to the Cardinal,
Henry gave her secret assurances that he would not
lend his aid towards opprefling France, in its pre-
sent helplel state, and obliged her to promiCe
that The would not content to difmembcr the
kingdom even in order to procure her son's li-
berty .

BUT as Henry's connections with the emperor

made it necessary to aCt in such a manner, as to
save appearances, he ordered public rejoicings to be
made in his dominions for the success of the Impe-
rial arms; and as if he had been eager to seize the
present opportunity of ruining the French monar-
chy, he sent ambassadors to lMadrid, to congratu-
late with Charles upon his victory; to put him in
mind, that he, as his ally, engaged in one com-
mon cause, was entitled to partake in the fruits of
it; and to require that in compliance with the
terms of their confederacy, he would iinvade
Guienne with a powerful army in order to give him
poirellion of that province. At the anice time, lie
offered to fend the princess Mary into Spain or the
ILow-Countries, that she might be educated under
the Emperor's direcion until the conclulion of the
marriage agreed on between them; and in retcrn
for that mark of his confidence lie inliifcJ, that
Francis should be delivered to him, in conle(quncc

' Mem. de Bellay, 94. Guic. 1. 16. 318. HcIebclt.

of

BOOK IV. of that article in the treaty of Bruges, whereby each
,'.-- of the contracting parties was bound to surrender

5 all usurpers to him whose rights they had invaded.

It was impossible that Henry could expec that the
Emperor would liften to there extravagant demands,
which it was neither his interest, nor in his power
to grant. They appear evidently to have been
made with no other intention than to firnifh himn
with a decent pretext for entering intofiuch engage.
ments with France as thejuncture required '.
On the Ita- IT was among the Italian states, that the victory

at Pavia occalioned the greatest alarm and terror.
That balance of power on which they relied for
their security, and which it lad been the confltant
objcd of all their negotiations and refinements to
rnmainai, was destroyed in a monment. They were
expoied by their situation to feel the first effects of
the uncontroled authority Charles had acquired.
They oblerved many symptoms of a boundlels
amnbition in that young prince, and were fcnfible
that as Emperor, or king of Naples, he'could ei-
ther form dangerous pretensions upon each of their
territories, or invade them with great advantage.
They deliberated, therefore, with much solicitude
concerning the means of raising such a force as
might obftrud his progress '. But their confultati-
ons, conducted with little union, and executced
with less vigour, had no effect. Clelm'nt, infleadl
ofl purrsing the mtafures which he had concerted
witl the Venetians for iecuring the liberty of Italy,
was to intimidattd by .annoy's threats, or ovei-
Alid i. come by his promises, that le entered into a fcpa-

ante treaty, binding himiclf to advance a confidcr-
able film in return for certain emoluments which lie

r Heibert, p. 64.
r Guic. i. 16. 30o. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74, ;76, &c
1 l'uali Hist. lib. i. c. 1.

wV IS

was to receive. The money was inflantly paid; Boos V.-
Charles afterwards refifed to ratify the treaty; and "V
the Pope remained exposed at once to infamy and
to ridicule; to the former, because he had delerted
the public cause for his private interest ; to the lat-
ter, because he had been a loser by that unworthy
action '

How dishonourable soever the artifice might be Mtinyi

which was employed in order to defraud the Pope army.
of this (um, it came very feaobnably into the vice-
roy's hands, and put it in his power to extricate
himself out of an imminent danger. Soon after
the defeat of the French army, the German troops
which had defended Pavia with such meritorious
courage and perseverance, growing insolent upon
the fame they had acquired, and impatient of rely-
ing anylonger on fruitless promises \\iih which they
had been 1o often amufied, rendered thlmfnclves
masters of the town, with a resolution to keep pof-
felfion of it as a security for the payment ot their ar-
rears; and the reft of the army dilcovered a much
fironger inclination to alift, than to punish the mu-
tineers. By dividing among them the money ex-
acted from the Pope, Lannoy quieted the tumul-
tuous Germans; but though this satisfied their pre-
sent demands, he had so little profplt of being
able to pay them or his other forces regularly for
the future, and was under such continlua apprehen-
lions of their seizing the person of tle captive king,
that not longer after, he was obliged to dilinils all
the Germans and Italians in the Imnpriil service".
Thus, from a circumstance that now appears very
lingular, but ariling naturally from the conlittiiuio
of most European governments in the sixteenth
century, while Charles was suspec.ted by all his

' Guic. . i6. 3o0. Mauroceni Hiflor. Vcner. ap. Illorichi
delle cofe Venez. V. 131, 136. Guic. I. 16. p. 3oz.

ni.ighbours

BOOK IV. neighbours of aiming at universal monarchy, and

while he was really forming vast projects of this
15'5 kind, his revenues were so limited, that he could

not keep on foot his victorious army, though it did
not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

The Empe- DURING thefetranfaaions, Charles, whofepre-
rations con-tenfions to moderation and disinterestedness were
cerning the loon forgotten, deliberated with the utmost folici.
improving tude, how he might derive the greatest advan-
his viaory. tages from the misfortune of his adversary. Some

of hiscounfellors adviled him to treat Francis with
the magnanimity that became a victorious Prince,
and instead of taking advantage of his situation to
impose ligcrcus coLnditions, to diinifs him on ucich
equal terms, as would bind him forever to lis in-
terest by the ties of gratitude and affection, more
forcible as well as more permanent than any which
could be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary
stipulations. Such an exertion of generosity is not,
perhaps, to be expected in the condud of political
affairs, and it was far too refined for that prince to
whom it was propostd. The more obvious, but
leSs splendid, scheme of endeavouring to make the
utmolt of Francis's calamity, had a greater number
in the council to recommend it, and suited better
w ith the Emperor's genius. But though Charles
adopted this plan, he did not execute it in a proper
manner. Instead of making one great effort to pe-
netrate into France with all the forcesof Spain and
the Low-Countries; instead of cru!hing the Italian
lhates before they recovered from the consternation

lwhich the ufccels of his arms had occasioned; he
had recoturi to the artifices of intrigue ai:d nego-
tiation. This procecdcd partiy from oleellity,
partly from the natural difi)oition of his mind.
T''he situation o' his financcs at that time rendered
it extremely difficult to carry on any extraoidinary
arnlmaent ; aid he lini-lfii having never appeared

ait

at the head of his armies, the command of which BooK IV.
he had hitherto committed to his generals, was '
av(rle from bold and martial counsels, and trusted '52
more to the arts with which he was acquainted.
He laid, besides, too much firess upon the vicory
of Pavia, as if by that event the strength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exh.uifted, and
the kingdom itelf, no less than the perlon of its
Monarch, had been subjected to his power.

F LL of this opinion, he determined to let the The rigo-
highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having U rot-,oms

he proiolic.

appointed the count de Roeux to visit the captive t Francis.
King in his name, he initruEted him to propole the
folloiingarticles, as the conditions on which he
would grant him his liberty; that he should restore
Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose ancestors
it had been unjufily wrested, that he ihould fur-
render Provence and Dauphine, that they might
be erected into an independent kingdom for the
Constable Bourbon; that he should make full iatif-
faftion to the king of England for all his claims;
and finally, renounce the pretensions of France to
Naples, Milan, or any other territory in Italy.
When Francis, who had hitherto flattered himself
that he should be treated by the Emperor with the
generosity becoming one great prince towards ano-
ther, heard there rigorous conditions, he was so
transported, with indignation that drawing his dag-
ger hastily, he cried out, " 'Twere better that a
king should die thus." Alarcon, alarmed at his
vehemence, laid hold on his hand; but though he
soon recovered greater composure, he Htill declared
in the most lolemn manner, that he would rather
remain a prisoner during life, than purchase liberty
by such ignominious concellions'.

Mem. de Bellay, 94. Ferreras Hill. ix. 43.

THIS

BooK IV. THIS mortifying discovery of the Emperor's in-
,-v.--,, tentioins, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin and
Frincis car- impatience under his confinement, and must have
r'edpnrfonerdriven him to absolute despair, if he had notlaid

pal hold of the only thing which still could adminiffter

to him any comfort. He persuaded himself, that
the conditions which Roeux had proposed, did not
flow originally from Charles himself, but were dic-
tated by the rigorous policy of his Spaniih council,
and that therefore he might hope in one perfbnal in-
terview with him, to do more towards hastening
l;is own deliverance, than could be effected by long
rnegt'Oiations palirng through the subordinate hands
of his ministers. Relying on this supposition, which
proceeded from too favourable an opinion of the
Emperor's charadter, he offered to visit him in
Spain, and was willing to be carried thither as a
fpedtacle to that haughty nation. Lannoy employ-
ed all his address to confirm him in these senti-
ments; and concerted with him in secret the man-
ner of executing this resolution. Francis was so
eager on a scheme which seemed to open some
prolpet of liberty, that he furnished the gallies
neceilary for the voyage, Charles being at that
time unable to fiUt any fleet to sea. The viceroy,
without communicating his intentions either to
Bourbon or Pelcara, conducted his prisoner toward
Genoa, under prcttl;ce of transporting him by sea
to Naples; though rfon after they set fail, he or-
dered the pilots to fl cer diredtly for Spain; but the
wind happening to carry them near the French
co;ift, the unfortuntate monarch had' a full profpett
of i:is own cdomiiions, towards which he caff ma-
liy a tbrrowlul and desiring look. They landed,
howiver,, in a few d:Iys at Barcelona, and soon al-
ter, :Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's com-
AUL'4. l11. and1, in th' Alcazar of MIVadid, under the care

of the vigil.ant Al.arcon, who guarded him with as
much circumipeclion as ever Y.

v Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. 1. 16 32.>

A FLWV

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, BOOK IV.

and when he began to be sensible of his having -v
relied without foundation on the Emperor's gene- Henry VIIi.
rofity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with theconcludes t
Regent of France, which afforded him tome hope France, i
of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extra-order to
vagant demands had been received at Madrid with rPlea- hi
that negleEt which they deserved, and which he
probably expected. Charles, intoxicated with
prosperity, no longer courted him in that refpet-
ful and fubmiflive manner which pleated his haugh-
ty temper. Wolfey, no less haughty than his
maifer, was highly irritated at the Emperor's dii-
continuing his wonted caresses and profefions of
friendihip to him. These flight offences, added to
the weighty considerations formerly mentioned, in-
duced Henry to enter into a defensive alliance with
Louise, in which all the differences between him
and her son were adjusted; at the lame time he en-
gaged that he would employ his best offices in order
to procure the deliverance of his new ally from a
slate of captivity '.

WHILE the open defection of such a powerfulMorone's

confederate affected Charles with deep concern, i"nt,'sto
a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, which overtrn
threatened him with consequences still more fatal. ,the

E,

The restless and intriguing genius of MoronS, ia Italy.
chancellor of Milan, gave rile to this. His re-
venge had been amply gratified by the expulsion
of the French out of Italy, and his vanity no lets
toothed by the re-eflablilhment of Sforza, to
whose interest he had attached hinfeclf, in the dutchy
of Milan. The delays however, and evasions of
the Imperial court in granting Sobrza the invefti-
ture of his new-acquired territories had long alarm-
ed Moron ; thelc were rep.ated lb often, and with
such apparent artifice, as became a full prout to his

' Hcrbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfcy, 337.

lilpicious

BooK IV. suspicious mind that the Emperor intended to firip

v--' his mailer of that rich country which he had con-

' quered in his name. Though Charles, in order to

quiet the Pope and the Venetians, no less jealous
of his designs than Morone, gave Sforza, at last,
the investiture which had been so long desired; the
charter was clogged with Co many reservations, and
iibjc'ted him to filch grievous burdens, as render-
ed the duke of Milan a dependant on the Emperor,
rather than a vassal ofthe Empire, and afforded him
scarce any other security for his possessions, than
the good pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such
an acceflion of power as would have accrued from
the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom ot
Naples, was considered by Morone as fatal to the
liberties of Italy no less than to his own power and
importance. Full of this idea, he began to revolve
in his mind the possibility of rescuing Italy from
the yoke of foreigners, the darling scheme, as has
been already observed, of the Italian politicians in
that age, and which it was the great object of their
ambition to accomplish. If to the glory of having
been the chizf instrument of driving the French
cut of Milan, he could add that of delivering
Naples from the dominion of the Spaniards, he
thought that nothing would be wanting to compleat
his fame. His fertile genius soon fiuggefted to him
a project for that purpose; a difficult indeed, and
daring one, but for that very reason, more agree-
able to his bold and enterprizing temper.

Hio nesnth BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged a:
Pfcrar.L Lannoy's carrying the French King into Spain

without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid tlat the two Monarchs might, in his
abincce, conclude some trcary in which his in-
terefis would be entirely sacrificcd, hastened to
Madrid, in order to guard against that danger.
The latter, on whom the comiinand of the army

novw

nov devolved was obliged to remain in Italy; Booa IV.
but in every company, he gave vent to his indig- .-' -
naiion agiuill the viceroy in expreflions full of I52S
rancour and contempt ; le acculed him in a letter
to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of dan-
gcr, and of inl(lence after a victorv, towards the
obtaiin;g of which lie had contributed nothing
either by his valour or his conduct; nor did he
ab:-ain fromt bitter complaints agaiiift the Emperor
himcelf, who had not ditcovered, as he imagined,
a lifficient eliife of his merit, nor bestowed any
adequate reward on his Cervices. It was on this
dilgufl of .FeCcara, that Morone founded his whole
system. lie knew the boundless ambition of his
nature, the vail extent of his abilities in peace as
well as war, and the intrepidity of his mind ca-
pable alike of undertaking and of executing the
molt desperate designs. The cantonment of the
Spanish troops on the frontier of the Milanese,
gave occasion to many interviews between him
and Morone, in which the latter took care fre-
quently to turn the conversation to the tranfattions
lubfequent to the battle of Pavia, a subjed upon
which the marquis entered willingly and with
passion; and Morone observing his resentment
to be uniform and violent, artfully pointed out
and aggravated every circumfance that could en-
crease its fury. He painted in the strongest colours
the Emperor's want of dilcernlenr, as well ,s of
gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to him, and in
allowing that presumptuous Fleming to dipuofe of
the captive King without consulting the main to
whose bravery and wildorn Charles wa= indebted
for the glory of having him in his power. Having
warmed him by luch difcourles, he then be-
gan to insinuate that now was the time to be
avenged for those insults, and to acquire in-
mortal renown as the deliverer of his couintry
from the oppreflion of strangers; that the states

VOL. II. K of

Boot IV. of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intole-
<"/~~ table dominion of barbarians, were at last ready to

525S' combihe in order to vindicate their own indepen-

dence; that their eyes were fixed on him as
the only leader whose genius and good fortune
could ensure the happy success of that noble en-
terprife; that the attempt was no less practicable
than glorious, it being in his power so to dif-
perse the Spanish infantry, the only body of
the Emperor's troops in Italy, through the vil-
lages of the Milanese, that, in one night they
mnight be destroyed by the people, who, having
fuflired much from their exadions and ;insolence,
would gladly undertake this service; that he might
then, without opposition, take poffeflion of the
throne of Naples, the elevation destined for
him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of
liberty to Italy ; that the Pope, of whom that
kingdom held, and whose predecessors had dif-
posed of it on many former occasions, would wil-
lingly grant him the right of investiture; that the
Venetians, the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to
whom lh had cornrtunicated the scheme, together
with the French, would be the guarantees of his
right; that the Neapblitans would naturally prefer
the government of one of their countrymen,
Whom they loved and admired, to that odious do-
minion of ftrangets, to which they ihad been f6
long fubje&ed; and that the Emperor, aflonifhed
at a blow so unexge6ted, would find that he had
neither troops nor money to refill such a powerful
confederacy b. .

PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent
of the scheme, listened attentively to Morone,

b Guic. xvi.. 32 . Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv. de Bran--

tome, iv. 171. ufcelli Letter de Princ. i.i . Ihu.,li
Hit. lib. i. c. l. P. Heuter. Rer. Aui[r. lib. ix. c 3.
P. 207.

but

but with the countenance of a man loft in pro- BOOK IV.
found and anxious thought. On the one hand, '-^
the infamy of betraying his Sovereign under whom B,52.
he bore such high command, deterred him from and taken
the attempt; on the other, the profped of ob- 'faeby
taining a crown allured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a fliort space in Ilifpenfe, the least
commendable motives, as is usual after such de-
liberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed
over honour. In order, however, to throw a
colour of decency on his condutt, he insisted that
some learned casuists should give their opinion,
" Whether it was lawful for a subject to take arms
againit his immediate 1overeign, in obedience to
the Lord Paramount of whom the kingdom ifelf
was held." Such a resolution of the cafe, as he
expected, was soon obtained from the divines and
civilians both of Rome and Milan; the negociation
went forward; and measures seemed to be taking
with great spirit for the speedy execution of the
design.

MEANWHILE Pescara, either (hocked at the

treachery of the ation which he was going to
commit, or despairing of its success, began to
entertain thoughts of abandoning the engagements
he had come under. The indisposition of Sforza,
who happened at that time to be taken ill of
a distemper which was thought mortal, confirmed
this resolution, and determined him to make
known the whole conspiracy to the Emperor,
deeming it more prudent to expect the dutchy
of Milan from him as the reward of this dilcovery,
than to aim at a kingdom to be purchased by a fe-
ries of crimes. This resolution, however, proved
the source of actions scarce leTs criminal and igno-
minious. The Emperor, who had already received
full information concerning the conspiracy from
other hands, seemed to be highly pleased with

R a Peicara's

BOOK IV. Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to con.
'---v- tinue his intrigues for Come time with the Pope and

1525. Sforza, both that he might dilcover their in-

tentions more fully, and be able to convict them
of the crime with greater certainty. 'efcara,
conscious of guilt, as well as tensible how sus-
picious his long silence must have appeared at
Madrid, durst not decline that difhonourab!e
office; and to his eternal disgrace, was obliged to
nt the meanest of all parts, that of seducing
with a purpose to betray. Confidering the abi-
lities of the persons with whom he had to deal,
the part was scarce less difficult, than base; but he
ated it with such addiefs, as to deceive even the
penetrating eye of Morone, who relying with full
confidence on his sincerity, visited him at Novara,
in order to put the last hand to their machinations.
Pescara received him in an apartment where
Antonio de Leyva was placed behind the tapeflry,
that he might over-hear and bear witness to their
conversation; as Morone was returning home-
wards, that officer suddenly appeared, and to his
astonishment arrested him prisoner in the Em-
peror's name. He was condtuced to the cafUe of
Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been his
accomplice, had now the assurance to interrogate
him as hisjudge. At the fame time. the Emperor
declared Sfoiza to have forfeited all right to the
dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in a confr;iracy
againit the sovereign of whom he held ; Pescara,
by his command, seized on every place in the
Milanese, except the castles of, Crt mona and
Milan, which the unfortunate duke attempting to
defend, were closely blockaded by the Imperial
troops c

c Guc 1. 16. 329. Jovii Hill. 319. Capella, lib. v.
p. 200.

BL' 1

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, inflead BooK IV.

of firipping the Emperor of what he already pof- "-'
fefed in Italy, contributed to extend his dori- The5ri5.
nions in that country, it lhewed him the necessity roustr at-
of coming to Ibme agreement with the French Franris in
King, unless he would draw on himfclf a confe-Spaia.
deracy of all Europe, which the progress of his
arms, and his boundless and undisguiscd ambition,
filled with general alarm. He had not hitherto
treated Francis with the generosity which that mo-
narch expected, and Icarce with the decency due
to his flarion. InPFead of displaying the senti-
ments becoming a great Piince, he seems to have
aded with the mcrccnary art of a corsair, who by
the rigorous ulage of his prifbners, endeavours to
draw from them an high price for their ransom.
The captive King was confined in an old castle,
under a keeper whose formal austerity of manners
rendered his vigilance fill more disgustful. He
was allowed no exercise but that of riding on a
mule, surrounded with armed guards on horse-
back. Charles, on pretence of its being necessary
to attend the Cortes aflembled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and suffered several
weeks to elapse without viliting Francis, though he
solicited an interview with the molt prefing and
submissive importunity. So many indignities made
a deep impreflion on an high spirited Prince; he
began to loIs all relilh for his usual amusements i
his natural gaiety of temper forsook him ; and as- IrntlngTcsl
ter languilhing for rome time, he was fcized
with a dangerous fever, dining the violence of
w.ihich lie complained constantly of the un-
excpdted and unprincely rigour with which he had
bern treated, often exclaiming, that now the
Emperor would have the fatisfadion of his dy-
ing in his hands, without having once deigned to
fee his face. The phylicians, at las, dclijaired
us his life, and informed the Emperor that they

R 3 law

BooK IV. saw no hopes of his recovery, unless he were gra-
'-,-.- tified with regard to that point on which he seemed

1525' to be so strongly bent. Charles, solicitous to

preserve a life, with which all his profpets of
farther advantage from the victory at Pavia must
have terminated, immediately consulted his mi-
nifters concerning the courie to be taken. In
vain did the chancellor Gattinara, the mol: able
among them, represent to him the indecency of
his viliting Francis, if he did not intend to set him
at liberty immediately upon equal terms; in
vain did he point out the infamy to which he
would be exposed, if motives of avarice or am-
bition should prevail on him to give the cap.
tive monarch this mark of attention and fy!n-
pathy, for which humanity and generofiry had
pleaded so long without effect. The Emperor,
less delicate, or less solicitous about reputation

Sept. 8. than his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his
roeifitsp prisoner. The interview was ihort; Francis be-
bim. ing too weak to bear a long conversation.

Charles accofRed him in terms full of affection
and refped, and gave him such promises of speedy
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have reflected the greatest honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in his
situation , and cheared with this gleam of hope
began to revive from that moment, and soon re-
covered his wonted health d.

'The con- He had soon the mortification to. find, that his
slable Bour,-
t boi, confidence in the Emperor was not better founded
t Madrid. than formerly. Charles returned instantly to

Toledo; all negociations were carried on by his
minitfkrs; aLd Francis was kept in as ftritt

d Guic. 1. i6. 339. Sandov. Hifl, i. 665.

cuflody

custody as ever. A new indignity, and that very BooK Il.
galling, was added to all these he had already
suffered. Bourbon arrived in Spain about this '
time. Charles, who had so long refuted to visit
the King, received his rebellious subjet with the
most studied refped. He met him without the
gates of Toledo, embraced him with the greatest
affeetion, and placing him on his left hand, con- v' 5
ducted him to his apartment. These marks of ho-
nour to him, were so many insults to the unfor-
tunate Monarch; which he felt in a very fenfble
manner. It afforded him rome consolation, how-
ever, to observe that the sentiments of the Spa-
niards differed widely from those of their sovereign.
That generous people detefied Bourbon's crime;
and notwithstanding his great talents and impor-
tant Cervices, they shunned all intercourse with
him to such a degree, that Charles having desired
the marquis de Villena to permit Bourbon to reside
in his palace white the court remained in Toledo,
he politely replied, "' That he could not refuse
gratifying the Emperor in that request ;" but
added with a Castilian dignity of mind, ' That he
must not be surprised if the moment the Conftabie
departed, he should burn to the ground a house,
which having been polluted by the presence of a
traitor, became an unfit habitation tor a man of
honour e."

THE Emperor himself, nevertheless, seemed to Appointed

have it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services he l'perialI
in a signal manner. But as Bourbon insisted, in the armyin
firlt place, on the accompliihment of his promile "ty'
of giving him in marriage his sifter Eleanora,
Queen dowager of Portugal, the honour of which
alliance had been one of his chief inducements to
rebel against his lawful Sovereign: as Francis, in or-
der to prevent such a dangerous union, had offered,

* Guic. 1. xvi 335.

R 4 bfore

*k

BooK IV. before he left Italy, to marry that Princels; and as

"-'" Eleanora discovered an inclination rather to match
s525' wirh a powerful monarch, than with his exiled

subjea; all the!e interfering circumstances created
great embaraflment to Charles, and left him
scarce any hope of extricating himself with de-
cency. But the death of Pescara, who at the age
December. of thirty-fix, left behind him the reputation of be-

ing one of the greatest generals and ablest poli.
ticians of that century, happened opportunely at
thisjunture for his relief. By that event, the
command of the army in Italy became vacant, and
Charles, always fertile in his resources, persuaded
Bourbon, who was in no condition to dif ute his
will, to accept the office of genctal in chief there,
together with a grant of the dutchy of Milan for-
feited by Sforza, and in return for these to reli-.
quifh all hopes of marrying the queen of Por-
tugal F.

Negociati- THE chief obstacle that flood in the way of
on? for pro- Francis's liberty, was the Emperor's infilling so pe-
cu['ing Francis's remptorily on the reltitution of Burgundy, as a
lborty. preliminary to that event. Francis declared that

he would never consent to dismember his kingdom;
and that if even he should so far forget the dutits
of a monarch as to come to such a resolution, the
fundamental laws of the kingdom would prevent its
taking effec. On his part he was willing to make
an absolute ceflion to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy and the Low-Countries; he pro-
mifed to restore Bourbon all his lands which had
been confiscated ; he renewed his proposal of mar-
rying the Emperor's sifter, the Queen dowager of
Portugal ; and engaging to pay a great fumr by
rnforn for his own pcrfon. But all mutual esteem
and confidence between the two monarchs were
now entirely loft; there appeared on the one

f Sandov. IIiR i. 676. Oe.v. de B-,lit. .v 249.

hand,

hand, a rapacious ambition labouring to avail it. BooK IV.
Iclf of every favourable circumstance; on the '--
other, suspicion and resentment, standing perpetu- 5Z5
ally on their guard; so that the prospect of bring-
ing their negociations to an issue, seemed to be far
distant. The dutchess of Alencon, the French
King's sifter, whom Charles permitted to visit her
brother in his confinement, employed all her ad-
dress, in order to procure his liberty on more rea-
fonable terms: Henry of England interposed his
good offices to the fame purpole; but both with Co
little luccefs, that Francis in despair took suddenly Frnci in
the resolution of resigning his crown with all its del'aire-

solves to re-

rights and prerogatives to his Ion the Dauphin, de- sign his
termining rather to end his days in a prison, than to crown
purchase his freedom by concefiions unworthy of
a King. The deed for this purpote he signed with
legal formality at Madrid, empowering his fifler
to carry it into France that it might be registered
in all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at the
fame time intimating his intention to the Emperor,
he desired him to name the place of his confine-
ment, and to aflign him a proper number of atten-
dants during the remainder of his days g.

THIS resolution of the French King had great Charle,

effect; Charles began to be sensible, that by alalmed.
pushing rigour to excess, he might defeat his own
measures, and inflead of the valf advantages he
hoped to draw from ransoming a powerful Mo-
narch, he might at last find in his hands a Prince
without dominions or revenues. About the fame
time, one of the King . of Navarre's domestics
happened by an extraordinary exertion of fide-
lity, courage and address, to procure his master
an opportunity of escaping from the prison in which
his master had been confined ever since the battle of

6 This paper. is publifled in Memoires Hiftoriques, &c.
par M. 1'Abbe Raynal, tom. ii. p. 151.

Pavia.

BOOK IV. Pavia. This convinced the Emperor, that the

v- moit vigilant attention of his officers might be
I5SS. eluded by the ingenuity or boldness of Francis, or

his attendants, and one unlucky hour might de.
prive him of all the advantages which he had been
To solicitous to obtain. By there considerations,
he was induced to abate somewhat of his former
demands. On the other hand, Francis's impati.
ence under confinement daily increased; and hav-
ing received certain intelligence of a powerful
league forming against his rival in Italy, he grew
more compliant with regard to conceflions, trutt-
ing, that if he could once obtain his liberty, he
would Coon be in a condition to resume whatever
he had yielded.

1. As these were the views and sentiments of the
Mdrid.ot two Monarchs, the treaty which procured Francis

his liberty was signed at Madrid on the fourteenth
of January, one thousand five hundred and twen-
ty-fix. The article with regard to Burgundy,
which had hitherto created the greatest difficulty,
was compromised, Francis engaging to restore
that dutchy with all its dependencies in full fove-
reignty to the Emperor; and Charles consenting
that this reflitution, Ihould not be made till the
King was let at liberty; in order to secure the
performance of this, as well as the other conditi-
ons in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame
instant he himself was released, he would deliver
as hostages to the Emperor, his eldest Ton the
Dauphin, his second son the duke of Orleans, or
in lieu of the latter, twelve of his principal nobili-
ty, to be named by Charles. The other articles
swelled to a great number, and though not of itlch
importance, were extremely rigorous. Among
these the mol remarkable were, that Francis
flould renounce all his pretensions in Italy; that
he (hould disclaim any title which he had to the
lovereignty of Slanders and Artois; that within

fl";

fix weeks after his release, he should restore toBooK IV.
Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods move- -v---
able and immoveable, and make them full repa- z56
ration for the damages they had sustained by the
confiscation of them; that he should use his in-
terest with Henry D'Albret to relinquish his pre-
tensions to the crown of Navarre, and should not
for the future afift him in any attempt to recover
it; that there ihould be eftablilhed between the
Emperor and Francis a league of perpetual friend-
ship and confederacy with a promise of mutual
afliftance in every cafe of neceflity. That in cor-
roboration of this union, Francis should marry the
Emperor's sifter, the Queen dowager of Portugal;
that Francis should cause all the articles of this
treaty to be ratified by the States, and registered
in the Parliaments of his kingdom; that upon the
Emperor's receiving this ratification, the hostages
ihould be set at liberty; but in their place, the
duke of Angouleme, the King's third Ton, should
be delivered to Charles, that in order to manifest,
as well as to strengthen the amity between the
two Monarchs, he might be educated at the im-
perial court; and that if Francis did not, within
the time limited, fulfil the stipulations in the trea-
ty, he should promise, upon his honour and oath,
to return into Spain, and to surrender himself again
a prisoner to the Emperor h.

BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that Sentiments

he had not only effeCtually humbled his rival, with refpdl
but that he had taken fuich precautions as wouldto it
for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion which the wileft
politicians formed concerning it, was very dif-
ferent; they could not persuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would execute
there articles against which he had struggled so

h Recueil des Trait. tom ii. 11 . Ulloa Vitadell Carlo. V.
p 102, &c.

long,

BOOK IV. long, and to which even amidst the horrors of

V-a. captivity he had consented with such reluctance.
t526 Ambition and refentmenr, they knew, would con.

spire in prompting him to violate the hard condi-
tions to which he had been constrained to submit;
nor would arguments and casuistry be wanting to
represent that which was so manifestly advantage.
ous, to be neceflary and just. If one part of
Francis's conduct had been known, at that time,
this opinion might have been founded, not in con.

Francis e- je6ture, but in certainty. A few hours before he
cretly pro- t
tef againfa tigned the treaty, he assembled such of his coun.
the validity fellors as were then in Madrid, and having exact-

ed from them a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a
long enumeration in their pretence of all the dig
honourable arts, as well as unprincely rigour,
which the Emperor had employed in order to en.
snare or intimidate him. For that reason he took
a formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his
content to the treaty should be confidered as an
involuntary deed, and be deemed null and void i.
By this disingenuous artifice, for which even the
treatment he had received was no apology, Fran-
cis endeavoured to satisfy his honour and confci-
ence in signing the treaty, and providing at the
fame time a pretext on which to break it.

MEANWHIILE, great were the outward demon-

ftratioDs of love and confidence between the two
Monarchs; they appeared often together in public;
they frequently had long conferences in private;
they travelled in the fame litter, and joined in the
fame amufiments. But amidfl there signs of
peace and friendihip, the Emperor fill harbour-
ed ftufpicion in his mind. Though the cere-
monies of the marriage between Francis and
the Queen of Portugal were performed Toon
after the conclusion of the treaty, Charles
would not permit him to consummate it until

i Recueil des Trait. tom. ii. p. o17.

the

the return of the ratification from France. Even BooK IV.
then Francis was not allowed to be at full liberty;
his guards were {till continued; and while he was '26.
caressed as a brother-in-law, he was ltiil watched
like a prisoner; and it was obvious to attentive
obleilvers, that an union in the very beginning of
which there might be discerned such symptoms of
ie,!oufy and distrust, could not be cordial, or of
long continuancek.

ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty, Raifiedin

the Regent's ratification of it was brought from '*P
France; and that wife Princess, preferring, on this
occasion, the public good to domestic affetion,
informed her son, that inltead of the twelve noble.
men named in the treaty, ihe had sent the duke
of Orleans along with his brother the Dauphin to
the frontier, as the kingdom could susser nothing
by the absence of a child, but muff be left almost
incapable of defence, if deprived of its ablest
statesmen, and most experienced generals, whom
Charles had artfully included in his nomination.
At last Francis took leave of the Emperor, whose Pranci set
suspicion of the King's sincerity encrealing, as the at ;i"erty.
time of putting it to the proof approacihed, he
endeavoured to bind him till faster by exacting
new promises, which after those he had already
made, the French Monarch was not flow to grant.
He fSt out from Madrid, a place which the remem-
brance of many afflicting circumstances rendered
peculiarly odious to him, with the joy natural on
filch an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-for
journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under the command of
Alarcon, who, as the King drew near the fron-
tiers of France, guarded him with more scrupulous
exadtnefs than ever. When he arrived at the river
Andaye, which separates the two kingdoms, Lautrec

k Guic. 1. i6. 'S3.

appeared

Boo IV. appeared on the opposite bank with a guard of

v`*V horse equal in number to Alarcon's. An empty
S52a6 bark was moored in the middle of the fiream;

the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy with eight
gentlemen put off from the Spanish, and Lautrec
with the fame number from the French fide of the
river; the former had the King in his boat; the
latter, the Dauphin and Duke of Orleans; they
met in the empty vessel; the exchange was made
in a moment; Francis, after a short embrace to
his children, leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reach-
ed the French shore. He mounted that instant a
Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, andt
with a joyful voice crying aloud several times,
"' I am yet a King," galloped full speed to St. John
de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This event,
no less impatiently desired by the French nation
than by their Monarch, happened on the eighteenth
of March, a year and twenty-two days after the
fatal battle of Pavia 1.

The Empe- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of
iagw'thr- Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
Ifabellaof towards his own dominions, he set out for Seville,
Portugal. in order to foleinnize his marriage with Isabella,

the daughter of Emanuel, the late King of Portu-
gal, and the sifter of John II. who had succeeded
him in the throne of that kingdom. Isabella was
a princess of uncommon beauty and accomplish-
ments; and as the Cortes both in Castile and Ara-
gon had warmly solicited their sovereign to marry,
the choice of a wife so nearly allied to the royal
blood of both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable
to his fubjefs. The Portuguese, fond of this new
connection with the first Monarch in Christendom,
granted him an extraordinary dowry with Isabella,

I Sandov. Hilt, i. 735. Guic. 1. i6. 355.

amount-

amounting to nine hundred thousand crowns, a BooK 1V.
fum, which, in the fituatior of his affairs at that--
juncture, Was of no small consequence to the Em- Marih6, .
peror. The marriage was celebrated with that
Iplendor and gaiety, which became a great and
youthful Prince. Charles lived with llabella in
perfect harmony, and treated her on all occasions
with much diftindion and regard m.

DURING these tranfaFtions, Chares could learce Afairsof

give any attention to the affairs of Germany, tho' Cermany.
it was torn in pieces by commotions, which threat-
ened the most dangerous consequences. The feu-
dal institutions still fubfisled almofttunitnpaired ih
the Empire. The property of lands was vested in
the princes, and free barons. Their vassals held Crievances
of them by the drideft and most limited tenures ;p the
while the great body of the people was kept in a
state but little removed from absolute servitude.
In some placts of Germany, people of the lowest
class were so entirely in the power of their maf-
ters, as to be fabje& to personal and domestic
slavery, the rmoft rigorous form of that wretched
slate. In other provinces, particukrly in Bo-
hemia and Lusatia, the peaanits were bound to e-
main on the lands to which they belonged, and
making part of the estate, were traneferred like
any other property from one hand to another.
Even in Suabia, and the countries on the,bfinkt of
the Rhine, where their condition was -tmo t:o-
lerable, the peasants not only paid the full tent of
their farms to the landlord; but if they dcofe
either to change the place of their abode, or to
follow a new profession, they were obiged to
purchase this privilege at a certain price. Befrdes
this, all grants of lands to peasants expired at
their death, without descending to their polleity.

n" UlloaVita di Carlo V. p. io6. Belcarius Corn. Rer. Gal-
lic. p. 565. Spalatmus ap. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ. ii. 18 1.

Upon

Boos IV. appeared on the opposite bank with a guard of

v' ' horse equal in number to Alarcon's. An empty
1526' bark was moored in the middle of the fiream;

the attendants drew up in order on the opposite
banks; at the fame instant, Lannoy with eight
gentlemen put off from the Spanilh, and Lautrec
with the fame number from the French fide of the
river; the former had the King in his boat; the
latter, the Dauphin and Duke of Orleans; they
met in the empty vessel; the exchange was made
in a moment; Francis, after a short embrace to
his children, leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reach-
ed the French shore. He mounted that instant a
Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, and
with a joyful voice crying aloud several times,
"' I am yet a King," galloped full speed to St. John
de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This event,
no less impatiently desired by the French nation
than by their Monarch, happened on the eighteenth
of March, a year and twenty-two days after the
fatal battle of Pavia 1.

The Empe- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of
ror'swarit Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
ITabella of towards his own dominions, he set out for Seville,
Portugal. in order to foleinnize his marriage with Isabella,

the daughter of Emanuel, the late King of Portu-
gal, and the fitter of John IIl. who had succeeded
him in the throne of that kingdom. Isabella was
a princess of uncommon beauty and accomplish-
ments; and as the Cortes both in Castile and Ara-
gon had warmly solicited thcir sovereign to marry,
the choice of a wife so nearly allied to the royal
blood of both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable
to his fubjeas. The Portuguese, fond of this new
connetion with the first Monarch in Christendom,
granted him an extraordinary dowry with Isabella,

I Sandov. Hilt, i. 735. Guic. 1. 6. 355.

amount-

amounting to nine hundred thousand crowns, a BooK IV.
fum, which, in the situation of his affairs at that'~-
jundure, was of no small consequence to the Em- Mlrchz.
peror. The marriage was celebrated with that
splendor and gaiety, which became a great and
youthful Prince. Charles lived with Ilabella in
perfect harmony, and treated her on all occasions
with much diftintion and regard m.

DURING these tranfadions, Charses could fearce Affairsof

give any attention to the affairs of Germany, tho' Germany.
it was torn in pieces by commotions, which threat-
ened the most dangerous consequences. The feu-
dal institutions ftil fubfifed almost'uirnipairtd ih
the Empire. The property of lands was vested in
the princes, and free barons. Their vaflali held Grievances
of them by the ftrideft and most limited tenures ;peate,.
while the great body of the people was kept in a
state but Tittle removed from absolute servitude.
In some placs of Germany, people of the lowest
class were so entirely in the power of their maf-
ters, as to be fabjet to personal and domestic
slavery, the most rigorous form of that wretched
state. In othtr provinces, particulakly iA Bo-
hemia and Lusatia, the peafaits were bound to re-
main on the lands to which they belonged, and
making part of the estate, were tratefetred like
any other property from one hand to another.
Even in Suabia, and the countries on thebbaiikds of
the Rhine, where their condition was ft to'
lerable, the peasants not only paid the full tent of
'their farms to the landlord; but if they chose
either to change the place of their abode, or to
follow a new profession, they were obtiged to
purchase this privilege at a certain price. Befrdes
this, all grants of lands to peasants expired at
their death, without descending to their polletity.

m Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. lo6. Belcarius Cor. Rer. Gal-
lic. p. 565. Spalatinus ap. Struv. Corp. Hilt. Germ. ii. 1o8 .

Upon

BooK IV. Upon that event, the landlord had a right to the
.*--.. best of their cattle, and of their furniture; and

z52 6 their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of the

grant, were obliged to pay large fums by way of
fine. These exations, though grievous, were
borne with patience, because they were cullomary
and ancient: But when the progress of elegance
and luxury, as well as the changes introduced ill
to the art of war came to encreafe the expence of
government, and made it necessary for Princts to
levy occasional or stated taxes on their subjects,
such impositions being new, appeared intolerable;
and in Germany, these duties being laid chieciv
upon beer, wine, and other necessaries of life, at-
sec&ed the common people in the most sensible
manner. The addition of such a load to their
former burdens, drove them to despair. It was
to the valour inspired by resentment against impo-
fitions of this kind; that the Swiss owed the ac-
quifition of their liberty in the fourteenth century.
'The fame cause had excited the peasants in fe-
veral other provinces in Germany to rebel against
their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth and
beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and tho' theie
infurretions were not attended with like success,
they could not however be quelled without much
difficulty and bloodshed .

Their inrur- By these checks, the spirit of the peasants was
reionin overawed rather than subdued; and their giievan-
Suabia.

ces multiplying continually, they raL.to arms, this
year, with the most frantic rage. The ftit ap-
pearance was near Uln in Suabia. The pcarants in
the adjacent country flocked to their flandard with
the ardour and impatience natural to men, who
having groaned long under oppression, beheld at last
rome profpeat of deliverance; and, the contagion
spreading from province to province, reached almofi

n Seckend; lib. ii. p. :. 6.

every

every part of Germany. Wherever they came, BooK IV.
they plundered the monasteries; wafted the lands '~/'
of their luperiors ; razed their cafiles a and ma- 1526'
sacred without mercy all persons of noble birth
who were so unhappy as to fall into their hands n.
having intimidated their oppressors, as they ima-
gined, by the violence of these proceedings, they
began to confider what would be the most proper
and effectual method of securing themselves for
the future from their tyrannical exadtions. With
this view, they drew up and publilled a memorial,
containing all their demands, and declared that
while arms were in their hands, they would either
persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full
fatisfadion with regard to there. The chief ar-
ticles were, that they might have liberty to choose
their own pastors; that they might be freed from
the payment of all tythes but those of corn; that
they might no longer be confidered as the slaves
or bondmen of their superiors, that the liberty of
hunting and fishing might be common; that the
great forests might not be regarded as private
property, but be open for the use of all; that they
might be delivered from the unusual burden of
taxes under which they laboured; that the admi-
niftration of justice might be rendered less rigo-
rous and more impartial ; that the encroachments
of the nobles upon meadows and commons might
be restrained o.

MANY of these demands were extremely rea- Quelled.

fonable; and being urged by such formidable num-
bers, might have met with fme redress. But those
vast unweildy bodies, assembled in different places,
had neither union, condudt, nor vigour. They were
led by perfonsof the low eft rank, without skill in war,

n Petr. Crinitus de Bello Rufticano. ap. Freher. :cript.

Rer. Germ. Argent. 1717. vol. iii. p. 243. * lcid. llt.
p. 9'.

VOL. II. S or

BOOK IV. or knowledge of what was necessary for accom-

- plifhing their designs; and all their exploits were
'526. diflinguifhed by a brutal and unmeaning fury.

To oppose this, the princes and nobles of Suabia
and the Lower Rhine raised their vassals, and at-
tackii g tome of the mutineers with open force,
and others by surprise, cut to pieces, or difpeifed
all who infested those provinces; Lo that the pea.
sants, after ruining the open country, and losing
upwards of twenty thousand of their associates in
the field, were obliged to return to their habi-
tations with less hope than ever of relief from their
grievances p.

Their inlur- THESE commotions happened at first in pro-
huringia vinces of Germany where Luther's opinions had

made little progrels; and being excited wholly by
political causes, had no connection with the dif-
puted points in religion. But the frenzy reaching
at last those countries in which the reformation
was established, derived new strength from cir-
cumftances peculiar to them, and rose to a frill
greater pitch of extravagance. The Reformation,
wherever it was received, encreafed that bold and
innovating spirit to which it owed its birth. Men
who had the courage to overturn a system support-
ed by every thing which can command refpet or
reverence, were not to be overawed by any au-
thority, however great or venerable. After having
been accustomed to confider themselves as judges
of the most important docdrines in religion,
to examine there freely, and to reject, without
scruple, what appeared to them erroneous, it was
natural for them to turn the fame daring and iln
quifitive eye towards government, and to think
of rectifying whatever disorders or imperfecions

P Seckend. lib. ii. p. io. Petr Gnodalius de Rulticanortiti
'I umultu in Gtrmania ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

were

were discovered there. And as religious abuses BOOK IV.
had been reformed in several places without the '-v -
permiflion of the magistrate, it was an easy tran- 1526.
lition to attempt the redress of political grievances
in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break More for-

out in Thuringia, a province subject to the Eletor m
of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were mostly
converts to Lutheranifm, than it aflumed a new
and more dangerous form. Thomas Mudcer, one
of Luther's disciples, having eftablilhfd himself
in that country, had acquired a wonderful afcen-
dant over the minds of the people. He propa- Their fan»-
gated among them the wildest and most enthusiastic ticl 'irit.
notions, but such as tended manifestly to inspire
them with boldness, and lead them to cedition.
" Luther, he told them, had done more hurt than
good to religion. He had indeed rescued the
church from the yoke of Popery, but his d(ctrines
encouraged, and his life Let an example of the ut-
most licentiouficfs of manners. In order to avoid
vice, fays he, men muff pratife perpetual mor-
tification. They must put on a grave countenance,
speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious in
their whole deportment. Such as prepare their
hearts in this manner, may expect that the fu-
preme Being will direct their lleps, and by fbme vi-
lible sign dilcover his will to hem; if that illumi-
nation be at any time giih-hcld, we may expoftu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so
harshly, and remind him of his prorijifs. This ex-
postulation and anger gill be highly acceptable to
God, and will at last prevail on hill to guide us
with the fame unerring hand that guided the pa-
triarchs of old. L et us beware, hoc evtr, of of-
fending him by our arrog nce, but as all men are
equal in his eye, let them return to that condit on
of equality in which he formed them, and having

S z all

BooK IV. all things in common, let them live together like
Y'J>" brethren, without any marks of subordination or

1526. pre-eminence q."

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they flat-

tered so many paflions in the human heart, as
to make a deep impreflion. To aim at nothing
more than abridging the power of the nobles was
now confidered as a triflng and partial refor-
Ination, not worth the contending for, it was pro-
posed to level every diftincion among mankind,
and by abolishing property, to reduce them to
their natural slate of equality, in which all should
receive their subsistence from one common flock.
:Muncer assured them, that the design was ap'roved
of by Heaven, and :that the Almighty had in a
dream ascertained him of its success. The pea-
sants set about the execution of it, not only with
the rage which animated those of their order in
bther parts of Germany, but with the ardour that
enthusiasm inspires. They deposed the magiflratts
in all the cities of which they were maflcrs;
seized the lands of the nobles; and obliged filch
of them as they got into their hands, to put
on the dress commonly worn by peasants, and in-
stead of their former titles, to be satisfied wi;h
the appellation given to people in the lowest cl:;s
ds life. Vast numbers engaged in this wild un-
dertaking; but Muncer, their leader and their
prophet, was destitute of the abilities neceflary
for conducting it. He had all the extravagance,
but not the courage, which enihufiajls usually pof-
fess. It was with difficulty he could be perluadcd
to take the field; and though he Toon drew to-
gether eight thousand men, he suffered hirn Ilf
to be f'iirou;:ded by a body of cavalry under the
command of the Elelor of Saxony, the Landgiave
of Hcffe, and Duke of Brunfwic. These Princes un-

q Seckend. lib. ii. p. zi. Slcid. Hifl. p. 83.
* willing

willing to shed the blood of their deluded fubjeds, BOOK IV.
sent a young nobleman to their camp, with the -"- .
offer of a general pardon, if they would imme- '526
diately lay down their arms, and deliver up the
au hors of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at this,
began to harangue them with his usual vehemence,
exhorting them not to trust these deceitful pro-
mises of their oppressors, nor to desert the caule of
God, and of Chrifrian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger made a deeper Peasants

impression on the peasants than his eloquence, defeatcd.
and confusion and terror were visible in every
face, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
the mutineers had painted on their colours, hap-
pening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable presence of mind, laid hold of that
incident, and suddenly raised his eyes and hands
towards heaven, " Behold," cries he, with an
elevated voice, ' the sign which God has given.
' There is the pledge of your safety, and a token
" that the wicked shall be destroyed." The fa-
natical multitude set up instantly a great shout,
as if victory had been certain; and pafling in a
moment from one extreme to another, murdered
the unfortunate nobleman who had come with
the offer of pardon, and demanded to be led
towards the enemy. The Princes enraged at
this fhock;ng violation of the laws of war, pre-
vented them by beginning the attack; but the May S.
behaviour of the pceafants in the combat was not
such as might have been expeted eithtr from their
ferocity or confidence of fucc,-s; an undifcillined
rabble was no equal inatlc for well trained
troops; above five thouland were slain in the field,
almost without making r,-fifance; the reft fled,
and among the toremoft Mulct-r, their general.
He was taken the next day, and being con-
demned to such punishments as his crimes had de-

S 3 served,

BOOK IV. served, he suffered them with a poor and daftardiy
'-..-' spirit. His death put an end to the infurretions

S-z6. of the peasants which had filled Germany with

such terror r; but the enthusiastic notions which
he had l:attered were not extirpated, and pro-
duced, not long after, effects more memorable,
as well as more extravagant.

Luthers DURING these commotions, Luther adted with
moderate exemplary prudence and moderation; like a
and prudent
condut. common parent, solicitous about the welfare of

both parties, without sparing the faults or errors of
either On the one hand, he addressed a moni-
tory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependants with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advifingthem
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to seek for redress by any but legal
means .

LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a

Boria, a nun of a noble family, who having
thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most devoted
followers thought this indecent at a time when his
country was involved in so many calamities; while
his enemies never mentioned it with any softer ap-
pellation than that of incefluous or profane. Lu-
ther himself was sensible of the impreflion it had
made to his disadvantage ; but berng satisfied with
his own conduct, he bore the censure of his
friends, and the reproaches of his adversaries, with
his usual fortitude '

rSleid. Hit. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius
Tumult Ruflican. 155. fSleid. Hilt. p. 87.

Seckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

THIS

THIS year the Reformation loft its firfl pro- BOOK I.

testor, Frederic, Elector of Saxony; but the ''-
blow was the less fcnfibly felt, as he was succeeded May 5
by his brother John, a more avowed and zealous,
though lets able patron of Luther and his doc-
trines.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame Prumf
time, which, as it occasioned a considerable 'rete

from the

change in the tlate of Germany, mufft be traced TuetoniL
back to its fou;ce. While the frenzy of the Cru- order
fades pnoeflTcd all Europe during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, leveral orders of religious
knighthood we e founded in defence of the Chris-
tian faith against Heathens and Infidels. Among
tlcfe the Teutonic order in Germany was one
of the most illultrious, the knights of which
difinguifhed themselves greatly in all the wild
enterpriles carried on in the Holy Land. Being
driven at last fiom their settlements in the East,
they were obliged to return to their native coun-
try. Their zeal, and valour, were too impetuous
to remain long inactive. They invaded, on very
flight pretences, the province of Prullia, the inha-
bitants of which were fill idolaters and having
completed the conquest of it about the middle of
the thirteenth century, held it many years as a
fief depending on the crown of P)land. Fierce
contests arose during this period, between the
grand masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former flruggling for independence,
while the latter asserted their right of sovereignty
uith great firmners. Albert, a Prince of the
house of Brandenburgh, who was eleted grand
master in the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, engagi g keenly in this quariel, main-
tained a long war with Sigilinund, King of Poland;
but having become an early convert to Lu-
ther's doctrines, this gradually lessened his zeal
for the interests of his fraternity, so that he

S 4 took

BOOK IV. served, he suffered them with a poor and dastardly
_--,- spirit. His death put an end to the iniurreAtions

5-26. of the peasants which had filled Germany with

such terror r; but the enthusiastic notions which
he had scattered were not extirpated, and pro-
duced, not long after, effects more memorable,
as well as more extravagant.

Luther's DURING there commotions, Luther a1ed with
moderate exemplary prudence and moderation; like a
and prudent
condua. common parent, solicitous about the welfare of

both parties, without sparing the faults or errors of
either On the one hand, he addrefred a moni-
tory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependants with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advifingthem
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to seek for redress by any but legal
means .

LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a

Boria, a nun of a noble family, who having
thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloilter,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most devoted
followers thought this indecent at a time when his
country was involved in so many calamities; while
his enemies never mentioned it with any softer ap-
pellation than that of incefluous or profane. Lu-
ther himself was sensible of the impreflion it had
made to his disadvantage ; but berng satisfied with
his own conduct, he bore the censure of his
friends, and the reproaches of his adversaries, with
his usual fortitude .

r Sleid. Hist. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius
Tumult Ruflican. 155. fSleid. Hilt. p. 87.

Seckend. lib. ii. p. 15.

THIS

THIS year the Reformation loft its first pro- BOOK IV.

tentor, Frederic, Elector of Saxony; but the '`--
blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was succeeded M526'
by his brother John, a more avowed and zealous,
though less able patron of Luther and his doc-
trilnes.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame Prufli

time, which, as it occasioned a considerable wrethe
change in the ifate of Germany, must be traced Tuetonic
back to its fou;ce. While the frenzy of the Cru- order.
fades poflfeicd all Europe during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, several orders of religious
knighthood we.e founded in defence of the Chril-
tian faith against Heathens and Infidels. Among
there the Teutonic order in Germany was one
of the most illustrious, the knights of which
diflinguihed themselves greatly in all the wild
enterprises carried on in the Holy Land. Being
driven at last from their settlements in the East,
they were obliged to return to their native coun-
try. Their zeal, and valour, were too impetuous
to remain long inactive. They invaded, on very
flight pretences, the province of Prullia, the inha-
bitants of which were flill idolaters and having
completed the conquest of it about the middle of
the thirteenth century, held it many years as a
fief depending on the crown of P.land. Fierce
contests arose during this period, between the
grand masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former firuggling for independence,
while the latter aflerted their right of sovereignty
mith great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the
house of Brandenburgh, who was elected grand
master in the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, engagi ,g keenly in this quarrel, main-
tained a long war with Sigilinund, King of Poland ;
but having become an early convert to Lu-
ther's doStrines, this gradually lessened his zeal
for the interests of his fraternity, so that he

S 4 took

BOOK IV. took the opportunity of the confusions in the Eln.
t'v- pire, and the absence of the Emperor, to.coa-

i5z6 elude a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to his pri-

vate emolument By it, that part of Prullia
which belonged to the Teutonic order, was erected
into a secular and hereditary dutchy, and the
investiture of it granted to Albert, who, in re-
turn, bound himnfel to do homage for it to the
Ki:gs of Poland as their vaflal. Immediately as-
ter this, he made public profeflion of the reformed
religi.on, and marriehl a Princess of Denmark.
The Teuto:ic knights exclaimed so loudly againfi
the treachery of their grand master, that he was
put under the ban of the Empire; but he still
kept poffcefion of the province he had usurped,
and transmitted it to his posterity. In process
of time this rich inheritance fell to the electoral
branch of the family, all dependance on the
crown of Poland was shaken off, and the Mar-
graves of Brandenburgh, having assumed the
title of Kings of Prufia, have not only risen to
an equality with the firit Princes in Germany, but
take their rank among the great Monarchs of
Eu-ope v.

Firt mea- UPONr the return of the French King to his do-
fures of the
FrenchKing minions, the ey,-s of all the powers in Europe
upon his were fixed upon him, that by observing his first
return to
France. motions, they might form a judgment concern-

ing his subsequent conduct. I hey were not held
long in Iufpenfe. Francis, as soon as he arrived at
Bayonne, wrote to the King of England, thanking
him for his zealous and affectionate interposition
in his favour, to which he acknowledged that he
owed the recovery of his liberty. Next day
the Emperor';i :arnb.afadors demanded audience,
and in their mafler's name, required him to

v Sleid. Hilt. p. 98. Pfeffcl Abrege de 1'hilt. I' , 1ro0
Publ. p. 605, &c.

^.r~

ifile such orders as were necessary for carrying the BOOK IV.
treaty of Madrid into full and immediate exe--.-
cution; he coldly answered, that though for his 1526.
own part he determined religiously to perform all
he had promised, the treaty contained so many
articles relative not to himself alone, but affecting
the interests of the French monarchy, that he
could not take any farther ftep without consulting
the flates of his kingdom, and that some time
would be necessary in order to reconcile their
minds to the hard conditions which he had con-
sented to ratify x. This reply was confidered as
no obscure discovery of his being resolved to elude
the treaty; and the compliment paid to Henry,
appeared a very proper ftep towards securing the
afsulance of that Monarch in the war with the
Emperor, to which fucll a resolution would cer-
tainly give rife. These circumstances, added to
the explicit declarations which Francis made in
secret to the ambafiadors from several of the Ita-
lian powers, fully satisfied them that their con-
jeetures With regard to his conduct had been just,
and that instead of intending to execute an unrea-
fonable treaty, he was eager to seize the first op-
portunity of re.enging those injuries which had
compelled him to feign an approbation of it.
Even the doubts, and fears, and scruples which
used, on other occasions, to hold Clement in a
state of unceitainty, were diflipated by Francis's
seeming impatience to break through all his engage-
ments with the Emperor. The situation, indeed,
ortaffai,s in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hefi are. long. Sforza was flill besieged by
the Impt ri.lifls in the cafle (o Milan. That feeble
Prince, de ' iv. d now of Mo one'sadvice, and un-
provided with every thing necessary for defence,

x Mem. de Bellay, p. 97.

found

B3oK IV. found means to inform Clement and the Vene-
'"--' tians, that he must soon Surrender, if they did

ii26. not come to his relief. The Imperial troops, as

they had received no pay since the battle of
Pavia, lived at discretion in the Milanese, levying
such exorbitant contributions in that dutchy, as
amounted, if we may rely on Guiccardini's cal-
culation, to no less a fum than five thousand ducats
a day y; nor was it to be doubted, but that the
soldiers, as soon as the cafile Ihould submit, would
choose to leave a ruined country which scarce as.
forded them subsistence, that they might take
poflfenin of more comfortable quarteis in the ser-
tile and untouched territories of the Pope and
Venetians. The assistance of the French King
was the only thing which could either save Sforza,
or enable them to protect their own dominions
from the insults of the Imperial troops.

A .pigue FOR these reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, and
;oini ia- duke of Milan, were equally impatient to come
gainft the
Emperor. to an agreement with Francis, who on his part,

was no less desirous of acquiring so considerable
an a.ceflion both of strength and reputation as
such a confederacy would bring along with it. The
chief objects of this alliance, which was concluded
at Cognac on the twenty-fecond of May, though
kept secret for some time, were to oblige the Em-
peror to set at liberty the French King's sons, upon
payment of a reasonable ransom, and to re-establish
Sforfa in the quiet poffeflion of the Milanese. If
Charles should refuse either of these, the con-
trating parties bound themselves to bring into
the field an army of thirty-five thousand men,
with which, after driving the Spaniards out

y Guic. 1. 17. 360.

of the Milanese, they would attack the kingdom BooK IV.
of Naples. The King of England was declared '-,
Protetor of this league, which they dignified with Ls26.
the name of Holy, because the Pope was at the head
of it; and in order to allure Henry more effedual-
ly, a principality in the kingdom of Naples, of
thirty thousand ducats yearly revenue, was to be
fettled on him; and lands to the value of ten
thousand ducats on Wolfey his favourite .

No sooner was this league concluded, than Cle- The Pope

ment, by the plenitude of his papal power, abfolv- Francis
ed Francis from the oath he had taken to observe from his

o:th to

the treaty of Madrid a. This right, how pernici. observe
ous soever to morals, and deftruative of that inte- thetea
grity which is the basis of all transactions amongit
men, was the natural consequence of the powers
which the Popes arrogated as infallible vicegerents
of Christ upon earth; and they having, in virtue
of there, often dispensed with obligations wh. .....h
were held sacred, the interest of some men, and the
credulity of others led them to imagine that the
decisions of a sovereign pontiffauthorized or jufli-
sied actions which would, otherwise, have been
criminal and unbecoming.

MeANWHILE, the discovery of Francis's inten- Thl Empe-

tion to elude the treaty of Madrid, filled the Em-
peror with a variety of disquieting thoughts.
He had treated an unfortunate Prince with
the moll ungenerous rigour; he had displayed
an insatiable ambition in all his negociations
with his prisoner: le knew what cen'ures the
former had drawn upon him, and what appre-

z P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 217. Recueil des
Trait. ii 24.

Goldaft. olit. Imperial. p. iooa. Pallav. Hit. p. 70.

henfions

BOOK IV. henfions the latter had excited in every court ot
'-- --' Europe; nor had he reaped from the measures he

1526' pursued, any of those advantages which politici.

ans are apt to confider as an excuse for the most
criminal conduct, and a conmenfati6n for the fe.
vereft reproachts. Francis was now out of his
hands, and not one of all the mighty confequen-
ces which he expeted from the treaty that set him
at liberty was likely to take place. His rashness
in relying so far on his own judgment as to trult to
the sincerity of the French King, in opposition to
the sentiments of his wileft ministers, was now
apparent; and he easily conjectured, that the fame
confederacy, the dread of which had induced him
to set Francis at liberty, would now be formed
against him with that gallant and incensed Mo-
narch at its head. Self-condemnation and Ihame,
on account of what was past, with anxious appre-
henfions concerning what might happen, were the
necessary result of these reflections on his own
conduct and situation. Charles, however, was na-
turally firm and inflexible in all his measures To
have receded suddenly from any article in the trea-
ty of Madrid, would have been a plain confeffiun
of imprudence, and a palpable tymptom of fear;
he determined therefore, that it wa, most luita-
ble to his dignity, to infilt, whatexer might be
the consequences, on the firiC execution ! the
treaty, and particularly not to accept t.fany thing
which might be offered as an equivalent for the
restitution of Burgundy b.

IN confcquence of this resolution, he appointed

rZq"'to Lannoy and Alarcon, to repair as his ambafladors
perform to the court of France, and formally to fuimmon
fl pulated the King either to execute the treaty with the

b Guic. 1. xvii. 366.

sincerity

sincerity that became him, or to return, accord- BOOK IV.
ing to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid, InRfead of"-'"
giving them an immediate answer, Francis admit- S26'
ted the deputies of the flates of Burgundy to an
audience in their pretence. They humbly repre-
sented to him, that he had exceeded the powers
veited in a King of France when he consented to
alienate their country from the crown, the do-
mains of which he was bound by his coronation
oath to preserve entire and unimpaired. Francis,
in return, thanked them for their attachment to
'his crown, and intreated them, though very faint-
ly, to remember the obligations which he lay un-
der to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor.
The deputies assuming an higher tone, declared
they would not obey commands which they confi-
dered as illegal; and if he fIould abandon them
to the enemies of France, they had resolved to
defend themselves to the best of their power, with
a firm purpose rather to perish than to submit to
a foreign dominion. Upon which Francis turning His anwer.
towards the Imperial ambassadors, represented to
them the impoflibility of performing what he had
undertaken, and offered in lieu of Burgundy, to
pay the Emperor two million of crowns. The
Viceroy and Alarcon, who easily perceived that
the scene to which they had been witnesses, was
concerted between the King and his fubjedts in
order to impose on them, signified to him their
master's fixed resolution not to depart in the small-
el point from the terms of the treaty, and with-
drewc. Before they left the kingdom, they had
the mortification to hear the Holy League against
the Emperor published with great solemnity. June II

c Belcar. Comment. deReb. Gal. 573. Mem. de Bellay, 97.

CHARLES

BOOK IV, CHARLES no sooner received an account of this

v ~confederacy than he exclaimed in the moRt pub-
52z6. lic manner, and in the harshest terms, against

The Empe- Francis, as a Prince void of faith, or of honour
rio` prs, He complained no less of Clement, whom he
war. foliciced in vain to abandon his new allies; he

accused him of ingratitude; he taxed him with an
ambition unbecoming his character; he threaten-
ed him not only with all the vengeance which the
power of an Emperor can inflict, but by appealing
to a general council, called up before him all the ter-
rors arising from the authority of those assemblies so
formidable to the Papal fee. It was necessary, how-
ever, to oppose something else than reproaches and
threats to the powerful combination formed against
him; and the Emperor, prompted by so many
passions, did not fail to exert himself with unusual
vigour, in order to fend supplies not only of men,
but of money, which was still more needed, inte
Italy.

Feeble ope- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confede-
rations of
the confede. rates bore no proportion to that animosity against
rates, the Emperor with which they seemed to enter into

the holy league. Francis it was thought, would
have infused spirit and vigour into the whole body.
He had his loft honour to repair, many injuries
to revenge, and the flation among the Princes or
Europe from which he had fallen to recover
From all there, added to the natural impetuciitv
of his temper, a war more fierce and bloody
than any he had hitherto made upon his rival,
was expected. But Francis had gone through
such a scene of distress, and the impression it had
made was still so fresh in his memory, that he
was become diffident of himself, distrustful of
fortune, and desirous of tranquillity. To procure
the release of his fbns, and to avoid the restitution
of Burgundy by paying some reasonable equiva-

lent,

lent, were his chief objeEcs, and for the fake of B'ooK IV
there, he would willingly have sacrificed Sforza '- '
and the liberties of Italy to the Emperor. He 1526.
flattered himself that the dread alone of such a
confederacy would induce Charles to liften to
what was equitable; and was afraid of employ-
ing any considerable force for the relief of the
Milanese, left his allies, whom he had often
found to be more attentive to their own interest,
than punctual in fulfilling their engagements.
Ihould abandon him as loon as the imperialists
were driven out of that country, and deprive his
negociations with the emperor of that weight
which they derived from his being at the head of
a powerful league. Meanwhile the caffle of Milan
was pressed more closely than ever, and Sforza was
now reduced to the last extrenity. The Pope
and Venetians, trusting to Francis's concurrence,
commanded their troops to take the field, in order
to relieve him; and an army more than sufficient
for that service was loon formed. The Milanese,
paflionately attached to their unfortunate duke,
and no less exasperated against the lmpeiialifts,
who had oppressed them so cruelly, were ready to
aid the confederates in all their enterprizes. But
the duke d' 'rbino, their general, naturally flow
and indecisive, and refrained, besides, by his anti-
ent enmity to the family of Medici, from taking
any flep that might aggrandize or add izi)utati.,
to the Poped, lolt some opportunities, and refie i1
to improve others, of attacking the Imperi.:li.,,
and raising the siege. These delays gave Bour
bon time to bring up a reinforcerint of frelh
troops, and a supply of money. He immdiircte- 4.
ly took the command of the army, ard r' fled
,n the liege with such vigour, as qiiicl. ly o! gcd
Sflrza to filrrender, who teciring t, Lrdi \ .ich
the confederates had furprized, lkfi l3urbi.. in

d Guic. 1, 17. 382.

C,.'i

BooK IV.full possession of the reft of the dutchy, the invefti.

Cy- ' ó'ture of which the Emperor had promised to grant
t526. him,.

Diquietude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
li powers. which Francis had played, and to be sensible that,

notwithstanding all their address, and refinements
in negociation, which they boasted of as talents
peculiarly their own, they had for once been over.
reached in those very arts by a tramontane Prince.
He had hitherto thrown almost the whole burden of
the war upon them, taking advantage of their es-
forts in order to enforce the proposals which he often
renewed at the court of Madrid for obtaining the
liberty of his sons. The Pope and Venetians ex.
postulated and complained f, but as they were not
able to rouze Francis from his inactivity, their own
zeal and vigour gradually abated, and Clement
having already gone farther than his timidity ufu-
ally permitted him, began to accuse himcilf of
rashness, and to relapse into his natural state of
doubt and uncertainty.

Feeble ope. ALL the Emperor's motions depending on him-
thOcnS of self alone, were more brilk and better concerted.
derates. The narrowness of his revenues, indeed, did not

allow him to make any sudden or great effort in
the field, but he abundantly fipplied that defect
by his intrigues and negociations. The family of
Colonna, the rnot powerful of all the Roman ba-
rons, had adhered uniformly to the Ghibelineor
Imperial faction, during thcfel .firce contentions
between the Popes and Emperors, which for several
ages, filled Italy and Germany with discord and

e Guic. 1. 17. 3.76, &c.
f Rufcelli Letterede Principi ii. 157, &c. 159 ,6o-i66.

bloodflicd.

bloodshed. Though the causes which at first gave BooK IV.
birth to these deftrudive tactions existed no longer '"
and the rage with which they had been animated 156
wasin a great measure spent, the Colonnas still re-
tained their attachment to the Imperial interest,
and by placing themselves under the protection of
the Emperors, secured the quiet po(fellion of their
own territories and privileges. The Cardinal
Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and am-
bitious temper, at that time the head of the family,
had long been Clement's rival, to whose influence
in the las conclave he imputed the disappointment
of all his schemes for attaining the Papal dignity,
of which, from his known connection with the Em-
peror, he thought himself secure. This was too
great an injury to an aspiring mind ever to be for-
given; and though he had difembled his resent-
ment so far as to vote for Clement at his election,
and to accept of great offices in his court, he waited
with the utmost impatience for an opportunity
of being revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the
Imperial ambassador at Rome, who was no firan-
ger to these sentiments, easily perluaded him that
now was the time, while all the Papal troops were
employed in Lombardy, to attempt something
which would, at once, avenge his own wrongs,
and be of essential service to the Emperor his
patron. The Pope, however, whole timidity
rendered him quick fighted, was ol attentive to
their operations, and began to be alarmed to
early, that he might have drawn together troops
sufficient to have disconcerted all Colonna's mea-
fures. But Moncada amused him lo artfully
with negociations, promises, and false intelli,
gence, that he lulled asleep all his fu(picions,
and prevented his taking any of the precautions
necefihr) for his safety; and to the eternal dit-
grace of a princt- poffTffld of great power, as
well as renowned for political wifdori, ,' lonna at
hti head of rhree thouland men, fcized one of the r 9.

\Vi.. 1!. T gates

BOOK IV. gates of his capital, while he imagined himself to
^V3 be in perfect security, and was altogether unpre-
ThC26ln pared for resiling such a feeble enemy. The i.-
nasbecome habitants of Rome permitted Colonna's troops,
af"r of from whom they apprehended no injury, to ad-

vance without opposition ; the Pope's guards were
dilperfed in a moment; and Clement himself, ter-
rified at the danger, ashamed of his own credulity,
and deserted by almost eveiy person, fled with
precipitation into the cafftle of St. Angelo, which
was immediately invested. The palace of the
Vatican, the church of St. Peter, and the houses
of the Pope's miniaters and servants, were plun-
dered in the most licentious manner; the reft of
the city was left unmoleited. Clement, destitute

Accommo- of every thijig necessary either for subsistence or
datinbc- defence, was soon obliged to demand a capitulation;
tweenthe
Pope and and Moncada, being admitted into the castle,
Emperor. prescribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a con-

queror, conditions which it was not in his power
to rejeet. The chief of there was, That Clement
should not only grant a full pardon to the Colonnas,
but receive them into favour, and immediately
withdraw all the troops in his pay from the army
of the confederates in Lombardy g.

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than

of deposing Clement, and of placing Pompeo,
their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St. Peter,
exclaimed loudly against a treaty which left them
at the mercy of a Pontiff justly incensed against
them. But Moncada, attentive only to his maf-
ter's interelt, paid little regard to their complaints,
and by this fortunate measure, broke entirely the
power of the confederates.

g Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. 17. 407. Ruf-
'.elli Lettere de Principi, i. p. 1o4.

WHILL

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered BOOK IV.

such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists '--
received two great reinforcements; one from Spain, The 5m6e-
under the command of Lannoy and Alarcon, rial amy
which amounted to fix thousand men. The other r'i"for'ed.
was railed in .the Empire by George Frondfperg,
a German nobleman, who having served in Italy
with great reputation, had acquired such influence
and popularity, that multitudes of his countrymen,
fond on every occasion of engaging in military
enterprises, and impatient at that juncture to
escape from the oppreflion of their superiors both
in religious and civil matters, crowded to his ftan-
dard; so that without any other gratuity than the
payment of a crown to each man, fourteen thou-
sand enlisted in his service. To there the Arch duke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Austrian dominions. But although the Em-
peror had raised troops, he could not remit the
fums necessary for their support. His ordinary
revenues were exhausted; the credit of princes,
during the infancy of commerce, was not exten-
five; and the Cortes of Caflile, though every
art had been tried to gain them, and some inno-
vations had been made in the conftitut;on in order
to secure their concurrence, peremptorily refused
to grant Charles any extraordinary supply h; so
that the more his army encreafed in number, the
more were his generals embarrafled and distressed.
Bourbon, in particular, was involved in Iuich dit-
ficulties, that he flood in need of all his addrels
and courage in order to extricate himielct Vast
funms were due to the Spanilh troops already
in the Milancle, when F'rondfplerg aniived with
sixteen thouiand hungry Germrans, deltitute of The I:rrn.
every thing. Both made thliir demands with equal d, ti;,in.
fierceness; the former elaiming their arrears,
and thelatter, the I,.y which had benc pruiiifcd

h S..Iuc, v.
i. 814,

T ' them

BOOK IV. them on their entering Lombardy: Bourbon was
'-" altogether incapable of giving fatisfadion to ei-

i 26' ther. In this situation, he was constrained to com-

mit aas of violence extremely (hocking to his
own nature, which was gentle and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Milan, and by
threats, and even torture, forced from them a
considerable fium; he riled the churches of all
their plate and ornaments ; the inadequate supply
which these afforded, he distributed among the
soldiers, with so many soothing expreflions of his
lympathy and affection, that, though it fell far
Ihort of the rums due to them, it appeased their
present murmurs h.

Bourbon AMONG other expedients for raising money,
et's Morone Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Morone,

who having been kept in prison since his intrigue
with Pescara, had been condemned to die by the
Spanilh judges empowered to try him. For
this remiflion he paid twenty thousand ducats;
and such were his singular talents, and the won-
derful ascendant he acquired over the minds of
those to whom he had access, that in a few days,
from being Bourbon's prisoner, he became his
prime confidant, with whom he consulted in all
affairs of importance. To his insinuations must
be imputed the suspicions which Bourbon began
to entertain, that the Emperor had never intended
to grant him the investiture of Milan, but had
appointed Leyva, and the other Spanish generals,
rather to be spies on his conduct, than to co-operate
heartily towards the execution of his schemes.
To him likewise, as he flill retained at the age of
fourscore all the enterprising flirit of youth, may
be attributed the bold and unexpected mealure
on which Bourbon soon after ventured i.

h Ripamont. Hill. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717. i Guic.
1.-17. 419.

SUCH

SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im- BOOK IV.

perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in- 26
difpenfably neceflary to take rome immediate ftep Hi&libe-
for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers en- rations with
created daily; the Emperor made no remittances rifmotions,
to his generals; and the utmost rigour of military
extortion could draw nothing more from a country
entirely drained and ruined In this situation
there was no choice left, but either to disband the
army, or to march for subsistence into the enemies
country. The territories of the Venetians lay
nearest at hand; but they, with their usual fore-
fight and prudence, had taken such precautions as
secured them from any insult. Nothing therefore
remained but to invade the dominions of the
church, or of the Florentines; and Clement had
of late aCted such a part, as merited the severest
vengeance from the Emperor. No sooner did the
troops return to Rome after the infurretion of the
Colonnas, than, without paying any regard to the
treaty wish Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal
Colotnra, t.. communicated the reft of the family,
ftiz-d their i!.:ces of strength, and wafted their
laids with a!) :he cruelty which the smart of a
recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
tu ned his arms againit Naples, and as his ope-
rations were seconded by tne French tleet, he i.ade
some progress towards tl conque't of that ki:'g-
dom ; the Viceroy being no less delhiture than the
other Imperial generalr, of the money requisite
for a vigorous defence k

T H ,E s R proceedings of the Pope, jutified, ,s' '

in appearance, the measures which Bourbon's i,,,;,!.i,
situation rendered neceflry ; and he set about exe- P.1"; tr'
cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnish
the strongest proof, both of the deipair to which

k Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. 18 i,.

T 3 he

BooKIV. he was reduced, and of the greatness of his abi-
'^'"" lities which were able to surmount so many obfta.

527. cles. Having committed the government of Milan

to Leyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave be-
Jan. 30. hind; he began his march in the depth of winter,

at the head ot twenty.five thousand men, composed
of nations differing from each other in language
and manners; without money, without magazines,
without artillery, without carriages ; in short, with-
out any of those things which are necessary to
the smallest party, and which seem essential to
the exiigence and motions of a great army. His
rout lay through a country cut by rivers and
mountains, in which the roads were almost im-
practicable; as an addition to his difficulties, the
enemy's army, superior to his own in number,
was at hand to watch all his motions, and to im-
prove every advantage. But his troops, impatient
of their present hardships, and allured by the
hopes of obtaining an immense booty, did not
confider how ill provided they were for a march,
and followed him with great chearfulnefs. His
first scheme was to have made himself mafler of
Placentia, and to have gratified his soldiers with
the plunder of that city; but the vigilance of the
confederate generals rendered the design abortive;
nor had he better lucce's in his projed for the re-
duEtion of Bologna, which was -aalminably fiup-
pl;ed with as many troops as ecured it from the
insults of an army which had neither artillery nor
ammunition. Having failed in both these attempts
to become mafler of some great city, he was
under a neceflity of advancing. But he had
now been two months in the field; his troops
had fuffcred every calamity which a long march,
together with the uncommon rigour of the fealbn
co'uld bring upon men destitute of all necessary

Mutinyof accommodations, in an enemies country; the
"histr:r'ps, l;'gnificent promises to which they trusted, had

proved

proved altogether vain; they saw no profpet of BooK IV.
relief; their patience, tried to the utmost, failed *'
at last, and they broke out into open mutiny. 1527.
Some officers, who rashly attempted to restrain
them, fell victims to their fury; Bourbon, him-
f:lf, not daring to appear during the first tranf-
ports of their rage, was obliged to fly secretly from
his quarters '. But this sudden ebullition of wrath
began at last to subside ; when Bourb(n, who pof.
effeed in a wolderful degree, the art of governing
the minds of soldiers, renewed his promises with
more confidence than formerly, and aflurtd them
that they would be Toon accorplifhed. He en-
deavoured to render their hardships more to-
lerable by partaking of them hinfelf; he fared
no better than the meanest centinel; he marched
along with them on foot; he joined them in tinging
their camp-ballads, in which, with high praises
of his valour, they mingled many strokes of mi-
litary raillery on his poverty; and wherever they
came, he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he
had promised, to plunder the adjacent villages at
dilcretion. Encouraged by all there soothing arts,
they entirely forgot their sufferings and complaints,
and followed him with the fame implicit confidence
as formerly m

BOU RB O N, mean-while, carefully concealed The Pope.s

his intentions. Rome and Florence, not know- 'ind irtu',
ing on which the blow would fall, were held in deuce.
the molt dilquieting slate of uhlpenfe. Clement,
equally solicitous for the safety of both, fluc-
tuated in more than his usual uncertainty;
and while the rapid approach of danger called
for prompt and decisive measures, he spent the
time in deliberations which came to no iffie, or in
taking relblutions, which next day, his refllels

I Guic. 1. 18. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. 163.
In Oeuvres de Brant. vol. 4. z 46, &c.

T ', mind,

Boo IV. mind, more sagacious in discerning than in ob.
~'-' viating difficulties, overturned, without being able

1527. to fix on what mhould be substituted in their

place. At one time he determined to unite
himself more clofcly than ever with his allies,
and to pulh the war with vigour; at another, he
inclined to bring all differences to a final accom-
modation by a treaty with Lannoy, who knowing
his paflion for negociation, solicited him incef-
fantly with proposals for that purpose. His ti-

March 5. midity at length prevailed; and led him to con-
Concludes a
treatywith elude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the
the Viceroy following were the chief articles: That a fufpen-
of NplI' sion of arms should take place between the

Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
Thar Clement should advance sixty thousand
crowns towards satisfying the demands of the Im-
perial army; That the Colonnas should be ab-
solved from censure, and their former dignities
and poffeflions be restored to them; That the
viceroy should come to Rome, and prevent Bour-
bon from approaching nearer to that city, or to
Florence n. On this sudden treaty, which deprived
him of all hopes of affillance From his allies, with-
out affording him any solid foundation of security,
Clement relied lb firmly, that like a man extricated
at once out of all difficulties, he was at perfed
ease, and in the fulness of his confidence disbanded
all his troops, except as many as were sufficient to
guard his own person. This amazing confidence
of Clement's, who on every other occasion was
fearful and Iufpicious to excess, appeared so un-
accountable to Guicciardini, who being at that
time the pontifical commi(fary-general and resident
in the confederate army, had great opportunity as
well as great abilities for oblerving how chimerical
all his hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's

n Guic. 1. 18. 436.

condui,

condut, at this juncture, wholly to infatuation, BOOK IV.
which those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid o.

1527.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have ex- whichBour-,

ecuted the treaty with great Sincerity; and having bondifre
detached Clement from the confederacy, wished to grd
turn Bourbon's arms against the Venetians, who,
of all the powers at war with the Emperor, had
exerted the greatest vigour. With this view he
dispatched a courier to Bourbon, informing him
of the suspension of arms, which, in the name of
their common master, he had concluded with the
Pope. Bourbon had other schemes; and he had
prosecuted them now too far to think of retreating.
To have mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would
have been dangerous; his command was indepen-
dant on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man
whom he had many reasons to hate; for these rea-
sons, without paying the least regard to the
mefiage, he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical
territories, and to advance towards Florence.
Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety re-
turning with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy,
and intreated and conjured him to put a stop to
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly set out
for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bourbon's
soldiers having got notice of the truce, raged and
threatened, demanding the accomplishment of the
promises to which they had trusted; their general
himself could scarce restrain them; every person
in Rome perceived that nothing remained but
to prepare for refitling a storm which it was now
impoflible to dispel. Clement alone, relying on
some ambiguous and deceitful profeflions which
Bourbon made of his inclination towards peace,
funk back into his former security P.

Guic. 1. 18.446.
l' Guic. 1. 18. 437, &c. Mem. dc Bellay, p. oo

Boy RBO.N,

BOOK IV. BOURBON, on his part, was far from being free
'- v. -' firom fblicitude. All his attempts on any places
Adcs7 of importance had hitherto mil'carried ; and Flo-
towards rence, towards which he had been approaching
Rome. for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke

d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his
power at defiance. As it now became neceifary
to change his rout, and to take instantly some
new relilution; he fixed without hesitation on
one no less daring in itself, than it was impious
according to the opinion of that age. This was
to assault and plunder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond of
thwarting Iannoy, who had undertaken for the
safety of that city; he imagined that the Em-
peror would be highly pleased to fee Clement,
the chief author of the league against him, hum-
bled; he flattered himself, that by gratifying the
rapacity of his soldiers with such immense booty,
he would attach them for ever to his interest;
or (which is fill more probable than any of these)
he hoped that by means of the power and fplen-
dor he would acquire from the conquest of the firll
city in Chritiendom, he might lay the foundation
of an independant power; and that after shaking
off all connection with the Emperor, he might take
pofleflion of Naples, or of some of the Italian states
in his own name '.

The Pope's WHATEVER his motives were, he executec
preparations his resolution with a rapidity equal to the boldneii
tor defenc. with which he had formed it. His soldiers, n,\t

that thty had their pay in full view, complainec
neither of fatigue, nor famine, noi want of pay
No sooner did they begin to move from Tufcaln
tovards Rome, than the Pope, sensible at la!
how fallacious the hopes had been on which li
reposed, started from his security. But no tim

q Brant. 4. 271. 6. 189. Belcarii Comment. 594.

nol
ji

now remained, even for a bold and decisive Pon- BOOK IV.
tiff, to have taken proper measures, or to have
formed any effectual plan of defence. Under 1527'
Clement's feeble conduct, all was consternation,
disorder, and irresolution. He colle&ed, howe-
ver, such of his disbanded soldiers as still remained
in the city; he armed the artificers of Rome, and
the footmen and train-bearers of the Cardinals;
he repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun
to ereit new works; he excommunicated Bour-
bon and all his troops, branding the Germans with
the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards with
that of Moors r. Trusting to these ineffectual mi-
litary preparations, or to his spiritual arms, which
were {till more defpiecd by rapacious soldiers, he
seems to have laid aside his natural timidity, and
contrary to the advice of all his counsellors, de-
termined to wait the approach of an enemy
whom, by a timely retreat, he might easily have
avoided.

BOURBON, who saw the neceflity of dispatch, Aaultof
now that his intentions were known, advancedRm
with such speed, that he gained several marches on
the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped in the
plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth of May.
From thence he (hewed his soldiers the palaces and
churches of that city, into which, as the capital of
the Christian common-wealth, the wealth of all
Europe had flowed during many centuries, without
having been once violated by any hostile hand;
and commanding them to refreih themselves that
night, as a preparation for the assault next day,
promised them in reward of their toils and valour,
the poifeflion of all the treasures accumulated
tlhre.

r Seckend. lib. ii. 68.

SARI Y

BOOK IV. EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had de.
,'-v"-. termined to diltinguiih that day either by his death

'527 or the fuccels of his enterprize, appeared at the

head of his troops, clad in compleat armour,
above which he wore a vest of white tissue, that
he might be more conspicuous both to his frields
and to his enemies; and as ail depended on one
bold impieflion, he led them instantly to ieale
the walis. Three diilinxet bodies, one ot Germans,
anotlcr of Spaniards, and the last of Italians, the
three different nations of wh.mn the army was
composed, were appointed to this service; a lepa.
rare attack was aliigned to each; and the whole
army advanced to support them as occasion ihuuld
require. A thick mist concealed their approach
until they reached almost the brink of the ditch
which Surrounded the suburbs; having planted
their ladders in a moment, each brigade rushed
on to the assault with an impetuosity heightened
by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own; the Swiss
in the Pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who
had been aflembled, fought with a courage be-
coming men to whom the defence of the noblest
city in the world was entrusted. Bourbon's troops,
notwithstanding all their valour, gained no ground,

Bourboh and even began to give way ; when their leader,
lai"n. perceivilrg that on this critical moment the fate of

the day depended, threw himself from his horse,
p, iTsed to the front, fiatched a scaling ladder from
a ioldier, planted it againit the wall, and began
to mount it, :incouraging his men with his voice
and hand, to follow him, but at that very instant,
a mnfket bullet from the ramparts pierced his
groin with a wound, which he immediately felt to
be !'.itdl; but lie retained so much pretence of
mi,,d as to desire those who were near him to cover
his body with a cloak, that his death might not
dishearten his troops; and soon after he expiretl

Witlh

with a courage worthy of a better cause, and which BooK IV.
would have entitled him to the highest pra:; its'-
he had thus fallen in defence of his country, not 1527.
at the head of its enemies s.

IT was impossible to conceal this fatal event Thecity
from the army; the soldiers soon miffed their ge- tAk
ntral, whom they were accustomed to fee in eve-
ry time of danger but instead of being difheart-
ened by their loss, it animated them with new va-
lour; the name of Bourbon refouridtd along the line,
accompanied with the cry of blood and revenge.
The veterans who defended the walls, were soon
overpowered by numbers; the untrained body of
city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and the
enemy with irresistible violence rushed into the
town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering up to heaven
unavailing prayers for victory. No sooner was he
informed that his troops began to give way than
he fled with precipitation; and with an infatuati-
on still more amazing than any thing already men-
tioned, inflead of making his escape by the opposite
gate where there was no enemy to ,ippofe it, he
Ihut himself up, together with thirteen cardinals,
the foreign ambassadors, and many persons of dif-
tindlion, in the castle of St. Angelo, which, from
his late misfortune, he might have known to be an
insecure retreat In his way from the Vatican to that
fortre's, he saw his troops flying before an enemy
who pursued without gi .ing quarter; he heard the
cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and
beheld the beginning of those calamities which

Mem. de Bellay, iol. Guic. 1. 18. p. 445, &c. Oeuv.
:eI Brant, iv. 257, &c.

his

BOOK IV. his own credulity and ill-condud had brought up.

Y-iY on his fubjets t.
1527.
Plundered. IT is impossible to describe, or even to imagine

the misery and horror of the scene that follow.
ed. Whatever a city taken by storm can dread
from military rage unrestrained by discipline;
whatever excesses the ferocity of the Germans, the
avarice of the Spaniards, or the licentioufniefs of
the Italians could commit, these the wretched in.
habitants were obliged to fuiffer. Churches, pai..
ces, and the houses of private persons were plut,.
dered without diflintion. No age, or character,
or sex was exempt from injury. Cardinals, noble¢,
priests, matrons, virgins, were all the prey of fol-
diers, and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice
of humanity. Nor did these outrages cease, as is
usual in towns which are carried by assault, when
thefirft fury of the storm was over: the Imperialists
kept possession of Rome several months; and
during all that time the insolence and brutality of
the soldiers scarce abated. Their booty in ready
money alone amounted to a million of ducats;
what they raised by ransoms and exaAions far ex-
ceeded that fum. Rome, though taken several diffe-
rent times by the northern nations, who over-ran
the Empire in the fifth and sixth centuries, wal
never treated with To much cruelty by the barba-
rous and heathen Huns, Vandals or Goths, as now
by the bigotted fubjets of a catholic Monarch '.

The Pope AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of tlht
besieged in theca",leofImrperial army devolved on Pllilibert de Clhalon
St.Aogelo. prince of Orange, who with difficulty prevailed

t Jov. Vit. Colon. 165. v Jov. Vit. Colon. i66. Guic

1. 18. 440, &c. Comment. de captaurbe Roma ap Scardi;ln
2. 230. Ulloa Vita dell. Carlo V. p. ilo, &c. Gianonn : lii:?
of Nap. B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

on as many of his soldiers to desist from the pil- BOOK IV.
lage, as were necessary to invest the catfle of St. v
Angelo. Clement was immediately sensible of his 1527'
error in having retired into that ill-provided and
untenable fort. But as the Imperialists, Icorn-
ing discipline, and intent only on plunder, puthed
the siege with little vigour, he did not despair of
holding out, until the duke d'Urbino should come
to his relief. That general advanced at the head of
an army compored of Venetians, Florentines, and
Swiss in the pay of France, of sufficient strength to
have delivered Clement from the present danger.
But d'Urbino preferring the indulgence of his ha-
tred against the family of Medici to the glory of
delivering the capital of Christendom, and the head
of the church, pronounced the enterprize to be too
hazardous; and having from an exquisite refine-
ment in revenge, marched forward so tar, that his
army being seen from the ramparts of St. Angelo,
flattered the Pope with a profped of certain re-
lief, he immediately retired x. Clement, deprived Surrenders
of every reiburce, and reduced to such extremity himself a
of famine as to feed on aftes fiefh y, was obliged prisoner.
to capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors June 6.
were pleated to prescribe. He agreed to pay four
hundred thousand ducats to the army; to furren-
der to the Emperor all the places of strength be-
longing to the church; and besides giving hofla-
ges, to remain a prisoner himself until the chief
articles were performed. He was committed to
the care of Alarcon, who, by his revere vigilance
in guarding Francis, had given full proof of his
being qualified for that office; and thus, by a fin-
gular accident, the fame man had the custody of
the two mos illustrious personages who had been
made prisoners in Europe during several ages.

(;uic,. 1. 1. 450. y Jov. Vit. Colon. 167.

([H I·,

Boot IV. THE account of this extraordinary and unex.

v- -' peted event was no less furprizing than agreeable

TheEpe-. to the Emperor. But in order to conceal his joy
ror's beha- from his fubjets, who were filled with horror at
viour at this
junure. the fuccers and crimes of their countrymen, and to

leflen the indignation of the reft of Europe, he de-
clared that Rome had been assaulted without any
order from him; he wrote to all the princes wirh
whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his having
had any knowledge of Bourbon's intention7; he
put himself and court into mourning; command.
ed the rejoicings which had been ordered for the
birth of his ton Philip to be stopped; and empl,,y-
ing an artifice no less hypocritical than gross, he
appointed prayers and processions throughout all
Spain for the recovery of the Popte's liberty, which
by an order to his generals !ie could have immedi-
ately granted him a.

Solyrne ;n THE good fortune of the house of Austria was
vades Hun-
gary. no less conspicuous in another part of Europe.

Solyman having invaded Hungary with an army
three hundred thousand strong, Lewis 1I. King of
that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and unex-
perienced prince, advanced rashly to meet him
with a body of men which did not amount to thir-
ty thousand. With an imprudence still more
unpardonable, he gave the command of these,
troops to Paul Tomorri, a Franciscan monk,
archbishop of Golocza. This aukward general,
in the dress ')f his order, girt with its (odi,
marched at the head of the troops; and hur-
ried on by his OWn presumption, as well as by the
impeiuofity of the nobles who ilefpifed danger, but
were impatient of lo;!, service, fiughlit the fatal
battle of Mohacz, in which the King, the flow-
er of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of

z Rufcelli Lcttere di Princi . ii. 234
· Sleid. 109. i. 822. MIauloc. IHift. V neta. lib. iii '/:

tw'e;. t

twenty thousand men fell the victims of his folly BOOK IV.
and ill-condut. Solyman, after his victory, fcized --
and kept poieffion of several towns of greatest Deeat of
itrength in the southern provinces of Hungary, the Hun-

garians, and

and over-running the reft of the country, carried death of
near two hundred thousand persons into captivity. theirKing.
As Lewis was the last male of the royal family of
Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdinand claimed both
his crowns. This claim was founded on a double
title the one derived from the ancient pretensions
of the house of Austria to both kiljgdums; the
other from the right of his wife, the only filter of
the deceased Monarch. The feudal institutions
however subsisted both in Hungary and Bohemia
in such vigour, and the nobles possesed such ex-
tensive power, that the crowns were still elective,
and Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been power-
fully supported, would have met with little re-
gard. But his own personal merit; the refpedt Ferdinand
due to the brother of the greatest Monarch in ,lede,
Christendom ; the neceflity of choofing a prince able
to afford his fubjets Come additional protection
against the Turkish arms, which, as they had felt
their weight so lately, they greatly dreaded; to-
gether with the intrigues of his sifter, who had
been married to the late King, overcame the pre-
judices which the Hungarians had conceived
against the Archduke as a foreigner; and though
a considerable party voted for the Waywode of
Transylvania, at length secured Ferdinand the
throne of that kingdom. The states of Bohemia
imitated the example of their neighbour kingdom;
but in order to ascertain and ficure their own privi-
leges, they obliged Ferdinand before his corona-
tion, to subscribe a deed which they term a Reverse,
declaring that he held that crown not by any pre-
vious right, but by their gratuitous and voluntary
eletion. By such a vail accellion of territories, the
hereditary possession of \vhich they feicured in process

Vol., JI U of

1 OOK 1V. of time to their family, the princes of the house
"''~'~of Austria attained that pre-eminence in power

1527. which hath rendered them so formidable to the

Treft of Germany b.

ProRefS, r THE diflenfions between the Pope and the Em.
nation. peror proved extremely favourable to the progress

.of Iuthcr;oiirm. Charles, cxalperated by Cl-
:ment's condud, and fully employed in oppofiig
the leagule wl.ich he had formed against them,
had litil- inclination and less leisure to take any
.tneafurts for (lupieefling the new opinions in Ger-

June 5, 'many. 1! a diet of the Empire held at Spire;,
'76.- -the fiate of religion came to be confidered, and

all that the Enperor required of the princes was,
,that they would wait patiently, and without en-
couraging innov'ations, for the meeting of a ge
neral council which he had demanded of the Pope.
qThey, in return, acknowledged the convocation
of a council to be the proper and regular flep to-
wards reforming abuses in the church: but con-
tended, that a national council held in Germany
would be more effectual for that purpose than what
he had proposed. To his advice, concerning the
discouragement of innovations, they paid so little
regard, that even during the meeting of -the diet
at Spir, th . divines who attended the Eletor of
Saxory and L'indgrave of HTffe-Caffel thither,
preachl-d publickly, and adminiflercd the sacra-
meits accordiilg to the rites of the reforlied
ciurch c. The' Emperor's own example em-
boldened the :Germans to treat the Papal au-
thority wi'h little revorence. Duiing the heat
of his relcsntment -again{l Clement, he had pub.
lifhled a long reply to an angry brief vlli:h
the Pope had intended as an apology for llis
own condut. In this mat-it'clo, tle Emperor,

h Sttplh. Brodcrick l'rocancelarii -lunga. CI'd-; : Camp"
lMohlac. ap. Scardium 2. 1.8. I'. Barre Hill. d'A: .mi;i,,,
om. viii. part i. p. 198. c Sleid. 103.

after having enumerated many instances of that BooK IV.
Pontiff's ingratitude, deceit and ambition, all -
which he painted in the ftrongeff and most aggra- 527.
vated colours, he appealed fromn him to a general
council. At the lame time, he wrote to the col-
lege of Cardinals, complaining of Clement's par-
tiality and injustice; and requiring them, if he
refused or delayed to call a council, to manifest
their concern for the peace of the Christian church,
so shamefully negletted by its chief pastor, by
fimmoning that assembly n their own name .
This manifesto, fcarcc inferior in virulence to the
inveEties of Luther himlclf, was dilperied over
Germany with great industry, and being eagerly
read by perlons of every rank, did much more
than counterbalance the effe& ot all Charles's de-
clarations against the new opinions.

d Goldaft. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

U 2 I Si,

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF T HE
RE I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V,

BOOK V.
BOOK V. T H E account of the cruel manner in which

%-^-'- A the Pope had been treated, filled all Europe

ceSr,27' with astonishment or horror. To fee a Chriflian
indignation Emperor, who, by polefling that dignity, ought
excited
against the to have been the protector and advocate of the
Emperor. holy fee, lay violent hands on him who represented

Christ on earth, and detain his sacred person in
a rigorous captivity, was confidered as an impiety
that merited the severest vengeance, and which
called for the immediate interposition of every
dutiful Ton of the church. Francis and Henry,
alarmed at the progress of the Imperial arms in
Italy, had, even before the taking of Rome, enter-
edl into a closer alliance; and, in order to give tome

check

check to the Emperor's ambition, had agreed to BOOK V.
make a vigorous diversion in the Low-Countries. ''T-
The force of every motive which had influenced 152z7
them at that time, was now encreafed; and to
there were added, the desire of rescuing the Pope
out of the Emperor's hands, a measure no less po-
litical, than it appeared to be pious. This, how-
ever, rendered it necessary to abandon their de-
signs on the Low-Countries, and to make Italy the
-eat of war, as it was by vigorous operations in
that country, they might promire molt certainly
upon delivering Rome, and setting Clement at
liberty. Francis being now sensible, that in his
system with regard to the affairs of Italy, the fpi-
rit of refinement had carried him too far; and
that, by an excess of remissness, he had allowed
Charles to attain advantages which he might easily
have prevented, was eager to make reparation for
an error for which he was not often guilty, by an
activity more fiitable to his temper. Henry thought
his interposition necessary, in order to hinder the
Emperor from becoming master of all Italy, and
acquiring by that means such superiority of power,
as would enable him, for the future, to dicdate
without controul to the other princes of Europe.
Wrolfey, whom Francis had taken care to fccure
by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, neglected nothing that could
incense his master against the Emperor. Besides
all there public considerations, Henry was in-
fluenced by one of a more private nature; having
begun about this time to form his great scheme
of divorcing Catharine of Aragon, towards the
ex;-cution of which he knew that the fandion of
Papal authority would be neceflary, he was de-
firous to acquire as much merit as pofible with
Clement, by appearing to be the chief infirumcnt
of his deliverance.

(J~ 3 ~ ~T1;!

BOOK V. THE negociation, between princes thus dif-
'---' posed, was not tedious. Wolfey himself con-
Co, 27acy dubbed it, on the part of his sovereign, with un-
againfi him. bounded powers. Francis treated with him in
July ". person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared,

and was received with royal magnificence. A
marriage between the duke of Orleans and the
princess Mary was agreed to as the basis of the
confederacy; it was refblved that Italy should be
the theatre of war; the firength of the army
which should take the field, and the contingent
of troops or of money which each prince should
furnish, were fettled ; and if the Emperor did not
accept of the proposals they were jointly to make
him, they bound themselves immediately to de-
clare war, and to begin hostilities. Henry, who
A took every resolution with impetuosity, entered so

eagerly into this new alliance, that in order to give
Francis the strongest proof of his friendship and
refpet, he formally renounced the ancient claim of
the English Monarchs to the crown of France,
which had long been the pride and ruin of the
nation; as a full comjienr..ion for which, he ac-
cepttd a pension of fifty tho.uland crow ,s, to be
paid annually to himfeif and his fucctffors a.

TheFioren- MEANWHILE the Pope, being unable to fulfil
tines recovcr r
their free- the conditions of his capitulation, remained a pri-
dom. soner undet the revere cuflody of Alarcon. 'The

Florentiiles to looner !eard of what hadl happened
at Rome, than they ran to arms il a tumultuc us
manlier, exr.elld the Cardinal di Cortona, who
go,,erned their city in the P(cpe's name; dtfacteJ
the arms of the Medici ; bioke in pieces the itatues
of L.eo and Cltnintn ; and declaring themselves a
free slate, re-eflablifhed their ancient popular

ovetlnment. The Ven(tians, taking advantage

l* Herbert, 83, &c. R,.mn. Feeder. :I. 2o3.

y

of the calamity of their ally the Pope, seized Ra- BOOK V.
venna, and other places belonging to the church, '
under pretext of keeping them in uep, site. The 527
dukes of Urbino and ic raIra, laid hold likewise
on part of the Ipoils of the unfortunate Pontiff,
whom they confidcrcd as irretrievably ruined i.

LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to de- The Impe-

rive tome solid benefit from that unforef. en event, na'i'etro's
which gave luch splendour and liperiority to his
master's armrs. For this purpolc he marched to
Rome, togttier with Moncada, and the marquis
del Guallo, at t;h head of all the troops they
could altremble in the kingdom of Naples. The
arrival of this reinforcmeiit brought new cala-
mities on the unhappy citzenns of Rome; for the
foldicis envying the wealth of their companions,
imitated their lictife, and with the utmolt rapa-
city gatlered the gleanings, which had escaped
the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans.
There was not now ai.y army il Italy capable
of making head againit the Imperialists; and
nothing moire was requisite to reduce Bologna,
and the otlitc towns in the ecclefiafical slate, than
to have appeared before them. But the soldiers
having been so loilg accultomed, under Bourbon,
to an entire relaxation of discipline, and having
tafled the tweets of living at discretion in a great
city, almost without the conltrul of a fiuperior,
were become To impatient of military subordination,
and so averse to service, that they refu ed to
leave Rome, unless all their arrears were paid;
a condition which they knew to he imf olihic;
and declared that they would not obey any ether
perron than the prince of Orange, whom the army
had chosen general. Lannoy, finding that it was
no longer safe for him to remain among li-

IGuic. 1. 18. 453.

U 4 centious

BOOK V. centious troops who despised his dignity, and
-" ' --' hated his perlbn, returned to Naples; soon after
1527 the marquis del Guatto and Moncada thought it

prudent to quit Rome for the fame reason. The
prince of Orange, a general only in name, and
by the most precarious of all tenures, the good
will of soldiers whom success and license had ren-
der.d capricious, was obliged to pay more atten-
tion to their humours, than they did to his com-
mands. Thus the Emperor, inflead of reaping
any of the advantages he might have expected
from the reduction of Kome, had the mortification
to fee the molt formidable body of troops he had
ever brought into the field, continue in a state of
inactivity from which it was impoflible to rouze
them c

The French THIS gave the King of France and the Vene-
lh in tians leiture to form new schemes, and to enter into
mJarchos in-
to Ital). new engagements for the delivering the Pope, and

preserving the liberties of Italy. The newly re-
tfored republic of Florence very imprudently joined
with them, and Lautrec, of whose abilities the
Italians entertained a much more favourable opi-
nion than his own master, was, in order to gratify
them, appointed generalifli-ro of the league. It
was with the utmost reluctance he undertook that
office, being unwilling to expose himself a second
time to the difficulties and disgraces which the ne-
gligence of the Kit g, or the malice of his favou-
rites might bring upon him The best troops in
France marched under his command, and the
King of England, thougl' he had not yet declared
war against the Emperoi, advanced, a considerable
Bti opera- fum towards carrying on the expedition. Lautrec's

l firlf operations were prudent, vigorous, and success-

ful. By the aliftance of Andrew Doria, the ableit

c Guic. 1. 18. 454.

lea

sea officer of that age, he rendered himself ma- BOOK V.
ter of Genoa, and re-eftabliihed in that republic v -
the faction of the Fregofi, together with the domi- 527.
nion of France. He obliged Alexandria to fur-
render after a short siege, and reduced all the
country on that fide of the Tefino. He took Pavia,
which had so long refilled the arms of his fove-
reign, by aflault, and plundered it with the cruel-
ty which the memory of the fatal disaster that had
befallen the French nation before its walls natu-
rally inspired. All the Milanese, which Antonio
de Leyva defended with a small body of troops
kept together and supported by his own address
and indullry, must have soon submitted to his
power, if he had continued to bend the force
of his arms against that country. But Lautrec
durst not compleat a conquest which would
have been To honourable to himself, and of such
advantage to the league. Francis knew his confe-
derates to be more desirous of circumscribing the
Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new
territories for him, and was afraid that if Sforza
were once re-eflablifhed in Milan, they would
second but coldly the attack which he intended to
make on the kingdom of Naples. For this rea-
son he inftruted Lautrec not to push his operations
with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily
the importunities of the Pope, and the folicitati-
ons of the Florentines, the one for relief, and the
other for protection, were so urgent as afforded
him a decent pretext to march forward without
yielding to the entreaties of the Venetians and
Sforza, who infilted on his laying siege to Milan d.

d Guic. 1. xviii. p. 46t. de Bellay, 170, &c. Mauroc.
Hilt. Venct. lib. iii. 238.

rlILE

BOOK V. W H I . E Lautrec advanced slowly towards
'-,-' Rome, the Emperor had time to deliberate con-
Th1527.r ccrning the disposal of the Pope's person, who fill
roi set the remaiied a priloner in the cattle of St. Angelo.
bPeatii- Notwithfltarding the fpeclous veil of religion with

which he fiually endeavoured to cover his actions,
Chait's in many niltances appears to have been
bui ;ittle under tle influence of religious coifidera.
tions, and l.id frequently on this occasion express-
ed an incli;aition to transport the Pope into Spain,
that he might indulge his ambition with the
Ifpedtacle of ihe two most illufirious personages in
Europe lucceffively prisoners in his court. But
the fear of giving new offence to all Christendom,
and of filling his own fubjeas with horror, obliged
him to forego that fatisfadion e. The prcgrefs of
the conf-d rates made it now necefla,y eilher to fct
the Pope at liberty, or to remove him to some place
of confinenrent more secure than the caflle of St. An-
gelo. Many confilerations induced him to prefer
the former, particularly his want of the money
requisite as well for recruiting his army, as for
paying off the afl arrears due to it. In order to
Febl. 1. obtain this he had affenbled the Cortes of Castile

at \alladolid about the beginning cf the year,
and having laid before them the slate of his as-
fairs, aitd repiefented the necefliny of making
great preparations to refill the enemies, whom
envy at the fuiccefs which had crowned his arms
would unite against him, he demanded a large
supply in the most piefling tt rms. But the Corns,
as the nation was already exhaustld by ex-
traordinary donatives, refuted to load it with
any new burden, and in spite of all his en-
dtavoelurs to gain or to intimidate the members,
pcerfilled in this resolution f. No resource, there-
fore, icntained but the extorting from Clement,

Cu Cuic.l . 18.41,7. s jandov. i. p. Si,;.

iy way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging BOOK V.
what was due to his troops, without which it was - -
;-ain to mention to them their leaving Rome. lz7

NOR was the Pope inative on his part, or his
intrigues unsuccessful towards hastening such a
treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of un-
bounded confidence, he disarmed the resentment
of the cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his
vanity, which made him desirous of shewing the
world that as his power had at firit depressed the
Pope, it would now raise him to his former digni-
ty. By favours and promises he gained Morone,
who, by one of those whimsical revolutions which
occur so often in his life, and which so firongly
display his character, had now recovered his cre-
dit and authority with the Imperialifls. The ad-
dress and influence of two such men easily remov-
ed all the difficulties of the Emperor's ambassadors,
and brought to a conclusion the treaty for Clement's
liberty, upon conditions, hard indeed, but not
more intolerable than a prince in his situation had
reason to expec. He was obliged to advance in
ready money an hundred thousand crowns for the
use of the army; to pay the fame fum at the dif-
tance of a fortnight; and at the end of three
mon:hs, an hundred and fifty thousand more.
He engaged not to take part in the war againit
Charles, either in Lombardy or in Naples; he
granted him a cruzado, and the tenth of ec-
lefiafTical revenues in Spain; and he not only
gave hoft;.ges, but puc the Emperor in poffeflion
cf several towns, as a security for the perfor-
mance of there articles g. Having raiftd the first
moiety by a sale of ecclesiastical digniti-s and

c Guic. 1. i8. 47, &c.

helln:fices,

BOOK V. benefices, and other expedients equally uncanno-
'ni~' nical, a day was fixed for delivering him from im-
Decenb. 6. prifonment. But Clement, impatient to be free,

after a tedious confinement of fix months, as well
as full of the suspicion and distrust natural to the
unfortunate, was To much afraid that the Imperi-
alifts might still throw in obstacles to put off his
deliverance, that he disguised himself the preced-
ing night in the habit of a merchant, and Alarcon
having remitted somewhat of his vigilance upon the
conclusion of the treaty, he made his escape un-
discovered. He arrived before next morning,
without any attendants but a single officer, at
Orvieto; and from thence wrote a letter of thanks
to Lautrec, as the chief infirument of procuring
him liberty h.

Overtures DURING there tranfadions, the ambassadors of
of the Em-
rerorto France and England repaired to Spain, in confe-
Fran and quence of the treaty which Wolfey had concluded

with the French King. The Emperor, unwilling
to draw on himself the united forces of the two
Monarchs, discovered an inclination to relax some-
what the rigour of the treaty of Madrid, to which
hitherto, he had adhered inflexibly. He offered
to accept of the two millions of crowns which
Francis had proposed to pay as an equivalent for
the dutchy of Burgundy, and to set his sons at li.
berty on condition that he would recall his army
out of Italy, and restore Genoa together with the
other conquests he had made in that country.
With regard to Sforza, he infifled that his fate
should be determined by the judges appoint-
ed to enquire into his crimes. These propufi-
tions being made to Henry, he transmitted them
to his ally the French King, whom it more
nearly concerned to examine, and to anlwer
them; and if Francis had been sincerely solicitous

h Guic. 1. 18. 4(7, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc
Hit. Venct. lib. iii. 252.

either

either to conclude peace, or preserve consistency Booi V.
in his own conduct, he ought instantly to have '---
closed with overtures which differed but little 1527'
from the propositions he himself had formerly
made i. But his views were now much changed;
his alliance with Henry; Lautrec's progress in Ita-
ly, and the.fuperiority of his army there above
that of the Emperor scarce left him room to
doubt of the success of his enterprize against Na-
ples. Full of there sanguine hopes, he was at no
loss tofind pretexts for rejecting or evading what
the Emperor had proposed. Under the appearance
offympathy with Sforza, for whose interests he had
not hitherto discovered much solicitude, he ragain
demanded the full and unconditional re-establish-
ment of that unfortunate prince in his dominions.
Under colour of its being imprudent to rely on
the Emperor's sincerity, he insisted that his sons
ihould be set at liberty before the French troops
left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The unreafona-
blenefs of these demands, as well as the reproach-
ful inlinuation with which they were accompanied,
irritated Charles to such a degree, that he could
scarce liften to them with patience; and repenting
of his moderation which had made so little imprel-
sion on his enemies, declared that he would not
depart in the smallest article from the conditions he
had now offered. Upon this the French and En-
glifh ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn un-
accountably to concur with Francis in these strange
propositions, demanded and obtained their audi-
ence of leave k.

N EX T day two heralds who had accom- ,2.

panied the ambassadors on purpose, though Janualy '2
they had hitherto concealed their charac-

i Recueil des Traitez, 2. 249.
k Rym. 4. zoo200. Herbert 85 Guic. 1. iS. 471.

ter,

BOOK V. ter, having assumed the ensigns of their office,

1 q. appeared in the Emperor's court, and being ad-

They2de- mitted into his presence, they in the name of their
elare war refpeEtive masters, and with all the solemnity cul-
againf the
Emperor. tomary on such occasions, denounced war againtl

him. Charles received both with a dignity fuir-
able to his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone
adapted to the sentiments which he entertained ci
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English Monarch with a firmness tempered by lome
degree of decency and relped. His reply to the
French King abounded with that acrimony of ex-
pression, which personal rivalfhip, exasperated by
the memory of many injuries inflited as well as fut.
sered, naturally suggests. He desired the French
herald to acquaint his sovereign, that he would
henceforth confider him as a bale violator of public
faith, and a firangtr to the honour and integrity

Francis becoming a gentleman. Francis, too high spirit-
chaelieg ed to bar such an imputation, had recourse to an
the Empe.
ror to iigicl uncomnn.on expedient in order to vindicate his
ccmbat. charatcr. He instantly sent back the herald with

a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the Empe-
ror the li. in form, challenged him to single com-
bat, requiring hi:. to name the time and place of the
encounter, and the weapons with which he chore
to fight. Charles, as he was not inferior to his ri-
v'al in fpirir or bravery, readily accepted the chal.
len e; but after fcyeral mefiages concerning the
arra :gement of all the circunitlances relative tu
the combat, accompanied ,with mutual rcproaches,
bordering on the moif indcmn t feurrility, all
thoughts of this duel, more becoming the heroe'
of romance than the two ge-atell Monarchs of their
age, were entirely laid aside1.

I Recueil des Traitcz z. Mem. de Bellay, 103, &c. Sai
dov. Hilt. 1. 837.

THE example of two personages so illultrious BOOK V.

drew such general attention, and carried along - ~
with it so much authority, asgave rife to an impor- s28
tant change in manners all over Europe. Duels, The tfca
as has already been observed, had long been per- o this in

-,romotii:g

mitted by the laws of all the European nations, the cutoim
and forming a part of their jurilprudence, were ot du"iling
authorized by the magistrate on many occasions as
the molt proper method of terminating questions
with regard to property, or of deciding in those
which reeted crimes. But single combats be-
ing confidered as solemn appeals to the omniscience
and juflice of the supreme Being, they were al..
lowed only in public causes, according to the pre-
scription of law, and carried on in a judicial form.
Men accustomed to this manner of decision in
courts of jullice, were naturally led to apply it to
personal and private quarrels. Duels, which at first
could be appointed by the civil judge alone, were
fought without the interposition of his authority,
and in cafes to which the laws did not extend.
The tranfation between Charlcb and Francis
strongly countenanced this pradcice. Upon every
affront, or injury that seemed to touch his ho-
nour, a gentleman thought himself entitled to
draw his sword, and to call on his adversary to
make reparation. Such an opinion introduced
among men of fierce courage, of high spirit, and
of rude manners, when offence was often given,
and revenge was always prompt, produced moif
fatal coniequences. Much of the bell blood in
ChrifRendom was fled; many useful lives were la-
crificed; and at Come periods, war itft ls hath
scarce been more deftrudive than there contests of
honour. So powerful, however, is the dominion
of fashion, that neither the terror of penal laws,
nor reverence for religion, have been able entirely
toabolifh a practice unknown among the .i cients,

and

BOOK V. and not justifiable by any principle of reason-
~'-" though at the fame time it mufl be admitted, that

1528. to this absurd custom, we muff ascribe in rome

degree the extraordinary gentleness and complai-
fance of modern manners, and that refpedttui at-
tention of one man to another, which, at pref(eit,
render the social intercourses of life far more agree-
able and decent than among the most civilized
nations of antiquity.

Retreat of WHILE the two monarchs seemed so eager tu
thelmperi- terminate their quarrel by a personal combat,
aias from Lautrec continued his operations which promilaie
Rome.

to be more decisive. His army, which was now
February increased to thirty-five thousand men, advanced

by great marches towards Naples. The terroi
of their approach, as well as the remonstrances
and the entreaties of the prince of Orange, pre.
vailed at last on the Imperial troops, though with
difficulty, to quit Rome, of which they had kept
possession during ten months. But of that flo-u
rifhing army which had entered the city, scarce
one half remained; the reft, cut off by the
plague, or wafted by diseases, the effecs of their
inactivity, intemperance, and debauchery, fell
victims to their own crimes . Lautrec made
the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat
towards the Neapolitan territories, which would
have finished the war at one blow. But the pru-
dence of their leaders disappointed all his meafuies,
and conducted them with little lo's to Naples.
The people of that kingdom, , always the prey
of every invader, extremely impatient to shake
off the Spanish yoke, received the French with
open arms, wherever they appeared to take
pofleflion; and Gaeta and Naples excepted,
scarce an place of importance remained in the
hands of the Imperialists. The prefeivatio,

m Guic. 1 . S 487.

of the former was owing to the strength of its BOOK V.
fortifications, that of the latter to the pretence of "'
the Imperial army. Lautrec, however, fat down Fr,,chbe-
before Naples, but finding it vain to think of re. fiegeNaple".
ducing by force a city defended by to many troops,
he was obliged to employ the flower, but lets
dangerous method of blockade; and having taken
measures which appeared to him effedtual, he con-
fidently aflured his master, that famine would soon
compel the besieged to capitulate. These hopes
were firongly confirmed by the defeat of a vigo-
rous attempt made by the enemy in order to reco-
ver the command of the sea. She gallies of
Andrew Doria, under the command of his nephew
Philippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour.
Moncada, who had succeeded Lannoy in the vice-
royalty, rigged out a number of gallies superior to
Doria's, and going on board himself, together
with the marquis del Guafto, and the flower of
the Spanish officers and soldiers, attacked Doria
before the arrival of the Venetian and French
fl(ets. But Doria, by his superior skill in naval
operations, eafi!y triumphed over the valour and
number of the Spaniards. The viceroy was
killed, molt of his fleet destroyed, and Guafto,
with many officers of diftindion being taken
prisoners, were put on board the captive gallies,
and sent by Philippino, as trophies of his victory,
to his uncle n.

BUT notwithfianding this flattering profped of ci,,ilmn^i-

success, many circumstances concurred to frustrate {i ih
Lautrec's expectations. Clement, though lie al- pir..,;e!s
ways acknowledged his being indebted to Francis ''
for the recovery of his liberty, and often com-
plained of the cruel treatment he had Inct with
from the Emperor, was not influenced at this

n Guic. 1. 19. 487 . I'. Icuter. lib. x c 2. p. 231.
Vol.. II. X julnlure

';ooKV. junature by principles of gratitude, nor, which

' is more extraordinary, was ihe swayed by the de-
I *8 fire of revenge. His part misfortunes ren-

dered him nmore 4:autious than ever, and his re-
colleCtion of the errors which he had com-
mitted, encreafed the natural irresolution of
his n'indc. While he arnufed Francis with pro-
mises, he secretly negociattd with Charles; and
being folicitos, :above all things, to re establish
his family in Florence with their ancient authority,
which he could not expect from Francis, who had
entered into .trict alliance with the new republic,
he leaned rather towards the fide of his enemy
than that of his benefactor, and gave Lautrec no
afliftance towards carrying on his operations. The
Venetians, viewing with jealousy the progress of
the French arms, were intent only on recovering
such maritime towns in the Neapolitan dominions
as were to be poflefied by their republic, while
they were altogether carelefis about the reduction
of Naples, on which the success of the common
cause depended °.: The King of England, inflead
of being able, as had- been projected, to embar-
rafs the Emperor by attacking his territories in the
Low-Count.ies, found his fubjedts so averse to an
unnecessary war, which would have ruined the
trade of the nation, that in order to silence their
clamours, and put a stop to the inftiritdions ready
to break out among them, he was compelled to
conicluie ;t truce for eight months with the guvrr-
ness of the Netherlands P. Francis himtelf, with
the fame unpardonable inattention of which he
had formerly been guilty, and soir which he h.ad
fifferecd i; severely, negleted to make proper re.
rnittances to Lautrec for the ftipport of his army q

" ,;uic. I. xix. 491. r Herheit, )o. Rymer, 14. 258

'HESE unexpected events retarded the progress BOOK V.

of the French, and discouraged both the general 'v
and his troops; but the revolt of Andrew Doria Revot of
proved a fatal blow to all their measures. That Andrew

Doria from

gdalant officer, the citizen of a republic, and France.
ijained up from his infancy in the sea ltrvice, re-
tained the spirit of independence natural to the
former, and the plain liberal manners peculiar to
the latter. A perfect firanger to the arts of fib-
million or flattery neceltary in courts, and conlci-
ous at the fame time of his own merit a;,d im-
portance, he always offered his advice with free-
dom, and often preferred his complaints and re-
monstrances with boldness. The French minifiters,
unaccustomed to such liberties, determined to ruin
a man who treated them with so little deference;
and though Fiancis himself had a just sense of
Doria's ser ices, as well as an high esteem for his
character, the courtiers, by continually represent-
ing him as a man haughty, intractable, and more
solicitous to aggrandize himself, than to promote
the interest of France, gradually undermined the
foundations of his credit, and filled the King's
mind with suspicion and difRruft. From thence
proceeded ltvtral affronts and indignities put upon
Doria. His appointments were not regularly paid,
his advice, even in naval affairs, was often flight-
ed; an attempt was made to ftize the prilfners
taken by his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples;
all which he bore with abundance of ill humour.
But an injury offered to his country, tranlported
him beyond all bounds of patience. The French
began to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour. and,
rerno ing thither some branches of trade carried on
at Genoa, plainly flewed that they intended to ren-
der that town, long the objtec of jealousy and hatred
to the Genoese, their t ival in wealth and commerce.
Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal for the ho,-
nour and interceft of his country, remonflra.td

X 2 agaiitul

BOOK V. against this in the highest tone, not without
-v--' threats, if the measure were not instantly aban-

;528. doned. This bold action, aggravated by the

malice of the courtiers, and placed in the most
odious light, irritated Francis to such a degree,
that lie commanded Barbefieux, whom he ap-
pointed admiral of the Levant, to fail directly
to Genoa, vith the French fleet, to arrest Doria,
and to seize his gallies. This rash order, of which
the most profound secrecy alone could have fe-
cured the execution, was concealed with so little
care, that ['oria got timely intelligence of it, and
retired with all his gallies to a place of faftty.
Guafto his prisoner, who had long observed and
fomented his growing discontent, and had often
allured him by magnificent promiles to enter
into the Emperor's service, laid hold on this fa-
vourable opportunity. While his indignation and
resentment were at their height, he prevailed on
him to dispatch one of his officers to the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The ne.
gociation was not long; Charles fully sensible of
the importance of such an acquisition, granted him
whatever teims he required Doria sent back lis
commifimon, together with the collar of St. Michael
to Francis, and hoisting the Imperial colours,
fiiled with all his gallies towards Naples, not to
block up the harbour of that unhappy city as hc
had Ifrmerly engaged, but to bring them pro-
tection and deliverance.

Wictchcd H s arrial opened the communication witl:
f'itutioln c the sea, and reflored plenty in Naples, which was
the F) rnch
army before now re,!uccd to the last extremity; and the Frencli,
Naplcó. hlaving loft their fileriority at sea, wtre soon re-

duced to great firaits for want of provisions. The
prince of Orange. who fucceccled the viceroy in
the rommand of' the Imperial army, Ihewed him-
fel by l:is prnudcntt co)nduell woith of that honour

which

which his good fortune and the death of his generals BOOK V.
had twice acquired him. Beloved by the troops,
who remembering the prosperity they had enjoyed
under his command, served him with the utmost
alacrity, he let flip no opportunity of harafling the
enemy, and by continual alarms or sallies, fa-
tigued and weakened them '. As an addition to
all these misfortunes, the diseases common in
that country during the sultry months, began to
break out among the French troops. The pri-
foners communicated to them the pestilence which
the Imperial army had brought to Naples from
Rome, and it raged with lich violence, that few,
either officers or soldiers, escaped the infection.
Of the whole army, not f ur thousand men, a
number scarce sufficient to defend the camp, were
capable of doing duty f; and being now besieged
in their turn, they suffered all the miseries of which
the Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after
struggling long with so many disappointments and
calamities, which preyed on his mind at the fime
time that the pestilence wafted his body, died, Aug. 15.
lamenting the negligence of his Sovereign, and the
infidelity of his allies, to which so many brave men
had fallen vicims t. By his death, and the indif-
position of the other generals, the command de-
volved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer ;Jltcge-
ther unequal to such a trust. He, with Lioops no Ri;ri ti.e
iels dispirited than reduced, retreated in dilorder s'eg
:o Averfa ; which town being invested by the
prince of Orange, Saluces was under the necelliry
,f consenting, that he himself Ihould remain a
ptifoner of war, that his troops should lay down
:iriir arms and colours, give up their baggage,
nd march under a guard to the frontiers of

' lovii Hilt. lib 36. p. 31, &c. Sigonii Vita Do(rix,
p 1139. Bellav, I f, Sac. 1' Bcllay, 117, C&c.

P. IIeutcr. lerum Aultr. lib. x . . 2. 31.

X 3 France.

BOOK V. France. By this ignominious capitulation, the

-V wretched remains of the French army were fared;
1528. and the Emperor by his own perseverance and

the good conduMt of his generals, acquired once
more the superiority in Italy v.

Genoa re- THE loss of Genoa followed immediately upon,
covers its the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his

country from the dominion of foreigners was
Do(ri 's highft ambition, and had been his principal
inducement to quit the fcrvice of France, and en-
ter into that of the Emperor. A most favourable
opportunity for executing this honourable enter-
prise now preftnttd itlelf. The city of Genoa,
aftflied by the peltilence, was almost deserted by
its inhabitants; the French garrilon being neither
regularly paid nor recruited, was reduced to an
inconsiderable number; Doria's emissaries found
that such of the citizens as remained, being weary
alike of the French and Imperial yoke, the rigour
of which they had alternately felt, were ready to
welcome him as their deliverer, and to second all
his measures. Things wearing this promising
aspet, he failed towards the coast of Genoa; on
his approach the French gallies retired; a rmall
body of men which he lnuded, surprised one of
the gates of Genoa in the night time; Trivulci,
the French governor, with his feeble garritfn,
Sept. 1i. shut himself up in the citadel, and Doria took

poffieion of the town without bloodshed or re-
fiftance. Want of provisions ,quickly obliged
Trivulfci to capitulate ; the people, eager to abolifl
flch an odious monument of their Lcrvitude, ran
together with a tumultuous violence, and levelled
the citadel with the ground.

Dfintetefed II' was now in Doria's power to have rendered
Doria. himself the sovereign of his country, which he had

v Belly, 117, &c. lovii Iilt. lib z5, 26.

so

so happily freed from oppreflion. The fame of BOOK \.
his former aftions, ihe success of his present at- -
tempt, the attachment of his friends, the grati- 52 "
tude of his counti ymen, together with the support
of the Emperor, all conilired to facilitate his at-
taining the fuprcme authority, and invited him to
lay hold of it. But with a magnanimity of which
there are few examples, he sacrificed all thoughts
of aggrandizing himlelf to the virtuous satisfaction
of eftablifling liberty in his coiuntry, the highest
object at \vhicl) ambition can aim. Having as-
fembled the whole b,)dy of the people in the court
before his palace, he assured them, that the hap-
piness of feeing them once more in pofleflion of free-
dom, was to hi;n a full reward for all his services;
that more delglitcd with the name of citizen than
of sovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence or power
above his equals; but remitted entirely to them
the right of fettling what form of government
they would now choose to be eftablilhed among
them. The people listened to him with tears of
admiration, and of joy. Twelve persons were
eleaed to new model the constitution of the re-
public. The infllence of Dori,'s virtue and ex-
ample, communicated itself to his countrymen;
the factions which had long torn and ruined the
state, seemed to be forgotten; prudent precau-
tions were taken to prevent their reviving; and
the fame form of government which hath subsisted
with little variation since that time in Genoa,
was establishcd with universal applause. Doria,
lived to a great age, beloved, refpeted and
h noured by his countrymen, and adhering uni-
formly to his piof'efions of moderation, with-
out arrogating any thing unbecoming a pri-
vate citizen, he preserved a great ascendant over
the councils of the republic, which owed its
being to his generosity. The authority he pof-
fefed was more flattering, as well as more fa-
tisfactory, than that derived from fiverrigrty;

X 4 a dominion

BOOK V. a dominion founded in love and in gratitude; and
ks"^v' upheld by veneration for his virtues, not by the
'528' dread of his power. His memory is still re-

verenced by the Genoese, and he is diflinguifhed
in their public monuments, and celebrated in the
works of their historians by the most honourable
of all appellations, THE FATHER OF HIS
COUNTRY, AND THE RESTORER OF ITS
LIBERTY x.

1529. FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of

O"nerhtiMs his arms, discredited by-fo many losses, made new
laheLe. efforts in the Milanese. But the Count of St. Pol,

a rash and unexperienced officer, to whom he
gave the command, was no match for Antonio de
Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial generals. He,
by his superior ikill in war, checked with a hand-
ful of men, the brisk, but ill-concerted motions
of the French ; and though so infirm himfelf'that
he was carried conftantiy in a litter, he surpassed
them when occasion required, no less in activity
·than in prudence. By an unexpected march he
surprised, defeated, and took the Count of St. Pol,
and ruined the French army in the Milanese as en-
tirely as the prince of Orange had ruined that
which besieged Naples y.

Negociati- AMIDST there vigorous operations in the field,
ns between each party discovered an impatient desire of peace,
Charles and t-i' e -p r
Francis. and continual negociations were carried on for

that purpose. The French Kingdifcouraged, and
almost exhaufled by so many unsuccessful enttr-
prises, was reduced now to think of obtaining the
release of his sons by concessions, not by the ter-
ror of his arms. The Pope hoped to recover by

x Guic. 1. 19. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doriae, p. r i,6. Jovii

Ilifl. lib. 26. p. 36, &c. y Guic. 1. 19. ;zo. P. Heuter.
Rer. Autr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 233. Men. de Bellay, Izl.

a treaty

a treaty whatever he had loft in the war. TheBooK v.
Emperor, notwithstanding the advantages which '-----
he had gained, had many reasons to make him 529'
wish for an accommodation; Solyman, having
over-run Hungary, was ready to break in upon
the Austrian territories with the whole force of the
East; the Reformation gained ground daily in
Germany, the princes who favoured it entered in-
to a confederacy, which he thought dangerous to
the tranquillity of the empire; the Spaniards
murmured at a war the weight of which refted
chiefly on them; the variety and extent of his
operations, far exceeded what his revenues could
support; his success hitherto had been owingchiefly
to his own good fortune, and to the abilities of
his generals, nor could he flatter himself that they,
with troops deflitute of every thing necessary,
would always triumph over enemies still in a con-
dition to renew their attacks. All parties, howe-
ver, were at equal pains to conceal, or to diffem-
ble their real sentiments. The Emperor, that his
inability to carry on the war might not be sus-
peted, infifled on high terms in the tone of a con-
queror. The Pope solicitous not to lose his pre-
sent allies, before he came to any agreement with
Charles, continued to make a thousand proteftati-
ons of fidelity to the former, while he privately
negociated with the latter. Francis afraid that his
confederates might prevent him by treating for
themselves with the Emperor, had recourse to ma-
ny dilhonourable artifices in order to turn their at-
tention from the measures which he was taking to
ndjuft all differences with his rival.

IN this situation of affairs, when all the

contending powers wished for peace, but durlt
not venture too hastily on the steps necefnary for
attaining it, two ladies undertook to procure

this

BooK V. this blefling so much desired by all Europe. There

-<3 were Margaret of Austria, dowager of Savoy, the
M'2y. Emperor's aunt, and Louise Francis's motler.

. They agreed on an interview at Cambray, and

being lodged in two adjoining houses between which
a communication was opened, met together with.
out ceremony or observation, and held daily confe-
rences to which no person whatever was admitttd
As both were profoundly skilled in bufinels,
thoroughly acquainted with the secrets of their re.
fpedive courts, and poifeffed with perfect confidence
in each other, they soon mnade great progress towards
a final accomodation; and the ambassadors of all
the confederates 'waited in anxious fulpenfe to
know their fate, the determination of which was
entirely in their handsz.

Separate BUT whatever diligence they used to haften for.
tety bhe ward a general peace, the Pope had the addrcfs
Pope and and industry to get the start of his allies, by con-
Jhanle^. cluding at Barcelona a particular treaty for him-

self. The Emperor, impatient to visit Italy in his
way to Germany ; and desirous of re-efIablifhing
tranquillity in the one country, before he attempt-
ed to compose the disorders which abounded in
the other, found it necessary to secure at least one
alliance on which he might depend, among the
Italian flates. That with the Pope who courted it
with unweaiied importunity, seemed more proper
than any other. Charles being extremely folici.
tous to make Come reparation for the inuilts wiich
he had offered to his Cacred character, and to re-
deem pald off.nces by new merit, granted Cle-
ment, after all his misfortunes, terms more favour-
able than he could have expected after a continued
series of success. Among other articles he engaged

2 P. cutcr. Rer. Aufir. lib. x. c. 3. p. 133. Mem. d&
Bcllay, p ; 22.

to

to restore all the territories belonging to the ecclefi- BOOK V.
aftical state; to re-establish the dominion of the '-v--
Medici in Florence; to give his natural daughter '129
in marriage to Alexander the head of that family;
and to put it in the Pope's power to decide con-
cerning the fate of Sforza, and the poffeflion of the
Milanese. In return for these ample conceflions,
Clement gave the Emperor the investiture of Na-
ples without the reserve of any tribute, but the
present of a white fleed in acknowledgment of
his sovereignty; absolved all who had been con-
cerned in assaulting and plundering Rome; and
permitted Charles and his brother Ferdinand to
levy the fourth of the ecclesiastical revenues
throughout their dominions a.

THE account of this tranfatAion, quickened the Augul 5.

negociations at Cambray, and brought Margaret cambray
and Louise to an immediate agreement. The between
treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that Pran.and
which they concluded; the latter being intended
to mitigate the rigour of the former. The chief
articles were, That the Emperor should not, for
the present, demand the restitution of Burgundy,
refer, ing however, in full force, his rights and pre-
tensions to that dutchy; That Francis (hould pay
two millions of crowns as the ransom of his sons,
and, before they were set at liberty, should restore
luch towns as he frill held in the Milanese; That
he should resign the sovereignty of Slanders and
Artois, that he flould renounce all his pretensions
to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every other place
beyond the Alps; that he should immediately con-
fummate the marriage concluded between him
;Ind the Emperor's ifler Eleanora b.

a Guic. 1. io. 522. b P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib x.
c 3. P. 234. Sandov. Hlfl. dell. Emper. Carl. V. ii. z8.

THUS

BOOK V. Tlus Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
--..--' procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing
A.'in2 which had at first prompted him to take arms,
so, ih E:n- or which had induced him, by continuing hoftili.
pP or ties, during nine successive campaigns, to protrac

the war at a length scarce known in Europe before
the establishment of standing armies, and the im.
positions of exorbitant taxes became universal,
The Emperor, by this treaty, was rendered sole
arbiter of the fare of Italy ; he delivered his ter.
ritories in the Netherlands from an ignominious
badge of fubjetion; and after having baffled his
rival in the field, he prescribed to him the condi.
tions of peace. The different conduct and spirit
with which the two monarchs carried on the ofe-
rations of war, led naturally to such an issue of it.
Charles, inclined by temper, as well as obliged by
his situation, concerted all his schemes with cau.
tion, pursued them with perseverance; and obferv.
ing circumstances and events with attention, let
none escape that could be improved to advantage.
Francis, more enterprizing than steady, undertook
great designs with warmth, but executed them
with remissness; and, diverted by his pleasures,
or deceived by his favourites, he often loft the
molf promising opportunities of success. Nor had
the characer of the two rivals themselves greater
influence on the operations of the war, than the op.
pofite qualities of the generals whom they employ-
ed. Among the Imperialists, valour tempered
with prudence; fertility of invention aided by ex-
perience; sagacity to penetratethe designs of their
enemies, as well as to conduct tlhir own, with all
the talents that form great commanders and ensure
vidory were conspicuous. Among the French,
there qualities were either wanting, or the very re-
verse of them abounded; nor could they boast if
one man (unless we except Lautrec, who was

always

always unfortunate) that equalled the merit of BOOK V.
Pescara, Leyva, Guafto, the prince of Orange, and '-v-
other leaders whom Charles had to set in oppofi- 15Z9'
lion to them. Bourbon, Morone, and Doria, who
might have been capable of balancing by their
abilities and conduct the superiority which the Im-
perialifs had acquired, were loft through the care-
klfnels of the King, and the malice or injustice of
his counlellors; and the most fatal blows given to
France during the progress of the war, proceeded
from the delpair and resentment of these thr.-e
persons, who were forced to abandon her service.

THE hard conditions to which Francis was obli Dini;;nour-

ged to submit, were not the most afflicting cir- a''''F.ran
curmfance to him in the treaty of Cambray. He
loft his reputation and the confidence of all Eu-
rope, by abandoning his allies to his rival. Un-
willing to enter into the details neceflary for ad-
justing their interests, or afraid that whatever he
claimed for them must have been purchased by
farther conceflions on his own part, he gave them up
in a body; and without the leatt provision in their
behalf, left the Venetians, the Florentines, the
duke of Ferrara, together with such of the Nea-
politan barons as had joined his army, to the mer-
cy of the Emperor. They exclaimed loudly a-
gainft this base and perfidious ateion, of which
Francis himself was so much alhamed, that, in
(rder to avoid the pain of hearing from their anm-
bafiadors the reproaches which hejuftly merited,
it was some time before he would conlent to al-
low them an audience. Charles, on the other
lanld, was attentive to the interest of every person
who had adhered to him; the rights of some of
his Ilqemifi subjectss, who had estates or pretensions
in lFrance, were lecured; one article was inserted,
obligirg Francis to restore the blood and menmory
(f tlle constable Bourbon; and to grant his l:irs

tile

BOOi V. the possession of his lands which had been forfeit.

^cV ed; another, by which indemnification was ftipu-
5"29' lated for those French gentlemen who had accom-

panied Bourbon in his exile c This conduEt, lau-
dable in itself, and placed in the molt firiking
light by a comparison with that of Francis, gainrle
Charles as much esteem as the success of his arms
had acquired him glory.

Henry ac- FRANCIS did not treat the King of Engi:in(
quielcesin with the fame neglect as his other allies. He

communicated to him all the steps of his negocia.
tion at Cambray, and luckily found that Monarch
in a situation which left him no choice, but to ap-
prove implicitly of his measures, and to concur

His rcheme with them. Henry had been soliciting the Pope
of being di- for some time, in order to obtain a divorce from
hiv.rced fCatharine of Aragon his Queen. Several mo-

tives combined in prompting the King to urge this
suit; as he was powerfully influenced at some sea-
sons by religious considerations, he entertained ma-
ny scruples concerning the legitimacy of his mar-
riage with his brother's widow; his affeCtions had
long been estranged from the Queen, who was older
than himself, and had loft all the charms she poi-
setsed in the earlier part of her life ; he was pal-
fionately desirous of having male iflue; Wolfey
artfully fortified his scruples, and encouraged his
hopes, that he might widen the breach between
him and the Emperor, Catharine's nephew; and.
what was more forcible perhaps in its opcratiic,
than all there united, the King had conceivc'd a vi-
olent love for the celebrated Anne Poleyn, a
young lady of great beauty, and of greater acc(,n.
plifhments, whom, as he found it impoflible togiin
her on other terms, he determined to raise to the
throne. The papal authority had often been inter-

c Guic. 1. i9. p. 525. P. EJcuter. Rcr. *Aufr. lib, x. c. 4
P. Z35.

iFiuk

posed to grant divorces for reasons less fpeciousBooK V.
than thole which Henry produced. When the --v--0-
matter was first proposed to Clement, during his 1529'
imprilonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as his
hopes of recovering liberty depended intirely on
the King of England, and his ally of France, he
exprefled the warmest inclination to gratify him.
But no sooner was he set free, than he di!covered
other sentiments. Charles, who espoused the pro-
tection of his aunt with zeal inflamed by relent-
ment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand with
threats which made a deep impreIffon on his timid
mind; and allured him on the other with those
promises in favour of his family which he after-
wards accomplished. Upon the profpea of there
Clement not only forgot all his obligations to
Henry, but ventured to endanger the interest of
the Romilh religion in England, and to run the
risk of alienating that kingdom for ever from the
obedience of the papal fee. After amusing Henry
during two years, with all the fubtilties and chi-
cane which the court of Rome can so dextroufly
employ to protract or defeat any cause; after dif-
playing the whole extent of his ambiguous and dt-
ceitful policy, the intricacies of which the English
historians to whom it properly belongs, have found
it no easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at last,
recalled the powers of the delegates whom he had
appointed toj udge in the point, avocated the cause
to Rome, leaving the King no other hope of ob-
taining a divorce but from the personal decision
of the Pope himself. As Clement was now in
ftrii alliance with the Emperor, who had purchaf-
ed his friendship by such exorbitant conceflions,
Henry del'paired of procuring any sentence from
the former, but what was dictated by the latter.
His honour, however, and paflions concurred in
Preventing him from relinquishing his scheme of a
divorce, which he determined to accomplish by
other means, and at any rate; and the continuance

of

BOOK V. of Francis's friendship being necessary to counter.
''' balance the Emperor's power, he, in order to fe.
1529' cure that, not only offered no remonstrances a-

gainft the total negled of their allies, in the treaty
of Cambray, but made Francis the present of x
large fum, as a brotherly contribution towards the
payment of the ransom for his sonsd.

Aug. ,2. MEANWHILE the Emperor landed in Italy v:tl;
ror vifitp a numerous train of the Spanish nobility, and a
t'dy- considerable body of troops. He left the govern.

ment of Spain during his absence to the Empre(s
Isabella. By his long residence in that country.
he had acquired such thorough knowledge of the
character of the people, that he could perfectly
accommodate the maxims of his government to
their genius. He could even assume, upon some
occasions, such popular manners, as gained won-
derfully upon the Spaniards. A striking instance
of his disposition to gratify them had occured a
few days before he embarked for Italy: He was
to make his public entry into the city of Barce-
lona; and some doubts having arisen among the
inhabitants, whether they should receive him as
Emperor, or as Count of Barcelona, Charles in-
flantly decided in favour of the latter, declaring
that he was more proud of that ancient title, than
of his Imperial crown. Soothed with this flatter-
ing expreflion of his regard, the citizens welcom-
ed him with acclamations of joy, and the fitres
of the province swore allegiance to his ion Phiiip,
as heir of the county of Barcelona. A similar oath
had been taken in all the kingdoms of Spain with
equal satisfaction e.

'TH E Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror; and am-
baffadors from all the princes and states of

d Herbert. Mem. dc Bcllay, p. 122. e Sandov. ii p. 0.
Ferrer. ix. 116.

that

that country attended his court waiting to receive BooK V.
his decision with regard to their fate. At Genoa, '
where he first landed, he was received with the 529
acclamations due to the protector of their liberties.
Having honoured Doria with many marks of dif-
tinftion, and bestowed on the republic several
new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place
fixed upon for his interview with the Pope. He
affeAed to unite in his public entry into that city
the fiate and majesty that suited an Emperor, with
the humility becoming an obedient son of the
church; and while at the head of twenty thou-
sand veteran soldiers, able to give law to all Italy,
he kneeled down to kits the feet of that very Pope
whom he had so lately detained a prisoner. The
Italians, after suffering so much from the ferocity
and licentiousness of his armies, and after having
been long accustomed to form in their imagination
a picure of Charles which bore some resemblance
to that of the barbarous Monarchs of the Goths
or Huns, who had formerly affli&ed their country
with like calamities, were surprised to fee a prince
of a graceful appearance, affable and courteous
in his deportment, of regular manners, and of
exemplary attention to all the offices of religion f.
They were frill more astonished when he fettled
all the concerns of the princes and fIates which
now depended upon him, with a degree of mo-
deration and equity much beyond what they had
expeted.

CHARLES himrelf, when he set out from Spain, His no-

deration and

far from intending to give any such extraordinary the motivee
proof of this felf-denial, seems to have been re-of it.
solved to avail himself to the utmost of the fu-
periority which he had acquired in Italy. But va-
rious circumfiances concurred in pointing out the

f Sandov. Hill. dll Emp. Carl.V. ii. So, 53, &c.
VOL. II. Y neceflity

BOOK V. neceflity of purtuing a very different course. The

progress of the Turkish Sultan, who, after over.

1529. running Hungary, had penetrated into Austria, and
Sept. 13. laid siege to Vienna with an army of an hundred

and fifty thousand men, loudly called on him to
colle8 his whole force to oppose that torrent; and
though the valour of the Germans, the prudent
conduct of Ferdinand, together with the treachery
o0. 16. of the Vizier, soon obliged Solyman to abandon

that enterprise with infamy and lots, the religious
disorders ltill growing in Germany made the Em-
peror's presence highly necessary there g: The Flo-
rentines, instead of giving their consent to the re.
establishment of the Medici, which by the treaty of
Barcelona the Emperor had bound himself to pro.
cure, were preparing to defend their liberty by
force of arms; the vast preparations for his jour-
ney had involved him in unusual expences; and on
this, as well as many other.occafions, the mul-
tiplicity of his affairs, and the narrownels of his
revenues obliged him to contract his vast schemes
of ambition, and to forego present and certain ad-
vantages, that he might guard againrt more remote
but unavoidable dangers. Charles, from all thede
considerations, finding it necessary to assume an air
of moderation, aced his part with a good gr.ce.
He admitted Sforza into his presence, and not only
gave him a full pardon of all past offences, but
granted him the investiture of the dutchy together
with his niece the King of Denmark's daughter
in marriage. He allowed the luke of Ferrara to
keep possession of all his domiriions, adjultilg the
points in dispute between him and the Pope with
an impartiality not very agreeable to the latter.
He came to a final accommodation with the Ve-
netians upon the reasonable condition ot their re.

z Sleidan, 121. Guic. 1. xx. 5r0o.

floring

floring whatever they had usurped during the late BOOK V.
war, either in the Neapolitan or papal territories. ,-v"-.
In return for so many conceflions lhe exacted con- £529.
fiderable funms from each of the powers with whom
he treated, which they paid without relud.ance,
and which afforded him the means of proceeding
on his journey towards Germany with a magnifi-
cence suitable to his dignity h.

THESE treaties, which reflored tranquiility to 153o.

Italy after a tedious war, the caiamilies of which ,lCn te
had chitfly affiet'd that country, were i ublifhed altthoriiy of
at Bologna with great solemnity on the first day of in Flortdc.
the year one thouiand five hundred and thirty,
amidst the universal acclamations ol the people,
applauding the Emperor to whole moderation and
generosity they ascribed the blessings of peace which
they had so long dclired. The Florentines alone
did not partake of this general joy. Animated
with a zeal for liberty more laudable than prudent,
they determined to oppose the restoration of the
Medici. The Imperial army had already entered
their territories, and formed the siege of their ca-
pital. But though deserted by all their allies, and
left without any hope of succour, they defended
themselves many months with an obstinate valour
worthy of better fuccels, and even when they lir-
rendered, they obtained a capitulation which gave
them hopes of securing some remains of their
liberty. But the Emperor, from hlI desire to gra-
tify the Pope, frustrated all their expectations,
and abolifhiig their ancient form of gnvernment,
raised Alexander Medici to the fame ablolute do-
minion over that fiate which his family have re-
tained to the present times. Philibcrt de Chalons
prince of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed

th andov. ii. 55, &c.

Y 2 during

BOOK V. during this siege. His estate and titles descended

A-*vm- to his fiRler Claude de Chalons, who was married to
'530 Rene count of Nassau, and she transmitted to her

posterity of the house of Nassau the title of Princes
of Orange which they have rendered Co illustrious i

Stateofrf. AFTER the publication of the peace at Bologna,
andreligiils and the ceremony of his coronation as King of
inGermary. Lombardy and Emperor of the Romans, which
Feb. Z,4 ad the Pope performed with the accustomed formali-

ties, nothing detained Charles in Italy k; and he
began to prepare for his journey to Germany. His
pretence became every day more necessary in that
country, and was solicited with equal importunity
by the catholics and by the favourers of the new
doctrines. During that long interval of tranquil-
lity which the absence of the Emperor, the con.
telRs between him and the Pope, and his attention
to the war with France afforded them, the latter
had gained much ground. Molt of the princes
who had embraced Luther's opinions, had not only
established in their territories that form of worship
which he approved, but had entirely suppressed
the rites of the Romish church. Many of the free
cities had imitated their condut. Almost one
half of the Germanick body had revolted from
the Papal fee, and its dominion, even in that part
which had not hitherto shaken off the yoke, was
considerably weakened by the example of the
neighbouring fates, or by the secret progress of
those doctrines which had undermined it among
them. Whatever fatisfadion the Emperor, while
he was at open enmity with the fee of Rome,
might have felt in those events that tended to mor-

i Guic. 1. xx. p. 541. &c. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x

c. 4. p. 236. k H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Coronationc
Car.V. ap. Scard. ii. 266.

tiit

tify and embarrass the Pope, he could not help BOOK V.
perceiving now, that the religious divisions in Ger- v---
many would, in the end, prove extremely hurtful '530
to the Imperial authority. The weaknels of for-
mer Emperors had suffered the great vaffais of the
Empire to make such fuccelsful encroachments upon
their power and prerogative, that during the whole
course of a war, which had often required the ex-
ertion of his utmost strength, Charles scarce drew
any effectual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obfilete pretensions were al-
most the only advantages which he had gained by
swaying the Imperial sceptre. He now became
fully sensible, that if he did not recover in tome
degree the prerogatives which his predecessors had
loft, and acquire the authority, as well as possess
the name of head of the Empire, his high dignity
would contribute more to obftrud than to pro-
mote his ambitious schemes. Nothing, he saw, was
more essential towards attaining this than to suppress
opinions that might form new bonds of confederacy
among the princes of the Empire, and unite them
by ties stronger and more sacred than any political
connetion. Nothing seemed to lead more cer-
tainly to the accomplishment of his designs, than
to employ zeal for the established religion, of which
he was the natural protector, as the initrument of
extending his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a profpe& no sooner opened of Proceedings

coming to an accommodation with the Pope, than ,, .,,.,
by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of the Em- sLli 'i,
pire was held at Spires, in order to take into con- 9
fideration the slate of religion. The decree of the
diet assembled there in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-fix, which was almost equiva-
lent to a toleration of Luther's opinions, had given
great offence to the reft of Christendom. The

Y 3 greatest

BOOKV. greatest delicacy of address, however, was re-
^'V^ oquifite in proceeding to any decision more rigorous.

1530' The minds of men kept in.per , il agitation by

a controversy carried on during twelve years with-
out intermiflion of debate, or abatement of zeal,
were now inflamed to an high degree. They were
accustomed to innovations, and saw the boldest of
them successful. Having not only abolished old
rites, but fubflituted new forms in their place, they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
system which he had embraced, as by aversion to
that which they had abandoned. Luther himself,
of a 'spirit not to be worn out by the length and
obstinacy of the combat, or to become remiss upon
success, continued the attack with as much vigour
as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom many
equalled him in zeal, and omre surpassed him in learn-
ing, were no lets capable than their master to con-
dudt the controversy in the propereft manner. Many
of the laiety, and even of the princes, trained up
amidst there inceufant disputations, and in the habit
of listening to the arguments of the contending par-
ties who alternately appealed to them as judges,
came to be profoundly ikilled in all the quefiions
which were agitated, and, upon occasion, could
shew themselves not inexpert in any of the arts
with which these theological encounters were ma-
naged. It was obvious fiom all these circum-
stances, that any violent decision of the diet muil
have immediately precipitated matters into confuli-
on, and have kindled in Germany tthe flames of a re-
ligious war. All, therefore, thlit the Archduke,
and the other commiflioners appointed by the Emn-
peror demanded of the diet, was, to enjoin thrl
flates of the Empire who had hitherto obeyed the
decree iflfed againf Luthtr at Worms in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-four, to per-
Itvere in the observation of it, and to prohibit the

other

other states from attempting any farther innovation BOOK V.
in religion, particularly from abolishing the MaTs, -
brfJe the meeting of a general council. After 1530.
much dilpute, a decree to that effed was approved
of by a majority of voices '

TH Eledor of Saxony, the Marquis of Bran- The follow-

denburgh, the Landgrave of Hefle, the Dukes of er, or Lu-
Lunenbuigh, the Prince of Anhalt, together with gaineltleh
the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free cities m, April 19.
entered a solemn protest against this decree, as un-
just and impious. On that account they were dif.
tinguifhed by the name of PROTESTANTS n,
an appellation which hath since become better
known, and more honourable, by its being ap-
plied indiscriminately to all the feds of whatever
denomination which have revolted from the Ro-
man fee. Not satisfied with this declaration of
their dissent from the decree of the diet, the Pro-
teftants sent ambassadors into Italy to lay their
grievances before the Emperor, from whom they
met with the most discouraging reception. Charles Delibera-
was at that time in close union with the Pope, and t",, f tdh
felicitous to attach him inviolably to his interest. Emperor.
During their long residence at Bologna, they held
many consultations concerning the most effectual
means of extirpating the hereties which had sprung
up in Germany. Clement, whose cautious and
timid mind the propohal of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond that which Popes, the
constant enemies of such afflmblies, ulually feel,
employed every argument to diffiuade the Em-

I Sleid. Hlit. 117. m The fourteen cities were Straf-

burg, Nurembergh, Ulm, Conltlnce, Rettlingen, WMind-
fileim, Meinengnt, Liidaw, Keinp:en, -lailblron, l1fn:i,
Weiltemburgh, Nordliiigcn, and St. Gal. " Slcid. Hilt. 119.
F'. Paul. Iil . p. +4. S eckend. ii. 17.

Y 4 peror

Boo V. peror from consenting to that measure. He repra.
'-s" n' sented general councils as facious, ungovernable,

1530' presumptuous, formidable to civil authority, and

too flow in their operations to remedy disorders
which required an immediate cure. Experience,
he said, had now taught both the Emperor and
himself, that forbearance and lenity exasperated
the spirit of innovation which they ought to have
mollified; it was necessary, therefore, to have re-
course to the rigorous methods which such a def-
perate cafe required; Leo's sentence of excom-
munication, and the decree of the diet at Worms
should be carried into execution, and it was in-
cumbent on the Emperor to employ his whole
power, in order to overawe those on whom the re.
verence due either to ecclesiastical or civil autho-
rity had no longer any influence. Charles, whose
views were very different from the Pope's, and
who became daily more sensible how obflinate and
deep rooted the evil was, thought of reconciling
the Protestants by means less violent, and con-
fidered the convocation of a council as no im-
proper expedient for that purpose; but promised,
if there gentler arts failed of success, that then he
would exert himself with vigour to reduce those
stubborn enemies of the Catholic faith °.

Emperor SUCH were the sentiments with which the Em-
prternt at
the iet of peror set out for Germany, having already ap-
Augfur;. pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf-
March iz,
1530. burg. In his journey towards that city, he had

many opportunities of obferviitg the disposition
of the Germans with regard to the points i;
controversy, and found their minds every where
so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced

o F. Paul, 47. Seek. I. ii. 142. Ilifi. de Confess.
d'Auxbourg, par D. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

him

him that nothing tending to severity or rigour BooK V.
ought to be attempted, till all other measures prov- --
ed ineffectual. He made his public entry into 1530.
Augsburg with extraordinary pomp; and found June Is.
there such a full assembly of the members of the
diet as was suitable both to the importance of the
affairs which were to come under their confidera-
tion, and to the honour of an Emperor, who, as-
ter a long ab(ence, returned to them crowned with
reputation and success. His pretence seems to have
communicated to all parties an unusual spirit of
moderation and desire of peace. The Eletor of
Saxony would not permit Luther to accompany
him to the diet, left he should offend the Empe-
ror by bringing into his pretence a person excom-
municated by the Pope, and the author of all those
dissensions which it now appeared so difficult to
compose. At the Emperor's desire, all the Pro-
teftant princes sorbad the divines who accompani-
ed them to preach in publick during their refi-
dence at Augsburg. For the fame reason they
employed Melancthon, the man of the greatest
learning, as well as of the most pacific and gentle
spirit among the Reformers, to draw up a confer-
sion of their faith, exprefled in terms as little of-
fenfive to the Roman Catholics, as a regard for
truth would permit. Melancthon, who reldom The confe.
suffered the rancour of controversy to envenom his iOnofAus.
,fyle, even in writings purely polemical, executed bug
a talk so agreeable to his natural disposition with
great moderation and success. The Creed which
he composed, known by the name of the Consef-
fipn of Augsburg, from the place where it was
presented, was read publickly in the diet; Come
Popish divines were appointed to examine it;
they brought in their animadversions; a dispute
ensued between them and Melancthon, seconded
by some of his brethren; but though Melandhon
softened ibme articles, made concefions with re-

gard

BooK V. gard to others, and put the least exceptionable

v-v sense upon all; though the Emperor himielf la.
3530' ooured with great earneflnefs to reconcile the con.

tendi:'g parties; so many marksof diftindion were
now etlablifhed, and such insuperable barriers
placed between the two churches, that all hopes of
bringing about a coalition seemed utterly defpe.
rate P.

FROM the divines, among whom his endea.

vours had been so unsuccessful, Charles turned to
the princes their patrons. Nor did he find them,
how desirous loever of accommodation, or willing
to oblige the Emperor, more disposed than the
former to renounce their opinions. At that time,
zeal for religion took pofftflion of the minds of
men to a degree which can scarce be conceived
by those who live in an age when the paflions ex-
cited by the first maiiifet;ation of truth, and the
first recovery of liberty, have in great measure
ceased to operate. This zeal was then of such
firength as to overcome attachment to their politi-
cal interest, which is commonly the predominant
motive among princes. The Elector of Saxony,
the Landgrave of Hesse, and other chiefs of the
Protestants, though solicited separately by the
Emperor, and allured by the promire or profped
of those advantages which it was known they
were most solicitous to attain, refused, with a for-
titude highly worthy of imitation, to abandon
what they deemed the cause of God for the fake
of any earthly acquisition q.
Severe ce- '. I RY scheme ih order to gain or disunite the

,heepni,

P r(:' lant [arty proving abortive, nothing nos
tants,

? cck:cnd. lib. ii. Ig9, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales Evar.
telici ap. llcrm. Vonder Hard. Hill. Liter. Reform. Lips
1717. tol. p. 159.
s Slcid. 132. Scultet. Annal. 158.

remaine

remained for the Emperor but to take some vigo. BOOK V.
rous measures towards aiferting the doctrines and '- '
authority of the established church. These, Cam- '130'
peggio, the Papal nuncio, had always recom-
mended as the only proper and effectual course of
dealing with such obstinate heretics. In compli-
ance with his opinions and remonstrances, the di-

Nov. 19.

et issued a decree, condemning most of the pecu-
liar tenets held by the Protestants; forbidding any
person to protect or tolerate those who taught
them; enjoining a ftri& observance of the establish-
ed rites; and prohibiting any further innovation
under revere penalties. All orders of men were
required to aflift with their persons and fortunes
in carrying this decree into execution; and fich
as refuted to obey it were declared incapable of
acting as judges, or of appearing as parties in the
Imperial chamber, the supreme court of judica-
ture in the Empire. To all which was subjoined
a promise that an application should be made to
the Pope, requiring him to call a general council
within fix months, in order to terminate all con-
troverfies by its sovereign decisions r.

THE severity of this decree, which they confi- Theyentca

dered as a prelude to the most violent perfecuti- int,',leas.e
ors, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced them k.drt.
that the Emperor was resolved on their deftruation.
The dread of those calamities which were ready
to fall on the church, oppretfed the feeble spirit of
M'elaiEthon; and as if the cause had already been
dclelerate, he gave hirr.felf up to melancholy
arnd lamentation. But l.uther, ho during the
meeting of the diet had endeavoured to confirm
and animate his party by several treatires which he
addrelfed to them, was not disconcerted or dismay-
*d at the profpet of this new danger. He corl-

r Sleid. 17,9

forted

Book V. forted Melan&hon and his other desponding difi.

L'- ' pies, and exhorted the princes not to abandon
Is30' those truths which they had lately aflerted with

such laudable boldness . His exhortations made
the deeper impression upon them as they were
greatly alarmed at that time by the account of a
combination among the Popish princes of the Em.
pire for the maintenance of the established religion,
to which Charles himself had acceded'. This
convinced them that it was necessary to fland on
their guard; and that their own safety as well as
the success of their cause depended on union. Fil-
led with this dread of the adverse party, and with
there fentimentN concerning the conduct proper for
themselves, they assembled at Smalkalde. There,
Decemb.7i. they concluded a league of mutual defence against

all aggressors v, by which they formed the Protefl
tant states of the Empire into one regular body,
and beginning already to confider themselves as
such, they resolved to apply to the Kings of France
and England, and to implore them to assist and
patronize their new confederacy.

The Empe- AN affair not connected with religion furnished
thrprop them with a pretence for courting the aid of so-
brothere- reign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views
leed King
oftheRo- enlarged in proportion to the increase of his power
mans, and grandeur, had formed a scheme of conti-

nuing the Imperial crown in his family, by pro-
curing his brother Ferdinand to be elected king of
the Romans. The present juncture was favour.
able for the execution of that design. The Empe-
ror's arms had been every where victorious; he
had given law to all Europe at the late peacei
no rival now remained in a condition to balance
or to controul him; and the Electors, dazzle

* Seck. ii. 18o. Sleid. 340, t Seek. ii. zoo. iii. 11
v Sleid. Hist. 142.

by the splendour of his success, or over-awed by BooK V.
the greatness of his power, durst scarce dispute the 'V `
will of a prince whose solicitations carried with 1530.
them the authority of commands. Nor did he
want plausible reasons to enforce the measure.
The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said, obliged
him to be often absent from Germany; the
growing disorders occasioned by the controversies
about religion, as well as the formidable neigh-
bourhood of the Turks, who continually threat-
ened to break in with their desolating armies into
the heart of the Empire, required the constant
pretence of a prince, endowed with prudence ca-
pable of composing the former, and with power
and valour sufficient to repel the latter. His bro-
ther Ferdinand pofl(efed these qualities in an emi-
nent degree; by residing long in Germany, he
had acquired a thorough knowledge of their con-
flitution and manners; having been present almost
from the first rife of their religious dissensions, he
knew what remedies were most proper, what they
could bear, and how to apply them; as his own
dominions lay on the Turkish frontier, he was the
natural defender of Germany against the invasions
of the Infidels, being prompted by interest no less
than he would be bound in duty to oppose them.

THesE arguments made little impreflion on the The Protef

rants averse

Protetfants. Experience taught them, that no-to it.
thing had contributed more to the undiflurbed
progress of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness in the reins of govern-
ment which there occasioned; after deriving such
advantages from a Rfate of anarchy, they were
extremely unwilling to give themselves a new and
a fixed maiter. They perceived clearly the extent
of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at rendering

the

BOOK V. the Imperial crown hereditary in his family, and
"-v'" would of course eftablfh in the Empire an ablb.
1530' lute dominion, to which elective princes could not

have aspired with equal facility. They determin.
ed therefore to oppose Ferdinand's election with
the utmost vigour, and to route their countrymen
by their example and exhortations, to withitand
this encroachment on their liberties. The Ele&tor
January. of Saxony accordingly, not only refuted to be

present in the electoral college, which the Empe.
ror summoned to meet at Cologne, but instructed
his eldest ton to appear there, and to protcft against
the election as informal, illegal, contrary to the
articles of the golden bull, and fubverfi e of the

Hischo. liberties of the Empire. But the other Eledtors,
fen.

whom Charles had been at great pains to gain,
without regarding either his absence or protest,
chore Ferdinand King of the Romans who a few
days after was crowned at Aix-la-Cbapelle x

Negociati- THE account of this tranfa&icon, as well as of
onof the the commencement of fume prosecutions against
withFrance. them on account of their religious- principles, in

the Imperial chamber, being brought to the Pro-
teftants, who were assembled a second time at
Smalkalde, they thought it necessary both to re-
new their former confederacy, and immediately
to dispatch their ambassadors into France and En.
Feb. 29. gland. Francis had observed, with all the jealou

fy of a rival, the reputation which the Emperor
had acquired by his teeming tifintereftednefs and
moderation in fettling the affairs of Italy; and be-
held with great concern, the successful flep which
he had taken towards perpetuating and extending
his authority in Germany by the election of a King
of the Romans. Nothing, however, would have

x Sleid. 142. Seek. iii. i. P. Ileutcr. Rer. iAuRr lib. .
c. 6. p z4o.

been

been more impolitic than to precipitate into a new Boot V.
war his kingdom exhausted by extraordinary es- '-v--
forts, and discouraged by ill success, before it had 'l3'
got time to recruit its strength, or to forget past
misfortunes. Nor could he, when no provocau-
on had been given, and scarce a pretext had been
afforded him, violate a treaty of peace which he
himself had ob lately solicited, without forfeiting
the esteem of all Europe, and being detcfttd as a
prince void of probity and honour. He observed,
with great joy, powerful factions beginning to
form in the Empire; he listened with the utmost
eagerness to the complaints of the Prote.stant prin-
ces; and without teeming to countenance their
religious opinions, determined secretly to cherish
those sparks of political discord which might be as-
terwards kindled into a flame. For this purpose,
he sent William de Bellay, one of the ablest ne-
gociators in France, into Germany, who visiting
the courts of the malecontent princes, and height-
ened their ill humour by various arts, concluded
an alliance between them and his mailer Y, which
though concealed at that time, and productive of
no immediate effects, laid the foundation of an
union fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambiti-
ous projects ; and Chewed the discontented princes
of Germany, where they might, for the future,
find a protetor no less powerful than willing to
undertake their defence against the encroachments
of the Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against W;th Eng

Charles, in complailance to whom, the Pope had lan'!
long retarded, and now openly opposed his di-
vorce, was no less disposed than Francis to strength-
en a league which might be rendered so formida-

Y Bellay. 129, a. 13o, b. Seck. iii. 14.

ble

BooK V. ble to the Emperor. But his favourite project of

-

V 'the divorce led him into such a labyrinth of
1531. schemes and negociations, and he was, at the fame

time, so intent on aboliihing the papal jurifdiftion
in England, that he had no leisure for foreign as.
fairs; and was obliged to satisfy himfelfwith giv.
ing general promises, together with a small supply
in money to the confederates of Smalkalde .

Charles MEANWHILE, many circumflances convinced
courtthe Charles that this was not a juncture when the ex-

n tirpation of heresy was to be attempted by violence

and rigour; that, in compliance with the Pope's
inclinations, he had already proceeded with impru-
dent precipitation; and that it was more his inte-
reft to consolidate Germany into one united and
vigorous body, than to divide and enfeeble it by
a civil war. The Protestants, already confidera.
ble by their numbers, and their zeal, had now ac-
quired additional weight and importance by their
joining in that confederacy into which the rash
steps taken at Augsburg had forced them. Having
now discovered their own strength, they despised
the decisions of the Imperial chamber; and being
secure of foreign protection, were ready to set the
head of the Empire at defiance. At the fame
time his peace with France was precarious, the
friendship of an irresolute and interested pontiff, was
not to be relied on; and Solyman, in order to re-
pair the infamy and loss which his arms had sustain-
ed in the former campaign, was preparing to enter
Aultria with more numerous forces. On all these
accounts, especially the last, a speedy accommo-
dation with the malecontent princes, was neceffa
ry not only for the accomplilhment of his future
schemes, but for ascertaining his present safety
Negociations were, accordingly, carried on by hii

s Herbert, 152, 154. dir
i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~__

diredtion with the Elector of 'Saxony and his as- BooK V.
bciates; after many delays occasioncd by the jea-
lousy of the Emperor, and of each other, after '532
innumerable difficulties arising froni the inflexible
nature of religious tenets, which cannot admit of
being altered, modified, or relinquished in the Grants
fame manner as points of political interest, terms thrbi eCna,.
of pacification were agreed upon at Nuremberg,
and ratified solemnly in the Diet at Ratisbon. In July23.
this treaty, it was stipulated, That universal Augut 3
peace be established in Germany, until the meet-
ing of a general council, the convocation of
which within fix months the Emperor shall en-
deavour to procure; That no perlbn be molested
on account of religion; That a itop be put to
all procefles begun by the Imperial chamber
against Protestants, and the sentences already pas-
led to their detriment be declared void. On their
part, the Protestants engaged to aflift the Em-
peror with all their forces in resisting the invasion
of the Turks a. Thus by their firmness in ad-
hering to their principles, by the unanimity
with which they urged all their claims, and by
their dexterity in asailing themkelves of the Em-
peror's fituarion, the Protetlants obtained terms
which amounted almofr to a toleration of their re-
ligion; all the conicefsu;i s were made by Charles,
ione by them; even thi favourite point of their
approving his brother': clction was not men-
tioned; and the ProteiLants of G. rmany, who had
hitherto been viewed only as a religious I. t,
came henceforth to be confidercd as a political
body of no Imall consequence '.

THE intelligence which Charles received of So- Cml',aign

lyman's having entered Htngaiy at the head of'"ll" u"'Y'
three hundred thouland men cut Ilhort the deli-

Du Mont. Corps Diplomatiquc, torn. iv. part ii. 87, 8y.
b Siidi. ^19, &c. Seek. iii. 19.
VXL. II. Z berations

BooK V. berations of the Diet at Ratisbon; the contin-
-v-.-- gent both of troops and money which eachprince
1532. was to furnish towards the defence iof the Empire

having been already fettled. The Protellants,
as a testimony of their gratitude to the Em.
peror, exerted themselves with extraordinary zeal,
and brought into the field forces that exceeded in
number the quota imposed on them; and the Ca-
tholics imitating their example, one of the greatesi
and best appointed armies that had ever been
levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Be.
ing joined by a body of Spanish and Italian ve-
terans under the marquis del Guafto; by some
heavy armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
and by the troops which Ferdinand had railed in
Bohemia, Austria, and his other territories, it
amounted in all to ninety thouland disciplined
foot, and thirty th0ufand horse, betides a pro-
digious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army,
worthy the first prince in Christendom, the Em-
peror took the command in person; and mnli-
kind waited in suspense the issue of a decifi'e
battle between the two greatefl Monarchs in the
world. But each of them dreading the other's
power and good fortune, they both conduct-d
their operations with such exceflive caufion, that
a campaign, for which such immense prepa-

September rations had been made, ended without any mc-
and Ocober morable event. Solyman finding it impolille t)

gain ground upon an enemy always attOrtivp,
and on his guard, marched back to Confttanri o,1-
towards the end of autumn c. %It is remarkable
that in such a martial age, when every gentle-
man was a soldier, and every p:ince a gcim 1,
this was the first time that Charles, who had il-
ready carried on such extensive wars, and ,,ained
so many vidories, appeared at the head of his

c Jovii Hifl. lib. 30 . . oo, &c. Barre Hill. de I'Elm-
pire, i 8. 347.

tioops,

troops. In this first essay of his arms, to have BooK V.
opposed such a leader as Solyman, was no firall --"--- '
honour; to have obliged him to retreat merited 1532'
very confiderabTe praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Aug. 6.

Elecor of Saxony died, and was succeeded by
his son John Frederick. The Reformation ra-
ther gained than loft by that evint; the new
Elector, no lets. attached than his predeceflbrs to
the opinions of Luther, occupied the etation
which they held at the head of the Proteitant
party, and defended, with the boldnels and zeal
of youth, the cause which they had foitered and
reared with the caution of old age.

IMMEDIATELY after the retreat of the Turks, The Em-

Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out, on tperv ithin
his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely thePopein
desirous of an interview with the Pope, they met spaiy.
a ftcond time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonstrations of refpeE and friendship, but with
little of that confidence which had lubfifted be-
tween them during their late negociations there.
Clement was much diffatisfitd with the Em-
peror's proceedings at Augsburg; his cotrcellions
with regard to the speedy convocation of a coun-
cil, having more than cancelled all the merit of
the fevdre decree against the doctrines of tih Re-
formers. The toleration granted to the P:utef-
tants at Ratisbon, and the more explicit promise
concerning a council with which it was acczm-
panied, shad irritated him flill faither. Charles,
however, partly from conviction that the meeting
of a council would be attended with filutary
cffects, and partly from tiis d-fire to please the
Germans, having solicited him by his arbatiadoJs
to call that afieinbly without delay, and now Neociati.
',rging the fame thing in peri'ui, Clement was " c r~"'en

;Z< 2 ,E~I'~a:~lyng ra ,ciuul,

Z 2 g t~ai
dy uci

BooK V. greatly embarrassed what reply he should make to

a request, which it was indecent to refuse, and
1532. dangerous to grant. He endeavoured at first to

divert Charles from the measure, but finding
him inflexible, he had recourse to artifices which
he knew would delay, if not entirely defeat the
calling of that assembly. Under the plausible
pretext of its being previously necessary to fettle,
with all parties concerned, the place of the coun-
cil's meeting; the manner of its proceedings;
the right of the persons who should be admitted to
vote; and the authority of their decisions; he
dispatched a nuncio, accompanied by an ambaf.
fador from the Emperor, to the Eledor of Saxony
as head of the Protellants. With regard to
each of these articles, inextricable difficulties and
contests arose. The Protestants demanded a
council to be held in Germany; the Pope insisted
that it Ihould meet in Italy; they contended that
all points in dispute should be determined by the
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered the
decrees of the church, and the opinions of fathers
and doctors as of equal authority; they required
a free council in which the divines commiflioned
by different churches should be allowed a voice;
he aimed at modelling the council in such a man-
ner as would render it entirely dependent on his
pleasure: Above all, the Protestants thought it
unrealonable that they should bind themselves to
submit to the decrees of a council, before thty
knew on what Principles there decrees were to be
founded, by what persons they were to be pro-
nounced, and what forms of proceeding they
would observe. The Pope maintained it to be
altogether unnecessary to call a council, if those
who demanded it did not previously declare their
resolution to acquiesce in its decrees. In order to
adjust such a variety of points, many expedients
were proposed, and the negociations spun out to

such

such a length, as effectually answered Clement's BOOK V.
purpose of putting off the meeting of a council, 'v-'
without drawing on himself the whole infamy of I532.
obtruding a measure which all Europe deemed
so essential to the good of the church d.

TOGETHER with this negociation about calling ad for prt

a council, the Emperor carried on another which tranquillity
he had still more at heart, for securing the peace of Italy.
established in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his pretensions in that country wiih great reluc-
tance, Charles made no doubt but that he would
lay hold on the firR pretext afforded him, or em-
brace the first opportunity which presented itself
of recovering what he had loft. It became necef-
fary, on this account, to take measures for as-
fembling an army able to oppose him, As his
treasury, drained by a long war, could not sup-
ply the fums requisite for keeping such a body
constantly on foot, he attempted to throw that
burden on his allies, and to provide for the 'afety
of his own dominions at their expence, by pro-
posing that the Italian states ihould enter into a
league of defence against all invaders; that, on
the first appearance of danger, an army (hould
be raised and maintained at the common charge;
and that Antonio de Leyva should be appointed
the generalillimo. Nor was the proposal unac-
ceptable to Clement, though for a reason very dif-
ferent from that which induced the Emperor to
make it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver ,533.
raily from the German and Spanish veterans which
.'id (o long filled all the powers in that coun-
ry with terror, and still kept them in fubjeclon
to the Impelial yoke. A league was accordingly Feb z4.
concluded; all the Italian states, the Venetians
cxcepted, acceded to it; the fium which each of
the contralitng parties fliould furnifli towards

It F. Pal1, Hifl. 6i. Seckleld. iii. 73.

Z 3 maintaining

BqoK V. greatly embarrassed what reply he should make to

aa request, which it was indecent to refuse, and
'532 dangerous to grant. He endeavoured at first to

divert Charles from the measure, but finding
him inflexible, he had recourse to artifices which
he knew would delay, if not entirely defeat the
calling of that assembly. Under the plausible
pretext of its being previously necessary to fettle,
with all parties concerned, the place of the coun-
cil's meeting; the manner of its proceedings;
the right of the persons who should be admitted to
vote; and the authority of their decisions; he
dispatched a nuncio, accompanied by an ambafl
fador from the Emperor, to the Eletor of Saxony
as head of the Proteiants. With regard to
each of these articles, inextricable difficulties and
contefis arose. The Protestants demanded a
council to be held in Germany; the Pope insisted
that it Ihould meet in Italy; they contended that
all points in dispute should be determined by the
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered the
decrees of the church, and the opinions of fathers
and doctors as of equal authority; they required
a free council in which the divines commissioned
by different churches should be allowed a voice;
he aimed at modelling the council in such a man-
ner as would render it entirely dependent on his
pleasure: Above all, the Protestants thought it
unrealonable that they (hould bind themselves to
submit to the decrees of a council, before thty
knew on what Principles these decrees were to be
founded, by what persons they were to be pro-
nounced, and what forms of proceeding they
would observe. The Pope maintained it to be
altogether unnecessary to call a council, if those
who demanded it did not previously declare their
resolution to acquiesce in its decrees. In order to
adjust such a variety of points, many expedients
were proposed, and the negociations spun out to

such

such a length, as effectually answered Clement's BOOK V.
purpose of putting off the meeting of a council, ''
without drawing on himself the whole infamy of 1532.
obltruding a measure which all Europe deemed
so essential to the good of the church d.

TOGETHER with this negociation about calling and for tPr

a council, the Emperor carried on another which tranquillity
he had still more at heart, for securing the peace o ltaly.
established in Italy. As Francis had renounced
his pretensions in that country wiih great reluc-
tance, Charles made no doubt but that he would
lay hold on the first pretext afforded him, or em-
brace the first opportunity which presented itself
of recovering what he had loft. It became necef-
fary, on this account, to take measures for as-
fembling an army able to oppose him, As his
treasury, drained by a long war, could not sup-
ply the fums requisite for keeping such a body
constantly on foot, he attempted to throw that
burden on his allies, and to provide for the lafety
of his own dominions at their expence, by pro.
posing that the Italian ltates should enter into a
league of defence against all invaders; that, on
the first appearance of danger, an army should
be raised and maintained at the common charge;
and that Antonio de Leyva should be appointed
the generalillimo. Nor was the proposal unac-
ceptable to Clement, though for a reason very dif-
ferent from that which induced the Emperor to
make it. He hoped, by this expedient, to deliver ,533.
Ialy from the German and Spanish veterans which
':aid lo long filled all the powers in that coun-
rty with terror, and still kept them in fubjecton
to the Impeial yoke. A league was accordingly Fb 14.
conlcluded; all the Italian tlates, the Venetians
excepted, acceded to it; the furn which each of
the contraCting parties should furnifl towards

t Fp. p'atl, lift. 61. Seck ldA iii. 73.

Z 3 maintaining

BootV. maintaining the army was fixed; the Emperor
'S33 agreed to withdraw the troops which gave so much

'533 umbrage to his allies, and which he was unable

any lo::ger to support. Having disbanded part of
them, and removed the reft to Sicily and Spain,
he embarked on board Doria's gallies, and arrived

April iz. at Barctlona e

Defignsand NOTWITHSTANDING all his precautions for fe-
negociations curing the peace of Germany and maintaining
of the G ani
French king that system which he had established in Italy, the
against the Emperor became every day more and more ap-

mperr prehenfive that both would be soon disturbed by

the intrigues or arms of the French King. His
apprehenlions were well founded, as nothing but
the desperate situation of his affairs could have
brought Francis to give his consent to a treaty so
dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of
Cambray: He at the very time of ratifying it,
had formed a resolution to oblerve it no longer
than necessity compelled him, and took a folenin
protest, though with the most profound secrecy,
against several articles in the treaty, particularly
that whereby he renounced all pretensions to the
dutchy of Milan, as unjust, injurious to his heirs,
and invalid. One of the crown - v ers, by his
command, entered a proteff to ithe iam:: .uri .fe,
and with tl-r like ltcrecy, when the r:tifica'iln
of the treaty was registered in the pali.:n-.ct of
Paris f; and Francis seems to have thought tlhar,
by employing an artifice unworthy of a King,
deiruative of public faith, and of the mutual con-
fidence on which all transactions between nations
are founded, he was releared from any obliga-
tion to perform the most solemn Promifcs, or to
adhere to the most sacred engagements. Fiom
the moment he concluded the peace of Cambray,

Guic. 1. xx. 551. Ferrcras. ix. 149.
f Lu Mont. Corps Diploin. torn. iv. part 2. p. 52.

h!

he wiflcid nd watched for an opportunity of vio- BooK V.
Lonilg it \d th safety. He endeavoured for that -"-
reilon to :trengthen his alliance with the King of 1533'
England, whole friendship he cultivated with the
grc:tefl assiduity. He put the military force of
his own kingdom on a better and more refpedable
footing than ever. He artfully fomented thejea-
lousy and discontent of the German princes.

BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the particularly

ftrit confederacy which subsisted between Charlesth the.
and Ciement; and he had soon the fatisfadtion to
oblerve appearances of disgust and alienation arising
in the mind of that suspicious and interested
Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union
would not be lasting. As the Emperor's deci-
sion in favour of the duke of Ferrara had greatly
irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated the in-
justice of that proceeding, and flattered him that
the Papal fee would find in him a more impartial
and no less powerful protecor. As the impor-
tunity with which Charles demanded a council
was extremely offensive to the Pope, Francis art-
fully created obstacles to prevent it, and attempted
to divert the German princes, his allies, from in-
sifting so obstinately on that point g. As the Em-
peror had gained such an ascendant over Cle-
ment by contributing to aggrandize his family,
Francis endeavoured to allure him by the fame
irresistible bait, propofirng a marriage between
his second son Henry duke of Oileans. and Ca-
tharine, the daughter of the Pope's cousin Lau.
rence di Medici. On the first overtures of this
march, the Emperor could not perluade liimfelf
that Francis really intended to debate the royal
blood of France by an alliance with Catharine,
whose ancestors had been so lately private citizens

l3cellay, 141, &:c. Seek. iii. 18. F'. Paul, 63.

Z 4 and

BOOK V. and merchants in Florence, and believed that he

meant only to flatter or amuse the ambitious Pon.
'533' tiff. He thought it necessary, however, to es

face the impreflion which such a dazzling offer
might have made, by promising to break off the
marriage which had been agreed on between his
own niece the King of Denmark's daughter, and
the Duke of Milan, and to fubfiitute Catharine
in her place. But the French ambassadors pro-
ducing unexpecedly full powers to conclude the
marriage treaty with the duke of Orleans, this
expedient had no effet. Clement was so highly
pleated with an honour which added such lustre
and dignity to the house of Medici, that he offered
to grant Catharine the investiture of considerable
territories in Italy by way of portion; he seemed
ready to support Francis in prosecuting his ancient
claims in that country, and consented to a per-
fonal interview with that Monarch h.

Interview CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent
between the
Pope nd a meeting, in which nothing was likely to pals
Franci,. but what would be of detriment to him; nor

could he bear, after he had twice condescended
to visit the Pope in his own territories, that Cle-
ment (hould bestow such a mark of diftindion on
his rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at
an unfavourable season, in order to pay court to
Francis in the French dominions. But the Pope's
eagerness to accomplish the match overcame all
scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which
mulf have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithfianding several artifices
of the Emperor to prevent it, took place at Mlir-
Oaober. feills with extraordinary pomp, and demonfira-

tions of confidence on both fides ; and the mar-

b Guic. 1. xx. 55 , 553. Bellay, 138.

riage,

;iage, which the ambition and abilities of Catha- BOOK V.
rine rendered in the sequel as fatal to France, as
it was then thought dishonourable, was confum- 1533'
mated. But whatever schemes may have been
secretly concerted by the Pope and Francis in fa-
vour of the duke of Orleans, to whom his father
proposed to make over all his rights in Italy, so
careful were they to avoid giving any cause of of-
fence to the Emperor, that no treaty was con-
cluded between them k; and even in the marriage-
articles, Catharine renounced all claims and pre-
tensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of Urbino .

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on Pope'scon-

there negotiations, and forming this connection rdgardtoh
with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to the the King of
Emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity ofdivol,.
Clement's character, that he suffered the latter to
direct all his proceedings with regard to the King
of England, and was no less attentive to gratify
him in that particular, than if the most cordial
union had fill subsisted between them. Henry's
suit for a divorce had now continued near fix
years; during all which period the Pope negoti-
ated, promised, retracted, and concluded no-
thing. After bearing repeated delays and difap-
pointments, longer than could have been expet-
ed from a prince of such a cholerick and impe-
tuous temper, his patience was at last so much
exhausted, that he applied to another tribunal
for that decree which he had solicited in vain at
Rome. Cranmer, archbilhop of Canterbury, by
a sentence founded on the authority of Univer.-
fities, Docors, and Rabbies, who had been con-
lulted with refpeft to the point, annulled the
King's marriage with Catharine; her daughter
was declared illegitimate; and Anne Boleyn ac-

k Guic 1. xx. 55.
! Du Mont. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part ii. 1ol.

knowledged

BOOK V. knowledged as Queen of England. At the fame
*~--'~-' time Henry began to nqgledt and to threaten the

'533. Pope whom he had hitherto courted, and to

i.i ke innovations in the church, of which he
had formerly been fugh a zealous defender. Cle.
mnent, who had already seen so many provinces
9nd kingdoms revolt from the Holy See, became
apprehensive at last that England would imitate
their example, and partly from his foiicrtude to
prevent that fatal blow, partly in compliance with
the French King's folicitatiors, determined to
give Henry such satisfaction as mignt fill retain
him within the bosom of the church. But the
violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Empe.
ror, did not allow the Pope leisure for executing

,534. this prudent resolution, and hurried him with a
March13. precipitation fa:al to the Roman fee, to issue a bull

rescinding Cranmer's sentence, confirming Hci.
ry's marriage with Catharine, and declaring him
excommunicated, if, within a time specified, he
did not abandon the wife he had taken, and re-

Papal au- turn to her whom he had deserted. Enraged at
heidyb i" this unexpeted decree, Henry kept no longer
England. any measures with the court of Rome; his sub-

jedts seconded his resentment and indignation; an
ac of parliament was pafled, aboliflhing the Pa-
pal power and jurifdiclion in England; by ano.
ther, t.e King was declared supreme head of the
church, and all the authority of which the Popes
were deprived was veiled in him. That vail fa-
brick of ecclefiaflical dominion which had been
railed with such art, and whose foundations seem-
ed l6 deep, being no longer supported by the
veneration of the people, was overturned in a
moment. Henry himself, with tlhe caprice pecu-
liar to his character, continued to defend the doc.
trines of the Romish church as fiercely as he at-
ticked its jurifdidion. He alternately persecuted
'!e Protellants for rejeding the former, and the

Catholicksl

Catholicks for acknowledging the latter. But his BooK V.
fubjeas being once permitted to enter into new '----
paths, did not choose to flop short at the precise 's34
point prescribed by him. Having been encouraged
by his example to break rome of their fetters, they
were so impatient to shake off all that remained k,
that in the following reign, with the general ap-
plause of the nation, a total separation was made
frorn the church of Rome in articles of dodtrine, as
well as in matters of discipline and jurifdition.

A SHORT delay might have saved the See ofDeathof
Rome from all the unhappy consequences of Cle- Cl"ment
ment's rashness. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a languishing distemper, which
graJually wafting his constitution, put an end to Sept. S.
his Pontificate, the moR unfortunate, both during
its continuance, and by its effects, that the church
had known for many ages. The very day on which Eleion of
the Cardinals entered the conclave, they raised to Paul 111.
the Papal throne Alexander Farnese dean of the o". 3.
sacred college, and the eldest member of that bo-
dy, who affiumed the name of Paul II. The ac-
count of his promotion was received with extraor-
dinary acclamations of joy by the people of Rome,
highly plealed, after an interval of more than an
hundred years, to fee the crown of St. Peter placed
on the head of a Roman citizen. Persons more
capable of judging, formed a favourable pre-
lage of his administration, from the experience
which he had acquired under four pontificates, as
wdl as the charader of prudence and moderation
which he had uniformly maintained in a ltation of
!.reat eminence, and during an active and difficult
jui:ture that required both talents and address'.

k Herbert. Burn. I-ill. of the Reform.
i Guic. 1.o 2 5s6, F. Patul. 64.

E ROPE,

BOOK V. EUROPE, it is probable, owed the continuance
'-v- 3of its peace to the death of Clement; for al-

1534 though no traces remain in history of any league

concluded between him and Francis, it is scarce to
be doubted but that he would have seconded the
operations of the French arms in Italy, that he
might have gratified his ambition by feeing one
of his family poffefled of the supreme power in
Florence, and another in Milan. But upon the
elecion of Paul III. who had hitherto adhered
uniformly to the Imperial interest, Francis found
it necessary to suspend his operations for Come time,
and to put off the commencement of hostilities
againit the Emperor, on which he was fully de-
termined.

Infurreaion WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to
of the Ana-
baptifs in renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal
Geimny. to himself and his subjects, a tranfadion of a very

singular nature was carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and salutary effects of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as muff be the cafe, in all adti-
ons and events wherein men are concerned, with
some consequences of an opposite nature. When
the human mind is rouzed by grand objeds, and
agitated by firong passions, its operations acquire
such force, that they are apt to become irregular
and extravagant. Upon any great revolution in
religion, such irregularities abound most, at that
particular period, when men having thrown off
the authority of their ancient principles, do not
yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obli-
gation of those new ones which, they have em-
braced. The mind, in that situation, pushing
forward with the boldness which prompted it to
reject eflablifhed opinions, and not guided by a
clear knowledge of the fyflem substituted in their
place, disdains all reitraint, and runs into wild

notions,

notions that often lead to scandalous or immoral BOOK V.
conduct. Thus, in the first ages of the Christian ',--
church, many of the new converts, having re- 1534'
nounced their ancient Creeds, and being but imper-
feetly acquainted with the doctrines and precepts of
Christianity, broached the most extravagant opi-
nions equally subversive of piety and virtue; all
which errors disappeared or were exploded when
the knowledge of religion increased, and came to
be more generally disused. In like manner, soon
after Luther's appearance, the ralhnefs or ignorance
of Come of his disciples led them to publish absurd
and pernicious tenets, which being proposed to
men extremely illiterate, but fond of novelty,
and at a time when their minds were turned
wholly towards religious speculations, gained too
easy credit and authority among them. To there
causes, must be imputed the extravagancies of
Munster, in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty-five, as well as the rapid progress
which they made among the peasants; but though
the insurrection excited by that Fanatic was soon
suppressed, several of his followers lurked in dif-
ferent places, and endeavoured privately to propa-
gate his opinions.

IN those provinces of upper Germany, which o)iginant

had already been To cruelly wafted by their en- tieta.f
thufiaflic rage, the magistrates watched their
motions with such revere attention, that many of
them found it necessary to retire into other coun-
tries, some were puniflied, others driven into ex-
ile, and their errors were cntirely rooted out.
But in the Netherlands and Weclplhil;, , where
the pernicious tendency of their opi iions was
more unknown, and guarded a;aiTrlt with less
care, they got admittance into frvcral tno.wns, anil
Iprcad the inf(cion of their pr iciplcs. '1 e
m"ost remal ;able of their ielgiols tecnie relatt:

BiSo Vr. to the Sacrament of Baptism, which as they con-

'-^"'~ tended, ought to be adminiftred only to persons

grown up to years of understanding, and fhotilj
be performed not by sprinkling them with water,
but by dipping them in it: For this reason they
condemned the baptism of infants, and rebap-
tizing all whom they admitted into their society,
the fed came to be diftinguilhed by the name of
Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion concern.
ing baptism, which has the appearance of being
founded on the pracice of the church in the
apoftolick age, and contains nothing inconsistent
with the peace and order of human f6ciety, they
added otherprinciples of a most enthusiastic, as well
as dangerous nature. They maintained that, among
Christians who had the precepts of the gospel to di-
rec, and the spirit of God to guide them, the of-
fice of magiitracy was not only unnecessary, but an
unlawful encroachment on their spiritual liberty;
that the diftindions occasioned by birth, or rank,
or wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel,
which confiders all men as equal, should be en-
tirely abolished; that all Christians throwing their
possessions into one common flock, ihould live to-
gether in that slate of equality which becomes
members of the fame family; that as neither the
laws of nature, nor the precepts of the New Tef.
tament had placed any restraints upon men with
regard to the number of wives which they might
marry, they fllould use that liberty which God him-
self had granted to the patriarchs.

sttle in SUCH opiniins, propagated and m-.intained
Muiitcr. with enthufiaflic zeal and boldness, were nut long

of producing tlie violent eTffels natural to tlein.
Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias, a ba-
ker of Haerlem, and John Bocold, or Beiikcls,
a journeyman taylor of Lcyden, pose;ssd i'lh

tl!c

the rage of making proselytes, fixed their rei- Aooic V.
dence at Munster an Imperial city in Westphalia, '_V`"
of the first rank, under the sovereignty of its 534
bishop, but governed by its own senate arid eon-
fuls. As neither of thele Fanaticks wanted the
talents necefiary for such an undertaking, great
rdnlution, the appearance of fandity, bold: pre-
tentious to inspiration, and a confident and plau-
fible manner of difcourling, they soon gained
many converts. Among these were Rothman,
who had first preached the Proteffant doc&trihe in
Munfier, and Cnipperdolitng, a citizen of good
birth. and considerable eminence. Ernboldened
by the countenance of such dilciples, they openly
taught their opinions; aid not satisfied with
that liberty, they made several attempts, though
without fiiccefs, to seize the town, in ordeo to
get their tenets established by publick authority.
At last, having iecretly called in their associateS necor
from the neighbouring country, they suddenly tltit.
took poffeflion of the arsenal and fenate-lihofe irl
thenight time, and running through the ifreets
with drawn swords, and horrible howlings, cried
out alternately, " Repent, and be baptized," and
" Depart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca- Fdjruary.
nons, the nobility, together with the more fober
ciizcns, whether Papists or Protestants, terrifed
at their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frantic
11liltitude, confifling chiefly of firangers. No-
thing now remaining to overawe or controul them,
hley fe: about modellingl the ;go, ernmentt accord-
ilg ro their own wild ideas; and though at firll
t'-\. fiewed so much reverence for ihe ancient
co:ftitution, as to eled senator. of tlhir own se't,
and to appoint Cnipperdoling and another prole- Efl L'(h liOf

nlWew irn of

tlye con(fils, this was nothing more thali torm ; g,vtnitnint
lor all thlir proceedings were direded h)y Mat-
thlis, who in the flile, and with the authority of
a propiht, uttered his commands, which it was

instant

BOOK V. instant death to disobey. Having begun with en-
--*- couraging the multitude to pillage the churches,
'534' and deface their ornaments; he enjoined them to

destroy all books except the Bible, as useless or
impious; he appointed the estates of such as fled
to be confiscated, and fold to the inhabitants of
the adjacent country; he ordered every man to
bring forth his gold, silver, and precious effects,
and to lay them at his feet; the wealth amasse(t
by there means, he deposited in a publick treafu-
ry, and named deacons to dispense it for the com-
mon use of all. The members of his common.
wealth being thus brought to a perfect equality,
he commanded all of them to eat at tables pre-
pared in public, and even prescribed the dilhe:
which were to be served up each day. Having
finished his plan of Reformation, his next care
was to provide for the defence of the city; and
he took measures for that purpose with a pru-
dence which favoured nothing of fanaticism. He
collected vast magazines of every kind; he re-
paired and extended the fortifications, obliging
every person without diftintion to work in his
turn; he formed such as were capable of bearing
arms into regular bodies, and endeavoured to add
the vigour of discipline to the impetuosity of en-
thufiafm. He sent emiflaries to the Anabaptifls
of the Low-Countries, inviting them to assemble at
Munster, which he dignified with the name of
Mount-Sion, that from thence they might set out to
reduce all the nations of the earth under their do-
minion. He himself was unwearied in attenidinlg
to every thing necessary for the security or increale
of the feet; animating his disciples by his own
example to refute no labour, as well as to repine
at no hardihip; and their enthusiastic pailions being
kept from subsiding by a perpetual fucceflion of
exhortations, revelations and prophecies, tlhy
seemed ready to undertake or to tfffer any thing
in maintenance of their opinions.

MEANWHILE

MEANWHI t.E, the bishop of Munster having af-BooK V.

fembled a considerable army, advanced to besiege - -'
the town. On his approach, Matthias sallied outTheli3fl4
at the head of rome chosen troops, attacked one of MunfRer
quarter of his camp, forced it, and after great aaintlhn.,
slaughter, returned to the city loaded with glory
and spoil. Intoxicated with this fiiccefs, he ap-
peared next day brandishing a spear, and declared,
that in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth
with a handful of men and smite the hofl of the
ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he named, May
followed him without helitation in this wild
enterprise, and rulhing on the enemy with a
frantic courage were cut oft to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first great
contlernation among his disciples, but Boccold, Johnt
by the fame gifts and pretensions which had ,Lyude,
gained Matthias credit, soon revived their fpi-a:!;,,ity
rits and hopes to such a degree, that he fuc- Anabaptl
ceeded him in the fame absolute direaion of
all their affairs. As he did not poflefs that en-
terprifing courage which diftingui.hed his pre-
deceffor, he satisfied himself with carrying on a
defensive war, and without attempting to annoy
the enemy by rallies, he waited for the succours he
expected from the Low Countries, the arrival of
which was often foretold and prorifed by their
prophets. But though less daring in adtion than
Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and of more
unbounded ambition. Soon after rh: death of
his predecessor, having by obicuile visions, and
prophesies, prepared the mllltitule for fbme ex-
traordinary event, he Efripped himrnfllf naked, and
marching through the streets, proclaimned with a
loud voice, " That the kingdom of Sion was at
hand; that whatever was higheil on earth should
be brought low, and whatever was lowell should
be exalted." In order to fulfil this, he commanded
thechurches, as the most lofty buildings in the
city, to be levelled with the ground i he degraded

VOL. II. A a the

looKV. the senators chosen by Matthias, and depriving

^'~' Cnipperdoling of the consulship,\ the higheR of.
1534 fice in the commonwealth, he appointed him to

execute the lowest and most infamous, that of
common hangman, to which strange transition
the other agreed, not only without murmuring,
but with the utmost joy; and such was the def-
potifm and rigour of Boccold's administration,
that he was called almost every day to perforn
some duty or other of his wretched fundcion. I,
place of the deposed senators, he namod twelve
judges, according to the number of tribes in If-
rael, to preside in dl. affairs; retaining to himself
the fame authority which Moses anciently poleflfcd
as legislator of that people.

!ed Nor satisfied, however, with power or titles

;!eeed
King. which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he

had gained and tutoied, having called the mul-
titude together, declared it to be the will of
God, that J hn Boccold should be King of Sion,,
and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling
.'ne Z4. down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he

solemnly protefled had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the slate and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and lhe
richest and molt fiimptuous garments. A Bible
was carried on his one hand, a naked sword on
the other. A great body of guards accompani:d
him when hie appeared in public. He coined
money ftarnped with his own image, and ap-
pointed the great officers of his houflold and king
dom, among whom CnipperdolY' g was noniinated
governor of the city, as a reward for his torncr
fubmiflion.

HA\ IN-

HAvING now attained the heighth of power, BooK V.

Boccold began to dilfcver pafions, which he had
hitherto restrained or indulged only in fecrct. As 1iS34

His licenti.

the excesses of enthufiail have been observed ,.t,s e,,t
in every age to lead to sensual gratifications, the and condue
fame constitution that is fulccptible of the for-
mer, being remarkably prone to the latter, he
instruCted the prophets and teachers to harangue
the people for several days concerning the law-
fu!nefs, and even necellity of taking Iiore wies
than one, which they afncrted to be one of. the
privileges granted by God to the faints. When
their ears were once accuttomed to this licentious
doctrine, and their paflions inflaned wi.h the
profped of liich unbounded indulgence, he him-
tldf let them an example of using what he called
their Christian liberty, by marrying at once three
wives, among which the widow of Matthias, a
woman of singular beauty, was one. As he was
allured by beauty, or the love of variety, he gra-
dually added to the number of his wives until
they amounted to fourteen, though the widow of
Mlatthias was the only one dignified with the title
of Queen, or who lhared with him the splendor
and ornaments of royalty. After the example
of their prophet, the multitude gave themlclves
up to the most licentious ard unc,)ntrouled gra-
tification of their defiles. No man remained Ia-
tisfied with a lingle wife. Not to ule their Chris-
tian liberty was deemed a crime. Persons were
appointed to fcarch the houlfs for young women
grown up to maturity, whom they inflantly com-
pelled to marry. Together with polygany, siee-
dom of divorce, Its inseparable arterldla::t, was
introduced, and became a new source of cor-
ruption. Every excels was committed, ul wvhich
the paflions of m-n are capable, when restrained
neither by the authority of laws nor the le!i;. of

A a 2 dtcncy;

gOOK V. decency m; and by a monfirous and almost incre.
'-v- dible conjunction, voluptuoufnefs was engrafted

1534 on religion, and diflolute riot accompanied the

aufterities of fanatical devotion.

Aconfede- MEANWHILE, the German princes were highly
te Anabap- offended at the insult offered to their dignity
tifts. by Boccold's prefumptnous ufulrpation of royal

honours; and the profligate manners of his fol-
lowers, which were a reproach to the Christian
name, filled men of all profeflions with horror
Luther, who had testified against this fanatical
spirit on its firlt appearance, now deeply la-
mented its progress, and exposing the delusion
with great strength of argument, as well as acri-
mony of stile, called loudly on all the states of
Germany to put a flop to a phrenzy no lets per.
nicious to society, than fatal to religion. The
Emperor, occupied with other cares and projes,
had no leisure to attend to such a diltant object.
But ihe princes of the Empire, assembled by the
King of the Romans, voted a supply of men and
money to the bishop of Munfler, who being un-
able to keep a sufficient army on foot, had con-
verted the siege of the town into a blockade.

Munter The forces raised in consequence of this refo-
besieged.

in Prophet:e & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo,

tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque faminas difcur-
fum es. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum turbi,
fere ulla reperta eft supra annum decimum quartum, qua'
ituprum paffa non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenf. p. l03. Vulgo
viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus senas, nonnullis feptenas &
oconas. Puellas supra duodecimum atatis annum Itatim
amare. Id. 305. Nemo una contentus.fuit, neque cuiquam
extra effaetas & viris immaturas cnntiniinti efle licuit. Id. 307.
Tacebo hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus, quanta barbaric et
malitia ufi funcin puellis vitiandis nondum aptis matrimoni.,
id quod mihi neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi fermonibu'
hauftum efl, fed ex ca vetula, cui cura sic vitiatarum denian
data suit, auditum. Joh. Corvinus, 316.

Itltiol

lution, were put under the command of an officer BOOK V.
of experience, who approaching the town to-
wards the end of spring in the year one thou- 1535
sand five hundred and thirty-five, pressed it
more closely than formerly, but found the fortifi-
cations so strong, and so diligently guarded,
that he durst not attempt an assault. It was now
above fifteen months since the Anabaptists had
established their dominion in Munster; they had
during that time undergone prodigious fatigue
in working on the fortifications, and perform-
ing military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent May.
attention of their King to provide for their sub- Difrefs and
fiftence, and his frugal and regular oeconomy in of thbe.
their public meals, they began to feel the ap- fieged.
proach of famine. Several small bodies of their
brethren, who were advancing to their afliftance
from the Low-Countries, had been intercepted,
and cut to pieces; and while all Germany was
ready to combine against them, they had no prof.
peat of succour. But such was the ascendant
which Boccold had acquired over the multitude,
and so powerful the fascination of enthusiasm,
that their hopes were as sanguine as ever, and
they hearkened with implicit credulity to the vi-
sions and predictions of their prophets, which
alsured them, that the Almighty would speedily
interpose, in order to deliver the city. The
faith, however, of Come few, shaken by the
violence and length of their sufferings, began to
fail; but being fufpedted of an inclination to
lurrender to the enemy, they were punished
with immediate death, as guilty of impiety in
difrufling the power of God. One of the King's
wives, having uttered certain words that implied
l)nme doubt concerning his divine miflion, he in-
flantly called the whole number together, and
omnimanding the blalphenler, as he called her,
to kneel down, cut off her head with his own

A a 3 lands;

*~ ~~~~ad

BOOKV. hands; and so far were the reft from exprefling

.--v any horror at this cruel deed, that they joined
s535' him in dancing with a frantic joy around the

bleeding body of their companion.

The city BY this time, the besieged endured the utmost
taken. June;'. rigour of famine; but they chore rather to susser

hardihips, the recital of which is shocking to hu.
manity, than to liften to the terms of capi-
tulation offered them by the bishop. At last, a
deserter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either less intoxicated with the fumes of
enthusiasm, or unable any longer to bear such
diflrefs, made his escape to the enemy. He in-
formed their general of a weak part in the for-
tifications which he had observed, and afluring
him that the befieg':d, exhausted with hunger
and fatigue, kept watch there with little care, he
offered to lead a party thither in the night. The
proposal was accepted, and a chosen body of
troops appointed for the service; who, scaling
the walls unperceived, seized one of the gates,
and admitted the rets of the armv. The Ana.
June 4. baptifls, though furprized, defended themftlvcs

in the market place with valour, heightened by
despair; but being overpowered by numbers, aid
surrounded on every hand, most of th.m were
slain, and the remainder taken prisoners. Among

Punishment the last were the King and CnippLrdoling. T'he
of the King
andhis ai- King, loaded with chains, was c;.rri. d from cily
bociates. to city as a f)pctacle to gratify the curiosity of

the people, and was txpofed to all their inlults.
His spirit, however, was not broken or hun:bled
by this fad reverse of his condition; and he ad-
hered with unfiaken firmness try the difliiguifh..
ing tenets of his set. After this, he was brought
back to Munfler, the scene of his royalty and
crimes, and put to death with the most exquisite
and lingering tortures, all which he bore with

astonishing

afonifhing fortitude. This extraordinary man, BooK V.
who had been able to acquire such amazing do- '
minion oxer the minds of his followers, and to 3535
excite conmmotions so dangerous to lociety, was
only twenty-fix years of age n.

TOGETHI'R with its Monarch, the kingdom Charaaer

of the Anabai;tifts came to an end. I heir prin- of the ta
ciples having taken deep root in the I.owCoun- period.
tries, the party till subsists there, under the name
of Mennonites; but by a very singular rtvo-
lution, this fe&, so mutinous and flanguinary at its
first origin, hath become altogether innocent and
pacific. Holding it unlawful to wage war, or to
accept of civil offices, they devore themselves en-
tirely to the duties of private citizens, and by
their industry and charity endeavour to make re-
paration to human society for the violence com-
mitted by their founders o. A small number of
this feet which is fettled in England, retain its pe-
culiar tenets concerning baptism, but without any
dangerous mixture of enthusiasm.

THE mutiny of the Ana^aptifts, though Proceedingp

it drew general attention, did not fto entirely en- ty uothoe
gross the princes ot Germany, as not to al- l-agtie o
low leisure for other tranfadions. The alliance smalkalde.
between the French King aid the confederates
at Smalkalde, began about this time o1 pro-
duce great effC ts. Ulric, Duke of \,V te:ltberg,
having been expelled his dcnlinions nI the year
onethoufand five hundred and ninet-ln, on ac-
count of his violent and opprellive admii iration,

n Sleid. 19o. &c. Tumultuum AnaLbaptifarum Liber unus.

Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio aurtorc ap ScarJi Lu , vol. z. p. * 3),
&c. De Miferabili Monalterieniiuin oblidioic, &c. libeitlis
Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 313. Annales Anah;tptii'ici a Joh.
Henrico (Jttio, 4to. f3afilce, ,17z. Cor. ieerlib:cl:ius Ilill.
Anab. Edit. 1637. p. 140.

0 Bayle Diction. Art. Anda,',tlj's .

A a 4 the

BOOK V. the house of Austria had got pofleffion of his
'-- dutphy. That prince having now by a long exile

!535, atoned for the errors in his conduct, which were

the effede rather of inexperience than of a tyran.
nical disposition, was become the objeEt of ge.
neral compaflion. The Landgrave of Hesse, in
particular, his near relation, warmly espoused
his interest, and used many efforts to recover for
him his ancient inheritance But the King of the
Romans obstinately refused to relinquish a valuable
acquisition which his family had made with so
much ease. The Landgrave, unable to compel
him, applied to the King of France his new ally.
Francis, eager to embrace any opportunity of
diltrelling the houle of Auflria, and defirousof
wresting from it a territory, which gave it foot-
ing and influence in a part of Germany at a dif.
tance from its other dominions, encouraged the
Landgrave to take arms, and secretly supplied
him with a large fum of money. This he em-
ployed to raise troops, and marching with great
expedition towards Wurtemberg, attacked, de-
feated, and difperled a considerable body of Auf-
trians, eltrufted with-the defence of the country.
All the Duke s subjects hastened, with emulation,
to receive their native Prince, and re-invested
him with that authority which is still enjoyed by
his descendants At the fame time the exercile
of the Proteflant religion was eltablifhed in his do-
minions P.

The Kirg FERDINAND, how sensible tbever of this unex
mans couits pe'ted blow, not daring to attack a Prince whom
them. all the Protestant powers in Germany were ready t(

fiupport, judged it expedient to cpnclude a treaty
with him, by which he recognized in the moflt
ample form his title to the dutchy. Thu filccefl

P Sleid. 172. Bellay, r59, &c

of the Landgrave's operations in behalf of the BOOK V.
Duke of Wurtemberg, having convinced Ferdi- - '
nand that a rupture with a league so formidable as 1535.
that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided with the ut-
most care, he entered likewise into a negotiation
with the Eletor of Saxony, the head of that union,
and by some concessions in favour of the Protestant
religion, and others of advantage to the Elector
himlelf, he prevailed on him together with his con-
federates to acknowledge his title as King of the
Romans, at the fame time, in order to prevent any
such precipitate or irregular elecion in times to
come, it was agreed that no person should hereaf-
ter be promoted to that dignity without the unani-
mous consent of the Electors; and the Emperor
soon after confirmed this flipulation q.

THESE aEts of indulgence towards the Protef- paul i1.

tants, and the close union into which the King of ral c.ec
the Romans seemed to be entering with the Princes to meet at
of that party, gave great offence at Rome. Paul Mantua.
III. though he had departed from a resolution of
his predecessor, never to conlent to the calling of a
general council, and had promised, in the first con-
filtory held after his election, that he would con-
voke that aflembly so much desired by all Christen-
dom, was no less enraged than Clement at the
innovations in Germany, and no less averse to any
scheme for reforming either the doctrines of the
church, or the abuses in the court of Rome : But
having been a witners of the univerfalcenfure which
Clement had incurred by his obstinacy with regard
o thete points, he hoped to avoid the fame re-
proach by the feenming alacrity with which he pro-
posed a council; flattering himself, however, that
luch difficulties would arire concerning the time anl
place of meeting, the perlbns who had a right to
9 Sleid. 173. Corps Diplom. torn. iv. p. 2. 119.

be

BooK V. be present, and the order of their proceedings, as
--v-- would effetually defeat the intention of thole who
'535. demanded that assembly, without exposing himself

to any imputation for refusing to call it. With
this view he dispatched nuncios to the several
courts, in order to make known his intention, and
that he had fixed on Mantua as a proper place
in which to hold the council. Such difficulties as
the Pope had foreseen, immediately pr tented
themselves in great number. The French King
did not approve of the place which Paul had cho.
fen, as the Papal and Imperial influence would
necessarily be too great in a town situated in that
part of Italy. The King of England not only
concurred with Francis in urging that objeEton,
but refused, besides, to acknowledge any council
cal'ed in the name and by the authority of the
Dec. 1 . Pope. The German Protestants having met to.

gether at Smalkalde, i;nsisted on their original de.
mand of a council to be held in Germany, and
pleading the Emperor's promise, as well as the
agreement at Ratisbon to that effcdt, declared that
they would not confider an assembly held at Man.
tua as a legal or free representative of the church.
By this di\erfity of sentiments and views, such a
field for intrigue and negotiation opened, as made
it easy for the Pope to aflume the merit of being
eager to assemble a council, while at the fame time
he could put off its meeting at pleasure. The
Proteflants on the other hand suspecting his designs,
and sensible of the importance which they derived
from their union, renewed for ten years the league
of Smalkalde, which now became ftionger and more
formidable by the accession of several new mem-
bers. "

DURING

r 'hi:; league was concluhie(d Dcember, one thousand five
:iundred and thirty five, but not extended or signed in tor!'

ti.

DURING these tranfacions in Germany, the BOOKV.
Emperor undertook his famous enterprize against ,-~
the piratical states in Africa. That part of the Trh^E35e.
African continent lying along the coast of the Me ror's expe-

dition to

diterranean sea, which anciently formed the king- Africa, and
doms of Mauritania and Maffylia, together with the tate of that
republick of Carthage, and which is now known c'ntrY'
by the general name of Barbary, had undergone
many revolutions. Subdued by the Romans, it
became a province of their empire. Conquered
afterwards by the Vandals, they erected a kingdom
there. That being overturned by Belisarius, the
country continued subject to the Greek Emperors,
until it was over-run towards the end of the seventh
century, by the rapid and irrefittible arms of the
Arabs. It remained for rome time a part of that
vast empire of which the Caliphs were the head. Its
immense distance, however, from the feat of go-
vernment, encouraged the descendants of those
kaders, who had subdued the country, or the chiefs
of the Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to throw off
the yoke, and to set up for independence. The
Caliphs, who derived their authority from a spirit
of enthusiasm, more fitted for making conquests
than for preserving them, were obliged to connive
at acs of rebellion which they could not prevent;
and Barbary was divided into several kingdoms, of
which Morocco, Algiers and Tunis were the most
considerable. The inhabitants of these kingdoms

till Sct'tember in the following year. The Princes who acceded
to it wserc J( n .leqtor of Sbaonv, Ernett Duke of Brunswick,
'llilip Landgrave of Hefle, Ulric )uke of Wurtemberg,
Basii i; and I'hilip Duikes o' i-'onicrania, John George, and
J:'chlim, Princes of A ihail, C;chhard and Albert Counts of
ih'ainslild, \ illiam Count of Nassau. The Cities Stralburg,
Nuremberg, Conflance, Ulm, Magdeburg, Bremen, Reut-
lingCn, Hliilbron, Memmcngen, Lindaw, Campen, lna,
]lilbrac, Windfheim, Augfl)urg, Fiancfort, Efling, Brunswick,
'ofnar, Hanover, Gottingen, Einbeck, .Hamburg, and
Mlinden.

were

.l3ooK V. were a mixed race, Arabs, Negroes from the

'v--' southern' provinces, and Moors, either natives of
'35s Africa, or who had been expelled out of Spain;

all zealous professors of the Mahometan religion,
and inflamed against Christianity with a bigotted
hatred proportional to their ignorance and barba-
rous manners.

RiCe of the AMONG these people, no less daring, incon.
states, sant and treacherous, than the ancient inhabi.

rants of the fame country described by the Roman
hiflorians, frequent seditions broke out, and ma.
ny changes in government took place. These, as
they affeded only the internal Rate of a country
so barbarous, are but little known, and deserve to
be so: But about the beginning of the sixteenth
century a sudden revolution happened, which by
rendering the states of Barbary formidable to the
Europeans, hath made their history worthy of
more attention. This revolution was brought a-
bout by persons born in a rank of life which en.

and of the titled them to ad no such illustrious part. Horuc
Birbaroflas. and Hayradin, the sons of a potter in the ifleof

Lesbos, prompted by a restless and enterprizing
spirit, forsook their father's trade, ran to sea, and
joined a crew of pirates. They soon diffinguifhed
themselves by their valour and activity, and be-
coming maflers of a small brigantine, carried on
their infamous trade with such conduct and fuc.
cess, that they assembled a fleet of twelve galleys,
betides many vessels of smaller force. Of this fleet
Horuc, the elder brother, called Barbarossa from
the red colour of his beard, was admiral, and
Hayradin second in command, but with almost e-
qual authority. They called themselves the friends
of the sea, and the enemies of all who fail upon
it; and their names loon became terrible from
the Straits of the Dardanels to those of Gibraltar.
Together with their fame and power, their ambi-

tious

tious views opened and enlarged, and while a&t- BooK V.
ing as Corsairs they adopted the ideas, and ac-v-
quired the talents of conquerors. They often car- '535
ried the prizes which they took on the coasts of
Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and
enriching the inhabitants by the sale of their booty,
and the thoughtless prodigality of their crews,
were welcome guefis in every place at which they
touched. The convenient situation of these har-
bours lying so near the greatest commercial fiates
at that time in Christendom, made the brothers
with for an establishment in that country. An
opportunity of accomplishing this quickly pre-
sented itself, which they did not susser to pars un-
improved. Eutemi, King of Algiers, having at-
tempted several times, without success, to take a
fort which the Spanish governors of Oran had
built not far from his capital, was so ill advised as
to apply for aid to Barbarossa, whose valour the
Africans confidered as irresistible. The active 15s6.
Corsair gladly accepted of the invitation, and
leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to Al-
giers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the
town; and observing that the Moors neither sus-
peated him of any bad intention, nor were capable
with their light-armed troops of opposing his dif-
ciplined veterans, he secretly murdered the Mo- Hrlnc the
narch whom he had come to aflift, and caused elder bro-
himself to be proclaimed King of Algiers in his comes ma-l
lead. The authority which he had thus boldly tof Al-
usurped, he endeavoured to eftabli(h by arts suit-
ed to the genius of the people whom he had to go-
vern; by liberality, without bounds to thole who
favoured his promotion, and by cruelty no less
unbounded towards all whom he had any reason to
dlifruft. Not satisfied with the throne which he
had acquired, he attacked the neighbouring King

of

.Booc V. of Tremecen, and having vanquished him in
(--. .J battle, added his dominions to those of Algiers.

'535. At the fame time, he continued to infest the coasts

of Spain and Italy with fleets which resembled
the armaments of a great Monarch, rather than
the light squadrons of a Corsair. The devaftati.
ons which these committed obliged Charles about
8 the beginning of his reign, to furnish the mar.

quis de Comares, governor of Oran, with troops
sufficient to attack him. That officer, aflifted by
the dethroned King of Tremecen, executed the
commifiion with such spirit, that Barbarossa's troops
being beat in several encounters, he himself was
shut up in Tremecen; after defending it to the
last extremity, he was overtaken in attempting
to make his escape, and slain while he fought
with an obflinate valour, worthy of his former
fame and exploits.

The pro- His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the
greRi of
Hayradn name of Barbarl, a, assumed the sceptre of Al.
the 'ecord giers with the fame ambition and abilities, but
brother, with better fortune. His rign being undisturbed

by the arms of the Spaniards, which had full oc.
cupation in the wars among the European powtrs,
he regulated with admirable prudence the interi-
or police of his kingdom, carried on his naval
operations with great vigour, and extended his
conquests on the continent of Africa. But, per-
ceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted to his
government with the utmott impatience, and be-
ing afraid that his continual depredations would,

Put, his d- one day, draw upon him the arms of the Chrifi-
minion un- ans, lie put his dominions under the protecti-
der tihe p" on of the Grand Sig:ior, and received from him
the Sulan. a body of Turkish Iuldiers sufficient for his lecu

rity against his domdilic as well as his foreign
enemies. At last, the fame of his exploits daily
increasing, Solyman offered him the command ot

the

the Turkish fleet, as the only peifon whose valour BOOK V.
and skill in naval affairs entitled him to command --v
against Andrew Doria, the greatest fea-officer of s53..
that age. Proud of this diflindtion, Barbarofla re-
paired to Constantinople, and with a wonderful
verlatility of mind. mingling the arts of a courtier
with the boldness of a Corsair, gained the entire
confidence both of the Sultan and his Vizier. To
them he communicated a scheme that he had form-
ed of making himfell master of Tunis, the most
flourishing kingdom, at that time, on the coast of
Africa; which being approved of by thenm, he ob-
tained whatever he demanded for carrying it into
execution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were His cheme

founded on the intetline divisions in the kingdom for conquer-
of Tunis. Mahmed, the last King of that coun-
try, having thirty-four sons by different wives,
named Muley-Hafcen, one of the youngest among
them, his successor. That weak Prince, who owed
his preference not to his own merit, but to the as-
cendant which his mother had acquired over an old
doating monarch, firfl poifmned his father in order
to prevent him from altering his destination ; and
then, with the barbarous policy which prevails
wherever polygamy is permitted, and the right of
fucceflion is not precisely fixed, he put to death all
his brothers whom he could get into his power.
Alrafchid, one of the eldlet, was so fortunate as
to escape his rage; and finding a retreat among
tile wandering Arabs, made fc:veral attempts, by
the ::lliflance (of lorrie of their cliefs, to recover
tihe tllrot:, which of right belonged to him. But
theli i loviitjl unllilccefbful, and the Arabs, from
iliti niariral le ity, beiig ready to deliver him tip
to his merciltles brother, he fled to il gier, the only
place of refuge remaining, and iimpk)rcd the pro-

ted ion

BOOK V. tetion of BarbarofTa; who, discerning at once all
~'-^ the advantages that might be gained by supporting

'535. his title, received him with every poflible demon.

firation of friendship and refpeA. Being ready,
at that time, to set fail for Constantinople, he ea-
fily persuaded Alrafchid, whose eagerners to ob-
tain a crown disposed him to believe or undertake
any thing, to accompany him thither, promising
him effelual afiftance from Solyman, whom he
represented to be the most generous, as well as
most powerful Monarch in the world. But no
sooner were they arrived at Constantinople, than
the false Corsair, regardless of all his promires to
him, opened to the Sultan a plan for conquering
Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish empire,
by making ute of the name of this exiled Prince,
and by means of the party ready to declare in his
favour. Solyman approved, with too much faci-
lity, of this perfidious proposal, extremely fuita-
ble to the character of its author, but altogether
unworthy of a great Prince. A powerful fleet
and numerous army were soon assembled; at the
fight of which the credulous Alrafchid flattered
himself, that he would soon enter his capital in
triumph.
It iluccefs. BUT jult as this unhappy Prince was going to

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan,
shut up in the seraglio, and was never heard o(
more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty veflels towards Africa. After ra-
vaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid,
whom he pretended to have left sick aboard
the Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta which
commands the bay, soon fell into his hands,
partly by his own address, partly by the tieachery
of its commander ; and the inhabitants of Tuinis

weary

weary of Muley-Hafcen's government, took arms, BooK V.
and declared for Alralczhid with luch zeal and una-.'- ---
nimity, as obliged the former to fly Ib precipitately, '535'
that he left all his treasures behind him. The gates
were immediately set open to Parbaroffa, as the re-
Rorer of their lawful sovereign. But when Alrafchid
himself did not appear, and when inflead of his
name, that of Solrman alone was heard among
the acclamations of the Turkish loldiers marching
into the town, the people of Tunis began to ful-
pect the Corlair's treachery ; and their fuipicions
being soon converted into certainty, they ran to
arms with the urmolf fury, and surrounded the
citadel, into which Earbarofia had led his troops.
But having foreleen such a revolution, he was not
unprepared for it;, he immediately turned against
them the artillery on the ramparts, and by one
brisk discharge of it, and of his small arms, he
dispersed the numerous but undirected assailants,
and forced them to acknowledge Solyman as their
sovereign, and to rubmit to himself as his viceroy.

His firfl care was to put the kingdom, of which Barbarr,.-,

l i l t rs 11' * n r s*rmitlablc

he had thus got poffelfion, in a proper posture oftpo,,,
defence. He ftr.ngthened the citadel which com-
mands the town; and fortifying the Goletta in a
regular manner, at vast expence, made it the prin-
cipal itation for his fleet, and his great arsenal
both for military and naval stores. Biing now
pofeffed of such extensive territories, he carried
on lis depredations againit the Chriltian flares to
a greater extent, and with more d-ftrnctivc vio-
lence than ever. Daily complaints ,f the outrages
committed by h's cruiz rs were brotught to the
Emprror by his subjects, both it Spain and Italy.
All Chriftendoin f emed to expect from him, as
its greatest and most fortunate Prince, that he
would put an end to this new and odious tpecies

VOL. 11. B b ot

BOOK V. of oppression. At' the fame time Muley-Hafcen,
~'-v-^ the exiled king of Tunis, finding none of the
The e3,d Mahometan Princes in Africa willing or able to
king of Tu-afift him in recovering his throne, applied to
tshe impoe Charles as the only person who could assert his
ror's afli- rights in opposition to such a formidable usurper.
tance.
April ,, The Emperor, equally desirous of delivering his
'553- dominions from the dangerous neighbourhood of

Barbarossa; of appearing as the protector of an
unfortunate Prince; and of acquiring the glory
annexed in that age, to every expedition against
the Mahometans, readily concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcen, and began to prepare for invading
Tunis. Having made trial of his own abilit:es
for war in the late campaign in Hungary, he was
now become so fond of the military character,
that he determined to command on this occasion

Hisprepara- in person. The united strength of his dominions
tion for the
expedition. was called out upon an enterprise in which the

Emperor was about to hazard his glory, and which
drew the attention of all Europe. A Flemish fleet
carried from the ports of the Low-Country a body
of German infantry s ; the gallies of Naples and
Sicily took on board the veteran bands of Italians
and Spaniards, which had distinguished themselves
by so many victories over the French; the hm-
peror himself embarked at Barcelona with the
flower of the Spanish nobility, and was joined by
a considerable squadron from Portugal, under the
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's
brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own g -
lies, the best appointed at that time in Europ,
and commanded by the most skilful officers: t e
Pope furnished all the aliftfance in his power to-
wards furh a pious enterprise; and the order of

1 lardi Annalcs Braiant. i. 599.

Malta,

!Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels, BooK V.
equipped a small squadron, but formidable by - '
the valour of the knights who served on board it. 1535
The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the general
place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed High
Admiral of the fleet; the command in chief of
the land forces was given to the Marquis di
Guafo.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting .ands in

of near five hundred veflels, having on board Atrica.
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail
from Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation,
landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarofla having
early intelligence of the Emperor's immense arma-
ment, and fufpeting its destination, prepared with
equal prudence and vigour for the defence of his
new conquest. He called in all his corsairs from
their different stations; he drew from Algiers what
forces could be spared; he dispatched messengers
to all the African Princes, Moors as well as Arabs,
and by representing Muley-Hafcen as an infamous
apoflate, prompted by ambition and revenge, not
only to become the vaflal of a Chrill'ia; Prince,
but to conspire with him to extirpate the Mahom-
rnedan faith, hd inflamed those ignorant and bi-
gotted chiefs to Iuch a degree, that they took
arms as in a common cause. Twenty thousand
horse together with a vast body of foot, soon as-
fembled at Tunis; and Barbarossa, by a proper
distribution of presents among them from time to
time, kept the ardour which had brought them
together from subsiding. But as he was too well
acquainted with the enemy whom he had to op-
pufe, to think that thele light troops could resist
tih hea y armed cavalry and veteran infantry
which com.,ofed the Imperial army, his chief con-
fidence was in the strength of the G iletta, and ill Lays iege
his body of Turkibh Ibldiers who were armed and to GCulett

B b a disciplined

43ooK V. disciplined after the European fashion. Six thou-
'" ^' sand of there, under the command of Sinan, a

'535. renegado Jew, the braved and molt experienced

of a21 his corsairs, he threw into that fort, which
the Emperor immediately iniefted. As Charlts
had the command of the sea, his camp was so
plentifully supplied not only.with the necessaries,
but with all the luxuries of life, that Muley-Hafcen,
who had not been accultomed to fee war carried
on with such order and magnificence, was filled
with admiration of the Emperor's power. His
troops, animated by his pretence, and confider-
ing it as meritorious to (hed their blood in tuch a
pious cause, contended with each other for the
posts of honour and danger. Three separate at-
tacks were concerted, and the Germans, Spa.
niards and Italians, having one of there commit.
ted to each of them, pushed them forward with
the eager courage which national emulation in-
spires. Sinan displayed refoliuion and skill be.
coming the confidence which his master had put
in him; the garrison performed the hard service
on which they were ordered with great fortitude.
But though he interrupted the besiegers by fre-
quent sallies; though the Moors and Arabs alarm-
ed the camp with their continual incursions; the
breaches soon became so considerable towards the
land, while the fleet battered the fortifications
which it could approach, with no less fury and

Takes it fucters, that an assault being given on all fides
JYly or5. at once, the place was taken by florm; Sinan,

with the remains of his garrison, retiring, after
an obstinate refifnance, over a shallow part of the
bay towards the city. By the reduction of the
Goletta, the Emperor becamcemafter of Barba-
roiff's fleet, confifling of eighty-feven gallies and
galliots, together with his arsenal, and three
hundred cannon mostly brass, which were planted
on the ramparts; a prodigious number in that

age,

age, and a remarkable proof of the firength of BOOK V.
the fort, as well as of the greatness of tie cor--
fair's power. The Emperor marched into the 535
Golctta through the breach, and turning to Muley-
Halcen who attended him, " Here," fays he,
" is a gate open to you, by which y ,u shall return
"to take poflefion of your dominins."

BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight

of the blow which he had received, did not,
however, lose courage, or abandon the defence
of Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend on
the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the
Moors and Arabs would liflain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with
his army, which amounted to fifty thousand men t,
towards the Imperial camp, and to decide the
fate of his kingdom by the issue of a battle. This
resolution he communicated to his principal offi-
cers, and representing to them the fatal con-
sequences which might follow, if ten thousand
Chrilian slaves, whom he had (hut up in the ci-
tadel, should attempt to mutiny during the absence
of the army, he proposed as a necelfary precaution
for the public fecuiity, to maflacre them * irhoi:t
mercy before he began his march. They all ap-
proved warmly of his intenlion to fight; but inlitd
as they were, in their piratical dt-predli(, ns, to
scenes of bloodshed and cruelty, the barbarity of
his proposal concerning the fiavts filled themr with
horror; and Btrbaronfa, rather from the dread of
iritating them, than swayed by moti'Vs of liu-
nlaniry, consented to Ipare the lives of tlie 1 ives.

Iv this time the Emlperor had begnn to ad- D" 't ts

v'aice towards TulIis ; and rthough his tiOO(s fIif- ,*i.
frced inconceivable liardliips i:: their m:irch over

t :'( jii:t c d 1I Fil , J)1 P ll i

'. , ,
p . 9 .,

B b 3 !.urliig

BOoKV. burning sands, detfitute of water, and expored

to the intolerable heat of the fun, they fooh came
S35- up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs,

emboldened by their vait superiority in number,
immediately rushed on to the attack with loud
ihouts, but their undisciplined courage did not
stand one moment the shock of regular bat-
talions; and though Barbarossa, with admirable
prelence of mind, and by exposing his own per-
son to the greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally
them, the rout became so general, that he him-
self was hurried along with them in their flight
back to the city. There he found every thing in
the utmost confusion ; some of the inhabitants
flying with their families and effects; others ready
to iet open their gates to the conqueror; the
Turkiflh oldiers preparing tu retreat; and the ci.
tadel, which in such circumfiances might have
afforded him Come refuge, already in the posses.
sion of the Chritian captives. These unhappy
men, rendered desperate by their situation, had
laid hold on the opportunity which Barbarossa
dreaded. As soon as his army was at some dif-
tance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose afiftance, knocking off their
fetters, and burfling open their prisons, they
overpowered the Turkish garrison, and turned
the artillery of the tort against their former maf-
ters. Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged, ex-
claimed sometimes againll the false companion of
his officers, and sometimes condemning his own
imprudent compliance uith their opinion, fled
precipitately to Bona.

tiniRiur- MiE AIWANWIILE Charles, latisfiec with the easy
r'i:'"F. and ahnotlt bloodless vidory which he had

gained, and advancing slowly with the precau-
tion inceffary in an enemy's country, did not yet
know the whole extent of his own good fortune.

But

But at lass, a messenger dispatched by the slaves BooKc V.
acquainted him with the success of their noble es- -
fort for the recovery of their liberty; and at the fame '535
time deputies arrived from the town, in order to
present him the keys of their gates, and to implore
his protection from military violence. While he
was deliberating concerning the proper measures
for this purpose, the soldiers fearing that they would
be deprived of the booty which they had ex-
peaed, broke suddenly, and without orders, into
the town, and began to kill and plunder without
distinCtion. It was then too late to restrain their
cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All the
outrages of which soldiers are capable in the ftiry
of a storm, all the excesses of which men can be
guilty when their passions are heightened by the
contempt and hatred which difference in manners
and religion ins iie, were committed. Above thirty
thousand of the innocent- inhabitants perished
on that unh-ppyday, and ten thousand were
carried ayay as slaves. Muley.Hafcen took pof-
fellion qs a throne surrounded with carnage, ab-
horred ly his fubjets on whom he had brought
such calamiti.-s, and pitied even by those whose
rashness had--been the occasion of them. The
Emperor lamented the fatal accident which had
stained th' lustre of his victory; and amidst such
a (cene of horror there was but one fpentacle
that afforded him any fatisfaclion. Ten thousand
Christian slaves, among whom were several per-
sons of diftintion, met him as he entered the tow, ;
and falling on their knees, thanked and blessed
him as their deliverer.

AT the fame time that Charles accomplifled Restore the

his promise to the Moorish King of re-efiablilh txisth.Ki,.
ing him in his dominions, he did not neglect what
was necessary for bridling the power of the Afri-
can coi fairs, for the security of his own fubijet s,

B b 4 and

BooK V. and for the interest of the Spanish crown: In
'y-^"' order to gain there ends, he concluded a tieaty

'S35. with Muley-Hafcen on the following conditions;

that he should hold the kingdom of fulis in fee
of the crown of Spain, and do homage to the
Emperor as his liege lord ; that all the Chriltian
slaves now within his dominions, of whatever na-
tion, should be set at liberty without ranfomr
that no subjet of the Emperor's should for the
future be detained in servitude; that no Turkilh
corsair should be admitted into the ports of his
dominions; that free trade, together with the
public exercise of the Chriitian religion, (hould
be allowed to all the Emperor's filbjeds; that
the Emperor should not only retain the Goletta,
but all the other sea ports in the kingdom which
were fortified, should be put into his hands; that
Muley-Hafcen should pay annually twelve thou-
sand crowns for the fubiiftence of the Spanish
garrison in the Goletta; that he Ihould enter into
no alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies,
and fliould present to him every year, as an ac-
knowledgment of his vassalage, fix Moorish horses,
and as many hawks v. Having thus fettled the
affairs of Africa; chastised the insolence of the cor-
fairs ; secured a safe retreat for the (hips of his sub-
jets, and a proper itation for his own fleets, on
that coast fronm hich he was most infested by pi-
ratical depredations ; Charles embarked again
for Europe, the tempefious eather, and fickners
Augll 7. among his troops, not permitting him to pursue

Balbarofia x,

v Du Monts Corps Diplanmat. ii. !z2r Summonte HifR.
di Napoli. iv. 81).

x Joh. Etropii Di:rium Fxpedition. Tunetana ap. Scard.

v. ii. p. 3.0 &c. Jovii Hillor. lib. xxxiv. 153, &c. San-
dov. ii lr,, &c. \ e;tot. litl. de Cheval. de M'althe. Epif-
tres dto Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Lellefor, p. 19,
! 0, &'C.

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~n

BY this expedition, the merit of which seems BOOK V.

to have been estimated in that age, rather by the I -
apparent generosity of the undertaking, the mag- Th'e3ry
nificence wherewith it was conduaed, and the whiclhthe
success which crowned it, than by the importance "C9uircd'
of the consequences that attended it, the Emperor
attained a greater height of glory than at any other
period of his reign. Twenty thousand slaves
whom he freed from bondage, either by his arms,
or by his treaty with Muley-Hafcen Y, each of
whom he cloathed and furnished with the means
of returning to their respective countries, spread
all over Europe the fame of their benefactor's
munificence, extolling his power and abilities with
the exaggeration flowing from gratitude and ad-
miration. In comparison with him, the other Mo-
narchs of Europe made an inconsiderable figure;
he, as the chief prince in Christendom, appeared
to be concerned for the honour of the Christian
rame, for the publick security and welfare, while
they were attentive only to their private and par-
ticular interests.

Y Summonte Hist. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

T HE

# BOOK VI.

T H.E
HISTORY

OP THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VI.

BooK VI. UNFORTUNATELY for the reputation of
'~O- .") Francis I. among his contemporaries, his con-
Tbhe^ ces du&, at this junlure, appeared a perfet contrast
of a new to that of his rival, as he laid hold on the oppor.
tweenbthe tunity afforded him, by the Emperor's having turn-
Emperor ed his whole force against the common enemy, to
ad Francis. revive his pretensions in Italy, and to plunge Eu-

rope into a new war. The treaty of Cambray, as
has been observed, did not remove the causes ol
enmity between the two contending Princes; it co.
vered up, but did not extinguish the flames of dif
cord. Francis, in particular, who waited with imr
patience for a proper occasion of recovering the re.
putation as well as territories which he had loft, con

tinuec

tinued to carry on his negociations in different BooK VI.
courts against the Emperor, taking the utmost V
pains to heighten the jealousy vhich many Princes 153S
entertained of his power or designs, and to inrpire
the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: Among
others, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though
indebted to Charles for the poffeflion of the dutchy
of Milan, had received it on such hard conditions,
as rendered him not only a vassal of the Empire,
but a tributary dependant upon the Emperor. The
honour of having married the Emperor's niece, did
not reconcile him to this ignominious slate of sub-
je¢ion, which became so intolerable even to Sfor-
za, a weak and poor spirited Prince, that he lift-
ened with eagerness to the first proposals Francis
made of rescuing him from the yoke. These pro-
pofals were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or
Merveille, as he is called by the French historians,
a Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and soon
after, in order to carry on the negotiation with
greater advantage, Merveille was sent to Milan,
on pretence of visiting his relations, but with fe-
cret credentials from Francis as his envoy. In this
character he was received by Sforza. But notwith-
standing his care to keep that circumstance conceal-
ed, Charles fulpetIing, or having received informa-
tion of it, remonfirated and threatned in such a high
tone, that the Duke and his ministers, equally inti-
midated, gave the world immediately a most infa-
mous proof of their servile fear of offending the
EtRpe:or. Having decoyed Merveille, who had
neither the prudence nor temper which the station
wherein he was placed required, into a quarrel, in
Svhich he happened to kill his antagonist, one of
the Duke's domestics, they inflantly commanded
him to be seized, to be tried for that crime, and
to be beheaded. Francis, astonished at this viola- Dec. 1533
'on of a character held sacred among the mait un-

civilized

B6OK VI. civilized nations, and enraged at the insult offered
'--'V to the dignity of his crown, threatened Sf;,rza with

535- the effects of his indignation, and complained to

the Emperor, whom he confidered as the real au.
thor of that unexampled outrage. But meeting
with no satisfaction from either, he appealed to all
the Princes of Europe, and thought himself now
entitled to take vengeance for an injury, which it
would have been indecent and pusillanimous to let
pass with impunity.

Francis def- BEING thus furnished with a pretext for begin.
titute of ning a war, on which he had already resolved, he

aie multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other

Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by
unforeseen events. After having sacrificed the
honour of his house by the marriage of his son
with Catharine of Medici, in order to gain Cle-
ment, the death of that Pontiff had deprived him
of all the advantages which he expeced to derive
from his friendship. Paul, his fuccefTor, tho' at-
tached by inclination to the Imperial interest,
seemed determined to maintain the neutrality suit-
able to his character as the common father of the
contending Princes. The King of England, oc-
cupied with domeflic cares and projects, declined,
for once, engaging in the affairs of the continent,
and refused to afiifl Francis, unless he would imi-
tate his example, in throwing off the Papal fupre-

Hi, eqoci- macy. These disappointments led him to folicir,
atir,, i, with greater earneflnefs, the aid of the Protestant
Protlt. Princes associated by the league of Smalkalde.

That he might the more easily acquire their confi-
dence, he endeavoured to accomodate himftlf
to their predominant patlion, zeal for their religi-
ous tenets. He affected a wonderful moderation
with regard to the points in dispute; he permitted
Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain his len-

timents

timents concerning rome of the most important ar- BooK VI.
tides, in terms not far different from those used "
by the Proteitantsa; he even condescended to in- '153'
vite Melandhon, whose gentle manners and pacific
spirit diflinguifhed him among the Reformers, to
visit Paris, that by his alliftance he might concert
the moif proper mealures for reconciling the con-
tending lects, which To unhappily divided the
church b. These conceflions muff be confidered
rather as arts of policy, than the result of conviction;
for whatever impreflion the new opinions in reli-
gion made on his filers, the Queen of Navarre
and Dutchess of Feirara, the gaiety of Fraucis's
own temper, and his love of pleafire, allowed him
little leisure to examine theological controversies.

BUT soon after he loft all the fruits or this dif- Irritate,

ingenuous artifice, by a flep very inconsistent with the"m
his declarations to the German Princes. This ftep,
however, the prejudices of the age, and the religi-
ous sentiments of his own fubjedts, rendered it ne-
ceffary for him to take. His close union with the
King of England, an excommunicated heretick;
his frequent negotiations with the German Protef-
tants; but above all, his giving publick audience
to an envoy from Sultan Solyman, had excited
violent fuifpicions concerning the lincerity of his at-
tachmient to religion. To have attacked the Em-
peror, who, on all occasions, made high pretenli-
ons to zeal in defence of the Catholick faith, and
at the very junlture, when he was preparingr for
his expedition against Earbaroffa, which was then
ci)lilcred as a pious enterprize, could not have
tailed to confirm such unfavourable fentinentts with

a Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &C. Slicl. H ill.
1'7, 183. Seckend. lib. iii. 103. b CII ralii Vila
Phl. MlanCthonis, izmo, lag. i655 p. ri.

regard

BooK VI. regard to Francis, and called on him to vindicate

_'-- himself by some extraordinary demonstration of
'S35. his reverence for the eftabliihed doctrines of the

church. The indiscreet zeal of some of his fubjefts,
who had imbibed the Protestant opinions, furnish.
ed him with such an occasion as he desired. They
had affixed to the gates of the Louvre, and other
public places, papers containing indecent rcfleati.
ons on the doctrines and rites of the Popish church.
Six of the persons concerned in this rash action were
discovered and seized. The King, in order to a-
vert the judgments which it was supposed their
blasphemies might draw down upon the nation, ap.
pointed a Iblemn procession. The holy sacrament
was carried through the city in great pomp; Fran-
cis walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in
his hand; the princes of the blood supported the
canopy over it; the nobles marched in order be-
hind. In the presence of this numerous assembly,
the King, accustomed to express himself on every
subject in strong and animated language, declared
that if one of his hands were infeced with heresy,
he would cut it off with the other, and would not
spare even his own children, if found guilty of
that crime. As a dreadful proof of his being in
earnest, the fix unhappy persons were publickly
burnt before the procession was finished, with cir-
cumfiances of the moR Ihocking barbarity attend-
ing their execution c.

They refuse THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled
tojoinhim with resentment and indignation at the cruelty

with which their brethren were treated, could not
conceive Francis to be sincere, when he offered to
protet in Germany those very tenets, which he

c Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hilf. 175,
&c.

persecuted

persecuted with such rigour in his own dominions; BooK VI.
so that all Bellay's art and'eloquence in vindicating '-
his master, and apologizing for his condut, made '535
but little impreflion upon them. Besides,. the
Emperor, who hitherto had never employed vio-
lence againfi the doctrines of the Reformers, nor
even given them much molestation in their pro-
grefs, was now bound by the agreement at Ratif-
bon, not to diflurb those who had embraced the
new opinions; and the Proteflants wifely confi-
dered this as a more certain and immediate fecu-
rity, than the precarious and distant hopes with
which Francis endeavoured to allure them. The
manner too in which he had behaved to his allies
at the peace of Cambray, was too recent to be
forgotten, and did not encourage others to rely-
much on his friendship or generosity. Upon all
these accounts, the Protestant Princes refuted to.
aflift the French King in any hostile attempt agai.nt
the Emperor. The Elector of Saxony, the most.
zealous among them, in order to avoid giving any
umbrage to Charles, would not permit Melanc.
thon to visit the court of France, although that,
Reformer, flattered perhaps by the invitation of
so great a Monarch, or hoping that his presence
there might be of signal advantage to the Protef-
tant cause, discovered a strong inclination to un-
dertake the journey d.

BUT though none of the many Princes who en- The French
vied or dreaded the power of Charles, would fe- arny ad-
cond Francis's efforts in order to reduce and cir- waids ltly.
cumfcribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded his
army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy.
As his sole pretext for taking arms was, that he
might chastise the Duke of Milan for his insolent
and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might

' (Camnrarii Vita Melan. 14z, &c. 415. Scckend.lib iii. 107.

have

BoK VI. have been expected that the whole weight of his
-ve-' n vengeance was to have fallen on his territories.
'535 But on a sudden, and at their very commence.

ment, the operations of war took another directi.
on. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the leait
aftive and able Princes of the line from which he
descended, had married Beatrix of Portugal, the
Empress's filter. By her great talents, she soon
acquired an absolute ascendant over her husband;
and proud of her affinity to the Emperor, or allu-
red by the magnificent promises with which he
flattered her ambition, she formed an union be.
tween the Duke and the Imperial court, extremely
inconsistent with that neutrality, which wife policy
as well as the situation of his dominions had hi-
therto induced him to observe in all the quarrels

Takes pof- between the contending Monarchs. Francis was
Duke ofs ,abundantly sensible of the distress to which he
voy's domi- might be exposed, ii when he entered Italy, he
Dions. should leave behind him the territories of a Prince,

devoted To obsequiously to the Emperor, that he
had sent his eldest son to be educated in the court
of Spain, as a kind of hostage for his fidelity.
Clement the Seventh, who had represented this
danger in a strong light during his interview with
Francis at Marseilles, suggested to him, at the fame
time, the proper method of guarding againii it,
having advised him to begin his operations againtl
the Milanese, by taking possession of Savoy and
Piedmont, as the only certain way of fectring a
communication with his own dominions. Fraal'ib,
highly irritated at the Duke on many accounts,
particularly for haing supplied the Conllable
Bourbon with the money, which enabled him
to levy that body of troops which ruined the
French army in the fatal battle of Pavia, was
not unwilling to let him now feel both how
deeply he resented, and how severely he could
punir these injuries. Nor did he want several

pretexts

pretexts that would give rome colour of equity BOOK VI.
to the violence which he intended. The ter-
ritorics of France and Savoy lying contiguous '135
to each other, and intermingled in many placeE,
various disputes, unavoidable in such a situation,
subsisted concerning the limits of their refpeaive
property; and betides, Francis had, in right of
his mother Louise of Savoy, large claims upon the
Duke her brother, for her (hare in their father's fuc-
cetlion. Being unwilling, however, to begin hoifi-
lities without rome cause of quarrel more specious
than there pretensions, many of which were obfo-
lete, and others dubious, he demanded permiflion
to march through Piedmont in his way to the
Milanese, hoping that the Duke, from an excess of
attachment to the Imperial interest, might refute
this request, and thus give a greater appearance of
justice to all his operations against him. But, if
we may believe the historians of Savoy, better in-
formed with regard to this particular than those of
France, the Duke readily, and with a good grace,
granted what it was not in his power to deny, pro-
mifing free passage to the French troops as was
desired; so that Francis, as the only method now
left ofjuftifying the measures which he determined
to take, was obliged to insist for full satisfaction
with regard to every thing that either the crown
of France or his mother Louise could demand of
the house of Savoy e. Such an evasive answer as
might have been expeEted, being made to this re-
quilition, the French army under the admiralBrion
poured at once into the Duke's territories at dif-
ferent places. The countries of Brefle and Bugey,
united at that time to Savoy, were over-run in a
moment. Most of the towns in the dutchy of Sa-
voy opened their gates at the approach of the ene-

c Hiltoire Genealogique de Savoye, par Guichenon.
z tom. fol. L;on. i Go, i. 639, &c.

VOL. II. C c my;

BOOK VI. my; a few which attempted to make resistance

-- were easily forced; and before the end of the
1535' campaign, the Duke saw himfelfttripped of all

his dominions, but the province of Piedmont, in
which there were not many places in a condition
to be defended.

The city f To compleat the Puke's misfortunes, the city
coversits of Geneva, the sovereignty of which heclaimed,
liberty. and in some degree poffcffed, threw off his yoke,

and its revolt drew along with it the lo1s of the
adjacent territories Geneva was, at that time, an
Imperial city; and though under the diret doni.
nion of itsown bishops, and the remote sovereignty
of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of its internal con-
flitution was purely republican, being governed
by syndics and a council chosen by the citizens.
From these diltint and often cliihing jurif-
didions, two opposite parties took their rife, and
had long fubfiited in tle ltate; the one composed
of the advocates for the privileges of the com-
munity, assumed the name of Eignotz, or confe-
derates in defence of liberty; and branded the
other, which supported the episcopal or ducal pre-
rogatives, with the name of Mamnelukes or slaves.
'9<3%. At length, the Proteflant opinions beginning to

spread among the citizens, inspired such as em-
braced them with that bold enterprising fpiiit
which always accompanied or was naturally pio.
duced by them in their firfl operations. As both the
Duke and Bishop were from interest, from prejut
dice, and from political considerations, violent ene-
mies of the Reformation, all the new converts
joined with warmth the paty of the Eignotz; and
zeal for religion, mingling with the love of liberty,
added strength to that generous passion. The rage
and animosity of two fadions, fhui up wirhin the
fame walls, occasioned frequent infulrredti ns,

which

which terminating mptlly to the advantage of the BOOK VI.
friends of liberty, they daily gained ground. --v-

*,35.

THE Duke and Bishop, forgetting their an-

cient contests aboutjurifdidtion, had united against
their common enemies, and each attacked them
with his proper weapons. The Bishop excommu-
nicated the people of Geneva as guilty of a
double crime; of impiety, in apoflatifing fromn
the established religion ; and of sacrilege, in in-
vading the rights of his fee. The Duke attacked
them as rebels against their la fiul Prince, and at-
tempted to render himself master of the city, first
by furpiife, and then by open force. The ci- '534.
tizens, despising the thunder of the Bilhop's cen-
fures, boldly atferted their independence against
the Duke ; and partly by their own valour, partly
by the powerful assistance which they received
from their allies, the canton of Berne, together
with some small supplies both of men and money,
secretly furnished by the King of France, they
defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied with having
repulsed him, or with remaining always upon the
defensive themselves, they now took advantage
of the Duke's inability to resist them, while over-
whelmed by the armies of France, and seized fe-
veral castles and places of strength which he pof-
fefld in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thusde-
livering the city from these odious monumtnts of
its former subjection, and rendering the public
liberty more secure for the future. At the farme
time'the canton of Berne invaded and conquered
the Paijis de Vaud, to which it had some preten-
sions The canton of Friburgh, though zealously
attached to the Catholic religion, and having no
fubjcet of contest with the Duke, laid hold on
part of the spoils of that unfortunate Prince.
A great portipn of there conqufts or usurpations

C C 2 being

Boo.K Vl. being still retained by the two cantons, add con.
'-- ' fiderably to their power, and have become the

;53jS moit valuable part of their territories Geneva,

notwithstanding many schemes and enterprises of
the Dukes of Savoy to re-establish their dominion
there, Rill keeps polfelfion of its independence,
and in coinfequence of that blefing, has artained
a degree of consideration, wealth and elegance,
which it could not otherwise have reached t.

The em- AMIDST inch a fucceflion of difafirous events,
peror unable the Duke of Savoy had no other resource blt
Duke of the Emperor's protection, which, upon his return
Savoy. from Tunis, he demanded with the most ear.

nest importunity and as his misfortunes were
occasioned chiefly by his attachment to the Im.
perial interest, he had ajuft title to immediate as.
fiftance. Charles, however, was not in a con.
dition to support him with that vigour and dispatch
which the exigency of his affairs called for. M(ft
of the troops employed in the African expedition,
having been raised for that service alone, were
disbanded as Toon as it was finished; the veteran
forces under Antonio de Leyva were scarce liffi-
cient for the defence of the Milanese; and the
Emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his
vast efforts against the Infidels.

Oa. 4. BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned,
Death of
DStorz according to some hiRtorians, by the terror of a
Dlkeof French invasion,. which had twice been fatal t
Milan: his .family, afforded the Emperor full Itifure t

prepare for action. By this unexpected ceen'
the nature of the war, :ind. the caufls of discord
were totally changed. Francis's first pretext so

f His. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. t2 . Utr. i':

p ('9. ilt. de la Reformation tie uifle, par Rnou.::
Gen. 1728. tom. iv. p. 294, &c. t(11. v. p. 21z, &c. Nici:
rIl liellay, 181. ak

<.;ikl.

taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the BooK VI.
insult offered to the dignity of his crown, was at -
once cut off; but, as that Prince died without 1535.
issue, all Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan,
which he had yielded only to Sforza and his
polterity, returned back to him in full force. As
the recovery of the Milanese was the favourite
objec of that Monarch, he instantly renewed his
claim to it; and if he had supported his preren- Franci.'s
sions by ordering the powerful arnmy quartered in preterfon
Savoy to advance without losing a moment to- dutchy.
wards Milan, he could scarce have failed to secure
the important point of poffeflion. But Francis,
who became daily less enterprising as he advanced
in years, and who was overawed at tome times
into an excess of caution by the remembrance of
his past misfortunes, endeavoured to eftablith his
rights by negotiation, not by arms; and from a
timid moderation, fatal in all great affairs, ne-
gleated to improve the favourable opportunity
which presented itself. Charles, meanwhile, in
quality of Sovereign, took poffiefion of the dut-
chy, as a vacant fief of the Empire; and while
Francis endeavoured to explain and assert his title
to it, by arguments and memorials, using every
art in order to reconcile the Italian powers to the
thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy, his ri-
val was silently taking effectual steps to prevent it.
The Emperor, however, was very careful not to
discover too early any intention of this kind; but
teeming to admit the equity of Francis's claim, he
appeared solicitous only about giving him posses-
filn in such a manner as might not diflurb the
ieace of Europe, or overturn the balance of
power in Italy, which the politicians of that coun-
!ry were so fond of preserving. By this artifice
i!e deceived Francis, and gained so mu:ch co.nfi-
'ence with the reft of Europe, that atmoa witih-
'iit incurring any suspicion, he involved the afliir

C c 3 i

BooK Vt. in new difficulties, and protracted the negotiations
'-----' at pleasure. Sometimes he proposed to grant the

535- investiture of Milan to the Duke of Orleans,

Francis's second son, Sometimes to the Duke of
Angoulenie, his third son; as the views and in-
clinations of the French court varied, he tranf.
ferred his choice alternately from the one to the
other, with such profound and well conduted
diflimulation, that neither Francis nor his mini.
ilers seem to have penetrated his real intention;
and all military operations were entirely suspended,
as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly
into poifeffion of what they demanded.

S536 DURING the interval gained in this manner,

Cha.rlresa Charles prevailed on the states both of Sicily and
for war. Naples, who thought themselves greatly honoured

by the presence of their fovereigrr on his return
from Tunis, and wto were no lels pleated with
the apparent difinterelttdnets of his expedition
into Africa, than dazzled by the success which
had attended his arms, to vote him such liberal
subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to
levy a body of Germans, and to take every other
proper precaution for executing or supporting the
measures on which he had determined. Bellay,
the French envoy in Germany, having discovered
the intention of raising troops in that country, not-
withstanding all the pretexts employed in or.
der to conceal it, first alarmed his master with
this evident proof of the Emperor's insincerity g.
But Francis was so poffiflTed at that time with the
rage of negotiation, in all the artifices and refine-
ments of which his rival far surpassed him, th;it
inflead of beginning his military operations, and
pushing them with vigour, or seizing the Milanese
before the Imperial army was aflembled, he satis

c Mern. dc Bellay, I q.

sied

tied himself with making new offers to the Em- BOOK VI
peror, in order to procure the investiture by his vo- T~-
luntary deed. His offers were, indeed, so liberal i536.
and advantageous, that if ever Charles had in-
tended to grant his demand, he could not have
rejected them with decency. He dextroufly eluded
them by declaring that, until he consulted the
Pope in person, he could not take his final refo-
lution with regard to a point which so nearly con-
cerned the peace of Italy. By this evasion he
gained rome farther time for ripening the lchemes
he had in view.

THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome, The nm.
and made his public entry into that city with ex- pCor en-

ter. Rome,

traordinary pomp; but it beingfound necessary to April 6.
remove the ruins of an ancient temple of peace,
in order to widen one of the streets, through
which the cavalcade had topafs, all the hiltorians
take notice of this trivial circumfiance, which
they are fond to interpret as an omen of the
bloody war that followed Charles, it is certain,
had by this time banished all thoughts of peace;
and at last threw off the mark, with which he
had To long covered his designs from the court of
France, by a declaration of his tentiments no less
singular than explicit. The French ambassadors
having in their master's name demanded a de-
finitive reply to his propositions concerning the
invefiiture of Milan, Charles promised to give it
next day in presence of the Pope and Cardinals
assembled in full consistory. These being accor :vs public
dingly met, and all the foreign amhaffadrs in- i'T've
vited to attend, the Emperor flood up, and ad- Franti.
drefling himself to the Pope, expatiated for ornme
time on the sincerity of his own wifhit so. the
peace of Chriftendonm, and his abhorrt nee i f wa r,
the miseries of which he enumerated at great
length, with fludied and elaborate oratory; he
complained that all his endeavours to prefnrx e the

C c 4 tranquillity

BOO'K VI. tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been defeated
.-v' by the restless and unjust ambition of the French

1536. King; that even during his minority he had proofs

of the unfriendly and hostile intentions of that
Monarch; that afterwards, he had openly at.
tempted to wrest from him the Imperial crown
which belonged to him by a title no lefsjuft than
natural; that he had next invaded his kingdom of
Navarre; that not satisfied with this,hehad attacked
his territories as well as those of his allies both
in Italy and the Low-Countries; that when the
valour of the Imperial troops, rendered irre.
fiftible by the protetion of the Almighty, had
checked his progress, ruined his armies, and seized
his person, he continued to pursue by deceit what
he had undertaken with injustice; that he had vio-
lated every article in the treaty of Madrid to which
he owed his liberty, and as soon as he returned to
his dominions took measures for rekindling the war
which that pacification had happily extinguished;
that when new misfortunes compelled him to sue
again for peace at Cambray, he concluded and
observed it with great insincerity; that soon there-
after he had formed dangerous conne&ions with
the heretical Princes in Germany, and incited them
to diRurb the tranquillity of the Empire; that now
he had driven the Duke of Savoy, his brother-in-
law and ally, out of the greater part of his terri-
tories; that after injuries so often repeated, and
amidst so many sources ofdifcord, all hope of amity
or concord becamedefperate ; and though he was
still willing to grant the investiture of Milan to one
of the Princes of France, there was little probabi-
lity of that event's taking place, as Francis, on the
one hand, would not content to what he judged
neceflary for securing the tranquillity of Europe,
nor, on the other, could he think it reasonable or
safe to give him the unconditional poffeflion of all
that he demanded Let us not, however, added he,

continulle

continue wantonly to (fed the blood of our innocent BOOK VI.
fubjedts let us decide the quarrel man to man, with - -'
what arms he pleases to choose, in our (hirts, on an Chl 36
island, a bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a ri- him to in-
ver; let the dutchy of Burgundy be ptt in deposit gle combat.
on his part, and that of Milan on mine; these (hall
be the prize of the conqueror; and after that, let
the united forces of Germany, Spain, and France,
be employed to humble the power of the Turk,
and to extirpate heresy out of Chriflendom. But if
he, by declining this method of terminating our
lifferences, renders war inevitable, nothing shall
;Iivert me from prosecuting it to such extremity,
as (hall reduce one of us to be the poorest gentle-
man in his own dominions. Nor do I fear that
it will be on me this misfortune (hall fall; I en-
ter upon action with the fairest profped of fuc..
cess; thejuftice of my cause, the union of my
l;bje6ds, the number and valour of my troops, the
experience and fidelity of my generals, all com-
bine to ensure it. Of all these advantages, the
King of France is destitute; and were my resources
no more certain, and my hopes of victory no bet-
ter founded than his, I would instantly throw
myself at his feet, and with folded hands and a
rope about my neck, implore his mercy h.

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered
with an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the
greatest vehemence of expreflion and geiture.
The French ambafladors, who did not fully com-
prehend his meaning, as he spoke in the Spanifl
tongue, were totally dirconcerted, and at a lols
,hw they thould aniver such an unexpedtcd in-
tutive; when one of them began to vindicate
lis rmaer's conduct, Charles interposcd abrupt-
ly, and would not permit him to proceed. The
h Bellalv,l9 9. Sandov. I-iflor. dcl Einpcr. II. -,i.

t',W.,

BooK VI. Pope, without entering into any particular detail,
'- -' satisfied himself with a short but pathetic recom.

1536. mendation of peace, together with an offer of

employing his sincere endeavours, in order to pro-
cure that blefling to Chiriftendom; and the as.
fembly broke up in the greatest astonishment at the

Themotives extraordinary scene which had been exhibited. In
oi'this rail no part of his conduct, indeed, did Charles ever
meaue. cdeviate so widely from his general charafter. In.

itead of that prudent recolletion, that compoeed
and regular deportment so ftrilly attentive to
decorum, and so admirably adapted to conceal
his own passions, for which he was at all other
times conspicuous, he appears on this occasion
before the most august afrembly in Europe, boast-
ing of his own power and exploits with insolence;
inveighing against his enemy with indecency;
and challenging him to combat with an ofentati-
ous valour, more becoming a champion in ro-
mance, than the first Monarch in Christendom.
But the well known and powerful operation of
continued prosperity, and of exaggerated praise,
even upon the firmest minds, sufficiently account
for this teeming inconfiflency. After having
compelled Solyman to retreat, and having ttrip-
ped Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles began to
confider his arms as invincible. He had been en-
tertained, ever since his return from Africa, with
repeated scenes of triumphs and public rejoicings;
the orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant
at that time in Furope, had exhausted their ge-
nius in panegyric, to which the astrologers added
magnificent promires of a more splendid fortune
still in store. Intoxicated with all these, he for-
got his ufilal reserve and moderation, and w'a
unable to restrain this extravagant sally of vanity,
which became the more remarkable, by being
both so uncommon and so public.

r t

HE h'imself seems to have been immediately gooK VI.

;enfible o: the impropriety of his behaviour, and -.--
when the French ambassadors demanded next day ' 36'
a more clear explanation of what he had said
concerning the combat, he told them, that they
were not to confider his proposal as a formal chal-
lenge to their master, but as an expedient for
preventing bloodshed; he endeavoured to soften
other expreflions in his discourse; and spoke in
terms full of refpest towards Francis: But though
this flight apology was far from being sufficient to
remove the offence which had been given, Fran-
cis, by an unaccountable infatuation, continued
to negotiate, as if it had fill been poflible to bring
their differences to a period by an amicable com-
position. Charles, finding him so eager to run
into the snare, favoured the deception, and by
teeming to liften to his proposals gained time to
prepare for the execution of his own designs ;.

AT last, the Imperial army assembled on the Charles in-

frontiers of the Milanese, to the amount of forty rde.
thousand foot, and ten thousand horse, while that Fce
of France encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont,
being greatly inferior in number, and weakened
by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom
Charles artfully persuaded the Popish cantons to
recall, that they might not serve againfl the May6.
Duke of Savoy their ancient ally. The French
general, not daring to rifque a battle, retired as
soon as the Imperialifis advanced. The Empe-
ror put himself at the head of his forces, which
the marquis del Guafto, the Duke of Alva, and
Ferdinand de Gnzzlga commanded under him,
iliough the supreme direction of the whole was
committed to Antonio de Leyva, whose abilities
and experience justly entitled him to that dillinc-

i Mem. de Bellay, o05, &c.

tion.

BooK vr. tion. Charles loon discovered his intention not
<v-J to confine his operations to the recovery of Pied-
1536. mont and Savoy, but to push forward and invade

the southern provinces of France. This scheme
he had long meditated, and had long been taking
measures for executing it with such vigour as
might ensure success. He had remitted large
tums to his sifter, the governess of the Low-
Countries, and to his brother the King of the
Romans, infiruding them to levy all the forces in
their power, in order to form two separate bodies,
the one to enter France on the fide of Picardy,
the other on the fide of Champagne; while he,
with the main army, fell upon the opposite fron-
tier of the kingdom. Trusting to these valt pre-
parations, he thought it impoflible that Francis
could resist so many unexpeced attacks, on such
different quarters; and begun his enterprize with
such confidence of its happy issue, that he desired
Paul Jovius the historian, to make a large pro.
vision of paper fuffcient to record the vicories
which he was going to acquire.

His ministers and generals, instead of enter-

taining the fame sanguine hopes, represented to
him in the tironget terms the danger of leading
his troops so far from his own territories, to
such a diflance from his magazines, and into pro-
vinces which did not yield sufficient fiubfitence
for their own inhabitants. They entreated him
to confider the inexhaustible resources of France
in maintaining a defensive war, and the ac-
tive zeal with which a gallant nobility would
serve a Prince whom they love.d, in repelling
the enemits of their country; they recalled to
his remembrance the fatal miscarriage of Bour-
bon and Pefcura, when they ventured upon the
fame enterprize under ciirctumances which seem-
ed as certainly to promise success; the marquis

del

del Guafto in particular, fell on his knees, and BOOK VI.
conjured him to abandon the undertaking as def- -
perate. But many circumstances combined in lead- 1536.
ing Charles to disregard all their remonfirances.
He could seldom be brought, on any occasion,
to depart from a resolution which he had once
taken ; he was too apt to under-rate and despise
the talents of his rival the King of France, which
differed so widely from his own; he was blinded
by the presumption which accompanies prosperity;
a!d relied, perhaps, in some degree, on the pro-
phecies which predicted the increase of his own
grandeur. He not only adhered obstinately to
his own plan, but determined to advance towards
France without waiting for the reduction of any
part of Piedmont, except such towns as were ab-
folutely necessary for preserving his communica-
tion with the Milanese.

THe marquis de Saluces, to whom Francis had Recovers

entrusted the command of a frall body of troops PDueof'e.
left for the defence of Piedmont, rendered this voy's iomi-
more easy than he had any reason to expect.Dnio'
That nobleman, educated in the court of France,
distinguished by continual marks of the king's fa-
vour, and honoured so lately with a charge of
such importance, suddenly, and without any pro-
vcati,,n or pretext of disgust, revolted from his
benefactor. His motives to this treacherous ac-
tion, were as childish as the deed itfrel was base.
Being firongly possessed with a uperflitious faith
in divination and astrology, he believed with full
aflurance, that the fatal period of the French na-
tion was at hand; that on its ruins the Emperor
would establish an universal monarchy; that
iherefore lie cught to follow the dictates of pru-
d nee, in att.ching himself to his rising fortune,
and would incur jio blame for deserting a Prince

whom

BooK VI. whom heaven had devoted to deiRruaion k. His
"v"' treason became still more odious, by his employ-

536. ing that very authority with which Francis had

inverted him, in order to open the kingdom to
his enemies. Whatever was proposed or under-
taken by the officers under his command for the
defence of their conquests, he rejeced or defeat.
ed. Whatever properly belonged to himself as
commander in chief, to provide or perform for
that purpose, he totally neglected. In this man.
ner he rendered towns even of the greatest con-
sequence untenable, by leaving them destitute
either of provisions, or ammunition, or artillery,
or a sufficient garrison; and the Imperialists mud
have reduced Piedmont in as short a time as was
necessary to march through it, if Montpezat, the
governor of Fotfano, had not, by an extraordi-
nary effort of courage and military conduct, de-
tained them almost a month before that incon.
fiderable place.

Francis', BY this meritorious and seasonable service, he
plan for the gained his master sufficient time for assembling
defence of
hi, kingdom. his forces, and for concerting a system of defence

againfl a danger which he now saw to be inevi-
table. Francis fixed upon the only proper and
effectual plan for defeating the invasion of a pow.
erful enemy; and his prudence in choofing this
plan, as well as his perseverance in executing it,
deserve the greater praise, as it was equally con-
trary to his own natural temper, and to the ge-
nius of the French nation. He determined to re-
main altogether upon the defensive , never to ha.
zard a battle, or even a great flirmifh, without
certainty of success; to fortify his camps in a re-
gular manner ; to throw garrifons'only into towns
of great strength; to deprive the enemy of fubfi:
tence, by laying waste the country before them;

k Bellay, 221, a. z26, 1

and to save the whole kingdom, by sacrificing one BooK VI.
of its provinces. The execution of this plan he "
committed entirely to the marechal Montmoren- Entr53
cy who was the author of it; a man wonderfully Montmo-

., rency with

fitted by nature for such a trust. Haughty, e- the executi-
vere, confident in his own abilities, and deipifing on of it,
thole of other men incapable of being diverted
fiom any refolutiorl by remonstrances or intreaties;
and in prosecuting rny scheme, regardless alike of
love and of pity.

MONTMORENCY, made choice of a strong Heencamrs

camp, under the walls of Avignon, at the conflu- at Avignol.
ence of the Rhofne and Durance, one of which
plentifully supplied his troops with all necessaries
from the inland provinces, and the other covered
his camp on that fide, where it was most probable
the enemy would approach. He laboured with
unwearied industry to render the fortifications of
this camp impregnable, and assembled there a con-
fiderable army, though greatly inferior to that of
the enemy ; while the king with another body.of
troops encamped at Valence,.higher up the Rholne.
Marseilles and Aries were the only towns he
thought it neceflary to defend; the former, in
order to retain the command of the sea; the lat-
ter, as the barrier of the province of Languedoc;
and each of there he furnished with numerousgar-
rifons of his best troops, commanded by officers, on
whose fidelity and valour he could rely. T'he in-
habitants of the other towns as well as of the open
country, were compelled to abandon their houles,
and were conduded to the mountains, to the
camp at Avignon, or to the inland provinces.
The fortifications of such places as might have
afforded Ihelter or defence to the enemy, were
thrown down. Corn, forage and provisions of
every kind, were caried away or destroycd;
all the mills and ovens were ruined, and the
wells filled up or rendered useless. The dcv'af-

tatiun

Booc VI.tation extended from the Alps to Marseilles, and
'"v ' from the sea to the confines of Dauphine; nor

536. does history afford any instance among civilized

nations, in which this cruel expedient for the
public safety was employed with the fame rigour.

Chres en- MEANWHILE, the Emperor arrived with the
venc. van of his army on the frontiers of Provence

and was still So possessed with confidence of fuc.
cess, that during a few days, when he was obli.
ged to halt until the reft of his troops came up,
he began to divide his future conqucfts among
his officers; and as a new incitement to serve
him with zeal, gave them liberal promises of of.
sices, lands and honours in France 1. The face
of delolation, however, which presented itelf to
him, when he entered the country, could scarce
fail to damp his hopes; and to convince him that
a monarch, who in order to distress an enemy,
had voluntarily ruined one of his richest provin.
ces, would defend the reft with obstinate despair.
Nor was it long before he became sensible, that
Francis's plan of defence was as prudent as it ap-
peared to be extraordinary. His fleet, on which
Charles chiefly depended for subsistence, was
prevented for some time by contrary winds, and
other accidents to which naval operations are sub'
jed, from approaching the French coast; and
even after its arrival, it afforded at best a preca.
rious and scanty supply to such a numerous body
of troopsm; nothing was to be found in the
country itself for their support; nor could thqy
draw any considerable aid from the doini
nions of the Duke of Savoy, exhausted al-
ready by maintaining two great armies. Tlh.
Emperor was no less embarrassed how to erm
ploy, than how to subsist his forces; for, though
he was now in poffeflion of almost an entire

i Bellay, 266, a. m Sandov. ii. 231.

province,

province, he could not however be said to have BOOK VI.
the command of it, while he held only defenceless
towns; and while the French, besides their camp 1536.
at Avignon, continued matters of Marseilles and
Aries. At first he thought of attacking the camp,
and of determining the war by one decisive blow;
but skilful officers, who were appointed to view it,
declared the attempt to be utterly impracicable. Befiges
He then commanded Marseilles andAries to be in- Marfeiil"
vested, hoping that the French would quit their
advantageous polR in order to relieve them; but
Montmorency adhering firmly to his plan, remain-
ed immoveable at Avignoni and the Imperialists
met with such a warm reception from the gar-
rifons of both towns, that they relinquished their
enterprizes with loss and disgrace. As a last es-
fort, the Emperor advanced once more towards
Avignon, though with an army harassed by the
perpetual incursions of small parties of the French
light troops, weakened by diseases, and dispirited
by disasters, which seemed more intolerable, be-
cause they were unexpetded.

DURING these operations Montmorency found Montmo-

rency's tor-

himself exposed to greater danger from his own titude i:, ad-
troops than from the enemy ; and their incon- erilng t
fiderate valour went near to have precipitateddefence.
the kingdom into those calamities, which hewith
such induflry and caution had endeavoured to
avoid. Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ravag-
ing thir country almost without controul; im-
patieit of filch long inadion ; unacquainted with
tle flow and remote, but certain effects of Mont-
morency's system of defence; the French wished
fora battle with no less ardour than the Im-
perialifts. They confidered the conduct of their
general as a disgrace to their country. His cau-
tion they imputed to timidity ; his circumspection

VOL. II. Dd to

*BOOK VI. to want of spirit; and the constancy with which

óv- -- he pursued his plan to obstinacy or pride. Thele
153 6 refletions, whispered, at first, among the soldiers

and subalterns, were adopted, by. degrees, by
officers of higher rank; and as many of thelc
envied Montmorency's favour with the King,
and more were dissatisfied with his harlh difgul.t
ing manner, the discontent soon became great in
his camp, which was filled with general mur.
murings and almost open complaints against his
measures. Montmorenrcy, on whom the lenti.
ments of his own troops made as little impref.
sion as the insults of the enemy, adhered steadily
to his system; though in order to reconcile the
army to his maxims, no less contrary to the genius
of the nation, than to the ideas of war among
undisciplined troops, he assumed an unusual afa.
bility in his deportment, and often explained with
great condescension the motives of his condud,
the advantages which had already resulted from it,
and the certain success with which it would bt
attended. At last Francis joined his army at Avig
non, which having received several reinforcements
he now confidered as of strength sufficient to fact
the enemy. As he had put upon himself no final
constraint, in having consented that his troopi
should remain so long upon the defensive, it can bt
scarce doubted but that his fondness for what wa!
daring and splendid, added to the impatience borl
of officers and soldiers, would have over-rulec
Montmorency's salutary caution '.

The retreat HAPPILY the retreat of the enemy delivered thi
and wretch-
ed condition kingdom from the danger which any rash refolu
of the Im- tion might have occasioned. The Emperor, aftc
penrilamy. spending two inglorious months in Provence

n Mem. de leIlay,, 269, &c. 3!z, &c.

havin!

having performed nothing suitable to his vail pre- BOOK VI.
parations, or that could jutlify the confidence ---
with which he had boasted of his own power, found 1536'
that, betides Antonio de Leyva, and other officers
of distinCtion, he ha t loft one half of hIs tioops
by difcafes, or by famine; and that the reft were
in no condition to rruggle any longer with calami-
ties, by which to many of their companions had pe-
rilhed. Necessity, therefore, extorted from him
orders to retire; and though he was tome time in
motion before the French Itupeeed his intention,
a body of light troops, alifted by crowds of pea-
sants, eager to be revenged on those who had
brought iuch defblation on their country, hung
upon the rear of the Imperialists, and by seizing
every favourable opportunity of attacking them,
threw them often into confusion. The road by
which they fled, for they pursued their march
with such disorder and precipitation, that it scarce
deserves the name of a retreat, was strewed with
arms or baggage, which in their hurry and trepi-
dation they had abandoned, and covered with the
tick, the wounded, and the dead; insomuch, that
Martin Bellay, an eye-witnels of their calamities,
endeavours to give his readers some idea of it, by
comparing reixir miseries to those which the Jews
fuiffered from the viCtorious and deftrutive arms
of the Romans , If Montmorency at this critical
moment had advanced wiith all his forces, nothing
could have saved the whole Imperial army from ut-
ter ruin. But that general, by slanding so long and
1,) bhflinately on the defeufive, had become cau-
iinus to excels; his mind, tenacious of any bent it
I:lii once taken, could not zflume a contrary one
as suddenly as the change of circumstances re-
quired ; and lie t ill continued to repeat his fat ou-
rite maxims, that it was more prudent to allow the
oMem. de Bcllay, 316. Sandov. -Iilt. dcl Einper. ii. 2, z.

D d 2 lion

I

BOOK VI. lion to escape, than to drive him to despair, and

.v'r that a bridge of gold should be made for a re-
1536' treating enemy.

THE Emperor having conducEed the h(attered

remains of his troops to the frontiers of Milan,
and appointed the Marquis del Guafto to succeed
Leyva in the government of the dutchy, set out
for Genoa. as he could not bear to expose him-
self to the scorn of the Italians, after such a fad
reverse of fortune; and did not choose, under his
present circumftanccs, to revisit those cities through
which he had so lately pased in triumph for one
conquest, and in certain expectation of another;

Novemb. he embarked directly for Spain P.

Operations NOR was the progress of his arms on the oppo.
inPicardy. site frontier of France such as to alleviate in any de-

gree the loses which he had sustained in Provence.
Bellay by his address and intrigues had prevailed on
so many of the German Princes to withdraw the
contingent of troops which they furnished to the
King of the Romans, that he was obliged to lay
aside all thoughts of his intended irruption into
Champagne. Though a powerful army levied in
the Low-Countries entered Picardy, which they
found but feebly guarded, while the strength of
the kingdom was drawn towards the south ; yet
the nobility taking arms with their usual alacrity,
supplied by their spirit the defects of the King's
preparations, and defended with such vigour Pe-
ronne, and other towns which were attacked, as
obliged the enemy to retire without making any
conquest of importance q.

THUS Francis, by the prudence of his own mea-

fures, and by the union and valour of his fubjecs,
rendered abortive those vast efforts by which his

P Jovii Hillor. lib. 35. p. 174, &c.
q Mem. de Bellay, 318, &c.

,~ival

rival had almost exhausted his whole force. As BOOK V.
this humbled the Emperor's arrogance no less '-
than it checked his power, he was mortified 1536.
more sensibly on this occasion than on any other,
during the course of the long contests between
him and the French Monarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered thejoy with Deauh of the

which the success of the campaign inspired Francis.
That was the death of the Dauphin, his eldest
son, a Prince of great hopes, and extremely be-
loved by the people on account of his resemblance
to his father. This happening suddenly, was im- Imputed to
puted to poison, not only by the vulgar, fond ofP°i"'1
ascribing the death of illustrious personages to ex-
traordinary causes, but by the King and his mini-
fters. The count de Montecuculi, an Italian no-
bleman, cupbearer to the Dauphin, being seized on
suspicion and put to the torture, openly charged
the Imperial generals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with
having instigated him to the commiflion of that
crime, and threw out some indirec and obscure
accusations against the Emperor himself. At a time
when all France was animated with implacable
hatred againit Charles, this was confidered as an
inconteftible proof of guilt; while the confidence
with which both he and his officers asserted their
own innocence, together with the indignation and
horror which they expreffd on their being sup-
posed capable of such a detestable ation, were
little attended to, and less regarded r. It is evident,
however, that the Emperor could have no induce-
ment to perpetrate such a crime, as Francis was
still in the vigour of life himself, and had two
sons, besides the Dauphin, grown up to a good age.
That tingle consideration, without mentioning the
Emperor's general characer, unblemished by the

r Mem. de Bellay, 289.

D d 3 imputation

BOOK VI. imputation of any deed resembling this in atro.

-'L"J city, is more than sufficient to counterbalance the
a536. weight of a dubious testimony uttered during the

anguish of torture s. According to the most un-
prejudiced historians, the Dauphin's death was oc-
cafioned by his havingdrunk too freely of cold wa.
ter after overhating himself at tennis; and this ac-
count, as it is the most simple, is likewise the molt
credible. But if his days were cut short by poison,
it is not improbable that the Emperor conjetured
rightly, when he affirmed that it had been admi-
nillered by the direction of Catharine of Medici,
in order to secure the crown to the Duke of Or-
leans her husband t. The advantages refilting to
her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious as well
as great; nor did her boundless and daring am-
bition ever scruple at any action necessary towards
attaining the objects which the had in view.

5s37. NEXT year opened with a tranfaAion very un-

the parlii- common, but so incapable of producing any es-
mentofrPa- set, that it would not deserve to be mentioned,
ris againlf
the Er- if it were not a striking proof of that personal ani-
peror. mofity which mingled itself in all the hostilities

between Charles and Francis, and which often
betrayed them into fich indecencies towards each
other, as lessened the dignity of both. Francis,
accompanied by the peers and princes of the blood,
having taken his feat in the parliament of Paris
with the usual folemnitier, the advocate-general
appeared; and after accusing Charles of Auftrin,
(for so he affected to call the Emperor) of having
violated the treaty of Cambray, by which he was
absolved from the homage due to the crown of
France for the counties of Artois and Slanders;
inliied that this treaty being now void, he was flill

a Sandlov. Hill. del Emper. ii. z31.
' Vera y Zuniga Vidade C.alo V. p. 75.

to be confidered as a vassal of the crown, and, by BOOK VI.
consequence, had been guilty of rebellion in taking '--
arms against' his sovereign ; and therefore he de- '537'
inanded that Charles should be summoned to ap-
pear in person, or by his counsel, before the par-
liament of Paris, his legal judges, to ani'wer for his
crime. The request was granted ; a herald re-
paired to the frontiers of Picardy, and summoned
him, with the accustomed formalities, to appear
againit a day prefixed. That term-being expired,
and no person appearing in his name, the parlia-
ment gave judgment, " That Charles of Austria
had forfeited by rebellion and contumacy these
fiefs; declared Slanders and Artoisto be re-united
to the crown of France; arid ordered their decree
for this purpose to be published by found of trum-
pet on the frontiers of these provinces v."

SOON after this vain display of his resentment, Campaign

rather than of his power, Francis marched to- opens in
wards the Low-Countries, as if he had intended huntries.
to execute the sentence which his parliament had March.
pronounced, and to seize those territories which
it had awarded to him. As the Queen of Hun-
gary, to whom her brother the Emperor had com-
mitted the government of that part of his domi-
nions, was not prepared for To early a campaign,
he at firit made some progress, and took several
towns of importance. But being obliged soon to
leave his army, in order to superintend the other
operations of war, the Flemings having assembled
a numerous army, not only recovered most of the
places which they had loft, but began to make con-
quests in their turn. At lait they invef'ed Te-
rouenne, and the Duke of Orleans, now Dauphin,

v Lettres et Memoires d'Etat, par Ribicr. 2 tom. Blois.
i(66. torn. i. p. '.

D d 4 by

BOOK VI. by the death of his brother, and Montmorency,

whom Francis had honoured with the constable's
1537. sword, as the reward of his great services during

the former campaign, determined to hazard a

Afurpen- battle in order to relieve it. While they were
sion of arms
thFer. advancing for this purpose, and within a few

miles of the enemy, they were flopped short by
the arrival of an herald from the Queen of Hun-
gary, acquainting him that a suspension of arms
was now agreed upon.

THIS unexpeted event was owing to the zea-

lous endeavours of the two filfers, the Queens of
France and of Hungary, who had long laboured to
reconcile the contending Monarchs. The war in
the Netherlands had laid waite the frontier pro-
vinces of both countries, without any real advan-
tage to either; the French and Flemings equally
regretted the interruption of their commerce,
which was beneficial to both; and Charles and
Francis, who had each firained to the utmost,
in order to support the vast operations of the
former campaign, found that they could not now
keep armies on foot in this quarter, without
weakening their operations in Piedmont, where
both wifled to push the war with the greatest
July 30; vigour. All there circumstances facilitated the

negotiations of the two Queens; a truce was
concluded, to continue in force for ten months,
but it extended no farther than the Low-Coun-
tries x.

And in I IN Piedmont the war was lil! prosecuted with
Piedmont. great animosity; and though neither Charles nor

Francis could make the powerful efforts to which
their animosity prompted them, they coutinued to
exert themselves like combatants, whose rancour

x Memoires de Ribier. 56.

remains

remains after their strength is exhausted. Towns BOOK VI.
were alternately loft and retaken; skirmishes were
fought every day; and much blood was shed, with- '537
out any decisive aftion, that gave the superiority
to either fide. At last the two Queens determining
not to leave unfinished the good work which they
had begun, prevailed, by their importunate folici-
tations, the one on her brother, the other on her
husband, to content also to a truce in Piedmont
for three months, upon condition that each should
keep pofeflion of what was in his hands, and leav-
ing garrisons in the towns, withdraw his army out
of the province; and that plenipotentiaries should
be appointed to adjust all matters in dispute by a
final treaty y.

THE powerful motives which inclined both Prin. Motives of

ces to this accommodation, have been often menti- it
oned. The expences of the war had far exceed-
ed the rums which their revenues were capable of
supplying, nor durst they venture upon any great
addition to the impositions then established, as sub-
jets were not yet taught to bear with patience the
immense burdens to which they have become ac-
customed in modern times. The Emperor, in par-
ticular, though he had contracted debts which in
that age appeared prodigious z, had it not in his
power to pay the large arrears which had beenlong
due to his army. At the fame time he had no
prospeCt of deriving any aid in money or men ei-
ther from the Pope or Venetians, though he had
employed promises and threats, alternately, in or-
der to procure it. But he found the former fixed
in his resolution of adhering steadily to the neutra-
lity which he had always declared to be suitable to
his charater, and paflionately desirous of bringing
about a peace. He perceived that the latter were

y Mem de Ribier. 62. * Ribier. i. 294.

flill

BOOK VI. still intent on their ancient objetl of holding the
'-4-3 ' balance even between the rivals, and folicitousno

i537' to throw too great a weight into either scale.

Of which WH AT made a deeper impression on Charles
Flrnci: s than all these, was the dread of the Turkish arms
with the which Francis had drawn upon him by his league
Turkieh with Solyman. Though Francis, without the as
the mot fiftance of a single ally, had a war to maintain
considerable. againfl an enemy greatly superior in power to him.

self, yet so great was the horror of Christians, in
that age, at any union with Infidels, which they
confidered not only as dishonourable but profane,
that it was long before he could be brought to
avail himself of the obvious advantages resulting
from such a confederacy. Neceflity at last fur.
mounted his delicacy and scruples; and towards
the close of the preceding year, La Forest, a fe-
cret agent at the Ottoman porte, had concluded a
treaty with the Sultan, whereby Solyman engaged
to invade, next campaign, the kingdom of Na.
pies, and to attack the King of the Romans in
Hungary with a powerful army, while Francis un.
dertook to enter the Milanese at the fame time
with a proper force. Solyman had punctually
performed what was incumbent on him. Barba-
roffa with a great fleet appeared on the coast of
Naples, filled that kingdom, from which all the
troops had been drawn towards Piedmont, with
consternation, landed without refitance near Ta-
rantoo, obliged Caltro a place of bome strength to
filrrender, plundered the adjacent country, and was
!aking measures for securing and extending his
conquests, when the unexpected arrival of Doria,
together with the Pope's gallits, and a fquadronof
the Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to re-
tire. In Hungary the progress of the Turks was

nloic

more formidable. Mahmet, their general, after BOOK VI.
gaining several small advantages, defeated the
Germans in a great battle at Efleck on the Drave. . 37
Happily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exadtnefs what he had
Rfipulated; nor could he assemble at thisjunture
an army strong enough to penetrate into the Mila-
neie. By this he failed in recovering possession of
that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved from
the calamities of a new war, but from feeling as
an addition to all that it had suffered the defolat-
ing rage of the Turkish arms b. As the Emperor
knew that he could not long resist the efforts of
two such powerful confederates, nor could expect
that the fame fortunate accidents would concur a
second time to deliver Naples, and to preserve
the Milanese : As he foresaw that the Italian
states would not only tax him loudly with infatia-
ble ambition, but might even turn their arms a-
gainft him, if he should be so regardless of their
danger as obstinately to protract the war, he
thought it necessary, both for his safety and repu-
tation, to give his content to a truce. Nor was
Francis willing to fuflain all the blame ofobftruet-
ing the re-eltablifhment of peace, or to expose
himfelfon that account to the danger of being de-
ferted by the Swiss and other foreigners in his ser-
vice. He even began to apprehend that his own
fbbjets would serve him coldly, if by contribut-
ing to aggrandize the power of the Infidels, which
it was his duty, and had been the ambition of his
ancestors to depress, he continued to acl in direct
opposition to all the principles which ought to in-
fluence a Molli-lch distinguished by the title of
M ft Chriflian King. He chnfe, for all there
reasons, rather to run the rifque of difobliging
his new ally the Sultan, than by an unseasonable

Iflnanhaffi Hit. flung. lib. xiii. p. 139.
, Jovii Hiltor. lib. xxxv. p. I '3.

adhcrence

BOOK VI. adherence to the treaty with him, to forfeit what
,- -.v ' was of greater consequence.

1537.

Ncgotiati- BUT though both parties consented to a truce,

opac°f b the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficulties
tween in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty. Each
Charles and of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a conque.

ror, aimed at giving law to the other; and neither
would Co far acknowledge his inferiority, as to fa-
crifice any point of honour, or to relinquish any
1538. matter of right;fo that the plenipotentiaries spent

the time in long and fruitless negotiations, and fe-
parated after agreeing to prolong the truce for a
few months.

The Pope THE Pope, however, did not despair of accom.
condu s1 1
thele in per- plifhing a point in which the plenipotentiaries had
ion. failed, and took upon himself the sole burden of

negotiating a peace. To form a confederacy ca-
pable of defending Christendom from the formida-
ble inroads of the Turkish arms, and to concert
effectual measures for the extirpation of the Lu-
theran heresy, were two great objects which Paul
had much at heart, and he confidered the union of
the Emperor with the King of France as an effen.
tial preliminary to both. To be the inftrumentof
reconciling there contending Monarchs, whom his
predecessors by their interested and indecent in-
trigues had bo often embroiled, was a circumstance
which could not fail of throwing diftinguifhedlui:
tre on his charadter and adminifiration. Nor was
he without hopes that while he pursued this lauda-
ble end, he might secure advantages to his own
family, the aggrandizing of which he did not ne-
glec, though he aimed at it witi a less audaci-
ous ambition than was common among the Popes
of that century. Influenced by these confidera-
tions, he proposed an interview between the two

Monarchs

Monarchs at Nice, and offered to repair thither BOOK VI.
in person, that he might act as mediator in corn-
posing all their differences. When a Pontiffof a '538.
venerable character, and of a very advanced age,
was willing, from his zeal for peace, to undergo
the fatigues of such a distant journey, neither
Charles nor Francis could with decency decline the
interview. But though both came to the place of
rendezvous, so great was the difficulty ofadjufling
the ceremonial, or such the remains of difruft and
rancour on each fide, that they refused to fee one
another, and every thing was tranfated by the in-
tervention of the Pope, who visited them alternate-
ly. Nor could he with all his zeal and ingenuity,
find out any method of removing the obstacles,
particularly those arising from the possession of the
Milanese, which prevented a final accommodation;
nor was all the weight of his authority fifficient
to overcome the obfsinate perseverance of either
Monarch in asserting his own claims. At last, that A truce foi
he might not seem to have laboured altogether ten etrs

concluded

without effet, he prevailed on them to Iign aat Nice.
truce for ten years, upon the fame condition with June i.
the former, that each should retain what was now
in his poffeifion, and in the mean time should fend
ambassadors to Rome to discuss their pretensions
at leisure c.

THUS ended a war of no long continuance, but

very extensive in its operations, and in which both
parties exerted their utmost strength. Tho' Fran-
cis failed in the object that he had principally in
view, the recovery of the Milanese, he acquired,
nevertheless, great reputation by the wildom of
his measures, as well as the filccef. of his arms in
repuling a formidable invasion; and by securing
poffeflion of one half of the Duke of Savoy's do-

c Rccucil des Traitez, ii ior. Rlairinne del N.icolo

Tiepolo de l'abocanimcto di Nizza. chcez, j. Moi.. Curps
Diplonmat. par. ii p. 17z.

BooK VI.minions, he added no inconsiderable accefllon tc
'""" his kingdom. Whereas, Charles, repulsed and

1538. baffled, after having boased so arrogantly ofvift).

ry, purchased an inglorious truce, by facrificiing
an ally who had rashly confided too much in his
friendship and power. The unfortunate Duke
murmured, complained, and remonfirated againfi
a treaty so much to his disadvantage; but in vain;
he had no means of redress, and was obliged to
submit. Of all his dominions, Nice, with its de-
pendencies, was the only corner of which he him.
lelf kept poffefiion. He saw the reft divided be-
tween a powerful invader, and the ally to whose
protetion he had trusted, while he remained a fad
monument of the imprudence of weak Princes,
who, by taking part in thequarrelsof mighty neigh.
bours, between whom they happen to be situated,
are crulhed and overwhelmed in the {hock.

Interview A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce,
between the Emperor set fail for Barcelona, but was driven
Charles and
Francis at by contrary winds to the island St. Margret on the
Aigues- coast of Provence. When Francis, who happen-

ed to be not far distant, heard of this, he con-
fidered it as an office of civility, to invite him to
take shelter in his dominions, and proposed a per-
fonal interview with him at Aigues-mortes. The
Emperor, who would not be outdone by his rival
in complaisance, instantly repaired thither. As
soon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis with-
out waiting to fettle any point of ceremony, but
relying implicitly on the Emperor's honour for
his security, visited him on board his galley, and
was received and entertained with the warmest
demonstrations of esteem and affEtion. Next
day, the Emperor repaid the confidence which the
King had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-
mortes with as little precaution, and met with a

reception

reception equally cordial. He remained on shore BOOK VI.
during the night, and in both visits, they vied with 'v-
each other in expreflions ofrefped and friendship d. 538.
After twenty years of open holtilities, or of secret
enmity ; after To many injuries reciprocally in-
sliced or endured; after having formally given
the lie, and challenged one another to tingle com-
bat; after the Emperor had inveighed To publick-
ly againif Francis, as a Prince void of honour or
integrity; and Francis had accusCd him as accef-
fary to the murder of his eldest Ton; such an inter-
view appears altogether singular, and even un-
natural. But the history of these Monarchs a-
bounds with such furprizing transitions. From im-
placable enmity, they appeared to pass, in a mo-
ment, to the most cordial reconcilement; from
suspicion and distrust, to perfect confidence; and
from pradifing all the dark arts of a deceitful po-
licy, they could assume, of a sudden, the liberal
and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, besides the glory of having restored The airam-

peace to Europe, gained, according to his ex- Aexandfr
pedation, a point of great consequence to his fa- di Med;ci.
mily, by prevailing on the Emperor to betroth
Margaret of Atufria his natural daughter, former-
ly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to his grand-
son Otavio Farnese, and in consideration of this
marriage, to bestow several honours and territories
upon his future fon-in-law. A very tragical event,
which happened about the beginning of the year
one thousand five hundred and thirty seven, had
deprived Margaret of her first husband. That
young prince, whoni the Emperor's partiality had

d Sandov. Hilt. vol. ii. 238 Relation de l'enRrevue de

Charl. V. & Fran. 1. par M. de la Rivoire. Hill. de Langucd.
par D. D. De \ic & \Vaifette ton., v. i'reuves, p. 93.

raised

BOOK VI. raised to the supreme power in Florence, upon the
'-"-- sruins of the publick liberty, neglected entirely the

3538. cares ofgovernment, and abandoned himself to the

most diifolute debauchery. Lorenzo di Medici
his nearest kinsman, was not only the companion
but direaor of his pleasures, and employing all
the powers of a cultivated and inventive genius in
this dilhonourable ministry, added such elegance
and variety to vice, as gained him an absolute as-
cendant over the mind of Alexander. But while
Lorenzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and affeLted
such an appearance of indolence and effeminacy,
that he would not wear a sword, and trembled at
the fight of blood, he concealed under that dif-
guise, a dark, designing, audacious spirit. Prompt-
ed either by the love of liberty, or allured by the
hopeof attaining the supreme power, he determin-
ed to afiafinateAlexander his benefadtor and friend.
Though he long revolved this design in his mind,
his reserved and suspicious temper prevented him
from communicating it to any person whatever;
and continuing to live with Alexander in their usual
familiarity, he, one night, under pretence of hav-
ing secured him an assignation with a lady of high
rank, whom he had often solicited, drew that un-
wary Prince into a secret apartment of his house,
and there stabbed him, while he lay carelessly on
a couch, expecting the arrival of the lady whoSe
company he had been promised. But no sooner
was the deed done, than standing altonifhed, and
itruck with horror at its atrocity, he forgot, in a
moment, all the motives which had induced him
to commit it, and instead of rouzing the people
to recover their liberty, by publiffing the death
of the tyrant, instead of taking any ftep towards
opening his own way to the dignity now va-
cant, he locked the door of the apartment, and,

like

like a man bereaved of reason and pretence of BOOK VI.
mind, fled with the utmost precipitation out of the -
Florentine territories. It was late next morning lS3
before the fate of the unfortunate Prince was
known, as his attendants, accustomed to his irre-
gularities, never entered his apartment early. Im-
mediately the chief persons in the fiate assembled.
Being induced partly by the zeal of Cardinal Cibo
for the house of Medici, to which he was nearly
related, partly by the authority of Francis Guic-
ciardini, who recalled to their memory and repre-
sented in flriking colours the caprice as well as tur-
bulence of their ancient popular government, they
agreed to place Cosmo di Medici, a youth ofCormod
eighteen, the only male heir of that illustrious 'pladat
house, at the head of the government; though at the head (!
the fame time such was their love of liberty, that tihee lrt.
they established several regulations in order to
circumscribe and moderate his power.

MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place His gover

of safety, made known what he had done toPhilip fden boPtho
Strozzi and the other Florentines who had been Flortntil.
driven into exile, or who had voluntarily retired, .i
when the republican form of government was abo-
liihed in order to make way for the dominion of
the Medici. By them, the deed was extolled with
extravagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was
compared with that of the elder Brutus, who dif-
regarded the ties of blood, or with that of the
younger, who forgot the friendship and favours of
the tyrant, that they might prelerve or recover the
liberty of their country c. Nor did they reft satis-
fled with empty panegyricks; they immediately
quitted their different places of retreat, affTmbled
forces, animated their valaLs and partizans to take

e Lettere di Principi, tomr iii. p. 52.
VOL. II. £ e arns,

BooK VI. arms, and to seize this opportunity of re-establish-

ing the public liberty on its ancient foundation.
1538. Being openly assisted by the French ambassador at

Rome, and secretly encouraged by the Pope, who
bore no good-will to the houle of Medici, they en-
tered the Florentine dominions with a considerable
body of men. But the persons who had elet:ed
Cosmo poflefled both the means of supporting his
government, and abilities to employ them in the
most proper manner. They levied, with the
greatest expedition, a good number of troops; they
endeavoured by every art, to gain the citizens of
greatest authority, and to render the adminifiration
of the young prince agreeable to the people.
Above all, they courted the Emperor's protection,
as the only firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity and
power. Charles, knowing the propensity of the
Florentines to the friendship of France, and how
much all the partizans of a republican government
detested him as the oppressor of their liberties, saw
it to be greatly for his interest to prevent the re-
establishment of the ancient constitution in Flo-
rence. For this reason, he not only acknowledged
Cosmo as head of the Florentine fate, and con-
ferred on him all the titles of honour with which
Alexander had been dignified, but engaged to
defend him to the utmost; and as a pledge of this,
ordered the commanders of such of his troops as
were stationed on the frontiers of Tuscany, to
wpport him againRt all aggressors. By their aid,
Cosmo obtained an easy vi&ory over the exiles,
whose troops he surprised in the night-time, and
took most of the chiefs prisoners; an event which
broke all their measures, and fully cftabli(hed his
own authority. But though he was extremely
desirous of the additional honour of marrying
the Emperor's daughter, the widow of his pre-
deceffor, Charles, secure already of his attach-

ment.

ment, chose rather to gratify the Pope by be- Boot VI.
stowing her on his nephew f.

1538.

DURING the war between the Emperor and Thefriend.
Francis, an event had happened which abated in 'ipbetween

Francis andi

rome degree the warmth and cordiality of friend- Henry VIIL.
(hip which had long subsisted between the latter begins to
and the King of England. James the fifth of Scot-
land, an enterprising young Prince, having heard
of the Emperor's intention to invade Provence,
and being fond of (hewing that he did not yield
to any of his ancestors in the sincerity of his at-
tachtnent to the French crown, as well as eager to
distinguish himself by Tome military exploit, levied
a body of troops with an intention of leading them
in person to the assistance of the King of France.
Though some unfortunate accident prevented his
carrying any troops into France, nothing could
divert him from going thither in person. Imme-
diately upon his landing he haflened to Provence,
but had been detained so long in his voyage that
he could not have any share in the military ope-
rations, and he met the King on his return after
the retreat of the Imperialists. Francis, greatly
pleated with his zeal, and no less with his man-
ners and conversation, could not refute him his Jan. 1,1537
daughter Magdalen, whom he demanded in mar-
riage. It mortified Henry extremely to fee a
Prince of whom he was lately becomejealous,
after having long treated him and his fubjecls
with contempt, form an alliance, from which he
derived such an accession both of reputation and
security g. He could not, however, with de-
cency oppose Francis's beftlR ing his daughter

f Jovii Hiit. c. xcviii p. 218, sec. Belcarii Commeon.

i. 2z. p. 696. Istoria de fui tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani.
Ven. 1587. p. ro.

g Hilt. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

E a upon

BboK VI. upon a Monarch descended from a race of Princes,
' -'- the most ancient'and faithful allies of the French
1538, crown. But when James, upon the sudden death

of Magdalen, demanded as his second wife Mary
of Guise, he warmly solicited Francis to deny his
suit, and, in order to disappoint him, asked that
lady in marriage for himself. When Francis pre-
ferred the Scottish King's sincere courtship to his
artful and malevolent proposal, he discovered
much diffatisfaetion. The pacification agreed
upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of the
two rivals at Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind
with new suspicions, as if Francis had altogether
renounced his friendihip for the fake of new con-

The Em- nections with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly
PHenry.r acquainted with the temper of the Englilh King,

and watchful to observe all the shiftings and ca-
prices of his paflions, thought this a favourable
opportunity of renewing his negotiations with him,
which 'had long been broken off By the death
of Qseen Catharine, whose interest the Emperor
could not with decency have abandoned, the
chief cause of their discord was removed;
so that without touching upon the delicate
question of her divorce, he might now take
what measures he thought most effetual for re-
gaining Henry's good will. For this purpose,
he began with proposing several marriage-treaties
to the King. He offered his niece, a daughter
of the King of Denmark, to Henry himfdlf;
he demanded the Princess Mary for one of the
Princes of Portugal, and was even willing to re-
ceive her as the King's illegitimate daugh-
ter h. Though none of these projected alliances
ever took place, or perhaps were ever seriously
intended, they occasioned such frequent inter-

i, Mem. de Ribier, t. i. 496.

course

cpojrfe between the courts, and fo-many reciprocal Boog VI.
profeflions of civility and esteem, as considerably -"v
abated the edge: of Henry's rancour against the '538.
Emperor, and paved the way for. that union be-
tween them which afterwards proved so difadvan-
tageous to the French King.

THE ambitious schemes in.which the Emperor Progress of

had been engaged, and the wars he had been car- ation.
rying on for Come years proved, as usual, extremely
favourable to the progress of the reformation in
Germany. While Charles was absent upon his
African expedition, or intent on his vait projects
against France, his chief object in Germany was
to prevent the dilfenfions about religion from dif-
turbing the public tranquillity, by granting such
indulgence to the Protestant Princes as might in-
duce them to concur with his measures, or at least
hinder them from taking part with his rival. For
this reason, he was careful to secure to the Pro-
teftants the poffeflion of all the advantages which
they had gained by the articles of pacification at
Nuremberg, in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and thirty-twoi; and except some flight
trouble from the proceedings of the Imperial cham-
ber, they met with nothing to diftuib them in the
exercise of their religion, or to interrupt the fuc-
cefsful zeal with which they propagated their
opinions. Meanwhile the Pope continued his ne- Negot;t;-
gotiations for convoking a general council; and t.grndinu.
though the Proteflants had expressed great dftatif- with relp.'r
faction with his intention to fix upon Mantua as to,.,ln,:
the place of meeting, he adhered oLtbinarely to his
choice, issued a bull on the second of June, one
thousand five hundred and thirty fix, appointing
it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of

Du Mont Corps Diplom. torn. iv part, I. 138.

E e NMna;

BorVI[. May the year following; he nominated three car-
* .-v-- dinals to preside in his name; enjoined all Chris-

153- 'tian Princes to countenance it by their authority,

and invited the prelates of every nation to attend
in person. This citation of a council, an assembly
which from its nature and intention demanded
quiet times, as well as pacific dispositions, at the
veryjuneture, when the Emperor was on his march
towards France, and ready to involve a great part
of Europe in the confusions of war, appeared to
every person extremely unseasonable. It was in-
timated, however, to all the different courts by
nuncios dispatched of purpose k The Emperor,
with an intention to gratify the Germans, had,
during his residence at Rome, warmly solicited the
Pope to call a council; but being at the fame time
willing to try every art in order to persuade Paul
to depart from the neutrality which he preserved
between him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice
chancellor along with the nuncio whom the Pope
employed in Germany, initruding him to second
all the nuncio's representations, and to enforce
them with the whole weight of the Imperial autho-

February rity. The Protestants gave them audience at Smal-
59 1 537. kalde, where they had assembled in a body, in order

to receive them. But after weighing all their ar-
guments, they unanimously refuted to acknow-
ledge a council summoned in the name and by the
authority of tle Pope alone; in which he assumed
the sole right (of prefi:ling; which was to be held
in a city not only far distant from Germany, but
fubjeft to a Prince, a ttranger to them, and
closely conneted with the court of Rome; and to
which their Divines could not repair with safety,
especially after their doctrines had been stigma-
tized in the very bull of convocation with the name

k Pallavic. Hilt. Conc. Trid. 113.

tit

of heresy. TheJe and many other objections Boo VI.
againlt the council, which appeared to them un-
answerable, they enumerated in a large manifesto, 53
which they pubiilhed in vindication of their con-
duct '.

AG A INST this the court of Rome exclaimed as

a flagrant proof of their obftinacyand i,refump-
tion, and the Pope itill perfifled in his resolution
to hold the council at the time and in the place ap-
pointed. But ionie unexpected difficulties being
flarted by the Duke of Mantua, both about the
right of jurisdiction over those who retorted to the
council, and the security of his capital amidst such
a concourle of strangers, the Pope, after fruitless
endeavours to adjust there, firtt prorogued the
council for Come months, and afterwards tranf-
ferring the plate of meeting to Vicenza in the Ve- oa e.
netian territories, appointed it to assemble on the 353s.
first of May iol the following year. As neither the
Emperor nor French King, who had not then come
to any accommodation would permit their fubjets
to repair thither, not a tingle prelate appeared on
the day prefixed, and the Pope, that his autho-
rity might not become altogether contemptible by
so many ineffectual intimations, put off the meet-
ing by an indefinitive prorogation m.

MA NWHII E, that he might not feern to have A partllre-

turned hts whole attention towards a reformation ',butes by
which he was not able to accomplish, while he ne- the PoP.
gleted that which was in his power, he deputed
a certain number of ca.rdinals and bishops with fu.l
authority to inquire into the abuses and corruptions

1 Siledan, 1. xii. 123, &c. .eckend. Corn. lib. iii.
p. 143, &c.

m F. Paul, 17. Pallavic. 117

E e 4 t

BOOK VI. of the Roman court; and to propose the most cf-

- fetual method of removing them. This scrutiny,
1538. undertaken with reluctance, was carried on slowly

and with remiffiefs. All defe4s were touched
with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too deep,
or of discovering too much. But even by this par-
tial examination, many irregularities were detet-
ed, and many enormities exposed to light, while
the remedies which they suggestad as most proper
were either inadequate, or were never applied.
The report and resolutions of thefe'deputies,
though intended to be kept secret, were transmitted
by some accident into Germany, and being imme-
diately made public, afforded ample matter for
refletion and triumph to the Protestants °. On
the one hand they demonstrated the necessity ofa
reformation in the head as well as the members of
the church, and even pointed out many of the cor-
ruptions against which Lutler and his followers
had remontfrated with the greatest vehemence.
They shewed, on the other hand, that it was vain
to expeCt this reformation from ecclefiafticks them-
selves, who, as Luther strongly expressed it piddled
at curing warts, while they overlooked or con-
firmed ulcers °.

A league THE earnestness with which the Emperor seem-
form d in
opposition ed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the Pope's
tolhat. at scheme of holding a council in Italy, ha ing

kae. alarmed theProteftant Princes so much, that they

thought it prudent to strengthen their confederacy,
by admitting several new members who solicited
that privilege, particularly the King of Denmark;
Heldo, who during his residence in Germany, had
observed all the advantages whichthey derived
from that union, endeavoured to counterbalance its

n Sleidan, 233. o Seck. I. iii. 164

effe C

effeds by an allianceamong the catholick powers BOOK VI.
of the Empire. This league, distinguished by the '^
name of Holy, was merely defensive, and though '539'
conchlded by Heldo in the Emperor's name, was
afterwards disowned by him, and subscribed by
very few Princes P.

THE Protestants soon got intelligence of this as- Alarms the

fociation, notwithflanding all the endeavours ofPoteflant.
the contracting parties to conceal it; and their
zeal, always apt to fufped and to dread, even to
excess, every thing that seemed to threaten reli-
gion, instantly took the alarm, as if the Emperor
had beenjuft ready to enter upon the execution of
some formidable plan for the extirpation of their
opinions. In order to dihappoint this, they held
frequent consultations; they courted the Kings of
France and England with great afliduity, and even
began to think of rairing the refpetive contingents
both in men and money, which they were obliged
to furnish by the treaty of Smalkalde. But it was
not long before they were convinced, that these ap-
prehensions were without foundation, and that the
Emperor, to whom repose was absolutely necef-
fary, after being exhausted by efforts beyond his
strength in the war with France, had no thoughts
of disturbing the tranquillity of Germany. As a
proof of this, his ambafadors, at an interview April l,
itlh the Proteflant Princes in Francfort, agreed
that all conceflions in their favour, particularly
lthoe contained in the pacification of Nuremberg,
should continue in force for fifteen months; that
during this period, all proceedings of the Imperial
cl:trmber againil them fhloild be suspended; that a
conIerence fliould be held by a few divines. of each

P Seek. 1. iii. 171. Recueil des Traitez.

party,

.BOOK VI. party, in order to discuss the points in controver.

-'-' fy, and to propose articles of accommodation
'539. which should be laid before the next diet. Thougi

the Emperor, that he might not irritate the Pope.
who remonstrated ageairf the sift part of this
agreement as impolitick, and against the latter, at
an impious encroachment upon his prerogative,
never formally ratified this convention, it was ob.
served with considerable exatnefs, and greatly
strengthened the basis of that ecclesiastical liberty,
for which the Protestants contended q.
April 14. A FEW days after the convention at Francfort,

ao,,"ifatnd happened the death of George Duke of Saxony,
in everypaat an event of great advantage to the reformation.
of SaxoIy. That Prince, the head of the Albertine or younger

branch of the Saxon family, poffIffed, as marquis
of Mifnia and Thuringia, extensive territories,
com prehending Dresden, Leipfick, and other cities
now the most considerable in the electorate. From
the first dawn of the reformation, he had been its
enemy as avowedly, as the electoral Princes were
its protectors, and had carried on his opposition not
only with all the zeal flowing from religious pre-
judices, but with a virulence inspired by peifonal
antipathy to Luther, and imbittered by the do-
meftick animofiry, fubfifling between him and the
other branch of his family:. By his death without
issue, his fucceflon fell to his brother Henry,
whose attachment to the Protestant religion, fur-
pased, if poflible, that of his predecessor to pope-
ry. Henry no sooner took poffeflion of his new do.
minions, than, disregarding a clause in George's
will, dictated by his bigotry, whereby he be.
queathed all his territories to tee Emperor and

' F. Paul, 8z. Sleid. 247. Seek. 1. iii. zoo00

King

King of the Romans, if his brother Ihould attempt BOOK VI.
to make any innovation in religion; he invited -^
some Protestant divines, and among them Luther Is39'
himself, to Leipfick. By their advice and aflif-
tance, he overturned, in a few weeks, the whole
system of ancient rites, eftablilhing the full exer-
cife of the reformed religion, with the universal
applause of his subjects, who had long wished for
this change, which the authority of their Duke a-
lone had hitherto prevented r. This revolution de-
livered the Protestants from the danger to which
they were exposed, by having an inveterate enemy
situated in the middle of their territories; and their
dominions now extended in one great and almost
unbroken line from the shore of the Baltick to the
banks of the Rhine.

Soot after the conclusion of the truce at Nice, A mutiny of

the Imperis!

an event happened, which satisfied all Europe, that troops.
Charles had prosecuted the war to the utmost ex-
tremity that the state of his affairs would permit.
Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he had
long amused with vain hopes and promires. As
they now foresaw that little attention would be
paid to their demands, when, by the re-establish-
ment of peace, their services became of less im-
portance, they loft all patience, broke out into
an open mutiny, and declared, that they thought
themselves entitled to seize by violence, what was
detained from them contrary to alljuflice. Nor
was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of
the Emperor's dominions; the mutiny was almost
as general as the grievance which gave rife to it.
The soldiers in the Milanese plundered the open
country without controul, and filled the capital

r Sleidan, 249.

itself

BOOK VI.itfelf with consternation. Those in garrison at
.,-- - Goletta, threatened to give up that important for-

l539. trefs to Barbarossa. In Sicily, the troops proceed.

ed to fill greater excesses; having chaced away
their officers, they eleaed others in their stead,
defeated a body of men whom the viceroy sent
against them, took and pillaged several cities, con.
ducting themselves all the while, in such a man.
ner, that their operations resembled rather the re-
gular proceedings of a concerted rebellion, than
the rashness and violence of a military mutiny.
But by the address and prudence of the generals,
who, partly by borrowing money in their own
name, or in that of their masser, partly by extort.
ing large fums from the cities in their refpedive
provinces, raised what was sufficient to discharge
the arrears of the soldiers, these infurredions were
quelled. The greater part of the troops being dif-
banded, such a number only as was neceflary for
garrisoning the principal towns, and protecting the
sea coasts from the insults of the Turks, was kept
in pay 5.

Cortes of IT was happy for the Emperor, that the abili.
Ciale held ties of his generals extricated him out of there dif-

t Tdo. ficulties, which it exceeded his own power to have

removed. He had depended, as his chief resource
for discharging the arrears due to his loldiers, upon
the subsidies which nle txpedted from his Caitilian
fubjets. For this purpose, he afiT.nbld the
Cortes of Castile at Tbledo, and having repre.
sented to them the great expence of his military
operations, together with the vail debts in whicii
there had necessarily involved him, he propof(d
to levy such supplics as the present exigency of
his affairs demanded, by a general excite on

6 Jovii Hirtor, I, xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. fcrreras, ix,
209.

corn modi ties.

commodities. But the Spaniards who already felt BOOK VI,
themselves oppressed with a load of taxes un.-- --

1539.

known to their ancestors, and who had often corn- The com-
plained that their country, in order to profccute plaints and

difsatisiadi-

quarrels in which it was not interested, and toI of that
fight battles from which it could reap no benefit, afembly.
was drained not only of its wealth but of its in-
habitants, determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor
with the means of engaging in new enterprizes no
less ruinous to the kingdom than most of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles, in
particular, inveighed with great vehemence against
the imposition proposed, as an encroachment upon
the valuable and distinguishing privilege of their
order, that of being exempted from the payment
of any tax. They demanded a conference with
the representatives of the cities concerning the state
of the nation. They contended that if Charles-
would imitate the example of his predecessors, who
had resided conflantly in Spain, and would avoid
entangling himfclf in a multiplicity of tranfadions
foreign to the concerns of his Spanilh dominions,
the stated revenues of the crown would be fully
sufficient to defray the neceifary expences of go-
vernment. They represented to him that it would
be unjust to lay new burdens upon the people,
while this prudent and cffectual method of re-
eflablifhing public credit, and securing national
opulence, was totally neglected t, Charles, after
employing arguments, entreaties and promises, but
without ficcels, in order to overcome their obfti-
nacy, difnifled the assembly with great indignati-
on. From that period neither the nobles nor the The ancient
prelates have been called to these assemblies, on pre- c,"(i)ttit ir

of theC,)tce
tence that such as pay no part of the public taxes fcubvetcid.

t Sandov. lHid. vol. ii. 269.

should

BooK VI. should claim no vote in laying them on. None

.
-J have been admitted to the Cortes but the procura-
t539. trs or representatives of eighteen cities. These,

to the number of thirty-fix, being two from each
community, form an assembly which bears no re-
semblance either in power or dignity or indepen-
dence to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at
the devotion of the court in all their determinati-
ons v. Thus the imprudent zeal with which the
Castilian nobles had supported the royal preroga-
tive, in opposition to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one, proved at last fatal
to their own body. By enabling Charles to depress
one of the orders in the state, they destroyed that
balance to which the constitution owed its security,
and put it in his power, and that of his successors
to humble the other, and to strip it of its molt
valuable privileges.

The Spanish AT that time, however, the Spaniff grandees
grandeessull ,,.
pofelftred still poffelfed extraordinary power as well as privi-
high privi- leges, which they exercised and defended with an

g. haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this the

Emperor himfelfhad a mortifying proof during the
meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was re-
turning one day from a tournament accompanied
by most of the nobility, one of the serjeants of the
court, out of officious zeal to clear the way for
the Emperor, struck the Duke of Infantado's horse
with his batoon, which that haughty grandee re-
senting, drew his sword, beat and wounded the of-
sicer. Charles provoked at such an insolent deed
in his presence, immediately ordered Ronquillo
the judge of the court to arrest the Duke; Ron-

v Sandov. ibid. La Science du Goavcrnement, par M.
de Real, tom. ii. p. oz.

qu'lllo

quillo advanced to execute his charge, when the BooK VI.
eontlable of Castile interposing, checked him, '--v
claimed the right of jurisdiction over a grandee as 539*
a privilege of his office, and condu'ted Infantado
to his own apartment. All the nobles present
were so pleated with the boldners of the conttable
in aflerting the rights of their order, that deferring
the Emperor, they attended him to his house with
infinite applauses, and Charles returned to the
palace without any person along with him but the
cardinal Tavera The Emperor, how ftnfible
soever of the affiont, saw the danger of irritating
a jealous and high-fpirited order of men whom
the slightest appearance of offence might diive to
the most unwarantable extremes. For that rea.
son, instead of firaining at any ill-timed exertion
of his prerogative, he prudently connived at the
arrogance of a body too potent for him to con-
troul, and Cent next morning to the Duke of In-
fantado offering to inflict what punishment he
pleated on the person who had affronted him.
The Duke confidering this as a full reparation to
his honour, instantly forgave the officer; bestowing
on him, besides, a considerable present as a com-
penfation for his wound. Thus the affair was en-
tirely forgotten x; nor would it have deserved to
be mentioned, if it were not a striking example
of the haughty and independent spirit of the
Spanish nobles in that age, as well as an instance
of the Emperor's dexterity in accommodating his
condudt to the circumstances in which he was
placed.

CHARIES was far from discovering any ftlch InftireCti

condescension or lenity towards the citizens of thet
Ghent, who not long after broke out into open

x Sandov. 11.274. Ferreras, ix. 212. Miniana, 113.

rebellion

'BOOK VI. rebellion againfl his government. An event which

-/" happened in the year one thousand five hundred
1539. and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this rash infurrec-

tion so fatal to that flourishing city. At that time
the Queen dowager of Hungary, governess of the
Netherlands, having received orders from her bro.
ther to invade France with all the forces which she
could raise, ihe afiembled the flates of the united
Provinces, and obtained from them a subsidy of
twelve hundred thousand florins, to defray the ex.
pence of that undertaking. Of this fium, the
county of Slanders was obliged to pay a third part

Pretensions as its proportion. But the citizens of Ghent, the
of the cit most considerable city in that country, averse to a

war with France with which they carried on an
extensive and gainful commerce, refused to pay
their quota, and contended that in consequence of
stipulations between them and the ancestors of
their present sovereign the Emperor, no tax could
be levied upon them, unless they had given their
express content to the imposition of it. The go-
vernefs, on the other hand, maintained, that as the
subsidy of twelve hundred thousand florins had
been granted by the States of Slanders, of which
their representatives were members, they were
bound, of course, to conform to what was enad-
ed by them, as it is the first principle in society,
on which the tranquillity and order of govern-
ment depend, that the inclinations of the minori-
ty must be over-ruled by the judgment and deci-
sion of the superior number.

procedings THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not wil.
againfttlem ling to relinquish a privilege of flich high impor-

tance as that which they claimed. Having been
accustomed, under the government of the houle
of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, and

to

to be treated with much indulgence, they disdained Boo VI.
to sacrifice to the delegated power of a regent --'
those rights and liberties which they had often and 159'
successfully asserted against their greatest Princes.
The Queen, though Ihe endeavoured at first to
sooth them, and to reconcile them to their duty
by various conceflions, was at last so much ir-
ritated by the obstinacy with which they adhered
to their claim, that she ordered all the citizens of
Ghent, on whom fhl could lay hold in any part of
the Netherlands, to be arrested. But this rash
adion made an imprcflion very different from what
she expedted on men, whole minds were agitated
with all the violent paflio.s which indignation at
oppreflion anti zeal for liberty inspire. Less as-
sected with the danger of their friends and com-
panio.s, than irritated at the governess, they
openly despised her authority, and sent deputies to
the other towns of Slanders, conjuring them not
to abandon their country at such a juncture, but
to concur with them in vindicating its rights
against the encroachments of a woman, who either
did not know or did not regard their immunities.
All but a few inconsiderable towns declined enter-
ing in:o any colnfederacy againfi the governess;
however, they joined in petitioning her to put off
the term for payment of the tax 1b long, that they
might have it in their power to fend some of their
number into Spain, in order to jay their title to eX-
emption before their Ibvereigi. This the granted
with tome difficulty. But Charles received their
commiflioners with ant haughtiness to wt.ich they
were not accuftoied from their ancient Princes,
and enjoining them to yield the fame rqfi.etful
obedience to his filter, which they owed to him in
person, remitted the examination of their claim to
the council of Malines. This courr, which is pro-
perly a s(anding committee of the parjiament or

VOL. II. F f itateC

BOOK VI. states of the county, and which possesses the fu-

1'-" premejurifdiion in all matters civil as well as
'539' criminal y, pronounced the claim of the citizens of

Ghent to be ill founded, and appointed them forth-
with to pay the proportion of the tax.

They take ENRAGED at this decision, which they con-
rams, and
offertofub- fidered as notoriously unjust, and rendered def-
Mit to perate on feeing their rights betrayed by that very

court which was bound to protect them, the people
of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner,
drove such of the nobility as resided among them
out of the city; secured several of the Emperor's
officers; put one of them to the torture, whom
they accused of having stolen or destroyed the
record, that contained the privileges of exemption
from taxes which they pleaded; chore a council
to whom they committed the direction of their
affairs; gave orders for repairing and adding to
their fortifications; and openly erested the ftan-
dard of rebellion against their sovereign z. Sen-
fible, however, of their inability to support what
their zeal had prompted them to undertake, and
desirous of securing a protector against the formi-
dable forces by which they might expet Coon to be
attacked, they Cent Come of their number to Fran-
cis, offering not only to acknowledge him as their
sovereign, and to put him in immediate pofeflion
of Ghent, but to aflift him with all their forces
in recovering those provinces in the Netherlands,
which had anciently belonged to the crown of
France, and had been so lately re-united to it by

y Defcrittione di tutti pacfi bafli di Lud. Guicciardini.
Ant. 1 57 . fol.. p 53.

z Memoires fur la revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean

d'Hollander, ecrit en 1547. A la Haye 1747. P. Hleuter.
Kcr. Aultr. lib. xi. p. z62. Sandov. Hifor. tom. ii.
p. 282.

the

the decree :f the parliament of Paris. This un- BOOK VI.
expected proposition coming from persons who -
had it in their power to have performed initantly '539.
one part of what they undertook, and who could
contribute so effectually towards the execution of
the whole, opened vast as well as alluring prof-
peds to Francis's ambition. The counties of
Slanders and Artois were of greater value than
the Dutchy of Milan, which he had so long la-
boured to acquire with passionate but fruitless
delire; their situation with refpedt to France
rendered it more easy to conquer or to defend
them; and they might be formed into a separate
principality for the Duke of Orleans, no less suit-
able to his dignity than that which his father aimed
at obtaining. From this, the Flemings, who were
acquainted with the French manners and govern-
ment, would not have been averse; and his own
fubjeets, weary of their defirudive expeditions
into Italy, would have turned their arms towards
this quarter with more good will, and with greater
vigour. Several considerations, nevertheless, pre- Francis de-
vented Francis from laying hold of this oppor- Clies "'
tunity, the most favourable in appearance which
had ever presented itself, of extending his domi-
nions or diltrefjing the Emperor. From the time of
their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles had con-
tinued to court the King of France with wonderful
attention; and often flattered him with hopes of
gratifying at last his wishes concerning the Mila-
nefe, by granting the investiture of it either to him
or to one of his Cons, But though these hopes and
promises were thrown out with no other intention
than to detach him from his confederacy with the
grand Seignor, or to raise suspicions in Solyman's
mind by the appearance of a cordial and familiar
intercourse subsisting between the courts of Paris

Y f 2 and

BOOK VI. and Madrid, Francis was weak enough to catch

v'-1- at the shadow by which he had been so often de-
1539. ceived, and from eagernels to seize it, relinquish-

ed what must have proved a more substantial ac-
quifition. BeGides this, the Dauphin jealous to
excess of his brother, and unwilling that a Prince
who teemed to be of a restless and, enterprising
nature flould obtain an eftabllhmnient,-which from
its lituation might be confideted almost as a do.
mesic one, made use of Miontrmorecy, who, by
a singular piece of good fortune, was at the fame
time the favourite of the father and of the son,
to defeat the application of the Flemipgs, and to
divert the King from eipoufing their cause. Mont
morency represented accordingly the reputation
and power which Francis would acquire by reco-
vering that footing which he had formerly in Italy,
and that nothing could be so eficciiUs to over-
come the Emperor's aversion to this, as his ad-
hering sacredly to the truce, and rufuling on this
occasion to countenance his rebellioas subjects,
Francis, apt of hinnfelE to over-rate the value of the
Milanese, because he eftinated it frrom the length
of time as well as from the great efor.ts which he
had employed in order to re conquer it, and fond
of every adion which had the appearance of gc-
nerofity, afented without difficultyt o fentimeirs
so agreeable to his own, rejected the propositions
of the citizens of Ghent, and dismissed their de-
puties with an harsh aniwer a,

Ctommui'- NOT fiatisfied with this, by a farther refinement
cates their in generosity, he communicated to the Empeior
'inentiOn his whole negotiation with the malecontents, and
to the Em- ' w w
peror.

a Mem. de Bellay, p. 263. P. Icuter. Rer. Auirl
lib. xi. p. 26'.

aH

all that he knew of their schemes and intentions b. BOOK VI;
This convincing proof of Francis'sdifintereftednefs i --
relieved Charles from the most disquieting appre- '539'
henfions, and opened a way to extricate himself
out of all difficulties. He had already received full
information of all the tranfadtions in the Nether-
lands, and of the rage with which the people of
Ghent had taken arms against his government.
He was thoroughly acquainted with the genius
and qualities of his fubjets in that country; with
their love of liberty; their attachment to their
ancient privileges and cufftoms; as well as the
invincible obstinacy with which their minds, flow
but firm and persevering, adhered to any measure
on which they had leiture to fix. He easily saw
what encouragement a[id support they would have
derived from the assistance of France; though now
free from any danger on that quarter, he was fill
sensible that some immediate and vigorous inter-
position was necessary in order to prevent the spirit
of difaffedtion and rebellion from spreading in a
country where the number of cities, the multitude
of people, together with the great wealth diffused
among them by commerce, rendered it peculiarly
formidable, and would fupplyit with inexhaustible
resources. No expedient, after long delibe- Charles's
ration, appeared to him so effectual as his going tionbeon-
in perlbn to the Netherlands; and the governess terning his
his siser being of the fame opinion, warmly so- Jhurney t
licited him to undertake the journey. There were lands.
only two different routs which he could take; one
by land through Italy and Germany, the other,
entirely by sea, from some port in Spain to one in
the Low-Countries. But the former was more
tedious than suited the present exigency of his
affairs; nor could he in confillency with his dig-

b Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. 284.

F f 3 nity

BOOK VI. nityor even his safety pass through Germany with-
k-vi out such a train both of attendants and of troops,

1539. as would have added greatly to the time that he

muff have consumed in his journey; the latter
was dangerous at this season, and not to be ven.
tured upon, while he was on bad terms with the
King of England, unless under the convoy of a
powerful fleet. This perplexing situation in which
he was under a necessity of choofing, and did not
know what to choose, inspired him at last with the
singular and seemingly extravagant thought of
pafling through France, as the moit expeditious

Propoes to way of reaching the Netherlands. He proposed
rs, through in his council to demand Francis's permission for

ra that purpose. All his counfellorsjoined with one

voice in condemning the measure as no less rash
than unprecedented, and which must infallibly
expose him to disgrace or to danger; to disgrace,
if the demand was rejected in the manner that
he had reason to expect; to danger, if he put his
person in the power of an enemy whom he had
often offended, who had ancient injuries to re-
venge, as well as subjects of present contest still
remaining undecided. But Charles who had
ltudied the charater of his rival with greater
care, and more profound discernment than any
of his ministers, persisted in his plan, and flat-
tered himself that it might be accomplished not
only without danger to his own person, but even
without the expence of any concellion detrimen-
tal to his crown.

To which WITH this view he communicated the matter to
Francis on- the French ambassador at his court, and sent Gran.

velle his chief minister to Paris, in order to obtain
from Francis permiflion to pals through his do
minions, and to promise that he would soon fetlle
the affair of the Milanese to his fatisfadion;

but

but at the fame time to intreat that he would not BOOK VI.
exaCt any new promise, or even insist on former .,
engagements, at this junture, left whatever he 1539'
(hould grant, under his present circumfiances,
might seem rather to be extorted by neceflity,
than to flow from friendship or the love of justice.
Francis, instead of attending to the snare which
such a flight artifice scarce concealed, was so
dazzled with the splendour of overcoming an
enemy by ats of generosity, and so pleated with
the air of superiority, which the rectitude and
disinterestedness of his proceedings gave him on
this occasion, that he at once assented to all that
was demanded. Judging of the Emperor's heart
by his own, he imagined that the sentiments of
gratitude, arising from the remembrance of good
offices and liberal treatment, would determine
him more forcibly to fulfil what he had so often
promised, than the most precise itipulations that
could be inserted in any treaty.

UPON this, Charles, to whom every moment His recp-

was precious, set out, notwithstanding the fears ion in tha'
and suspicions of his Spanish fubjedts, with a
small but splendid train of an hundred persons.
At Bayonne, on the frontiers of France,he was re-
ceived by the Dauphin and the Duke of Orleans,
attended by the constable Montmorency. The
two Princes offered to go into Spain, and to
remain there as hostages for the Emperor's safety ;
but this he rejected, declaring, that he relied with
implicit confidence on the King's honour, and had
nex er demanded, nor would accept of any other
pledge for his security. In all the towns through
which he passed, the greatest poflible magnificence
was displayed; the magistrates presented him the
keys of the gates ; the prison doors were set open;
and by the royal honours paid to him, he appeared

F f 4 more

.Bouo VI. wore like the sovereign of the country, than a
_-,---' stranger. The King advanced as tar as Chatel.

1539. herault to meet him; their interview was diftin-

guifhed by the warmest expreflions of friendship
and regard. They proceeded together towards
Paris, and presentcd to the inhabi tants of that city,
theextraordinary fpedtacle of tworival Monarchs,
whose enmity had disturbed aid laid waste Europe,
during twenty years, making their solemn entry
together, with all the symptoms of confidence and
harmony, as if they had forgotten, for ever, past
injuries, and would never revive hostilities for the
future c

TheEm- CHARLES remained fix days at Paris, but
peror's 1- amidst the perpetual carefles of the French court,

and the various entertainments contrived to amule
or to do him honour, he dilcovered an extreme im-
patience to continue his journey, arising as much
from an apprehension of danger which constantly
oppressed him, as from the neceflity of his pre-
fence in the Low-Countries. Conscious of tl:. dif-
ingenuj,ty of his own intentions, hse ticniled when
he reflected, that some fatal accident n ight betray
them to his rival, or lead him to fufped them;
and though his artifices to conceal there should be
successful, he could not help fearing that motives
ofintereft, might at lait triumph over the scruples
of honour, and tempt Francis to avail himfclf of
the advantage now in his hands. Nor were there
wanting pt Ifons among the Fiench ministers, who
adviftd tie Ki g to turn his own arts againll tlie
Em, eror, and as the retribution due for so many
instances of fraud or fallehood, to size and detain

c Thuan. Hilt. lib. i. c. 14. Memn. de Bellay, -64.

hi?

his perfbn, till he granted him full fatisfaioion with BOOK VI.
regard to all the jufft claims of the French crown.
But no consideration could induce Francis to vio- 1540'
late the faith which he had pledged, nor could
any argument convince him, that Charles, after
all the promises that he had given, and all the
favours which he had received, might flill be ca-
pable of deceiving him. Full of this false confi-
dence, he accompanied him to St. Quintin, and
the two Princes, who had met him on the borders
of Spain, did not take leave of him, until he en-
tered his dominions in the Low-countries.

As loon as the Emperor reached his own terri- ail ;si 21-

tories, the French ambassadors demanded the ac- .",y *
complifhment of what he had promised, concern-
irg the investiture of Milan, but Charles, under
the plausible pretext, that his whole attention was
then engrossed by the consultations neceflary to-
wards fupprefling the rebellion in Ghent, put off
the matter for tome time. But in order to prevent
Francis from fulpeting his sincerity, he still con-
tinued to talk of his resolutions with refpeft to
that matter, in the iame strain as when he entered
France, and even wrote to the King much to the
fame purpose, though in general terms, and with
equivocal exprellions, which he might afterwards
explain away or interpret at pleasure d.

BME A NWH I LU, the unIfortunate citizens of Ghent, Rcaltion

de lii ott ofleaders c ipable either ofdirecding their of GIoent,
co0iIn,:i!s, or co,,(duti')g their troops; abandoned
by the French King, and unfiipported by their
('ctuntrynln ; were unable to resist their offended
I,\ reign; wlho was ready to advance against them
vith one body of troops, which he had raised in

d Mcmoires de Ribirr, i. ,04.

the

BOOK VI, the Netherlands, with another drawn out of Ger-
^V^-' many, and a third which had arrived from Spain

40 by sea. The near approach of danger made them,

at last, so sensible of their own folly, that they
fcnt ambassadors to the emperor imploring his mer-
cy, and offering to set open their gates at his ap-
proach. Charles without vouchsafing them any
other answer, than that he would appear among
them as their sovereign, with the sceptre and the
sword in his hand, began his march at the head of
his troops. Though he chore to enter the city on
the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, he
was touched with nothing of that tenderness or in-

and dulgence which was natural towards the place of

mentofthe his nativity. Twenty-fix of the principal citizens
citizens. were put to death; a greater number was lent
Ap: 10. into banishment: the city was declared to have

forfeited all its privileges and immunities; the re-
venues belonging to it were confiscated; its anci.
ent form of government was abolished : the nomi-
nation of its magiflrates was vested for the future
in the emperor and his successors; a new system
of laws and political administration was prefcrib-
ed b, and in order to bridle the seditious spirit of
the citizens a firong citadel was appointed to be e-
redted, for defraying the expence of which a fine
of an hundred and fifty thousand florins was imn
posed on the inhabitants, together with an annual
tax of fix thousand florins for the support of a gar-
rifon c. By these rigorous proceedings, Charles
not only punished the citizens of Ghent, but set
an aw ful example of severity before his other sub-
jetls in the Netherlands, whose immunities and
privileges, partly the effect, partly the cause of
their extensive commerce, circumscribed the royal

I, Les coutumes & loix du Compt: de Flandre, par Alex.
le Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom i. p. 169.

c Haraei Annales Brabantix, vol. i. 616.

prerogative

prerogative within very narrow bounds, and often BOOK VI.
stood in the way of measures which he wished to '--
undertake, or fettered and retarded him in his 540'
operations.

CHARLES having thus vindicated and re-ela- Charlesre-

blilhed his authority in the Low-Countries, and sues toful-
being now under no neceflity of continuing the gagernents
fame bcene of falsehood and dissimulation with to Francis.
which he had long amused Francis, began gradu-
ally to throw aside the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with reect to the Mila-
nefe. At first, he eluded the demands of the French
ambassadors when they again reminded him of his
promises; then he proposed, by way.of equivalent
for the dutchy of Milan, to grant the Duke of
Orleans the invefliture of Slanders, clogging the
offer, however, with impracticable conditions, or
such as he knew would be rejeted d. At iaft,
being driven from all his evasions and subterfuges
by their insisting for a categorical answer, he pe-
remptorily refuted to give up a territory of such
value, or voluntarily to make fiuch a liberal addi-
tion to the strength of an enemy by diminishing
his own power e. He denied at the fame time,
that he had ever made any promise which could
bind him to an action so foolish, and so contrary
to his own interest f

OF all the actions in the Emperor's life, this,

without doubt, reflcts the greatell difbonomi on
his reputation g. Tho' Charles was not extreme-
ly scrupulous at other times about the means
which he employed for accomplishing his ends, or
always observant of the ftrit precepts of veracity
and honour, he had hitherto maintained some re-
gard for the maxims of that leTs precise and rigid

d Mem. de Ribicr, i. 509. ti4. e Ribier, i. 519.
f Belay, 365-6. g Juvii iii lib. xxxix p. z3' a.

mlr;ality

Booi VI. morality by which monarchs think themselves en.

-----' titled to regulate their conduc. But on this oc-
1540. cafion, the scheme that he formed, of deceivinga

generous and open-hearted Prince; the illiberal
and mean artifices by which he carried it on ; the
insensibility with which he received all the marks
of his friendship, and the ingratitude with which
he requited them are all equally unbecoming the
dignity of his character, and inconsistent with the
grandeur of his views.

THIS transaction exposed Francis to as much

scorn as it did the Emperor to censure. After the
experience of a long reign, after so many opportu-
nities of discovering the duplicity and artifices of
his rival, the credulous simplicity with which he
trusted him at this juncture seemed to merit no
other return than it actually met with. Francis,
however, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this
had been the first instance in which the Emperor
had deceived him Feeling, as is usual, the iniult
which was offered to his understanding frill more
sensibly than the injury done to his interest, he
discovered such resentment as made it obvious
that he would lay hold on the firfl opportunity of
being revenged, and that a war, nolefs rancorous
than that which had so lately raged, would soon
break out anew in Europe.

The Poe THIS year is rendered memorable by the efa.
theinni- blithment of the order of Jesuits ; a body whole
onoftheOi- influence on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs
itl. hath been so colficderable, that an account of the

genius of its laws and government juttly merits a
place in hiflory. When men take a view of the
rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable pru-
dence with which it has been governed ; wher
they attend to the persevering and fyftematick pi-

Ir"

tit with which its schemes have been carried on; Boos VI.
they are apt to ascribe such a singular institution '-
to the superior wisdom of its founder, and to fiup- 1540.
pose that he had formed and digested his plan with
profound policy. But the Jeluits, as well as the
other monaltic orders, are indebted for the exif-
tence of their order not to the wisdom of their
founder, but to his enthufiafrn. Ignatio Loyola,
whom 1 have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which hle received in defending Pampe-
luna h, was a fanatick diftinguilhed by extrava-
gancies in sentiment and conduct, no Ids incom-
patible with the maxims of fober reason, than re-
pugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary fchemcs, in which his
enthusiasm engaged him, equal any thing record-
ed in the legends of the Romish faints i but un-
worthy of notice in history.

PROMPTDn.by this fanatical spirit, or incited by Fanatcifin

the love of power and diftindion, from which fofL it
such pretenders to superior fandity are not exempt,
Loyola was ambitious of becoming the founder of
a religious order. The plan which he formed of
its constitution and laws, was suggested, as he
gave out, and as his followers fill teach, by the
immediate inspiration of heaven i. But notwith-
flanding this high pretension, his design met at
first with violent opposition rhe Pope, to whom
Loyolahad applied for the sanction of his autho-
rity to confirm the infitution, referred his petiti-
on to a committee of Cardinals. They represent-
ed the eftabliflment to be unnecessary as well as
dangerous, and Paul refused to grant his appro-
bation of it. At lalt, Loyola removed all his fcru-

h Book iip. 13p .
i Compterondu des CtonltitLtions des Jesuites, au Parle-
ment de Provence, par M. de Monclar. p. 285. p

pIes

Bool VI. pies by an offer which it was impoflible for any

'v"- Pope to resist. He proposed that betides the three
Th1540e vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monaftick
motives for obedience, which are common to all mohadtic or-
confirming
th ofre ders, the members of his society should take a

fourth vow of obedience to the Pope, binding
themselves to go whithersoever he should command
for the service of religion, and without requiring
any thing from the Holy See for their support. At
a time when the papal authority had received such
a ihock by the revolt of so many nations from the
Romish church; at a time when every part of the
popish system was attacked with lb much violence
and success, the acquisition of a body of men, thus
peculiarly devoted to the fee of Rome, and whom
it might set in opposition to all its enemies, was
an object of the highest consequence. Paul, in-
Se. , aftantly perceived this, confirmed the institution of

the Jesuits by his bull; granted the most ample
privileges to the members of the society;, and ap-
pointed Loyola to be the first General of the order,
The event had fully justified Paul's discernment,
in expecting such beneficial consequences to the
fee of Rome from this institution. In less than half
a century, the society obtained establishments in
every country that adhered to the Roman catholic
church; its power and wealth encreafed amazing-
ly; the number of its members became great;
their character and accomplishments were still
greater; and the Jesuits were celebrated by the
friends, and dreaded by the enemies of the Romish
faith, as the most able and enterprizing order in
the church.

ks con01fitu- THE conflititution and laws of the society were
tion and ge- perfected by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two ge-
niuf, merit
paticuIir nerals who Succeeded Loyola, men far filperior
attention. to their rafter in abilities, and in the science of

government.

government. They framed that system of pro- BOOK VI.
found and artful policy which distinguished the '/^
order. The large infusion of fanaticism, mingled 1540.
with its regulations, should be imputed to Loyola
its founder. Many circumstances concurred in
giving a peculiarity of character to the order of
Jesuits, and in forming the members of it not on-
ly to take greater part in the affairs of the world
than any other body of monks, but to acquire fu-
perior influence in the conduct of them.

THE primary object of almost all the monastic The objeet

of the order

orders is to separate men from the world, and from tgh,!ade.
any concern in its affairs. In the iblitude and si-
lence of the cloister, the monk is called to work
out his own salvation by extraordinary acts of mor-
tification and piety. He is dead to the world, and
ought not to mingle in its tranfadions. He can be
of no benefit to mankind, but by his example and
by his prayers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are
taught to confider themselves as formed for action.
They are chosen soldiers, bound to exert them-
selves continually in the service of God, and of
the Pope, his v icar on earth. Whatever tends to
inffruC the ignorant; whatever can be of use to
reclaim or to oppose the enemies of the Holy See,
is their proper object. That they may have full
leisure for this active service, they are totally ex-
empted from those functions, the performance of
which is the chief business of other monks. They
appear in no procefiions; they pradife no rigorous
aufterities ; they do not consume one half of their
time in the repetition of tedious offices k. But they
are required to attend to all the tranfadions of the
world, on account of the influence which these

k Comptc Rendu, par M de Monclar. p. 13. 290. Sur.
la defiruat. des Jesuites, par M D'Alembcrt, p. 4 :.

nnay

BOoK VI. may have on religion; they are direaed to fludy

the dispositions of persons in high rank, and to cul-
3540. tivate their friendship l; and by the very conftitu-

tion as well as genius of the order, a spirit of ac-
tion and intrigue is infused into all its members.

Peculiarities As the obje& of the society of Jesuits differed
in the form
of its policy, from that of the other monastic orders, the diver-
particularly fity was no less in the form of its government.
to the power The other orders are to be confidered as voluntary
f the gene- associations, in which whatever affects the whole

body, is regulated by the common suffrage of all
its members. The executive power is vested in
the persons placed at the head of each convent, or
of the whole society; the legislative authority re-
fides in the community. Affairs of moment, re-
lating to particular convents, are determined in
conventual chapters; luch as refped the whole or-
der are confidered in general congregations. But
Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedience,
which he had derived from his military profeflion,
appointed that the government of his order should
be purely monarchical. A General, chosen for life
by the deputies from the several provinces, pof-
ieffed power that was supreme and independent,
extending to every person, and to every cafe. He,
by his Cole authority, nominated provincials, reLtors,
and every other officer employed in the govern-
ment of the society, and could remove them at
pleasure. In him was vested the sovereign admi-
niftration of the revenues and funds of the or-
der. Every member belonging to it was at
his dilpofal; and by his uncontrollable man-
date, he could impose on them any task, or em-
ploy them in what service soever he"pleafid. To
his commands they were required to yield not

i Compte par M. de Monclar. p. 12.

only

only outward obedience, but to resign up to him Boor VI.
the inclinations of their own wills, and the senti- ---
ments of their own ulnderftandings. They were to £540
liften to his injuncions, as if they had been ut-
tered by Christ himself Under his diretion, they
were to be mere palfive instruments, like clay in
the hands of the potter, or like dead carcasses in-
capable of refitance m. Such a singular form of
policy could not fail to impress its character on all
the members of the order, and to give a peculiar
force to all its operations. There is not in the
annals of mankind any example of such a perfec
despotism, exercised not over monks (hut up in
the cells of a convent, but over men dispersed
among all the nations of the earth.

As the constitutions of the order vest, in the Circumrlan.

General, such absolute dominion over all its mem- enb which
bers, they carefully provide for his being perfedtly to exercise
informed with refped to the charader and abilities it ith the
of his fubjets. Every novice who offers himself vantage.
as a candidate for entering into the order, is
obliged to manifef bis conscience to the superior, or
to a person appointed by him; and is required to
confess not only his fins and defets, but to dif-
cover the inclinations, the passions, and the bent of
his foul. This manifestation must be renewed
every fix months i'. The society not satisfied vith
penetrating in this manner into the innermoll re-
cefes of the heart, directs each member to ob-
serve the words and ations of the novices; they
are constituted spies upon their conduct; and are
bound to disclose every thing of importance con-
cerning them to the superior. In order that this
scrutiny into their character may be as compleat as

m Compte rendu au Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Cha-
lotais, p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Moncl:;r. 83. 85. 334.

n Compte par M. de Monclar. p. l z , &c.
VOL. II. G g poflible,

BOOK VI. poflible, a long noviciate must expire, during which
'-v- -- they pass through the several gradations of ranks

1540' in the society, and they mufi have attained

the full age of thirty three years, before they
can b'. admitted to take the final vows, by which
they become prfcffed members o. By these va-
rious rntthods, the superiors, under whose in-
mediate i:ifpection the novices are placed, acquire
a thorough knowledge of their difplofitions and ta-
I.nts In order that tlie General, who is tlhe foul
that animates and moves the whole society, may
have under :is eye every thing neceflary to in-
f)rm or dirct him, the provincials and heads of
the several hourss are obliged to transmit to him
regular and fiequ.nt reports concerning the mem-
b2rs under their inspeCtion. In there they descend
into minute details with refped to the charafter of
each person, his abilities natural or acquired, his
temper, his experience in affairs, and the parti-
cular department for which lie is best fitted i.
There reports, when digested and arranged, are

entered

c Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la deft. des Jef.
? ar MI. D'Alemb p. 39

P M. dc halctais has made a calculation of the number

of there rclorts, which the general of the Jesuits muif an-
nually receive according t') the rgulations of th. focicty.
These amount in all to 6; F . If this fum be divided by 37,
the numbrr cf t;rc\ inccs in the order, it appears that i 7
repo;it concerningi tll.' iate of each province are tranfinit:ed
to Rome annually. uCoptc, r, 52. Besides this. there m;ny
be cxtri(.rdinarv I ti'rs, or such as are sent by the monitors
or spies w h.ich tlc pencral pnd provincials entertain in each
l]oule. Compte p.'r 1M. de MToncl. p 431. Hill. des Jesuites,
Amri. 1 76: te iv p. r6. '1 he provincials and lieads of
houses not cr.lv report concerning the memlers of the so-
ciet;, i u: ca,- bIund tco give the general an account cf the
civii af.airs of the country wherein they are fettled, in so
far as th .:lge o es thefc may be of benefit to religion.
This c-ndition may extend to every particular, so that the

general

entered into registers, kept of purpose that the BooK VI.
General may, at one comprehentive \ icw, survey ' ^
the slate of the fuciety in every corner of the '540
earth; observe the qualifications and talents of
its members; and thus choose, with perfect infor-
mation, the instruments, which his absolute pow-
er can employ in any service fur which he thinks
meet to deftinc them .

As it was the profeff-d intention of the order Progress
"

the power

of Jesuits to labour with unwearied zeal in pro- and in-
rmoting the salvation of men, this enga.ged them, fl'n'ho ot
of course, in many a.tive fundtions. From tlieir
first inflitutign, they confidered the education of
youth as their peculiar province ; they aimed at
being fpiritial guides and (cnfefFirs; they preach-
ed frequently in order to intflruR the people; they
set out as miflionaries to convert unbelieving na-
tions. The novelty of the institution, as well as
the singularity of its objedts, procured the Order
many admirers and patrons. The governors of
the lociety had the address to avail themselves of
every circumflance in its favour, and in a short
time, the number as well as influence of its
members encrealed wonderfully. Before the ex-
piration of the sixteenth century, the Jefuiits had
obtained the chi'.f direction of the education of
,'outh in every catholic country in Europe. They
hadc become the confi.fors of almost all its mo-

v'tneral is furnihlid with full informati-n concerning the
rr:n:f;liions of everv Prince and li;tte in the world.
L'ompte par M. de Moncl. 41 3. Hill. des Jefilit ibid. p 5X.
When the aftfirs with rc:fpet to which the provincials or
rl'.q:r: write arc of importance, they are dirc'ted to use cy-
I,'n-rs, and each of thml h;as a particular cypher from tiie
; ,ceral. Compte par M. de hlalotais, p. 54.
q Compte par M. de Moncl p. 215. 543.--Compte par
1d de Clialotai, p. e. 222.

G g 2 na;c1s,

BOOK VI. narchs, a fundion of no small importance in any
~'v' reign, but under a weak Prince, superior even

540. to that of minister. They were the spiritual

guides of almost every person eminent for rank or
power. They possessed the highest degree of con-
fidence and interest with the papal court, as the
most zealous and able champions for its authority.
The advantages which an active and enterprising
body of men might derive from all these circum-
stances are obvious. They formed the minds of
men in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in theiradvanced years. They possessed,
at different periods, the direction of the most
considerable courts in Europe. They mingled in
all affairs. They took part in every intrigue and
revolution. The General, by means of the ex-
tensive intelligence which he received, could re.
gulate the operations of the order with the most
perfect discernment, and by means of his ab-
solute power could earry them on with the utmost
vigour and effet r.

Progrers of TOGETHER with the power of the order, its
itswealth. wealth continued to encreafe. Various expedients

were devised for eluding the obligation of the
vow of poverty. The order acquired ample pof-
feflions in every catholic country; and by the

rWhen Loyola in the year 40 petitioned the Pope to au

thorife the institution of the order, he had only ten disciples,
But in the year z6o8, fixty-eight years after their first in-
flitution, the number of Jesuits had encreafed to ten thou-
sand five hundred and eighty-one. In the year 1710, the
order possessed twenty-fourprofsed houses ; fifty-nine houses
of probation ; three hundred and forty residences; fix hun-
dred and twelve colleges; two hundred millions; one
hundred and fifty seminaries and boarding schools; and
confiRed of 19,998 Jesuits. Hill. des Jesuites, tom. i.
p. 20.

number

number as well as magnificence of its publicBOOK VL
buildings, together with the value of its pro-'---'-
perty, moveable or real, it vied with the molt 1540'
opulent of the monastic fraternities. Besides the
sources of wealth common to all the regular cler-
gy, the Jesuits pofeffded one which was peculiar
to themselves. Under pretext of promoting the
success of their millions, and of facilitating the
support of their miflionaries, they obtained a
special license from the court of Rome, to trade
with the nations which they laboured to convert.
In confeqnence of this, they engaged in an ex-
tensive and lucrative commerce, both in the East
and Weft Indies. They opened ware-houCes in
different parts of Europe, in which they vended
their commodities. Not satisfied with trade alone,
they imitated the example of other commercial
societies, and aimed at obtaining settlements,
They acquired possession accordingly of a large
and fertile province in the southern continent of
America, and reigned as sovereigns over some
hundred thousand fubje¢ts',

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influence Pernicious

which the order of Jesuits acquired by all thele hrn'ci-
different means, has been often exerted with the vii society.
most pernicious effect. Such was the tendency of
that discipline observed by the society in forming
its members, and such the fundamental maxims
in its constitution, that every Jefiit was taught
to regard the interest of the order as the capital
object, to which every consideration was to be
sacrificed. This spirit of attachment to their or.
der, the most ardent, perhaps, that ever influen-
ced any body of men t, is the charateriftic prin-

f Hilt. des Jef . iv168-196, &c.
t Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 285,

g 3 ciple

tooK VI. ciple of the Jesuits, and serves as a key to the
k' -- genius of their policy, and to the peculiarities in

IS'tO their sentiments and condut.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the

society, that its members should poffcfs an afc'en-
dant over persons in high rank or of great power,
the desire of acquiring and prelerving iuch a di-
rection of their condui, with greater facility, has
led the Jesuits to propagate a lyftem of relaxed
and pliant morality, which accommodates itself
to the paflions of men, which jullifies their vices,
which tolerates their imperfect'ions, which autho-
riles almost every aCdion that the moti audacious
or crafty politician would wilh to perpetrate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

conneded with tihe prefrvation of the papal au-
thlority, the Jefuiis, influenced by the fame prin-
ciple of attaclihfentlto the interests of their so.
ciety, have been the mofl zealous patrons of tlofe
dodtrines, which tnd to exalt ecclesiastical power
on the ruins of civil government. They have
attribute ' to the cotrrt of Rome ajurifiitoion as
extlnfivc and abtiilute as was claimed by the most
prefilmpttuous po,'tiffsin the dark ages. They
have (ontended for tile entire independence of
ecclefiafnlis on the civil magillrate. They have
publifled Ilich tenets conce!ning the duty of op-
poling Princes who were enemies of the catholic
faith, as countenanced the imfOC atrocious cr;nies,
ar:d tended to diflblve all the ties which conne't
fibjeds with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and

authority from the zeal with which it ft'od si rth
in defence ,of the Romifli church againit the at-

tacks

tacks of the reformers, its members, proud of Boos VI.
this diftindion, have confidered it as their pecu- t
liar function to combat the opinions, and to check '1540.
the progress of the Protestants. They have made
use of every art, and have employed every wea-
pon against them. They have (tt themlt'nles in
opposition to every gentle or tolerating meaf'lre
in their favour.. They have iiicel.antly flirted
up against them all the rage of eccl'fiallical andr
civil pt-rlecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious doatrines,
and have held opinions equally inconfitlet will!
the order and happiness of civil bociety. But
they, from reasons which are obvious, have ei-
ther delivered such opinions with greater reierve,
or have propagated them with less fuccels. Who-
ever recollects the events which have happened
in Europe during two centuries, will find that the
Jesuits mayjuitly be confidered as refponlible for
most of the pernicious efft-s arising from that
corrupt and dangerous cafiiftry, from those ex-'
travagant tenets concerning ecclesiastical power,
and from that intolerant spirit, which have been
the diigrace of' the church of Rrome throutghour
that period, and which have brought l;) many cu-
lamitics upon civil society v.

BUT amidll many bad con; (iIIenct s fld;. .il,

..

i ' 3':-

from the inltiittion of this order, rnankiln , iit ,',i';1:' ; ,,.
mull be acknowledged, have iderived from it Ior i le il!,li;l-
considerable advantages. As the Jeltlts mad: I','',1''t L"
the education of youth one of' their capiftal oh-
jeds, and as their first attempts to cftbiljlil col-

v Encyclopcdic, Art. '/mir i, tiom v:ii. 513.

G g 4 It?'.:

Boor VI. leges for the reception of tudent$ were violently
'---' opposed by the universities in different countries,

5540' it became n:ecessary for them, as the most effec-

tual method of acquiring the public favour, to
surpass their rivals in science and indufiry. This

Particularly prompted them to cultivate with great ardor the
tp!iterature. fiudy of ancient literature. This put them upon

various methods for facilitating the inftrustion of
youth; and by the improvements which they
made in it, they have contributed not a little to-
wards the progress of polite learning, and have
on this account merited well of society. Nor
has the order of Jesuits been successful only in
teaching the elements of literature, it has pro-
duced likewise eminent masters in many branches
of science, and can alone boast of a greater num-
ber of ingenious authors, than all the other re-
ligious fraternities taken together x.

x M. d'Alembert has observed that though theJefuits

have made etraordinaryprogrefs in eruditionof every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who have
been eminent mathematicians, antiquarians, and critics;
though they have even formed Come orators of reputation;
yet the order has never produced one man, whose mind was
so much enlightened with found knowledge, as to merit the
name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable
este& of monastic education to contrat and fetter the human
kind. The partial attachment of a monk to the interell of
his order, which is often incompatible with that of other
citizens; the habit of implicit obedience to the will of a
superior, together with the freqtent return of the weari-
some and frivolous duties of the cloifler, debase his facul-
-ties, and extinguish that generosity of {entiment and spirit,
which qualifies men for thinking or feeling jufily with rtl-
pet to what is proper in life and conduc. Father Paul of
Venice is, perhaps, the only person educated in a cloifler,
that ever was altogether superior to its prejudices, or who
viewed the transactions of men, and reasoned concerning
the interests of society, with the enlarged sentiments of a
philosopher, with the discernment of a man conversant in
affairs, and with the liberality of a gentleman.

BUT

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have BooK VI.

exhibited the most wonderful display of their abi-
lities, and have contributed most effectually to the More rpe.
benefit of the human species. The conquerors of citly from

the fettle-

that unfortunate quarter of the globe had nothing ment of th
in view but to plunder, to enslave, and to exter- Jeruits in
minate its inhabitants. The Jesuits alone have Paraguay.
made humanity the object of their fettling there.
About the beginning of the last century they ob-
tained admission into the fertile province of Para-
guay, which stretches across the southern conti-
nent of America, from the bottom of the moun-
tains of Potofi to the confines of the Spanish and
Portuguese settlements on the banks of the river
de la Plata: they found the inhabitants in a state
little different from that which takes place among
men when they firtf begin to unite together; firan-
gers to the arts; subsisting precariously by hunt-
ing or fishing; and scarce acquainted with the
first principles of subordination and government.
The Jesuits set themselves to inftrut and to civilise
these savages. They taught them to cultivate the
ground, to rear tame animals, and to build houses.
They brought them to live together in villages.
They trained them to arts and manufactures.
They made them tafle the sweets of society; and
accustomed them to the bleflings of security and
order. There people became the fubjectsof their
benefacors; who have governed them with a ten-
der attention, resembling that, with which a fa-
ther directs his children. RespeCted and beloved
alinoft to adoration, a few Jesuits presided over
some hundred rhoufand Indians. They maintain-
ed a perfec equality among all the members of
the community. fach of them was obliged to
labour not for himself alone, but for the public.
The produce of their fields, together with the
fruits of their indutfry of every species, were de-
pnfited in common florehoufes, from which each
individual received every thing necessary for the
lipply of his wants. Ey this ins itution, almost all

the

BOOK VI. the passions A hich diaturb the peace of society, and

- rendter the members of it unhappy, were extin-
40 guilhed. A few magifRrates, cholen by the Indi-

ans themselves, watched over the publick tran-
quillity, and secured obedience to the laws. The
sanguinary punishments frequent under other go-
vernments were unknown. An admonition from
a Jesuit; a flight mark of infamy; or, on rome
singular occasion, a few lathes with a whip, were
sufficient to maintain good order among these in-
nocent and happy people y.

Even here BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Jelu-
hnd plicon its for the good of mankind, the genius and spirit
the older of their order have mingled and are discernible.
dilcinible. They plainly aimed at eflablilhing in Paraguay

an independent empire subjed to the society alone,
and which, by the superior excellence of its con-
fiitution and police, could scarce have failed to
extend its dominion over all the southern conti-
nent of America. With this view, in order to
prevent the Spaniards or Portuguele in the adja-
cent settlements from acquiring any influence over
the people whom they governed that might be
dangerous, the Jelisits endeavoured to inspire the
Indians with hatred and contempt of thele nati-
ons. They cut off all intercourse bet-ween their
fibie:ts and the Spanith or Portuguele fettle-
nients. They prohibited any private trader ot
either nation trom entering their territories. W\liii
they were obliged to admit any perion in a publici
charader from the neighbouring governments,
they did not permit him to have any converlitioi
with their fubjecas, and no Indian was allow'.Cl
even to enter the hliotic where thlrel trangers re
fided, unless in the pretence of a leflir. n1L order
to render any communicatien between them .1

y Hill. de Paraguay par Pcee dc Cliarlevi^, torn, ii,. ,

Xc. Voyage au lserou par I)on C(. Juan .I 1). Antl de 1
loat. t(om. i 5}^, c !1 0 I, '.
j 17- . -

'
* * ~~~i~lict'

difficult as pofible, they indufirioufly avoided giv- BOOK Vt.
ing the Indians any knowledge of the Spanilh----'
or any other European language; but encouraged 1540.
the different tribes, which they had civilized, to
acquire a certain diale& of the Indian tongue, and
laboured to make that the universal language
throughout their dominions. As all these precau-
tions, without military force, would have been in-
sufficient to have rendered their empire secure and
permanent, they inftrufed their fubjets in the
European arts of war. They formed them into
bodies of cavalry and infantry, completely arm-
ed and regularly disciplined. They provided a
great train of artillery, as well as magazines ftor-
ed with all the implements of war. Thus they
eftablifled an army so numerous and well ap-
pointed, as to be formidable in a country, where
a few sickly and ill disciplined battalions compol-
ed all the military force kept on foot by theSpani-
ards or Portuguese z.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of R:nfr,r°

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with aviewfthe
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous tenden- govcrnmcnt

and pr,)grels

cy of the institution, and checked its progress . ot the order.
But as the order was founded in the period of
which I write the hillory, and as the age to which
I address this work hath seen its fall, the view
which I have exhibiteld of' the laws and genius of
this formidable body will not, I hope, be unac-
ceptable to my re:d'lrs; elpeciailly as one circum-
stance hiis cn.i)lId me to enter into this detail
..i:h particular :idvant.ge Europe had observed,
olr two centuries, the ambition and power of the
ollcr. But while it felt many fatal effecs of
thlele, it could not fully dilcern the causes to which

'Vyuge de Juan & dc Ullna, torn. i 549. Recucil dcs

t,'utes les 1Iieces qui ont paru ;fui les Affaires des Jesuites en
PrUrtug:tl, tonl . i.p. 7, t..

'I tulpte palr 1M : M\'1t. p. 312.

tlhcy

Bobr VI. they were to be imputed. It was unacquainted
'- ~- with many of the singular regulations in the poli.

3540. tical constitution or government of the Jesuits,

which formed that spirit of intrigue and enterprize
which distinguished its members, and elevated
the body itself to such a height of power. It was
a favourite maxim with the Jefuitc, from their firfl
institution, not to publish the rules of their order.
These they kept concealed as an impenetrable myf-
tery. They never communicated them to ftran-
gers; nor even to the greater part of their own
members. They refused to produce them when
required by courts ofjufticeb; and by a frange
solecism in policy, the civil power in different
countries authorized or connived at the'eftablifh.
ment of an order of men, whose conffitution and
laws were concealed with a solicitude, which alone
was a good reason for having excluded them.
During the prosecutions lately carried on against
them in Portugal and France, the Jesuits have
been so inconsiderate as to produce the mysterious
volumes of their institute. By the aid of there
authentic records, the principles of their govern-
ment may be delineated, and the sources of their
power investigated with a degree of certainty and
precision, which, previous to that event, it was
impoflible to attain c. But as I have pointed out
the dangerous tendency of the constitution and
spirit of the order with the freedom becoming

b Hifi. des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par M. de
Chalotais, p. 38.

c The greater part of my information concerning the go.

vernment and laws of the order of Jesuits, I have derived
from the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. I
reft not, however, upon the authority even of these refpec-
table magifirates, and elegant writers, but upon innumera-
blepaffages which they have extrafted from the confitutions
of the order, deposited in their hands. Hofpinian, a Pro-
tefart divine of Zurich, in his HlIoria Jeiuitica, printed
A. F, 1619, publilhed a small part of the confitutions of
the Jesuits, of which by fomne accident he had got a copy;
P '3-54-

an

an historian, the candour and impartiality no less BooK VI.
requisite in that character call on me to add one
observation, That no class of regular clergy in the 'i40*
Romish church has been more eminent for decen-
cy, and even purity of manners, than the major
part of the order ofJefuitsd. The maxims of an
intriguing, ambitious, interested policy, might
influence those who governed the society, and
might even corrupt the heart, and pervert the
condut of some individuals, while the greater
number, engaged in literary pursuits, or employed
in the functions of religion, was left to the guidance
of those common principles which restrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and lau-
dable. The causes which occasioned the ruin of this
mighty body, as well as the circumstances and
effects with which it has been attended in the
different countries of Europe, tho' objects ex-
tremely worthy the attention of every intelligent
observer of human affairs, do not fall within the
period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-established order in Affairs o

the Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn Germany.
his attention to the affairs of Germany. The Pro-
teftants pressed him earnefily to appoint that con-
ference between a felet number of the divines of
each party, which had been Itipulated in the con-
vention at Frankfort. The Pope, confidering such
an attempt to examine or decide the points in dif-
pute as derogatory to his right of being the fu-
premejudge in controversy, and persuaded that it
would be either ineffeteual by determining nothing,
or prove dangerous by determining too much, em-
ployed every art to prevent the meeting The
Emperor, however, finding it more for his inte-
reft to tooth the Germans, than to gratify Paul,

d Sur la destruct. des Jef. par M. D'Alembert, p. 55.

paid

BocK1 VI. paid little regard to his remonflrances. In a di-
"'~" et held at Haguenaw, matters were ripened for

5n40. the conference. In another diet assembled at

A confe-
rencebe- Worms, the conference was begun, Melanhlon
tween the
opifl and on the one fide and Eckius on the other, ulftain-
Protestant ing the principal part in the dispute: But after
Junin5. they had made some progress, tho' without con-
Dec. 6. cluding any thing, it was suspended by the Em-

peror's command, that it might be renewed with
greater solemnity in his own presence in a diet
,54,. summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This assembly

was opened with great pomp, and with a general
expectation that its proceedings would be vigo-
rous and decisive. By the content of both parties,
the Emperor was entrusted with the power of no-
minating the persons who should manage the con-
ference, which it was agreed should be conducted
not in the form of a public disputation, but as a
friendly scrutiny or examination into the articles
which had given rife to the present controversies.
He appointed Eckius, Cropper and Pflug, on the
part of the Catholicks, and Melancthon, Bucer
and Piftorius, on that of the Proteffants, all men
of distinguished reputation among their own ad-
herents, and, except Eckius, all eminent for their
moderation, as well as desirous of peace. As they
were about to begin their consultations, the Em.
peror put into their hands a book, composed, as
he faid,by a learned divine in the Low-Countries,
with such extraordinary perspicuity and temper,
as might go far, in his opinion, to unite and com-
prehend the two contending parties. Gropper, a
canon of Cologne, whom ie had named amung
the managers of the conference, a man of addi fs
as well as of erudition, was afterward fufpeded
to be the author of this flort treatise. It contain-
ed positions with regard to twenty-two of Ite
chief articles in theology, which included niolf of
the queflions then agitated in the controvcrfy bc-
tween the Lutherans and the church ol Rome. IS

rangir;',

ranging his sentiments in a natural order, and ex- BOOK Vr.
pressing them with great simplicity; by employ- '--
ing often the very words of scripture, or of the 'S4
primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of some
opinions, and explaining away what was absurd in
others; by conceflions, now on one fide, and
now on the other; and especially by banishing as
much as possible scholastic phrases, those words
and terms of art in controversy, which serve as
badges of diftindtion to the different fests, and
for which theologians often contend more fiercely
than for opinions themfdlves; he framed his
work in fich a manner, as promised fairer than
any thing that had hitherto been attempted to
compose and to terminate religious diflenfions e.

BUT the attention of the age was turned, with l'ruitici.

such acute observation, towards theological con-
troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it by
any gloss how artful or specious soever. The
length and eagerness of the dispute had separated
the contending parties so compleatly, and had set
their minds at such variance, that they were not to
be reconciled by partial concessions. All the zealous
Catholics, particularly the ecclesiastics who had a
feat in the diet, joined in condemning Gropper's
treatise as too favourable to the Lutheran opini-
ons, the poison of which heresy it conveyed, as
they pretended, with greater danger, becauii: it
was in some degree disguised. The rigid Protef-
tants, crpecially Luther himself, and his patron
the Elecor of Saxony, were for rejecting it as an
impious compound of error and truth, craftily
prepared that it might impose on the weak, the
timid, and the unthinking, But the divines, to
whom the examination of it was committed, en-
tered upon that business with greater delibcration

e Goldaf. Confiit. Inper. ii. p. 18z.

and

BOOK VI. and temper. As it was more easy in itself, as well

as more consistent with the dignity of the church to
3541. make conceflions, and even alterations with re.

gard to speculative opinions, the difcuflion where.
of is confined chiefly to schools, and which pre-
sent nothing to the people that either itrikes their
imagination or affects their senses, they came to
an accommodation about those without much la-
bour, and even defined the great article concern-
ingjuftificatioi to their mutual fatisfation. But,
when they proceeded to points of jurifidtloil,
where the interest and authority of the Roman
See were concerned, or the rites and forms of ex-
ternal worthip, where every change that could be
made must be public, and draw the observation
of the people, there the Catholics were altogether
untractable; nor could the church either with
safety or with honour abolish its ancient inftituti-
ons. All the articles relative to the power of the
Pope, the authority of councils, the adminiftra-
tion of the sacraments, the worship of faints, and
many other particulars, did not, in their na-
ture, admilt:of any temperament; so that after
labouring long to bring about an accommodation

ecete with refpea to there, the Emperor found all his

dietofRatiCf endeavours ineffectual. Being impatient, how-
bonin favour ever, to close the diet, he at last prevailed on a
of a general
council. majority of the members to approve of the follow-
July A8. ing recess; " That the articles concerning which

the divines had agreed in the conference, should
be held as points decided, and be observed invi-
olably by all; that the other articles about which
they had differed, should be referred to the de-
termination of a general council, or if that could
not be obtained, to a national fynod of Germany;
and if it should prove impracticable, likewise, to
assemble a fynod, that a general diet of the Erh-
pire should be called within eighteen months, ir.
order to give some finaljudgment upon the whole

controvert)',

controversy that the Emperor (hould use all his BOOK VI.
interest and authority with the Pope, to procure '-v-
the meeting either of a general council or fynod; 1541'
that, in the mean time, no innovations flould be
attempted, no endeavours should be employed to
gain proselytes; and neither the revenues of the
church, nor the rights of the monasteries, should
be invaded f.

ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the Cid -

tinee bol

l, °o

recess in which they terminated, gave great of- Papits and
fence to the Pope. The power which the Germans Proteiant..
had assumed of appointing their own divines to
examine and determine matters of controversy,
he confidered as a very dangerous invasion on his
rights; the renewing of their ancient proposal con-
cerning a national fynod, which had been so often
rejected by him and his predecessors, appeared
extremely undutiful; but the bare mention of al-
lowing a diet, composed chiefly of laymen, to pars
judgment with respect to articles of faith, was
deemed no less criminal and proane, than the
worst of those herefies which they femed zealous
to suppress. On the other hand, the Protestants
were no less dissatisfied with a recess, which con-
fiderably abridged the liberty which they enjoyed
at that time. As they murmured loudly against Charles
it, Charles, unwilling to leave any feeds of dif- courtsth
content in the Empire, granted them a private
declaration, in the most ample terms, exempting
them from whatever they thought oppreflive or
injurious in the recess, and ascertaining to them
the full possession of all the privileges which they
had ever enjoyed s.

f Sleidan, 267, &c. Pallav. 1. 4. c. I1. p. 36. F.
Paul, p. 86. Seckend. 1. iii. 2 6.

g Sleid. 283. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplom. iv.
V. 1i. p, 210.

VOL. UI. Hh Ex-

BOOK VI. EXTRAORDINARY as there concefilons may ap-
t v--- pear, the situation of his affairs at this juncture
Affla,4 made it necessary for the Emperor to grant them.
Hungary. He foresaw a rupture with France to be unavoid-

able, as well as near at hand, and durst not give
any such cause of disgust or fear to the Protef-
tants, as might force them, in felf.defence, to
court the protection of the French King, from
whom, at present, they were much alienated.
The rapid progress of the Turks inIHungary, was
a more powerful and present cause of the modera-
tion which Charles discovered. A great revolu-
tion had happened in that kingdom; John Zapol
Scaepus having chosen, as has been related, ra-
ther to possess a tributary kingdom, than to re-
nounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the assistance of his mighty
protetor Solyman, wrested from Ferdinand a
great part of the country, and left him only the
precarious poffeflion of the reft. But being a
prince of pacific qualities, thefrequent attempts
of Ferdinand, or of his partizans among the Hun-
garians, to recover what they had loft, gave him
great pain; and the necessity, on these occasions,
of calling in the Turks, whom he confidered and
felt to be his masters rather than auxiliaries, were
scarce less mortifying. Id order, therefore, to a-
void there diftrefres, and to I-cut! ,. quiet and leisure
to enjoy the arts and amufemtuts in which he de-
lighted, he secretly came to an agreement with
A. D. ,535 his competitor, on this condition; I hat Ferdi-

nand should acknowledge him as Kni g of Hun-
gary, ind leave him, during life, the unmol, fted
poffellion of that part of the kingdorr now in his
power; but that upon his demise, the sole light
to the whole /hould devolve upon Ferdinand h.
As John had never been married, and was then
far advanced in life, the terms of the contract

Ih lluanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xii. P.'l35

seemed

seemed very favourable to Ferdinand. But, ofon BOOK VI.
after, some of the Hungarian nobles, solicitous '-
to prevent a foreigner from ascending their throne, '541'
prevailed on John to put an end to a long celiba-
cy, by marrying Isabella, the daughter of Sigif-
mond, King of Poland. John had the fatisfaei- eath of
on, before his death, which happened within less Hungaly.
than a year thereafter, to fee a Ton born to inherit
his kingdom To him, without regarding his
treaty with Ferdinand, which he confidered, no
doubt, as void, upon an event not foreseen when
it was concluded, he bequeathed his crown; ap-
pointing the Queen and George Martinuzzi, bi-
shop of Waradin, guardians of his son; and re-
gents of the kingdom. The greater part of the
Hungarians immediately acknowledged the young
King, to whom, in memory of the founder of their
monarchy, they gave the name of Stephen .

FERD1 NAND, though extremely disconcerted by Fcrdinand'n
this unexpected event, resolved not to abandon efoctstoob-

tainthe

the kingdom which he had acquired by his corn- cow.
pact with John. He lent ambaffddors to the
Queen to claim poflcfion, and to offer the pro-
vince of Tranlvlv;.iia as a settlement for her son,
praparing at the fame time to assert his right by
force of arms. But John had committed the care
of his Ton to persons, who had too much spirit to
give up the crown tamely, and who pofleffed abi-
lities sufficient to defend it. The Queen, to all
the address peculiar to her own sex, added a maf-
culine courage, ambition, and magnanimity. Mair- c'iracr
tinutzi, who had railed himfelt tfrom the lowest .idl oll ruf
rank in life to his present dignity, was one of
those extraordinary men, who by the extent as
well as variety of their talents, are fitted to aA
a superior part in bultling and factious times. In
difcha!ging the functions of his ecclefiafical of-

i Jovii Hist. lib. 39. p. 239, a. &c.

H h a fice,

BooK VI. fice, he put on the semblance of an humble and

v'v_-' aufftere sanctity. He discovered in civil tranfaai-
1541. otns, industry, dexterity and boldness. During

war he laid aside the cassock, and appeared on
horseback with his scimitar and buckler, as active,
as ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
trymen. Amidst all there different and contra-
dictory forms which he could assume, an insatiable
desire of dominion and authority wasconfpicuous.
From such persons it was obvious what answer
Ferdinand had to expect. He soon perceived that
he mud depend on arms alone for recovering Hun.
gary. Having levied for this purpose a confidera-
ble body of Germans, whom his partizans among
the Hungarians joined with their vassals, he order-
ed them to march into that part of the kingdom
which adhered to Stephen. Martinuzzi, unable
to make head against such a powerful army in the
field, satisfied himself with holding out the towns,
all of which, especially Buda, the place of greatest
consequence, he provided with every thing necef-

Call in the fary for defence; and in the mean time he sent
Turks. ambassadors to Solyman, beseeching him to ex-

tend towards the son, the fame Imperial protefti-
on which had so long maintained the father on his
throne. The Sultan, though Ferdinand used his
utmost endeavours to thwart this negotiation, and
even offered to accept of the Hungarian crown on
the fame ignominious condition of paying tribute
to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had held it,
faiw such profpecs of advantage from elpoufing
the interests of the young King, that he instantly
promised him his protection; and commanding
one army to advance towards Hungary, he him-
self followed with another. Meanwhile the Ger-
mans, hoping to terminate the war by the reduc-
tion of a city in which the King and his mother
were shut up, had formed the siege of Buda.
Martinuzzi, having drawn thither the strength of

the

the Hungarian nobility, defended the town with BOOK VI.
such courage and skill, as allowed the Turkiih '
forces time to come up to its relief. They in- 'S41'
ftantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fa-
tigue, diseases and desertion, and defeated themi
with great slaughter k. /

SOLYMAN Coon after joined his vitoriousl,,,.

troops, and being weary of lo many expenfi e ex. u..,nrou.
peditions undertaken in defence of dominions° coiu'.
which were not his own, or being unable to resist
this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while possessed by an infant, under the guardian-
ship of a woman and a priest, he allowed inte-
refted considerations to triumph with too much
facility over the principles of honour and the
sentiments of humanity. Wlat he planned
ungenerously, he executed by fraud. Hav-
ing prevailed on the Queen to fend her son,
whom he pretended to be desirous of feeing,
into his camp, and having at the fame time in-
vited the chief of the nobility to an entertaiL.-
ment there, while they, fufpeting no treachery,
gavethemfelves up to the mirth and jollity of the
feast, a feled band of troops by the Sulian's or-
ders seized one of the gates of Buda. Being thus
master of the capital, of the King's peiibo and
of the leading men among the nobles, he order-
ed the Queen together with her ton to be con-
duted to Tranfilvania, which province lie allot-
ted to them, and appointing a Baflia to reside in
Buda with a large bodyof soldiers, annexed Hun-
gary to the Ottoman Empire. The tears and
complaints of the unhappy Queen had no influ-
ence to change his purpose, nor could Martinuz-
zi either resist his absolute and uncontroulable
command, or prevail on him to recall it 1.

k Illuanhaffii Hilt. Hung. lib. i4. P ' o.
I Ifluanhaffiilib. 1,. p. 56. Jovii lit. ti, 9. p.

" .

,
&c.

1I ! _ I'~ .....

BOOK VI. BEFORE the account of this violent usurpation
,-.-. reached Ferdinand, he was so unlucky as to have
Ferdinand's dispatched new ambassadors to Solyman with a
overtures to fresh representation of his right to the crown of
Solyman. Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former

overture to hold the kingdom of the Ottoman
Porte, and to pay for it an annual tribute. This
ill-lnmed proposal was reje'ted with scorn. The
Sultan elated with success, and thinking that he
might prescribe what terms he pleated to a prince
who voluntarily proffered conditions so unbecom-
ing his own dignity, declared that he would not
iufpend the operations of war, unless Ferdinand
instantly evacuated all the towns which he held
in Hungary, and consented to the imposition of
a tribute upon Auflria, in order to reimburse the
fuims, which his presumptuous invasion of Hun-
gary had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend
in defence of that kingdom m

SUCH was the slate of affairs in Hungary. As

the uifc.rti:,ate events there had either happened
before the dilolution of the diet at Ratisbon, or
were dreaded at that time, Chnrles saw the dan-
ger of irritating and inflanii. g th,: minds (f the
Geim.ans, w',ile such a formidatle, enemy was
ready io break into the Empire; and perceived
that he could not expeEt any vigorous afliftLnce
either towards the recovery of Hungary or thede-
fence of the Aufirian frontiers, unless he courted
and satisfied the Proteflants. By the conceflions
which have been mentioned, he gained this point,
and luch liberal supplies both of men and money
were voted for carrying on the war against the

m fluanhaffii Hillt HIng. 1.. p. . 8.

''tulrks,

Turks, as left him under little anxiety about the BOOK VI.
security of Germany during next campaign n,

154!.

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, Emperor

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he passed through vi'a' taly.
Lucca he had a short interview with the Pope, but
nothing could be concluded concerning the proper
method of composing the religious disputes in Ger-
many, between two princes whose views and in-
terest with regard to that matter were at thisjunc-
ture so opposite. The Pope's endeavours to re-
move the cauies of discord between Charles and
Francis, and to extinguish all those mutual ani-
mofities which threatened to break out suddenly
into open hostility, were not more successful.

The Emperor's thoughts were bent To entirely, His expe,,i.

at that time, on the great enterpiize which he had tionagainft
concerted against Algiers, that he listened with little mogtires ot.
attention to the Popt's schemes or overtures, and
hastened to join his army and fleet o.

ALGIERS fill cotinued in that slate of depen-

dance on the Turkiih empire to which Barbarofla
had subjec-ted i.. Ever since he, as captain Bafha,
commanded the: Ottoman fleet, Algiers had been
governed by Hafcen Apa a renegado eunuch, who
by palling through eve, y tation in the Corsairs
service, had acquired gr,.t experience in war, and
was well fitted for a fi.:ioii which required a man
of tried and daring courage. Hafcen, in order to
shew how wel! he d.leived that dignity, carried
on his piratical deprcdations against the Christian
States with amazing activity, and out-d;id, if pof-

:S Sleid. 283. , Sandov. hiltor. tom ii. p. :8.

H h 4 fible,

BOOK VI. fible, Barbarossa himself in boldness and cruelty.

rV>^ The commerce of the Mediterranean was greatly
1541' interrupted by his cruisers, and such frequent a-

larms given to the coafis of Spain, that there was
a neceflity of erecting watch-towers at proper dif-
tances, and of keepingguards constantly on foot,
in order to descry the approach of his squadrons,
and to protect the inhabitants from their defcentsp.
Of this the Emperor's fubjets had long complain-
ed, representing it as an enterprize corresponding
to his power, and becoming his humanity, to re-
duce Algiers, which, since the conquest of Tunis,
was the common receptacle of all the free-booters,
and to exterminate that lawless race, the impla-
cable enemies of the Chriflian name. Moved
partly by their intreaties, and partly allured by
the hopeof adding to the glory which he had ac-
quired by his last expedition into Africa, Charles,
before he left Madrid in his way to the Low-
Countries, had issued orders both in Spain and
Italy to prepare a fleet and army for this purpose.
No change in circumitances, since that time,
could divert him from this refllurion, or pre-
vail on him to turn his arms towards Hungary;
though the success of the Turks in that country
feerned more immediately to require his pretence
there; though many of his molt faithful adhe-
rents in Germany urged that the defence of the
Empire ought to be his first and peculiar care;
though such as bore him no good willridiculed his
prepofierous conduc in flying from an enemy al-
most at hand, that he might go in qeleft of a remote
and more ignoble foe. But to attack the Sultan in
Hungary, how splendid soever that measure might
appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his

r Jovii hil k 40. p. 266.

powve;

power, and was not confifent with his interest. To BOOK VI.
draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march them - '
into a country f6 distant as Hungary, to provide '541'
the vast apparatus necessary for transporting thi-
ther the artillery, ammunition and baggage of a re-
gular army, and to push the war in that quarter,
where it could scarce be brought to any iflue dur-
ing several campaigns, were undertakings so
extensive and unwieldy as did not correspond
with the low condition of the Emperor's treasury.
While his principal force was thus employed, his
dominions in Italy and the Low-Countries must
have lain open to the French King, who would
not have allowed such a favourable opportunity of
attacking them to go unimproved. Whereas the
African expedition, the preparations for which
were already finished and almost the whole ex-
pence of it defrayed, would depend upon a single
effort, and besides the security and satisfaction
which the success of it must give his fubjeds,
would detain him during so Ihort a space, that
Francis could scarce take advantage of his ab-
fence, to invade his dominions in Europe.

ON all these accounts, Charles adhered to his His prepa-

first plan, and with such determined obstinacy, ration-
that he paid no regard to the Pope who advised,
or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not to ex-
pose his whole armament to almofft unavoidable
deftrudion, by venturing at such an advanced
season of the year, and while the autumnal winds
were so violent, to approach the dangerous coast
of Algiers. Having embarked on board Doria's
gallies at Porto Venere in the Genoese territories,
he Coon found that this experienced tailor had not
judged wrong concerning the element with which
he was so well acquainted; for ilch a Itorm arose
that it was with the utmost difficulty and danger

he

Boo Vl. he reached Sardinia, the place of general ren-
'- -- dezvous. But as his courage was undaunted, and

2541. his temper often inflexible, neither the remon-

ftrances of the Pope and Doria, nor the danger to
which he had already been exposed by disregard-
ing them, had any other effec than to confirm
him in his fatal resolution. The force, indeed,
which he had collected was such as might have
inspired a Prince leis adventurous, and less con-
sident in his own schemes, with the most sanguine
hopes of success. It consisted of twenty thousand
foot and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians
and Germans, mostly veterans, together with
three thousand volunteers, the flower of the Spa-
nifh and Italian nobility, fond of paying court to
the Emperor by attending him in this favourite
expedition, and eager to share in the glory which
they believed he was going to reap; to these were
added a thousand soldiers sent from Malta by the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its most
gallant Knights.

Linds in THE voyage, from Majorca to the African
Africa. coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard, than

that which he had just finished. When he ap-
proached the land, the roll of the Tea, and vehe-
mence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to disembark. But at !aft, the Emperor feiliag a
favourable opportunity, landed them without op-
position. not far from Algiers, and immediately
advanced cowards the town. To oppose this
mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
Turks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives
of Africa, and partly refugees from Granada. He
returned, however, a fierce and haughty answer
when summoned to surrender. But with fiich a
handful of soldier,, neither his desperate courage,
nor consummate skill in war could have long re-

filled

sised forces superior to those which had defeated foot VI.
Barbarofla at the head of sixty thousand men, ""
and had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his en- l'41'
deavours to save it.

BuT how far soever the Emperor might think The difat.

himself beyond the reach of any danger from the er. which
enemy, he was suddenly exposed to a more dread- army.
ful calamity, and one againit which human pru-
dence, and human efforts availed nothing. On
the second day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to disperse some light
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea-
vens to appear with a fierce and threatening afpe&.
Towards evening rain began to fall accompanied
with violent wind, and the rage of the tempest
encreafing during the night, the soldiers who had
brought nothing alhore but their arms, remained
exposed to all its fury without tents, or shelter, or
cover of any kind. The ground was so wet that
they could not lie down on it; their camp being
in a low situation was overflowed with water, and
they funk at every ftep to the ankles in mud;
while the wind blew with such impetuosity, that
to prevent their falling they were obliged to thrust
their spears into the ground, and to support them-
fcves by taking hold of them. Hafcen was too
vigilant an officer to allow an enemy in such dif-
trefs to remain unmolested. About the dawn of
morning, he rallied out with folciers, who having
been screened from the storm under their own
roofs, were frefli and vigorous. A body of Italians
who were ftatinncd nearefl the city, dispirited
and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach
of the Turks. The troops :a the polt behind
them, discovered greater courage, but as the
rain had extinguiflhed their matches and wet their

powder,

CooK VI. powder, their muskets were useless, and having
^- ^-'. scarce strength to handle their other arms, they
1541. were soon thrown into confusion. Almost the

whole army, with the Emperor himself in person,
was obliged to advance before the enemy could
be repulsed, who, after Spreading such general
conflernation, and killing a considerable number
of men, retired at last in good order.
And fleet. BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss and

danger were quickly obliterated by a more dread-
ful as well as affecting spectacle. It was now
broad day; the hurricane had abated nothing ot
its violence, and the sea appeared agitated with
all the rage of which that deftrutive element is
capable; all the ships, on which alone the whole
army knew that their safety and subsistence de-
pended, were seen driven from their anchors,
some dashing against each other, some beat to
pieces on the rocks, many forced a shore, and
not a few finking in the waves. In less than an
hour, fifteen ihips of war, and an hundred and
forty transports with eight thousand men perished;
and such of the unhappy crews, as escaped the
fury of the tea, were murdered, without mercy, by
the Arabs, as lbon as they reached land. The
Emperor flood in silent anguilh and astonishment
beholding this fatal event, which at once blasted
all his hopes of fucce(s, and buried in the depths
the vast flores which he had provided as well for
annoying the enemy, as for subsisting his own
troops. He had it not in his power to afford them
any other afliftance or relief than by fending tome
troops to drive away the Arabs, and thus deliver-
ing a few who were so fortunate as to get ashore
from the cruel fate which their companions had
met with. At last the wind began to fall, and to
give some hopes that as many ships might escape,

as

as to save the army from perilhing by famine, Boos VI.
and transport them back to Europe. But these --v-
were only hopes; the approach of evening covered '54i.
the sea with darkness ; and it being impossible for
the officers aboard the (hips that had out-lived the
fiorm to fend any intelligence to their companions
who were ashore, they remained during the
night in all the anguish of suspense and uncer-
tainty. Next day, a boat, dispatched by Doria,
made shift to reach land, with information, that
having weathered out the form, to which, during
fifty years knowledge of the sea, he had never
'een any equal in fierceness and horror, he had
found it necessary to bear away with his shattered
ships to Cape Metafuz. He advised the Emperor,
as the face of the sky was fiill lowering and tem-
pefluous, to march with all speed to t, at place,
where the troops could reimbark with greater ease.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afforded obligedto

Charles, from being assured that part of his fleet retre'
had escaped, was balanced by the new cares and
perplexity in which it involved him with regard
to his army. Metafuz was at least three days
march from his present camp; all the provisions
which he had brought ashore at his first landing
were now consumed; his soldiers, worn out with
fatigue, were scarce able for such a journey, even
in a friendly country; and being dispirited by a
succession of hardlhips, which victory itself would
scarce have rendered tolerable, they were in no
condition to undergo new toils. But the situation
of the army was such, as allowed not one moment
for deliberation, nor left it in the least doubtful
what to choose. They were ordered instantly to
march, the wounded, the tick and the feeble be-
ing placed in the centre; such as seemed most vi-
gorous were stationed in the front and rear. Then

the

Booi VI. the fad effets of what they had suffered began

to appear more manifestly than ever, and new ca-
'541. lamities were added to all these which they had

already endured. Some could scarce bear the
weight of their arms; others, spent with the toil
of forcing their way through deep and almofft im-
passable roads, funk down.and died; many perish-
ed by famine, as the whole army subsisted chiefly
on roots and berrries, or the flesh of horses, killed
by the Emperor's order, and difiributed among
the several battalions; many were drowned in
brooks which were fwoln so much by the excessive
rains, that in pafling them they waded up to the
chin; not a few were killed by the enemy, who
during the greatest part of their retreat, alarmed,
harassed and annoyed them night and day. At
last they arrived at Metafuz; and the weather be-
ing now so calm as to restore their communication
with the fleet, they were supplied with plenty of
provisions, and cheered.with the profpet of safety.
Misfortitude DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the

Emperor discovered great qualities, many of which
an almost uninterrupted flow of prosperity had
hitherto afforded him no opportunity of displaying.
He was conspicuous for firmness and constancy of
spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude, humanity and
compassion., He endured as great hardfiips 2,
the meanest soldier; he exposed his own person
wherever danger appeared ; he encouraged the
desponding; visited the sick and wounded; and
animated all by his words and example. When
the army embarked, he was among the last who
left the shore, although a body of Arabs hovered
at no great distance, ready to fall on the rear.
By there virtues, Charles atoned, in some degree,
for his obitinacy and presumption in undertaking
an expedition so fatal to his subjects.

THE

THE calamities which attended this unfortunate BooK VI

enterprise did not end here; for no sooner were -
the forces got on board, than a new storm arising, Re 41t;
though less furious than the former, scattered the Europe.
fleet, and obliged them, separately, to make to-
wards such ports in Spain or Italy as they could
first reach; thus spreading the account of their
difaflers, with all the circumstances of aggravation
and horror, which their fear or fancy suggested.
The Emperor himself, after escaping great dan-
gers, and being forced into the port of Bugia inDeceb.
Africa, where he was obliged by contrary winds toecem
remain federal weeks, arrived at last in Spain, in
a condition very different from that in which he
had returned from his former expedition against
the infidels. ·:

z Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Vi!lag-

nonem Equitem Rhodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii
Hilt. 1. xl. p. 269-b. Vera y Zuniga vida de Carlos V.
p. 83. Sandov. Hiftor. ii. p. 299, &c.

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.
