THE

HISTORr OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. IV.

F NJPEE

T--L1TT b_

Flllnr~~~Ilig.65 rc 路Urir ~nZ

THE

HIS TORE OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINEURGH,

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND,

AND MEMBER OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT MADRID.

2WE NINTII EDITION.

IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. IV.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES

(SUCCESSORS TO MR. CADELL) IN THE STRANDS

AND E. BALFOUR, EDINBURGH.

1798*

# BOOK X.

THE

IIISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE

EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK X.

W HLtE Charles laboured, with such unwea-

ried induitry, to persuade or to force the

protefants to adopt his regulations with refpea
to religion, the effeas of his ieadinefs in the exe-
cution of his plan were rendered less considerable
by his rupture with the pope, which daily in-
creased. The firm resolution which the empe.
ror seemed to have taken against restoring Pla-
centia, together with his repeated encroachments
on the ecclesiastical jurifdiaion, not only by the
regulations contained in the Interim, but by his
attempt to re-assemble the council at Trent, ex-
afperated Paul to the utmost, who, with the
weakness incident to old age, grew more attached
to his family, and more jealous of his authority,
as he advanced in years. Pushed on by these
paflions, he made new efforts to draw the French
king into an alliance againit the emperor a: but

a Mem. de Ribier, ii. 230.

VOL.IV. f finding

finding that monarch, notwithstanding the here-
ditary enmity between him and Charles, and the
jealousy with which he viewed the fuccefsful pro-
grefs of the Imperial arms, as unwilling as for-
merly to involve himself in immediate hoflilities,
he was obliged to contraa his views, and to
think of preventing future encroachments, since
it was not in his power to inflia vengeance on
account of those which were past. For this
purpose, he determined to recall his grant of
Parma and Placentia, and after declaring them
to be re-annexed to the holy fee, to indemnify
his grandson O&tavio by a new establishment in
the ecclesiastical state. By this expedient he
hoped to gain two points of no small confe-
quence. He, firt of all, rendered his poffeffion
of Parma more secure; as the emperor would
be cautious of invading the patrimony of the
church, though he might seize without scruple a
town belonging to the house of Farnese. In the
next place, he would acquire a better chance of
recovering Placentia, as his folicitations to that
effe& might decently be urged with greater im-
portunity, and would infallibly be attended with
greater effea, when he was considered not as
pleading the cause of his own family, but as an
advocate for the interest of the holy fee. But while
Paul was priding himself on this device, as a
happy refinement in policy, Oaavio, an ambitious
and high-fpirited young man, who could not bear
with patience to be spoiled of one half of his
territories by the rapaciousness of his father-in-
law, and to be deprived of the other by the arti-
fices of his grandfather, took measures in order
to prevent the execution of a plan fatal to his

interest.

having first endeavoured to surprise Parma, which
attempt was frufhrated by the fidelity of the go-
vernor to whom the pope had entrusted the de,
fence of the town, he made overtures to the em-
peror, of renouncing all connexion with the pope,
and of depending entirely on him for his future
fortune. This unexpeded defeaion of one of
the pope's own family to an enemy whom he
hated, irritated, almost to madness, a mind peev-
ifh with old age; and there was no degree of
severity to which Paul might not have proceeded
against a grandson whom he reproached as an
unnatural apostate. But, happily for O&avio,
death prevented his carrying into execution the
harsh resolutions which he had taken with refpea
to him, and put an end to his pontificate in the
sixteenth year of his administration, and the
eighty-fecond year of his age #.

1550.)

* Among many inLrances of the credulity or weakners of

hiflorians in attributing the death of illuffrious personages to
extraordinary causes, this is one. Almost all the historians of
the sixteenth century affirm, that the death of Paul IIl. was
occalioned by the violent passions which the behaviour of his
grandson excited; that being informed, while he was refresh-
ing himself in one of his gardens near Rome, of Ofavio's
attempt on Parma, as well as of his negotiations with the
emperor by means of Gonzaga, he fainted away, continued
some hours in a swoon, then became feverish, and died within
three days. This is the account given of it by Thu.
anus, lib. vi. zII. Adriani Iltor. di fuoi Tempi, lib. vii.
480. and by Father Paul, 280. Even cardinal Pallavicini,
better informed than any writer with regard to the events
which happened in the papal court, and, when not warped by
prejudice or fyfRem, more accurate in relating them, agrees
with their narrative in its chief circumitances. Pallas. b. ii.
74. Paruta, who wrote his history by command of the senate

a of

Ispo.] As this event had been long expeaed,

there was an extraordinary concourse of cardinals

of Venice, relates it in the fame manner. Hfitorici Venez.
vol. iv. ass. But there was no occasion to search for any
extraordinary cause to account for the death of an old man of
eighty-two. There remains an authentic account of this
event, in which we find none of those marvellous circum-
flances of which the historians are so fond. The cardinal of
Ferrara, who was entrusted with the affairs of France at the
court of Rome, and M. D'Urf6, Henry's ambassador in or-
dinary there, wrote an account to that monarch of the affair
of Parma, and of the pope's death. By these it appears, that
Otavio's attempt to furprize Parma, was made on the twen-
tieth of Otober; that next day in the evening, and not
while he was airing himself in the gardens of Monte Cavallo,
the pope received intelligence of what he had done; that he
was seized with such a transport of pallion, and cried so bit-
terly, that his voice was heard in several apartments of the
palace i that next day, however, he was so well as to give
an audience to the cardinal of Ferrara, and to go through
buoinefs of different kinds; that Otavio wrote a letter to
the pope, not to cardinal Farnese his brother, intimating his
selolution of throwing himself into the arms of the emperor;
that the pope received this on the twenty-firlt without any
new symptoms of emotion, and returned an answer to it;
that on the twenty-fecond of Odober, the day on which the
cardinal of Ferrara's letter is dated, the pope was in his ufoal
slate of heilth. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 247. By a letter of
M. D'Urfe, Nov. 5. it appears that the pope was in such
good health, that on the third of that month he had cele-
brated the anniversary of his coronation with the usual folem-
nities. Ibidem, 25路. By another letter from the fame
person, we learn, that on the sixth of November a catarrh
or defluxion fell down on the pope's lungs, with foch danger-
ass symptoms, that his life was immediately despaired of.
Ibid. 25z. And by a third letter we are informed, that he
died November the tenth. In none of these letters is his
death imputed to any extraordinary cause. It appears, that
more than twenty days elapsed between Oravio's attempt on
Parma and the death of his grandfather, and that the difeale
was the natural effeet of old age, and not one of those ocea-
fioned by violence of pallion.

time to form their parties, and to concert their
measures, their ambition and intrigues protra&ed
the conclave to a great length. The Imperial
and French famion fitrove, with emulation, to
promote one of their own number, and had, by
turns, the profpe& of success. But as Paul
during a long pontificate had raised many to the
purple, and those chiefly persons of eminent
abilities, as well as zealously devoted to his fa-
mily, cardinal Farnese had the command of a
powerful and united squadron, by whose address
and firmnels he exalted to the papal throne the
cardinal di Monte [Feb. 7th], whom Paul had
employed as his principal legate in the council of
Trent, and trusted with his most secret intentions.
He assumed the name of Julius III. and in
order to express his gratitude towards his bene-
fador, the firif a& of his administration was to
put OAavio Farnese in poffefion of Parma.
When the injury which he did to the holy fee,
by alienating a territory of such value, was men-
tioned by some of the cardinals, he briskly re-
plied, " That he would rather be a poor pope,
with the reputation of a gentleman, than a rich
one, with the infamy of having forgotten the
obligations conferred upon him, and the pro-
mises which he had made b." But all the lufre
of this candour or generosity he quickly effaced
by an a&ion most shockingly indecent. Accord-
ing to an ancient and established praaice, every
pope upon his cleEtion considers it as his privilege
to bellow, on whom he pleases, the cardinal's

b Mem. de Ribicr.

133 hat,

hat, which falls to be disposed of by his being
invested with the triple crown. Julius, to the
astonishment of the sacred college, conferred this
mark of diftinAion, together with ample ecclefi-
aftical revenues, and the right of bearing his
name and arms, upon one Innocent, a youth of
lixteen, born of obscure parents, and known by
the name of the Ape, from his having been trusted
with the care of an animal of that species, in
the cardinal di Monte's family. Such a profti-
tution of the highest dignity in the church would
have given offence, even in those dark periods,
when the credulous fuperifition of the people em-
boldened ecclefiaftics to venture on the most
flagrant violations of decorum. But in an en-
lightened age, when, by the progress of know-
ledge and philosophy, the obligations of duty
and decency were better underitood, when a
blind veneration for the pontifical charader was
every where abated, and one half of Christendom
in open rebellion against the papal fee, this ac-
tion was viewed with horror. Rome was imme-
diately'filledwith libelsand pafquinades, which im-
puted the pope's extravagant regard for foch an
unworthy objea to the most criminal passions.
The protestants exclaimed againit the absurdity
of supposing that the infallible spirit of divine
truth could dwell in a breast so impure, and
called more loudly than ever, and with greater
appearance of justice, for the immediate and
thorough reformation of a church, the head of
which was a disgrace to the Christian name c.

c Sleid. 493. F. Paul, 2S1. Pallav. Ii, 76. Thuan.

lib. vi, a:5h

a Thei

with this firit specimen of his dispositions.
Having now reached the summit of ecclesiastical
ambition, he seemed eager to indemnify himself,
by an unredtrained indulgence of his desires, for
the feif-denial or dissimulation which he had
thought it prudent to praaife while in a fubor-
dinate station. He became careless, to so great
a degree, of all serious business, that he could
seldom be brought to attend to it, but in cafes of
extreme neceflity; and giving up himself to
amusements and dissipation of every kind, he imi-
tated the luxurious elegance of Leo rather than
the severe virtue of Adrian, the latter of which
it was necessary to display, in contending with
a fe& with derived great credit from the rigid
and austere manners of its teachers d

The pope, however ready to fulfil his engage-

ments to the family of Farnese, discovered no in-
clination to observe the oath, which each car-
dinal had taken when he entered the conclave,
that if the choice {hould fall on him, he would
immediately call the council to re-affume its de-
liberations. Julius knew, by experience, how
difficult it was to confine fiuch a body of men
within the narrow limits which it was the interelt
of the fee of Rome to preferibe; and how easily
the zeal of some members, the rafhnels of others,
or the suggestions of the princes on whom they
depended, might precipitate a popular and un-
governable assembly into forbidden inquiries, as
well as dangerous decisions. He wished, for
these reasons, to have eluded the obligation of
his oath, and gave an ambiguous answer to the

d F.fPaul, ir1.

firlk

firit proposals which were made to him by the
emperor, with regard to that matter. But
Charles, either from his natural obitinacy in ad-
hering to the meafuses which he had once
adopted, or from the mere pride of accomplishing
what was held to be almost impossible, perlified
in his resolution of forcing the protestants to
return into the bosom of the church. Having
persuaded himself, that the authoritative decisions
of the council might be employed with efficacy in
combating their prejudices, he, in consequence of
that persuasion, continued to solicit earnefily
that a new bull of convocation might be issued;
and the pope could not, with decency, reje&
that requefi. When Julius found that he could
not prevent the calling of a council, he endea-
voured to take to himself all the merit of having
procured the meeting of an assembly, which was
the objea of such general desire and expeaation.
A congregation of cardinals, to whom he re-
ferred the consideration of what was necessary
for restoring peace to the church, recommended,
by his direAion, the speedy convocation of a
council, as the most effeaual expedient for that
purpose; and as the new herefies raged with the
greatest violence in Germany, they proposed
Trent as the place of its meeting, that, by a
near infpeaion of the evil, the remedy might
be applied with greater discernment and cer.
tainty of success. The pope warmly approved
of this advice, which he himself had diaated,
and sent nuncios to the Imperial and French
courts, in order to make known his inten-
tionse.

C F. Paul, 231. Pallay. i. 77. About

a new diet to meet at Augsburg, in order to
enforce the observation of the Interim, and to.
procure a more authentic ai of the supreme
court in the empire, acknowledging the jurifi
diaion of the council, as well as an explicit pro.
mise of conforming to its decrees. He appeared
there in person, together with his son the orince
of Spain [June 25]. Few eleeors were present,
but all sent deputies in their name. Charles,
notwithflanding the despotic authority with
which he had given law in the empire during
two years, knew that the spirit of independence
among the Germans was not entirely subdued,
and for that reason took care to over-awe the diet
by a considerable body of Spanish troops which
escorted him thither. The fdit point submitted
to the consideration of the diet, was the necessity
of holding a council. All the popilh members
agreed, without difliculty, that the meeting of
that assembly should be renewed at Trent, and
promised an implicit acquiescence in its decrees.
The protestants, intimidated and disunited, must
have followed their example, and the resolution
of the diet would have proved unanimous, if
Maurice of Saxony had not begun at this time
to disclose new intentions, and to ad a part
very different from that which he had so long
afifmed.

By an artful diflmulation of his own senti-

ments; by address in paying court to the em-
peror; and by the seeming zeal with which he
forwarded all his ambitious schemes, Maurice
had raised himself to the eledoral dignity; and
having added the dominions of the elder branch

of the Saxon family to his own, he was become
the most powerful prince in Germany. But his
long and intimate union with the emperor had
afforded him many opportunities of observing
narrowly the dangerous tendency of that mo-
narch's schemes. He saw the yoke that was
preparing for his country; and from the rapid
as well as formidable progress of the Imperial
power, was convinced that but a few Qieps more
remained to be taken, in order to render Charles
as absolute a monarch in Germany as he had be-
come in Spain. The more eminent the condi-
tion was to which he himself had been exalted,
the more solicitous did Maurice naturally be-
come to maintain all its rights and privileges,
and the more did he dread the thoughts of de-
fcending from the rank of a prince almost inde-
pendent, to that of a vassal fubjea to the com-
mands of a maiter. At the fame time he perceived
that Charles was bent on exading a rigid con-
formity to the doArines and iites of the Romish
church, initead of allowing liberty of conscience,
the promise of which had allured several protestant
princes to affifit him in the war against the confe-
derates of Smalkalde. As he himself, notwith.
flanding all the compliances which he had made
fromh motives of interest, or an excess of confi-
dence in the emperor, was sincerely attached to
the Lutheran tenets, he determined not to be a
tame fpedator of the overthrow of a fyitem
which he believed to be founded in truth.

This resolution, flowing from the love of li-

berty, or zeal for religion, was fitrengthened by
political and interefited considerations. In that
elevated station in which Maurice was now

3 placed,

placed, new and more extensive profpeas opened
to his view. His rank and power entitled him
to be the head of the protefiants in the empire.
His predecessor, the degraded eledor, with in-
ferior abilities, and territories less considerable,
had acquired such an ascendant over the councils
of the party; and Maurice neither wanted dif-
cernment to fee the advantage of this pre-emi.
nence, nor ambition to aim at attaining it. But
he found himself in a situation which rendered
the attempt no less difficult, than the objea of
it was important. On the one hand, the con-
neEtion which he had formed with the emperor
was so intimate, that he could fearcely hope to
take any itep which tended to dissolve it, with-
out alarming his jealousy, and drawing on him-
self the whole weight of that power, which had
crushed the greateit confederacy ever formed in
Germany. On the other hand the calamities
which he had brought on the protestant party
were so recent, as well as great, that it seemed
almost impossible to regain their confidence, or
to rally and re-animate a body, after he himself
had been the chief inifrument in breaking its
union and vigour. These considerations were
fufficient to have discouraged any person of a
spirit less adventurous than Maurice's. But to
him the grandeur and difficulty of the enterprise
were allurements; and he boldly resolved on
measures, the idea of which a genius of an infe-
rior order could not have conceived, or would
have trembled at the thoughts of the danger that
attended the execution of them.

His pafflions concurred with his interest in con-

firming this resolution; and the resentment ex-

cited

cited by an injury, which he sensibly felt, added
new force to the motives for opposing the em-
peror, which found policy fuggefited. Maurice,
by his authority, had prevailed on the landgrave
of Hesse to put his person in the emperor's
power, and had obtained a promise from the Im-
perial ministers that he should not be detained a
prisoner. This had been violated in the manner
already related. The unhappy landgrave ex.
claimed as loudly againit his fon-in-law as against
Charles. The princes of Hesse required Maurice
to fulfil his engagements to their father, who
had loft his liberty by trufling to him; and all
Germany fufpeaed him of having betrayed, to
an implacable enemy, the friend whom he was
most bound to proteA. Roused by these soli.
citations or reproaches, as well as prompted by
duty and affeAion to his father-in-law, Mainrice
had employed not only entreaties but remon-
itrances in order to procure his release. All these
Charles had disregarded; and the shame of
having been first deceived, and then slighted, by
a prince whom he had served with zeal as well as
success, which merited a very different return,
made such a deep impression on Maurice, that
he waited with impatience for an opportunity of
being revenged.

The utmost caution as vell as the mofi delicate

address were requisite in taking every step towards
this end; as he had to guard, on the one hand,
against giving a premature alarm to the emperor;
while, on the other, something considerable and
explicit was necessary to be done, in order to re-
gain the confidence of the protestant party.
Maurice had accordingly applied all his powers

: 路. of

of art and dissimulation to attain both these points.
As he knew Charles to be inflexible with regard
to the submission which he required to the Inte-
rim, he did not hesitate one moment whether he
should establish that form of doarine and worship
in his dominions: but being sensible how odious
it was to his fubjeas, initead of violently impof.
ing it on them by the mere terror of authority,
as had been done in other parts of Germany, lie
endeavoured to render their obedience a volun-
tary deed of their own. For this purpose, he
had assembled the clergy of his country at Leip-
Lick, and had laid the Interim before them, toge-
ther with the reasons which made it necessary to
conform to it. He had gained some of them by
promises, others he had wrought upon by threats,
and all were intimidated by the rigour with which
obedience to the Interim was extorted in the
neighbouring provinces. Even Melanahon,
whose merit of every kind entitled him to the
firit place among the protestant divines, being
now deprived of the manly counsels of Luther,
which were wont to inspire him with fortitude,
and to preserve him steady amidif the florms and
dangers that threatened the church, was seduced
into unwarrantable concessions, by the timidity
of his temper, his fond desire of peace, and his
excessive complaisance towards persons of high
rank. By his arguments and authority, no less
than by Maurice's address, the assembly was
prevailed on to declare, " that, in points which
were purely indifferent, obedience was due to
the commands of a lawful fuperior." Founding
upon this maxim, no less uncontrovertible in
theory, than dangerous when carried into prac-

VOL.Iv. C tice,

tice, especially in religious matters, many of the
protestant ecclefiaftics whom Maurice conflted,
proceeded to class, among the number of things
indifferent, several doArines, which Luther had
pointed out as gross and pernicious errors in the
Romilh creed; and placing in the fame rank
many of those rites which distinguished the re-
formed from the popith worship, they exhorted
their people to comply with the emperor's in-
junaions concerning these particulars F.

By this dexterous condufi, the introduaion

of the Interim excited none of those violent con-
vulfions in Saxony which it occasioned in other
provinces. But though the Saxons submitted,
the more zealous Lutherans exclaimed againit
MelanAhon and his associates, as false brethren,
who were either so wicked as to apoitatize from
the truth altogether; or so crafty as to betray it
by fibtle difiinaions; or so fehble-fpirited as to
give it up from pusillanimity and criminal com-
plaifance to a prince, capable of sacrificing to his
political interest that which he himself regarded
as molt sacred. Maurice, being conscious what
a colour of probability his palt condua gave to
those accusations, as well as afraid of losing en-
tirely the confidence of the protefiants, iflnued a
declaration containing profeflions of his zealous
attachment to the reformed religion, and of his
resolution to guard againit all the errors or en-
croachments of the papal fee e.

f Sleid. 4r. 485. Jo. Laur. Molhemii Inflitutionem
iff. Ecclefiaflica, lib.iv. Helmif. s755* 4to. p. 74S.

Jo And. Schmidii Hifitoria Interimiflica, p. 70, &c. Helmft.
3730.

r Sleid. 48ai

Having~

and jealounies of the proteieants, he found it ne-
ceffary to efface the impreflion which foch a
declaration might make upon the emperor. For
tint purpose, he not only renewed his profefflons
of an inviolalic adherence to his alliance with
hint, but as the ciry of Magdchnrg till perfiited
in rejeding the Interim, he undertook to reduce
it to obedience, and imiiantly set about levying
troops to be employed in that service. This
damped all the hopes which the proteliants began
to conceixe of Maurice, in consequence of his
declaration, and left them more than ever at a loss
to guess at his real intentions. Their former fiuf-
picion and diitruit of him revived, and the di-
vines of Magdeburg filled Germany with writings
in which they represented him as the moR formi-
dable enemy of the proteflant religion, who
treacherously assumed an appearance of zeal for
its interest, that he might more effeAually execute
his schemes for its deitruaion.

This charge, supported by the evidence of re-

cent faas, as well as by his present dubious con-
dud, gained such universal credit, that Maurice
was obliged to take a vigorous flep in his own
vindication. As soon as the re-assembling of the
council at Trent was proposed in the diet, his
ambassadors proteited that their maiter would
not acknowledge its authority, unless all the
points which had bee:1 already decided there,
were reviewed, and considered as itill undeter-
mined; unless the proteitant divines had a full
heaiing granted them, and were allowed a de-
ciinve vouc in the council; and nnlefs the pope
renot:.:cml lmi.i pret.ibo0as to preside in the conn-

C2 cil,

cil, engaged to submit to its decrees, and to ab.
solve the bishops from their oath of obedience,
that they might deliver their sentiments with
greater freedom. These demands, which were
higher than any that the reformers had ventured
to make, even when the zeal of their party was
warmest, or their affairs most prosperous, counter-
balanced, in some degree, the impression which
Maurice's preparations against Magdeburg had
made upon the minds of the protestants, and
kept them in suspense with regard to his designs,
At the fame time, he had dexterity enough to
represent this part of his condu& in such a light
to the emperor, that it gave him no offence, and
occasioned no interruption of the frin confidence
which subsisted between them. What the pre.
texts were which he employed, in order to give
fich a bold declaration an innocent appearance,
the contemporary historians have not explained;
that they imposed upon Charles is certain, for
he fitll continued not only to prosecute his plan,
as well concerning the Interim as the council,
with the fame ardour, but to place the fame con-
fidence in Maurice, with regard to the execution
of both.

The pope's resolution concerning the council

not being yet known at Augsburg, the chief
business of the diet was to enforce the observation
of the Interim. As the senate of Magdeburg,
notwithfianding various endeavours to frighten
or to sooth them into compliance, not only per-
fevered obitinately in their opposition to the In-
terim, but began to fitrengthen the fortifications
of their city, and to levy troops in their own
defence, Charles required the diet to aflift him in

quelling

quelling this audacious rebellion againit a decree
of the empire. Had the members of the diet
been left to ad agreeably to their own inclination,
this demand would have been rejeAed without
hesitation. All the Germans who favoured, in
any degree, the new opinions in religion, and many
who were influenced by no other consideration
than jealousy of the emperor's growing power,
regarded this effort of the citizens of Magde-
burg, as a noble itand for the liberties of their
country. Even foch as had not resolution to
exert the fame spirit, admired the gallantry of
their enterprise, and wished it success. But the
presence of the Spanish troops, together with
the dread of the emperor's displeasure, overawed
the members of the diet to foch a degree, that,
without venturing to utter their own sentiments,
they tamely ratiied, by their votes, whatever
the emperor was pleared to prescribe. The rigo-
rous decrees, which Charles had ifiued by his
o .n authority againit the Magdeburgers, were
confirmed; a resolution was taken to raise troops
in order to beliege the city in form ; andperfons
were named to fix the contingent in men or mo-
ney to be furnilhed by each itate. At the fame
time, the diet petitioned that Maurice might be en-
trusted with the command of that army; to vhich
Charles gave his consent with great alacrity, and
with high encomiums upon the wisdom of the
choice which they had made h. As Maurice
conduaed all his schemes with profound and im-
penetrable secrecy, it is probable that he took no
liep avowedly in order to obtain this charge.

" Sicid. 503. 512.

c3 The

The recommendation of his countrymen was
either purely accidental, or flowed from the
opinion generally entertained of his great abili-
ties; and neither the diet had any foreiight, nor
the emperor any dread, of the consequences which
followed upon this pomination. Maurice accept-
ed, without hesitation, the command to which
he was recommended, inflantly discerning the im,
portant advantages which he might derive from
having it committed to him.

Meanwhile, Julius, in preparing the bull for

the convocation of the council, observed all those
tedious forms which the court of Rome can art-
fully employ to retard any disagreeable measure.
At last however it was published, and the council
was summoned to meet at Trent on the first day
of the ensuing month of May. As he knew
that many of the Germans rejeded or disputed
the authority and jurifdidion which the papal fee
claims with refpeat to general councils, he took
care, in the preamble of the bull, to assert, in the
itrongeft terms, his own right, not only to call
and preside in that assembly, but to dire& its
proceedings; nor would he soften these expref-
lions in any degree, in compliance with the re-
peated folicitations of the emperor, who foresaw
what offence they would give, and what conifrue-
tion might be put on them. They were cen-
sured accordingly with great severity by several
members of the diet; but whatever disgust or
suspicion they excited, such complete influence
over all their deliberations had the emperor ac-
quired, that he procured a recess [Feb. 13, r55 51,
in which the authority of the council was recog-
pifed, and declared to be the proper remedy for

the

all the princes and states of the empire, such as
had made innovations in religion, as well as those
who adhered to the system of their forefathers,
were required to fend their representatives to the
council; the emperor engaged to grant a safe
condua to such as demanded it,and to secure them
an impartial hearing in the council; he promised
to fix his residence in fame city of the empire,
in the neighbourhood of Trent, that he might
prote& the members of the council by his pre.
fence, and take care that, by conduaing their
deliberations agreeably to scripture and the
doarine of the fathers, they might bring them
to a desirable issue. In this recess, the observation
of the Interim was more firiAly enjoined than
ever; and the emperor threatened all who had
hitherto negleaed or refused to conform to it,
with the severest effeas of his vengeance, if they
persisted in their disobedience i

During the meeting of this diet, a new attempt

was madc, in order to procure liberty to the
landgrave. That prince, nowise reconciled to
his situation by time, grew every day more im-
patient of restraint. Having often applied to
Maurice and the eleEtor of Brandenburg, who
took every occasion of soliciting the emperor in
his behalf, though without any effea, he now
commanded his sons to summon them, with legal
formality, to perform what was contained in the
bond which they had granted him, by surrender-
ing themselves into their hands to be treated

iSleid. s; Thuanolib.ii.32334 Goldai.Conlit.

Imperiale6, vol. ii. 340.

with the fame rigour as the emperor had used
him. This furnithed them with a freth pretext
for renewing their application to the emperor,
together with an additional argument to enforce
it. Charles firmly resolved not to grant their re-
quelL; though, at the fame time, being extremely
desirous to be delivered from their incessant impor-
tunity, he endeavoured to prevail on the landgrave
to give up the bond which he had received from
the two eledors. But that prince refiufing to
part with a security which he deemed essential to
his safety, the emperor boldly cut the knot which
he could not untie; and by a public deed an-
nulled the bond which Maurice and the eledor
of Brandenburg had granted, absolving them
from' all their engagements to the landgrave.
No pretension to a power so pernicious to society
as that of abrogating at pleasure the mou sacred
laws of honour, and mofd formal obligations of
public faith, had hitherto been formed by any
but the Roman pontiffs, who, in consequence of
their claim of supreme power on earth, arrogate
the right of dispensing with precepts and duties
of every kind. All Germany was filled with
astonishment, when Charles assumed the fame
prerogative. The slate of fibjedtion, to which
the empire was reduced, appeared to be more
rigorous, as well as intolerable, than that of the
modt wretched and enslaved nations, if the empe.
ror, by an arbitrary decree, might cancel those
solemn contradts which are the foundation of
that mutual confidence whereby men are held
together in social union. The landgrave himself
now gave up all hopes of recovering his liberty
by the emperor's coufent, and endeavoured to

procure

procure it by his own address. But the plan
which he had formed to deceive his guards being
discovered, such of his attendants as he had
gained to favour his escape, were put to death,
and he was confined in the citadel of Mechlin
more closely than ever k

Another tranfaaion was carried on during this

diet, with refpea to an affair more nearly inte-
resting to the emperor, and which occasioned
likewise a general alarm among the princes of the
empire. Charles, though formed with talents
which fitted him for conceiving and conduaing
great designs, was not capable, as has been often
observed, of bearing extraordinary success. Its
operation on his mind was so violent and intoxi-
cating, that it elevated him beyond what was
moderate or attainable, and turned his whole
attention to the pursuit of vast but chimerical
objeas. Such had been the effed of his viaory
over the confederates of Smalkalde. He did not
long reft satisfied with the fubitantial and certain
advantages which were the result of that event,
but, despising these, as poor or inconsiderable
fruits of such great success, he aimed at nothing
less than at bringing all Germany to an uni-
formity in religion, and at rendering the Imperial
power despotic. These were objvEts extremely
splendid indeed, and alluring to an ambitious
mind; the pursuit of them, however, was attended
with manifest danger, and the hope of attaining
them very uncertain. But the iteps which he
isad already taken towards them, having been
pccompanied with such success, his imagination,

SSleid. 504. Thuan. i. vi. 234, 235.

warmed

warmed with contemplating this alluring objed,
overlooked or despised all remaining difficulties.
As he conceived the execution of his plan to
be certain, he began to be solicitous how he
might render the poffeflion of such an important
acquisition perpetual in his family, by tranf-
mitting the German empire, together with the
kingdoms of Spain, and his dominions in Italy
and the Low-Countries, to his son. Having
long revolved this flattering idea in his mind,
without communicating it, even to those minis-
ters whom he most trufed, he had called Philip
out of Spain, in hopes that his presence would
facilitate the carrying forward the feheme.

Great obitacles, however, and such as would

have deterred any ambition less accullomed to
overcome difficulties, were to be fiurmounted.
He had, in the year one thousand five hundred
and thirty, imprudently aflifled in procuring his
brother Ferdinand the dignity of king of the
Romans, and there was no probability that this
prince, who was still in the prime of life, and had
a son grown up to the years of manhood, would
relinquish, in favour of his nephew, the near
profpe& of the Imperial throne, which Charles's
infirmities and declining Rtate of health opened
to himself. This did not deter the emperor
from venturing to make the proposition; and
when Ferdinand, notwithflanding his profound
reverence for his brother, and obfequions fob.
mission to his will in other infrances, rejeded it
in a peremptory tone, he was not difcoumaged hy
one repulle. He renewed his applicaiuons to
him by his fiffer, Mary queen of Hun;ary, to
whom Ferdinand Rlood indebted for the crowns

both

both of Hungary and Bohemia, and who, by her
great abilities, tempered with extreme gentleness
of disposition, had acquired an extraordinary in-
fluence over both the brothers. She entered
warmly into a measure, which tended so mani-
feitly to aggrandize the house of Aufria; and,
flattering herself that (he could tempt Ferdinand
to renounce the reversionary poffeffion of the
Imperial dignity for art immediate establishment,
she assured him that the emperor, by way of coin-
penfation for his giving up his chance of fuccef-
don, would initantly bestow upon him territories
of very considerable value, and pointed out in
particular those of the duke of Wurtemberg,
which might be confifeated upon different pre-
texts. But neither by her address nor intreaties
could (he induce Ferdinand to approve of a plan,
which would not only have degraded him from
the higheR rank among the monarchs of Eu-
rope to that of a fiuourdinate and dependent
prince, but would have involved both him and
his posterity in perpetual contests. He was,
at the fame time, more attached to his children,
than by a raih concession to fruifrate all the
high hopes, in profpedt of which they had been
educated.

Notwithifanding the immoveable firmness

which Ferdinand discovered, the emperor did not
abandon his fcheeme. He flatered himself that
lie might attain the objea in view by another
channel, and that it was not impossible to pre-
vail on the eledors to cancel their former choice
of Ferdinand, or at Ladt to eleft Philip a second
king of the Romans, fubidituting him as next in
succession to his uncle. With this view, he took

Philip

mans might have an opportunity to observe and
become acquainted with the prince, in behalf of
whom he courted their interet; and he himself
employed all the arts of address or insinuation to
gain the eleaors, and to prepare them for listen.
ing with a favourable ear to the proposal. But
no sooner did he venture upon mentioning it to
them, than they, at once, saw and trembled at
the consequences with which it would be attend-
ed. They had long felt all the inconveniencies
of having placed at the head of the empire a
prince whose power and dominions were so ex
tensive; if they should now repeat the folly, and
continue the Imperial crown, like an hereditary
dignity, in the fame family, they foresaw that
they would give the son an opportunity of carry-
ing on that sys em of oppression which the father
had begun; and would put it in his power to
overturn whatever was yet left entire in the
ancient and venerable fabrick of the German
conflitution.

The charaaer of the prince, in whose favour

this extraordinary proposition was made, rendered
it itill less agreeable. Philip, though poffeffed
with an insatiable desire of power, was a fitranger
to all the arts of conciliating good-will. Haugh.
ty, reserved, and severe, he, iniead of gaining
new friends, disgusted the ancient and modt de.
voted partizans of the Aufrian interest. He
scorned to take the trouble of acquiring the
language of the country to the government of
which he aspired; nor would he condescend to
pay the Germans the compliment of accommo路
dating himself, during his residence among them,

eledors and most illufirious princes in Germany
to remain in his presence uncovered, affeAing a
itately and difitant demeanour, which the greatest
of the German emperors, and even Charles him-
self, amidit the pride of power and viaory, had
never assumed '. On the other hand, Ferdinand,
from the time of his arrival in Germany, had
iudied to render himself acceptable to the peoples
by a conformity to their manners, which seemed
to flow from choice; and his son Maximilian,
who was born in Germany, poffeffed, in an emi-
nent degree, such amiable qualities as rendered
him the darling of his countrymen, and induced
them to look forward to his eleaion as a most
desirable event. Their esteem and affe&ion for
him, fortified the resolution which found policy
had suggested; and determined the Germans to
prefer the popular virtues of Ferdinand and his
son, to the flubborn austerity of Philip, which
interest could not soften, nor ambition teach him
to disguise. All the eleaors, the ecclesiastical
as well as secular, concurred in expressing such
ifrong disapprobation of the measure, that
Charles, notwithitanding the reluAance with
which he gave up any point, was obliged to drop
the scheme as impradicable. By his unfeafon-
able perseverance in pushing it, he had not only
filled the Germans with new jealousy of his
ambitious designs, but laid the foundation of
rivalfhip and discord in the Austrian family, and
forced his brother Ferdinand, in feif-defence, to

' Frediman Andre9 Zulich Differtatio politico-hiftorica

de Navis politicis Caroli V. Lips. 17o6. 4to. p. 25.

VOL. Iv. D court

court the eleAors, particularly Maurice of
Saxony, and to form such connedions with them,
as cut off all profped of renewing the proposal
with fnccefs. Philip, soured by his disappoint.
mnent, was sent back to Spain, to be called thence
when any new scheme of ambition should render
his presence necessary r.

Having relinquithed this plan of domestic am.

bition, which had long occupied and engrossed
him, Charles imagined that he would now have
leisure to tuni all his attention towards his
graiid scheme of establishing uniformity of reli-
gion in the empire, by forcing all the contending
parties to acquiesce in the decision3 of the council
of Trent. But such was the extent of his do-
minions, the variety of conneaiona in which this
entangled him, and the multiplicity of events to
which these gave rife, as seldom allowed him to
apply his whole force to any one objed. The
machine which he had to condud was so great
and complicated, that an unforeseen irregularity
or obifruAion in one of the inferior wheels, often
disconcerted the motion of the whole, and pre-
vented his deriving from them all the beneficial
effeAs which he expeted. Such an unlooked.
for occurrence happened at this junAure, and
created new obstacles to the execution of his
fehemes with regard to religion. Julius III.
though he had confirmed Odavio Farnese in the
pofeilion of the dutchy of Parma, during the first
efiufions of his joy and gratitude on his promo.
tion to the papal throne, soon began to repent

m Sieid. 505. Thuan. 0So. 235. Memoir. de Ribirr,

0.. 219. 281. 314. Adriani Iltor. lib. viii.507. 52o.

consequences which either he did not foresee, or
had disregarded, while the sense of his obliga-
tions to the family of Farnese was recent. The
emperor frill retained Placentia in his hands, and
had not relinquiffed his pretensions to Parma as
a fief of the empire. Gonzaga, the governor of
Milan, having, by the part which he took in the
murder of the late duke Peter Ludovico, offered
an insult to the family of Farnese, which he knew
could never be forgiven, had, for that reason,
vowed its defiruAion; and employed all the in-
fluence which his great abilities, as well as long
services, gave him with the emperor, in per-
fuading him to seize Parma by force of arms.
Charles, in compliance with his folicitations, and
that he might gratify his own desire of annexing
Farma to the Milanese, lifrened to the proposal;
and Gonzaga, ready to take encouragement from
the flighteit appearance of approbation, began to
assemble troops, and to make other preparations
for the execution of his scheme.

Otavio, who saw the impending danger, found

it necessary, for his own safety, to increase the
garrison of his capital, and to levy soldiers for
defending the reit of the country. But as the
expence of such an effort far exceeded his scanty
revenues, he represented his situation to the pope,
and implored that protedion and afidiance
which was due to him as a vassal of the church.
The Imperial minidfer, however, had already
pre-occupied the pope's ear ; and by discoursing
continually concerning the danger of giving
offence to the emperor, as well as the irepro-

D 2 dence

dence of supporting Odavio in an usurpation
so detrimental to the holy fee, had totally alien-
ated him from the family of Farnese. Odavio's
remonfitrance and petition met, of consequence,
with a cold reception; and he, despairing of any
assistance from Julius, began to look round for
proteaion from some other quarter. Henry II.
of France was the only prince powerful enough
to afford him this proteaion, and fortunately he
was now in a situation which allowed him to
grant it. He had brought his tranfaaions with
the two Britilh kingdoms, which had hitherto
diverted his attention from the affairs of the con-
tinent, to such an issue as he desired. This he
had effeaed partly by the vigour of his arms,
partly by his dexterity in taking advantage of
the political fa&ions which raged in both king.
doms to such a degree, as rendered the councils
of the S&ots violent and precipitate, and the ope-
rations of the English feeble and unfleady. He
had procured from the Englith favourable con.
ditions of peace for his allies the Scots; he had
prevailed on the nobles of Scotland not only to
affiance their young queen to his son the Dau-
phin, but even to fend her into France, that she
might be educated under his eye; and had re-
covered Boulogne,together with its dependencies,
which had been conquered by Henry VIII.

The French king having gained points of so

much consequence to his crown, and disengaged
himself with such honour from the burden of
supporting the Scots, and maintaining a war
against England, was now at full leisure to pur-
jue the measures which his hereditary jealousy

of the emperor's power naturally fiiggefted. He
lifrened, accordingly, to the fire overtures which
OAavio Farnese made him; and embracing
eagerly an opportunity of recovering footing in
Italy, he infrantly concluded a treaty, in which
he bound himfefl to espouse his cause, and to
fornifh him all the assistance which he desired.
This tranfadion could not be long kept secret
from the pope, who, foreseeing the calamities
which must follow if war were rekindled so near
the ecclesiastical date, immediately ifiied moni-
tory letters, requiring Odavio to relinquish his
new alliance. Upon his refilfal to comply with
the requisition, he soon after pronounced his fief
to be forfeited, and declared war againd him as
a disobedient and rebellious vassal. But as, with
his own forces alone, he could not hope to sub-
lue Ofavio while fiopported by such a powerful
ally as the king of France, he had recourse to
the emperor, who being extremely solicitous to
prevent the efdablifhment of the French in Parma,
ordered Gonzaga to second Julius with all his
troops. Thus the French took the field as the
allies of Odavio; the Imperialists as the pro-
tedors of the holy fee ; and hodilities commenced
between them, while Charles and Henry them-
selves frill affeaed to give out that they would
adhere inviolably to the peace of Crefpy. The
war of Parma was not distinguished by any me-
snorable event. Many fmnall rencontres hap-
pened with alternate success; the French ravaged
part of the ecclesiastical territories ; the Imperial-
ills laid wadte the Parmesan ; and the latter, after
having begun to bciege Parma in form, were

a 3 obliged

obliged to abandon the enterprise with dif.
grace n.

But the motions and alarm which this war, or

the preparations for it, occasioned in Italy, pre-
vented most of the Italian prelates from repair.
ing to Trent on the first of May, the day ap.
pointed for re-assembling the council; and though
the papal legate and nuncios resorted thither,
they were obliged to adjourn the council to the
first of September, hoping such a number of
prelates might then assemble, that they might
with decency begin their deliberations. At that
time about faxty prelates, moitly from the eccle.
fiaftical fiate, or from Spain, together with a
few Germans, convened O. The session was
opened with the accustomed formalities, and the
fathers were about to proceed to business, when
the abbot of Bellozane appeared, and presenting
letters of credence as ambassador from the king
of France, demanded audience. Having ob-
tained it, he protefited, in Henry's name, againf
an assembly called at such an improper junfure,
when a war, wantonly kindled by the pope, made
it impossible for the deputies from the Gallican
church to resort to Trent in safety, or to deli-
berate concerning articles of faith and discipline
with the requisite tranquillity; he declared, that
his master did not acknowledge this to be a ge-
neral or oecumenic council, but must confider,
and would treat it, as a particular and partial

SAdriani Iflor. Ilb-. vii. 505. 514. 524. Sleid. ps.

Paruta, p. zzo. Lettere del Caro (critte al nome del Card.
Farnese, torn. ii. p. II, &c.

O F. Paul, z68.

conven-

protest; and the prelates proceeded, notwith.
itanding, to examine and decide the great points
in controversy concerning the sacrament of the
Lord's supper, penance, and extreme undion.
This measure of the French monarch, however,
gave a deep wound to the credit of the council,
at the very commencement of its deliberations.
The Germans could not pay much regard to an
assembly, the authority of which the second
prince in Christendom had formally disclaimed,
or feel any great reverence for the decisions of a
few men, who arrogated to themselves all the
rights belonging to the representatives of the
church universal, a title to which they had such
poor pretensions.

The emperor, nevertheless, was fthaining his

authority to the utmost, in order to establish the
reputation and jurifdiaion of the council. He
had prevailed on the three ecclefiailical eleaors,
the prelates of greatest power and dignity in the
church next to the pope, to repair thither in per
son. He had obliged several German bishops of
inferior rank, to go to Trent themselves, or to
fend their proxies. He granted an Imperial
fafe-condua to the ambassadors nominated by
the eleaor of Brandenburg, the duke of Wur-
temberg, and other proteitants, to attend the
council ; and exhorted them to fend their divines
thither, in order to propound, explain, and de-
fend their dodrine. At the fame time, his zeal
anticipated the decrees of the council; and as if
the opinions of the protefitants had already been

P Sleid. ir. Thuan. 282. F. Paul, lo0.

condemned,

minating them. With this intention, he called
together the ministers of Augsburg; and after
interrogating them concerning several contro-
verted points, enjoined them to teach nothing
with refpeA to these, contrary to the tenets of
the Romilh church. Upon their declining to
comply with a requifstion so contrary to the dic-
tates of their consciences, he commanded them
to leave the town in three days, without reveal-
ing to any person the cause of their banifihment;
he prohibited them to preach for the future in
any province of the empire; and obliged them
to take an oath that they would punaually obey
these injunaions. They were not the only vic-
tims to his zeal. The protestant clergy, in most
of the cities in the circle of Swabia, were ejeded
with the fame violence ; and in many places, such
magistrates as had diftinguilhed themselves by
their attachment to the new opinions, were dif-
miffed with the moit abrupt irregularity, and their
offices filled, in consequence of the emperor's arbi-
trary appointment, with the most bigoted of their
adversaries. The reformed worship was almost
entirely suppressed throughout that extensive
province. The ancient and fundamental privi.
leges of the free cities were violated. The peo-
ple were compelled to attend the ministration of
priests, whom they regarded with horror as idol-
ators; and to submit to the jurifdiAiou of magif-
trates, whom they detefited as ufurpers q.

The emperor, after this discovery, which was

more explicit than any that he had hitherto made,

9 Sleid. 5x6. haS. Thuan. 276.

tion, as well as to extirpate the protefitant reli.
gionl set out for Infpruck in the Tyrol. He
fixed his residence in that city [Novem.], as, by
its situation in the neighbourhood of Trent, and
on -the confines of Italy, it appeared a commo-
dious flation, whence he might infpea the ope-
rations of the council, and observe the progress
of the war in the Parmesan without losing fight
of fisch occurrences as might happen in Ger-
many T.

During these tranfadions, the siege of Mag-

deburg was carried on with various success. At
the time when Charles proscribed the citizens of
Magdeburg, and put them under the ban of the
empire, he had exhorted and even enjoined all
the neighbouring ilates to take arms againit
them, as rebels and common enemies. Encou-
raged by his exhortations as well as promises,
George of Mecklenburg, a younger brother of
the reigning duke, an aative and ambitious prince,
colleaed a considerable number of those soldiers
of fortune who had accompanied Henry of
Brunswick in allhis wild enterprises; and though
a zealous Lutheran himself, invaded the terri-
tories of the Magdeburgers, hoping that, by the
merit of this service, he might procure iome part
of their domains to be allotted to him as an efta.
blifhment. The citizens, unaccustomed as yet
to endure patiently the calamities of war, could
not be reitrained from failying out in order to
save their lands from being laid waste. They at-
p.scked the duke of Mecklenburg with more

r Sleid. p9.

resolution

great slaughter. But as they were animated
with that unconquerable spirit, which flows from
zeal for religion co-operating with the love of
civil liberty, far from being difneartened by their
misfortune, they prepared to defend themselves
with vigour. Many of the veteran soldiers who
had served in the long wars between the empe-
ror and king of France, crowding to their stand-
ards under able and experienced officers, the citi-
zens acquired military skill by degrees, and added
all the advantages of that to the efforts of un-
daunted courage. The duke of Mecklenburg,
notwithifanding the severe blow which he had
given the Magdeburgers, not daring to invest a
town fitrongly fortified, and defended by such a
garrison, continued to ravage the open country.

As the hopes of booty drew many adventurers

to the camp of this young prince, Manrice of
Saxony began to be jealous of the power which
he poffeffed by being at the head of such a nu-
merous body, and marching towards Magde-
burg with his own troops, affiumed the fa-
preme command of the whole army, an honour
to which his high rank and great abilities, as
well as the nomination of the diet, gave him
an indisputable title. With this united force,
he invefied the town, and began the siege in
form; claiming great merit with the emperor
on that account, as from his zeal to execute the
Imperial decree, he was exposing himself once
more to the censures and maledidrions of the party
with which he agreed in religious sentiments.
But the approaches to the town went on slowly;
the garrison interrupted the besiegers by frequent

sallies,

was taken prisoner, levelled part of their works,
and cut off the soldiers in their advanced pofds.
While the citizens of Magdeburg, animated by
the discourses of their pastors, and the soldiers,
encouraged by the example of their officers, en-
dured all the hardships of a siege without mur-
muring, and defended themselves with the fame
ardour which they had at firn discovered; the.
troops of the besiegers a6{ed with extreme re-
miffnefs, repining at every thing that they sus-
fered in a service which they disliked. They
broke out more than once into an open mutiny,
demanding the arrears of their pay, which, as
the members of the Germanic body sent in their
contributions towards defraying the expences
of the war sparingly, and with great reludance,
amounted to a considerable fum '. Maurice,
too, had particular motives, though such as he
durif mot avow at that junaure, which induced
him not to pulh the siege with vigour, and made
him cloofe rather to continue at the head of an
army exposed to all the imputations which his
dilatory proceedings drew upon Isim, than to
precipitate a conquct that might have brought
him some accefion of reputation, but would have
rendered it necessary to disband his forces.

At lad, the inhabitants of the town beginning

to fuf~er diffrefs from want of provisions, and
Maurice, finding it impoflible to protraa matters
any longer without filling the emperor with such
suspicions as might have disconcerted all his
measures, he concluded a treaty of capitulation

Thun. 277. Sleid. i4.

with

conditions; that the Magdeburgers ihould hum.
bly implore pardon of the emperor; that they
should not for the future take arms, or enter
into any alliance againit the house ofAuftria;
that they should submit to the authority of the
Imperial chamber; that they should conform to
the decree of the diet at Augfbtrrg with refpe8
to religion; that the new fortifications added
to the town should be demolished; that they
lhould pay a fine of fifty thousand crowns, de.
liver up twelve pieces of ordnance to the empe.
ror, and set the duke of Mecklenburg, together
with their other prisoners, at liberty, without
ransom. Next day their garrison marched out,
and Maurice took poffeflion of the town with
great military pomp.

Before the terms of capitulation were fettled,

Maurice had held many conferences with Albert
count Mansfeldt, who had the chief command in
Magdeburg. He consulted likewise with count
Heideck, an officer who had served with great
reputation in the army of the league of Smal.
kalde, whom the emperor had proscribed on
account of his zeal for that cause, but whom
Maurice had, notwithstanding, secretly engaged
in his service, and admitted into the most inti.
mate confidence. To them he communicated a
scheme, which he had long revolved in his mind,
for procuring liberty to his father-in-law the
landgrave, for vindicating the privileges of the
Germanic body, and setting bounds to the
dangerous encroachments of the Imperial power.
Having (leliberated with them concerning the
measures which might be necessary for securing

2 the

Mansfeldt secret assurances that the fortifications
of Magdeburg should not be defiroyed, and that
the inhabitants ihould neither be diiturbed in the
exercise of their religion, nor be deprived of any
of their ancient immunities. In order to en-
gage Maurice more thoroughly from conlidera-
tions of interest to fulfil these engagements, the
senate of Magdeburg eleaed him their bur-
grave, a dignity which had formerly belonged to
the eledoral house of Saxony, and which en-
titled him to a very ample jurifdiaion not only
in the city but in its dependencies '.

Thus the citizens of Magdeburg, after en-

during a siege of twelve months, and fitruggling
for their liberties, religious and civil, with an
invincible fortitude, worthy of the cause in which
it was exerted, had at last the good fortune to
conclude a treaty, which left them in a better
condition than the relt of their countrymen,
whom their timidity or want of public spirit had
betrayed into such mean submissions to the em.
peror. But while a great part of Germany ap-
plauded the gallant condua of the Magdeburgers,
and rejoiced in their having escaped the deidruc-
tion with which they had been threatened, all
admired Maurice's address in the condua of his
negotiation with them, as well as the dexterity
with which he converted every event to his own
advantage. They saw, with amazement, that after
having affiited the Magdeburgers during many
months with all the calamities of war, he was at

tSleid. 5S. Thuan. U. 276. Oblidionis Magdebur-

gici Defcriptio per Sebast. Belff:meierum, ap. Scard. ii.

OL. IV. E la,

lait, by their voluntary eledion, advanced to the
station of highest authority in that city which he
had so lately besieged ; that after having been so
long the objeA of their satirical invedives as an
apoitate and an enemy to the religion which he
profeffed, they seemed now to place unbounded
confidence in his zeal and good will . At the
fame time, the public articles in the treaty of
capitulation were so perfedly conformable to
those which the emperor had granted to the
other protefitant cities, and Maurice took fetch
care to magnify his merit in having reduced a
place which had defended itself with so much
obitinacy, that Charles, far from fufpeAing any
thing fraudulent or collusive in the terms of ac-
commodation, ratified them without hesitation,
and absolved the Magdeburgers from the fen-
tence of ban which had been denounced against
them.

The only point that now remained to embar-

rafs Maurice was how to keep together the vete-
ran troops which had served under him, as well
as those which had been employed in the defence
of the town. For this, too, he found an expe-
dient with singular art and felicity. His fehemes
against the emperor were not yet so fully ripened,
that he durit venture to disclose them, and pro-
ceed openly to carry them into execution. The
winter was approaching, which made it impof.
fible to take the field immediately. He was
afraid that it would give a premature alarm to
the emperor, if he lhould retain such a confider-
able body in his pay untilthe season of ation re-

u Arnoldi vita Maurit, apud Menken. ii, uz7- turned

burg opened its gates, he sent home his Saxon
fubjeds, whom he could command to take arms
and re-assemble on the shorteR warning; and at
the fame time, paying part of the arrears due to
the mercenary troops, who had followed his
fiandard, as well as to the soldiers who had served
in the garrison, he absolved them from their re-
fpedive oaths of fidelity, and disbanded them.
But the moment he gave them their discharge,
George of Mecklenburg, who was now set at
liberty, offered to take them into his service, and
to become surety for the payment of what was
fitll owing to them. As iuch adventurers were
accuffomed often to change maiters, they in-
itantly accepted the offer. Thus these troops
were kept united, and ready to march wherever
Maurice should call them, while the emperor,
deceived by this artifice, and imagining that
George of Mecklenburg had hired them with an
intention to assert his claim to a part of his bro-
ther's territories by force of arms, fuffered this
tranfadion to pass without observation, as if it
had been a matter of no consequence X.

Having ventured to take these iteps, which

were of so much consequence towards the execu-
tion of his ichemes, Maurice, that he might
divert the emperor from observing their tendency
too narrowly, and prevent the suspicions which
that must have excited, saw the neceflity of em-
ploying some new artifice in order to engage his
attention, and to confirmb him in his present fe-

X Thuan. 278. Struv. Corp. Hia. Germ. so64. Arnoldi

vkta Mdauritii, apud Menken. ii. 1227.

Ea curity.

emperor's solicitude at this junature, was how
he might prevail with the protefitant states of
Germany to recognize the authority of the coun.
cil of Trent, and to fend thither ambassadors in
their own name, as well as deputies from their
refpe&ive churches, he took hold of this predo.
minating pafflion in order to amule and to deceive
him. He affeaed a wonderful zeal to gratify
Charles in what he desired with regard to this
matter; he nominated ambassadors, whom he
empowered to attend the council; he made
choice of Melanahon and some of the most emi-
nent among his brethren to prepare a confeflion
of faith, and to lay it before that assembly.
After his example, and probably in consequence
of his folicitations, the duke of Wurtemberg, the
city of Strafburg, and other protefitant states,
appointed ambassadors and divines to attend the
council. They all applied to the emperor for
his fafe-condu&, which they obtained in the
most ample form. This was deemed fufficient
for the security of the ambassadors, and they
proceeded accordingly on their journey; but a
separate fafe-condua from the council itself was
demanded for the protestant divines. The fate
of John Huss and Jerome of Prague, whom the
council of Constance, in the preceding century,
had condemned to the flames without regarding
the Imperial fafe-condua which had been grant-
ed them, rendered this precaution prudent and
receffary. But as the pope was no less unwilling
that the protestants (hould be admitted to an
hearing in the council, than the emperor had
heen eager in bringing them to demand it, the

legate

legate by promises and threats prevailed on the
fathers of the council to decline issuing a safe-
condue& in the fame form with that which the
council of Basil had granted to the followers of
Huss. The protestants, on their part, indifted
upon the council's copying the precise words of
that initrument. The Imperial ambassadors in-
terpofed in order to obtain what would satisfy
them. Alterations in the form of the writ wertY
proposed; expedients were fulggefted; protests
and counter protests were taken: the legate, to-
gether with his associates, laboured to gain their
point by artifice and chicane; the proteitants ad-
hered to theirs with firmness and obilinacy. An
account of every thing that passed in Trent was
tranimitted to the emperor at Infpruck, who,
attempting, from an excess of zeal, or of confi-
dence in his own address, to reconcile the con-
tending parties, was involved in a labyrinth of
inextricable negotiations. By means of this,
however, Maurice gained all that he had in
\iew; the emperor's time was wholly engioffed,
and his attention diverted; while he himself had
leilfure to mature his schemes, to carry on his
intrigues, and to finish his preparations, before
he threwv off the maflk, and fitruck the blow vwhich
he had so long meditated y.

But previous to entering into any farther de-

tail concerning Maurice's operations, some ac.
count must be given of a new revolution in Hun-
gary, which contributed not a little towards their
producing such extraordinary effeds. WXhcn
Solyman, in the year 1541, by a stratagem,

Y Sieid. 526. 529. F.Paul. 323. 338. Thuan, z6ch

Ewhich

petty usurper, rather than the magnanimity of
a mighty conqueror, deprived the young king of
Hungary of the dominions which his father had
left him, he had granted that unfortunate prince
the country of Transylvania, a province of his
paternal kingdom. The government of this,
together with the care of educating the young
king, for he frill allowed him to retain that title,
though he had rendered it only an empty name,
he committed to the queen and Martinuzzi bishop
of Waradin, whom the late king had appointed
joint-guardians of his son, and regents of his do-
minions, at a time when those offices were of
greater importance. This co-ordinate jurifdic.
tion occasioned the fame diffentions in a small
principality as it would have excited in a great
kingdom; an ambitious young queen, poffeffed
with an high opinion of her own capacity for
governing, and an high-fpirited prelate, fond of
power, contending who Ihould engross the
greatest share in the administration. Each had
their partizans among the nobles; but as
Martinuzzi, by his great talents, began to ac-
quire the ascendant, Isabella turned his own arts
againit him, and courted the protetion of the
Turks.

The neighbouring bafhas, jealous of the

bifhop's power as well as abilities, readily pro.
mifed her the aid which she demanded, and
would soon have obliged Martinuzzi to have
given up to her the sole direaion of affairs, if his
ambition, fertile in expedients, had not suggested
to him a new measure, and one that tended not
only to preserve but to enlarge his authority. Having

by the mediation of some of the nobles, who
were solicitous to save their country from the
calamities of a civil war, he secretly dispatched
one of his confidents to Vienna, and entered into
a negotiation with Ferdinand. As it was no dif-
ficult matter to persuade Ferdinand, that the
fame man whole enmity and intrigues had driven
him out of a great part of his Hungarian do-
minions, might, upon a reconciliation, become
equally inifrumental in recovering them, he
listened eagerly to the firfi overtures of an union
with that prelate. Martinuzzi allured him by
such profpeds of advantage, and engaged, with
so much confidence, that he would prevail on the
most powerful of the Hungarian nobles to take
arms in his favour, that Ferdinand, notwith-
standing his truce with Solyman, agreed to in-
vade Transylvania. The command of the troops
destined for that service, coniifting of veteran
Spanith and German soldiers, was given to
Caftaldo Marquis de Piadena, an officer formed
by the famous Marquis de Pescara, whom he
lirongly resembled both in his enterprising genius
for civil business, and in his great knowledge in
the art of war. This army, more formidable
by the discipline of the soldiers, and the abilities
of the general, than by its numbers, was power-
fully seconded by Martinuzzi and his fation
among the Hugarians. As the Turkish balhas,
the sultan himself being at the head of his army
on the frontiers of Persia, could not afford the
queen such immediate or effeaual assistance as
the exigency of her affairs required, she quickly
loft all hopes of being able to retain any longer

the

the authority which she poffeffed as regent, and
even began to despair of her fon's safety.

Martinuzzi did not fuffer this favourable op-

portunity of accomplihfling his own designs to
pass unimproved, and ventured, while (he was
in this dtate of dejeaion, to lay before her a
\propos al, which at any other time (he would have
rejeaed with disdain. He represented how im.
possible it was for her to resist Ferdinand's vic-
torious arms; that even if the Turks (hould en-
able her to make head againit them, she would
be far from changing her condition to the bet-
ter, and could not confider them as deliverers,
but as masters, to whose commands The muot
submit; he conjured her, therefore, as The re-
garded her own dignity, the safety of her son,
or the security of Christendom, rather to give up
Transylvania to Ferdinand, and to make over
to him her fon's title to the crown of Hungary,
than to allow both to be usurped by the invete-
rate enemy of the Christian faith. At the fame
time he promised her, in Ferdinand's name, a
compensation for herself, as well as for her son,
fiuitable to their rank, and proportional to the
value of what they were to sacrifice. Isabella,
deserted by fume of her adherents, difdrufting
others, destitute of friends, and surrounded by
Caftaldo's and Martinuzzi's troops, subscribed
these hard conditionS, though with a reluaant
hand. Upon this, The surrendered such places of
lirength as were dlill in her poiTefifon, The gave
up all the ensigns of royalty, particularly a crown
of gold, which, as the Hungarians believed, had
descended from Heaven, and conferred on hias
who wore it an undoubted right to the throne.

As

in a country where ihe had once enjoyed sovereign
power, she instantly set out with her son for
Silesia, in order to take poffeffion of the princi-
palities of Oppelen and Ratibor, the inveiliture
of which Ferdinand had engaged to grant her
on, and likewise to bellow one of his daughters
upon him in marriage.

Upon the resignation of the young king,

Martinuzzi, and after his example the relt of
the Transylvanian grandees, swore allegiance to
Ferdinand; who, in order to teflify his grateful
sense of the zeal as well as success with which
that prelate had ferveri him, affeAed to distinguish
him by every poflible mark of favour and confi-
Ajence. He appointed him governor of Tranfyl-
vania, with almost unlimited authority; he pub.
licly ordered Caftaldo to pay the greatest defe-
rence to his opinion and commands; he increased
his revenues, which were already very great, by
new appointments; he nominated him archbishop
of Gran, and prevailed on the pope to raise him
to the dignity of a cardinal. All this oitentation
of good-will, however, was void of sincerity, and
calculated to conceal sentiments the molt perfeitly
its reverse. Ferdinand dreaded Martinuzzi's
abilities; diftrufled his fidelity; and foresaw,
that as his extensive authority enabled him to
check any attempt towards circumscribing or
abolilhing the extensive privileges which the
Hungarian nobility poffeffed, he would fhand
forth on every occasion, the guardian of the
liberties of his country, rather than a& the
part of a viceroy devoted to the will of his
lfuereign.

For

For this reason, he secretly gave it in charge

to Caftaldo, to watch his motions, to guard
against his designs, and to thwart his meaiures.
But Martinuzzi, either because he did not per.
ceive that Cafaldo was placed as a spy on his ac.
tions, or because he despised Ferdinand's insidious
arts, assumed the direaion of the war againif the
Turks with his usual tone of authority, and
conduaed it with great magnanimity, and no
less success. He recovered some places of which
the infidels had taken poffeffion; he rendered
their attempts to reduce others abortive; and
efablifhed Ferdinand's authority not only in
Transylvania, but in the Bannat of Temefwar,
and several of the countries adjacerit. In carry-
ing on these operations, he often differed in senti.
ments from Caftaldo and his officers, and treated
the Turkish prisoners with a degree not only of
humanity, but even of generosity, which Caftaldo
loudly condemned. 'rhis was represented at
Vienna as an artful method of courting the
friendship of the infidels, that, by securing their
proteAion, he might ihake off all dependence
upon the sovereign whom he now acknowledged.
Though Martinuzzi, in justification of his own
conduA, contended that it was impolitic by
unnecessary severities to exasperate an enemy
prone to revenge, Caftaldo's accusations gained
credit with Ferdinand, pre-poffeffed already
againRt Martinuzzi, and jealous of every thing
that could endanger his own authority in Hun-
gary, in proportion as he knew it to be precarious
and ill-eftablifhed. These suspicions Caftaldo
confirmed and strengthened, by the intelligence which

at Vienna. By misrepresenting what was inno-
cent, and putting the worit conifruaion on what
seemed dubious in Martinuzzi's condud; by im-
puting to him designs which he never formed,
and charging him with aaions of which he was
not guilty; he at ladt convinced Ferdinand, that,
in order to preserve his Hungarian crown, he must
cut off that ambitious prelate. But Ferdinand,
foreseeing that it would be dangerous to proceed
in the regular course of law againd a fubjea of
such exorbitant power as might enable him to
set his sovereign at defiance, determined to em-
ploy violence, in order to obtain that fatisfaltion
which the laws were too feeble to afford him.

He issued his orders accordingly to Caffaldo,

who willingly undertook that infamous service.
Having communicated the design to some Italian
and Spanish officers whom he could truot, and
concerted with them the plan of executing it,
they entered Martinuzzi's apartment, early one
morning [Dec. S1], under pretence of present-
ing to him some dispatches which were to be sent
off immediately to Vienna; and while he perused
a paper with attention, one of their number
struck him with his poignard in the throat. The
blow was not mortal. Martinuzzi dtarted up with
the intrepidity natural to him, and grappling the
affaffin, threw him to the ground. But the
other conspirators ruffing in, an old man, un-
armed, and alone, was unable long to sustain
such an unequal confliA, and funk under the
v ounds which he received from so many hands.
The Tranfylvanians were reitrained by dread of

the

the foreign troops fRationed in their country,
from riling in arms, in order to take vengeance
on the murderers of a prelate who had long been
the objed of their love as well as veneration.
They spoke of the deed, however, with horror
and execration; and exclaimed againdt Ferdi-
nand, whom neither gratitude for recent and
important ferviees, nor reverence for a cha.
ra&er considered as sacred and inviolable among
Christians, could redtrain from Ihedding the
blood of a man, whose only crime was attach.
ment to his native country. The nobles, de.
telting the jealous as well as cruel policy of a
court, which, upon uncertain and improbable
surmises, had given up a person, no less confpi.
cuous for his merit than his rank, to be butchered
by affaffins, either retired to their own estates, or
if they continued with the Aufrian army, grew
cold to the service. The Turks, encouraged by
the death of an enemy whose abilities they knew
and dreaded, prepared to renew hostilities early
in the spring; and instead of the security which
Ferdinand had expeaed from the removal of
Martinuzzi, it was evident that his territories
in Hungary were about to be attacked with
greater vigour, and defended with less zeal, than
tver a

By this time, Maurice having almost finished

his intrigues and preparations, was on the point
of declaring his intentions openly, and of taking
the field againfi the emperor. His firid care,

a Sleid. 535. Thuan. flb. ix. S09, &c. Ifluanhaffi

Hiqt. Regn. Hungarici, lib. xvi. 189, &e. Mcm. deRibier,
1n. SC7. Natalis Comitis Hitoria, lii. iv. 84., &c.

after

that narrow and bigoted maxim of the confede-
rates of Smaikalde, which had led them to shun
all connexion with foreigners. He had observed
how fatal this had been to their cause; and, in-
firuaed by their error, he was as eager to court
the proteaion of Henry II. as they had been
solicitous to prevent the interposition of Fran-
cis I. Happily for him, he found Henry in a
disposition to listen to the firit overture on his
part, and in a lituation which enabled him to
bring the whole force of the French monarchy
into amion. Henry had long observed the pro-
grefs of the emperor's arms with jealousy, and
wished to distinguish himself by entering the lifts
againit the fame enemy, whom it had been the
glory of his father's reign to oppose. He had
laid hold on the firdt opportunity in his power of
thwarting the emperor's designs, by taking the
duke of Parma under his proteaion; and hof-
tilities were already begun, not only in that
dutchy but in Piedmont. Having terminated
the war with England by a peace, no less advan-
tageous to himifelf than honourable for his allies
the Scots, the restless and enterprising courage
of his nobles was impatient to display itself on
some theatre of a~ion more conspicuous than
the petty operations in Parma or Piedmont as-
forded them.

John de Fienne, bilhop of Bayonne, whom

Henry had sent into Germany, under pretence
of hiring troops to be employed in Italy, was
empowered to conclude a treaty in form with
Maurice and his associates. As it would have
been very indecent in a king of France to have

VOL. Is'. P under-

undertaken the defence of the proteflant church,
the interefis of religion, how much soever they
might be affeaed by the treaty, were not once
mentioned in any of the articles. Religious con-
cerns, they pretended to commit entirely to the
disposition of Divine Providence; the only mo-
tives assigned for their present confederacy
against Charles, were to procure the landgrave
liberty, and to pretent the subversion of the an-
cient constitution and laws of the German empire.
In order to accomplish these ends, it was agreed,
that all the contra.ing parties should, at the
fame time, declare war againit the emperor;
that neither peace nor truce should be made but
by common consent, nor without including
each of the confederates; that, in order to guard
against the inconveniencies of anarchy, or of pre-
tenflons to joint command, Maurice should be
acknowledged as head of the German confede-
rates, with absolute authority in all military as-
fairs; that Maurice and his associates should bring
into the field seven thousand horse, with a pro.
portional number of infantry; that, towards the
fubfiulence of this army, during the three first
months of the war, Henry should contribute two
hundred and forty thousand crowns, and after-
wards sixty thousand crowns a-month, as long as
they continued in arms; that Henry fnould at-
tack tile emperor on the fide 9f Lorrain with a
powerful army; that if it were found requisite
to eled a new emperor, such a person flhould be
nominated as hall be agreeable to the king of
Fiance b. This treaty was concluded on the

b.Rtcueiides Trahtez, tom, ii. 258. Thuan. ib, viii. 279.

fifth

surrendered, and the preparatory negotiations
were conduated with such profound secrecy, that,
of all the princes who afterwards acceded to it,
Maurice communicated what he was carrying on
to two only, John Albert, the reigning duke
of Mecklenburg, and William of Hesse, the
landgrave's eldeit son. The league itself was no
less anxiously concealed, and with such fortunate
care, that no rumour concerning it reached the
ears of the emperor or his ministers; nor do they
seem to have conceived the molt distant sus-
picion of such a tranfadion.

At the fame time, with a solicitude which

was careful to draw some accefflion of strength
from every quarter, Maurice applied to Edward
VI. of England, and requefited a fibfidy of four
hundred thousand crowns for the support of a
confederacy formed in defence of the protestant
religion. But the fa6{ions which prevailed in the
English court during the minority of that prince,
and which deprived both the councils and arms
of the nation of their wonted vigour, left the
English ministers neither time nor inclination to
attend to foreign affairs, and prevented Maurice's
obtaining that aid, which their zeal for the re-
formation would have prompted them to grant
him C.

Maurice, however, having secured the protec-

tion of such a powerful monarch as Henry 1I.
proceeded with great confidence, but with equal
caution, to execute his plan. As le judged it
necessary to make one effort more, in order to ob-

V Burnet's Hist. of the Reform. vol. ii. Append. 37.

F 2 taim

{hould be set at liberty, he sent a solemn embassy,
in his own name, and in that of the eledor of
Brandenburg, to Infpruck [Decem.]. After re-
fuming, at great length, all the faas and argo.
ments upon which they founded their claim, and
representing, in the lirongeft terms, the peculiar
engagements which bound them to be so affidu.
ous in their folicitations, they renewed the requelt
in behalf of the unfortunate prisoner, which they
had so often preferred in vain. The ele~tor
palatine, the duke of Wurtemberg, the dukes of
Mecklenburg, the duie of Deux-Ponts, the mar.
quis of Brandenburg Bareith, and the marquis of
Baden, by their ambassadors, concurred with them
in their suit. Letters were likewise delivered to
the fame effea from the king of Denmark, the
duke of Bavaria, and the dukes of Lunenburg.
Even the king of the Romans joined in this ap.
plication, being moved with compassion towards
the landgrave in his wretched situation, or influ.
enced, perhaps, by a secret jealousy of his bro.
ther's power and designs, which, since his attempt
to alter the order of fucceflion in the empire, he
had come to view with other eyes than formerly,
qud dreaded to a great degree.

But Charles, constant to his own fyffem with

regard to the landgrave, eluded a demand urged
by such powerful interceffors; and having de.
dared that he would communicate his resolution
concerning the matter to Maurice as soon as he
arrived at Infpruck, where he was every day
e~upeaed, he did not deign to descend into any
more particular explication of his intentions ".

SSleid. 53s. Thuan. lib. viii. 280. This

landgrave, was of great advantage to Maurice.
It served to justify his subsequent proceedings,
and to demonifrate the necessity of employing
arms in order to extort that equitable conceflion,
which his mediation or intreaty could not obtain.
It was of use, too, to confirm the emperor in his
security, as both the solemnity of the applica-
tion, and the Solicitude with which So many
princes were drawn in to enforce it, led him to
conclude that they placed all their hopes of
restoring the landgrave to liberty, in gaining his
consent to dismiss him.

1s52.] Maurice employed artifices dtill more

refined to conceal his machinations, to amuse the
emperor, and to gain time. He affeded to be
more Solicitous than ever to find out Some ex-
pedient for removing the difficulties with regard
to the fafe-condud for the protestant divines ap.
pointed to attend the council, So that they might
repair thither without any apprehension of danger.
His ambassadors at Trent had frequent confer-
ences concerning this matter with the Imperial
ambassadors in that city, and laid open their fen-
timents to them with the appearance of the moss
unreserved confidence. He was willing, at last,
to have it believed, that he thought all differences
with refpea to this preliminary article were on
the point of being adjusted; and in order to give
credit to this opinion, he commanded Melanc-
thon, together with his brethren, to Sct out on
their journey to Trent. At the fame time, he
held a close correlpondence with the Imperial
court at Infpruck, and renewed on every occa-
son his profeffions not only of fidelity but of at-

F 3 tachment

ally of his intention of going to Infpruck in per.
son; be gave orders to hire a house for him in
that city, and to fit it up with the greatef dif.
patch for his reception e*

But, profoundly skilled as Maurice was in the

arts of deceit, and impenetrable as he thought
the veil to be, under which he concealed his
designs, there were several things in his condufi
which alarmed the emperor amidit his security,
and tempted him frequently to fufpet that he
was meditating something extraordinary. AE
these suspicions took their rife from circumfIances
inconsiderable in themselves, or of an arnbiguouS
as well as uncertain nature, they were more than
counterbalanced by Maurice's address; and the
emperor would not, lightly, give up his confi-
dence in a man, whom he had once truffed and
loaded with favours. One particular alone seemed
to be of such consequence, that he thought it
necessary to demand an explanation with regard
to it. The troops, which George of Mecklen.
burg had taken into pay after the capitulation of
Magdeburg, having fixed their quarters in Thu.
ringia, lived at discretion on the lands of the rich
ecclefiaftics in their neighbourhood. Their li-
cence and rapaciousness were intolerable. Such
as felt or dreaded their exadlions, complained
loudly to the emperor, and represented them as
a body of men kept in readiness for some defpe.
rate enterprise. But Maurice, partly by exte-
puating the enormities of which they had been
guilty, partly by representing the impossibility

e Arnoldi virt Mauat. ap, Menken, ii. 1zz5.

of

of disbanding these troops, or of keeping them
to regular dilcipline, unless the arrears frill due
to them by the emperor were paid, either removed
the apprehensions which this had occasioned, or,
as Charles was not in a condition to satisfy the
demands of these soldiers, obliged him to be silent
with regard to the matter '.

The time of acdion was now approaching.

Maurice had privately dispatched Albert of
Brandenburg to Paris, in order to confirm his
league with Henry, and to halten the march of
the French army. He had taken measures to
bring his own fubjeas together on the first fum-
mons; he had provided for the security of Sax-
ony, while he should be absent with the army;
and he held the troops in Thuringia, on which
he chiefly depended, ready to advance on a mo,
ment's warning. All these complicated opera-
tions were carried on without being discovered
by the court at Infpruck, and the emperor re-
mained there in perse& tranquillity, busied en-
tirely in counteraAing the intrigues of the pope's
legate at Trent, and in fettling the conditions on
which the protefiant divines should be admitted
into the council, as if there had not been any
tranfadion of greater moment in agitation.

This credulous security in a prince, who, by

his sagacity in observing the condud of all around
him, was commonly led to an excess of difrruit,
may seem unaccountable, and has been imputed
to infatuation. But besides the exquisite address
with which Maurice concealed his intentions,
two circumitances contributed to the delusion.

( 41014. 449. Thw~an*339h

The

The gout had returned upon Charles soon after
his arrival at Infpruck, with an increase of vio.
lence; and his conofitution being broken by fiuch
frequent attacks, he was seldom able to exert
his natural vigour of mind, or to confider affairs
with his usual vigilance and penetration; and
Granvelle, bilhop ofArras, his prime minifler,
though one of the most subtle statesmen of that or
perhaps of any age, was on this occasion the dupe
of his own craft. He entertained such an high
opinion of his own abilities, and held the political
talents of the Germans in such contempt, that he
defpiled all the intimations given him concerning
Maurice's secret machinations, or the dangerous
designs which he was carrying on. When the
duke of Alva, whose dark fiufpicious mind har.
boured many fdoubts concerning the ele61or's
sincerity, proposed calling him immediately to
court to answer for his condua, Granvelle re.
plied with great scorn, That these apprehensions
were groundless, and that a drunken German
head was too gross to form any scheme which
he could not easily penetrate and baffe. Nor
did he affiume this peremptory tone merely from
confidence in his own discernment; he had bribed
two of Maurice's ministers, and received from
them frequent and minute information concern-
ing all their mafter's motions. But through this
very channel, by which he expeded to gain
access to all Maurice's counsels, and even to
his thoughts, such intelligence was conveyed to
him as completed his deception. Maurice for.
tunately discovered the correspondence of the
two traitors with Granvelle, but inflead of
punifthing them for their crime, he dexterously

availed

own arts againit the bishop. He affeated to treat
these minifers with greater confidence than ever;
he admitted them to his consultations; he seemed
to lay open his heart to them; and taking care
all the while to let them be acquainted with
nothing but what was his interest should be
known, they transmitted to Infpruck such ac-
counts as poffeffed Granvelle with a firm belief
of his sincerity as well as good intentions s.
The emperor himself, in the fulness of fecu.
rity, was so little moved by a memorial, in
name of the ecclesiastical eleaors, admonilhing
him to be on his guard againif Maurice, that
he made light of this intelligence; and his an-
fwer to them abounds with declaratious of his
entire and confident reliance on the fidelity as
well as attachment of that prince b

At last Maurice's preparations were completed,

and he had the fatisfaaion to find that his in.
trigues and designs were Hill unknown. But,
though now ready to take the field, he did not
lay aside the arts which he had hitherto employed;
and by one piece of craft more, he deceived his
enemies a few days longer. He gave out, that
he was about to begin that journey to Infpruck
of which he had so often talked, and he took
one of the ministers whom Granvelle had bribed,
to attend him thither. After travelling post a
few fRages, he pretended to be indisposed by the
fatigue of the journey, and dilpatching the sus-
peaed minilters to make his apology to the em-
peror for this delay, and to assure him that he

g Melvil's Memoirs, fol. edit. p. z. " Sleid. 535*

would

mounted on horseback, as soon as this spy on
his adions was gone, rode full speed towards
Thuringia, joined his army, which amounted to
twenty thousand foot and five thousand horse,
and put it immediately in motion [March 18]h.

At the fame time he published a manifesto con.

taining his reasons for taking arms. These were
three in number: that he might secure the pro.
tefitant religion, which was threatened with im.
mediate def'rufion; that he might maintain the
constitution and laws of the empire, and lave
Germany from being fubjeAed to the dominion
of an absolute monarch; that he might deliver
the landgrave of Hesse from the miseries of a long
and unjust imprisonment. By the first, he rouled
all the favourers of the reformation, a party for-
midable by their zeal as well as numbers, and
rendered desperate by oppression. By the second,
he interefited all the friends of liberty, catholics
no less than protestants, and made it their interet
to unite with him in asserting the rights and pri.
vileges common to both. The third, befidesthe
glory which he acquired by his zeal to fulfil his
engagements to the unhappy prisoner, was be-
come a cause of general concern, not only from
the compassion which the landgrave's fofferings
excited, but from indignation at the injustice and
rigour of the emperor's proceedings againit him.

b Melv. Mem. p. 53. These circumfeances concerning

the Saxon miniiters whom Granvelle had bribed, are iot
mentioned by the German Itiftorians; but as Sir James
Meivil received his information from the eleaor Palatine,
and as they are perfetly agreeable to the rerft of Maurice's
Ecndu&, they may be conlidered as authentic.

Together

Together with Maurice's manifesto, another ap-
peared in the name of Albert marquis of Bran-
denburg Culmbach, who had joined him with
a body of adventurers whom he had drawn toge-
ther. The fame grievances which Maurice had
pointed out are mentioned in it, but with an
excess of virulence and animosity suitable to the
charaaer of the prince in whose name it was
published.

The king of France added to these a manifesto

in his own name; in which, after taking notice
of the ancient alliance between the French and
German nations, both descended from the fame
ancestors; and after mentioning the applications
which, in consequence of this, some of the molt
illuifrious among the German princes had made
to him for his protedion ; he declared, that he
now took arms to re-eftabliih the ancient coniti-
tution of the empire, to deliver some of its princes
from captivity, and to secure the privileges and
independence of all the members of the Germanic
body. In this manifesto, Henry affiumed the
extraordinary title of Protenor of the Liberties of
Germany and of its captive Princes ; and there was
engraved on it a cap, the ancient symbol of
freedom, placed between two daggers, in order
to intimate to the Germans, that this blefling
was to be acquired and secured by force of
arms '.

Maurice had now to ad a part entirely new;

but his flexible genius was capable of accommo-
dating itself to every situation. The moment le
took arms, he was as bold and enterprising in the

SSleid. 549. Thean. lib. x. 339. Mem. de Ribisr, ii. 37!.

field,

field, as he had been cautious and crafty in tk
cabinet. He advanced by rapid marches towards
the Upper Germany. All the towns in his way
opened their gates to him. He reindlated tht
magistrates whom the emperor had deposed, and
gave poffeflion of the churches to the proteftanu
ministers whom he had ejeaed. He direted he
march to Augsburg, and as the Imperial garrison,
which was too inconliderable to think of defend.
ing it, retired immediately, he took poffeffion of
that great city [April I], and made the fame
changes there as in the towns through which he
had passed k

No words can express the emperor's astonish.

ment and coniternation at events so unexpefted.
He saw a great number of the German princesin
arms against him, and the reft either ready to
join them, or wishing success to their enterprise.
He beheld a powerful monarch united with them
in close league, seconding their operations in per.
son at the head of a formidable army, while he,
through negligence and credulity, which exposed
him no less to scorn than to danger, had neither
made, nor was in condition to make, any effefual
provision, either for crufbing his rebellious sub.
jeas, orreffiting the invasion of the foreign enemy.
Part of his Spanish troops had been ordered into
Hungary againit the Turks; the reft had march.
ed back to Italy upon occasion of the war in the
dutchy of Parma. The bands of veteran Ger-
mans had been dismissed, because he was notable
to pay them; or had entered into Maurice's
service after the siege of Magdeburg; and he

k Sleid. 55. Thuan. 342.

remained

remained at Infpruck with a body of soldiers
hardly firong enough to guard his own person.
His treasury was as much exhauffed, as his army
was reduced. He had received no remittances
for some time from the new world. He had
forfeited all credit with the merchants of Genoa
and Venice, who refused to lend him money,
though tempted by the offer of exorbitant inte.
reft. Thus Charles, though undoubtedly the
mout considerable potentate In Chriffendom, and
capable of exerting the greatest ffrength, his
power, notwithfitanding the violent attack made
upon it, being dtill unimpaired, found himself in
a situation which rendered him unable to make
such a fiudden and vigorous effort as the junaure
required, and was necessary to have saved him
from the present danger.

In this situation, the emperor placed all his

hopes on negotiating; the only resource of such
as are conscious of their own weakness. But
thinking it inconsistent with his dignity to make
the first advances to fubjeas who were in arms
againit him, he avoided that indecorum by em-
ploying the mediation of his brother Ferdinand.
Maurice confiding in his own talents to conduft
any regotiation in such a manner asto derive ad.
vantage from it, and hoping that, by the appear-
ance of facility in hearkening to the firnt over-
ture of accommodation, he might amuse the em-
peror, and tempt him to slacken the aftivity with
which he was now preparing to defend himfeilf,
readily agreed to an interview with Ferdinand in
the town of Lintz in Auffria; and having left
his army to proceed on its march under the com-

voL. xv. G mand

mand of the duke of Mecklenburg, he repaired
thither.

Meanwhile tne king of France puntually

fullilled his engagements to his allies. He took
the field early, with a numerous and well-ap.
pointed army, and marching direaly into Lor-
rain, Toul and Verdun opened their gates at his
approach. His forces appeared next before
Metz, and that city, by a fraudulent fitratagem
of the conitable Montmorency, who having ob.
tained permission to pass through it with a small
guard, introduced as many troops as were fuffi.
cient to overpower the garrison, was likewise
seized without bloodshed. Henry made his entry
into all these towns with great pomp; he obliged
the inhabitants to swear allegiance to him, and
annexed those important conqueffs to the French
monarchy. He left a firong garrison in Metz.
From thence he advancedtowardsAlface, in order
to attempt new conquests, to which the fucces
that had hitherto attended his arms invited him'.

The conference at Lintz did not produce any

accommodation. Maurice, when he consented
to it, seems to have had nothing in view but to
amuse the emperor; for he made such demands,
both in behalf of his confederates and their ally
the French king, as he knew would not be ac路
cepted by a prince, too haughty to submit, at
once, to conditions didated by an enemy. But,
however firmly Maurice adhered during the ne-
gotiation to the interests of his associates, or how
iteadily soever he kept in view the objeAs which
had induced him to take arms, he often profeffed

I Thoan. 349. a strong

with the emperor in an amicable manner. Encou-
raged by this appearance of a pacific disposition,
Ferdinand proposed a second interview at Paffau
on the twenty-Lxth of May, and that a truce
thould commence on that day, and continue to
the tenth of June, in order to give them leisure
for adjuffing all the points in dispute.

Upon this, Maurice rejoined his army on the

ninth of May, which had now advanced to Gun-
delfingen. He put his troops in motion next
morning; and as sixteen days yet remained for
adion before the commencement of the truce, he
resolved, during that period, to venture upon an
enterprise, the success of which would be so de-
cifive, as to render the negotiations at Paffau ex-
tremely (hort, and entitle him to treat upon his
own terms. He foresaw that the profpea of a
cessation of arms, which was to take place so
soon, together with the opinion of his earnestness
to re-establish peace, with which he had artfully
amused Ferdinand, could hardly fail of inspiring
the emperor with such false hopes, that he would
naturally become remiss, and relapse into some
degree of that security which had already been
so fatal to him. Relying on this conjecture, he
marched direaly at the head of his army towards
Infpruck, and advanced with the mouf rapid mo-
tion that could be given to so great a body of
troops. On the eighteenth, he arrived at Fieffen,
a podt of great consequence, at the entrance
into the Tyrolefe. There he found a body of
eight hundred men, whom the emperor had as-
fembled, firongly intrenched, in order to oppose
his progress. He attacked them inifantly with

a z fucl.

such violence and impetuosity, that they aban-
doned their lines precipitately, and, falling back
on a second body polted near Ruten, communi.
cated the panic terror with which they them.
selves had been seized, to those troops; so that
they likewise took to flight, after a feeble refiltl
ance.

Elated with this success, which exceeded hin

most sanguine hopes, Maurice pressed forward to
Ehrenbergh, a cafile situated on an high and
ileep precipice, which commanded the only pass
through the mountains. As this fort had been
surrendered to the protestants at the beginning
of the Smalkaldic war, because the garrison was
then too weak to defenad it, the emperor, sensible
of its importance, had taken care, at this junc.
ture, to throw into it a body of troops fufficient
to maintain it against the greatest army. But
a shepherd, in pursuing a goat which had ifrayed
from his flock, having discovered an unknown
path by which it was possible to ascend to the
top of the rock, came with this seasonable piece
of intelligence to Maurice. A small band of
chosen soldiers, under the command of George
of Mecklenburg, was inflantly ordered to follow
this guide. They set out in the evening, and
clambering up the rugged track with infinite
fatigue as well as danger, they reached the sunn.
arit unperceived; and at an hour which had been
agreed on, when Maurice began the assault on
the one fide of the castle, they appeared on the
other, ready to scale the walls, which were feeble
in that place, because it had been hitherto deem-
ed inacceifable. The garrison, itruck with ter-
ror at the fight of an enemy on a quarter where

t~hey

they had thought themselves perfealy secure,
immediately threw down their arms. Maurice,
almost without bloodshed, and, which was of
greater consequence to him, without loss of
time, took poffeffion of a place, the reduaion
of which might have retarded him long, and
have required the utmost efforts of his valour
and skill m.

Maurice was now only two days march from

Infpruck, and without losing a moment he or-
dered his infantry to advance thither, having left
his cavalry, which was unserviceable in that
mountainous country, at Fieffen, to guard the
mouth of the pass. He proposed to advance
with fiich rapidity as to anticipate any accounts
of the loss of Ehrenburgh, and to surprise the
emperor, together with his attendants, in an open
town incapable of defence. But just as his troops
began to move, a battalion of mercenaries muti-
nied, declaring that they would not fdir until they
had received the gratuity, which, according to the
cuitom of that age, they claimed as the recom-
pence due to them for having taken a place by
aiault. It was with great difficulty, as well as
danger, and not without some considerable loss
of time, that Maurice quieted this infurreaion,
and prevailed on the soldiers to follow him to a
place where he promised them such rich booty as
would be an ample reward for all their services.

To the delay, occasioned by this unforeseen

accident, the emperor owed his safety. He was
informed of the approaching danger late in the
evening, and knowing that nothing could save

n Arnoldi vita Maurit. 13.

G 3 hiin

him but a speedy flight, he infiantly left In.
fpruck, without regarding the darkness of teh
iight, or the violence of the rain which hap.
pened to fall at that time; and notwithifanding
the debility occasioned by the gout, which ren-
dered him unable to bear any motion but that of
a litter, he travelled by the light of torches,
taking his way over the Alps, by roads almost
impassable. His courtiers and attendants followed
him with equal precipitation, some of them on
such horses as they could hastily procure, many
of them on foot, and all in the utmost confusion.
In this miserable plight, very unlike the pomp
with which Charles had appeared during the five
preceding years as the conqueror of Germany,
he arrived at length with his dejeaed train at
Villach in Carinthia, and fearcely thought
himself secure even in that remote inacceilible
corner.

Maurice entered Infpruck a few hours after

the emperor and his attendants had left it; and
enraged that the prey (hould escape out of his
hands when he was just ready to seize it, he
pursued them some miles; but finling it impof-
fible to overtake persons, to whom their fear
gave speed, he returned to the town, and aban.
doned all the emperor's baggage, together with
that of his ministers, to be plundered by the
soldiers; while he preserved untouched every
thing belonging to the king of the Romans,
either because he had formed some friendly con
nexion with that prince, or because he wished to
have it believed that such a connexion fubfifed
between them. As there now remained only
three days to the commencement of the truce

(with

(with such nicety had Maurice calculated his
operations), he set out for Paffan, that he might
meet Ferdinand on the day appointed.

Before Charles left Infprock, he withdrew the

guards placed on the degraded eledor of Saxony,
whom, during five years, he had carried about
with him as a prisoner, and set him entirely at
liberty, either with an intention to embarrass
Maurice by letting loose a rival, who might dif.
pute his title to his dominions and dignity, or
from a sense of the indecency of detaining him
a prisoner, while he himfelfrun the riik of being
deprived of his own liberty. But that prince,
feeing no other way of escaping than that which
the emperor took, and abhorring the thoughts
of falling into the hands of a kinsman, whom he
justly considered as the author of all his misfor-
tunes, chose rather to accompany Charles in his
flight, and to expe& the final decision of his fate
from the treaty which was now approaching.

These were not the only effeas which Mau.

rice's operations produced. It was no sooner
known at Trent that he had taken arms, than a
general consternation seized the fathers of the
council. The German prelates immediately re-
turned home, that they might provide for the
safety of their refpeAive territories. The reft
were extremely impatient to be gone; and the
legate, who had hitherto disappointed all the
endeavours of the Imperial ambassadors to pro-
cure an audience in the council for the proteflant
divines, laid hold with joy on such a plausible
pretext for dismissing an assembly, which he had
found it so difficult to govern. In a congrega-
tion held on the twenty-eighth of April, a de-

cree

cree was iifued proroguing the council during two
years, and apppinting it to meet at the expiration
of that time, if peace were then re-eitablifhed in
Europe ". This prorogation, however, continued
no less than ten years; and the proceedings of
the council, when re-assembled in the year one
thousand five hundred and fixty-two, fall not
.within the period prescribed to this hillory.

The convocation of this assembly had been

passionately desired by all the states and princes
in Chriffendom, who, from the wisdom as well
as piety of prelates representing the whole body
of the faithful, expeded fomne charitable and
efficacious endeavours towards composing the
dissensions which unhappily had arisen in the
church.- But the several popes by whose autho.
rity it was called, had other objeas in view.
They exerted all their power or policy to attain
these; and by the abilities as well as address of
their legates, by the ignorance of many of the
prelates, and by the servility of the indigent Ita-
lian bishops, acquired such influence in the
council, that they dicated all its decrees, and
framed them not with an intention to restore
unity and concord to the church, but to efiablifh
their own dominion, or to confirm those tenets,
upon which they imagined that dominion to be
founded. Doarines, which had hitherto been
admitted upon the credit of tradition alone, and
received with some latitude of interpretation,
were defined with a ferupulous nicety, and con-
firmed by the fanaion of authority. Rites,
which had formerlybeen obfervedonlyin deference

RS. Paul, 353,

to

by the decrees of the church, and declared to be
essential parts of Its worship. The breach, in-
{tead of being closed, was widened, and made ir-
reparable. In place of any attempt to reconcile
the contending parties, a line was drawn with
such ifudied accuracy, as ascertained and marked
out the diftinaion between them. This still
serves to keep them at a distance; and without
some signal interposition of Divine Providence,
muff render the separation perpetual.

Our knowledge of the proceedings of this

assembly, is derived from three different authors.
Father Paul of Venice wrote his history of the
council of Trent, while the memory of what had
passed there was recent, and some who had been
members of it were still alive. He has exposed
the intrigues and artifices by which it was con-
duoed, with a freedom and severity which have
given a deep wound to the credit of the coun-
cil. He has described its deliberations, and ex-
plained its decrees, with such perspicuity and
depth of thought, with such various erudition
and such force of reason, as have juffly entitled
his work to be placed among the most admired
historical compositions. About half a century
thereafter, the Jesuit Pallavicini published his
hiffory of the council, in opposition to that of
Father Paul, and by employing all the force of
an acute and refining genius to invalidate the
credit, or to confute the reasonings of his anta-
gonift, he labours to prove, by artful apblogies
for the proceedings of the council, and subtile
interpretations of its decrees, that it deliberated
with impartiality, and decided with judgment as

well

well as candour. Vargas, a Spanish doEtor of
laws, who was appointed to attend the Imperial
ambassadors at Trent, sent the bishop of Arras a
regular account of the tranfadions there, ex.
plaining all the arts which the legate employed
to influence or overawe the council. His letten
have been publilhed, in which he inveighs againit
the papal court with that asperity of censure,
which was natural to a man whose situation en-
abled him to observe its intrigues thoroughly,
and who was obliged to exert all his attention
and talents in order to disappoint them. But
whichsoever of these authors an intelligent per-
son takes for his guide, in forming a judgment
concerning the spirit of the council, he muff
discover so much ambition as well as artifice
among some of the members, so much ignorance
and corruption among others; he must observe
such a large infulion of human policy and pas.
Lions, mingled with such a scanty portion of that
simplicity of heart, fanaity of manners, and love
of truth, which alone qualify men to determine
what doarines are worthy of God, and what
worship is acceptable to him; that he will find
it no easy matter to believe, that any extraor-
dinary influence of the Holy Ghost hovered over
this assembly, and diaated its decrees.

While Maurice was employed in negotiating

with the king of the Romans at Lintz, or us
making war on the emperor in the Tyrol, the
French king had advanced into Alsace as far as
Strafburg; and having demanded leave of the
senate to march through the city, he hoped that,
by repeating the fame fraud which he had prac-
tifed at Metz, he might render himself master of

the

the place, and by that means secure a passage
over the Rhine into the heart of Germany. But
the Strafburghers, inftruaed and put on their
guard by the credulity and misfortune of their
neighbours, lhut their gates; and having affem-
bled a garrison of five thousand soldiers, repaired
their fortifications, raised the houses in their
fnburbs, and determined to defend themselves to
the utmost. At the fame time they sent a de-
putation of their most refpecable citizens to the
king, in order to divert him from making any
hostile attempt upon them. The eledors of
Treves and Cologn, the duke of Cleves, and
other princes in the neighbourhood, interposed
in their behalf; beseeching Henry that he would
not forget so soon the title which he had gene-
roufly affinmed; and instead of being the deli-
verer of Germany, become its oppressor. The
Swiss Cantons seconded them wvithl zeal, solicit-
ing Henry to spare a city which had long been
conneaed with their community in friendship
and alliance.

Powerful as this united intercession was, it

would not have prevailed on Henry to forego a
prize of so much value, if he had been in a condi-
tion to have seized it. But, in that age, the
method of fubfisling numerous armies at a dif.
tance from the frontiers of their own country,
was imperfealy underitood, and neither the re-
venues of princes, nor their experience in the art
of war, were equal to the great and complicated
efforts which fisch an undertaking required.
The French, though not far removed from their
own frontier, began already to fuffer from fear-
city of provisions, and had no fullicient magazines colle~ted

colleaed to support them during a siege which
mull necessarily have been of great length O. At
the fame time, the queen of Hungary, governess
of the Low-Countries, had assembled a confider.
able body of troops, which, under the command
of Martin de Roffem, laid waite Champagne,
and threatened the adjacent provinces of France.
These concurring circumitances obliged the king,
though with reluaance, to abandon the enter.
prise. But being willing to acquire some merit
with his allies, by this retreat which he could
not avoid, he pretended to the Swiss that he had
taken the resolution merely in compliance with
their requeftP; and then, after giving ordens
that all the horses in his army fbould be led to
drink in the Rhine, as a proof of his having
pufbed his conquelt so far, he marched back to.
wards Champagne.

While the French king and the main army of

the confederates were thus employed, Albert of
Brandenburg was entrulled with the command
of a separate body of eight thousand men, cono
silting chiefly of mercenaries who had resorted
to his flandard, rather from the hope of plunder,
than the expeEtation of regular pay. That
prince, feeing himself at the head of such a num-
ber of desperate adventurers, ready to follow
wherever he ihould lead them, soon began to dif.
dain a slate of subordination, and to form such
extravagant schemes of aggrandizing himself, as
seldom occur, even to ambitious minds, unless
when civil war or violent fadions rouse them to

a Thuan. 351, 35Z*
P Sleid. 557. Brantome, tom. vii. 39. bold

hopes of fiuccefs. Full of these aspiring thoughts,
Albert made war in a manner very different from
the other confederates. He endeavoured to
spread the terror of his arms by the rapidity of
his motions, as well as the extent and rigour of
his devastations; he exa6ted contributions where-
ever he came, in order to amass such a fum of
money, as would put it in his power to keep
his army together; he laboured to get poffeffion
of Nuremburg, Ulm, or some other of the free
cities in Upper Germany, in which, as a capital,
he might fix the feat of his power. But, finding
these cities on their guard, and in a condition
to resist his attacks, he turned all his rage against
the popish ecclefia{tics, whole territories he
plundered with such wanton and merciless bar-
barity, as gave them a very unfavourable im-
pression of the spirit of that reformation in reli-
gion, with zeal for which he pretended to be
animated. The bishops of Bamburgh and Wurz-
burgh, by their ftuation, lay particularly ex-
posed to his ravages; he obliged the former to
transfer to him, in property, almost one half of
his extensive diocese; and compelled the latter
to advance a great fum of money in order to save
his territories from ruin and desolation. During
all those wild sallies, Albert paid no regard
either to Maurice's orders, whose commands as
generaliflimo of the league he had engaged to
obey, or to the remonfirances of the other con-
federates; and manifestly discovered, that he at-
tended only to his own private emolument, with-
out any solicitude about the common cause,

toL. IV. i or

to take arms 4.

Maurice having ordered his army to march

back into Bavaria, and having published a pro.
clamation enjoining the Lutheran clergy and in.
firudors of youth, to resume the exercise of their
fundions in all the cities, schools, and univer-
foties from Which they load been ejeded, met
Ferdinand at Paffau on the twenty-fixth day of
May. As matters of the greatest consequence
to the future peace and independence of the em.
pire were to be fettled in this congress, the eyes
of all Germany were fixed upon it. Belides
Ferdinand and the Imperial ambassadors, the
duke of Bavaria, the bishops of Saltzburgh and
Aichlladt, the ministers of all the eledors, to-
gether with deputies from most of the confider.
able princes and free cities, resorted to Paffau.
Maurice, in the name of his associates, and the
king of the Romans as the emperor's reprefenta.
tive, opened the negotiation. The princes who
were present, together with the deputies of uch
as were absent, adled as interceffors or mediators
between them.

Maurice, in a long discourse, explained the

motives of his own condua. After having enu-
merated all the unconflitutional and oppreflive
ads of the emperor's administration, he, agree-
ably to the manifeffo which he had publilhed
when he took arms againit him, limited his de-
mands to three articles: That the landgrave of
Hesse ihould be immediately set at liberty; that

4 Sleid* 56. Thua 357 t

the grievances in the civil government of the em-
pire (hould be redressed; and that the protestants
lhould be allowed the public exercise of their re-
ligion without molestation. Ferdinand and the
Imperial ambassadors discovering their unwilling-
ness to gratify him with regard to all these
points, the mediators wrote a joint letter to the
emperor, beseeching him to deliver Germany
from the calamities of a civil war, by giving
such fatisfaftion to Maurice and his party as
might induce them to lay down their arms; and
at the fame time they prevailed upon Maurice
to grant a prolongation of the truce for a
short time, during which they undertook to
procure the emperor's final answer to his de-
mands.

This request was presented to the emperor in

the name of all the princes of the empire, popilh
as well as protestant, in the name of such as had
lent an helping hand to forward his ambitious
schemes, as well as of those who had viewed the
progress of his power with jealousy and dread.
The uncommon and cordial unanimity with
which they concurred at this junaure in en-
forcing Maurice's demands, and in recommend-
ing peace, flowed from different causes. Such as
were most attached to the Roman catholic church
could not help observing, that the protefitant
confederates were at the head of a numerous
army, while the emperor was but just beginning
to provide for his own defence. They foresaw
that great efforts would be required of them,
and would be necessary on their part, in order to
cope with enemies, who had been allowed to get
the start so far, and to attain such formidable

H z power.

power. Experience had taught them, that the
fruit of all these efforts would be reaped by
the emperor alone, and the more complete any
vioory proved which they (hould gain, the faster
would they bind their own fetters, and render
them the more intolerable. These refleotions
made them cautious how they contributed a fe.
cond time, by their indiscreet zeal, to put the
emperor in poffeffion of power which would be
fatal to the liberties of their country. Notwith.
standing the intolerant spirit of bigotry in that
age, they chose rather that the proteflants
should acquire that security for their religion
which they demanded, than by affitinfg Charles
to oppress them, to give such additional force to
the Imperial prerogative, as would overturn the
conflitution of the empire. To all these confider.
ations, the dread of feeing Germany laid waRe
by a civil war added new force. Many slates of
the empire already felt the deifrudive rage of
Albert's arms, others dreaded it, and all wilhed
for an accommodation between the emperor and
Maurice, which they hoped would save them
from that cruel scourge.

Such were the reasons that induced so many

princes, notwithianding the variety of their politi.
cal interests, and the opposition in their religious
sentiments, to unite in recommending to the em-
peror an accommodation with Maurice, not only
as a salutary, but as a necessary measure. The mo-
tives which prompted Charles to desire it, were
not fewer or of less weight. He was perfedly fen-
fible of the superiority which the confederates
had acquired through his own negligence; and
he now felt the infufficiency of his own resources

to

to oppole them. His Spanilh fuobjeas, difguited
at his long absence, and weary of endless wars,
which were of little benefit to their country, re-
fused to fiirnifh him any considerable supply either
of men or money; and although by his address
or importunity he might have hoped to draw
from them at last more effeaual aid; that, he
knew, was too diflant to be of any service in the
present exigency of his affairs. His treasury
was drained ; his veteran forces were dispersed or
disbanded, and he could not depend much either
on the fidelity or courage of the new levied folb
diers whom he was colleaing. There was no
hope of repeating with success the fame artifices
which had weakened and ruined the Smalkaldic
league. As the end at which he aimed was not
known, he could no longer employ the specious
pietexts which had formerly concealed his am.
bitious designs. Every prince in Germany was
alarmed and on his guard; and it was vain to
think of blinding them a second time to such a
degree, as to make one part of them infitruments
to enslave the other. The spirit of a confederacy
whereof Maurice was the head, experience had
taught him to be very different from that of the
league of Smalkalde; and from what he had al-
ready felt, he had no reason to flatter himself
that its councils would be as irresolute, or its
efforts as timid and feeble. If he should resolve
on continuing the war, he might be assured, that
the most considerable fRates in Germany would
take part in it against him ; and 'a dubious neu-
trality was the 'utmoft he could expe& from the
reft. While the confederates found full employ-
flent for his arms in one quarter, the king of

u France

France would seize the favourable opportunity,
and push on his operations in another, with
almoll certain success. That monarch had al-
ready made conquests in the empire, which
Charles was no less eager to recover, than impa.
tient to be revenged on him for aiding his male-
content fubjeas. Though Henry had now re-
tired from the banks of the Rhine, he had only
varied the scene of hostilities, having invaded the
Low.Countries with all his forces. The Turks,
roused by the folicitations of the French king, as
well as flimulated by resentment against Ferdi-
nand for having violated the truce in Hungary,
had prepared a powerful fleet to ravage the coasts
of Naples and Sicily, which he had left almost
defenceless, by calling thence the greatest part
of the regular troops to join the army which he
was now assembling.

Ferdinand, who went in person to Villach,

in order to lay before the emperor the result of
the conferences at Paffau, had likewise reasons
peculiar to himself for desiring an accommoda-
tion. These prompted him to second, with the
greatest earneitnefs, the arguments which the
princes assembled there had employed in recom-
mending it. He had observed, not without fe-
cret fatisfaaion, the fatal blow that had been
given to the despotic power which his brother
had usurped in the empire. He was extremely
solicitous to prevent Charles from recovering
his former superiority, as he foresaw that am-
bitious prince would immediately resume, with
increased eagerness, and with a better chance of
success, his favourite scheme of transmitting
that power to his son, by excluding his brother

from

throne. On this account he was willing to con-
tribute towards circumscribing the Imperial au-
thority, in order to render his own poffeffion of
it certain. Besides, Solyman, exasperated at
the loss of Transylvania, and still more at the
fraudulent arts by which it had been seized, had
ordered into the field an army of an hundred
thousand men, which having defeated a great
body of Ferdinand's troops, and taken several
places of importance, threatened not only to
complete the conquest of the province, but
to drive them out of that part of Hungary which
was dtill fubjea to his jurifdiaion. He was un-
able to resist such a mighty enemy; the emperor,
while engaged in a domestic war, could afford
him no aid; and he could not even hope to draw
from Germany the contingent, either of troops
or money, usually furniihed to repel the invasions
of the Infidels. Maurice, having observed Ser-
dinand's perplexity with regard to this last point,
had offered, if peace were re-eftablilhed on a fe-
cure foundation, that he would march in person
with his troops into Hungary against the Turks.
Such was the effe& of this well-timed proposal,
that Ferdinand, destitute of every other profpea
of relief, became the molt zealous advocate
whom the confederates could have employed to
urge their claims, and there was hardly any
thing that they could have demanded which he
would not have chosen to grant, rather than
have retarded a pacification, to which he trusted
as the only means of saving his Hungarian
crown.

When

When so many causes conspired in rendering

an accommodation eligible, it might have been
expeded that it would have taken place immedi,
ately. But the inflexibility of the emperor's
temper, together with his unwillingness at once
to relinquish objeds which he had long pursued
with such earnestness and afliduity, counterba-
lanced, for some time, the force of all the motives
which disposed him to peace, and not only put
that event at a diflance, but seemed to render it
uncertain. When Maurice's demands, together
with the letter of the mediators at Paffau, were
presented to him, he peremptorily refused to
redrcfs the grievances which were pointed out,
nor would he agree to any flipulation for the
immediate security of the protestant religion, but
proposed referring both these to the determina-
tion of a future diet. On his part, he required
that inflant reparation Should be made to all who,
during the present war, had fuffered either by
the licentiousness of the confederate troops, or
the exaaions of their leaders,

Maurice, who was well acquainted with the

emperor's arts, immediately concluded that he
had nothing in view by these overtures but to
amuse and deceive; and therefore, without
listening to Ferdinand's intreaties, he left Paffan
abruptly, and joining his troops, which were
encamped at Mergentheim, a city in Franconia,
belonging to the knights of the Teutonic order,
he put them in motion, and renewed hostilities.
As three thousand men in the emperor's pay
had thrown themselves into Frankfort on the
Maine, and might from thence infest the neigh.

bouring

that city, and laid siege to it in form [July f1].
The briskness of this enterprise, and the vigour
with which Maurice carried on his approaches
against the town, gave such an alarm to the
emperor, as disposed him to lend a more favour-
able ear to Ferdinand's arguments in behalf of
an accommodation. Firm and haughty as
his nature was, he found it necessary to bend,
and signified his willingnels to make conceflions
on his part, if Maurice, in return, would abate
somewhat of the rigour of his demands. Ferdi-
nand, as soon as he perceived that his brother
began to yield, did not desist from his importuni-
ties, until he prevailed on him to declare what
was the utmost that he would grant for the fe-
eurity of the confederates. Having gained this
difficult point, he instantly dispatched a meffen-
ger to Maurice's camp, and imparting to him the
emperor's final resolution, conjured him not to
frufirate his endeavours for the re-establishment
of peace; or, by an unseasonable obitinacy on
his fide, to disappoint the wishes of all Germany
for that salutary event.

Maurice, notwithifanding the prosperous

situation of his affairs, was itrongly inclined to
liiten to this advice. The emperor, though
over-reached and surprised, had now begun to
assemble troops, and however flow his motions
might be, while the first effeAs of his coniterna-
tion remained, he was sensible that Charles muff
at ladt ad with vigour proportional to the extent
of his power and territories, and lead into Ger-
many an army formidable by its numbers, and
dtill more by the terror of his name, as well as

the

the remembrance of his past viaories. He could
scarcely hope that a confederacy composed of so
many members would continue to operate with
union and perseverance fufficient to refil the con.
fiftent and well-direaed efforts of an army, at
the absolute disposal of a leader accustomed to
command and to conquer. He felt, already,
although he had not hitherto experienced the
Shock of any adverse event, that he himself was
at the head of a disjointed body. He saw, from
the example ofAlbert of Brandenburg, how diffi-
cult it would be, with all his address and credit,
to prevent any particular member from detaching
himself from the whole,and how impossible to recal
him to his proper rank and subordination. This
filled him with apprehensions for the common
cause. Another consideration gave him no less
disquiet with regardto his own particular interests.
By setting at liberty the degraded eledor, and by
repealing the a& by which that prince was de-
prived of his hereditary honours and dominions,
the emperor had it in his power to wound him
in the most tender part. The efforts of a prince
beloved by his ancient fobjeas, and revered by
all the protefitant party, in order to recover what
had been unjuffly taken from him, could hardly
have failed of exciting commotions in Saxony,
which would endanger all that he had acquired
at the expence of so much dissimulation and arti-
lice. It was no less in the emperor's power to
render vain all the folicitations of the confederates
in behalf of the landgrave. He had only to add
one a& of violence more to the injustice and rigour
with which he had already treated him; and he
had accordingly threatened the sons of that uo.

fortunate

present enterprise, indtead of feeing their father
refiored to liberty, they should hear of his
having fuffered the punishment which his rebel-
lion had merited r

Having deliberated upon all these points with

his associates, Maurice thought it more prudent
to accept of the conditions offered, though less
advantageous than those which he had proposed,
than again to commit all to the doubtful issue of
war '. He repaired forthwith to Paffau, and
signed the treaty of peace; of which the chief
articles were, That before the twelfth day of
August, the confederates ihould lay down
their arms, and disband their forces; That on
or before that day the landgrave shall be set at
liberty, and conveyed in safety to his castle of
Rheinfels; That a diet shall be held within fix
months [August 2], in order to deliberate con-
cerning the molt proper and effeaual method
of preventing for the future all disputes and dif-
fenfions about religion ; That, in the mean time,
neither the emperor, nor any other prince, (hall,
upon any pretext whatever, offer any injury or
violence to such as adhered to the confeffion of
Augsburg, but allow them to enjoy the free
and undisturbed exercise of their religion; That,
in return, the proteitants (hall not molest the
catholics either in the exercise of their ecclefi-
aftical jurifdiaion, or in performing their reli-
gious ceremonies ; That the Imperial chamber
(hail administer justice impartially to persons of

r Sleid. 57!.
S Sleid. Llt. 563, &c. Thuan.lib. x. 359, &c.

both

criminately with the catholics to fit as judges in
that court; That if the next diet should not be
able to terminate the disputes with regard to
religion, the flipulations in the present treaty in
behalf of the protestants ihall continue for ever
in full force and vigour; That none of the con-
federates shall be liable to any a6ion on account of
what had happened during the course of the war;
That the consideration of those encroachments
which had been made, as Maurice pretended,
upon the conititution and liberties of the em-
pire, shall be remitted to the approaching diet;
That Albert of Brandenburg shall be compre-
hended in the treaty, provided he shall accede
to it, and disband his forces before the twelfth
of Auguit t.

Such was the memorable treaty of Paffau, that

overturned the vast fabric, in ereaing which
Charles had employed so many years, and had
exerted the utmost efforts of his power and po-
licy ; that annulled all his regulations with regard
to religion ; defeated all his hopes of rendering
the Imperial authority absolute and hereditary
in his family; and eiablifhed the protestant
church, which had hitherto subsisted precariously
in Germany, through connivance, or by expe-
dients, upon a firm and secure basis. Maurice
reaped all the glory of having concerted and
completed this unexpeaed revolution. It is a
lingular路 circumfiance,. that the reformation
thould be indebted for its security and full efta-
blifhment in Germany, to the fame hand which

t Recuell des Traitez, ii. z6i.

2 hIad

that both events ihould have been accompliihed-
by the fame arts of dissimulation. The ends,
however, which Maurice had in view, at those
different junaures, seem to have been more at-
tended to than the means by which he attained
them; and he was now as universally extolled
for his zeal and public spirit as he had lately
been condemned for his indifference and interest.
ed policy. It is no less worthy of observation, that
the French king, a monarch zealous for the catho-
lic faith, should employ his power in order to pro-
ted and maintain the reformation in the empir'e,
at the very time when he was persecuting his
own protestant fubjeds with all the fierceness of
bigotry, and that the league for this purpose,
which proved so fatal to the Romish church,
should be negotiated and signed by a Roman
catholic bimhop. So wonderfully doth the wis-
dom of God superintend and regulate the caprice
of human paflions, and render .them fubfer-
vient towards the accomplishment of his own
purposes.

Little attention was paid to the interests of

the French king during the negotiations atPaffau.
Maurice and his afficiates, having gained what
they had in view, discovered no great solicitude
about an ally, whom, perhaps, they reckoned
to be overpaid for the assistance which he had
given them, by his acquisitions in Lorrain. A
ihort clause which they procured to be inserted
in the treaty, importing that the king of France
might communicate to the confederates his par-
ticular pretensions or causes of hoffility, wrhich
they would lay before the emperor, was the

vOL. Iv. I only

# BOOK XI.

only sign that they gave of their remembering how
much they had been indebted to him for their
success. Henry experienced the fame treatment
which every prince who lends his aid to the au-
thors of a civil war may exped. As soon as
the rage of faaion began to subside, and any
profpe& of accommodation to open, his services
were forgotten, and his associates made a merit
with their sovereign, of the ingratitude with
which they abandoned their protedor. But how
much soever Henry might be enraged at the
perfidy of his allies, or at the impatience with
which they hastened to make their peace with
the emperor, at his expence, he was perfealy
sensible that it was more his interest to keep well
with the Germanic body, than to resent the in-
dignities offered him by any particular members
of it. For that reason he dismissed the holtages
which he had received from Maurice and his
associates, and affeaed to talk in the fame ifrain
as formerly, concerning his zeal for maintain-
ing the ancient conititution and liberties of the
empire.

B OO K XI.

As soon as the treaty of Paffau was fgned,

Maurice in consequence of his engagements

with Ferdinand, marched into Hungary at the
head of twenty thousand men [Aug. 3]. But
the great superiority of the Turkilh armies, the
frequent mutinies both of the Spanish and Ger-

2 manl

man soldiers, occasioned by their want of pay,
together with the dissensions between Maurice
and Caftaldo, who was piqued at being obliged
to resign the chief command to him, prevented
his performing any thing in that country suitable
to his former fame, or of great benefit to the
king of the Romans a.

When Maurice set out for Hungary, the

prince of Hesse parted from him with the forces
pnder his command, and marched back into his
own country, that he might be ready to receive
his father upon his return, and give up to him
the reins of government which he had held during
his absence. But fortune was not yet weary of
persecuting the landgrave. A battalion of mer.
cenary troops, which had been in the pay of
Hesse, being seduced by Reifenberg their colo-
nel, a foldicr of fortune, ready to engage in any
enterprlfe, secretly withdrew from the young
prince as he was marching homewards, and
joined Albert of Brandenburg, who still con-
tinued in arms againit the emperor, refusing to
be included in the treaty of Paffau. Unhappily
for the landgrave, an account of this reached the
Netherlands, just as he was difiniffed from the
citadel of Mechlin, where he had been confined,
but before he had got beyond the frontiers of
that country. The queen of Hungary, who
governed there in her brother's name, incensed
at such an open violation of thy treaty to which
he owed his liberty, iflfued orders to arrest him,
and committed him again to the custody of the
fame Spanish captain who had guarded him for

a iftusnhaffli Hist. Hungar. 288. Thuan. lib. . 371.

12 five

five years with the mod. severe vigilance. Philip
beheld all the horrors of his imprisonment renew.
ed, and his spirits subsiding in the fame propor.
tion as they had risen during the ihort interval
in which he had enjoyed liberty; he funk into
despair, and believed himself to be doomed to
perpetual captivity. But the matter being so
explained to the emperor, as fully satisfied him
that the revolt of Reifenberg's mercenaries could
be imputed neither to the landgrave nor to his
son, he gave orders for his release ; and Philip at
lad. obtained the liberty for which he had so long
languished b. But though he recovered his free.
dom, and was reinflated in his dominions, his
fufferings seem to have broken the vigour, and to
have extinguilhed the aaivity of his mind: from
being the boldest as well as modt enterprising
prince in the empire, he became the modt timid
and cautious, and pafied the remainder of his
days in a pacific indolence.

The degraded eleaor of Saxony, likewise,

procured his liberty in consequence of the treaty
of Paffau. The emperor having been obliged
to relinquish all his schemes for extirpating the
proteilant religion, had no longer any motive for
detaining him a prisoner; and being extremely
solicitous, at that jundure, to recover the confi-
dence and good-will of the Germans, whose
assistance was essential to the success of the enter-
prise which he meditated againdt the king of
France, he, among other expedients for that pur.
pose, thought of releasing from imprisonment a
prince whose merit entitled him no less to esteem,

b Sleid. 573路 Belcari Comment. S34.

than

than his fufferings rendered him the objea of
compaifion. John Frederick took poffefion
accordingly of that part of his territories which
had been reserved for him, when Maurice was
invedied with the eleAoral dignity. As in this
situation he continued to display the fame vir-
tuous magnanimity for which he had been con-
fpicuous in a more prosperous and splendid fate,
and which he had retained amidit all his fuffer-
ings, he maintained during the remainder of his
life that high reputation to which he had so just
a title.

The loss of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, had

made a deep impreflion on the emperor. Ac-
cufdomed to terminate all his operations against
France with advantage to himself, he thought
that it nearly concerned his honour not to allow
Henry the fuperioriry in this war, or to fuffer his
own administration to be fained with the infamy
ofhaving permitted territories of such consequence
to be dismembered from the empire. This was
no less a point of interest than of honour. As
the frontier of Champagne was more naked, and
lay more exposed than that of any province in
France, Charles had frequently, during his wars
with that kingdom, made inroads upon that
quarter with great success and effeA; but if
Henry were allowed to retain his late conquedts,
France would gain such a formidable barrier on
that fide, as to be altogether secure, where for-
merly she had been weakest. On the other
hand, the empire had now loft as much, in point
of security, as France had acquired; arid being
diripped of the defence which those cities afforded
it, lay open to be invaded on a quarter, where

'3 all

interior, and remote from any enemy, were but
slightly fortified. These considerations deter-
mined Charles to attempt recovering the three
towns of which Henry had made himself maf.
ter; and the preparations which he had made
against Maurice and his associates, enabled him
to carry his resolution into immediate execution.

As soon, then, as the peace was concluded at

Paffau, he left his inglorious retreat at Villach,
and advanced to Augsburg at the head of a
considerable body of Germans which he had
levied, together with all the troops which he had
drawn out of Italy and Spain. To these he
added several battalions, which having been in
the pay of the confederates, entered into his
service when dismissed by them; and he pre,
vailed likewise on some princes of the empire to
join him with their vassals. In order to conceal
the destination of this formidable army, and to
guard againif alarming the French king, so as to
put him on preparing for the defence of his late
conquests, he gave out that he was to march
forthwith into Hungary, in order to second
Maurice in his operations againif the infidels.
When he began to advance towards the Rhine,
and could no longer employ that pretext, he tried
a new artifice, and spread a report, that he took
this rout in order to chastise Albert of Branden-
burg, whose cruel exadions in that part of the
empire called loudly for his interpofitipn to check
them.

But the French having grown acquainted, at

last, with arts by which they had been so often
c!eceivcd, viewed all Charles's moyions with dif-

trust.

trait. Henry immediately discerned the true ob-
jed of his vait preparations, and resolved to de-
fend the important conqueits which he had gained
with vigour equal to that with which they were
about to be attacked. As he foresaw that the
whole weight of the war would be turned againit
Metz, by whole fate that of Toul and Verdun
would be determined, he nominated Francis of
Lorrain, duke of Guise, to take the command
in that city during the siege, the iffiue of which
would equally affed the honour and intereit of
his country. His choice could not have fallen
upon any person more worthy of that trufi. - The
duke of Guise poffeffed, in a high degree, all the
talents of courage, sagacity, and presence of
mind, which render men eminent in military
command. He was largely endowed with that
magnanimity of foul which delights in bold en-
terprifes, and aspires to fame by splendid and
extraordinary adions. He repaired with joyto the
dangerous flation assigned him, as to a theatre on
which he might display his great qualities under
the immediate eye of his countrymen, all ready
to applaud him. The martial genius of the
French nobility in that age, which considered it
as the greatefl reproach to remain inadive, when
there was any opportunity of signalising their
courage, prompted great numbers to follow
a leader who was the darling as well as the pat-
tern of every one that courted military fame.
Several princes of the blood, many noblemen of
the higheit rank, and all the young officers who
could obtain the king's permission, entered Metz
as volunteers. By their presence they added
pirit to the garrison, and enabled the duke of

Guise

eager to diftinguilh themselves, and fit to con-
dud any service.

But with whatever alacrity the duke of Guise

undertook the defence of Metz, he found every
thing upon his arrival there, in such a situation,
as might have induced any person of less intre-
pid courage to despair of defending it with
success. The city was of great extent, with large
suburbs; the walls were in many places feeble
and without ramparts; the ditch narrow; and
the old towers, which projeaed inflead of bas.
tions, were at too great distance from each other
to defend the space between them. For all
these defeas he endeavoured to provide the heft
remedy which the time would permit. He
ordered the suburbs, without sparing the monas-
teries or churches, not even that of St. Arnulph,
in which several kings of France had been buried,
to be levelled with the ground; but in order to
guard againit the imputation of impiety, to which
such a violation of so many sacred edifices, as
well as of the ashes of the dead, might expose
him, he executed this with much religious cere-
mony. Having ordered all the holy vefiments
and utensils, together with the bones of the
kings, and other persons deposited in these
churches, to be removed, they were carried in
solemn procession to a church within the *walls,
be himself walking before them bare-headed,
with a torch in his hand. He then pulled down
such houses as flood near the walls, cleared and
enlarged the ditch, repaired the ruinous fortifica-
tions, and ereaed new ones. As it was necef-
(ary that all these works fitould be fiailhed with

the

the utmost expedition, he laboured at them with
his own hands: the officers and volunteers
imitated his example, and the soldiers submitted
with cheerfulness to the most severe and fatiguing
service, when they saw that their superiors did
not decline to bear a part in it. At the fame
time he compelled all useless persons to leave the
place; he filled the magazines with provisions
and military flores; he burnt the mills, and de-
ftroyed the corn and forage for several miles
round the town. Such were his popular talents,
as well as his arts of acquiring an ascendant over
the minds of men, that the citizens seconded
him with no less ardour than the soldiers; and
every other paflion being swallowed up in the
zeal to repulse the enemy, with which he in-
spired them, they beheld the ruin of their estates,
together with the havoc which he made among
their public and private buildings, without any
emotion of resentment C.

Meantime the emperor having colleAed all his

forces, continued his march towards Metz. As
he passed through the cities on the Rhine, he
saw the dismal effeds of that licentious and
wasteful war which Albert had carried on in these
parts. Upon his approach, that prince, though
at the head of twenty thousand men, withdrew
into Lorrain, as if he had intended to join the
French king, whose arms he had quartered with
his own in all his flandards and ensigns. Albert
was not in a condition to cope with the Imperial
troops d, which amounted at least to sixty thou-
Land men, forming one of the most numerous

C Thuan. xi. 387. d Natal. Comitis, Hilt. 1Z7.

and

and bell appointed armies which had been brought
into the field during that age, in any of the wars
among Christian princes.

The chief command, under the emperor, was

committed to the duke of Alva, affilted by the
marquis de Marignano, together with the molt
experienced of the Italian and Spanish generals.
As it was now towards the end of Oalober,
these intelligent officers represented the great
danger of beginning, at such an advanced season,
a siege which could not fail to prove very tedious.
But Charles adhered to his own opinion with
his usual obifinacy, and being confident that he
had made such preparations, and taken such pre-
cautions, as would ensure success, he ordered the
city to be invefited. As soon as the duke of
Alva appeared [O. i9], a large body of the
French sallied out and attacked his van-guard
with great vigour, put it in confusion, and killed
or took prisoners a considerable number of
men. By this early specimen which they gave
of the condua of their officers, as well as the
valour of their troops, they Ihewed the Impe-
rialifts what an enemy they had to encounter,
and how dear every advantage mull coil them.
The place, however, was completely invefited,
the trenches were opened, and the other works
begun.

The attention both of the besiegers and be-

fieged was turned for some time towards Albert
of Brandenburg, and they fitrove with emulation
which ihould gain that prince, who still hovered
in the neighbourhood, fluduating in all the un-
certainty of irresolution, natural to a man, who,
being swayed by no principle, was allured differ-

cot

ent ways by contrary views of interest. The
French tempted him with offers extremely bene-
ficial; the Imperialists scrupled at no promise
which they thought might allure him. After
much hesitation he was gained by the emperor,
from whom he expeaed to receive advantages
which were both more immediate and more per-
manent. As the French king, who began to
fufped his intentions, had appointed a body of
troops under the duke of Aumale, brother to
the duke of Guise, to watch his motions, Albert
fell upon them unexpeaedly with such vigour
that he routed them entirely ENov. 4], killed
many of the officers, wounded Aumale him-
self, and took him prisoner. Immediately after
this vidory, he marched in triumph to Metz,
and joined his army to that of the emperor.
Charles, in reward for this service, and the great
accession of fitrength which he brought him,
granted Albert a formal pardon of all paRt of-
fences, and confirmed him in the poffeffion of the
territories which he had violently usurped during
the war e.

The duke of G-uise, though deeply affeded

with his brother's misfortune, did not remit, in
any degree,. the vigour with which he defended
the town. He harassed the besiegers by frequent
sallies, in which his officers were so eager to
distinguish themselves, that his authority being
hardly fufficient to reifrain the impetuosity of
their courage, he was obliged at different times
to shut the gates, and to conceal the keys, in
order to prevent the princes of the blood, and

a Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389. 392.

noblemen

noblemen of the first rank, from exposing them-
selves to danger in every sally. He repaired in
the night what the enemy's artillery had beat
down during the day, or ereted behind the
ruined works new fortifications of almost equal
firength. The Imperialists, on their part, puihed
on the attack with great spirit, and carried for-
ward, at once, approaches against different parts
of the town. But the art of attacking fortified
places was not then arrived at that degree of
perfedion to which it was carried towards the
close of the lixteenth century, during the long
war in the Netherlands. The besiegers, after
the unwearied labour of many weeks, found that
they had made but little progress; and although
their batteries had made breaches in different
places, they saw, to their astonishment, works
suddenly appear, in demolishing which their
fatigues and dangers would be renewed. The em.
peror, enraged at the obitinate resistance which his
army met with, left Thionville, where he had been
confined by a violent fit of the gout, and though
Itill so infirm that he was obliged to be carried
in a litter, he repaired to the camp [Nov. 26];
that, by his presence, he might animate the
soldiers, and urge on the attack with greater
spirit. Upon his arrival, new batteries were
ereaed, and new efforts were made with re-
doubled ardour.

But, by this time, winter had set in with

great rigour; the camp was alternately deluged
with rain or covered with snow; at the fame
time provisions were become extremely fearce,
as a body of French cavalry which hovered in
the neighbourhood, often interrupted the con-

voys,

voys, or rendered their arrival difficult and un-
certain. Diseases began to spread among the
soldiers, especially among the Italians and Spa-
niards, unaccustomed to such inclement weather;
great numbers were disabled from serving, and
many died. At length, such breaches were made
as seemed pralicable, and Charles resolved to
hazard a general assault, in spite of all the remon-
itrances of his generals against the imprudence of
attacking a numerous garrison, conduaed and
animated by the most gallant of the French nobi-
lity, with an army weakened by diseases, and dif-
heartened with ill success. The duke of Guise,
fufpeaing the emperor's intentions from the ex-
traordinary movements which he observed in the
enemy's. camp, ordered all his troops to their
refpedive -posts. They appeared immediately
on the walls, and behind the breaches, with such
a determined countenance, so eager for the com.
bat, and so well prepared to give the assailants a
warm reception, that the Imperialists, instead of
advancing to the charge when the word of com-
mand was given, flood motionless in a timid de-
jeaed silence. The emperor, perceiving that he
could not trust troops whose spirits were so much
broken, retired abruptly to his quarters, com-
plaining that he was now deserted by his fol-
diers, who deserved no longer the name of
men '.

Deeply as this behaviour of his troops morti路

fled and affeaed Charles, he would not hear of
abandoning the Liege, though he saw the neceflity
of changing the method of attack. He sus-

' Thuan. 397.

VOL. IV. K pendel

pended the fury of his batteries, and proposed to
proceed by the more secure but tedious method
of sapping. But as it still continued to rain or
to snow almost incessantly, such as were em.
ployed in this service endured incredible hard.
ships: and the duke of Guise, whose indnftry
was not inferior to his valour, discovering
all their mines, counter-worked them, and pre.
vented their effe&. At last, Charles finding it
impossible to contend any longer with the feve.
rity of the season, and with enemies whom he
could neither overpower by force, nor subdue by
art, while at the fame time a contagious difteml
per raged among his troops, and cut off daily
great numbers of the officers as well as soldiers,
yielded to the folicitations of his generals, who
conjured him to save the remains of his army by
a timely retreat; " Fortune," says he, " I now
perceive, resembles other females, and chooses
to confer her favours on young men, while
she turns her back on those who are advanced
in years."

Upon this, he gave orders immediately to raise

the siege [Dec. 26], and submitted to the dif.
grace of abandoning the enterprise, after having
continued fifty-fix days before the town, during
which time he had loft upwards of thirty thou-
sand men, who died of diseases, or were killed by
the enemy. The duke of Guise, as soon as he
pIerceived the intention of the Imperialidts, sent
out several bodies both of cavalry and infantry to
infest their rear, to pick up firagglers, and to
seize every opportunity of attacking them with
advantage. Such was the confusion with which
they made their retreat, that the French might have

when they sallied out, a fpcetacle presented
itself to their view, which extinguilhed at once
all hofaile rage, and melted them into tenderness
and compassion. The Imperial camp was filled
with the sick and wounded, with the dead and
the dying. In all the different roads by which
the army retired, numbers were found, who,
having made an effort to efeape, beyond their
flrength, were left, when they could go no far-
ther, to perish without affifiance. This they
received from their enemies, and were indebted
to them for all the kind offices which their friends
had not the power to perform. The duke of
Guise immediately ordered proper refreshments
for such as were dying of hunger; he appointed
surgeons to attend the sick and wounded; he
removed such as could bear it into the adjacent
villages; and those who would have fuffered by
being carried so far, he admitted into the hofpi-
tals which he had fitted up in the city for his
own soldiers. As soon as they recovered, he
sent them home under an escort of soldiers, and
with money to bear their charges. By these ats
of humanity, which were uncommon in that
age, when war was carried on with greater
rancour and ferocity than at present, the duke
of Guise completed the fame which he had ac-
quired by his gallant and fuccefsful defence of
Metz, and engaged those whom he had van-
quifhed to vie with his own countrymen in ex-
tolling his name g.

a Sleid. 575. Thuan. lib. xi. 389, &c. Pere Daniel,

Iift. de France, tom. iii. 392. Pere Daniel's account of
this siege is taken from the journal of the Sieur de Salignac,
who was present. Natal. Comit. Hill. 129.

K 2 To

To these calamities in Germany, were added

such unfortunate events in Italy as rendered this
the most disastrous year in the emperor's life.
During his residence at Villach, Charles had ap-
plied to Cosmo di Medici for the loan of two
hundred thousand crowns. But his credit at that
time was so low, that in order to obtain this in-
considerable fum, he was obliged to put him in
poffeffion of the principality of Piombino, and
by giving up that, he loft the footing which he
had hitherto maintained in Tuscany, and enabled
Cosmo to assume, for the future, the tone and
deportment of a prince altogether independent.
Much about the time that his indigence con-
firained him to part with this valuable territory,
he loft Siena, which was of fRill greater confe-
quence, through the ill-condua of don Diego
de Mendoza h

Siena, like most of the great cities in Italy,

had long enjoyed a republican government, under
the protedion of the empire; but being torn in
pieces by the diffentions between the nobility and
the people, which divided all the Italian common-
wealths, the fadion of the people, which gained
the ascendant, besought the emperor to become
the guardian of the adminifration which they
had established, and admitted into their city a
small body of Spanish soldiers, whom he had sent
to countenance the execution of the laws, and to
preserve tranquillity among them. The com-
mand of these troops was given to Mendoza, at
that time ambassador for the emperor at Rome,
who persuaded the credulous multitude, that it
was necessary for their security against any future

b Thuan, Jib. xi. 376.

attempt

citadel in Siena; and as he flattered himself
that by means of this fortress he might render
the emperor mailer of the city, he pushed on
the works with all possible dispatch. But he
threw off the maflk too soon. Before the fortifi-
cations were completed, he began to indulge his
natural haughtiness and severity of temper, and
to treat the citizens with great insolence. At
the fame time the soldiers in garrison being paid
as irregularly as the emperor's troops usually
were, lived almoil at discretion upon the inha-
bitants, and were guilty of many aAs of licence
and oppreflion.

These injuries awakened the Sienefe to a sense

of their danger. As they saw the necelfity of
exerting themselves, while the unfinished fortifi-
cations of the citadel left them any hopes of
fuecefs, they applied to the French ambassador
at Rome, who readily promised them his mailer's
protedion and afliftance. At the fame time,
forgetting their domeitic animofities when such a
mortal blow was aimed at the liberty and exiil-
ence of the republic, they sent agents to the
exiled nobles, and invited them to concur with
them in saving their country from the servitude
with which it was threatened. As there was
not a moment to lose, measures were concerted
speedily, but with great prudence; and were
executed with equal vigour. The citizens rose
suddenly in arms; the exiles flocked into the
town' from different parts with all their partisans,
and what troops they could draw together; and
several bodies of mercenaries in the pay of France
appeared to support there. The Spaniards,

K 3 though

though surprised, and much inferior in
number, defended themselves with great
courage; but feeing no profpea of relief,
and having no hopes of maintaining their
station long in a half-finilhed fortress, they soon
gave it up. The Sienefe, with the utmost
alacrity, levelled it with the ground, that no
monument might remain of that odious ftruc.
ture, which had been raised in order to enslave
them. At the fame time renouncing all connec-
tion with the emperor, they sent ambassadors to
thank the king of France as the restorer of their
liberty, and to entreat that he would secure to
them the perpetual enjoyment of that blessing,
by continuing his protedion to their republic5.

To these misfortunes, one itill more fatal had

almofit succeeded. The severe administration of
Don Pedro de Toledo, viceroy of Naples, having
filled that kingdom with murmuring and difaf-
fedion, the prince of Salerno, the head of the
malecontents, had fled to the court of France,
where all who bore ill-will to the emperor or his
ministers were sure of finding proteaion and as-
fiftance. That nobleman, in the usual Pcyle of
exiles, boasting much of the number and power
of his partisans, and of his great influence with
them, prevailed on Henry to think of invading
Naples, from an expedation of being joined by
all those with whom the prince of Salerno held
correspondence, or who were diffatisfied with
Toledo's government. But though the first

Peeci Memorie de Siena, vol. iii. p. ago. 261. Thuan,

375. 377, &C. Paruta. Hist. Venet. 267. Mem. de
Ribier, 424, &c. hint

of Salerno, Henry did not choose that its fuc.
cess should entirely depend upon his being able
to fulfil the promises which he had made. He
applied for aid to Solyman, whom he courted,
after his fathef's example, as his most vigorous
auxiliary againit the emperor, and solicited him
to second his operations, by sending a powerful
sleet into the Mediterranean. It was not difficult
to obtain what he requested of the sultan, who,
at this time, was highly incensed againit the
house of Austria, on account of the proceedings
in Hungary. He ordered an hundred and fifty
ihips to be equipped, that they might fail to-
wards the coast of Naples, at whatever time
Henry should name, and might co-operate with
the French troops in their attempts upon that
kingdom. The command of this fleet was given
to the corsair Dragut, an officer trained up under
Barbarossa, and scarcely inferior to his master in
courage, in talents, or in good fortune. He
appeared on the coast of Calabria at the time
which had been agreed on, landed at several
places, plundered and burnt several villages;
and at last, casting anchor in the bay of Naples,
flled that city with consternation. But as the
French fleet, detained by some accident, which
the contemporary historians have not explained,
did not join the Turks according to concert,
they, after waiting twenty days, without hear-
ing any tidings of it, set fail for Confiantinople,
and thus delivered the viceroy of Naples from
the terror of an invasion, which he was not in a
condition to have resifted k.

k Thuan. 375. 380. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 403. Gianone.

'553-1

1553.] As the French had never given so

severe a check to the emperor in any former
campaign, they expressed immoderate joy at the
success of their arms. Charles himself, accustomed
to a long series of prosperity, felt the calamity
most sensibly, and retired from Metz into the
Low-Countries, much dejeaed with the cruel
reverse of fortune which affeaed him in his de.
clining age, when the violence of the gout had
increased to such a pitch, as. entirely broke the
vigour of his conititution, and rendered him pee-
viih, difficult of access, and often incapable of
applying to business. But whenever he enjoyed
any interval of ease, all his thoughts were bent
on revenge; and he deliberated, with the greatest
solicitude, concerning the most proper means of
annoying France, and of effacing the 11ain which
had obscured the reputation and glory of his
arms. All the schemes concerning Germany,
which had engrossed him so long, being difcon.
certed by the peace of.Paffau, the affairs
of the empire became only secondary objeds
of attention; and enmity to France was the
predominant passion which chiefly occupied his
mind.

The turbulent ambition of Albert of Branden-

burg excited violent commotions, which disturb.
ed the empire during this year. That prince's
troops having ihared in the calamities of the
liege of Metz, were greatly reduced in number.
But the emperor, prompted by gratitude for
his distinguished services on that occasion, or
perhaps with a secret view of fomenting divisions
among the princes of the empire, having paid up
all the money due to him, he was enabled with

that

from the Imperial army, that he was Loon at the
head of a body of men as numerous as ever.
The bishops of Bamberg and Wurtzburg having
Lolicited the Imperial chamber to annul,
by its authority, the iniquitous conditions
which Albert had compelled them to sign, that
court unanimously found all their engagements
with him to be void in their own nature, because
they had been extorted by force; enjoined Al-
bert to renounce all claim to the performance of
them; and, if he thould persist in such an unjust
demand, exhorted all the princes of the empire
to take arms againfi him as a disturber of the
public tranquillity. To this decision, Albert
opposed the confirmation of his tranfa~ions with
the two prelates, which the emperor had granted
him as the reward of his having joined the Impe-
rial army at Metz; and in order to intimidate
his antagonists, as well as to convince them of
his refolutionnot to relinquilh his pretensions, he
put his troops in motion, that he might secure
the territory in question. Various endeavours
were employed, and many expedients proposed,
in order to prevent the kindling a new war in
Germany. But the fame warmth of temper
which rendered Albert turbulent and enter-
prifing, inspiring him with the most sanguine
hopes of success, even in his wildest undertak-
ings, he disdainfully rejeaed all reasonable over-
tures of accommodation.

Upon this, the Imperial chamber issued its

decree against him, and required the eleaor of
Saxony, together with several other princes
mentioned by name, to take arms in order to

carry

carry it into execution. Maurice, and those
afiociated with him, were not unwilling to un,
dertake this service. They were extremely so.
licitous to maintain public order by supporting
the authority of the Imperial chamber, and saw
the neceflity of giving a timely check to the
ufurpations of an ambitious prince, who had no
principle of adion but regard to his own interell,
and no motive to direa him but the impulse of
ungovernable passions. They had good reason
to fufpeA, that the emperor encouraged Albert
in his extravagant and irregular proceedings, and
secretly afforded him assistance, that, by raising
him up to rival Maurice in power, he might, in
any future broil, make use of his affiftane to
counterbalance and controul the authority which
the other had acquired in the empire .

These considerations united the most power-

ful princes in Germany in a league against
Albert, of which Maurice was declared gene-
ralifiimen[April z]. This formidable confede.
racy, however, wrought no change in Albert's
sentiments; but as he knew that he could not
resist so many princes, if he lhould allow therm
time to assemble their forces, he endeavoured,
by his aaivity, to deprive them of all the ad-
vantages which they might derive from their
united power and numbers; and for that reason
mnarched diredly againit Maurice, the enemy
whom he dreaded moul. It was happy for the
allies that the condua of their affairs was com-
xnitted to a prince of such abilities. He, by his

1Sleidg85. Mem. de Ribier, ii. 44Z. Arnoldi vita

Maurit. ap. Menken. ii. 5241.

autho-

vigour; and having carried on their preparations
with a degree of rapidity of which confederate bo.
dies are seldom capable, he was in condition to
face Albertbefore he could makeany considerable

progress. Their armies, which were nearly equal in
number, each confiding of twenty-four thousand
men, met at Sieverhaufen, in the duchy of
Lunenburgh; and the violent animosity againid
each other, which poffeffed the two leaders, did
jot fuffer them to continue long inaAive. The
troops, inflamed with the fame hofile rage,
marched fiercely to the combat [June 9]; they
fought with the greatest obdinacy; and as both
generals were capable of availing themselves of
every favourable occurrence, the battle remained
long doubtful, each gaining ground upon the
other alternately. At last viftory declared for
Maurice, who was superior in cavalry, and
Albert's army fled in confusion, leaving four
thousand dead in the field, and their camp, bag-
gage, and artillery in the hands of the conque-
rors. The allies bought their viaory dear, their
bedt troops fuffered greatly, two Sons of the duke
of Brunowick, a duke of Lunenburgh, and many
other persons of diftinAion, were among the
number of the slain m. But all these were soon
forgotten; for Maurice himself, as he led up tp
a second charge a body of horse which had been
broken, received a wound with a pidol-bullet in

m Hinforia pugne infelicis inter Maurit. & Albert.

Them. Wintzero autore apud Scard. ii. 559. Sleid. 583.
Rufcelli epiUtres aux Princes, 554. Arnoldi vita Maurit.
5245. the

the belly, of which he died two days after the
battle, in the thirty-fecond year of his age, and in
the sixth after his attaining the eleatoral dignity.

Of all the personages who have appeared in

the history of this aaive age, when great occur.
rences and sudden revolutions called forth extra.
ordinary talents to view, and afforded them full
opportunity to display themselves, Maurice may
juitly be considered as the most remarkable. If
his exorbitant ambition, his profound diffimula.
lation, and his unwarrantable usurpation of his
kinfman's honours and dominions, exclude him
from being praised as a virtuous man; his pru.
dence in concerting his measures, his vigour
in executing them, and the uniform success
with which they were attended, entitle him
to the appellation of a great prince. At an age
when impetuosity of ipirit commonly predomi-
nates over political wisdom, when the highest
effort even of a genius of the first order is to fix
on a bold scheme, and to execute it with promp-
titude and courage, he formed and conduded an
intricate plan of policy, which deceived the most
artful monarch in Europe. At the very junc-
ture when the emperor had attained to almost
unlimited defpotifrn, Maurice, with power seem.
ingly inadequate to such an undertaking, com-
pelled him to relinquish all his ufurpations, and
established not only the religious but civil liber-
ties of Germany on such foundations as have
hitherto remained unshaken. Although, at one
period of his life, his conduA excited the jea-
lousy of the protestants, and at another drew
on him the resentment of the Roman catholics,
such was his masterly address, that he was the

only

only prince of the age who, in any degree, pof-
sessed the confidence of both, and whom
both lamented as the most able as well as
faithful guardian of the confeitution and laws
of his country.

The consternation which Maurice's death oc-

cafioned among his troops, prevented them from
making the proper improvement of the viaory
which they had gained. Albert, whose adive
courage, and profuse liberality, rendered him
the darling of such military adventurers as were
little solicitous about the juffice of his cause,
soon re-afl'embled his broken forces, and made
frefi levies with such success, that he was quickly
at the head of fifteen thousand men, and renewed
his depredations with additional fury. But
Henry of Brunfiwick having taken the command
of the allied troops, defeated him in a second
battle [Sept. s2] fearcely less bloody than the
former. Even then his courage did not fink,
nor were his resources exhausted. He made fe-
veral efforts, and some of them very vigorous,
to retrieve his affairs: but being laid under the
ban of the empire by the Imperial chamber;
being driven by degrees out of all his hereditary
territories, as well as those which he had ufux ped;
being forsaken by many of his officers, and over-
powered by the number of his enemies, he fled
for refiuge into France. After having been, for
a considerable time, the terror and scourge of
Germany, he lingered out fume years in an indi-
gent and dependent ifate of exile, the miseries of
which his restless and arrogant spirit endured
withl the mout indignant impatience. Upon
his death without ilfte [Jan. iz, 5.557], his

VOL. IV. L terrn.

territories, which had been seized by the princes
who took arms against him, were restored, by
a decree of the emperor, to his collateral heirs
of the house of Brandenburg ".

Maurice having left only one daughter, who

was afterwards married to William prince of
Orange, by whom (he had a son who bore his
grandfather's name, and inherited the great
talents for which he was conspicuous, a violent
dispute arose concerning the lucceflion to his
honours and territories. John Frederick,
the degraded eledor, claimed the ele0o-
ral dignity, and that part of his patrimo.
nial critate of which he had been violently
itripped after the Smalkaldic war. Augultus,
Maurice's only brother, pleaded his right not
only to the hereditary poffeffions of their family,
but to the eletoral dignity, and to the territo.
ries which Maurice had acquired. As Auguflus
swas a prince of considerable abilities, as well as
of great candour and gentleness of manners, the
Rates of Saxony, forgetting the merits and sus-
ferings of their former mailer, declared warmly
in his favour. His pretensions were powerfully
supported by the king of Denmark, whose
daughter he had married, and zealously espoused
by the king of the Romans, out of regard to
Maurice's memory. The degraded eledor,
though secretly favoured by his ancient enemy
the emperor, was at last obliged to relinquish his
claim, upon obtaining a small addition to the ter-
ritories which had been allotted to him, together
with a fcipulation, securing to his family the

1 Sicid. 592* 594. 599. Struv. Corp. HIt. Germ. 1075.

eventual

eventual fiucceffion, upon a failure of male heirs
in the Albertine line. That unfortunate, but
magnanimous prince, died next year, soon after
.ratifying this treaty of agreement; and the elec-
toral dignity is still poffeffed by the descendants
.of Augustus O.

During these tranfa~tions in Germany, war

was carried on in the Low-Countries with con-
路fiderable vigour. The emperor, impatient to
efface the dtain which his ignominious repulse at
Metz left upon his military reputation, had an
army early in the field, and laid siege to
Terouane. Though the town was of such im-
portance, that Francis used to call it one of the
two pillows on which a king of Frince might
leep with security, the fortifications were in bad
repair: Henry, trufring to what had happened
at Metz, thought nothing more was necessary to
render all the efforts of the enemy abortive, than
to reinforce the garrison with a considerable
number of the young nobility. But d'Efsi, a
veteran officer who commanded them, being
killed, and the Imperialists puffing the siege
with great vigour and perseverance, the place
was taken by assault [June 21]. That it might
not fall again into the hands of the French,
Charles ordered not only the fortifications but
the town itself to be rafed, and the inhabitants
to be dispersed in the adjacent cities. Elated
with this success, the Imperialists immediately
invefited Hedlen, which, though defended with
great bravery, was likewise taken by assault,
and such of the garrison as escaped the sword,

S bleid. 587. Thuan. 409. Stray. Corp. Hill. Germ.

L z were

were made prisoners. The emperor entrufled
the condu& of this liege to Emanuel Philibert
of Savoy, prince of Piedmont, who, on that oc-
cafion, gave the firftdifplay of those great talents
for military command, which soon entitled him
to be ranked among the firit generals of the age,
and facilitated his re-eftablilhment in his heredi-
tary dominions, the greater part of which
having been over-run by Francis in his expedi.
tions into Italy, were itill retainedby Henry .

The loss of these towns, together with so

many persons of diitinaion, either killed or
taken by the enemy, was no inconsiderable cala-
mity to France, and Henry felt it very sensibly;
but he was still more mortified at the emperor's
having recovered his wonted superiority in the
field so soon after the blow at Metz, which the
French had represented as fatal to his power.
He was ashamed too, of his own remissness and
excessive security at the opening of the campaign;
and in order to repair that error, he assembled a
numerous army, and led it into the Law.
Countries.

Rouoed at the approach of such a formidable

enemy, Charles left Brussels, where he had been
shut up so closely during seven months, that it
came to be believed in many parts of Europe
that he was dead; and though he was so much
debilitated by the gout that he could hardly bear
the motion of a litter, he hastened to join his
army. The eyes of all Europe were turned with
expefation towards those mighty and exafpe-
rated rivals, between whom a decisive battle was

P Thuan. 41!. Hsrni Annales Brabant. 669.

now

now thought unavoidable. But Charles having
prudently declined to hazard a general engage.
ment, and the violence of the autumnal rains
rendering it impossible for the French to under-
take any siege, they retired, without having
performed any thing suitable to the great prepa-
rations which they had made q.

The Imperial arms were not attended with the

fame success in Italy. The narrowness of the
emperor's finances seldom allowed him to a&
with vigour in two different places at the fame
time; and having exerted himself to the utmost
in order to make a great effort in the Low-
Countries, his operations on the other fide of the
Alps wrre proportionally feeble. The viceroy
of Naples, in conjunaion with Cosmo di Medici,
who was greatly alarmed at the introduaion of
French troops into Siena, endeavoured to be-
come master of that city. But, inifead of re-
ducing the Sienefe, the Imnperialifts were obliged
to retire abruptly, in order to defend their own
country, upon the appearance of the Turkish
fleet, which threatened the coast of Naples; and
the French not only established themselves more
firmly in Tuscany, but, by the assistance of the
Turks, conquered a great part of the island of
Corsica, fubjea at that time to the Genoese r.

The affairs of the house of Austria declined no

less in Hungary during the course of this year.
As the troops which Ferdinand kept in Tran-
fylvania received their pay very irregularly, they
lived almost at diferetion upon the inhabitants;
and the irinfolence and rapaciounefs greatly dif.

5 Harxeus, 67. Thuan. 4s4. I Thuan. 417.

L 3 gufed

guited all ranks of men, and alienated them
from their new sovereign, who infitead of pro-
teaing, plundered his fubjeAs. Their indigna.
tion at this, added to their desire of revenging
Martinuzzi's death, wrought so much upon a
turbulent nobility impatient of injury, and upon a
fierce people prone to change, that they were
ripe for a revolt. At that very junAure, their
late queen Isabella, together with her son, ap-
peared in Transylvania. Her ambitious mind
could not bear the solitude and inativity of a
private life; and repenting quickly of the cef-
sion which {he had made of the crown in the year
one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, Ihe left
the place of her retreat, hoping that the dif-
fatisfh8cion of the Hungarians with the Aufirian
government would prompt them once more to
recognise her fon's right to the crown. Some
noblemen of great eminence declared immediately
in his favour. The bafha of Belgrade, by
Solyman's order, espoused his cause, in oppo.
lition to Ferdinand; the Spanish and German
soldiers, instead of advancing againit the enemy,
mutinied for want of pay, declaring that they
would march back to Vienna; so that Caftaldo,
their general, was obliged to abandon Tranfyl.
vania to Isabella and the Turks, and to place
himself at the head of the mutineers, that by
his authority he might refitrain them from plun.
dering the Austrian territories through which
they paffeds.

Ferdinand's attention was turned so entirely

towards the affairs of Germany, and his treasures
so much exhausted by his late efforts in Hun.

? Thuan* 430.

gary,

gary, that he made no attempt to recover this
valuable province, although a favourable oppor-
tunity for that purpose presented itfeif, as Soly-
man was then engaged in a war with Persia, and
involved besides in domeffic calamities which en-
grossed and disturbed his mind. Solyman, though
diftinguilhed by many accomplilhments from the
other Ottoman princes, had all the passions pecu-
liar to that violent and haughty race. He was
jealous of his authority, sudden as well as furi-
ous in his anger, and susceptible of all that rage
and love, which reigns in the East, and oftei
produces the wildest and most tragical effeas.
His favourite mistress was a Circaflian slave of
exquisite beauty, who bore him a son called
Multapha, whom, both on account of his birth-
right and his merit, he destined to be the heir
of his crown. Roxalana, a Ruflian captive,
sion supplanted the Circassian, and gained the
fultan's heart. Having the address to retain
the conquest which The had made, the kept pof-
feflion of his love without any rival for many
years, during which The brought him several sons
and one daughter. All the happinels, however,
which the derived from the unbounded sway that
The had acquired over a monarch whom one half
of the world revered or dreaded, was embittered
by perpetual reflections on Multapha's accession
to the throne, and the certain death of her sons,
who, The foresaw, would be immediately facri-
ficed, according to the barbarous jealousy of
Turkimh policy, to the safety of the new empe-
ror. By dwelling continually on this melancholy
idea, The came gradually to view Muftapha as
the enemy of her children, and to hate him with

more

more than a fiep-mother's ill-will. This
prompted her to wish his deifrudion, in order
to secure for one of her own sons the throne
which was destined for him. Nor did uhe want
either ambition to attempt such a high enter-
prize, or the arts requisite for carrying it into
execution. Having prevailed on the sultan to
give her only daughter in marriage to Ruftan
the grand vifier, she disclosed her feheme to that
crafty minister, who perceiving that it was his
own interest to co-operate with her, readily
promised his affifiance towards aggrandizing that
branch of the royal lihe to which he was so nearly
allied.

As soon as Roxalana had concerted her mea-

fures with this able confident, the began to as-
fed a wonderful zeal for the Mahometan re-
ligion, to which Solyman was superstitiously at.
tached, and proposed to found and endow a royal
xnofque, a work of great expence, but deemed
by the Turks meritorious in the highest degree.
The mufti whom Ihe consulted, approved much
of her pious intention; but having been gained
and inifruAed by Ruftan, told her, that she being
a slave could derive no benefit herfelffrom that
holy deed, for all the merit of it would accrue
to Solyman, the master whose property she was.
Upon this she seemed to be overwhelmed with
sorrow, and to fink into the deepest melancholy,
as if she had been disgusted with life and all its
enjoyments. Solyman, who was absent with
the army, being informed of this dejeaion of
mind, and of the cause from which it proceed-
ed, discovered all the solicitude of a lover, to re.
move it, aind by a writing under his hand de-

clared

gained this point, proceeded to build the mosque,
and-reaffumed her usual gaiety of spirit. But
when Solyman, on his return to Conifantinople,
sent an eunuch, according to the cuffom of the
seraglio, to bring her to partake of his bed, she,
seemingly with deep regret, but in the moss pe-
remptory manner, declined to follow the eunuch,
declaring that what had been an honour to her
while a slave, became a crime as she was now a
free woman, and that she would not involve
either the sultan or herself in the guilt that must
be contraaed by such an open violation of the
law of their prophet. Solyman, whose passion
this difficulty, as well as the affeted delicacy
which gave rife to it, heightened and inflamed,
had recourse immediately to the mufti for his di.
reaion. He replied, agreeably to the koran,
that Roxalana's fEcruples were well founded; but
added, artfully, in words which Ruitan had
taught him to use, that it was in the fultan's
power to remove these difficulties, by espousing
her as his lawful wife. The amorous monarch
closed eagerly with the proposal, and solemnly
married her, according to the form of the Maho-
metan ritual; though, by doing so, he difre-
garded a maxim of policy which the pride of the
Ottoman blood had taught all the sultans
since Bajazet I. to confider as inviolable. From
his time, none of the Turkish monarchs had mar-
ried, because, when he was vanquished and taken
prisoner by Tamerlane, his wife had been abused
with barbarous insolence by the Tartars. That
no limilar calamity might again fubjea the Ot-
toman family to the fame disgrace, the sultans

admitted

admitted none to their beds but slaves, wvhofe
dilhonour could not bring any such stain upon
their house.

But the more uncommon the flep was, the more

it convinced Roxalana of the unbounded influence
which (he had acquired over the fultan's heart;
and emboldened her to prosecute, with greater
hope of success, the feheme that (he had formed
in order to destroy Muflapha. This young
prince having been entrufied by his father, ac.
cording to the pradice of the sultans in that age,
ovith the government of several different provinces,
was at that time invefited with the adminifiration
in Diarbequir, the ancient Mesopotamia, which
Solyman had wrefited from the Persians, and
added to his empire. In all these different com-
mands, Muftapha had conduaed himself with
such cautious prudence as could give no offence
to his father, though, at the lame time, he
governed with so much moderation as well as
juflice, and displayed luch valour and generosity,
as rendered him equally the favourite of the peo-
ple and the darling of the soldiery.

There was no room to lay any folly or vice

to his charge, that could impair the high opi-
nion which his father entertained of him. Rox-
alana's malevolence was more refined; (he turned
his virtues against him, and made use of these as
engines for his defkruftion. She often mentioned,
in Solyman's presence, the splendid qualities of
his son ; (he celebrated his courage, hsis liberality,
his popular arts, with malicious and exaggerated
praise. As soon as (he perceived that the sultan
heard thcfe encomiums,which were oftenrepeated,
with uneasiness; that suspicion of his fan began

to mingle itself with his former e{Ieem; and
that by degrees he came to view him with jealousy
and fear; (he introduced, as by accident, some
discourse concerning the rebellion of his fathei*

lSeln againdt Bajazet his grandfather: (he took
notice of the bravery of the veteran troops under
Muftapha's command, and of the neighbourhood
of Diarbequir to the territories of the Perian
fophi, Solyman's mortal enemy. By these arts,
whatever remained of paternal tenderness was
gradually extinguished, and such passions were
kindled in the breadt of the sultan, as gave all
Roxalana's malignant suggestions the colour not
only of probability but of truth. His suspicions
and fear of Muftapha fettled into deep-rooted
hatred. He appointed spies to observe and re-
port all his words and aAions; he watched and
flood on his guard against him as his most dan-
gerous enemy.

Having thus alienated the fultan's heart from

Muftapha, Roxalana ventured upon another flep.
She entreated Solyman to allow her own sons the
liberty of appearing at court, hoping that by
gaining access to their father, they might, by
their good qualities and dutiful deportment, infi-
nuate themselves into that place in his affedrions
which Muftapha had formerly held; and, though
what (he demanded was contrary to the pra~tice
of the Ottoman family in that age, the uxorious
monarch granted her request. To all these fe-
male intrigues Ruftan added an artifice dill more
subtle, which completed the fultan's delusion,
and heightened his jealoofy and fear. He wrote
to the bafhaws of the provinces adjacent to Diar-
bequir, inftru~ting them to fend him regular in-

telhgence

telligence of Muftapha's proceedings in his
government, and to each of them he gave a
private hint, flowing in appearance from his zeal
for their interest, that nothing would be more
acceptable to the sultan than to receive favourable
accounts of a son whom he deflined to sustain the
glory of the Ottoman name. The bafhafws, igno-
rant of his fraudulent intention, and eager to
pay court to their sovereign at such an easy price,
filled their letters with flodied but fatal pane-
gyrics of Muftapha, representing hiim as a prince
worthy to succeed such an illufirious father, and
as endowed with talents which might enable him
to emulate, perhaps to equal, his fame. These
letters were induifrioufly (hewn to Solyman, at
the seasons when it was known that they would
make the deepest impression. Every expression
in recommendation of his son wounded him to
the heart; he fufpedted his principal officers of
being ready to favour the moid desperate attempts
of a prince whom they were so fond of praising;
and fancying that he saw them already assaulting
his throne with rebellious arms, he determin-
ed, while it was yet in his power, to anticipate
the blow, and to secure his own safety by his
fon's death.

For this purpose, though under pretence of

renewing the war against Persia, he ordered
Ruftan to march towards Diarbequir at the head
of a numerous army, and to rid him of a son
-vhofe life lie deemed inconsistent with his own
lhfety. But that crafty minister did not choose
to be loaded with the odium of having executed
this cruel order. As foonas he arrived in Syria
lhe wrote to Solyman, that the danger was so

3 uImmnent

that the camp was full of Muftapha's emissaries;
that many of the soldiers were corrupted; that
the affeaions of all leaned towards him; that he
had discovered a negotiation which had beenr
carried on with the fophi of Persia in order to
marry Muftapha with one of his daughters; that
he already felt his own talents as well as authority
to be inadequate to the exigencies of such an
arduous conjunaure; that the sultan alone had
sagacity to discern what resolution should be
taken in those circumstances, and power to carry
that resolution into execution.

This charge of courting the friendship of the

fophi, Roxalana and Ruitan had reserved as the
last and most envenomed of all their calumnies.
It operated with the violence which they ex-
peded from Solyman's inveterate abhorrence of
the Persians, and threw him into the wildest
transports of rage. He set out initantly for
Syria, and hastened thither with all the precipi-
tation and impatience of fear and revenge. As
soon as he joined his army near Aleppo, and
had concerted measures with Ruitan, he sent a
chiaus, or messenger of the court, to his son,
requiring him to repair immediately to his pre-
fence. Muftapha, though no ihanger to his
ftep.mother's machinations, or to Ruftan's ma-
lice, or to his father's violent temper, yet relying
on his own innocence, and hoping to difcredie
the accusations of his enemies by the promptitude
of his obedience, followed the messenger without
delay to Aleppo. The moment he arrived in the
camp, he was introduced into the fultan's tent.

voL. lv. a AR

As he entered it, he observed nothing that could
give him any alarm; no additional crowd of at-
tendants, no body of armed guards, but the
fame order and lilence which always reign in the
fultan's apartments. In a few minutes, however,
several mutes appeared, at the light of whom
Muftapha, knowing what was his doom, cried
w'ith a loud voike, " Lo, my death !" and at.
tempted to fly. The mutes rulhed forward to
seize him; he resifted and firuggled, demanding
with the utmost earnefitefa to fee the sultan;
and despair, together with the hope of finding
protedion from the soldiers, if he could escape
out of the tent, animated him with such extra-
ordinary Arength, that, for some time, he baffled
all the efforts of the executioners. Solyiman
was within hearing of his fon's cries, as well as
of the noise which the struggle occalioned. Im-
patient of this delay of his revenge, and Piruck
with terror at the thoughts of Mukapha's efeap.
ing, he drew aside the curtain which divided the
tent, and thrufling in his head, d irted a fierce
look towards the mutes, and, with wvik and
threatening geIhures, seemed to condemn their
sloth and timidity. At fight of his father's furi-
ous and unrelenting countenance, Muftapha's
fitrength failed, and his courage forsook him; the
mutes fastened the bow-f{riug about his neck,
and in a moment put an end to his life.

The dead body was exposed before the ful-

tan's tent. The soldiers gathered round it, and
contemplating that mournful objea with astonish-
ment, and sorrow, and indignation, were ready,
if a leader had not been wanting, to have broke

out

out into the wildest excesses of rage. After
giving vent to the first expreflions of their grief;
they retired each man to his tent, and ihutting
themselves up, bewailed in feeret the cruel fate
of their favourite; nor was there one of them
who tasted food, or even water, during the re.
mainder of that day. Next morning the fame
solitude and silence reigned in the camp; and
Solyman, being afraid that some dreadful iforna
would follow this sullen calm, in order to appease
the enraged soldiers, deprived Ruftan of the seals,
ordered him to leave the camp, and raised Ach-
met, a gallant officer much beloved in the army,
to the dignity of vifier. This change, however,
was made in concert with Ruftan himself; that
crafty minister suggesting it as the only expedient
which could save himself or his master. But
within a few months, when the resentment of the
soldiers began to subside, and the name of Muf-
tapha to be forgotten, Achmet was fitrangled by
the fultan's command, and Ruitan re instated in
the office of vifier. Together with his former
power, he re-affumed the plan for exterminating
the race of Multapha which he had concerted
with Roxalana; and as they were afraid that an
only son whom Muftapha had left, might grow
up to avenge his death, they redoubled their
ativity, and by employing the fame arts against
him which they had pradifed againit his father,
they inspired Solyman with the fame fears, and
prevailed on him to ifliTe orders for putting t6
death that young innocent prince. These orders
were executed with barbarous zeal, by an eunuch,
who was dispatched to Bursa, the place where
the prince resided; and no rival was left to dif-

MZ pute

pute the Ottoman throne with the sons of Rox.
alana t,

Such tragical scenes, produaive of so deep

diflrefs, seldom occur but in the history of the
great monarchies of the east, where the warmth
of the climate seems to give every emotion of the
heart its greateRt force, and the absolute power of
sovereigns accustoms and enables them to gratify
all their passions without controul. While this
interesting tranfadion in the court of Solyman
engaged his whole attention, Charles was purfu.
ing, with the utmost ardour, a new scheme for
aggrandizing his family. About this time, Ed.
ward the Sixth of England, after a short reign,
in which he displayed such virtues as filled his
fubjeats with sanguine hopes of being happy un-
der his government, and made them bear with
patience all that they fuffered from the weaknefi,
the dissensions, and the ambition of ministers who
affzumed the adminifiration during his minority,
was seized with a lingering distemper which
threatened his life. The emperor no sooner re-
ceived an account of this, than his ambition,
always attentive to seize every opportunity of
acquiring an increase of power, or of territories,
to his son, fuggefited the thought of adding Eng-
land to his other kingdoms,, by the marriage of
Philip with the princess Mary, the heir of Ed.
ward's crown. Being apprehensive, however,
that his son, who was then in Spain, might de.
cline a match with a princess in her thirty-eighth

n Augeril Gillenii Bufbequii Legationis Turcic9 Epi1oleI

sv. Franc. a61s5 P. 37. Thuan. lib. xii. p. 432. Mem.
de Ribier, ii. 457, Mauroceni Hiitor. Veneta, lib. vii.
p.60.

year,

year, and eleven years older than himself u
Charles determined, notwithstanding his own age
and infirmities, to make offer of himself as a
huiband to his cousin.

But though Mary was so far advanced in

years, and destitute of every charm either of
person or manners that could win affe&ion or
command efeem, Philip, without hesitation,
gave his consent to the match proposed by his
father, and was willing, according to the usual
maxim of princes, to sacrifice his inclination to
his ambition. In order to ensure the success of
his feheme, the emperor, even before Edward's
death, began to take such fReps as might facili-
tate it. Upon Edward's demise, Mary mounted
the throne of England; the pretensions of the
lady Jane Gray proving as unfortunate as they
were ill founded '. Charles sent immediately a
pompous embassy to London to congratulate
Mary on her acceflion to the throne, and to
propose the alliance with his son. The queen,
dazzled with the profpca of marrying the heir
of the greatefr monarch in Europe; fond of
uniting more closely with her mother's family,
to which she had been always warmly attached;
and eager to secure the powerful aid which Ihe
knew would be necessary towards carrying on her
favourite scheme of re-establishing the Romish
religion in England, listened in the most favour-
able manner to the proposal. Among her sub.
jeas, it met with a very different reception.
Philip, it was well known, contended for all the

U Palav. Hilt. Conchl. Trid. v. ii. c. 13. p. 150.
SCarte's Hifl. of England, iii. 287.

. 3 tenets

tenets of the church of Rome with a sanguinary
zeal which exceeded the measure even of Spanilh
higotry: this alarmed all the numerous partisans
of the reformation. The Castilian haughtiness
and reserve were far from being acceptable to
the English, who, having several times seen their
throne occupied by persons who were born sub-
jeas, had become accuffomed to an uncereme.
nious and familiar intercourse with their fove.
reigns. They could not think, without the ut.
most uneasiness, of admitting a foreign prince to
that influence in their councils, which the hus.
band of their queen would naturally possess.
They dreaded, both from Philip's overbearing
temper, and from the maxims of the Spanish
monarchy which he had imbibed, that he would
infuse ideas into the queen's mind, dangerous to
the liberties of the nation, and would introduce
foreign troops and money into the kingdom, to
assist her in any attempt against them.

Full of these apprehensions, the house of

commons, though in that age extremely obfe-
quious to the will of their monarchs, presented
a warm address againift the Spanish match;
many pamphlets were published, representing the
dangerous consequences of the alliance with
Spain, and describing Philip's bigotry and arro-
gance in the most odious colours. But Mary,
inflexible in all her resolutions, paid no regard
to the remonifrances of her commons, or to the
sentiments of the people. The emperor, having
secured, by various arts, the ministers whom she
trusted mouf, they approved warmly of the match,
and large sums were remitted by him in order to
gain the reit of the council, Cardinal Pole,

whom

sion, had d ifpatched as his legate into England,
in order to reconcile his native country to the
fee of Rome, was detained by the emperor's com-
mand at Dillinghen in Germany, less by his pre-
fence he fhoiild thwart Philip's pretensions, and
employ his interest in favour of his kinsman
Courtnay earl of Devonfiire, whom the English
ardently withed their sovereign to choose for a
husband Y.

As the negotiation did not admit of delay, it

was carried forward with the greatest rapidity,
the emperor agreeing, without hefitation,to every
article in favour ofEngland,whichMary'sminifters
either represented as necessary to sooth the people
and reconcile them to the match, or that was fug-
gefted by their own fears and jealousy of a foreign
master. The chief articles were [Jan.12, 1554],
that Philip, during his marriage with the queen,
Ihould bear the title of king of England, but the
entire administration ofaffairs, as well as the sole
disposal of all revenues, offices, and benefices,
should remain with the queen; that the heirs of
the marriage lhould, together with the crown of
England, inherit the dutchy of Burgundy and
the Low-Countries; that if prince Charles,
Philip's only son by a former marriage, should
die without issue, his children by the queen,
whether male or female, should succeed to the
crown of Spain, and all the emperor's hereditary
dominions; that before the consummation of the
marriage, Philip (hould swear solemnly, that he
would retain no domestic who was not a fubjeat

of the queen, and would bring no foreigners into
the kingdom that might give umbrage to the
Englith; that he would make no alteration in
the conititution or laws of England; that he
would not carry the queen, or any of the chil-
dren born of this marriage, out of the kingdom;
that if the queen should die before him without
iffle, he would immediately leave the crown to
the lawful heir, without claiming any right of
administration whatever; that in consequence of
this marriage, England ihould not be engaged in
any war subsisting between France and Spain;
and that the alliance between France and England
should remain in full force ".

But this. treaty, though both the emperor and

Mary's ministers employed their utmost address
in framing it so as to please the English, was
far from quieting their fears and jealousies. They
Law that words and promises were a feeble fecu.
rity againit the .eneroachments of an ambitious
prince, who, as Loon as he got poffeflion of the
power and advantages which the queen's huiband
mud necessarily enjoy, could easily evade any of
the articles which either limited his authority or
obhtrudted his schemes. They were convinced
that the more favourable the conditions of the
present treaty were to England, the more Philip
would be tempted hereafter to violate them.
They dreaded that England, like Naples, Milan,
and the other countries annexed to Spain, would
soon feel the dominion of that crown to be in-
tolerably oppredlive, and be confirained, as they

2 Rymer's Faed. vol. xv. 377* 393. Mem. de Ribier,

i1. 49a. had

wherein it had no interest, and from which it
could derive no advantage. These sentiments
prevailed so generally, that every part of the
kingdom was filled with discontent at the match,
and with indignation against the advisers of it.
Sir Thomas Wyat, a gentleman of some note,
and of good intentions towards the public, took
advantage of this, and roused the inhabitants of
Kent to arms, in order to save their country
from a foreign yoke. Great numbers resorted in
a short time to his standard; he marched to
London with such rapidity, and the queen was
so utterly unprovided for defence, that the afpe&
of affairs was extremely threatening; and if any
nobleman of diftin&ion had joined the malecon-
tents, or had Wyat poffeffed talents equal, in any
degree, to the boldness of his enterprize, the in-
furreaion must have proved fatal to Mary's
power. But all Wyat's measures were concerted
with so little prudence, and executed with such
irresolution, that many of his followers forsook
him; the reft were dispersed by an handful of
soldiers; and he himself was taken prisoner,
without having made any effort worthy of the
cause that he had undertaken, or suitable to the
ardour with which he engaged in it. He fuffered
the punishment due to his rashness and rebellion.
The queen's authority was confirmed and in-
creased by her success in defeating this inconfi-
derate attempt to abridge it. The lady Jane
Gray, whose title the ambition of her relations
had set up in opposition to that of the queen,
was, notwithstanding her youth and innocence,
brought to the fcaffold. The lady Elizabeth,

the

the queen's fiflter, was observed with the most
jealous attention. The treaty of marriage was
ratified by the parliament.

Philip landed in England with a magnificent

retinue, celebrated his nuptials with great folem-
nity; and though he could not lay aside his
natural severity and pride, or assume gracious
and popular manners, he endeavoured to con-
ciliate the favour of the English nobility by his
extraordinary liberality. Lell that thould fail of
acquiring him such influence in the government
of the kingdom as he aimed at obtaining, the em-
peror kept a body of twelve thousand men on the
coast of Slanders in readiness to embark for Eng-
land, and to support his son in all his enterprizes.

Emboldened by all these favourable circum.

ltances, Mary pursued the feheme of extirpating
the protestant religion out of her dominions,
with the most precipitate zeal. The laws of
Edward the Sixth, in favour of the reformation,
were repealed; the proteitant clergy ejeded;
all the forms and rights of the popiih worlhip
were re-established; the nation was solemnly ab-
solved from the guilt which it had contraded
during the period of its apostasy, and was pub-
licly reconciled to the church of Rome by car.
dinal Pole, who immediately after the queen's
marriage, was permitted to continu- his journeyto
England, and to exercise his legatine funfions
with the most ample power. Not satisfied with
having overturned the protestant church, and re-
eftablilhing the ancient system on its ruins, Mary
insisted that all her fubjeds should conform to
the fame mode of worship which Ihe preferred;
Thould profess their faith in the fame creed

which

pradice or opinion that was deemed repugnant to
either of them. Powers, altogether unknown in
the English conifitution, were vefed in certain
persons appointed to take cognizance of heresy,
and they proceeded to exercise them with more
than inquisitorial severity. The profped of dan-
ger, however, did not intimidate the principal
teachers of the proteltant dotrines, who believed
that they'were contending for truths oftheutmoft
consequence to the happiness of mankind. They
boldly avowed their feutiments, and were con-
demned to that cruel death which the church of
Rome reserves for its enemies. This ihocking
punilhment was infliaed with that barbarity'
which the rancour of false zeal alone can inspire.
The Englifl, who are inferior in humanity to no-
people in Europe, and remarkable for the mild-
ness of their public executions, beheld, with
astonishment and horror, persons who had filled
the most refpedable frations in their church, and
who were venerable on account of their age,
their piety, and their literature, condemned to&
endure torments to which their laws did not sub-
je& even the most atrocious criminals.

This extreme rigour did not accomplish the

end at which Mary aimed. The patience and
fortitude with which these martyrs for the re
formation submitted to their fufferings, the heroic
contempt of death expressed by persons of every
rank, and age, and sex, confirmed many more in
the protellant faith, than the threats of their
enraged persecutors could frighten into apostasy.
The business of such as were eutruited with try.
ing heretics multiplied continually, and appeared

ableR ministers became sensible how impolitic, as
well as dangerous, it was to irritate the people
by the frequent fpeaacle of public execution3,
which they detefited as no less unjust than cruel.
Even Philip was so thoroughly convinced of her
having run to an excels of rigour, that on this
occasion he assumed a part to which he was little
accustomed, becoming an advocate for moderation
and lenity a.

But, notwithitanding this attempt to ingratiate

himself with the English, they discovered a con-
iRant jealousy and diTruit of all his intentions;
and when some members, who had been gained
by the court, ventured to move in the house of
commons that the nation ought to assist the em-
peror, the queen's father-in-law, in his war
againit France, the proposal was rejeaed with
general diffatisfaaion. A motion which was
made, that the parliament should give its con-
sent that Philip might be publicly crowned as
the queen's husband, met with such a cold recep.
tion, that it was instantly withdrawn b.

The king of France had observed the progrels

of the emperor's negotiation in England with
much uneasiness. The great acceflion of terri-
tories as well as reputation which his enemy
would acquire by the marriage of his son with
the queen of such a powerful kingdom, was ob-
vious and formidable. He easily foresaw that
the English, notwithifanding all their fears and
precautions, would be soon drawn in to take part

拢 Godwin's Annals of Q.Maryap. Kennet, . ii. p. 3z9.

Eurnet's Hil. of Reform. ii. 298. 305.

Carte's Hill. of England, iii. 3'4.

pelled to ad in subserviency to the emperor's
ambitious fehemes. For this reason, Henry had
given it in charge to his ambassador at the court
of London, to employ all his address in order to
defeat or retard the treaty of marriage; and as
there was not, at that time, any prnce of the
blood in France whom he could propose to the
queen as a husband, he infitruaed him to co-
operate with such of the English as wished their
sovereign to marry one of her own fubjeAs.
But thequeen's ardour and precipitation in closing
with the firit overtures in favour of Philip, having
rendered all his endeavours ineffedual, Henry
was so far from thinking it prudent to give any
aid to the English malecontents, though earnefily
solicited by Wyat and their other leaders, who
tempted him to take them under his proteaion,
by offers of great advantage to France, that he
commanded his ambassador to congratulate the
queen in the warmest terms upon the suppression
of the infurreaion.

Notwithstanding these external profeffions,

Henry dreaded so much the consequence of this
alliance, which more than compensated for all
the emperor had loft in Germany, that he deter-
mined to carry on his military operations, both
in the Low-Countries and in Italy, with extra-
ordinary vigour, in order that he might compel
Charles to accept of an equitable peace, before
his daughter-in-law could surmount the aversion
of her fubjeds to a war on the continent, and
prevail on them to assist the emperor either with
money or troops. For this purpose he exerted
himfeif to the utmolt in order to have a nume-

VOL. 1V. N rouS

rous army early assembled on the frontiers of the
Netherlands, and while one part of it laid wale
the open country of Artois, the main body, under
the confrable Montmorency, advanced towardi
the provinces of Liege and Hainhault by the
forefr of Ardennes.

The campaign was opened with the siege f

Mariemburgh, a town which the queen of Hun-
gary, the governess of the Low-Countries, had
fortified at great expence; but, being destitute
ofa fufficient garrison, it surrendered in fix days
[June 28]. Henry, elated with this success,
pot himself at the head of his army, and invest.
ing Bouvines, took it by assault, after a thort
resistance. With equal facility he became mailer
of Dinant; and then turning to the left, bent
his march towards the province of Artois. The
large sums which the emperor had remitted into
England had so exhausted his treasury, as to
render his preparations at this junaure flower
and more dilatory than usual. He had no body
of troops to make head against the French at
their first ent1mnce into his territories; and though
he drew together all the forces in the country in
the utmost hurry, and gave the command of
them to Emanuel Philibert of Savoy, they were
in no condition to face an enemyfo far superior in
number. The prince of Savoy, however, by his
ativity and good conduA, made up forhis want
of troops. By watching all the motions of the
French at a diitance, and by choosing his own
pofls with frill, he put it out of their power
tither to form any siege of consequence, or to
attack hint. Want of fubfifteoce soon obliged
them to fall back towards their owvn frontiera,

after

plundered the country through which they
marched with a cruelty and licence more becom-
ing a body of light troops than a royal army led
by a great monarch.

But Henry, that he might not dismiss his

army without attempting some conquest ade-
露uate to the great preparations, as well as fan-
guine hopes, with which he had opened the
campaign, invefked Renti, a place deemed in that
age of great importance, as, by its situation on
the confines of Artois and the Boulonnois, it
covered the former province, and proteded the
parties which made incursions into the latter.
The town, which was firongly fortified, and pro-
vided with a numerous garrison, made a gallant
defence; but being warmly pressed by a power-
ful army, it must soon have yielded. The em-
peror, who at that time enjoyed a ihort interval
of ease from the gout, was so solicitous to save
it, that, although he could bear no other motion
but that of a litter, he inflantly put himself at
the head of his army, which, having received fe-
veral reinforcements, was now Rirong enough to
approach the enemy. The French were eager
to decide the fate of Renti by a battle, and ex-
peded it from the emperor's arrival in his camp;
but Charles avoided a general adion with great
indufiry, and as he had nothing in view but to
save the town, he hoped to accomplish that,
without exposing himself to the consequences of
such a dangerous and doubtful event.

Notwithifanding all his precautions, a dispute,

about a post which both armies endeavoured to
seize, brought on an engagement [Aug. 13]

N a which

which proved almost general. The duke of
Guise, who commanded the wing of the French
which flood the brunt of the combat, displayed va.
lour and condua worthy of the defender of Metz;
the Imperialifis after an obstinate firuggle were
repulsed; the French remained masters of the
poss in dispute, and if the conflable, either from
his natural caution and slowness, or from Un-
willingness to support a rival whom he hated,
had not delayed bringing up the main body to
second the imprefimon which Guise had made,
the route of the enemy must have been complete.
The emperor, notwithifanding the loss which he
had sustained, continued in the fame camp; and
the French, being ifraitened for provisions,
and finding it impoifible to carry on the siege in
the face of an hostile army, quitted their in-
trenchments. They retired openly, courting
the enemy to approach, rather than lhunning an
engagement.

But Charles, having gained his end, fuffered

them to march off unmolested. As soon as his
troops entered their own country, Henry threw
garrisons into the frontier towns, and dismissed
the reft of the army. This encouraged the Im-
perialifts to push forward with a considerable
body of troops into Picardy, and by laying walke
the country with fire and sword, they endeavoured
to revenge themselves for the ravages which the
French had committed in Hainhault and Artois C.
But, as they were not able to reduce any place
of importance, they gained nothing more thad
the enemy had done by this cruel and inglorious
tnethod of carrying on the war.

Thuan. 460, &c. Harai Ann. Brab. 674. The

ful in Italy. The footing which the French had
acquired in Siena occasioned much unealinefs to
Cosmo di Medici, the moit sagacious and enter-
prizing of all the Italian princes. He dreaded
the neighbourhood of a powerful people, to
whom all who favoured the ancient republican
government in Florence would have recourse, as
to their natural protetors, againit that absolute
authority which the emperor had enabled him to
usurp; he knew how odious he was to the
French, on account of his attachment to the Im-
perial party, and he foresaw that, if they were
permitted to gather itrength in Siena, Tuscany
would soon feel the effeds of their refeotment.
For these reasons, he wished with the utmost
solicitude for the expulsion of the French out of
the Sienefe, before they had time to eftablith
themselves thoroughly in the country, or to re-
Leive such reinforcements from France as would
render it dangerous to attack them. As this,
however, was properly the emperor's business,
who was called by his interest as well as honour
to dislodge those formidable intruders into the
heart of his dominions, Cosmo laboured to throw
the whole burden of the enterprize on him; and
on that account had given no assistance, during
the former campaign, but by advancing some
small sums of money towards the payment of
the Imperi.l troops.

But as the defence of the Netherlands engrossed

all the emperor's attention, and his remittances
into England had drained his treasury, it was
obvious that his operations in Italy would be
extremely feeble; and Cosmo plainly perceived,

N3 that

war, and aa with vigour, the French woula
scarcely meet with any annoyance. As his situ.
ation rendered this resolution necessary and un-
avoidable, his next care was to execute it in such
a manner, that he might derive from it some other
advantage, beside that of driving the French out
of his neighbourhood. With this view, he dif.
patched an envoy to Charles, offering to declare
war againit France, and to reduce Siena at his
own charges, on condition that he should be re-
paid whatever he should expend in the enterprize4
and be permitted to retain all his conquests until
his demands were fully satisfied. Charles, to
whom, at this junaure, the war againit Siena was
an intolerable burden, and who had neither ex-
pedient nor resource that could enable him to
carry it on with proper vigour, closed gladly with
this overture; andCofmo, well acquainted withthe
low ilate of the Imperial finances, flattered himi
seif that the emperor, finding it impossible to re.
imburfe him, would fuffer him to keep quiet
poffeffion of whatever places he should conquer d.

Full of these hopes, he made great prepara.

tions for war, and as the French king had turned
the fitrength of his arms againif the Netherlands,
he did not despair of assembling such a body of
men as would prove more than a fufficient match
for any force which Henry could bring into the
field in Italy. He endeavoured, by giving one
of his daughters to the pope's nephew, to obtain
assistance from the holy fee, or at least to secure
his remaining neutral. He attempted to detach

r Adriani Iitoria dc fuol Tempi, vol. i 66z.

the

attached to the French party, from his ancient
confederates, by beftowing on him another of his
daughters ; and what was of greater consequence
than either of these, he engaged John James
Medecino, marquis of Marignano, to take the
command of his army e. This officer, from a very
low condition in life, had raised himself, through
all the ranks of service, to high command, and
bad displayed talents, and acquired reputation in
war, which entitled him to be placed on a level
with the greatest generals in that martial age.
Having attained a ifation of eminence so dif-
proportionate to his birth, he laboured with a
fond solicitude to conceal his original obscurity,
by giving out that he was descended of the family
of Medici, to which honour the casual refem-
blance of his name was his only pretension.
Cosmo, happy that he could gratify him at such
an easy rate, flattered his vanity in this point,
acknowledged him as a relation, and permitted
him to assume the arms of his family : Medecino,
eager to serve the head of that family of which
he now considered himself as a branch, applied
with wonderful zeal and assiduity to raise troops;
and as, during his long service, he had acquired
great credit with the leaders of those mercenary
bands which formed the strength of Italian
armies, he engaged the most eminent of them to
follow Cofmo's Rtandard.

To oppose this able general, and the formi-

dable army which he had assembled, the king of
France made choice of Peter Strozzi, a Floren-

*Adriani lIoria, vol. i. p. 663.

tine

tine nobleman, who had resided long in France
as an exile, and who had risen by his merit to
high reputation, as well as command in the army.
He was the son of Philip Strozzi, who, in the
year one thousand five hundred and thirty-feven,
had concurred with such ardour in the attempt
to expel the family of Medici out of Florence,
in order to re-establish the ancient republican
form of government; and who had perished in
the undertaking. The son inherited the impla-
cable aversion to the Medici, as well as the fame
enthusiastic zeal for the liberty of Florence, which
had animated his father, whose death he was im-
patient to revenge. Henry flattered himself that
his army would make rapid progress under a ge-
neral whose zeal to promote his interest was rouTed
and seconded by such powerful passions; efpe.
cially as he had allotted him, for the feene of
aaion, his native country, in which he had many
powerful partisans, ready to facilitate all his
operations.

But how specious soever the motives might

appear which induced Henry to make his choice,
it proved fatal to the interests of France in Italy.
Cosmo, as Coon as he heard that the mortalenemy
of his family was appointed to take the command
in Tuscany, concluded that the king of France
aimed at something more than the protedion of
the Sienefe, and saw the necessity of making ex-
traordinary efforts, not merely to reduce Siena,
but to save himself from deitrudion f. At the
fame time, the cardinal of Ferrara, who had the
entire direaion of the French affairs in Italy,

t Pecci Memorie di Siera, vol. iv. p. 1og, &c.

considered

and in order to prevent his acquiring any increase
of authority from success, he was extremely re-
miss in supplying him either with money to pay
his troops, or with provisions to support them.
Stroz zi himself, blinded by his resentment againRc
the Medici, pushed on his operations with the
impetuosity of revenge, rather than with the
caution and prudence becoming a great general.

At first, however, he attacked several towns

in the territory of Florence with such vigour as
obliged Medecino, in order to check his progress,
to withdraw the. greater part of his army from
Siena, which he had invested before Strozzi's
arrival in Italy. As Cosmo fuflained the whole
burden of military operations, the expence of
which must soon have exhausted his revenues;
as neither the viceroy of Naples nor governor of
Milan were in condition to afford him any effec-
tual aid; and as the troops which Medecino had
left in the camp before Siena could attempt no-
thing against it during his absence; it was
Strozzi's business to have protraded the war,
and to have transferred the feat of it into the
territories of Florence; but the hope of ruining
his enemy by one deciiive blow, precipitated him
into a general engagement [AugufV 3] not far
from Marciano. The armies were nearly equal
in number; but a body of Italian cavalry, in
which Strozzi placed great confidence, having
fled without making any refifance, either through
the treachery or cowardice of the officers who
commanded it, his infantry remained exposed to
the attacks of all Medecino's troops. Encou-
raged, however, by Strozzi's presence and ex.

ample,

ample, who, after receiving a dangerous wound
in endeavouring to rally the cavalry, placed him.
(elf at the head of the infantry, and manifested
an admirable presence of mind, as well as extra.
ordinary valour, they Rtood their ground with
great firmness, and repulsed such of the enemy as
ventured to approach them. But those gallant
troops being surrounded at lai't on every fide, and
torn in pieces by a battery of cannon whiclh
Medecino brought to bear upon them, the Flo.
rentine cavalry broke in on their flanks, and a
general route ensued. Strozzi, faint with the
ltfs of blood, and deeply affeaed with the fatal
consequences of his own rashness, found the utmost
difficulty in making his escape with a handful of
men P.

Medecino returned immediately to the siege of

Siena with his viaorious forces, and as Strozzi
could not, after the greatest efforts of adivity,
collea as many men as to form the appearance
of a regular army, he had leisure to carry on his
approaches againit the town without moleffation.
But the Sienefe, initead of sinking into despair
upon this cruel disappointment of their only hope
of obtaining relief, prepared to defend themselves
to the utmost extremity, with that undaunted
fortitude which the love of liberty alone can in.
spire. This generous resolution was warmly
seconded by Monluc, who commanded the French
garrison in the town. The aaive and enter-
prifing courage which he had displayed on man7
occaiions, had procured him this command;
and as he had ambition which aspired at the
bigheft military dignities, without any pretensions

S Pecci Memorie della Siena, vol. iv, p. I55.

to

merit, he determined to diftinguilh his defence
of Siena by extraordinary efforts of valour and
perseverance. For this purpose, he repaired
and strengthened the fortifications with unwea.
ried induitry; he trained the citizens to the use
ofarms, and accuflomed them to go through the
fatigues and dangers of service in common with
the soldiers; and as the enemy were extremely
fInrit in guarding all the avenues to the city, he
hufbanded the provisions in the magazines with
the most parsimonious <economy, and prevailed
on the soldiers, as well as the citizens, to reftria
themselves to a very moderate daily allowance
for their fubfiltence. Medecino, though his
army was not numerous enough to form the
town by open force, ventured twice to assault it
by surprise; but he was received each time with
so much spirit, and repulsed with such loss, as
discouraged him from repeating the attempt,
and left him no hopes of reducing the town but
by famine.

With this view he fortified his own camp with

great care, occupied all the polls of strength
round the place, and having entirely cut off the
besieged from any communication with the ad-
jacent country, he waited patiently until necef.
fity Ihould compel them to open their gates.

ut their enthufialic teal for liberty made the
citizens despise the difreffes occasioned by the
fearcity of provisions, and supported them long
under all the mileries of famine: Monluc, by
his example and exhortations, taught his fol-
diers to vie with them in patience and abitinence;
and it .w as not netil they had withiftood a siege of

of ten months, until they had eaten up all the
horses, dogs, and other animals in the place,
and were reduced almost to their last mofel of
bread, that they proposed a capitulation [s555].
Even then they demanded honourable terms;
and as Cosmo, though no firanger to the extre-
mity of their condition, was afraid that despair
might prompt them to venture upon some wild
enterprize, he immediately granted them con.
ditions more favourable than they could have ex-
peded.

April 22.] The capitulation was made in the

emperor's name, who engaged to take the re-
public of Siena under the proteaion of the em-
pire ; he promised to maintain the ancient liber-
ties of the city, to allow the magistrates the full
exercise of their former authority, to secure the
citizens in the undisturbed poffeffion of their pri.
vileges and property; he granted an ample and
unlimited pardon to all who had borne arms
again{t him; he reserved to himself the right
of placing a garrison in the town, but engaged
not to rebuild the citadel without the consent
of the citizens. Monluc and his French garri-
son were allowed to march out with all the
honours of war.

Medecino observed the articles of capitula-

tion, as far as depended on him, with great
exaanefs. No violence -or insult whatever
was offered to the inhabitants, and the French
garrison was treated with all the refpea due
to their spirit and bravery. But many of
the citizens fufpeAing, from the extraordinary
facility with which they had obtained such fa-
vourable conditions, that the emperor, as well

z as

violating them, and dildaining to possess a pre-
carious liberty, which depended on the will of
another, abandoned the place of their nativity,
and accompanied the French to MontE-Alcino,
Porto Ercole, and other imall towns in the ter-
ritory of the republic. They established in
Mont6-Alcino, the fame model of government
to which they had been accustomed at Siena,
and appointing magifftrates with the fame titles
and jurifdi&ion, solaced themselves with this
image of their ancient liberty.

The fears of the Sienefe concerning the fate

of their country were not imaginary, or their
suspicion of the emperor and Cosmo ill founded;
for no sooner had the Imperial troops taken pof-
session of the town, than Cosmo, without re-
garding the articles of capitulation, not only
displaced the magifdrates who were in office, and
nominated new ones devoted to his own interest,
but commanded all the citizens to deliver up
their arms to persons whom he appointed to re-
ceive them. They submitted to the former
from necessity, though with all the relueance
and regret which men accustomed to liberty
feel in obeying the first commands of a mailer.
They did not yield the fame tame obedience to
the latter; and many persons of diftinaion,
rather than degrade themselves from the rank of
freemen to the condition of slaves by surrender-
ing their arms, fled to their countrymen at
MontC-Alcino, and chose to endure all the hard-
ships, and encounter all the dangers which they
had reason to expe& in that new Ration, where
they had fixed the feat of their republic.

vOL. IV. o Cosmo,

such numbers of implacable and desperate ene-
mies were fettled in his neighbourhood, and re-
tained any degree of power, solicited Medecino
to attack them in their different places of retreat,
before they had time to recruit their firengrh
and spirits, after the many calamities whichthey
had fuffered. He prevailed on him, though his
army was much weakened by hard duty during
the siege of Siena, to invest Porto Ercole; and
the fortifications being both flight and incom-
plete, the besieged were soon compelled to open
their gates [June 13]. An unexpeAed order,
which Medecino received from the emperor to
detach the greater part of his troops into Pied.
mont, prevented farther operations, and per.
sitted the Sienefe exiles to reside for some time
indifturbed in Montd-Alcino. But their un-
happy countrymen who remained at Siena were
not yet at the end of their fufferings; for the
emperor, inifead of .adhering to the articles of
capitulation, granted his son Philip the investiture
of that city and all its dependencies; and Francis
de Toledo, in the name of their new mailer,
proceeded to fettle the civil and military govern-
ment, treated them like a conquered people, and
fubjeded them to the Spanilh yoke, without
paying any regard whatever to their privileges or
ancient form of government h

The Imperial army in Piedmont had been so

feeble for some time, and its commander so inac.

"Sleid. 617- Thuan. lib. xv. 526. 537. J0oa. Cane-

rariiadnot. rer. priecipuarum ab anno 5550 ad a 6s 14p.
Freherum, vol. iii, p. 564. Pecci Iqmgrie dclls Siena, iv.
64, &cc. dtie,

tive, that the emperor, in order to give vigous
to his operations in that quarter, found it ne.
ceffary not only to recal Medecino's troops from
Tuscany, while in the career of conquest, but to
employ in Piedmont a general of such reputation
and abilities, as might counterbalance the great
military talents of the marechal Briffac, who
was at the head of the French forces in that
country.

He pitched on the duke of Alva for that

purpose; but that choice was as much the effe&
of a court intrigue, as of his opinion with refpe&
to the duke's merit. Alva had long made court
to Philip with the utmolt assiduity, and had en路
deavoured to work himself into his confidence
by all the insinuating arts of which his haughty
and inflexible nature was capable. As he nearly
refemtabled that prince in many features of his
ehara&er, he began to gain much of his good.
will. Ruy Gomez de Silva, Philip's favourite,
who dreaded the progress which this formidable
tival made in his mafter's affeaions, had the
address to prevail with the, emperor to natme Alva
to this command. The duke, though sensible
that he owed this diftinaion to the malicious arts
of an enemy, who had no other aim than to re-
move him at a difitance from court, was of such
punailious honour, that he would not decline a
command that appeared dangerous and difficult,
but, at the fame time, was so haughty, that he
would not accept of it but on his own terms, in
fifing on being appointed the emperor's vicar-
general in Italy, with the supreme military com-
mand in all the Imperial and Spanish territories
in that country. Charles granted all his de-

o mands;

nity with almost unlimited authority.

His firNt operations, however, were neither

proportioned to his former reputation and the
extensive powers with which he was invefited,
nor did they come up to the emperor's expeaa.
tions. Briffac had under his command an army
which, though inferior in number to the Im.
perialifts, was composed of chosen troops, which
having grown old in service in that country,
where every town was fortified, and every cafle
capable of being defended, were perfealy ac-
quainted with the manner of carrying on war
there. By their valour, and his own good con.
du&, Briffac not only defeated all the attempts
of the Imperialists, but added new conquests to
the territories of which he was formerly master.
Alva, after having boasted, with his usual ar-
rogance, that he would drive the French out of
Piedmont, in a few weeks, was obliged to re-
tire into winter-quarters, with the mortification
of being unable to preserve entire -that part of
the country of which the emperor had hitherto
kept poffeffion i.

As the operations of this campaign in Pied-

mont were indecisive, those in the Netherlands
were inconsiderable, neither the emperor nor
king of France being able to bring into the fieW
an army frhong enough to undertake any enter.
prize of moment. But what Charles wanted in
force, he endeavoured to supply by a bold fira-
tagem, the success of which would have been

i Thuan. lib. xv. 529. .Guichenon Hilt. de Savoye, tom.

equal

equal to that of the most vigorous campaign.
During the siege of Metz, Leonard, father
guardian of a convent of Franciscans in that
city, had insinuated himself far into the esteem
and favour of the duke of Guise, by his attach.
ment to the French. Being a man of an aaive
and intriguing spirit, he had been extremely
useful both in animating the inhabitants to
fuflain with patience all the hardships of the
siege, and in procuring intelligence of the ene-
mies designs and motions. The merit of those
important services, together with the warm re-
commendations of the duke of Guise, secured
him such high confidence with Vielleville, who
was appointed governor of Metz when Guise
left the town, that he was permitted to con.
verse or correspond with whatever persons he
thought fit, and nothing that he did created
any suspicion. This monk, from the levity na-
tural to bold and projeding adventurers; or from
resentment againit the French, who had not
bestowed on him such rewards as he thought due
to his own merit; or tempted by the unlimited
confidence which was placed in him, to imagine
that he might carry on and accomplish any
scheme with perfea security, formed a design of
betraying Metz to the Imperialists.

He communicated his intention to the queen-

dowager of Hlungary, who governed the Low-
Countries in the name of her brother. She ap-
proving, without any scruple, an ad of treachery,
rom which the emperor might derive such signal
advantage, assisted the father guardian in con-
certing the most proper plan for insuring its fuc.
cess. They* agreed, that the father guardiap

03 ihould

promoting the deiign; that he Ihould introduce
into the convent a certain number of chosen
soldiers, disguised in the habit of friars; that
when every thing was ripe for execution, the
governor of Thionville should march towards
Metz in the night with a considerable body of
troops, and attempt to scale the ramparts; that
while the garrison was employed in resisting the
assailants, the monks should set fire to the town
in different places; that the soldiers who lay
concealed (hould sally out of the convent, and
attack those who defended the ramparts in the
rear. Amidit the universal terror and confusion
which events so unexpeaed would occasion, it
was not doubted but that the Imperialists might
become maiters of the town. As a recompence for
this service the father guardian ilipulated that he
lhould be appointed bishop of Metz, and ample
rewards were promised to such of his monks as
lhould be most aaive in co-operating with him.

The father guardian accomplilhed what he had

undertaken to perform with great secrecy and
dispatch. By his authority and arguments, as
well as by the profpe& of wealth or honours
which he set before his monks, he prevailed on
all of them to enter into the conspiracy. He in.
troduced into the convent, without being fu.
peded, as many soldiers as were thought sus-
cient. The governor of Thionville, apprized in
due time of the design, had assembled a proper
number of troops for executing it; and the mo-
ment approached, which probably would have
wrefited from Henry the mo3t important of all
his conquets. But,

But, happily for France, on the very day that

was fixed for firiking the blow, Vielleville, an
able and vigilant officer, received information
from a spy whom he entertained at Thionville,
that certain Francifean friars resorted frequently
thither, and were admitted to many private con-
ferences with the governor, who was carrying on
preparations for some military enterprize with
great dispatch, but with a moa mysterious
secrecy. This was fufficient to awaken Vielle-
ville's suspicions. Without communicating these
to any person, he initantly visited the convent of
Franciscans; dete&ed the soldiers who were
concealed there; and forced them to discover as
much as they knew concerning the nature of the
enterprize. The father guardian, who had gone
to Thionville that he might put the last hand to
his machinations, was seized at the gate as he
returned; and he, in order to save himself from
the rack, revealed all the circumiances of the
conspiracy.

Vielleville, not satisfied with having seized

the traitors, and having frustrated their chemes,
was solicitous to take advantage of the difeove-
ries which he had made, so as to be revenged on
the Imperialists. For this purpose he marched
out with the best troops in his garrison, and
placing these in ambush near the road, by which
the father guardian had informed him that the
governor of Thionville would approach Metz,
he fell upon the Imperialists with great fury, as
they advanced in perse& security, without sus-
pe~ting any danger to be near. Confounded at
this sudden attack, by an enemy whom they ex路
peted to surprise, they made little resistance;

and

and a great part of the troops employed in this
service, among whom were many persons of dil-
tination, was killed or taken prisoners. Before
next morning, Vielleville returned to Meta in
triumph.

No resolution was taken for some time con.

cerning the fate of the father guardian and his
monks, the framers and conduaors of this dan-
gerous conspiracy. Regard for the honour of
a body so numerous and refpecable as the Fran-
cifcans, and unwillingness to afford a fubjeA of
triumph to the enemies of the Romish church by
their disgrace, seem to have occasioned this de-
lay. But at length, the necessity of infliaing
exemplary punishment upon them, in order to
deter others from venturing to commit the fame
crime, became so evident, that orders were issued
to proceed to their trial. The guilt was made
apparent by the clearest evidence; and sentence
of death was passed upon the father guardian,
together with twenty monks. On the evening
previous to the day fixed for their execution, the
gaoler took them out of the dungeons in which
they had hitherto been confdned separately, and
Ihut them all up in one great room, that they
might confess their fins one to another, and
join tog'ether in preparing for a fintm'e date.
But as fdon as they were left alone, inicad
of employing therstfelves in the religious exer-
eife's suitable to thtir condition, they began
to reproach the father g~uardian, and four of the
fieiior 'monks who had been most aftive in fe-
hicing them, for their inordinate ambition, which
-had brought such misery on them, and such dif-
grace upon their order. From reproaches they

proceedfd

proceeded to curses and execrations, and at last,
in a frenzy of rage and despair, they fell upon
them with such violence, that they murdered the
father guardian on the spot, and so disabled thp
other four, that it became necessary to carry
them next morning in a cart, together with the
dead body of the father guardian, to the place
of execution. Six of the youngest were pardon.
ed, the reft fuffered the punilhment which their
crime merited kJ

Though both parties, exhauffed by the length

of the war, carried it on in this languishing man-
ner, neither of them fhewed any dilpefition to
listen to overtures of peace. Cardinal Pole in-
deed laboured with all the zeal becoming his
piety and humanity, to re-establish concord
among the princes of Chrif'endom. He had
not only persuaded his mistress, the queen of
England, to enter warmly into his sentiments,
and to offer her mediation to the contending
powers, but had prevailed both on the emperor
and king of France to fend their plenipoten.
tiaries to a village between Gravelines and
Ardres. He himself, together with Gardiner
bishop of Winchester, repaired thither in order
to preside as mediators in the conferences which
were to be held for adjusting all the points iii
difference. But though each of the monarchs
committed this negotiation to some of the mini.
hiers, in whom they placed the greatest confi-
dence, it was soon evident that they came to-
gether with no sincere desire of accommodation.

k Thuan. lib. xv. p. Szz. Belcar. Corn. Rer. Gal. 866.

Memoirs du Marech. Vielleville, par M. Charloix, tom.n i.
p. 9, &Sc. p. 347. Par. 1757.[May

[May z13 Each proposed articles so ertravagant
that they could have no hopes of their being ao.
cepted. Pole, after exerting in vain all his
teal and address, in order to persuade them tj
relinquish such extravagant demands, and to
consent to the substitution of more equal condi'
tions, became sensible of the folly of xafiing
tune, in attempting to re-efitablifh concord be6
tween those whom their obitinacy rendered ir.
reconcilable, broke off the conference, and re.
turned to England!.

Drring these tranfadions in other parts of

Europe, Germany enjoyed such profound tran.
quillity, as afforded the diet full leisure to deli.
berate, and to establish proper regulations con.
cerning a point of the greatest confequenee to
The internal peace of the empire. By the treaty
of Paffau in one thousand five hundred and fifty.
two, it had been referred to the next diet of the
empire to confirm and perfea the plan of religi.
ous pacification, which was there agreed upon.
The terror and confusion with which the violent
commotions excited by Albert of Brandenburg
had filled Germany, as well as the constant at-
tention which Ferdinand was obliged to give tW
the affairs of Hungary, had hitherto prevented
the holding a diet, though it had been funr.
moned, soon after the conclusion of the treaty,
to meet at Augfiburg.

But as a diet was now necessary on many ad.

counts, Ferdinand about the beginning of this
year had repaired to Augsburg. Though few
of the princes were prelent either in person or

r Thuan, lib. xv. p. 5a3* Medm. de Ribier, tom.ii.

P. 613.

by their deputies, he opened the assembly by a
speech, in which he propafed a termination of
the dissensions to which the new tenets and con-
troverfies with regard to religion had given rife,
not only as the firfi and great business of the diet,
but as the point which both the emperor and he
had moit atheart. He reprefentedthe innumerable
obitacles which the emperor had to surmount
before he could procure the convocation of g
general council, as well as the fatal accidents
which had for some time retarded, and had at
last suspended the consultations of that assembly.
He observed, that experience had already taught
them how vain it was to expea any remedy for
evils which demanded immediate redress from a
general council, the assembling of which would
either be prevented, or its deliberations be inter-
iupted by the diffeniions and hostilities of the
princes of Christendom: that a national council
in Germany, which, as fume imagined, might
be called with greater ease, and deliberate with
inore perfed security, was an assembly of an un-
precedented nature, the j urifdi&ion of which wae
uncertain in its extent, and the form of its pro-
ceedings undefined: that in his opinion there
remained but one method for composing their
unhappy differences, which, though it had been
often tried without success, might yet prove es-
feaual if it were attempted with a better and more
pacific spirit than had appeared on former occa-
.ions, and that was to choose afew men of learn-
ing, abilities, and moderation, who, by discussing
the disputed articles, in an amicable conference,
路might explain them in Lucli h na er as to bring

3 tl

ment, or to differ with charity.

This speech being printed in common form,

and dispersed over the empire, revived the fears
andjealoufnes of the protestants; Ferdinand, they
observed with much surprise, had not once men-
tioned, in his address to the diet, the treaty of
Paffau, the flipulations which they considered as
the great security of their religious liberty. The
fufpncions to which this gave rife were confirmed
by the accounts which they daily received of the
extreme severity with which Ferdinand treated
their protefitant brethren in his hereditary domi.
nions; and, as it was natural to confider his ac-
tions as the surest indication of his intentions,
.this diminifhied their confidence in those pompous
profeffions of moderation and of zeal for the re-
establishment of concord, to which his pra8ice
seemed to be so repugnant.

The arrival of the cardinal Morone, whom

the pope had appointed to attend the diet as his
nuncio, completed their convidtion, and left
them no room to doubt that some dangerous
machination was forming against the peace or
:safety of the protefitant church. Julius, elated
with the unexpeded return of the English na-
tion from apostasy, began to flatter himself,
that the spirit of mutiny and revolt having now
spent its force, the happy period was come when
the church might resume its ancient authority,
and be obeyed by the people with the fame tame
submission as formerly. Full of these hopes he
had sent Morone to Augsburg, with infitru8ions
to employ his eloquence to excite the Germans to

imitate

imitate the laudable example of the Englimh, and
his political address in order to prevent any de-
cree of the diet to the detriment of the catholicj
faith. As Morone inherited from his father,
the chancellor of Milan, uncommon talents for
negotiation and intrigue, he could hardly have
failed of embarralliug the measures of the pro.
teftants in the dies1 or of defeating whatever
they aimed at obtaining in it for their farther fe-
curity.

But an unforeseen event delivered them from

all the danger which they had reason to appre-
hend from Morone's presence. Julius, by aban-
doning himElif to pleasures and amusements, no
less unbecoming his age than his charaaer, hav-
ing contradeed such habits of dissipation, that
any serious occupation, especially if attended
with difficulty, became an intolerable burden to
him, had long relifited the folicitations of his
nephew to hold a confiftury, because he expeded
there a violent opposition to his fehemes in favour
of that young man. But when all the pretexts
which he cocild invent for eluding this requelt
were exhaulted, and at the fame time his jido-
lent aversion to bufincfs continued to grow upom
him, he feigned indisposition rather than yield tq
his nephew s importunity; and that he mIght
give the deceit the greater colour of probabihty,
he not only confined himself to his apartment,
but changed his usual diet and manner of life.
By persisting too long in aaing this ridiculots
part, he contraded a real difeufe, of which he
died in a few days [March 23], leaving his in-
famous minion tile cardinal de Monte to bear
his name, and to difgraq the dignity which he

vOL. Iv. phad

heard of his death, he set out abruptly from
Augsburg, where he had resided only a few days,
that he might be present at the ele&ion of a new

pontiff. One cause of their suspicions and fears being
thus removed, the proteflants soon became fen-
fible that their conjedures concerning Ferdi-
niand's intentions, however specious, were ill-
founded, and that he had no thoughts of violating
the articles favourable to them in the treaty of
Paffau. Charles, from the time that Maurice
had defeated all his schemes in the empire, and
overturned the great system of religious and civil
despotism, which he had almost established there,
gave little attention to the internal government
of Germany, and permitted his brother to pursue
whatever measures he judged most salutary and
expedient. Ferdinand, lefa ambitious and enter-
prsfing than the emperor, initead of resuming a
plan which he, with power and resources so far
superior had failed of accomplishing, endeavoured
to attach the princes of the empire to his family
by an adminifiration uniformly moderate and
equitable. To this he gave, at present, parti-
cular attention, because his situation at this
jundure rendered it necessary to court their
favour and support with more than usual al-i.
duity.

Charles had again resumed his favourite pro-

jed of acquiring the Imperial crown for his. son
Philip, the prosecution of which, the reception

' Onuphr. Panvinius de Vitis Pontifcums, p.; o.

Thuan. isb. xv. 5' t

him to suspend, but had not induced him to re-
linquilh. This led him warmly to renew his re-
quelt to his brother that he would accept of
some compensation for his prior right ot fuccef-
sion, and sacrifice that to the grandeur of the
house ofAultria. Ferdinand, who was as little
disposed as formerly to give such an extraordinary
proof of feif-denial, being sensible that, in order
to defeat this scheme, not only the most inflexible
firmnels on his part, but a vigorous declaration
from the princes of the empire in behalf of his
title, were requilite, was willing to purchase their
favour by gratifying them in every point that they
deemed interefling or essential.

At the fame time he flood in need of imme-

diate and extraordinary aid from the Germanic
body, as the Turks, after having wrefied from
him great part of his Hungarian territories,
were ready to attack the provinces ltill fobje& to
his authority with a formidable army, againit
which he could bring no equal force into the
field. For this aid from Germany he could not
hope, if the internal peace of the empire were
not eltablifhed on a foundation solid in itself, and
which should appear, even to the proteioants, so
secure and so permanent, as might not only allow
them to engage in a diitant war with safety, but
might encourage them to a& in it with yvgour.

A itep taken by the protestants themselves, a

lhort time after the opening of the diet, rendered
him lill more cautious of giving them any new
cause of offence. As soon as the publication of
Ferdinand's speech awakened the fears and sus-
picions which have been mentioned, the eledors

Pa of

of Satony and Brandenburgh, together with the
landgrave of Hesse, met at Naumburgh, and con.
firming the ancient treaty of confraternity which
had long united their families, they added to it a
new article, by which the contrading parties
bound themselves to adhere to the confeflion of
Augsburg, and to maintain the doarine which it
contained in their refpeaive dominions '.

Ferdinand, influenced by all these confidera-

tions, employed his utmost address in condoding
the deliberations of the dirt, to as not to excite
the jealousy of a party on whokh friendship he
depended, and whose enmcity, as they had not
cnly taken the alarm, but had begun to prepare
for their defence, he had so much reason to dread.
The members of the diet readily agreed to Ser-
dinand's proposal of taking the slate of religion
into consideration, previous to any other bufinels.
But as soon as they entered upon it, both par-
ties discovered all the zeal and animosity which a
subjeCt o interesting naturally engenders, and
w'hich the rancour of controversy, together with
the violence of civil war, had inlamed to the
higher pitch.

The protefants contended, that the security

which they claimed in confeluence of the treaty
of Paffan ilould extend, without limitation, to
all who had hitherto embraced die do~trine of
Luther, or who should hereafter embrace it.
The catholics, having first of all asserted the
pope's right as the fapreme and final judge with
reipedt to all articles of faith, declared, that
though, on account of the present situation of

a Chytriel Saeonia, 48O.

the

willing to confirm the toleration granted by the
treaty of Paffau, to such as had already adopted
the new opinions; they must insist that this in-
dulgence should not be extended either to those
cities which had conformed to the Interim, or to
such ecclefiaftics as lhould for the future apofta.
tife from the church of Rome. It was no easy
matter to reconcile such opposite pretensions,
which were supported, on each fide, by the most
elaborate arguments, and the greatest acrimony
of exprdfion, that the abilities or zeal of theolo-
gians long exercised in disputation could suggest.
Ferdinand, however, by his address and perse-
verance; by softening fume things on each fide;
by putting a favourable meaning upon others;
by representing incessantly the neceflity as well
as the advantages of concord; and by threaten-
ing, on fume occasions, when all other confider-
ations were disregarded, to dissolve the diet,
brought them at length to a conclusion in which
they all agreed.

Conformably to this, a recess was framed, ap-

proved of, and published with the usual for.
malities [Sept. 25]. The following are the chief
articles which it contained: That such princes
and cities as have declared their approbation of
the confeflion of Augsburg, shall be permitted
to profess the do.rrine and exercise the worship
which it authorises, without interruption or mo-
lefitation from the emperor, the king of the Ro-
mans, or any power or person whatsoever; That
the protestants, on their part, lhall give no dif.
quiet to the princes and states who adhere to the
tenets and rites of the-church of Rome; That,

P3 for

for the future, no attempt shall be made towards
terminating religious differences, but by the gen-
tie and pacific methods of persuasion and con-
ference; That the popith ecclefiaftics ihall claim
no spiritual jurifdition in such Rtates as receive
the confeflion of Augsburg; That fiich as had
seized the benefices or revenues of the church,
previous to the treaty of Paffau, (hall retain pof-
session of them, and be liable to no prosecution in
the Imperial chamber on that account; That the
Supreme civil power in every fRate (hall have
right to establish what form of doarine and
worfnip it (hall deem proper, and if any ofits
fubjecds refuse to conform to these, (hail permit
them to remove with all their effeas whither.
soever they hall please ; That if any prelate or
tcclefiaftic (ball hereafter abandon the Romith
religion, he (hall instantly relinquish his diocese
or benefice, and it (hall be lawful for those in
whom the right of nomination is vefied, to
proceed immediately to an ele&ion, as if the
office were vacant by death or translation, and
to appoint a ficceffor of undoubted attachment
to the ancient fyfitem 0.

Such are the capital articles in this famous

recess, which is the basis of religions peace in
Germany, and the bond of union among its va.
rious fates, the fenriments of which are so ex-
trremely difftrent with refpec? to points the mout
interesting as wellas important. In our age and
nation, to which the idea of toleration is familiar,
ndl its benefcial effeas well known, it may seem
ferange, that a method of terminating their dif.

SSleid.4no. rF.Paulg fe

Palinf.oP.ss. 6,.

3 fenfions,

spirit of the Christian religion, did not sooner
occur to the contending parties. But this ex-
pedient, however salutary, was so repugnant to
the sentiments and praaice of Christians during
many ages, that it did not lie obvious to disco-
very. Among the ancient heathens, all whose
deities were local and tutelary, diversity of senti-
ment concerning the obje& or rites of religious
worship seems to have been no source of animo-
fity, because the acknowledging veneration to be
due to any one God, did not imply denial of the
exidence or the power of any other God; nor
were the modes and rites of worship eitablified
in one country incompatible with those which
other nations approved of and observed. Thus
the errors in their system of theology were of
such a nature as to be produdtive of concord;
and notwithiflanding the amazing number of their
deities, as well as the infinite variety of their cere-
monies, a sociable and tolerating spirit subsisted
almost universally in the pagan woild.

But when the Chriltian revelation declared

one Supreme Being to be the sole objea of reli-
gious veneration, and prescribed the form of
worlhip mod acceptable to him, whoever admit-
ted the truth of it held, of consequence, every
other system of religion, as a deviation from
what was eftablifled by divine authority, to be
false and impious. Hence arose the zeal of the
irit converts to the Chriflian faith in propagating
its dodrines, and the ardour with which they
hhbonrtd to overturn every other form of wirfhip.
They employed, however, for this purpose, no
mnthods but such as suited the nature of religion. By

By the force of powerful arguments, they con-
vinced the understandings of men ; by the charms
of superior virtue, they allured and captivated
their hearts. At length the civil power declarul
in favour of Chrifianmty ; and though numbers,
imitating the example of their superiors, crowded
into the church, many flill adhered to their an-
cient superstitions. Enraged at their obitinacy,
the ministers of religion, whose zeal was still
unabated, though their fandity and virtue were
much diminished, forgot so far the nature of their
own mission, and of the arguments which they
ought to have employed, that they armed the
Imperial power againit these unhappy men, and
as they could not persuade, they tried to compel
them to believe.

At the fame time, controversies concerning

articles of faith multiplied, from various causes,
among Christians themselves, and the fame unhal-
lowed weapons which had first been used against
the enemies of their religion, were turned against
each other. Every zealous disputant endeavoured
to interei' the civil magistrate in his cause, and
each in his turn employed the secular arm to
crush or to exterminate his opponents. Not
long after, the bishops of Rome put in their
claim to infallibility in explaining articles of faith,
and deciding points in controversy; and, bold
as the pretension was, they, by their artifices and
perseverance, imposed on the credulity of man-
kind, and brought them to recognise it. To
doubt or to deny any dodrine to which these
unerring infiruaors had given the fanaion of
their approbation, was held to be not only a re-
sifting of truth, but an aa of rebellion again{t their

of which by various arts they had acquired the
ahfolute direaion, was inifantly employed to
avenge both.

Thus Europe had been accustomed, during

many centuries, to fee speculative opinions pro-
pagated or defended by force; the charity and
mutual forbearance which Christianity recom-
mends with so much warmth, were forgotten,
the sacred rights of conscience and of private
judgment were unheard of, and not only the idea
of toleration, but even the word itself, in the
sense now affixed to it, was unknown. A right
to extirpate error by force was universally allow-
ed to be the prerogative of such as pofieffed the
knowledge of truth; and as each party of Christ-
isns believed that they had got poffeffion of this
invaluable attainment, they all claimed and exer-
cifed, as far as they were able, the rights which
it was supposed to convey. The Roman catho-
lies, ts their system rested on the decisions of am
infallible judge, never doubted that truth was on
their fide, and openly called on the civil power
to repel the impious and heretical innovators
who had risen up against it. The protestants,
no less confident that their do&trine was well
founded, required, with equal ardour, the princes
of their party to check such as presumed to im-
pugn it. Luther, Calvin, Cranmer, Knox, 'the
founders of the reformed church in their refpec.
tive countries, as far as they had power and op.
portunity, inflited the fame punishments upon
such as called in question any article in their
creeds, which were denounced against their own
disciples .by the church of Rome. To their

followers,

followers, and perhaps to their opponents, it
would have appeared a symptom of diffidence in
the goodness of their cause, or an acknowledg-
ment that it was not well founded, if they had
not employed in its defence allthofe means which
it was supposed truth had a right to employ.

It was towards the close of the seventeenth

century before toleration, under its present form,
was admitted first into the republic of the United
Provinces, and from thence introduced into
England. Long experience of the calamities
flowing from mutual persecution, the influence
of free government, the light and humanity ac.
quired by the progress of science, together with
the prudence and authority of the civil magif-
trate, were all requisite in order to establish a
regulation, so repugnant to the ideas which all
the different fefts had adopted, from mistaken
conceptions concerning the nature of religion and
the rights of truth, or which all of them had
derived from the erroneous maxims established by
the church of Rome.

The recess ofAugfburg, it is evident, waas

founded on no such liberal and enlarged senti-
ments concerning freedom of religious inquiry,
or the nature of toleration. It was nothing more
than a scheme of pacification, which political
considerations alone had suggested to the con-
tending parties, and regard for their mutual tran-
.quillity and safety had rendered necessary. Of
this there can be no stronger proof than an arti-
cle in the recess itself, by which the benefits of
the pacification are declared to extend only to
the catholics on the one fsde, and to such as ad-
hlered to the confeffion of Augsburg on the other.

The

The followers of Zuinglius and Calvin remained,
in consequence of that exclusion, without any
proteaion from the rigour of the laws denounced
againat heretics. Nor did they obtain any legal
security, until the treaty ofWeftphalia, near a
century after this period, provided, that they
ihould be admitted to enjoy, in as ample a man-
ner as the Lutherans, all the advantages and pro-
teaion which the recess of Augsburg affords.

But if the followers of Luther were highly

pleased with the security which they acquired
by this recess, such as adhered to the ancient
system had no less reason to be satisfied with
that article in it, which preserved entire to the
Roman catholic church the benefices of such
ecclefiaftics as should hereafter renounce its doc-
trines. This article, known in Germany by the
name of the Eccleiafiical Reservation, was appa-
rently so conformable to the idea and to the
rights of an established church, and it seemed so
equitable to prevent revenues, which had been
originally appropriated for the maintenance of
persons attached to a certain fyfitem, from being
alienated to any other purpose, that the protest-
ints, though they foresaw its consequences, were
obliged to relinquish their opposition to it. As
the Roman catholic princes of the empire have
taken care to fee this article exadly observed in
every cafe where there was an opportunity of
putting it in execution, it has proved the great
barrier of the Romilh church in Germany againit
the reformation; and as, from this period, the
fame temptation of interest did not allure eccle-
fiaftics to r-elinqui(h the eitablifhed system, there
have been few of that order, who have loved

truth

truth with such difintereited and ardent affearion,
as, for its fake, to abandon the rich benefices
which they had in pofl'eflion.

During the fitting of the diet [April 9, Mar-

cellus Cervino, cardinal of Santo Croce, was
eleAed pope in the room of Julius. He, in imi-
tation of Adrian, did not change his name on
being exalted to the papal chair. As he equalled
that pontiff in purity of intention, while he ex-
celled him much in the arts of government, and
itill more in knowledge of the itate and genius
of the papal court; as he had capacity to dif.
cern what reformation it needed, as well as
what it could bear; such regulations were ex-
peded from his virtue and wisdom, as would
have removed many of its grossest and mot fla-
grant corruptions,.and have contributed towards
reconciling to the church such as, from indigna.
tion at these enormities, had abandoned its com-
munion. But this excellent pontiff was only
ihewn to the church, and immediately snatched
away. The confinement in the conclave had
impaired his health, and the fatigue of tedious
ceremonies upon his accession, together with too
intense and anxious application of mind to the
schemes of improvement which he meditated,
exhausted so entirely the vigour of his feeble
conititution, that he sickened on the twelfth, and
died on the twentieth day after his eledion P.

All the refinements in artifice and intrigue,

peculiar to conclaves, were displayed in that
which was held for eleaing a successor to Mar-
cellus; the cardinals of the Imperial and French

PThupn. 52o. F.Paul, 365. Onuph. Paivin. 32s, &c.

faaions

the necessary number of fuifrages for one of their
own party. But, after a itruggle of no long dura.
tion, though conduded with all the warmth and
eagerness natural to men contending for so great
an objea, they united in chooflng John Peter
Caraffa [May 23], the eldest member of the fa-
cred college, and the son of count Montorio, a
nobleman of an illuitrious family in the kingdom
of Naples. The address and influence of car-
dinal Farnese, who favoured his pretenlions,
Caraffa's own merit, and perhaps his great age,
which soothed all the disappointed candidates
with the near profpea of a new vacancy, con.
curred in bringing about this speedy union of
fuffrages. In order to teffify his refped for the
memory of Paul III. by whom he had been
created cardinal, as well as his gratitude to
the family of Farnese, he assumed the name of
Paul IV.

The choice of a prelate of such a singular

charader, and who had long held a course ex-
tremely different from that which usually led to
the dignity now conferred upon him, filled the
Italians, who had nearest access to observe his
manners and deportment, with aftonilhment, and
kept them in suspense and solicitude with regard
to his future condua. Paul, though born in a
rank of life which, without any other merit,
might have secured to him the highefi eclefiaf
tical preferments, had, from his early years, ap.
plied to Rudy with all the afliduity of a man who
had nothing but his personal attainments to ren-
der him conspicuous. By means of this, he not
only acquired profound skill in fcholafic theo-

voL. v. v . logy,

logy, but added to that a considerable knowledge
of the learned languages and of polite literature,
the fLudy of which had been lately revived in
Italy, and was pursued at this time with great
ardour. His mind, however, naturally gloomy
and severe, was more formed to imbibe the four
spirit of the former, than to receive any tinaure
of elegance or liberality of sentiment from thd
latter; so that he acquired rather the qualities
and passions of a recluse ecciefiaftic, than the
talents necessary for the condua of great affairs.
Accordingly, when he entered into orders, ab
though several rich benefices were bestowed upon
him, and he was early employed as nuncio in
different courts, he soon became difguited with
that course of life, and languiihed to be in a situ-
ation more suited to his taste and temper. With
this view, he resigned at once all his路 ecclesiastical
preferments; and having initituted an order of
regular prieffs,. whom he denominated Theatines,
from the name of the archbishopric which he had
held, he associated himself as a member of their
fraternity, conformed to all the rigorous rules to
which he had fubjeated them, and preferred the
solitude of a monaitic life, with the honour of
being the founder of a new order, to all the
great objeas which the court of Rome presented
to his ambition.

In this retreat he remained for many years,

until Paul III. induced by the fame of his fanc-
tity and knowledge, called him to Rome, ini
order to consult with him concerning the mea-
fures which might be most proper and effeAual
for suppressing heresy, and re-establishing the
ancient authority of the church. Having thus al.

lured

lured him from his folitude,the pope, partly by his
entreaties, and partly by his authority, prevailed
on him to accept of a cardinal's hat, to re-affume
the benefices which he had resigned, and to re-
turn again into the usual path of ecclesiastical
ambition which he seemed to have relinquilhed.
But, during two successive pontificates, under the
firif of which the court of Rome was the most art-
ful and interested, and under the second the mult
dissolute of any in Europe, Caraffa retained his
monastic austerity. He was an avowedand bitter
enemy pot only of all innovation in opinion, but
of every irregularity in praaice; he was the
chief infcirument in eftablihmng the formidable
and odious tribunal of the inquisition in the papal
territories ; he appeared a violent advocate on all
occasions for the jurifdidion and discipline of the
church, and a severe censurer of every measure
which seemed to flow from motives of policy or
interest, rather than from zeal for the honour of
the ecclefiaflical order, and the dignity of the
holy fee. Under a prelate of such a charaAer,
the Roman courtiers cxpeaed a severe and violent
pontificate, during which the principles of found
policy would be sacrificed to the narrow preju-
dices of prieffly zeal; while the people of Riome
were apprehensive of feeing the sordid and for-
bidding rigour of monastic manners fubitituted in
place of the magnificence to which they had
long been accustomed in the papal court. These
apprebenfions Paul was extremely solicitous to
remove. At his first entrance upon the adminif-
tration, he laid aside that austerity which had
hitherto distinguished his person and family, and

La whea

when the master of his household inquired in
What manner he would choose to live, he haugh.
tily replied, " As becomes a great prince." He
ordered the ceremony of his coronation to be
condu~ed with more than ufualpomp; and en.
deavoured to render himself popular by several
a6ts of liberality and indulgence towards the in.
habitants of Rome 4.

His natural severity of temper, however, would

have soon returned upon him, and would have
ju5tified the conjeaures of the courtiers, as well
as the fears of the people, if he had not, imme;
diately after his elemion, called to Rome two of
his nephews, the sons of his brother the count of
Montorio. The eldest he promoted to~ be go-
vernor of Rome. The youngest, who had hi.
therto served as a soldier of fortune in the armies
of Spain or France, and whole disposition as wvell
as manners were still more foreign from the cleri-
cal charader than his profeffion, he created a
cardinal, and appointed him legate of Bologna,
the second office in power and dignity which a
pope can beitow. These marks of favour, no
less sudden than extravagant, he accompanied
with the moit unbounded confidence and attach.
ment, and forgetting all his former severe maxims,
he seemed to have no other objed than the ag-
grandizing of his nephews. Their ambition,
unfortunately for Paul, was too aspiring to be
satisfied with any moderate acquisition. They
had seen the family of Medici raised by the inte-

q Platina, p. 327. Caltaldo Vita di Paolo IV. Rom.

a6s5, p. 70. reft

in Tuscany; Paul III. had, by his abilities and
address, secured the dutchies of Parma and Pla-
centia to the family of Farnese. They aimed at
some establishment for themselves, no less con-
iderable and independent; and as they could not
txpeA that the pope would carry his indulgence
towards them so far as to secularize any part of
the patrimony of the church, they had no pro-
(ped of attaining what they wilhed, but by
dismembering the Imperial dominions in Italy,
in hopes of seizing some portion of them. This
alone they would have deemed a fufficient reason
for sowing the feeds of discord between their
uncle and the emperor.

But cardinalCaraffa had, besides, private rea-

sons which filled him with hatred and enmity to
the emperor. While he served in the Spanish
troops he had not received such marks of honour
and diftinaion as he thought due to his birth
and merit. Disgusted with this ill-ufage, he had
abruptly quitted the Imperialfervice ; and enter-
ing into that of France, he had not only met
with such a receptiontas soothed his vanity, and
attached him to the French interest, but by con-
trading an intimate friendship with Strozzi, who
commanded the French army in Tuncany, he had
imbibed a mortal antipathy to the emperor as the
great enemy to the liberty and independence of
the Italian slates. Nor was the pope himself in-
disposed to receive impressions unfavourable to
the emperor. The oppofrtion given to his elec.
tion by the cardinals of the Imperial fadion, left
in his mind deep resentment, which was height-
ened by the remembrance of ancient injuries from
Charles or his ministers.

Q3 Of

Of this his nephews took advantage, and em-

ployed various devices, in order to exasperate
him beyond a possibility of reconciliation. They
aggravated every circumstance which could be
deemed any indication of the emperor's diffatif-
faaion with his promotion; they read to him an
intercepted letter, in which Charles taxed the
cardinals of his party with negligence or inca.
pacity in not having defeated Paul's elcaion:
they pretended, at one time, to have discovered
a conspiracy formed by the Imperial miniffer and
Cosmo di Medici againit the pope's life; they
alarmed him, at another, with accounts of a
plot for affaffinating themnfelves. By these arti.
flees, they kept his mind, which was naturally
violent, and become fulpicious from old age, in
such perpetual agitation, as precipitated him into
measures which otherwise he would have been
the first person to condemn'. He seized some
of the cardinals who were most attached to the
emperor, and confined them in the castle of St.
Angelo; he perfectted the Colonnas and other
Roman barons, the ancient retainers to the Im-
perial fafion, with the utmost severity; and dif-
covering on all occasions his difiruft, fear, or
hatred of the emperor, he began at last to court
the fricndfhip of the French king, and seemed
willing to throw himself absolutely upon him for
support and proteaion.

This was the very point to which his nephews

wished to bring him, as most favourable to their
ambitious schemes; and as the accomplishment
of these depended on their uncle's life, whose

r Ripa'montil f11t. Patri*, I13, Iii. 1146. ap. GryV.

The. vol.ii. Mem. de Ribir, ii. 655* Adrianicetdr,
i. 906.

advanced

unnecessarily in negotiations, initead of treating
at second-hand with the French ambassador at
Rome, they prevailed on the pope t6 dispatch a
Terfon of confidence direaly to the court of
France, with such overtures on his part as they
hoped would not be rejeded. He proposed an
alliance offenfive and defensive between Henry
and the pope; that they should attack the dutchy
of Tuscany and the kingdom of Naples with
their united forces ; and if their arms (hould prove
fuccefsful, that the ancient republican form of
government Ihould be re-e{tablithed in the for-
iner, and the investiture of the latter (hould be
granted to one of the French king's sons, after
reserving a certain territory which should be an-
uexed to the patrimony of the church, together
with an independent and princely establishment
for each of the pope's nephews.

The king, allured by these specious projeas,

gave a most favourable audience to the envoy.
But when the matter was proposed in council,
the conitable Montmorency, whose natural cao-
tion and aversion to daring enterprizes increase露
with age and experience, remonifrated with
great vehemence against the alliance. He put
Henry in mind how fatal to France every expe-
dition into Italy had been during three fucceflive
reigns, and if such an enterprize had proved too
great for the nation even when its firength and
finances were entire, there was no reason to hope
for success, if it should be attempted now, when
both were exhausted by extraordinary efforts
during wars, which had laffed, with little inter-
Tuption, alnmot half a century. Hle represented the

the manifest imprudence of entering into engage-
tnents with a pope of fourscore, as any fyfitem
which refied on no better foundation than his
life, must be extremely precarious, and upon the
event of his death, which could not be diftaut,
the face of things, together with the inclination
of the Italian slates, muff inRfantly change, and
the whole weight of the war be left upon the
king alone. To these considerations he added
the near profpea which they now had of a final
accommodation with the emperor, who, having
taken the resolution of retiring from the world,
wished to transmit his kingdoms in peace to his
son; and he concluded with representing the ab-
solute certainty of drawing the arms of England
upon France, if it should appear that the re-efta-
blifhment of tranquillity in Europe was prevented
by the ambition of its monarch.

These arguments, weighty in themselves, and

urged by a minister of great authority, would
probably have determined the king to decline
any conneaion with the pope. But the duke
of Guise, and his brother the cardinal of Lor-
rain, who delighted no less in bold and dangerous
undertakings than Montmorency fhnnned them,
declared warmly for an alliance with the pope.
The cardinal expeAed to be entrusted with the
condua of the negotiations in the court of Rome
to which this alliance would give rife; the duke
hoped to obtain the command of the army which
would be appointed to invade Naples; and con.
fidering themselves as already in these fiations,
vafl projeds opened to their aspiring and unw
bounded ambition. Their credit, together with
the influence of the king's mistress, the famous

Diana

devoted to the interest of the family of Guise,
more than counterbalanced all Montmorency's
prudent remonifrances, and prevailed on an incon-
fiderate prince to listen to the overtures of the
pope's envoy.

The cardinal of Lorrain, as he had expedted,

was immediately sent to Rome with full powers
to conclude the treaty, and to concert measures
for carrying it into execution. Before he could
reach that city, the pope, either from refleaing
on the danger and uncertain issue of all military
operations, or through the address of the Impe-
trial ambassador, who had been at great pains to
sooth him, had not only begun to lose much of
the ardour with which he had commenced the
negotiation with France, but even discovered
great unwillingness to continue it. In order to
rouse him from this fit of delpondency, and to
rekindle his former rage, his nephews had re-
course to the arts which they had already prac-
tifed with so much success. They alarmed him
with new representations of the emperor's hostile
intentions, with fresh accounts which they had
received of threats uttered againd him by the Im-
perial ministers, and with new discoveries which
they pretended to have made of conspiracies
formed, and just ready to take effed againdt his
life.

But these artifices, having been formerly tried,

would not have operated a second time with the
fame force, nor have made the impression which
they withed, if Paul had not been excited by
an offence of that kind which he was leadt able to
bear. He received advice of the recess of the

diet

was thereby granted to the protefiants; and this
threw him at once into such transports of passion
againit the emperor and king of the Romans, as
carried him headlong into all the violent measures
of his nephews. Full of high ideas with refpe&
to the papal prerogative, and animated with the
fiercest zeal against heresy, he considered the 1i-
berty of deciding concerning religious matters,
which had been assumed by an assembly com-
posed chiefly of laymen, as a presumptuous and
unpardonable encroachment on that juriidiaion
which belonged to him alone; and regarded the
indulgence which had been given to the protest.
ants as an impious at of that power which the
diet had usurped. He complained loudly of both
to the Imperial ambassador. He insisted thatthe
recess of the diet should immediately be declared
illegal and void. He threatened the emperor and
king of the Romans, in cafe they Ihould either
refuse or delay to gratify him in this particular,
with the severest effe6ts of his vengeance. He
talked in a tone of authority and command which
might have suited a pontiff of the twelfth century,
when a papal decree was fofficient to have {haken,
or to have overturned, the throne of the greatest
monarch in Europe; but which was altogether
improper in that age, especially when addressed
to the minister of a prince who had so often made
pontiffs more formidable than Paul feel the weight
of his power. The ambassador, however, heard
all his extravagant propositions and menaces with
much patience, and endeavoured to sooth him,
by putting him in mind of the extreme distress
to which the emperor had been reduced at In-

fpruck,

fpruck, of the engagements which he had come
under to the proteitants, in order to extricate
himself, of the necessity of fulfilling these, and of
accommodating his condu& to the situation of
his affairs. But weighty as these considerations
were, they made no impreilion on the mind of the'
haughty and bigoted pontiff, who initantly re-
plied that he would absolve him by his apoitolic
authority from those impious engagements, and
even command him not to perform them; that
in carrying on the cause of God and of the
church, no regard ought to be had to the max-
ims of worldly prudence and policy; and that
the ill success of the emperor's schemes in Ger-
rnany might juilly be deemed a mark of the di-
vine displeasure againit him, on account of his
having paid little attention to the former, while
he regulated his condua entirely by the latter.
Having said this, he turned from the ambassador
abruptly without waiting for a reply.

His nephews took care to applaud and cherish

these sentiments, and easily wrought up his
arrogant mind, fraught with all the monkilh ideas
concerning the extent of the papal supremacy, to
inch a pitch of resentment againdt the house of
Austria, and to such an high opinion of his own
power, that he talked continually of his being
the successor of those who had deposed kings and
emperors; that he was exalted as head over them
all, and would trample such as opposed him under
his feet. In this disposition the cardinal of Lor-
rain found the pope, and easily persuaded him to
sign a treaty [Dtc. 15], which had for its ob-
jea the ruin of a prince, againit whom le was
la highly exafperattd. The itipulations in the

treaty

treaty were much the fame as had been proposed
by the pope's envoy at Paris; and it was agreed
to keep the whole tranfation secret until their
united forces should be ready to take the field S.

During the negotiation of this treaty at Rome

and Paris, an event happened which seemed to
render the fears that had given rife to it vain,
and the operations which were to follow upon it
unnecessary. This was the emperor's resignation
of his hereditary dominions to his son Philip;
together with his resolution to withdraw entirely
from any concern in business or the affairs of this
world, in order that he might spend the re-
mainder of his days in retirement and solitude.
Though it requires neither deep refleftion nor
extraordinary discernment to discover that the
slate of royalty is not exempt from cares and
disappointment; though most of those who are
exalted to a throne find solicitude, and satiety,
and disgust to be their perpetual attendants in
that envied pre-eminence ; yet to descend volun-
tarily from the supreme to a subordinate station,
and to relinquish the poffeilion of power in order
to attain the enjoyment of happiness, seems to
be an effort too great for the human mind. Se.
veral inifances, indeed, occur in history, of mo-
narchs who have quitted a throne, and have
ended their days in retirement. But they
were either weak princes who took this refoln-
tion rashly, and repented of it as soon as it was
taken ; or unfortunate princes, from whose hands
some flronger rival had wrested their sceptre, and

aPasIIy. lib. xiUi. p. 163. F. Paul, 365. Thuan. lib.

xv. 5Z5. lib. xvi. 540. Mum. de Ribler, ii. 609, &c.

compelled

compelled them to descend with reludance into
a private fdation. Dioclefian is perhaps the only
prince capable of holding the reins of govern-
ment, who ever resigned them from deliberate
choice, and who continued during many years to
enjoy the tranquillity of retirement without
fetching one penitent sigh, or cadting back one
look of desire, towards the power or dignity
which he had abandoned.

No wonder, then, that Charles's resignation

ihould fill all Europe with afdonifhment, and
give rife, both among his contemporaries, and
among the hifdorians of that period, to various
conjedures concerning the motives which deter-
mined a prince, whole ruling paflion had been
uniformly the love of power, at the age of fifty-
lix, when objeds of ambition continue to operate
with full force on the mind, and are pursued with
the greatest ardour, to take a resolution so fingu.
hr and unexpeaed. But while many authors
have imputed it to motives so frivolous and fan-
tafdical, as can hardly he supposed to influence
any reasonable mind; while others have imagined
it to be the result of some profound scheme of
policy; hiftdrians more intelligent, and better
informed, neither ascribe it to caprice, nor search
for myiterious secrets of itate, where simple and
obvious causes will fully account for the empe-
ror's condud. Charles had been attacked early
in life with the gout, and notwithifanding all the
precautions of the modt kilful physicians, the
violence of the distemper increased as he ad-
vanced in age, and the fits became every year
more frequent, as well as more severe. Not only
was the vigour of his conflitutioa broken, but

Soi. sy. a the

the faculties of his mind were impaired by the
excruciating torments which he endured. During
the continuance of the fits, he was altogether in.
capable of applying to business, and even when
they began to abate, as it was only at intervals
that he could attend to what was serious, he gave
up a great part of his time to trifling and even
childith occupations, which served to relieve or
to amuse his mind, enfeebled and worn out with
excess of pain. Under these circumitances, the
condua of such affairs as occurred of course, in
governing so many kingdoms, was a burden
more than fudficient; but to push forward and
complete the vast schemes which the ambition
of his more aaive years had formed, or to keep
in view and carry on the fame great system of
policy, extending to every nation in Europe, and
conneaed with the operations of every different
court, were funaions which so far exceeded his
fitrength, that they oppressed and overwhelmed
his mind. As he had beeii long accustomed to
view the business of every department, whether
civil, or military, or eccleftaftical,. with his own
eyes, and to decide concerning it according to
his own ideas, it gave him the utmost pain when
he felt his infirmities increase so fadt upon him,
that he was obliged to commit the condua of
all affairs to his ministers. He imputed every
misfortune which befel him, and every mifear.
riage that happened, even when the former was
unavoidable and the latter accidental, to his in-
ability to take the infpeAion of business himself.
He complained of his hard fortune, in being op.
posed, in his declining years, to a rival, who was
in the full vigour of life, and that while Henry

3 could

son, he should now be reduced, both in council
and in action, to rely on the talents and exertions
of other men. Having thus grown old before
his time, he wifely judged it more decent to con.
ceal his infirmities in fume solitude, than to ex-
pose them any longer to the public eye; and
prudently determined not to forfeit the fame,
or lose the acquifations of his better years, by
firuggling, with a vain obitinacy, to retain the
reins of government, when he was no longer able
to hold them with fleadinefs, or to guide them
with address*.

But

* Dom Leverque, in his memoirs of cardinal Granvelle,

gives a ieafon for the emp路ror's resignation, which, as far
as I recoedea, Is not mentioned by any other historian. He
-says, that the emperor raring ceded the government of the
kingdom of Napaes arnd the dutchy of MIilan to his son, upon
his marriage wish the queen of Enghnd; Philip, notwith-
fianding the advice and intrearies of his father, removed mouf
of the mini ters and officers whom he had employed in those
countries, and appointed creatures of his own, to fill the
places which they held. That he atpired openly, and with
little delicacy, to obtain a thare in the administration of affairs
in the Low-Countries. That he endearroured to thwart the
emperor's mealures, and to limit his authority, behaving
towards him sometimes with inattention, and sometimes
withhaughtinefs. That Charles finding that he muff either
yieid on every occaofon to his son, or openly contend with
bip, in order to avoid either of these, which were both dif.
agreeable and mortifying to a father, he toolk the relolution
of resigning his crowns, and retiring from the world, vol. i.
p. 24, &c. Dom Levefque derived his information con.
cerning these curious faas, which he relates very briefly,
from the original papers of cardinal Granvelle. But as that
vafl collealon of papers, which has been prefesved and ar-
ranged by M. l'abbe Boizot of Bcfangon, though one of the
ma2l valuable hifiorical ioonuments of the sixteenth century,

a 3 and

But though Charles had revolved this feheme

in his mind for several years, and had communi-
cated it to his sisters the dowager queens of
France and Hungary, who not only approved of
his intention, but offered to accompany him to
whatever place of retreat he (hould choose; feve-
ral things had hitherto prevented his carrying it
into execution. He could not think of loading
Wis Lon with the government of so many king-
doms, until he ihould attain such maturity of age,
and of abilities, as would enable him to sustain
that weighty burden. But as Philip had now
reached his twenty-eighth year,and had been early
accuitomed to business, for which he discovered
both inclination and capacity, it can hardly be
imputed to the partiality of paternal affe~rion,
that his scruples, with regard to this point,
were entirely removed; and that he thought he
might place his son, without further hesitation
or delay, on the throne which he himfelfwas
about to abandon. His mother's situation had
been another obitruition in his way. For
although she had continued almost fifty years in
confinement, and under the fame disorder of
mind which concern for her hufband's death had
brought upon her, yet the government of Spain
was still veiled in her jointly with the emperor;
her name was inserted together with his in all
the public infitruments iflised in that kingdom;

and which cannot fAil of throwing much light on the tranC-
aaions of Chrles V. is not pub~iihed, I cannot determine
what degree of credit should be given to this account of
Charles's refiguation. I have therefore taken no notice of it
in reating this event.

and

niards to her, that they would probably have
fErupled to recognise Philip as their sovereign,
unless the had consented to assume him as her
partner on the throne. Her utter incapacity
for bufinels rendered it impossible to obtain her
consent. But her death, which happened this
year, removed this difficulty; and as Charles,
upon that event, became sole monarch of Spain,
it left the succession open to his son. The war
with France had likewise been a reason for re-
taining the adminifration of affairs in his own
hand, as he was extremely solicitous to have ter-
minated it, that he might have given up his
kingdoms to his son at peace with all the world.
But as Henry had discovered no disposition to
close with any of his overtures, and had even re-
jeaed proposals of peace, which were equal and
moderate, in a tone that seemed to indicate a
size4 purpose of continuing hostilities, he saw
that it was vain to wait longer in expeaation of
an event, which, however desirable, was altogether
uncertain.

As this, then, appeared to be the proper

junaure for executing the scheme which he had
long meditated, Charles resolved to resign his
kingdoms to his son, with a solemnity suitable to
the. importance of the tranfaaion, and to per-
form this last a& of sovereignty with such formal
pomp, as might leave a lasting impression on the
minds not only of his fubjeas but of his fuc-
ceffor. With this view he called Philip out of
England, where the peevish temper of his queen,
which increased with her despair of having ifiue,
rendered hinm extremely unhappy; and the jea-

g3 lous

lousy of the English left him no hopes of obtain-
ing the direaion of their affairs. Having
assembled the States of the Low-Countries at
Brussels, on the twenty-fifth of Otober, Charles
seated himnfelf, for the lall time, in the chair of
slate, on one fide of which was placed his son,
and on the other his fifRer the queen of Hungary,
regent of the Netherlands, with a fplcndid retinue
of the princes of the empire and grandees of
Spain handing behind him. The prelident of
the council of Slanders, by his command, ex-
plained, in a few words, his intention in calling
this extraordinary meeting in the States. He
then read the instrument of resignation, by which
Charles surrendered to his son Philip all his ter-
ritories, jurifdition, and authority in the Low-
Countries, absolving his fubjeats there from their
oath of allegiance to him, which he required
them to transfer to Philip his lawful heir, and to
serve him with the fame loyalty and zeal which
they had manifefRed, during so long a course of
years, in support of his government.

Charles then role from his feat, and leaning

on the thoulder of the prince of Orange, because
he was unable to Ptand without support, he ad-
dressed himself to the audience, and from a paper
which he held in his hand, in order to alfit his
memory, he recounted, with dignity, but with-
out ostentation, all the great things which he had
undertaken and performed since the commence-
ment of his adminidration. He observed, that,
from the seventeenth year of his age, he had de-
dicated all his thoughts and attention to public
objeds, reserving so portion of his time for the
indulgence of his ease, and lery little for the en.-

joymnct

-

r -c,;

:'i/1

I JSY QS(A

QI i4t4A 路

joyment of private pleasure; that either in a
pacific or hoifile manner, he had visited Germany
nine times, Spain fix times, France four times,
Italy seven times, the Low-Countries ten times,
England twice, Africa as often, and had made
eleven voyages by sea; that while his health
permitted him to discharge his duty, and the
vigour of his couftitution was equal, in any de-
gree, to the arduous office of governing such
extensive dominions, he had never (hunned iabour,
nor repined under fatigue; that now when his
health was broken, and his vigour exhauited by
the rage of an incurable distemper, his growing
infirmities admonished him to retire, nor was he
so fond of reigning, as to retain the feeptre in
an impotent hand, which was no longer able to
protea his fubjeas, or to secure to them the
happiness which he withed they (hould enjoy;
that initead of a sovereign worn out with diseases,
and fearcely half alive, he gave them one in the
prime oflife, accustomed already to govern, and
who added to the vigour of youth all the atten-
tion and sagacity of maturer years; that if,
during the course of a long administration, he
'had committed any material error in government,
or if, under the pressure of so many and great
affairs, and amidst the attention which he had
been obliged to give to them, he had either ne-
gleded or injured any of hit fubjeas, he now im-
plored their forgivenefa 4 that, for his part, he
should ever retain a grateful sense of their fide-
lity and attachment, and would carry the re-
membrance of it along with him to the place of
his retreat, as his sweetest consolation, as well as
the best reward for all his services, and in his

lalt

last prayers to Almighty God would pour forth
his most earnest petitions for their welfare.

Then turning towards Philip, who fell on his

knees and kissed his father's hand, " If," says
he, " I had left you by my death this rich inhe.
ritance, to which I have made such large addi.
tions, some regard would have been justly due
to my memory on that account; but now, when
I voluntarily resign to you what I might have itil
retained, I may well expe& the warmest expref-
Lions of thanks on your part. With these, how-
ever, I dispense, and shall confider your concern
for the welfare of your fubjeas, and your love
of them, as the best and most acceptable tefti.
rnony of your gratitude to me. It is in your
power, by a wife and virtuous adminiffration, to
justify the extraordinary proof which I, this day,
give of my paternal affe~cion, and to demonfitrate
that you are worthy of the confidence which I
repose in you. Preserve an inviolable regard for
religion; maintain the catholic faith in its pu-
rity; let the laws of your country be sacred in
your eyes; encroach not gn the rights and pri-
vileges of your people; and if the time should
ever come when you Ihall wish to enjoy the
tranquillity of private life, may you have a son
endowed with fiuch qualities, that you can re-
sign your sceptre to him with as much fatif-
fadion as I give up mine to you."

As soon as Charles had finished this long ad-

dress to his fubjeas and to their new sovereign, he
funk into the chair, exhauted and ready to faint
with the fatigue of such an extraordinary effort.
During his discourse, the whole audience melted
into tears, some from admiration of his magnani- mity,

mity, others softened by the exprellions of ten-
dernefs towards his son, and of love to his people;
and all were affeted with the deepest sorrow at
losing a sovereign, who, during his adminiflra-
tion, had distinguished the Netherlands, his na-
tive country, with particular marks of his re-
gard and attachment.

Philip then arose from his knees, and arter re-

turning thanks to his father, with a low and sub-
missive voice, for the royal gift which his un-
exampled bounty had bellowed upon him, he
addressed the assembly of the States, and regret-
ting his inability to speak the Flemish language
with such facility as to express what he felt on
this interesting occasion, as well as what he owed
to his good fubje6as in the Netherlands, he
begged that they would permit Granvelle bilhop
of Arras to deliver what he had given him i.s
charge to speak in his name. Granvelle, in a
long discourse, expatiated on the ze:n with which
Philip was animated for the good of his fubjedas,
on his resolution to devote all his time and talents
to the promoting of their happiness, and on his
intention to imitate his father's example in dif-
tinguilhing the Netherlaiids with peculiar mparks
of his regard. MaEs, a lawyer of great elo-
quence, replied, in the name of the States, with
large profefions of their fidelity and affeeaion to
their new sovereign.

1556.] Then Mary, queen-dowager of Huu-

gary, resigned the regency with which ihe had
been entrofted by her brother during the space of
twenty-five years. Next day [Jan. 6] Philip, in
presence of the States, took the usual oaths to
maintain the rights and privileges of his fubjeas; and

that of their constituents, swore allegiance to
him r.

A few weeks after this tranfaaion, Charles,

in an assembly no less splendid, and with a cere.
monial equally pompous, resigned to his son the
crowns of Spain, with all the territories depend.
ing on them, both in the old and in the new
world. Of all these vaif poffeflions, he reserved
nothing for himself but an annual pension of an
hundred thousand crowns, to defray the charges
of his family, and to afford him a small fum for
aas of beneficence and charity U.

As

Godleveus Relatio Abdkcationis Car. V. ap. Goldall.

Polit. Imper. p. 37. Strada de Bello Belgico, lib. i. p. 5.

U The emperor's resignation is an event not only of focli

importonce, but of such a nature, that the precise date of it,
one would expe&, fhouid have been ascertained by hiborians
with the greatelt accuracy. There is, however, an amazing
and unaccountable diverlity among them with regard to this
point. All agree, that the deed by which Charles transferred
to his son his dominions in the Netherlands, bears date at
Brussels the 25th of Oaober. Sandoval fixes on the ztth
of Ofober as the day on which the ceremony of resignation
happened, and he was present at the tranfaaion, vol. ii.
p. 592. Godleveus, who published a treatise de Abdicatione
Caroli V. fixes the public ceremony, as well as the date of
the intsrument of refsgnation, on the 25th. Pere Barre, I
know not on what authority, fixes it on the 24th of No-
vember, Hill. d'Alem. viii. 976. Herrera agrees with God.
leveus in his account of this matter, tom. i. 155. as likewise
does Paliavicini, whose authority with refpe& to dates, and
every thing where a minute accuracy is requifire, is of great
weight, HiLt. lib. xvi. p. 168. Historians differ nolefs with
regard to the day on which Charles reftgned the crown of
Spain to his son. According to M. de Thou, it was a month
after his having resigned his dgminions in the Netherlands,

i, e.

hoping that the dryness and the warmth of the
climate in that country might mitigate the vio-
lence of his disease, which had been much in-
creased by the moisture of the air and the rigour
of the winters in the Netherlands, he was ex-
tremely impatient to embark for that kingdom,
and to disengage himself entirely from bufinels,
which he found to be impossible while he re-
mained in Brussels. But his physicians remon-
Ifrated so {irongly againit his venturing to sea at
that cold and boisterous season of the year, that
he consented, though with relu6tance, to put off
his voyage for some months.

i. e. about the 25th of November, Thuan. lib. lvi. p. 57i.
According to Sandoval, it was on the s6th of January a556,
Sand. ii. 603. Antoaio de Vera agrees with him, Epitome
del Vida del Car. V. p. Iao. According to Pallavacini, it
was on the srrh, Pal.lib. xvi. p. s68. and with him Herrera
agrees, Vida del D. Felipe, tom. i. p. 233. But Ferreras
fixes it on the firi day of January, Hilt. Gener. tom. ix.
p. 37!. M. de Beaucaire fuppoles the reeignation of the
crown of Spain to have been executed a few days after the
resignation of the Netherlands, Com. de Reb. Gall. p. 379.
It is remarkable, that in the treaty of truce at Vaucelles,
though Charles had made over all his dominions to his sos
fame weeks previous to the conclusion of it, all the ftipula-
tions are in the emperor's name, and Philip is only flyled
king of England and Naples. It is certain Philip was not
pioclaimed king of Cafitle, &c. at Valladolid sooner than the
24th of March, Sandov. ii. p. 606 i and previous to that
ceremony, he did not choose, it ihould seem, to assume the
title of king of any of his Spanish kingdoms, or to perform
any as of royal jurifdiaion. In a deed annexed to the treaty
of truce, dated April 59, he assumes the title of king of Caf-
tile, &c. in the usual ityle of the Spanihl mooarchs in that
age. Corps DipI tom. iv. Append. p. 85* By

By yielding to their intreatics, he had the

fatisfaaion, before he left the Low-Countties,
es taking a considerable ilep towards a peace
with France, which he ardently wished for, not
only on his fon's account, but that he might
have the merit, when quittilig the world, of re-
eitablithing that tranquillity in Europe, which
he had banilhed out of it alinolt from the time
that he assumed the adminifiration of affairs.
Previous to his resignation, cofomififoners had
been appointed by him and by the French king,
in order to treat of an exchange of prisoners.
In their conferences at the abbey of Vaucelles,
near Cambray, an expedient was accidentally
proposed for terminating hoftiliries between the
contending monarchs, by a long truce, during
the subsistence of tvhich, and without difcufling
their refpeaive clainis, each should retain what
was now in his poffeffion. Charles, feufible how
much his kingdoms were exhauiled by the ex-
pensive anid almost continual wars in which his
ambition had engaged him, and eager to gain
for his son a short interval of peace, that he
might efitablifh himself firmly on his throne, de-
clared warmly for closing with the overture,
though manifefily difhonournble as well as dif-
advantageous; and such was the refpea due to
his wisdom and experience, that Philip, not-
w~ithitanding his unwillingness to purchase peace
by such concessions, did not presume to urge his
opinion in opposition to that of his father.

Henry could not have hefstatcd one moment

about giving his consent to a truce on such con-
ditions, as would leave him in quiet poffefion of

the

the greater part of the duke of Savoy's domi-
nions, together with the important conqueffs
which he had made on the German frontier.
But it was no easy matter to reconcile such a
fiep with the engagements which he had come
under to the pope, in his late treaty with him.
The conflable Montmorency, however, repre-
fented in such a firiking light the imprudence of
sacrificing the true intere~ts of his kingdom to
these rash obligations, and took such advantage
of the absence of the cardinal of Lorrain, who
had seduced the king into his alliance with the
Caraffas, that Henry, who was naturally flnusi-
ating and uniteady, and apt to be influenced by
the advice lalt given him, authorised his ambaf-
fadors ESth Feb.] to sign a treaty of truce with
the emperor for five years, on the terms which
had been proposed. But that he might not feern
to have altogether forgotten his ally the pope,
who, he forefawv, would be highly exasperated,
he, in order to sooth him, took care that he
should be expressly included in the truce X.

The count of Lalain repaired to Blois, and

the admiral Coligny to Brussels, the former to
be present when the king of France, and the
latter when the emperor and his son ratified the
treaty and bound themSelves by oath to observe
itY. When an account of the conferences at

Vaucelles,

x Mem. de Ribier, 1i. 626. Corps Diplom. tom. iv7

App. S.

Y One of admiral de Coligny's attendants, who wrote to

the court of France an account of what happened while they
resided at Bruflels, takes notice, as an inistance of Philip's
urnpolitenefs, that he received the French ambaff45or in an

you7. r路 ~apartment

had been proposed there, were first carried to
Rome, it gave the pope no manner of disquiet.
He trusted so much to the honour of the French
monarch, that he would not allow himself to
think that Henry could forget so soon, or vio-
late so Ihamefully, all the stipulations in his
league with him. He had such an high opinion
of the emperor's wisdom, that he made no doubt
of his refusing his consent to a truce on such un.
equal terms: and on both these accounts he con-
fidently pronounced that this, like many preced.
ing negotiations, would terminate in nothing.
But later and more certain intelligence soon con-
vinced him that no reasoning in political affairs is
more fallacious, than, because an event is im-
probable, to conclude that it will not happen.
The sudden and unexpeEded conclusion of the
truce filled Paul with aftouifhment and terror.
The cardinal of Lorrain durit not encounter
that storm of indignation, to which he knew
that he (hould be expoled from the haughty
pontiff, who had so good reason to be incensed;
but departing abruptly from Rome, he left to
the cardinal Tournon the difficult talk of at-
tempting to sooth Paul and his nephews. They
were fully sensible of the perilous situation in
which they now stood. By their engagements
with France, which were no longer secret, they
had highly irritated Philip. They dreaded the

apartment hung with tapeflry, which represented the battle
of Pavia, the manner in which Francisl. was taken prisoner,
his voyage to Spain, with all the mortifying circumstances
of his captivity and imprisonment at Madrid. Mem. di

ibLier, ii. 634. violence

Alva, a minister fitted, as well by his abilities
as by the severity of his nature, for executing all
Philip's rigorous schemes, had advanced from
Milan to Naples, and began to assemble troops
on the frontiers of the ecclesiastical slate: while
they, if deserted by France, mulL not only re-
linquifh all the hopes of dominion and sovereignty
to which their ambition aspired, but remain ex.
posed to the resentment of the Spanish monarch,
without one ally to protea them against an
enemy with whom they were so little able to
contend.

Under there circumifances, Paul had recourse

to the arts of negotiation and intrigue, of which
the papal court knows well how to avail itself
in order to ward off any calamity threatened by
an enemy superior in power. He affe&ed to ap-
prove highly of the truce, as an happy expedient
for putting a flop to the effufion of Chrifian
blood. He expressed his warmest wishes that it
might prove the forerunner of a definitive peace.
He exhorted the rival princes to embrace this
favourable opportunity of setting on foot a nego-
tiation for that purpose, and offered, as their
common father, to be mediator between them.
Under this pretext, he appointed cardinal Rebiba
his nuncio to the court of Brussels, and his
nephew cardinal Caraffa to that of Paris. The
public infirudions given to both were the fame;
that they Ihould use their utmost endeavours to
prevail with the two monarchs to accept of the
pope's mediation, that, by means of it, peace
might be re-established, and measures might be
taken for assembling a general council. But

a z under

ing objeas so desirable in themselves, and so be,
coming his sacred charader to pursue, Paul
concealed very different intentions. Caraffa,
besides his public infitru6ions, received a private
commiflion to solicit the French king to re-
nounce the treaty of truce, and to renew his
engagements with the holy fee; and he was
empowered to spare neither entreaties, nor pros
mises, nor bribes, in order to gain that point.
This, both the uncle and the nephew considered
as the real end of the embassy; while the other
served to amuse the vulgar, or to deceive the
emperor and his son. The cardinal, accord.
ingly, set out instantly forParis [sIthMay], and
travelled with the greateit expedition, while
Rebiba was detained some weeks at Rome; and
when it became neceflary for him to begin his
journey, he received secret orders to protraa it
as much as pofiible, that the issue of Caraffa's
negotiation might be known before he should
reach Brussels, and according to that, proper
direEaions might be given to him with regard to
the tone which he should assume, in treating
with the emperor and his son Z.

Caraffa made his entry into Paris with extra-

ordinary pomp: and having presented a confe-
crated sword to Henry, as the protedor on
whose aid the pope relied in the present exi.
gency, he besought him not to disregard the
entreaties of a parent in distress, but to employ
that weapon which he gave him in his defence,.

t Pallar. lib. xiii. p. z69. Burnet Hiflt. of Reform. ii.

App. 309. This

piety, but as an ad of justice. As the pope,
from confidence in the afi~lRance and support
which his late treaty with France entitled him to
exped, had taken such ifeps as had irritated the
king of Spain, he conjured Henry not to fuffer
Paul and his family to be crushed under the
weight of that resentment which they had drawn
on themselves merely by their attachment to
France. Together with this argument addressed
to his generosity, he employed another which
he hoped would work on his ambition. He as-
firmed that now was 'the time, when, with the
most certain profped of success, he might attack
Philip's dominions in Italy; that the flower of
the veteran Spanish bands had perished in the
wars of Hungary, Germany, and the Low-
Countries; that the emperor had left his son an
exhausted treasury, and kingdoms drained of
men; that he had no longer to contend with
the abilities, the experience, and good fortune
of Charles, but with a monarch fearcely seated
on his throne, unpraAifed in command, odious
to many of the Italian states, and dreaded by all.
He promised that the Pope, who had already
levied soldiers, would bring a considerable army
into the field, which, when joined by a fufficient
number of French troops, might, by one brisk
and sudden effort, drive the Spaniards out of
Naples, and add to the crown of France a king.
dom, the conquelt of which had been the great
objea of all his predecefiors during half a cen-
tury, and the chief motive of all their expeditions
into Italy. 83 July

that the pope had juIf cause to reproach him
with having violated the laws not only of gene.
rofity but of decency, when he renounced his
league with him, and had agreed to the truce of
Vaucelles; and eager, on the other hand, not
only to diftinguilh his reign by a conquest which
three former monarchs had attempted without
success, but likewise to acquire an establishment
of such dignity and value for one of his sons.
Reverence, however, for the oath, by which
he had so lately confirmed the truce of Vau.
celles; the extreme old age of the pope, whose
death might occasion an entire revolution in the
political fyf1em of Italy; together with the re-
presentations of Montmorency, who repeated all
the arguments he had used against the firit league
with Paul, and pointed out the great and imme-
diate advantages which France derived from the
truce; kept Henry for some time in suspense,
and might poflibly have outweighed all Caraffa's
arguments. But the cardinal was not such a
novice in the arts of intrigue and negotiation, as
not to have expedients ready for removing or
surmounting all these obstacles. To obviate the
king's scruple with regard to his oath, he pro-
duced powers from the pope, to absolve him
from the obligation of it. By way of security
againit any danger which he might apprehend
from the pope's death, he engaged that his
uncle would make such a nomination of cardi-
nals, as Should give Henry the absolute com-
mand of the next eleaion, and enable him to

place

place in the papal chair a person entirely devoted
to his interest.

In order to counterbalance the effea of the

conftable's opinion and influence, he employed
not only the adive talents of the duke of Guise,
and the eloquence of his brother the cardinal of
Lorrain, but the address of the queen, aided by
the more powerful arts of Diana of Poitiers, who,
unfortunately for France, co-operated with Ca-
tharine in this point, though she took pleasure,
on almoRt every other occasion, to thwart and
mortify her. They, by their united folicitations,
easily swayed the king, who leaned, of his own
accord, to that fide towards which they wished
him to incline. All Montmorency's prudent re.
monifrances were disregarded; the nuncio ab-
solved Henry from his oath; and he ligned d
new league with the pope, which rekindled the
flames of war both in Italy and in the Low-
Countries.

As soon as Paul was informed by his nephew

that there was a fair profpeA of his focceeding
in this negotiation, he dilpatched a messenger
after the nuncio Rebiba [July 35], with orders
to return to Rome, without proceeding to Bruf-
fels. As it was now no longer necessary to pre.
serve that tone of moderation, which suited the
chara&er of a mediator, and which he had affeaed
to assume, or to put any farther restraint upon
his resentment again{t Philip, he boldly threw off
the mafkl, and took such violent fiteps as rendered
a rupture unavoidable. He seized and imprisoned
the Spanish envoy at his court. He excommu-
nicated the Colonnas ; and having deprived
Mark Antonio, the head of that family, of the

dukedom

dukedom of Paliano, he granted that dignity,
together with the territory annexed to it, to his
nephew the count of Montorio. He ordered a
legal information to be presented in the consistory
of cardinals againlt Philip, letting forth that he,
notwithilanding the fidelity and allegiance due
by him to the holy fee, of which he held the
kingdom of Naples, had not only afforded a
retreat in his dominions to the Colonnas, whom
the pope had excommunicated and declared re-
bels, but had furnished them with arms, and was
ready, in conjunaion with them, to invade the
ecclesiastical slate in anhoftile manner; that such
condudin a vassal was to be deemed treason againit
his liege lord, the punishment of which was the
forfeiture of his fief. Upon this, the confifuorial
advocate requested the pope to take cognizance
of the cause, and to appoint a day for hearing of
it, when he would make good every article of
the charge, and exped from his juflice that fen-
tence which the heinousness of Philip's crimes
merited. Paul, whose pride was highly flattered
with the idea of trying and passing judgment on
so great a king, assented to his request [July 27],
and as if it had been no less easy to execute than
to pronounce such a sentence, declared that he
would consult with the cardinals concerning the
formalities requisite in conduaing the triala

But while Paul allowed his pride and resent.

ment to drive him on with such headlong impe-
tuofity, Philip discovered an amazing moderation
on his part. He had been taught by the Spa-
ailh ecclefiaftics, who had the charge of his

a Pallav. lib. xiii. 171. education,

This sentiment, which had been early infused,
grew up with him as he advanced in years, and
took full poffeffion of his mind, which was nato.
rally thoughtful, serious, and prone to fuperifi.
tion. When he foresaw a rupture with the pop$
approaching, he had such violent scruples with
refpea to the ]awfulness of taking arms againit
the vicegetent of Christ, and the common father
tf all Christians, that he consulted some Spanish
divines upon that point. They, with the usual
dexterity of cafuifts in accommodating their re.
fponfes to the circumitances of those who apply
to them for dire&ion, assured him that, after
employing prayers and remonftrances in order
to bring the pope to reason, he had full right,
both by the laws of nature and of Christianity,
iiot only to defend himself when attacked, but td
begin hostilities, if that were judged the most
proper expedient for preventing the effeAs of
Pauls violence and injuitice. Philip neverthelef&
continued to deliberate and delay, considering it
as a most cruel misfortune, that his adminifira.
tion should open with an attack ofl a person,
ivhofe facted funaion and charaAer he so highly
fefpeaed b.

At last the duke of Alva, who, in compliance

hvith his maiter's scruples, had continued to ne-
gotiate long after he should have begun to as,
fndingPaul inexorable, and that every overture of
peace, and every appearance of hesitation on his
part, increased the pontiff's natural arrogance,
took the field [Sept. 5] and entered the ecclefi.

SFerrer. Hit. de.Erpagne, ix. 373. Herrer, i. 308.

aftical

affical territories. His army did not exceed
twelve thousand men, but it was composed of
veteran soldiers, and commanded chiefly by those
Roman barons, whom Pau]'s violence had driven
into exile. The valour of the troops, together
with the animosity of their leaders, who fought
in their own quarrel, and to recover their own
eiates, supplied the want of numbers. As none
of the French forces were yet arrived, Alva
soon became master of the Campagna Romagna;
some cities being surrendered through the cow-
ardice of the garrisons, which consisted of raw
soldiers, ill disciplined, and worse commanded;
the gates of others being opened by the inhabit-
ants, who were eager to receive back their an-
cient mailers. Alva, that he might not be taxed
with impiety in seizing the patrimony of the
church, took poffeifion of the towns which capi-
tulated, in the name of the college of cardinals,
to which, or to the pope that should be chosen
to succeed Paul, he declared that he would im-
mediatly restore them.

The rapid progress of the Spaniards, whose

light troops made excursions even to the gates
of Rome, filled that city with conifernation.
Paul, though inflexible and undaunted himself,
was obliged to give way so far to the fears and
folicitations of the cardinals, as to fend deputies
to Alva in order to propose a cessation of arms.
The pope yielded the more readily, as he was
sensible of a double advantage which might be
derived from obtaining that point. It would
ileliver the inhabitants of Rome from their pre-
sent terror, and would afford time for the arri-
val of the succours which he expeAed from

France,

# BOOK XII.

France. Nor was Alva unwilling to close with
the overture, both as he knew how desirous his
master was to terminate a war, which he had
undertaken with reludance, and as his army was
so much weakened by garrisoning the great num-
ber of towns which he had reduced, that it was
hardly in a condition to keep the field without
fresh recruits. A truce was accordingly con.
cluded [Nov. 19], firit for ten, and afterwards
for forty days, during which, various schemes of
peace were proposed, and perpetual negotiations
were carried on, but with no sincerity on the
part of the pope. The return of his nephew
the cardinal to Rome, the receipt of a confider-
able fum remitted by the king of France, the
arrival of one body of French troops, toge-
ther with the expedation of others which had
begun their march, rendered him more arrogant
than ever, and banished all thoughts from his
mind, but those of war and revenge c.

BOOK XII.

HILE these operations or intrigues kept the
pope and Philip busy and attentive, the em-

peror disentangled himself finally from all the as-
fairs of this world, and set out for the place of his
retreat. He had hitherto retained the Imperial
dignity,not from any unwillingness to relinquifhit,

c Pallav. lib. xiii. I77. Thuan. lib. xvii. 58. Mem.

de Ribier, ii. 664. for,

authority that he enjoyed in his hereditary do.
minions, to part with the limited and often ideal
jurifdiaion which belongs to an eledive crown,
was no great sacrifice. His sole motive for delay
was to gain a few months, for making one trial
more, in order to accomplish his favourite scheme
in behalf of his son. At the very time Charles
seemed to be most sensible of the vanity of worldly
grandeur, and when he appeared to be quitting
it not only with indifference, but with contempt,
the vast schemes of ambition, which had so long
occupied and engrossed his mind, still kept pof.
session of it. He could not think of leaving his
son in a rank inferior to that which he himfeif
had held among the princes of Europe. As he
had, some years before, made a fruitless attempt
to secure the Imperial crown to Philip, that by
uniting it to the kingdoms of Spain, and the
dominions of the house of Burgundy, he might
put it in his power to prosecute, with a better
profpeat of success, those great plans, which his
own infirmities had obliged him to abandon, he
was still unwilling to relinquiih this flattering
projea as chimerical or unattainable.

Notwithstanding the repulle which he had

formerly met with from his brother Ferdinand,
he renewed his folicitations with fresh importu-
nity; and during the summer, had tried every art,
and employed every argoment, which he thought
could induce him to quit the Imperial throne to
Philip, and to accept of the investiture offome
province, either in Italy, or in the Low-Countries,
as an equivalent a. But Ferdinand, who w路s so

t Ambaffades des Noailles, tom. v. 356

3 firm

he had paid no regard to the folicitations of the
emperor, even when they were enforced with all
the weight of authority which accompanies fu-
preme power, received the overture, that now
came from him in the situation to which he had
descended, with greater indifference, and would
hardly deign to liffen to it. Charles, ashamed of
his own credulity in having imagined that he
might accomplish that now, which he had at-
tempted formerly without success, defifted finally
from his feheme. He then resigned the govern.
nent of the empire, and having transferred all his
claims of obedience and allegiance from the Ger-
manic body, to his brother the king of the Ro-
mans, he executed a deed to that effea [Aug.
27], with all the formalities requilite in such
an important tranfaaion. The inifrument of
resignation he committed to William prince of
Orange, and empowered him to lay it before the
college of eledors b.

Nothing now remained to detain Charles from

that retreat for which he languifhe4. The pre-
parations for his voyage having been made for
some time, he set out for Zuitburg in Zealand,
where the fleet which was to convoy him had
orders to assemble. In his way thither he passed
through Ghent, and after stopping there a few
days, tq indulge that tender and pleasing melan-
choly, which arises in the mind of every man in
the decline of life, on visiting the place of his
nativity, and viewing the scenes and objeas fa-
miliar to him in his early youth, he pursued his

b Coldaf. ConLit. Imper. pari. 576.

VOL, IV. 2 journey,

journey, accompanied by his son Philip, his
daughter the archduchess, his fifiters the dowager
queens of France and Hungary, Maximilian his
fon-in-law, and a numerous retinue of the Flemish
nobility. Before he went on board, he dismissed
them, with marks of his attention or regard, and
taking leave of Philip with all the tenderness of
a father who embraced his son for the lait time, he
set fail on the seventeenth of September, under
convoy of a large fleet of Spanish, Flemish, and
Englith ships. He declined a pressing invitation,
from the queen of England, to land in some part
of her dominions, in order to refresh himself,
and that (he might have the comfort of feeing
him once more. " It cannot furely," said he,
'' be agreeable to a queen to receive a visit from
a father-in-law, who is now nothing more than
a private gentleman."

His voyage was prosperous, and he arrived at

Laredo in Biscay on the eleventh day after he
left Zealand. As soon as he landed, he fell
prostrate on the ground; and considering himself
now as dead to the world, he kissed the earth, and
said, " Naked came I out of my mother's womb,
and naked I now return to thee, thou common
mother of mankind." From Laredo he pursued
his journey to Burgos, carried sometimes in a
chair and sometimes in a horse litter, fuffering ex-
quifite pain at every fiep, and advancing with the
greatest difficulty. Some of the Spanish nobility
repaired toBurgos,in order to pay court tohim, but
they were so few in number, and their attendance
was so negligent, that Charles observed it, and
felt, for the firit time, that he was no longer a mo-
narch. Accutomed from his early youth to the

z dutiful

who possess sovereign power are attended, he
had received it with the credulity common to
princes, and was sensibly mortified, when he now
discovered, that he had been indebted to his
rank and power for much of that obsequious re-
gard which he had fondly thought was paid to
his personal qualities. But though he might
have soon learned to view withunconcern the levity
of his fubjeas, or to have despised their negleA,
he was more deeply afflided with the ingratitude
of his son, who, forgetting already how much
he owed to his father's bounty, obliged him to
remain some weeks at Burgos, before he paid him
the first moiety of that small pension, which was
all that he had reserved of so many kingdoms.
As without this fum, Charles could not dismiss
his domeltics with such rewards as their services
merited, or his generosity had deffined for them,
he could not help expressing both surprise and
diffatisfadionC. At last the money was paid,
and Charles having dismissed a great number of
his domeftics, whose attendance he thought
would be superfluous or cumbersome in his retire-
ment, he proceeded to Valladolid. There he took
a laWt and tender leave of his two sisters, whom
he would not permit to accompany him to his
solitude, though they requefied him with tears,
not only that they might have the consolation of
contributing by their attendance and care to
mitigate or to sooth his fufferings, but that
they might reap inifmuaion and benefit by join-
ing with him in those pious exercises, to which
he had consecrated the remainder of his days.

' Strada de Bello Belg. ib. i. 9.

T 2 155fl

i557] rrom Valladolid he continued his joura

ihey to Placencia in Eidremadura. He had passed
through this place a great many yeari befitet
and having been fitruck at that time with thP
delightful situation of the monadtery of St.Julks,
belonging to the order of St. Jerome, not many
mniles distant from the town, he had thdn oba
served to some of his attendants, that this was A
spot to which Dioclefian might have retired with
pleasure. The impreflion had remained so firong
on his mind, that he pitched upon it as the place
of his own retreat. It was seated in a vale of
io great extent, watered by a small brook, and
fiurrounded by rising grounds, covered with lofty
trees ; from the nature of the foil, as well as the
temperature of the climate, it was eaeemed the
fnoft healthful and delicious situation in Spain.
Some months before his resignation he had sent
an architea thither to add a new apartment to
the monastery, for his accommodation; but he
gave ifriA orders that the flyle of the building
Thould be such as suited his present flation, rather
than his former dignity. It confiked only of fix
tooms, four of them in the form of friars cells,
writh naked walls; the other two, each twenty
feet square, were hung with brown cloth, and
furnifbed in the mofe simple manner. They were
all on a level with the ground; with a door on
one fide into a garden, of which Charles hiinfelf
had given the plan, and had filled it with variou8
plants, which he intended to cultivate with him
own hands. On the other fide they communi.
cated with the chapel of the monastery, in which
he was to perform his devotions. Into this
humble retreat, hardly fulficient for the comfort-

I able

P2LYY.

(An/es~~~ TcU~ atb~

(ihod 21 nt~ ~o w

1557.1 EMPEROR CHARLES V. 20g
able accommodation of a private gentleman, did
Charles enter [February 24], with twelve do-
meftics only. He buried there, in solitude and
silence, his grandeur, his ambition, together with
all those valt projeas, which, during almost half
a century, had alarmed and agitated Europe,
silting every kingdom in it, by turns, with the
terror of his arms, and the dread of being sub-
dued by his power d.

The contrait between Charles's condua and

that of the pope at this junaure was so obvious,
that it diruck even the modt careless observers;
nor was the comparison which they made to the
advantage of Paul. The former, a conqueror,
born to reign, long accufdomed to the splendour
which accompanies supreme power, and to those
busy and interesting scenes in which an adive
ambition had engaged him, quitted the world
at a period of life not far advanced, that he might
close the evening of his days in tranquillity, and
secure some interval for sober thought and serious
recolleaion. The latter, a priedt who had passed
the early part of his life in the Ihade of the
schools, and in the dtudy of the speculative
sciences, who was seemingly so detached from the
world, that he had shut himself up for many
years in the solitude of a cloydier, and who was
not raised to the papal throne until he had
reached the extremity of old age, discovered at
once all the impetuosity of youthful ambition,
and formed extensive schemes, in order to accom.
pliih which, he scrupled not to featter the feeds
of discord, and to kindle the flames of war, in

' Sadov. l1. 607. & Zuniga, ioo. Thuan. lib. xvii. 609,

S3 every

110 iHE REIGN OF THE B.LIf

every eorner of Europe. But Paul, regardlerf
of the opinion or censures of mankind, held on his
own course with his wonted arrogance and vio.
lence. These, although they seemed already to
have exceeded all bounds, rose to still a greater
height, upon the arrival of the duke of Guilfe itn
Italy.

That which the two princes of Lorrain fore.

saw and desired, had happened. The duke as
Guise was entrusted with the comrnand of the
army appointed to march to the pope's affil-
ance. It consisted of twenty thousand men, of
the bell troops in the service of France. So
high was the duke's reputation, and such thd
general expetation of beholding some extraor-
dinary exertion of his courage and abilities ih A
war into which he had precipitated his country,
chiefly with the design of obtaining a field where
he might display his own talents, that many of
the French nobility who had no command in the
troops employed, accompanied him as volun-
teers. This army passed the Alps in an incle.
ment season, and advanced towards Romie, with-
out any opposition from the Spaniards, who, as
they were not firong enough to a&t in different
parts, had colleaed all their forces in one body
on the frontiers of Naples, for the defence of
that kingdom.

Emboldened by the approach of the French,

the pope let loose all the fury of his refeotment
against Philip,which, notwithilanding the natural
violence of his temper, prudential considerations
had hithetto obliged him to keep under fomr
refiraint. He named commissioners [Feb. I22,
路thom he empowered to pas judgment in the

suit,

iVr7.1 EMPEROR CetAktLts C .1
Iuit, which the confiflorial advocate had com-
mnenced against Philip, in order to prove that he
had forfeited the crown of Naples, by taking
arms againlt the holy fee, of which he was a
traffal. He recalled all the nuncios [April 9]
resident in the courts of Charles V. of Philip, or
ds any of their allies. This was levelled chiefly
against cardinal Pole, the papal legate in the court
of England, whose great merit, in having con-
tributed so fuccefsfully to reconcile that kingdom
to the church of Rome, together with the ex-
pelation of farther services, which he might
perform, was not fufficient to screen him from
the resentment that he had incurred by his
aealous endeavours to establish peace between the
house of Auffria and France. He commanded
an addition to be made to the anathemas annually
denounced against the enemies of the church on
Maunday-Thurfday, whereby he infliaed the
censure of excommunication on the authors of
the late invasion of the ecclesiastical territories,
whatever theic rank or dignity might be; and
in consequence of this, the usual prayers for
the emperor were omitted next day in the pope's
chapele.

But while the pope indulged himself in those

wild and childish sallies of rage, either he ne-
gleaed, or found that it exceeded his powe?, to
take such meaflures as would have rendered his
resentment really formidable, and fatal to his
enemies. For when the duke of Guise entered
Rome, where he was received with a triumphal
pomp, which would have been more suitable if

3 Pal.. lib, iSo. Mem, de Ribier,ii. 678. he

路ZIz THE REIGN OF THE B.117.

he had been returning after having terminated
the war with glory, than when he was going
to begin it with a doubtful chance of success, he
found none of the preparations for war in such
forwardness as cardinal Caraffa had promised, or
he had expeaed. The papal troops were far in.
ferior in number to the quota stipulated; no
magazines fufficient for their subsistence were
formed; nor was money for paying them pro-
vided. The Venetians, agreeably to that cautious
maxim which the misfortunes of their itate had
first led them to adopt, and which was now be-
come a fundamental principle in their policy, de-
clared their resolution to preserve an exa& neu-
trality, without taking any part in the quarrels
of princes, so far superior to themselves in power.
The other Italian Rtates were either openly united
in league with Philip, or secretly wished success
to his arms again{t a pontiff, whose inconsiderate
ambition had rendered Italy once more the feat
of war.

The duke of Guise perceived that the whole

weight of the war would devolve on the French.
troops under his command; and became sensible,
though too late, how imprudent it is to rely,
in the execution of great enterprizes, on the aid
of feeble allies. Pushed on, however, by the
pope's impatience for adion, as well as by his
own desire of performing some part of what he
had so confidently undertaken, he marched to-
wards Naples [April 13], and began his opera-
tions. But the success of these fell far short of
his former reputation, of what the world expea-
ed, and of what he himself had promised. He
opened the campaign with the siege of Civitella,

a towfn

1557.4 EMPEROR CHARLES V. 213
a towit of rome importance on the Neapolitan
frontier. But the obifinacy with which the
Spanish governor defended it, baffled all the im-
petuous efforts of the French valour, and obliged
the duke of Guise, after a siege of three weeks,
to retire from the towri with disgrace. He en-
deavoured to wipe off that Prain, by advancing
boldly towards the duke of Alva's camp, and
offering him battle. But that prudent com-
mander, sensible of all the advantages offianding
6n the defensive before an invading enemy, de-
elined an engagement, and kept within his in.
trenchments; and adhering to his plan with the
iteadinefs of a CafRilian, eluded, with great ad-
dress, all the duke of Guife's ifratagems to draw'
him into aaion F. By this time sickness began
to waste the French army; violent dissensions had
arisen between the duke of Guise and the com-
inander of the pope's forces; the Spaniards re-
newed their incursions into the ecclesiastical Prate;
the pope, when he found, inflead of the conqueffs
and triumphs which he had fondly expeacd, that
he could not secure his own territories from de-
predation, murmured, complained, and began to
talk of peace. The duke of Guise, mortified to
the last degree with having aaed such an inglo-
tious part, not only solicited his court either to
reinforce his army, or to recal him, but urged
Paul to fulfil his engagements; and called on
cardinal Caraffa, sometimes with reproaches,
sometimes with threats, to make good those
mnagnificent promises, from a rash confidence in
which he had advised his master to renounce the

f Hkrrera Vida de Felipe, i8ri

truce

254 THE REIGN OF TSEI B.XII..

truce of Vaucelles, and to join in league with
the pope g.

But while the French affairs in Italy were in

this wretched situation, an unexpeded event
happened in the Low-Countries, which called
the duke of Guise from a itation wherein he
could acquire no honour, to the molt dignified
and important charge which could be committed
to a fubjeA. As soon as the French had disco-
vered their purpose of violating the truce of
Vaucelles, not only by sending an army into
Italy, but by attempting to surprise some of the
frontier towns in Slanders, Philip, though will-
ing to have avoided a rupture, determined to
prosecute the war with such spirit, as ihould
make his enemies sensible that his father had not
erred, when he judged him to be so capable of
government, that he had given up the reins into
his hands. As he knew that Henry had been
at great expence in fitting out the army under
the duke of Guise, and that his treasury was
hardly able to answer the exorbitant and endless
demands of a difitant war, he foresaw that all his
operations in the Low-Countries mull, of con-
sequence, prove feeble, and be considered only as
secondary to those in Italy. For that reason, he
prudently resolved to make his principal effort in
that place where he expeaed the French to be
weakest, and to bend his chief force against that
quarter where they would feel a blow molt fen-
sibly. With this view, he assembled in the Low-
Countries an army of about fifty thousand men,

a Thuan. lib. xzviil. 614. Pallav. lib. xi1i. JSx. Burn.

ii. App. 3'7* thc

1557-1 EaPEROR CHARLES V. 215
the Flemings serving him on this occasion with
that a~rive zeal which fubjeAs are wont to exert
in obeying the firfi commands of a new sovereign.
But Philip, cautious and provident, even at this
early period of life, did not reft all his hopes of
success on that formidable force alone.

He had been labouring for some time to en-

gage the English to espouse his quarrel; and
though it was manifefily the interest of that king-
dom to maintain a firid neutrality, and the peo.
pie themselves were sensible of the advantages
which they derived from it; though he knew
how odious his name was to the English, and
how averse they would be to co-operate with him
in any measure, he nevertheless did not despair of
accompliihing his point. He relied on the affec-
tion with which the queen doated on him, which
was so violent, that even his coldness and negle&
had not extinguished it; he knew her implicit
reverence for his opinion, and her fond desire of
gratifying him in every particular. That he
might work on these with greater facility and
more certain success, he set out for England.
The queen, who, during her hufband's absence,
had languilhed in perpetual dejedion, resumed
frelh spirits on his arrival ; and, without paying
the leafl attention either to the interest or to the
inclinations of her people, entered warmly into
all his fehemes. In vain did her privy-council
remonfirate against the imprudence as well as
danger of involving the nation in an unnecessary
war; in vain did they put her in mind of the
solemn treaties of peace subsisting between
England and France, which the condud of that
nation had afforded her no pretext to violate.

Mary,

otT aEHX RIGN or THE 3). frrr
Mary, soothed by Philip's caresses, or intimi-
dated by the threats which his ascendant over
her emboldened him at some times to throw out,
was deaf to every thing that could be urged in
opposition to his sentiments, and insisted with the
greateit vehemence on an immediate declaration
of war againf France. The council, though
all Philip's address and Mary's authority were
employed to gain or overawe them, after firug.
gling long, yielded at ladt, not from conviaion,
but merely from deference to the will of their
sovereign. War was declared againit France
[June 20], the only one perhaps against that
Sringdom into which the English ever entered
with reluc'ance. As Mary knew the averfin
of the nation to this measure, the durit not call
a parliament in order to raise money for carrying
on the war. She supplied this want, however,
by a diretch of royal prerogative, not unusual in
that age; and levied large sums on her fubjeas
by her own authority. This enabled her to
assemble a fufficient body of troops, and to fend
eight thousand men under the condua of the
earl of Pembroke to join Philip's army h.

Philip, who was not ambitious of military

glory, gave the command of his army to Emanuel
Philibert, duke of Savoy, and fixed his own refit
dencc at Cambray, that he might be at hand to
receive the earliest intelligence of his motione,
and to aid him with his councils. The duke
opened the campaign with a madterly droake of
address, which judfified Philip's choice, and dif-
Foveed such a superiority of genius over the

Csarte, ihi. 337*

French

I557.] EM"PEROR CHARiEE V. 257
French generals, as almost insured success in his
subsequent operations. He appointed the gene-
ral rendezvous of his troops at a place confider-
ably diflant from the country which he destined
to be the scene of adion; and having kept the
enemy in suspense for a good time with regard
to his intentions, he at last deceived them so
effedually by the variety of his marches and
counter-marches, as led them to conclude that
he meant to bend all his force againit the pro.
vince of Champagne, and would attempt to pene.
trate into the kingdom on that fide. In confe-
quence of this opinion, they drew all their
fitrength towards that quarter, and reinforcing
the garrison there, left the towns on other parts
of the frontier destitute of troops fufficient to
defend them.

The duke of Savoy, as soon as he perceived

that this feint had its full effea, turned suddenly
to the right, advanced by rapid marches into
Picardy, and sending his cavalry, in which he
was extremely firong, before him, invefited St.
Quintin. This was a town deemed in that age
of considerable fitrength, and of great importance,
as there were few fortified cities between it and
Paris. The fortifications, however, had been
much negleAed; the garrison, weakened by
draughts sent towards Champagne, did not
amount to a fifth part of the number requisite
for its defence; and the governor, though a
brave officer, was neither of rank, nor authority,
equal to the command in a place of so much con-
sequence, belieged by such a formidable army.
A few days muit have put the duke of Savoy in
poffeffion of the town, if the admiral de Coligny,

VOL. iv. V who

21S THE REIGN OF THE L. XII.

who thought it concerned his honour to attempt
Laving a place of such importance to his country,
and which lay within his jurifdiaion as governor
of Picardy, had not taken the gallant resolution
of throwing himfeif into it, with flch a body of
men as he could colled on a sudden. This refo-
lution he executed with great intrepidity, and, if
the nature of the enterprize be considered, with
no contemptible success; for though one half
of his small body of troops was cut off, he, with
the other, broke through the enemy, and entered
the town. The unexpeded arrival of an officer
of such high rank and reputation, and who had
exposed himself to such danger in order to join
them, inspired the defponding garrison with
courage. Every thing that the admiral's great
skill and experience in the art of war could fug-
gedt, for annoying the enemy, or defending the
town, was attempted; and the citizens, as well
as the garrison, seconding his zeal with equal
ardour, seemed to be determined that they would
hold out to the laid, and sacrifice themselves in
order to save their countryi.

The duke of Savoy, whom the English, under

the earl of Pembroke, joined about this time,
pushed on the siege with the greatedt vigour. An
army so numerous, and so well supplied with
every thing requilite, carried on Its approaches
with great advantage against a garrison which
was dill so feeble that it durl seldom venture to
dilturb or retard the enemy's operations by sallies.
The admiral, sensible of the approaching danger,
and unable to avert it, acquainted his uncle the

拢 Thuan, lib. xix. 647. conflable

1557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 219
conitable Montmorency, who had the command
of the French army, with his situation, and
pointed out to him a method by which he might
throw relief into the town. The conifable, soli-
citous to save a town, the loss of which would
open a passage for the enemy into the heart of
France; and eager to extricate his nephew out
of that perilous situation, in which zeal for the
public had engaged him; resolved, though aware
of the danger, to attempt what he desired. With
this view, he marched from La Fere towards St.
Quintin at the head of his army, which was not
by one-half Lo numerous as that of the enemy,
and having given the command of a body of
chosen men to Coligny's brother Dandelot, who
was colonel-general of the French infantry, he
ordered him to force his way into the town by
that avenue which the admiral had represented
as most pradicable, while he himself, with the
main army, would give the alarm to the enemy's
camp on the opposite fide, and endeavour to draw
all their attention towards that quarter. Dan-
delot executed his orders with greater intrepidity
than condu&. [August so] He rushed on with
such headlong impetuosity, that, though it broke
the firit body of the enemy which stood in his
way, it threw his own soldiers into the utmost
confusion; and as they were attacked in that
Lituation by fresh troops which closed in upon
them on every fide, the greater part of them
were cut in pieces, Dandelot, with about five
hundred of the most adventurous and mofl for-
tunate, making good his entrance into the
town.

u z Meanp

12O THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.

Meanwhile the conflable, in executing his

part of the plan, advanced so near the camp of
the besiegers, as rendered it impofible to retreat
with safety in the face of an enemy so much fu.
perior in number. The duke of Savoy iniantly
perceived Montmorency's error, and prepared,
with the presence of mind and abilities of a great
general, to avail himself of it. He drew up his
army in order of battle, with the greatest expe.
dition, and watching the moment when the
French began to file off towards La Fere, he
detached all his cavalry, under the command of
the count of Egmont, to fall on their rear,
while he himself, at the head of his infantry, ad-
vanced to support him. The French retired at
first in perfea order, and with a good counte-
nance; but when they faxw Egmont draw near
with his formidable body of cavalry, the shock
of which they were confcions that they could
not withfiand, the profpe& of imminent danger,
added to difiruft of their general, whose impru.
dence every soldier now perceived, firuck them
with general condernation. They began infen-
sibly to quicken their pace, and those in the
rear pressed so violently on such as were before
them, that in a (hort time their march resembled
a flight rather than a retreat. Egmont, observing
their confusion, charged them with the greateit
fury, and in a moment all their men at arms,
the pride and strength of the French troops in
that age, gave way and fled with precipitation.
The infantry, however, whom the constable, by
his presence and authority, kept to their colours,
gill continued to retreat in good order, until the

enemy

3557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 22*
enemy brought some pieces of cannon to bear
upon their centre, which threw them into fiich
confusion, that the Flemish cavalry, renewing
their attack, broke in, and the rout became
universal. About four thousand of the French
fell in the field, and among thele the duke of
Anguien, a prince of the blood, together with
fix hundred gentlemen. The confable, as soon
as he perceived the fortune of the day to be irre-
trievable, rushed into the thickest of the enemy,
with a resolution not to survive the calamity
which his ill-condu& had brought upon his
country: but having received a dangerous
wound, and being wasted with the loss of blood,
be was surrounded by some Flemish officers, to
whom he was known, who proteAed him from
the violence of the soldiers, and obliged him to
surrender. Besides the conifable, the dukes of
Montpenfier and Longueville, the marechal St.
Andre, many officers of diftinaion, three hundred
gentlemen, and near four thousand private fol-
diers, were taken prisoners. All the colours
belonging to the infantry, all the ammunition,
and all the cannon, two pieces excepted, fell
into the enemy's hands. The viftorious army
did not lose above fourscore men k.

This battle, no less fatal to France than the

ancient viaories of Crecy and Agincourt, gained
by the English on the fame frontier, bore a near
resemblance to those difafirous events, in the
suddenness of the rout; in the ill-condua of

k Thuan. 650. Herei Annal. Brabant. ii. 692. Her.

icr,, 191h

222 rHE REIGN OF THE X II.

the commander in chief; in the number of per.
sons of note slain or taken; and in the small lofa
fuflained by the enemy. It filled France with
equal conifernation. Mainy inhabitants ofParis,
with the fame precipitancy and trepidation as if
the enemy had been already at their gates,
quitted the city, and retired into the ihterior
provinces. The king, by his presence and ex-
hortations, endeavoured to console and to ani-
mate such as remained, and applying himself
with the greateit diligence to repair the ruinous
fortifications of the city, prepared to defend it
against the attack which he initantly expeded.
But happily for France, Philip's caution, to-
gether with the intrepid firmness of the admiral
de Coligny, not only saved the capital from the
danger to which it was exposed, but gained the
nation a (hort interval, during which the people
recovered from the terror and deje&ion occasioned
by a blow no less severe than unexpeaed, and
Henry had leisure to take measures for the
public security, with the spirit which became
the sovereign of a powerful and martial people.

Philip, immediately after the battle, visited

the camp at St. 0uintin, where he was received
with all the exultation of military triumph; and
such were his transports of joy on account of
an event which threw so mnuch luffre on the
beginning of his reign, that they softened his
severe and haughty temper into an unusual flow
of courtesy. When the duke of Savoy approach.
ed, and was kneeling to kiss his hands, he caught
him in his arms, and embracing him with
warmth, " It becomes me," says he, " rather

1557.] EMPEROR CHRARTES V. 223
to kiss your hands, which have gained me such
a glorious and almost bloodless viaory."

As soon as the rejoicings and congratulations

on Philip's arrival were over, a council of war
was held, in order to determine how they might
improve their viaory to the best advantage.
The duke of Savoy, seconded by several of the
ablest officers formed under Charles V. insisted
that they should immediately relinquish the siege
of St. Quintin, the reduAion of which was now
an obje& below their attention, and advance
direaly towards Paris; that as there were nei-
ther troops to oppose, nor any town of strength
to retard their march, they might reach that
capital while under the full imprefflion of the
astonishment and terror occafloned by the rout
of the army, and take poffcflion of it without
resistance. But Philip, less adventurous or
more prudent than his generals, preferred a mo-
derate but certain advantage, to an enterprize
of greater splendour, but of more doubtful
fuccels. He represented to the council the in-
finite resources of a kingdom so powerful as
France; the great number as well as martial
spirit of its nobles; their attachment to their
sovereign; the manifold advantages with which
they could carry on war in their own territories;
and the unavoidable deftruaion which muff be
the consequence of their penetrating too rashly
into the enemy's country, before they had fe-
cured such a communication with their own as
might render a retreat safe, if, upon any dif-
aftrous event, that measure should become ne-
ceffary. On all these accounts, he adviled the
continuance of the siege, and his generals ac-

quiefed

;24 THE LEIGN OF TylE 4. XII,
quiefced the more readily in his opinion, as they
made no doubt of being masters of the town in
a few days, a loss of time of so little consequence
in the execution of their plan, that they might
eaily repair it by their fuhfequent adivity'.

The weakness of the fortifications, and the

small number of the garrison, which could no
longer hope either for reinforcement or relief,
seemed to authorize this calculation of Philip's
generals. But, in making it, they did not at,
tend fufficiently to the charaaer of admiral de
Coligny, who commanded in the town. A
courage undismayed, and tranquil amidst the
greatest dangers, an invention fruitful in re-
sources, a genius which roused and seemed to
acquire new force upon every disaster, a talent
of governing the minds of men, together with a
capacity of maintaining his ascendant over them
even under circumfitances the most adverse and
diftrefsful, were qualities which Coligny poffeffed
in a degree superior to any general of that age,
These qualities were peculiarly adapted to the
flation in which he was now placed; and as he
knew the infinite importance to his country of
every hour which he could gain at this jundure,
he exerted himself to the utmost in contriving
how to protrad the liege, and to detain the
enemy from attempting any enterprize more dan-
gerous to France. Such were the perseverance
and skill with which he conduded the defence,
and such the fortitude as well as patience with
which he animated the garrison, that though
the Spaniard5, the Flemings, and the English,

! Belkar. Commentar. de Reb. Galli. pox.

Farried

1557.) EMPEORO CHARLES v. 22S
carried on the attack with all the ardour which
national emulation inspires, he held out the town
seventeen days. He was taken prisoner at lalk
(Aug. 17], on the breach, overpowered by the
superior number of the enemy.

Henry availed himself, with the utmost ahi

vity, of the interval which the admiral's well-
timed obitinacy had afforded him. He appointed
officers to coiled the scattered remains of the
conflable's army; he issued orders for levying
soldiers in every part of the kingdom; he com-
manded the ban and arriere ban of the frontier
provinces infiantly to take the field, and to join
the duke of Nevers at Laon in Picardy; he re-
called the greater part of the veteran troops
which fervnd under the marechal Briffac in
Piedmont; he sent courier after courier to the
duke of Guise, reqeiring him, together with all
his army, to return inltantly for the defence of
their cauntry; he dispatched one envoy to the
grand iignior, to solicit the assistance of his fleet,
and the loan of a fum of money; he feat an-
other into Scotland, to incite the Scots to invade
the north of England, that, by drawing Mary's
attention to that quarter, he might prevent her
from reinforcing her troops which served under
Philip. These efforts of the king were warmly
seconded by the zeal of his fubjeas. The
city of Paris granted him a free gift of three
hundred thousand livres. The other great towns
imitated the liberality of the capital, and
contributed in proportion. Several noblemen
of diftinaion engaged, at their own expence, to
garrison and defend the towns which lay moaE
exposed to the enemy. Nor was the general

concern

226 THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.

concern for the public confined to corporate bodies
alone, or to those in the higher sphere of life,
but diffufing itself among persons of every rank,
each individual seemed disposed to a& with as
much vigour as if the honour of the king, and
the safety of the state, had depended solely on
his single efforts m.

Philip, who was no fitranger either to the pru-

dent measures taken by the French monarch for
the security of his dominions, or to the spirit
with which his fubjeas prepared to defend
themselves, perceived, when it was too late,
that he had lot an opportunity which could
never be recalled, and that it was now vain to
think of penetrating into the heart of France.
He abandoned, therefore, without much re-
luaance, a scheme which was too bold and
hazardous to be perfealy agreeable to his cau-
tious temper; and employed his army, during
the remainder of the campaign, in the sieges of
Ham and Catelet. Of these, he soon became
mailer; and the reduaion of two such petty
towns, together with the acquisition of St.
Ot~intin, were all the advantages which he de.
rived from one of the most decisive viaories
gained in that century. Philip himself, how.
ever, continued in high exultation on account
of his success; and as all his pafinons were tinged
with fuperitition, he, in memory of the battle
of St. QOintin, which had been fought on the
day consecrated to St. Laurence, vowed to build
a church, a monafery, and a palace, in honour
of that faint and martyr. Before the expiration

F Mem. de Ribier, ii. 70!. 703.

1557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 227
of the year, he laid the foundation of an edifice,
in which all these were united, at the Escurial
in the neighbourhood of Madrid; and the fame
principle which didated the vow, direaed the
building. For the plan of the work was so
formed as to resemble a gridiron, which, accord-
ing to the legendary tale, had been the infiru-
ment of St. Laurence's martyrdom. Notwith..
fianding the great and expensive schemes in
which his restless ambition involved him, Philip
continued the building with such perseverance
for twenty-two years, and reserved such large
sums for this monument of his devotion and
vanity, that the monarchs of Spain are indebted
to him for a royal residence, which, though not
the most elegant, is certainly the most sump-
tuous and magnificent of any in Europe n.

The first account of that fatal blow which

the French had received at St. Quintin was car-
ried to Rome by the courier whom Henry had
sent to recal the duke of Guise. As Paul, even
with the assistance of his French auxiliaries,
had hardly been able to check the progress of
the Spanish arms, he foresaw that, as soon as
he was deprived of their proteaion, his territo.
ries must be over-run in a moment. He remon.
ilrated, therefore, with the greatest violence
against the departure of the French army, re-
proaching the duke of Guise for his ill-condua,
which had brought him into such an unhappy
situation; and complaining of the king for de-
serting him so ungenerously under such circum-
ifances. The duke of Guife's orders, however,

D Colmenar Annalcs d'Efpagne, tom. ii. p. 136.

were

228 THE REIGN OF TFFE L. KIL

were peremptory. ' Paul, inflexible as he was,
found it necessary to accommodate his condua
to the exigency of his affairs, and to employ the
inediation of the Venetians, and of Cosmo di
Medici, in order to obtain peace. Philip, who
had been forced unwillingly to a rupture with
the pope, and who, even while success crowned
his arms, doubted so much the juitice of his own
cause, that he had made frequent overtures of
pacification, listened eagerly to the firif propo.
fals of this nature from Paul, and discovered
such moderation in his demands, as could hardly
have been expeaed from a prince elated with
viftory.

The duke of Alva on the part of Philip, and

the cardinal Caraffa in the name of his uncle,
met at Cavi, and both being equally disposed to
peace, they, after a short confererece, terminated
the war by a treaty on the following terms:
'That Paul (hould renounce his league with
France, and maintain for the future such a neu-
trality as became the common father of Chrifien.
dom; That Philip should inilantly restore all the
towns of the ecclefiaitical territory of which he
had taken poffeffion; That the claims of the
Caraffas to the dutchy of Paliano, and other
demefues of the Colonnas, should be referred to
the decision of the republic of Venice; That the
duke of Alva should repair in person to Rome,
and after aflking pardon of Paul in his own name,
and in that of his master, for having invaded the
patrimony of the church, ihould receive the
pope's absolution from that crime. Thus Paul,
through Philip's scrupulous timidity, finished an
unprofperous war wihhout any detriment to the

papal

5557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 229
papal fee. The conqueror appeared humble,
and acknowledged his error; while he who had
been vanquished retained his usual haughtiness,
and was treated with every mark of fuperi-
ority 0. The duke of Alva, in terms of the
treaty, repaired to Rome, and, in the polture
of a supplicant, kissed the feet, and implored
the forgiveness of that very person whom his
arms had reduced to the last extremity. Such
was the fuperititious veneration of the Spaniards
for the papal charater, that Alva, though per-
haps the proudest man of the age, and accustomed
from his infancy to a familiar intercourse with
princes, acknowledged that when he approached
the pope, he was so much overawed, that his
voice failed, and his presence of mind forsook
him P.

But though this war, which at its commence-

ment threatened mighty revolutions, was brought
to an end without occasioning any alteration in
those states which were its immediate objea, it
had produced during its progress effeas of con-
fiderable consequence in other parts of Italy.
As Philip was extremely solicitous to terminate
his quarrel with Paul as speedily as possible, he
was willing to make any sacrifice in order to gain
those princes, who, by joining their troops to
the papal and French army, might have pro-
longed the war. With this view, he entered
into a negotiation with Oaavio Farnese, duke
of Parma, and in order to seduce him from

o Pallav. lib. xifl. 183. F. Paul, 380. HerreTa, vol. i.

30o. P Pallav. lib. xli. iS5. Summonte Iftoria
di Napoli, iv. 236.

VOL. IV. x his

230 THE REIGN OF THE B. XI.
his alliance with France, he restored to him
the city of Placentia, with the territory depend-
ing on it, which Charles V. had seized in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-feven,
had kept from that time in his poffeffion, and
had transmitted, together with his other domi-
nions, to Philip.

This itep made such a discovery of Philip's

charader and views to Cosmo di Medici, the
most sagacious as well as provident of all the
Italian princes, that he conceived hopes of ac-
complifhing his favourite scheme of adding Siena
and its territories to his dominions in Tuscany.
As his success in this attempt depended entirely
on the delicacy of address with which it should be
conduaed, he employed all the refinements of
policy in the negotiation which he let on foot
for this purpone. He began with soliciting
Philip, whose treasury he knew to be entirely
drained by the expence of the war, to repay the
great sums which he had advanced to the empe-
ror during the Liege of Siena. When Philip en-
deavoured to elude a demand which he was
unable to satisfy, Cosmo affeaed to be extremely
difquieted, and making no Lecret of his difguit,
infitrued his ambassador at Rome to open a
negotiation with the pope which seemed to be
the effea of it. The ambassador executed his
commission with Luch dexterity, that Paul,
imagining Cosmo to be entirely alienated from
the Spanish interest, proposed to him an alliance
with France which should be cemented by the
marriage of his eldest son to one of Henry's
daughters. Cosmo received the overture with
fiuch apparent fatisfaaion, and with so many pro-

sessions

1557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 23!
sessions of gratitude for the high honour of which
he had the profped, that not only the pope's
minifiers, but the French envoy at Rome, talked
confidently, and with little reserve, of the ac.
cession of that important ally, as a matter certain
and decided. The account of this was quickly
carried to Philip; and Cosmo, who foresaw how
much it would alarm him, had dispatched his
nephew Ludovico de Toledo into the Nether-
lands, that he might be at hand to observe and
take advantage of his consternation before the
first impression which it made should in any de-
gree abate. Cosmo was extremely fortunate in
the choice of the infirument whom he employed.
Toledo waited, with patience, until he discover-
ed with certainty, that Philip had received such
intelligence of his uncle's negotiations at Rome
as mutt have filled his suspicious mind with fear
and jealousy; and then craving an audience, he
required payment of the money which had been
borrowed by the emperor, in the most earnest
and peremptory terms. In urging that point,
he artfully threw out several dark hints and
ambiguous declarations, concerning the ex-
tremities to which Cosmo might be driven by
a refusal of this just demand, as well as by other
grievances of which he had good reason to com-

plain. Philip, aftonithed at an address in such a
ifrain from a prince so far his inferior as the duke
of Tuscany, and comparing what he now heard
with the information which he had received
from Italy, immediately concluded that Cosmo
had ventured to assume this bold and unusual
tone on the profpe& of his union with France.

x2 In

232 THE REIGN OF THE a. xII.
In order to prevent the pope and Henry from
acquiring an ally, who, by his abilities, as well as
the situation of his dominions, would have added
both reputation and firength to their confederacy,
he offered to grant Cosmo the invertiture of
Siena, if he would coufent to accept of it as an
equivalent for the sums due to him, and engage
to furnish a body of troops towards the defence
of Philip's territories in Italy, against any power
who should attack them. As soon as Cofimo
had brought Philip to make this concession,
which was the objed of all his artifices and in-
trigues, he did not protrad the negotiation by
any unnecessary delay, or any excess of refine.
rnent, but closed eagerly with the proposal, and
Philip, in spite of the remonfitrances of his ablest
cotnfellors, signed a treaty with him to that
effea s.

As no prince was ever more tenacious of his

rights than Philip, or less willing to relinquilh
any territory which he poffeffed, by what tenure
soever he held it, these unusual concessions to the
dukes of Parma and Tuscany, by which he
wantonly gave up countries, in acquiring or de.
sending which his father had employed many
years, and wasted much blood and treasure,
cannot be accounted for from any motive, but
his superstitious desire of extricating himself out
of the war which he had been forced to wage
against the pope. Byj these treaties, however,
the balance of power among the Italian states
was poised with greater equality, and rendered
less variable than it had been since it received the

q Thuan. lib. xviii. 624. Herrera, i. z63* 275. Pallay.

lib. xiii. 180.

first

1557.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 233
firit violent shock from the invasion of Charles
VIII. of France. From this period Italy ceased
to be the great theatre, on which the monarchs
of Spain, France, and Germany, contended for
power or for fame. Their dissensions and hofti-
lities, though as frequent and violent as ever,
being excited by new objeas, flained other re-
gions of Europe with blood, and rendered
them miserable, in their turn, by the devastations
of war.

The duke of Guise left Rome on the fame

day [Sept. 29] that his adversary the duke of
Alva made his humiliating fubmiflion to the pope.
He was received in France as the guardian angel
of the kingdom. His late ill success in Italy
seemed to be forgotten, while his former services,
particularly his defence of Metz, were recounted
with exaggerated praise; and he was welcomed
in every city through which he passed, as the
refforer of public security, who, after having set
bounds by his condua and valour to the viAorious
arms of Charles V. returned now, at the call of
his country, to check the formidable progress of
Philip's power. The reception which he met
with from Henry was no less cordial and honour-
able. New titles were invented, and new digni-
ties created, in order to distinguish him. He
was appointed lieutenant-general in chief both
within and without the kingdom, with a jurif.
di6ion almoit unlimited, and hardly inferior to
that which was poffeffed by the king himfdlf.
Thus, through the singular felicity which attend-
ed the princes of Lorrain, the miscarriage of their
own schemes contributed to aggrandize them.
The calamities of his country, and the ill-condu&

X3 of

3+ THE KEIGN OUK THE 15. XII.

of his rival the conifable, exalted the duke of
Goife to a height of dignity and power, which
he could not have expeaed to attain by the most
fortunate and most complete success of his own
ambitious projeas.

The duke of Guise, eager to perform some.

thing suitable to the high expeaations of his
countrymen, and that he might justify the ex-
traordinary confidence which the king had re.
posed in him, ordered all the troops, which could
be got together, to assemble at Compeigne.
Though the winter was well advanced, and had
set in with extreme severity, he placed himself at
their head, and took the field. By Henry's
aaivity and the zeal of his fubjear, so many
soldiers had been raised in the kingdom, and fich
considerable reinforcements had been drawn from
Germany and Swifferland, as formed an army
refpedable even in the eyes of a viaorious ene.
my. Philip, alarmed at feeing it put in motion
at such an uncommon season, began to tremble
for his new conqueis, particularly St. Quintin,
the fortifications of which were hitherto but im.
perfedly repaired.

But the duke of Guise meditated a more im-

portant enterprize ; and after amusing the enemy
with threatening successively different towns on
the frontiers of Slanders, he turned fulddesly to
the left, and invefited Calais with his whole
army [Jan. 1, 5558]. Calais had been taken by
the English under Edward III. and was the fruit
of that monarch's glorious vialory at Crecy.
Being the only place that they retained of their
ancient and extensive territories in France, and
which opened to them, at all times, an easy and

I558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 235
secure passage into the heart of that kingdom,
their keeping poffeffion of it soothed the pride of
the one nation as much as it mortified the vanity
of the other. Its situation was naturally so ifrong,
and its fortifications deemed so impregnable, that
no monarch of France, how adventurous soever,
had been bold enough to attack it. Even when
the domestic firength of England was broken and
exhausted by the bloody wars between the houses
of York and Lancaster, and its attention entirely
diverted from foreign objeas, Calais had re-
mained undisturbed and unthreatened. Mary and
her council, composed chiefly of ecclefiaftics, un-
acquainted with military affairs, and whose whole
attention was turned towards extirpating heresy
out of the kingdom, had not only negleded to
take any precautions for the safety of this im-
portant place, but seemed to think that the re-
putation of its fitrength was alone fufficient for
its security. Full of this opinion, they ven-
tured, even after the declaration of war, to con-
tinue a pradice which the low Rate of the queen's
finances had introduced in times of peace. As
the country adjacent to Calais was overflowed
during the winter, and the marshes around it
became impassable, except by one avenue, which
the forts of St. Agatha and Newnham-bridge
commanded, it had been the custom of the Eng-
lifh to dismiss the greater part of the garrison
towards the end of autumn, and to replace it in
the spring. In vain did lord Wentworth, the
governor of Calais, remonfirate against this ill-
timed parsimony, and represent the poffibiliry of
his being attacked suddenly, while he had not
troops fufficient to man the works. The privy-

council

230 THE REIGN OF THE B. XI.e
council treated these remonftrances with scorn,
as if they had flowed from the timidity or the
rapaciousness of the governor; and some of them,
with that confidence which is the companion of
ignorance, boasted that they would defend Calais
with their white rods against any enemy who
should approach it during winter r. In vain did
Philip, who had passed through Calais as he re-
turned from England to the Netherlands, warn
the queen of the danger to which it was ex-
posed; and acquainting her with what was
necefiary for its security, in vain did he offer to
reinforce the garrison during winter with a de-
tachment of his own troops. Mary's coun-
fellors, though obsequious to her in all points
wherein religion was concerned, difiruited, as
much as the reit of their countrymen, every
proposition that came from her husband; and
fufpeaing this to be an artifice of Philip's in
order to gain the command of the town, they
negleaed his intelligence, declined his offer, and
left Calais with less than a fourth part of the
garrison requisite for its defence.

His knowledge of this encouraged the duke

of Guise to venture on an enterprize, that fur-
prized his own countrymen no less than his ene-
mies. As he knew that its success depended on
conduaing his operations with such rapidity as
would afford the English no time for throwing
relief into the town by sea, and prevent Philip
from giving him any interruption by land, he
pushed the attack with a degree of vigour little
known in carrying on sieges during that age..

' Carte, iii. 3454

Fle

1558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 237
He drove the English from fort St. Agatha, at
the firit assault. He obliged them to abandon
the fort of Newnham-bridge after defending it
only three days. He took the calle which
commanded the harbour by florm; and on the
eighth day after he appeared before Calais, com-
pelled the governor to surrender, as his feeble
garrison, which did not exceed five hundred
men, was worn out with the fatigue of sustain-
ing so many attacks, and defending such exten-
five works.

The duke of Guise, without allowing the

English time to recover from the consternation
occasioned by this blow, immediately invefited
Guifnes, the garrison of which, though more
numerous, defended itself with less vigour, and
after standing one briik assault, gave up the
town. The caffle of Hames was abandoned by
the troops posted there, without waiting the
approach of the enemy.

Thus, in a few days, during the depth of

winter, and at a time when the fatal battle of
St. Quintin had so depressed the sanguine spirit
of the French, that their utmost aim was to pro-
te& their own country, without dreaming of
making conquefs on the enemy, the enterprizing
valour of one man drove the English out of Ca-
lais, after they had held it two hundred and ten
years, and deprived them of every foot of land
in a kingdom, where their dominions had been
once very extensive. This exploit, at the fame
time that it gave an high idea of the power and
resources of France to all Europe, set the duke
of Guise, in the opinion of his countrymen, far
above al the generals of the age. They celebrated

his

238 THE REIGN OF THE E. XII.
his conquests with immoderate transports of
joy; while the English gave vent to all the pas-
fions which animate a high-fpirited people,
when any great national calamity is manifefily
owing to the ill condua of their rulers. Mary
and her ministers, formerly odious, were now
contemptible in their eyes. All the terrors of
her severe and arbitrary administration could
not reitrain them from uttering execrations and
threats against those, who having wantonly involv-
ed the nation in a quarrel wherein it was nowise
interefled, had by their negligence or incapacity
brought irreparable disgrace on their country,
and loft the molt valuable poffeffion belonging to
the English crown.

The king of France imitated the condua of

its former conqueror, Edward III. with regard
to Calais. He commanded all the English in-
habitants to quit the town, and giving their
houses to his own fubjeas, whom he allured to
fettle there by granting them various immuni-
ties, he left a numerous garrison, under an ex-
perienced governor, for their defence. After
this, his viaorious army was conduaed into
quarters of refreshment, and the usual inaaion
of winter returned.

During these various operations, Ferdinand

assembled the college of eledors at Frankfort
[Feb. 24], in order to lay before them the in-
ftrument whereby Charles V. had resigned the
Imperial crown, and transferred it to him. This
he had hitherto delayed on account of some dif.
ficulties which had occurred concerning the for.
malities requisite in supplying a vacancy occa-
fioned by an event, to which there was no

parallel

I558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 239
parallel in the annals of the empire. These being
at length adjusted, the prince of Orange exe-
cuted the commiflion with which he had been
entrusted by Charles; the eleaors accepted of
his resignation; declared Ferdinand his lawful
successor; and put him in poffeffion of all the
ensigns of the Imperial dignity.

But when the new emperor sent Gufman his

chancellor to acquaint the pope with this tranf-
aaion, to testify his reverence towards the holy
fee, and to signify that, according to form, he
would soon dispatch an ambassador extraordinary
to treat with his holiness concerning his corona-
tion; Paul, whom neither experience nor difap.
pointments could teach to bring down his lofty
ideas of the papal prerogative to such a moderate
itandard as suited the genius of the times, refused
to admit the envoy into his presence, and de-
clared all the proceedings at Frankfort irregular
and invalid. He contended that the pope, as
the vicegerent of Christ, was entrusted with the
keys both of spiritual and of civil government;
that from him the Imperial jurifdiftion was de-
rived; that though his predecessors had autho-
rifed the elefors to choose an emperor whom
the holy fee confirmed, this privilege was confined
to those cafes when a vacancy was occasioned by
death; that the inifrument of Charles's reiigna-
tion had been presented in an improper court, as
it belonged to the pope alone to rejea or to ac-
cept of it, and to nominate a person to fill the
Imperial throne; that, setting aside all these
objeAions, Ferdinand's eleaion laboured under
two defeas which alone were fufficient to render
it void, for the protestant eledors had been ad-

mitted

240 THE REIGN OF THE B.XII.

mitted to vote, though, by their apofcacy from
the catholic faith, they had forfeited that and
every other privilege of the eleaoral office ; and
Ferdinand, by ratifying the concessions of several
diets in favour of heretics, had rendered himself
unworthy of the Imperial dignity, which was
inflituted for the proteaion, not for the deifruc-
tion, of the church. But after thundering out
these extravagant maxims, he added, with an
appearance of condescension, that if Ferdinand
would renounce all title to the Imperial crown,
founded on the eleion at Frankfort, make pro.
fefflions of repentance for his pafR condua, and
supplicate him, with due humility, to confirm
Charles's resignation, as well as his own affump.
* tion to the empire, he might expe& every mark
of favour from his paternal clemency and good.
ness. Gufman, though he had foreseen con-
fiderable difficulties in his negotiation with the
pope, little expeaed that he would have revived
those antiquated and wild pretensions, which
astonished him so much that he hardly knew in
what tone he ought to reply. He prudently
declined entering into any controversy concern-
ing the nature or extent of the papal jurifdiaion,
and confining himself to the political confidera-
tions, which Ihould determine the pope to re-
cognize an emperor already in poffeffion, he en-
deavoured to place them in such a light, as he
imagined could scarcely fail to lirike Paul, if he
were not altogether blind to his own interest.
Philip seconded Gufman's arguments with great
earnefitnefs, by an ambassador whom he sent to
Rome on purpose, and besought the pope to de.
silt from claims so unseasonable, as might not

only

1558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 241
only irritate and alarm Ferdinand and the princes
of the empire, but furnish the enemies of the
holy fee with a new reason for representing its
jurifdidion as incompatible with the rights of
princes, and subversive of all civil authority.
But Paul, who deemed it a crime to attend to
any consideration suggested by human prudence
or policy, when he thought himself called upon
to assert the prerogatives of the papal fee, re-
mained inflexible; and during his pontificate,
Ferdinand was not acknowledged as emperor by
the court of Rome '.

While Henry was intent upon his preparations

for the approaching campaign, he received ac-
counts of the issue of his negotiations in Scot-
land. Long experience having at last taught
the Scots the imprudence of involving their
country in every quarrel between France
and England, neither the folicitations of the
French ambassador, nor the address and autho-
rity of the queen regent, could prevail on them
to take arms againit a kingdom with which they
were at peace. On this occasion the ardour of a
martial nobility and of a turbulent people was
restrained by regard for the public interest and
tranquillity, which in former deliberations of this
kind had been seldom attended to by a nation
always prone to rush into every new war. But
though the Scots adhered with steadiness to
their pacific system, they were extremely ready
to gratify the French king in another parti-
cular which he had given in charge to his am-
baffador.

* Godleveus de Abdicat. Car.V. ap. Gold. Polt. Imper.

192. Pallav. lib. xii. 5S9. Ribier, ii. 746. 759T

VOL. IV. VThe

242 THEKREIGN OU THE LX XII.

The young queen of Scots had been affianced

to the Dauphin in the year one thousand five
hundred and forty-eight, and having been edu.
cated since that time in the court of France, she
had grown up to be the most amiable, and one
of the most accomplished princesses of that age.
Henry demanded the consent of her fubjeas to
the celebration of the marriage, and a parliament,
which was held for that purpose, appointed
eight commissioners to represent the whole body
of the nation at that solemnity, with power to
sign such deeds as might be requisite before it
was concluded. In fettling the articles of the
marrriage, the Scots took every precaution that
prudence could diAate, in order to preserve the
liberty and independence of their country; while
the French used every art to secure to the Dau-
phin the condua of affairs during the queen's
life, and the succession of the crown on the event
of her demise. The marriage was celebrated with
pomp suitable to the dignity of the parties, and
the magnificence of a court at that time the most
splendid in Europe t. Thus Henry, in the
course of a few months, had the glory of reco-
vering an important poffeffion which had ani-
ciently belonged to the crown of France, and of
adding to it the acquisition of a new kingdom.
By this event, too, the duke of Guise acquired
new consideration and importance; the marriage
of his niece to the apparent heir of the crown,
raising him so far above the condition of other
fubjeas, that the credit which he had gained by
his great adions, seemed thereby to be rendered
no less permanent than it was extensive.

t Keith's Hiftor. of Scotland, P. 73, Appe'd. sJ. Corps

Dipnom, v. aI.

Wv'hen

1558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 243

When the campaign opened, soon after the

Dauphin's marriage, the duke of Guise was
placed at the head of the army, with the fame
unlimited powers as formerly. Henry had re-
ceived such liberal supplies from his fiubjeas, that
the troops under his command were both nume-
rous and well appointed; while Philip, exhausted
by the extraordinary efforts of the preceding
year, had been obliged to dismiss so many of his
forces during the winter, that he could not bring
an army into the field capable of making head
against the enemy. The duke of Guise did not
lose the favourable opportunity which his fuperi-
ority afforded him. He invefited Thionville in the
dutchy ofLuxemburg, one of the ltrongeft towns
on the frontier of the Netherlands, and of great
importance to France by its neighbourhood to
Metz; and, notwithianding the obhiinate va-
lour with which it was defended, he forced it.
to capitulate [June 22] after a siege of three
weeks U.

But the success of this enterprize, which it

was expeded would lead to other conquests, was
more than counterbalanced by an event that
happened in another part of the Low-Countries.
The marechal de Termes, governor of Calais,
having penetrated into Slanders without oppofi-
tion, invested Dunkirk with an army of fourteen
thousand men, and took it by storm on the fifth
day of the siege. Hence he advanced towards
F.ieuport, which muff have soon fallen into his
bands, if the approach of the count of Egmont
with a superior army had not made it prudent to

U Thuan. lib. zx. 690.

X 2 retreat.

244 THE REING OF THE B.XII.
retreat. The French troops were so much en-
cumbered with the booty which they had got at
Dunkirk, or by ravaging the open country, that
they moved slowly; and Egmont, who had left
his heavy baggage and artillery behind him,
marched with such rapidity, that he came up
with them near Gravelines, and attacked them
with the utmost impetuosity. De Termes, who
had the choice of the ground, having polted his
troops to advantage in the angle formed by the
mouth of the river Aa and the Lea, received him
with great firmness. Vidory remained for some
time in suspense, the desperate valour of the
French, who foresaw the unavoidable deftruaion
that mult follow upon a rout in an enemy's
country, counterbalancing the superior number
of the Flemings, when one of those accidents to
which human prudence does not extend, decided
the contelt in favour of the latter. A squadron
of English Ihips of war, which was cruising on
the coast, being drawn by the noise of the firing
towards the place of the engagement, entered
the river Aa, and turned its great guns againit
the right wing of the French, with stich effea,
as immediately broke that body, and spread
terror and confusion through the whole army. The
Flemings, to whom afliftance, so unexpeaed and
so seasonable, gave fresh spirit, redoubled their
efforts, that they might not lose the advantage
which fortune had presented them, or give the
enemy time to recover from their conllernation,
and the rout of the French soon became universal.
Near two thousand were killed on the spot; a
greater number fell by the hands of the peasants,
who, in revenge for the cruelty with which their

country

1550*J sEPEROR CHARLES V. 245
country had been plundered, pursued the fugi-
tives, and massacred them without mercy; the
reft were taken prisoners, together with De
Termes their general, and many officers of dif-
tinaion X.
* This signal viaory, for which the count of
Egmont was afterwards so ill requited by Phi.
lip, obliged the duke of Guise to relinquish all
other schemes, and to hasten towards the frontier
of Picardy, that he might oppose the progress
of the enemy in that province. This difaiter,
however, refleAed new lustre on his reputation,
and once more turned the eyes of his countrymen
towards him, as the only general on whose arms
viaory always attended, and in whose condud, as
well as good fortune, they could confide in every
danger. Henry reinforced the duke of Guife's
army with so many troops drawn from the ad-
jacent garrisons, that it soon amounted to forty
thousand men. That of the enemy, after the
junaion of Egmont with the duke of Savoy,
was not inferior in number. They encamped at
the distance of a few leagues from one another4
and each monarch having joined his refpedive
army, it was expeded, after the vicissitudes of
good and bad success during this and the former
campaign, that a decisive battle would at lalt de-
termine, which of the rivals thould take the as-
cendant for the future, and give law to Europe.
But though both had it in their power, neither
of them discovered any inclination to bring the
determination of such an important point to de-
pend upon the uncertain issue of a single battle.

Thuan. lib. xx. 694.

v 3 The

246 THE REIGN OF THE B.XII.
The fatal engagements at St. Quintin and Grave.
lines were too recent to be so soon forgotten,
and the profpe& of encountering the fame troops,
commanded by the fame generals who had twice
triumphed over his arms, inspired Henry with a
degree of caution which was not common to
him. Philip, of a genius averse to bold opera-
tions in war, naturally leaned to cautious mea-
fures, and was not disposed to hazard any thing
against a general so fortunate and fuccefsful as
the duke of Guise. Both monarchs, as if by
agreement, flood on the defensive, and fortify.
ing their camps carefully, avoided every flkirmifh
or rencounter that might bring on a general
engagement.

While the armies continued in this inaaion,

peace began to be mentioned in each camp, and
both Henry and Philip discovered an inclination
to listen to any overture that tended to re-efia.
blifh it. The kingdoms of France and Spain
had been engaged during half a century in almost
continual wars, carried on at great expence, and
produaive of no considerable advantage to either.
Exhausted by extraordinaryand unceasing efforts,
which far exceeded those to which the nations of
Europe had been accustomed before the rivalfhp
between Charles V. and Francis I. both nations
longed so much for an interval of repose, in order
to recruit their fitrength, that their sovereigns
drew from them with difficulty the supplies ne.
ceffary for carrying on hostilities The private
inclinations of both the kings concurred with
those of their people. Philip was prompted to
wish for peace by his fond desire of returning to
Spain. Accufomed from his infancy to the cli,

mate

r550-J EMPEROR CHARLES V. 247
mate and manners of that country, he was at-
tached to it with such extreme predileion, that
he never felt himself at ease in any other part of
his dominions. But as he could not quit the
Low-Countries, either with decency or safety,
and venture on a voyage to Spain during the
continuance of war, the profpea of a pacification
which would put it in his power to execute his
favourite scheme, was highly acceptable. Henry
was no less desirous of being delivered from the
burthen and occupations of war, that he might
have leisure to turn all his attention, and bend
the whole force of his government, towards
suppressing the opinions of the reformers, which
were spreading with fiuch rapidity in Paris and
other great towns of France, that they began
to grow formidable to the established church.

Besides these public and avowed confirlerations

arising from the ifate of the two holtile king-
doms, or from the withes of their refpedive mo-
narchs, there was a secret intrigue carried on in
the court of France, which contributed as much
as either of the other, to hasten and to facili-
tate the negociation of a peace. The constable
!Vlontmorency, during his captivity, beheld the
rapid success and growing favour of the duke of
Guise with the envy natural to a rival. Every
advantage gained by the princes of Lorrain he
considered as a fresh wound to his own reputa-
tion, and he knew with what malevolent address
it would be improved to diminilh his credit with
the king, and to augment that of the duke of
Guise. These arts, he was afraid, might, by
degrees, work on the easy and duaile mind of
Henry, so as to efface all remains of his ancient

affe'tion

248 THE REIGN OLI TIRE B.XII.
affeaion towards himself. But he could not
discover any remedy for this, unless he were
allowed to return home, that he might try whe-
ther by his presence he could defeat the arti-
fices of his enemies, and revive those warnm and
tender sentiments which had long attached Henry
to him, with a confidence to entire, as resembled
rather the cordiality of private friendship, than
the cold and felfifh connexion between a monarch
and one of his courtiers. While Montmorency
was forming schemes and wishes for his return to
France with much anxiety of mind, but with
little hope of success, an unexpeaed incident
prepared the way for it. The cardinal of Lor.
rain, who had shared with his brother in the
king's favour, and participated of the power
which that conferred, did not bear prosperity
with the fame discretion as the duke of Guise.
Intoxicated with their good fortune, he forgot
how much they had been indebted for their pre.
sent elevation to their connexions with the duchess
of Valentinois, and vainly ascribed all to the ex-
traordinary merit of their family. This led him
not only to negle& his benefaarefs, but to thwart
her schemes, and to talk with a sarcastic liberty
of her charader and person. That singular wo-
anan, who, if we may believe contemporary
writers, retained the beauty and charms of youth
at the age of threescore, and on whom it is cer-
tain that Henry itill doated with all the fondness
of love, felt this injury with sensibility, and set
herself with eagerness to infia the vengeance
which it merited. As there was no method of
supplanting the princes of Lorrain so effeaually
as by a coalition of interests with the conflable,

lhe

!558*] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 249
she proposed the marriage of her grand-daughter
with one of his sons, as the bond of their future
union; and Montmorency readily gave his con-
sent to the match. Having thus cemented their
alliance, the duchess employed all her in-
fluence with the king, in order to confirm his
inclinations towards peace, and induce him to
take the steps necessary for attaining it. She in-
finuated that any overture of that kind would
come with great propriety from the confliable,
and if entrusted to the conduA of his prudence,
could hardly fail of success.

Henry, long accustomed to commit all affairs

of importance to the management of the confla-
ble, and needing only this encouragement to re-
turn to his ancient habits, wrote to him imme-
diately with his usual familiarity and affeaion,
empowering him at the fame time to take the firit
opportunity of founding Philip and his ministers
with regard to peace. Montmorency made his
application to Philip by the most proper channel..
He opened himself to the duke of Savoy, who,
notwithifanding the high command to which he
had been raised, and the military glory which he
had acquired in the Spanish service, was weary
of remaining in exile, and languished to return
into his paternal dominions. As there was no
profpe& of his recovering poffeffion of them by
force of arms, he considered a definitive treaty
of peace between France and Spain, as the only
event by which he could hope to obtain reftitu-
tion. Being no franger to Philip's private
wishes with regard to peace, he easily prevailed
on him not only to discover a disposition on his
part towards accommodation, but to permit.
Montmorency to return, on his parole, to France,

that

250 THE REIGN OF THE B. XIIs
that he might confirm his own sovereign in his
pacific sentiments. Henry received the conitable
with the most flattering marks of regard; ab.
fence, initead of having abated or extinguished
the monarch's friendihip, seemed to have given
it new ardour. Montmorency, from the moment
of his appearance in court, assumed, if possible,
a higher place than ever in his affeaion, and a
more perse& ascendant over his mind. The
cardinal of Lorrain and duke of Guise prudently
gave way to a tide of favour too fitrong for thenm
to oppose, and confining themselves to their pros
per departments, permitted, without any ifrug.
gle, the conifable and duchess of Valentinois to
dire& public affairs at their pleasure. They soon
prevailed on the king to nominate plenipotenti.
aries to treat of peace. Philip did the fame.
The abbey of Cercamp was fixed on as the
place of congress; and all military operations
were immediately terminated by a suspension of
arms.

While these preliminary fleps were taking

towards a treaty which reflored tranquillity to
Europe, Charles V. whose ambition had so long
disturbed it, ended his days in the monaltery of
St. Juftus. When Charles entered this retreat,
he formed such a plan of life for himself, as would
have suited the condition of a private gentleman
of a moderate fortune. His table was neat, but
plain; his domeftics few; his intercourse with
them familiar; all the cumbersome and cere-
monious forms of attendance on his person were
entirely abolilhed, as dellruaive of that social
ease and tranquillity which he courted, in order
to sooth the remainder of his days. As the

mildness

3558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 25z
mildness of the climate, together with his deli-
verance from the burthens and cares of govern-
ment, procured him, at firif, a confiderrble remif-
sion fromn the acute pains, with which he had
been long tormented; he enjoyed, perhaps, more
complete fatisfation in this humble solitude,
than all his grandeur had ever yielded him. The
ambitious thoughts and projeas which had so
long engrossed and difquieted him, were quite
effaced from his mind; far from taking any part
in the political tranfaaions of the princes of
Europe, he reifrained his curiosity even from any
inquiry concerning them; and he seemed to view
the busy scene which he had abandoned with all
the contempt and indifference arising from his
thorough experience of its vanity, as well as
from the pleasing refieAion of having disentangled
himself from its cares.

Other amusements and other objeas now

occupied him. Sometimes he cultivated the
plants in his garden with his own hands ; some-
times he rode out to the neighbouring wood on
a little horse, the only one that he kept, attended
by a single servant on foot. *When his infirmi-
ties confined him to his apartment, which often
happened, and deprived him of these more aaive
recreations, he either admitted a few gentlemen
who resided near the monastery to visit him,
and entertained them familiarly at his table; or
he employed himself in studying mechanical
principles, and in forming curious works of
mechanism, of which he had always been re-
markably fond, and to which his genius was
peculiarly turned. With this view he had en-
gaged Turriano, one of the most ingenious artists

252 THE REIGN OF THE 2. xuI.

artiis of that age, to accompany him in his re-
treat. He laboured together with him in framing
models of the modt useful machines, as well as in
making experiments with regard to their refpec-
tive powers, and it was not seldom that the ideas
of the monarch affided or perfeded the inventions
of the artidt. He relieved his mind, at inter.
vals, with slighter and more fantadtic works of
mechanism, in fashioning puppets, which, by the
ilruaure of internal springs, mimicked the gef.
tures and aaions of men, to the adtonifhment of
the ignorant monks, who beholding movements
which they could not comprehend, sometimes
didfrudfed their own senses, and sometimes sus-
peaed Charles and Turriano of being in com-
paa with invisible powers. He was particularly
curious with regard to the confdruAion of
clocks and watches; and having found, after
repeated trials, that he could not bring any two
of them to go exaaly alike, he refleied, it is
said, with a mixture of surprise as well as regret,
on his own folly, in having bedfowed so much time
and labour on the more vain attempt of bringing
mankind to a precise uniformity of sentiment
concerning the profound and mydierious doarines
of religion.

But in what manner soever Charles disposed

of the redt of his time, he condantly reserved a
considerable portion of it for religious exercises.
He regularly attended divine service in the
chapel of the monadtery, every morning and
evening; he took great pleafurein reading books
of devotion, particularly the works of St. Au-
guffin and St. Bernard; and conversed much
with his confeffer, and the prior of the monal-

tery,

55t8.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 253
tery, on pious fubjeas. Thus did Charles pass
the first year of his retreat, in a manner not un-
becoming a man perfedly disengaged from the
affairs of the present life, and standing on the
confines of a future world; either in innocent
amusements, which soothed his pains, and re-
lieved a mind worn out with excessive application
to business; or in devout occupations, which
he deemed necessary in preparing for another
faate.

But about fix months before his death, the

gout, after a longer intermission than usual, re-
turned with a proportional increase of violence.
His shattered conititution had not vigour enough
remaining to withitand such a shock. It en-
feebled his mind as much as his body, and from
this period we hardly discern any traces of that
found and masculine undeeftanding, which dif-
tinguifhed Charles among his contemporaries.
An illiberal and timid fuperitition depressed his
spirit. He had no relish for amusements of any
kind. He endeavoured to conform, in his man-
ner of living, to all the rigour of monadtic auf-
terity. He desired no other society than that
of monks, and was almod continually employed
with them in chanting the hymns of the Missal.
As an expiation for his fins, he gave himself the
discipline in secret with such severity, that the
whip of cords which he employed as the inidri-
ment of his punishment, was found after his de-
cease tinged with his blood. Nor was he satisfied
with these ads of mortification, which, however
severe, were not unexampled. The timorous
and difruitful solicitude which always accom-
panies fuperflition, dtill continued to disquiet

vOL. IV. Z him,

254i THE REIGN OF THE B. XI!.
him, and depreciating all the devout exercifesin
which he had hitherto been engaged, prompted
him to aim at something extraordinary, at some
new and singular a& of piety that would display
his zeal, and merit the favour of Heaven. The
a& on which he fixed was as wild and uncommon
as any that fuperitition ever fuggefied to a weak
and disordered fancy. He resolved to celebrate
his own obsequies before his death. He ordered
his tomb to be ereaed in the chapel of the mo*
naftery. His domeftics marched thither in fu-
neral proceflion, with black tapers in their hands.
He himself followed in his shroud. He was laid
in his coffin with much solemnity. The service
for the dead was chanted, and Charles joined in
the prayers which were offered up for the reil
of his foul, mingling his tears with those which
his attendants shed, as if they had been cele-
brating a real funeral. The ceremony closed
with sprinkling holy water on the coffin in the
usual form, and all the assistants retiring, the
doors of the chapel were shut. Then Charles
rose out of the coffin, and withdrew to his apart.
ment, full of those awful sentiments which such
a singular solemnity was calculated to inspire.
But either the fatiguing length of the ceremony,
or the impression which the image of death left
on his mind, affeaed him so much, that next
day he was seized with a fever. His feeble frame
could not long resist its violence, and he expired
oen the twenty-firit of September, after a life of
fifty-eight years, fix months, and twenty-five
days'.

Y Strada de Bello Belg. lib. i. p. Is. Thuan. 723.

Sandov. ii. 609, &c. Miniana Contin. Marianae, ol, iv.
zaG. Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlos, p. IaI.

As

1558.1 EMPEROR CHARLES V. 255

As Charles was the first prince of the age in

rank and dignity, the part which he aded,
whether we confider the greatness, the variety,
or the success of his undertakings, was the most
conspicuous. It is from an attentive observation
of his condu&, not from the exaggerated praises
of the Spanish historians, or the undiitinguifhing
censure of the French, that a just idea of
Charles's genius and abilities is to be colleaed.
He poffeffed qualities so peculiar, that they
firongly mark his charaaer, and not only dif-
tinguilh him from the princes who were his con-
temporaries, but account for that superiority
over them which he so long maintained. In
forming his schemes, he was, by nature, as
well as by habit, cautious and considerate.
Born with talents which unfolded themselves
slowly, and were late in attaining maturity, he
was accustomed to ponder every fubje& that
demanded his consideration, with a careful and
deliberate attention. He bent the whole force
of his mind towards it, and dwelling upon it
with a serious application, undiverted by plea-
sure, and hardly relaxed by any amusement, he
revolved it, in silence, in his own breast. He
then communicated the matter to his miniiters,
and after hearing their opinions, took his refolu.
tion with a decisive firmness, which seldom fol-
lows such flow, and seemingly hesitating consul.
tations. Of consequence, Charles's measures,
inflead of resembling the desultory and irregular
sallies of Henry VIII. or Francis I. had the
appearance of a consistent system, in which all
the parts were arranged, all the effeAs were fore-
seen, and even every accident was provided for.

z2 His

T50 THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.

His promptitude in execution was no less remark-
able than his patience in deliberation. He did
not discover greater sagacity in his choice of the
measures which it was proper to pursue, than
fertility of genius in finding out the means for
rendering his pursuit of them fuccefsful. Though
he had naturally so little of the martial turn, that
during the most ardent and bustling period of
life, he remained in the cabinet inaaive, yet
when he chose at length to appear at the head of
his armies, his mind was so formed for vigorous
exertions in every direaion, that he acquired
such knowledge in the art of war, and such
talents for command, as rendered him equal in
reputation and success to the mout able generals
of the age. But Charles poffeffed in the mout
eminent degree, the science which is of greatest
importance to a monarch, that of knowing men,
and of adapting their talents to the various de-
partments which he allotted to them. From the
death of Chievres to the end of his reign, he
employed no general in the field, no miniffer in
the cabinet, no ambassador to a foreign court,
no governor of a province, whose abilities were
inadequate to the trust which he reposed in them.
Though destitute of that bewitching affability
of manners, which gained Francis the hearts of
all who approached his person, he was no itranger
to the virtues which secure fidelity and attach-
ment. He placed unbounded confidence in his
generals; he rewarded their services with muni-
ficence; he neither envied their fame, nor dif-
covered any jealousy of their power. Almost all
the generals who conduAed his armies, may be
placed on a level with those illufirious personages

who

i5528.J EMPEROR CHARLES V. 257
who have attained the highest eminence of mili.
tary glory; and his advantages over his rivals
are to be aferibed so manifestly to the superior
abilities of the commanders whom he set in op-
position to them, that this might seem to de-
traA, in some degree, from his own merit, if the
talent of discovering and iteadinefs in employing
such infiruments were not the most undoubted
proofs of a capacity for government.

There were, nevertheless, defeds in his po-

litical charafter which must considerably abate
the admiration due to his extraordinary talents.
Charles's ambition was insatiable; and though
there seems to be no foundation for an opinion
prevalent in his own age, that he had formed
the chimerical projea of establishing an universal
monarchy in Europe, it is certain that his desire
of being distinguished as a conqueror involved
him in continual wars, which not only exhaufred
and oppressed his fubjeds, hut left him little leisure
for giving attention to the interior police and im-
provement of his kingdoms, the great objeas
of every prince who makes the happiness of
his people the end of his government. Charles,
at a very early period of life, having added the
Imperial crown to the kingdoms of Spain, and
to the hereditary dominions of the houses of
Aufiria and Burgundy, this opened to him such
a vast field of enterprize, and engaged him in
schemes so complicated as well as arduous, that
feeling his power to be unequal to the execution
of them, he had often recourse to low artifices,
unbecoming his superior talents, and sometimes
ventured on such deviations from integrity, as
were dishonourable in a great prince. His infi-

z 3dious

z55 THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.
dioua and fraudulent policy appeared more con-
fpicuous, and was rendered more odious by a
comparison with the open and undesigning cha-
rader of his contemporaries Francis I. and
Henry VIII. This difference, though occa-
fioned chiefly by the diversity of their tempers,
muff be aferibed, in some degree, to such an op.
poiition in the principles of their political con.
du& as affords fume excuse for this defe& in
Charles's behaviour, though it cannot serve as a
justification of it. Francls and Henry seldom
aaed but from the imp life of their pallions, and
rushed headlong towards the objea in view,
Charles's measures, being the result of cool re.
fleaion, were disposed into a regular system, and
carried on upon a concerted plan. Persons who
a& in the former manner, naturally pursue the
end in view, without assuming any disguise, or
displaying much address. Such as hold the
latter course, are apt, in forming, as well as in
executing their designs, to employ such refine-
ments as always lead to artifice in condud, aud
often degenerate into deceit.

The circumitances transmitted to us, with re-

fpe& to Charles's private deportment and cha-
raaer, are fewer and less interesting, than might
have been expeaed from the great number of
authors who have undertaken to write an ac-
count of his life, These are not the obje& of
this hiffory, which aims more at representing the
great tranfaEtions of the reign of Charles V.
and pointing out the manner in which they as-
feaed the political state of Europe, than at de.
lineating his private virtues or defeis. The

1558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 259

The plenipotentiaries of France, Spain, and

England, continued their conferences at Cer-
camp; and though each of them, with the usual
art of negotiators, made at first very high de-
mands in the name of their refpedive courts, yet
as they were all equally desirous of peace, they
would have consented reciprocally to such abate-
ments and reitriaions of their claims, as mua
have removed every obitacle to an accommoda-
tion. The death of Charles V. was a new mo-
tive with Philip to hasten the conclusion of a
treaty, as it increased his impatience for return-
ing into Spain, where there was now no person
greater or more illustrious than himself. But
in spite of the concurring wishes of all the
parties interested, an event happened which oc-
cajioned an unavoidable delay in their negotia-.
tions. About a month after the opening of the
conferences at Cercamp, Mary of England ended
her (hort and inglorious reign [Nov. 17], and
Elizabeth, her fitter, was immediately proclaimed
queen with universal joy. As the powers of the
English plenipotentiaries expired on the death of
their mistress, they could not proceed until they
received a commiflion and initruaions from their
new sovereign.

Henry and Philip beheld Elizabeth's eleva-

tion to the throne with equal solicitude. As
during Mary's jealous administration, under the
most difficult circumitances, and in a 4ituation
extremely delicate, that princess had conduated
herself with prudence and address far exceed-
ing her years, they had conceived an high idea
of her abilities, and already formed expedations
of a reign very different from that of her filter.

Equally

260 THE REIGN OF THE B. Xt.

Equally sensible of the importance of gaining
her favour, both monarchs set themselves with
emulation to court it, and employed every art
in order to insinuate themselves into her confi-
dence. Each of them had something meritorious,
with regard to Elizabeth, to plead in his own
behalf. Henry had offered her a retreat in his
dominions, if the dread of her fiffer's violence
thould force her to fly for safety out of England.
Philip, by his powerful interceflion, had pre.
vented Mary from proceeding to the most fatal
extremities againit her fiffer. Each of them
endeavoured now to avail himself of the circum-
itances in his favour. Henry wrote to Elizabeth
soon after her accession, with the warmeR ex-
preffions of regard and friendship. He repre-
fented the war which had unhappily been kindled
between their kingdoms, not as a national quar.
rel, but as the effed of Mary's blind partiality to
her husband, and fond compliance with all his
wishes. He entreated her to disengage herself
from an alliance which had proved so unfortunate
to England, and to consent to a separate peace
with him, without mingling her interests with
those of Spain, from which they ought now to
be altogether disjoined. Philip, on the other
hand, unwilling to lose his conneaion with
England, the importance of which, during a
rupture with France, he had so recently expe.
rienced, not only vied with Henry in declarations
of esteem for Elizabeth, and in profefifons of his
resolution to cultivate the Rirideft amity with her,
but, in order to confirm and perpetuate their
union, he offered himself to her in marriage, and

3 undcr路

1558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 261
undertook to procure a dispensation from the
pope for that purpose.

Elizabeth weighed the proposals of the two

monarchs attentively, and with that provident
discernment of her true intercft, which was con-
fpicuous in all her deliberations. She gave some
encouragement to Henry's overture of a separate
negotiation, because it opened a channel of cor-
reipondence with France, which she might find
to be of great advantage, if Philip (hould not
discover fufficient zeal and solicitude for securing
to her proper terms in the joint treaty. But
Ihe ventured on this flep with the most cautious
reserve, that she might not alarm Philip's fufpi-
cious temper; and lose an ally in attempting to
gain an enemy z. Henry himself, by an unpar-
donable ad of indiscretion, prevented her from
carrying her intercourse with him to such a
length as might have offended or alienated
Philip. At the very time when he was courting
Elizabeth's friendship with the greateit afilduity,
he yielded with an inconsiderate facility to the
folicitations of the princes of Lorrain, and al-
lowed his daughter-in-law the queen of Scots to
assume the title and arms of queen of England.
This ill-timed pretension, the fouree of many
calamities to the unfortunate queen of Scots, ex-
tinguifhed at once all the confidence that might
have grown between Henry and Elizabeth, and
left in its place distrust, refeutment, and antipathy.
Elizabeth soon found that she muff unite her in-
terefts closely with Philip's, and exped peace

Forbes, i. p. 4.

only

26Z THE REIGN OF trE i3. xu.

only from negotiations carried on in conjunaion
with him a.

As she had granted a commifion, immediately

after her accession, to the fame plenipotentiaries
whom her sifter had employed, she now in-
ifruded them to a& in every point in concert
with the plenipotentiaries of Spain, and to take
no fiep until they had previously consulted with
them b. But though she deemed it prudent to
assume this appearance of confidence in the
Spanish monarch, she knew precisely how far to
carry it; and discovered no inclination to accept
of that extraordinary proposal of marriage which
Philip had made to her. The English had ex.
pressed so openly their detefitation of her lifter's
choice of him, that it would have been highly
imprudent to have exasperated them by renews
ing that odious alliance. She was too well ac-
quainted with Philip's harsh imperious temper,
to think of him for a husband. Nor could the
admit a dispensation from the pope to be sus.
ficient to authorize her marrying him, without
condemning her father's divorce from Catharine
of Aragon, and acknowledging of consequence
that her mother's marriage was null, and her
own birth illegitimate. But though she deter-
mined not to yield to Philip's addresses, the situ-
ation of her affairs rendered it dangerous to re-
je& them; she returned her answer, therefore,
in terms which were evasive, but so tempered with
refpea, that though they gave him no reason to

a Strype's Annals of the Reformation, i. 1s. Carne's

HIs. of England, vol. iii. p. 375*

" Forbes's Full View, i. p. 37. 40.

i558.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 263
be secure of success, they did not altogether ex-
tinguifh his hopes.

By this artifice, as well as by the prudence

with which ihe concealed her sentiments and in-
tentions concerning religion, for some time after
her accession, (he so far gained upon Philip, that
he warmly espoused her interest in the confer-
ences which were renewed at Cercamp, and as-
terwards removed to Cateau-Cambrefis [Feb. 6,
5559]. A definitive treaty, which was to ad-
just the claims and pretensions of so many princes,
required the examination of such a variety of in-
tricate points, and led to such infinite and minute
details, as drew out the negotiations to a great
length. But the constable Montmorency exerted
himself with such indefatigable zeal and industry,
repairing alternately to the courts of Paris and
Brussels, in order to obviate or remove every dif-
ficulty, that all points in dispute were adjusted
at length in such a manner, as to give entire fa-
tisfadion in every particular to Henry asi'd
Philip; and the last hand was ready to be put to
the treaty between them.

The claims of England remained as the only

obstacle to retard it. Elizabeth demanded the
restitution of Calais in the molt peremptory tone,
as an essential condition of her consenting to
peace; Henry refused to give up that impor-tant
conquest; and both seemed to have taken their
resolution with unalterable firmness. Philip
warmly supported Elizabeth's pretensions to
Calais, not merely from a principle of equity
towards the English nation, that he might ap-
pear to have contributed to their recovering
what they had loft by espousing his cause; nor

solely

264 THE REIGN OF THE a. XII.
solely with a view of soothing Elizabeth by this
ananifeftation of zeal for her interest; but in
order to render France less formidable, by fe.
curing to her ancient enemy this easy access into
the heart of the kingdom. The earnestness,
however, with which he seconded the arguments
of the English plenipotentiaries, soon began to
relax. During the course of the negotiation,
*Elizabeth, who now felt herself firmly seated on
her throne, began to take such open and vigor.
ous measures not only for overturning all that
her sifter had done in favour of popery, but for
eitablithing the protefiant church on a firm
foundation, as convinced Philip that his hopes
of an union with her had been from the begin.
ing vain, and were now desperate. From that
period, his interpofitions in her favour became
more cold and formal, flowing merely from a re-
gard to decorum, or from the consideration of
remote political interests. Elizabeth, having
reason to expe& such an alteration in his condu&t,
quickly perceived it. But as nothing would
have been of greater detriment to her people, or
more inconsistent with her schemes of domestic
administration, than the continuance of war, the
saw the neceflity of submitting to such conditions
as the situation of her affairs imposed, and that
ihe muff reckon upon being deserted by an ally
who was now united to her by a very feeble tie,
if she did not speedily reduce her demands to
what was moderate and attainable. She ac.
cordingly gave new infitruAions to her ambaffa.
dors; and Philip's plenipotentiaries aaing as
mediators between the French and themne, an

C Forbes, i. 59. expedient

1559.]l EMPEROR CHARLES V. 20}
expedient was fallen upon which, in some degree,
justified Elizabeth's departing from the rigour
of her first demand with regard to Calais. All
lesser articles were fettled without much difeuf-
sinn or delay. Philip, that he might not appear
to have abandoned the English, insisted that the
treaty between Henry and Elizabeth should be
concluded in form, before that between the
French monarch and himself. The one was
signed on the second day of April, the other on
the day following.

The treaty of peace between France and

England contained no articles of real importance,
but that which refpeAed Calais. It was ftipu-
lated, That the king of France should retain
poffeffion of that town, with all its dependencies,
during eight years; That at the expiration of
that term, he (hould restore it to England; That
in cafe of non-performance, he should forfeit
five hundred thousand crowns, for the payment
of which fum, seven or eight wealthy merchants,
who were not his fubjeas, (hould grant security;
That five persons of diftinaion (hould be given
as hostages until that security were provided;
That, although the forfeit of five hundred thou-
sand crowns (hould be paid, the right of England
to Calais should still remain entire, in the fame
manner as if the term of eight years were expiredt
That the king and queen of Scotland (hould be
included in the treaty; That if they, or the
French king, should violate the peace by any
hostile amion, Henry ihould be obliged inifantly
to restore Calais; That on the other hand, if
any breach of the treaty proceeded from Eliza-.
beth, then Henry and the king and queen of

VOL. Iv. kA Scota

i66 THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.

Scots were absolved frorri all the engagements
which they had come under by this treaty.

Notwithstanding the studied attention with

which so many precautions were taken, it is eni-
dent that Henry did not intend the relritution of
Calais, nor is it probable that Elizabeth expefted
it. It was hardly possible that she could main-
tain, during the course of eight years, fich
perse& concord both with France and Scotland,
as not to afford Henry some pretext for alleging
that the had violated the treaty. But even if that
term ihould elapse withbut any ground for com-
plaint, Henry might then choose to pay the ftim
itipulated, and Elizabeth had no method of as-
serting her right but by force of arms. However,
by throwing the articles in the treaty with regard
to Calais into this form, Elizabeth satisfied her
finbjeAs of every denomination; (he gave men of
discernment a striking proof of her address, in
pailiating what (he could not prevent; and
amused the multitude, to whom the cession of
such an important place would have appeared
altogether infamous, with the profped of
recovering in a ihort time that favourite posse.
sion.

The expedient which Montmorency employed;

in order to facilitate the concluion of peace be-
tween France and Spain, was the .negotiating
two treaties of marriage, one between Elizabeth,
Henry's eldest daughter,and Philip, wlho sup.
planted his son, the unfortunate Don Carlos, to
whom that princers had been promised in the
former conferences at Cercamp ; the other be-
tween Margaret, Henry's only fifrer, and the
duke of Savoy. For however feeble the ties of

blood

1559.3 EMPEROR CHARLES V. 207
1lood may often be among princes, or how
little soever they may regard them when pushed
on to aa by motives of ambition, they assume
on other occasions the appearance of being so far
influenced by these domestic affetions, as to
employ them to juliify measures and concessions
which they find to be necessary, but know to be
impolitic or dilhonourable. Such was the use
Henry made of the two marriages to which he
gave his consent. Having secured an honourable
eitablifhment for his sifter and his daughter, he,
in consideration ofthefe, granted terms both to
Philip and the duke of Savoy, of which he would
not, on any other account, have ventured to ap-
prove.

The principal articles in the treaty between

France and Spain were, That sincere and perpe-
tual amity (hould be established between the two
crowns and their refpeaive allies; That the two
monarchs should labour in concert to procure the
convocation of a general council, in order to
check the progress of heresy, and restore unity
and concord to the Chriftiani church; That all
conquests made by either party, on this (ide of
the Alps, since the commencement of the war
in one thousand five hundred and fifty-one, fhfuld
be mutually reflored; That the dutchy of Savoy,
the principality of Piedmont, the country of
Breite, and all the dther territories formerly flb-
jea to the dukes of Savoy, ihould be restored to
Emanuel Philibert, immediately after the cele;
bration of his marriage with Margaret of France,
the towns of Turin, Quiers, Pignerol, Chivaz,
end Villanova excepted, of which Henry (hould
keep poffeflion until his claims to these places,
in right of his grandmothser, should be tried and

A A z decided

T68 THE REIGN OF THE !5.Xzr,

decided in course of law; That as long as Henry
retained these places in his hands, Philip should
be at liberty to keep garrisons in the towns of
Vercelli and Asti; That the French king should
immediately evacuate all the places which he held
in Tuscany and the Sienefe, and renounce all
future pretensions to them; That he thould
restore the marquisate of Montlerrat to the
duke of Mantua; That he should receive
the Genoese into favour, and give up to
them the towns which he had conquered in the
island of Corsica; That none of the princes or
ilates, to whom these cefions were made, fbould
call their fubje6ts to account for any part of their
condudi while under the dominion of their ene.
mies, but lhould bury all past tranfations in
oblivion. The pope, the emperor, the kings of
Denmark, Sweden, Poland, Portugal, the king
and queen of Scots, and almost every prince
and fiate in Christendom, were comprehended in
this pacification as the allies either of Henry or
of Philip d*

Thus, by this famous treaty, peace was re-

established in Europe. All the caules ofdifcord
which had so long embroiled the powerful mo-
narchs of France and Spain, which had tranf.
mitted hereditary quarrels and wars frdm Charles
to Philip, and from Francis to Henry, seemed
to be wholly removed, or finally terminated.
The French alone complained of the unequal
conditions of a treaty, into which an ambitious
minister, in order to recover his liberty, and an
artful mistress, that (he might gratify her resent.
meut, had (educed their too easy monarch. They

? Recuell des Trlitez, tom.ii. 2 e7 d

exclaimed

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 2(9

exclaimed loudly againit the folly of giving up
to the enemies of France an hundred and eighty-
nine fortified places, in the Low-Countries or in
Italy, in return for the three insignificant towns
of St. Quintin, Ham, and Catekt. They con-
fidercd it as an indelible stain upon the glory of
the nation, to renounce in one day territories so
extenhive, and so cipable of being defended,
that the enemy could not have hoped to wrest
themn out of its hands, after many years of

But Henry, without regar-ding the sentiments

of his people, or being moved by the re-
monstrances of his council, ratified the treaty,
and executed with great fidelity whatever he had
flipulated to perform. The duke of Savoy re-
paired with a numerous retinue to Paris, in order
to celebrate his marriage with Henry's sifter.
Tihe duke of Alva was sent to the fame capital,
at the head of a splendid embassy, to espouse
Elizr.beth in name of his malter. They were
received with extraordinary magnificence by the
French court. Amidit the rejoicings and feftivi-
ties on that occafron, Henry's days were cut ihort
by a singular and tragical accident [July ro]. His
son, Francis II. a prince under age, of a weak
constitution, and of a mind itill more feeble, fuc-
ceeded him. Soon after, Paul endedhis violent
and imperious pontificate, at enmity with all the
world, and disgusted even with his own nephews.
They, persecuted by Philip, and deserted by
the succeeding pope, whom they had raised by
their influence to the papal throne, were con-
demned to the punishment which their crimes
and ambition had merited, and their death was

& A 3 decided

27o THE REIGN OF rHE a. XIrr
as infamous as their lives had been criminal.
Thus most of the personages, who had long sus.
tained the principal charaaers on the great the.
atre of Europe, disappeared about the fame time.
A more known period of history opens at this
tra; other aaors enter upon the stage, with
different views, as well as different passions ; new
contests arose, and new schemes of ambition oc-
cupied and difquieted mankind.

Upon reviewing the tranfaAions of any aaive

period, in the history of civilised nations, the
changes which are accompliihed appear wonder.
fully difproportioned to the efforts which have
been exerted. Conquests are never very exten-
five or rapid, but among nations whose progress
an improvement is extremely unequal. When
Alexander the Great, at the head of a gallant
people, of simple manners, and formed to war
by admirable military infritutions, invaded a slate
funk in luxury, and enervated by exceflive re-
finement; when Ghenchizcan and Tamerlane,
with their armies of hardy barbarians, pouned
in upon nations, enfeebled by the climate in
which they lived, or by the arts and commerce
which they cultivated, these conquerors, like a
torrent, swept every thing before them, fubda.
ing kingdoms and provinces in as short a space
of time as was requisite to march through them.
But when nations are in a state similar to each
other, and keep equal pace in their advances to-
wards refinement, they are not exposed to the
calamity of sudden conquests. Their acquisitions
of knowledge, their progress in the art of war,
their political sagacity and address, are nearly
equalt The fate of itates in this situation, de.

pendo

1559.] EMPEROR CHARLES V. 27P
pends not on a single battle. Their internal re-
sources are many and various. Nor are they
themselves alone interefited in their own safety,
or aaive in their own defence. Other ifates in-
terpofe, and balance any temporary advantage
which either party may have acquired. After
the fierceRt and most lengthened contest, all the
rival nations are exhausted, none are conquered.
At length they find it necessary to conclude a
peace, which refuores to each almofi the fame
power and the fame territories of which they
were formerly in poffeffion.

Such was the Rate of Europe during the reign

of Charles V. No prince was so much superior
to the reft in power, as to render his efforts irre.
fiftible, and his conquests easy. No nation had
made progress in improvement so far beyond its
neighbours, as to have acquired a very manifest
pre-eminence. Each fRate derived ofme advan-
tage, or was fubjea to fume inconvenience from
its situation or its climate ; each was diifinguifhed
by something peculiar in the genius of its people,
or the conifitution of its government. But the
advantages poffeffed by one fRate, were counter-
balanced by circumitances favourable to others;
and this prevented any from attaining such fu-
periority as might have been fatal to all. The
nations of Europe in that age, as in the prelent,
were like one great family ; there were some
features common to all, which fixed a refem.
blance; there were certain peculiarities confpi-
cuous in each, which marked a diftinaion. But
there was not among them that wide diversity
of charader and of genius which, in almost every
period of history, hath exalted the Europeans

above

$TZ THE REIGN OF THE B. to,

above the inhabitants of the other auarters of
the globe, and seems to have deilined the one to
rule, and the other to obey.

But though the near resemblance and equality

in improvement among the different nations of
Europe prevented the reign of Charles V. from
being distinguished by such fndden and extentive
conquefis as occur in fume other periods of
history, yet, during the course of his adminifira-
tion, all the considerable slates inEurope fuffered a
remarkable change in their political situation,
and felt the influence of events, which have not
hitherto spent their force, but dill continue to
operate in a greater or in a less degree. It was
during his reign, and in consequence of the per-
petual efforts to which his enterprizing ambition
roused him, that the different kingdoms of
Europe acquired internal vigour; that they dif-
cerned the resources of which they were pof-
sessed; that they came both to feel their own
itrength, and to know how to render it formid-
able to others. It was during his reign, too,
that the different kingdoms of Europe, which
in former times seemed frequently to a&e as if
they had been single and dinjoined, became so
thoroughly acquainted, and so intimately con-
neaEed with each other, as to form one great po-
litical fydiem, in whlich each took a itation,
wherein it has remained since that time with less
variation than could have been expeaed after the
events of two adive centuries.

The progress, however, and acquisitions of the

house of Auffria, were not only greater thais
those of any other power, but more difernible
and conspicuous. I have i1ready enumerated

the

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 273

the extensive territories which descended to
Charles from his Austrian, Burgundian, and
Spanilh ancestors *. To these he himself added
the Imperial dignity; and, as if all this had been
too little, the bounds of the habitable globe
seemed to be extended, and a new world was
fubjeded to his command. Upon his refigna.
tion, the Burgundian provinces, and the Spanish
kingdoms with their dependencies, both in
the old and new worlds, devolved to Philip.
But Charles transmitted his dominions to his son,
In a condition very different from that in which
he himself had received them. They were aug.
mented by the accession of new provinces; they
were habittuated to obey an adminiffration which
was no less vigorous than iteady; they were ac-
cuffomed to expensive and persevering efforts,
which, though necessary in the contests be-
tween civilised nations, had been little known
in Europe before the sixteenth century. The
provinces of Friesland, Utrecht, and Overyffel,
which he acquired by purchase from their
former proprietors, and the dutchy of Gueldres,
of which he made himself master, partly by force
of arms, partly by the arts of negotiation, were
additions of great value to his Burgundian do-
minions. Ferdinand and Isabella had tranf-
mitted to him all the provinces of Spain, from
the bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of
Portugal; but as he maintained a perpetual
peace with that kingdom, amidit the various
efforts of his enterprizing ambition, he made no
acquisition of territory in that quarter.

* Vol. IL p. I.

a Charles

274 THE REIGN 路OF THE J3.XII.

Charles had gained, however, a vait accession

of power in this part of his dominions. By his
success in the war with the commons of Cafble,
he exalted the regal prerogative upon the ruins
of the privileges which formerly belonged to the
people. Though he allowed the name of the
Cortes to remain, and the formality of holding it
to be continued; he reduced its authority and
jurifdidlion almost to nothing, and modelled itin
such a manner, that it became rather a junto of
the servants of the crown, thani an assembly of
the representatives of the people. One member
of the confiitution being thus lopped off, it was
impossible but that the other must feel the firoke,
and fuffer by it. The fupprefiion of the popular
power rendered the ariftocratical less formidable.
The grandees, prompted by the warlike spirit of
the age, or allured by the honours which they
enjoyed in a court, exhausted their fortunes in
military service, or in attending on the person of
their prince. They did not dread, perhaps did
not observe, the dangerous progress of the royal
authority,which, leaving them the vain diftinoion
of being covered in presence of their sovereign,
feripped them, by degrees, of that real power
wvhich they poffeffed while they formed one body,
and aAed in concert with the people. Charles's
success in abolishing the privileges of the com-
mons, and in breaking the power of the nobles
of Castile, encouraged Philip to invade the liber-
ties of Aragon, which were still more extefive.
The Caftilians, accuitomed to fubje~tion them.
selves, assisted in imposing the yoke on their more
happy and independent neighbours. The will
of the sovereign became .the supreme law in all

the

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 275

the kingdoms of Spain ; and princes who were
not checked in forming their plans by the jea.
lousy of the people, nor controlled in executing
them by the power of the nobles, could both aim
at great objecs, and call forth the whole firength
of the monarchy in order to attain them.

As Charles, by extending the royal preroga.

tive, rendered the monarchs of Spain mailers at
home, he added new dignity and power to their
crown by his foreign acquilitions. He secured
to Spain the quiet poffeflion of the kingdom of
Naples, which Ferdinand had usurped by fraud,
and held with difficulty. He united the dutchy
of Milan, one of the most fertile and populous
Italian provinces, to the Spanish crown ; and left
his focceffors, even without taking their other
territories into the account, the mout confider-
able princes in Italy, which had been long the
theatre of contention to the great powers of
Europe, and in which they had ifruggled with
emulation to obtain the superiority. When the
French, in conformity to the treaty of Cateau-
Cambrefis, withdrew their forces out of Italy,
and finally relinquished all their schemes of con-
quest on that fide of the Alps, the Spanish domi-
nions then rose in importance, and enabled their
kings, as long as the monarchy retained any de-
gree of vigour, to preierve the chief sway in all
the tranfad.ions of that country. But whatever
accession, either of interior authority or of foreign
dominion, Charles gained for the monarchs of
Spain in Europe, was inconsiderable when com-
pared with his acquisitions in the new world.
He added there, not provinces, but empires to
his crown. He conquered territories of such

immense

2 6 THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.
immense extent ; he discovered such inexhaufiible
veins of wealth, and opened such boundless pro-
fpeds of every kind, as must have roused his
successor, and have called hinr forth to aaion,
though his ambition had been much less ardent
than that of Philip, and must have rendered him
not only enterprizing but formidable.

While the elder branch of the Auifrian family

rose to such pre-eminence in Spain, the younger,
of which Ferdinand was the head, grew to be
confiderabie in Germany; the ancient hereditary
dominions of the house of Austria in Germany,
united to the kingdoms of Hungary and Bohe-
mia, which Ferdinand had acquired by marriage,
formed a refpe&able power; and when the Im-
perial dignity was added to these, Ferdinand
poffeffed territories more extensive than had be.
longed to any prince, Charles V. excepted, who
had been at the head of the empire during several
ages. Fortunately fo' Europe, the disgust which
Philip conceived on account of Ferdinand's re.
fusing. to relinquish the Imperial crown in his
favour, not only prevented for fume time the
separate members of the house of Auifria from
aaing in concert, but occasioned between them
a visible alienation and rivalfhip. By degrees,
however, regard to the interest of their family
extinguilhed this impolitical animosity. The
confidence which was natural returned; the
aggrandizing of the house of Auifria became the
common objea of all their schemes; they gave
and received a-'liftance alternately towards the
execution of them; and each derived confider-
ation and importance from the other's fuccels.
A family so great and so aspiring, became the

general

EMEROR CHARLES V. 277

general objea1 of jealousy and terror. All the
power, as well as policy, of Europe were exerted
during a century, in order to check and humble
it. Nothing can give a more firiking idea of the
ascendant which it had acquired, and of the
terror which it had inspired, than that after its
vigour was spent with extraordinary exertions of
its ilrength, after Spain was become only the
shadow of a great name, and its monarchs were
funk into dcbility and dotage, the house of Au-
itria still continucd to be formidable. The na.
tions of Europe had so often felt its superior
power, and had been so conifantly employed in
guarding againR it, that the dread of it became
a kind of political habit, the influence of which
remained when the causes which had formed it
ceased to exist.

Whsile the house of Aufiria went on with such

success in enlarging its dominions, France made
no conliderable acquisition of new territory. All
its schemes of conqueff in Italy had proved
abortive; it had hitherto obtained no efitablith-
ment of consequence in the new world ; and after
the continued and vigorous efforts of four fuc-
ceffive reigns, the confines of the kingdom were
much the lame as Louis XI. had left them. But
though France made not such large strides to-
wards dominion as the house of Auitria, it con-
tinued to advance by iteps which were more
secure, because they were gradual and less ob-
served. The conquest of Calais put it out of
the power of the English to invade France but at
their utmost peril, and delivered the French from
the dread of their ancient enemies, who, previous
to that event, could at any time penetrate into

VOL. IV. in the

278 THE REIGN dr THE B. XII.

the kingdom by that avenue, and thereby retard
or defeat the execution of their best concerted
enterprizes against any foreign power. The im.
portant acquisition of Metz covered that part
of their frontier which formerly was mnoff feeble,
and lay most exposed to insult. France, from
the time of its obtaining these additional fecuri.
ties againit external invasion, mufit be deemed the
mos powerful kingdom in Europe, and is more
fortunately situated than any on the continent
either for conoueft or defence. From the cos-
fines of Artois to the bottom of the Pyrenees,
and from the Brirtifn channel to the frontiers of
Savoy and the coast of the Mediterranean, its
territories lay compad and unubiningled with those
of any other power. Several of the considerable
provioces, which had contraded a spirit of inde.
pendence by their having been long fubje6d to
the great vassals of the crown, who were often
at variance or at war with their mafler, were
now accuttomed to recognize and to obey ene
sovereign. As they became members of the
fame monarchy, they affomed the sentiments of
that body into which they were incorporata.,
and co-operated with zeal towards promoting its
interest and honour. The power and influense
wrested from the nobles were seized by the crown.
The people were not admitted to Ihare in there
spoils; they gained no new privilege; theyace
quired no additional weight in the legislature.
It was not for the fake of the people, but in
order to extend their own prerogative, that tie
monarchs of France had laboured to hamble their
great vassals. Satisfied with having brought
them under entire fubjedion to the crown, the1

difcovred

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 279

dlifcovered no solicitude to free the people
from their ancient dependence on the nobles of
whom they held, and by whom they were often
appressed.

A monarch, at the head of a kingdom thus

united at home and secure from abroad, was en-
titled to form great designs, because he felt him-
self in a condition to execute them. The foreign
wars which had continued with little interrup-
tion from the accelfion of Charles VIII. had
not only cherished and augmented the martial
genius of the nation, but by inuring the troops
during the course of long service to the fatigues
of war, and accustoming them to obedience, had
added the force of discipline to their natural
ardour. A gallant and aftive body of nobles,
who considered themselves as idle and ufelcfs,
unless when they were in the field; who were
hardly acquainted with any paflirne or exercise
but what was military; and who knew no road
to power, or fame, or wealth, but war, would
not have fuffered their sovereign to remain long
in ina8ion. The people, little acquainted with
the arts of peace, and always ready to take arms
at the command of their superiors, were accuf-
tomedl, by the expence of long wars carried on
in diflant countries, to bear impositions, which,
however inconsiderable they may seem if efti-
mated by the eorbitant rate of modern exac-
tions, appear immense when compared with the
sums levied in France, or in any other country
of Europe, previous to the reign of Louis XI.
As all the mcmbhrs of which the fiate was com-
posed were thus impatient for adion, and capable
of great efforts, the schemes and operations of

a n 2 France

i8o THE REGN OF THE 13. XII.

France muff have been no less formidable to Eu-
rope than those of Spain. The superior advan-
tages of its situation, the contiguity and com-
paanefs of its territories, together with the pe-
culiar Rate of its political constitution at that
junaure, muff have rendered its enterprizes itill
more alarming and more decisive. The king
poffeffed such a degree of power as gave him the
entire command of his fubjeAs; the people
were strangers to those occupations and habits
of life which render men averse to war, or unfit
for it; and the nobles, though reduced to the
subordination necessary in a regular government,
fill retained the high undaunted spirit which
was the effed of their ancient independence.
The vigour of the feudal times remained, their
anarchy was at an end; and the kings of France
could avail themselves of the martial ardour
which that singular institution had kindled or
kept alive, without being exposed to the dangers
or inconveniencies which are inseparable from it
when in entire force.

A kingdom in such a Rate is, perhaps, capable

of greater military efforts than at any other pe-
riod in its progress. But how formidable or how
fatal soever to the other nations of Europe the
power of such a monarchy might have been, the
civil wars which broke out in France saved them
at that junaure from feeling its effeas. These
wars, of which religion was the pretext and am-
bition the caule, wherein great abil:ties were
displayed by the leaders of the different faaions,
and little condua or firmness were manifefied
by the crown under a fuccefflon of weak princes,
kept France occupied and embroiled for half a

century.

aNIrEROR CHARLE;S V. 2Sr

century. Doring these commotioans the internal
fitrength of the kingdom was much walted, and
such a spirit of anarchy was spread among the
nobles, to whom rebellion was familiar, and the
restraint of laws unknown, that a considerable
interval became requisite not only for recruiting
the internal vigour of the nation, but for re-
eftabliihing the authority of the prince ; so that
it was long before France could turn her whole
attention towards foreign tranfadions, or ad
with her proper force in foreign wars. It was
long befere (he rose to that aicendant in Europe
which the has maintained since the adminifiration
of cardinal Richlieu, and which the situation as
well as extent of the kingdom, the nature of her
government, together with the charaaer of her
people, entitle her to maintain.

While thekingdomson the continent grew into

power and consequence, England likewise made
considerable progress townrds regular government
and interior flrength. Henry VIII. probably
without intention, and certainly without any
confihtent plan, of which his nature was incapa-
ble, pisrfued the scheme of deprefling the nohi-
lity, which the policy of his father Henry VII.
had begun. The pride and caprice of his tem-
per led him to employ chiefly new men in the
adrminitration of affairs, because he found them
nofu obsequious, or leaRt frupulous; and he
not only conferred on them such plenitude of
power, but exalted them to such pee-eminence
in dignity, as mortiried and degraded the ancient
nobility. By the alienation or sale of the church
lands, which were diflipated with a protulion not
inferior to the rapaciousness with which they had

aa3 been

211Z THE REIGN OF THE 5. XU.

been seized, as well as by the privilege granted
to the ancient landholders of felling their estates,
or disposing of them by will, an immense property,
formerly locked up, was brought into circulation.
This put the spirit of induifry and commerce in
motion, and gave it some considerable degree of
vigour. The road to power and to opulence
became open to persons of every condition. A
sudden and excessive flow of wealth from the
Wedt Indies proved fatal to induRry in Spain;
a moderate acceflion in England to the fum in
circulation gave life to commerce, awakened the
ingenuity of the nation, and excited it to useful
enterprize. In France, what the nobles loft the
crown gained. In England, the commons were
gainers as well as the king. Power and infla.
ence accompanied of course the property which
they acquired. They rose to consideration
among their fellow-fnbjefts; they began to feel,
their own importance; and extending their in.
fluence in the legislative body gradually, and
often when neither they themselves nor others
foresaw all the effeas of their claims and pre.
tensions, they at ladt attained that high autho-
rity to which the British conititution is indebted
for the existence, and muff owe the preservation,
of its liberty. At the fame time that the English
conititution advanced towards perfefion, several
circumitances brought on a change in the ancient
fydiem with refpea to foreign powers, and intro.
duced another more beneficial to the nation. As
soon as Henry difelaimed the fopremacy of the
papal fee, and broke off all connexion with the
papal court, considerable sums were saved to the
nation, of which it had been annually drained by

remittances

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 283

remittances to Rome for dilpenfat'ons and indui.
gences, by the expence of pilgrimages into foreign
countries ", or by pay nent of annates, firit fruits,
and a thousand other taxes which that artful and
rapacious court levied on the credulity of man-
kind. The exercise cf a jurifdidion different
from that of the civil 'power, and claiming not
only to be independent of it, but superior to it,
a wild solecism in government, apt not only to
perplex and disquiet weak minds, but tending
direaly to dillurb society, was finally abolished.
Government became more simple as well as more
refpefable, when no rank or charader exempted
any person from being amenable to the fame courts
as other fubjeas, from being tried by the fame
judges, and from being acquitted or condemned
by the fame laws.

By the loe of Calais the English were excluded

from the continent. All schemes for invading
France became of course as chimerical as they had
formerly been pernicious. The views of the
English were confined, first by necessity, and
afterwards from choice, within their own island.
That rage for conquest which had poffeffed the
nation during many centuries, and wasted its
firength in perpetual and fruitless wars, ceased at
length. Those adive ipirits which had known

* The loss which the nation fullained by molt of thebe

articles is obvious, and mull have been great. Even that by
pilgrimages was not inconfierable. In the year 1423, licence
was obtained by no fewer than 916 persons to visit the
Ihrineof St. James of Compoflella in Spain. Rymer, vol. r.
p. . In 1434, the number of pilgrims to the fame
place was 246o. Ibid. p. * In 1445, they were 20oo,
vsl. xi. p.

and

2a4 . THE REIGN OF THE B.XII.
and followed no profefflon but war, fought for
occupation in the arts ofpeace, and their country
was benefited as much by the one as it had fuffer-
ed by the other. The nation, which had been
exhaulted by frequent expeditions to the conti-
nent, recruited its numbers, and acquired new
strength ; and when roused by any extraordinary
exigency to take part in foreign operations, the
vigour of its efforts was proportionally great, be.
cause they were only occasional and of a short
continUrance.

The fame principle which had led England to

adopt this new system with regard to the powers
on the continent, occasioned a change in its plan
of condu& with refpea to Scotland, the only
foreign fdate with which, on account of its situ-
ation in the fame island, the English had such a
cloife connexion as demanded their perpetual at-
tention. Instead of prosecuting the ancient
fheme of conquering that kingdom, which the
nature of the country, defended by a brave and
hardy people, rendered dangerous if not imprac.
ticable; it appeared more eligible to endeavour
at obtaining such influence in Scotland as might
exempt England from any danger or disquiet
from that quarter. The national poverty of the
Scots, together with the violence and animosity
of their fadions, rendered the execution of this
plan easy to a people far superior to them in
wealth. The leading men of greatest power and
popularity were gained; the ministers and fa-
vourites of the crown were corrupted; and such
absolute direaion of the Scottish councils was
acquired, as rendered the operations of the one
kingdom dependent, in a great measure, on the

sovereign

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 65

sovereign of the other. Such perse& external
security, added to the interior advantages which
England now poffeffed, mufd soon have raised it
to new consideration and importance; the long
reign of Elizabeth, equally conspicuous for wis-
dom, for Readiness, and for vigour, accelerated
its progress, and carried it with greater rapidity
towards that elevated fdation which it hath since
held among the powers of Europe.

During the period in which the political slate

of the great kingdoms underwent such changes,
revolutions of considerable importance happened
in that of the secondary or inferior powers.
Those in the papal court are most obvious, and
of mot extenlive consequence.

In the Preliminary Book, I have mentioned

the rife of that spiritual jutifdiation which the
popes claim as vicars of Jesus Christ, and have
traced the progress of that authority which they
possess as temporal princes *. Previous to the
reign of Charles V. there was nothing that tended
to circumferibe or to moderate their authority,
but science and philosophy, which began to re-
rive and to be cultivated. The progress of these,
however, was dtill inconsiderable ; they always
operate slowly; and it is long before their influ-
ence reaches the people, or can produce any fen-
fible effea upon them. They may perhaps gra.
dually, and in a long course of years, undermine
and shake an established fyfitem of false religion,
but there is no indtance of their having overturned
one. The battery is too feeble to demolish those
fabrics which fuperitition raises on deep founda-

* Vol. I. p. 533, &c.

tions,

20 .THE REIGN OF THE L. XII.

tions, and can strengthen with the most confum-
mate art.

Luther had attacked the papal supremacy with

other weapons, and with an impetuosity more
formidable. The time and manner of his at.
tack concurred with a multitude of circumitances,
which have been explained, in giving him imme-
diate success. The charm which had bound
mankind for so many ages was broken at once.
The human mind, which had continued long as
tame and passive as if it had been formed to
believe whatever was taught, and to bear what-
ever was imposed, roused of a sudden and be-
came inquisitive, mutinous, and disdainful of the
yoke to which it had hitherto submitted. That
wonderful-ferment and agitation of mind, which,
at this distance of time, appears unaccountable, or
is condemned as extravagant, was so general, that
it mufd have been excited by causes which were
natural and of poaverful efficacy. The king-
doms of Denmark, Sweden, England, and Scot-
land, and almost one-half of Germany, threw off
their allegiance to the pope, abolished his jurif-
diaion within their territories, and gave the
fanution of law to modes of dicialine and sys.
tems of do~trine which were not only inde-
pendent of his power, but hofile to it. Nor
was this spirit of innovation confined to those
countries which openly revolted from the pope;
it spread through all Europe, and broke out
in every part of it with various degrees of
violence. It penetrated early into France, and
made a quick progress there. In that kingdom,
the number of converts to the opinions of the
reformers was f great, their zeal so enterprizing, and

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 237

and the abilities of their leaders so diflinguilhed,
that they soon ventured to contend for superiority
with the eftablilhed church, and were sometimes
on the point of obtaining it. In all the provinces
of Germany which continued to acknowledge the
papal supremacy, as well as in the Low-Countries,
the protestant dodrines were secretly taught, and
had gained so many profelytes, that they were
ripe for revolt, and were refirained merely by
the di rend of their rulers from imitating the ex-
ample of their neighbours, and affeicing their
independence. Even in Spain and in Italy,
symptoms of the fame difpolition to thake off the
yoke appeared. The pretentions of the pope to
infallible knowledge and supreme poxver were
treated by many persons of eminent Earning and
abilities with such scorn, or attacked with fulch
vehemence, that the modt vigioant attention of
the civil magifirate, the higheR dirains of pontd-
fidal authority, and all the rigour of inqoilico-
rial jurifdiaion were requisite to check and cx-
tinguifh it.

The defeAion of Co many opulent anti power-

ful kingdoms from the papal fee, was a fatal
blow to its grandeur and power. It abridged the
dominions of the popes in extent, it diminilhed
their revenues, and left them fewer rewards to
bellow on the ecclefiaftics of various denomina-
tions, attached to them by vows of obedience as
well as byties of intereft,and whom they employed
as inifruments to establish or support their usurp.
ations in every part of Europe. The countries
too which now disclaimed their authority, were
those which formerly had been modt devoted to
it. The empire of fuperifition differs from every

other

288 THE REIGN OF THE B. xi,

other species of dominion; its power is often
greatest and most implicitly obeyed in the pro.
vinces most remote from the feat of government;
while such as are situated nearer to that, are more
apt to discern the artifices by which it is upheld,
or the impoftures on which it is founded. The
personal frailties or vices of the popes, the errors
as well as corruption of their administration, the
ambition, venality, and deceit which reigned in
their courts, fell immediately under the obferva.
tion of the Italians, and could not fail of dimni
nifhing that refpe& which begets fubmiflion. But'
in Germany, England, and the more remote pam
of Europe, these were either altogether unknown,
or being only known by report, made a slighter
impression. Veneration for the papal dignity in-
creased accordingly in these countries in propor.
tion to their diflance from Rome; and that
veneration, added to their gross ignorance, ren.
dered them equally credulous and passive. In
tracing the progress of the papal domination, the
boldeit and most fuccefsful inLtances of encroach.
ment are to be found in Germany and other
countries difitant from Italy. In these its impo.
fitions were heaviest, and its exa~ions the moll
rapacious; so that in estimating the diminution
of power which the court of Rome fuffered in
consequence of the reformation, not only the
number but the charader of the people who re-
volted, not only the great extent of territory,
but the extraordinary obsequiousness of the fob.
jeas which it loll, mufl be taken into the ac-
count.

Nor was it only by this defedion of so many

kingdoms and Qtates which the reformation oc路

cafioned,

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 289

cafioned, that it contributed to diminith the
power of the Roman pontiffs. It obliged them
to adopt a different fyfitem of conduA to-
wards the nations which still continued to re-
cognise their- jurifdidion, and to govern them
by new maxims and with a milder spirit. The
reformation taught them, by a fatal example,
what they seem not before to have appre-
hended, that the credulity and patience of man-
kind might be overburdened and exhausted.
They became afraid of venturing upon any foch
exertion of their authority as might alarm or ex-
afperate their fubjeas, and excite them to a new
revolt. They saw a rival church established in
many countries of Europe, the members of which
were on the watch to observe any errors in their
adminiflration, and eager to expose them. They
were sensible that the opinions, adverse to their
power and ufurpations, were not adopted by their
enemies alone, but had spread even among the
people who dilladhered to them. Upon all these
accounts, it was no longer possible to lead or to
govern their flock in the fame manner as in those
dark and quiet ages when faith was implicit,
when fubmiflion was unreserved, and all tamely
followed and obeyed the voice of their pastor.
From the mra of the reformation, the popes
have ruled rather by address and management
than by authority. Though the fryle of their
decrees be still the fame, the effea of them is
very different. Those bulls and interdias which,
before the reformation, made the greatefi princes
tremble, have since that period been disregard.
ed or despised by the most inconsiderable.
Those bold decisions and aAs of jurifdiaion

VOL. IV. c c which,

290 THE REIGN OF THE E. XII.

which, during many ages, not only passed un-
censured, but were revered as the awards of a
sacred tribunal, would, since Luther's appear-
ance, be treated by one part of Europe as the
effedt of folly or arrogance, and be detested by
the other as impious and unjust. The popes, in
their administration, have been obliged not only
to accommodate themselves to the notions of their
adherents, but to pay fume regard to the pre-
judices of their enemies. They seldom venture
to claim new powers, or even to inlift obstinately
on thseir ancient prerogatives, left they should
irritate the former; they carefully avoid every
measure that may either excite the indignation or
draw on them the derision of the latter. The
policy of the court of Rome has become as
cautious, circumfpe&, and timid, as it was once
adventurous and violent; and though their pre-
tensions to infallibility, on which all their au-
thority is founded, does not allow them to re-
nounce any jurifdiaion, which they have at any
time claimed or exercised, they find it expedient
to fuffer many of their prerogatives to lie dor.
mant, and not to expose themselves to the rifkl of
losing that remainder of power which they fdill
enjoy, by ill-timed attempts towards reviving
obsolete pretensions. Before the sixteenth cen-
tury, the popes were the movers and diredtors
in every considerable enterprize; they were at
the head of every great alliance; and being con-
fidered as arbiters in the affairs of Christendom,
the court of Rome was the centre of political
nIaegotiation and intrigue. Since that time, the
greatest operations in Europe have been carried
on independent of them; they have iunk almoil

I3 to

EMPEROR CHARLES v. V9.

to a level with the other petty princes of Italy;
they continue to claim, though they dare not
exercise, the fame spiritual jurifdiaion, but
hardly retain any (hadow of the temporal power
which they anciently poffeffed.

But how fatal soever the reformation may

have been to the power of the popes, it has con-
tributed to improve the church of Rome both in
science and in morals. The desire of equalling
the reformers in those talents which had procured
them refpea; the necessity of acquiring the
knowledge requisite for defending their own
tenets, or refuting the arguments of their oppo-
nents, together with the emulation natural be-
tween two rival churches, engaged the Roman
catholic clergy to apply themselves to the fludy
of useful science, which they cultivated with
such assiduity and success, that they have gra-
dually become as eminent in literature, as they
were in some periods infamous for ignorance.
The fame principle occasioned a change no less
considerable in the morals of the Romish clergy.
Various canfes which have formerly been Enu-
merated, had concurred in introducing great ir-
regularity, and even dissolution of manners,
among the popish clergy. Luther and his ad-
herents began their attack on the church with
such vehement inveaives againfi these, that, in
order to remove the scandal, and silence their
declamations, greater decency of condua be-
came necessary. The reformers themselves were
so eminent not only for the purity but even auf-
terity of their manners, and had acquired such
reputation among the people on that account,
that the Roman catholic clergy must have soon

cc2 loft

292 THE REIGN OF THE a.!XI.
loft all credit, if they had not endeavoured to
conform in some measure to their frandard.
They knew that all their aaions fell under the
severe infpeaion of the protefitants, whom en-
mity and emulation prompted to observe every
vice, or even impropriety in their condu&; to
censure them without indulgence, and to expose
them without mercy. This rendered them, of
course, not only cautious to avoid such enormi-
ties as might give offence, but fiudious to ac-
quire the virtues which might merit praise. In
Spain and Portugal, where the tyrannical jurif.
diaion of the inquisition cruihed the protefiant
faith as soon as it appeared, the spirit of popery
continues invariable; science has made small pro.
grefs, and the charaaer of ecclefiaftics has under.
gone little change. But in those countries where
the members of the two churches have mingled
freely with each other, or have carried on any
considerable intercourse, either commercial or
literary, an extraordinary alteration in the ideas,
as well as in the morals of the popith ecclefiaftics,
is manifest. In France, the manners of the dig.
nitaries and secular clergy have become decent
and exemplary in an high degree. Many of
them have been distinguished for all the accom.
plifhments and virtues which can adorn their pro.
feflion; and differ greatly from their predecessors
before the reformation, both in their maxims and
in their conduEt.

Nor has the influence of the reformation been

felt only by the inferior members of the Roman
catholic church; it is extended to the fee of
Rome, to the sovereign pontiffs themselves.
Violations of decorum, and even trespasses against

morality,

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 293

morality, which passed without censure irs those
ages, when neither the power of the popes, nor
the veneration of the people for their charader,
had any bounds; when there was no hoilile eye
to observe the errors in their condnul, and no ad-
verfaries zealous to inveigh againit them ; would
be liable now to the feverelt animadverflon, and
excite general indignation or horror. Instead
of rivalling the courts of temporal princes in
gaiety, and surpassing them in licentiousness,
the popes have studied to afifne manners more
severe and more fuitabie to their ecclefiallical
charaaer. The chair of St. Peter hath not been
polluted during two centuries, hy any pontiff
that resembled Alexander VI. or several of his
predecessors, who were a disgrace to religion
and to human nature. Throughout this long
ficceffion of popes, a wonderful decorum of
conduct, compared with that of precedirrg ages,
is observable. Many of them, especially anrong
the pontiffs of the present century, have been
conspicuous for all路 the virtues becoming their
high fration; and by their humanity, their love
of literature, and their moderation, have made
some atonement to mankirsd for the crimes of
their predecessors. Thus the beneficial influences
of the reformation have been more extensive than
they appear on a fiuperficial view ; and this great
division in the Christian church hath contributed,
in some measure, to inereafe purity of manners,
to diffufe science, and to inspire humanity.
History recites such a number of shocking events
occasioned by religious dissensions, that it must
afford peculiar fatisfamion to trace any one falu-

cc3 tary

294 THE REIGN OF THE B. Xii.
tary or beneficial effea to that source foom
which so many fatal calamities have flowed.

The republic of Venice, which, at the begin.

ning of the sixteenth century, had appeared so
formidable, that almoit all the potentates of
Europe united in a confederacy for its deltruc-
tion, declined gradually from its ancient power
and splendor. The Venetians not only loll a
great part of their territory in the war excited
by the league of Cambray, but the revenues as
well as vigour of the hate were exhausted by
their extraordinary and long-continued efforts in
their own defence; and that commerce by which
they had acquired their wealth and power began
to decay, without any hopes of its reviving. All
the fatal consequences to their republic, which
the sagacity of the Venetian senate foresaw on
the firit discovery of a passage to the East Indies
by the Cape of Good Hope, a~ually took place.
Their endeavours to prevent the Portuguese
from establishing themselves in the East Indies,
not only by exciting the Soldans of Egypt,
and the Ottoman monarchs, to turn their arms
against such dangerous intruders, but by afford-
ing secret aid to the infidels in order to insure
their success z, proved ineffeaual. The a&ivity
and valour of the Portuguese surmounted every
obitacle, and obtained such a firm footing in
that fertile country, as secured to them large
poffeifrons, together with an influence itill more
extensive. Lisbon, initead of Venice, became
the itaple for the precious commodities of the

s Freher. Script. Rer. German. vol. ii* 529.

Eaitb

EMPEROK CHARtLES V. 295

Eait. The Venetians, after having poffeffed for
many years the monopoly of that beneficial com-
merce, had the mortification to be excluded
from almost any share in it. The discoveries of
the Spaniards in the Western world proved no
less fatal to inferior branches of their commerce.
The original defe6ts which were formerly pointed
ont in the constitution of the Venetian republic
itill continued, and the disadvantages with which
it undertook any great enterprize increased,
rather than diminished. The sources from which
it derived its extraordinary riches and power
being dried up, the interior vigour of the Rtate
declined, and, of course, its external operations
became less formidable. Long before the
middle of the sixteenth century, Venice ceased
to be one of the principal powers in Europe,
and dwindled into a secondary and subaltern
Rlate. But as the senate had the address to con-
ceal the diminution of its power, under the veil
of moderation and caution; as it made no rash
effort that could discover its weakness; as the
symptoms of political decay in Rtates are not
soon observed, and are seldom so apparent to
their neighbours as to occasion any sudden altera-
tion in their condua towards them, Venice con-
tinued long to be considered and refpeaed. She
was treated not according to her present con-
dition, but according to the rank which she had
formerly held. Charles V. as well as the kings
of France his rivals, courted her aflitance with
emulation and solicitude in. all their enterprizes.
Even down to the close of the century, Venice
remained not only an objea of attention, but

a Coa*

296 THE REIGN OF THE B. X11,
a confider able feat of political negotiation and
intrigue.

That authority which the firif Cofino di

Medici, and Lawrence, his grandfnn, had ac-
quired in the republic of Florence by their be-
neficence and abilities, inspired their descendants
with the ambition of uforping the sovereignty in
their country, and paved their way towards it.
Charles V. placed Alexander di Medici at the
head of the republic [A. D. i5gol, and to the
natural intereit and power of the family added
the weight as well as credit of the Imperial
proteaion. Of these, his successor Cosmo, fur-
named the Great, availed himself; and eftablilh-
ing his supreme authority on the ruins of the
ancient republican confritution, he transmitted
that, together with the title of grand duke of
Tuscany, to his descendants. Their dominions
were composed of the tesritories which had be-
longed to the three commonwealths of Florence,
Pisa, and Siena, and formed one of the most
refpe~able of the Italian itates.

The dukes of Savoy, during the former part

of the sixteenth century, poffeffed territorirs
which were not considerable either for extent or
value; and the French, having seized the greater
part of them, obliged the reigning duke to retire
for safety to the firong fortress of Nice, where he
shut himself up for feyeral years, while his son,
the prince of Piedmont, endeavoured to better
his fortune, by serving as an adventurer in the
armies of Spain. The peace of Cateau-Cambrefis
restored to him his paternal dominions. As these
are environed on every hand by powerful neigh-

bours,

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 297

hours, all whose motions the dukes of Savoy
must observe with the greatest attention, ia
order not only to guard againit the danger ofbe-
ing fiurprifed and overpowered, but that they
may choose their fide with discernment in those
quarrels wherein it is impossible for them to avoid
taking part, this peculiarity in their situation
seems to have had no inconsiderable influence on
their chara&er. By rousing them to perpetual
attention, by keeping their ingenuity always on
the firetch, and engaging them in almost conti-
nual ation, it hath formed a race of princes
more sagacious in discovering their true interest,
more decisive in their resolutions, and more dex-
terous in availing themselves of every occurrence
which presented itself, than any perhaps that can
befingled out in the history of Europe. By gra.
dual acquisitions the dukes of Savoy have added
to their territories, as well as to their own im-
portance; and aspiring at length to regal dignity,
which they obtained about half a century ago,
by the title of kings of Sarfdinia, they hold now
no inconsiderable rank among the monarchs of
Europe.

The territories which form the republic of the

U.iited Netherlands were loft during the first part
of the sixteenth century, among the numerous
provinces fubjed to the house of Aufiria; and
were then so inconfideratle, that hardly one op.
portunity of mentioning them hath occurred in
all the busy period of this hiffory. But soon
after the peace of Cateau-Cambrefis, the violent
and bigoted maxims of Philip's government,
being carried into execution with unrelenting ri.
gour by the duke of Alva, exasperated the free

people

298 . THE REIGN OF THE B. XII.

people of the Low-Countries to such a degree,
that they threw off the Spanish yoke, and as
ferted their ancient liberties and laws. These
they defended with a persevering valour, which
gave employment to the arms of Spain during half
a century, exhausted the vigour, ruined the repu.
tation of that monarchy, and at last conifrained
their ancient masters to recognise and to treat
with them as a free independent state. This
state, founded on liberty, and reared by induifry
and ceconomy, grew into great reputation, even
while liruggling for its existence. But when
peace and security allowed it to enlarge its views,
and to extend its commerce, it role to be one of
the most refpetable as well as enterprizing
powers in Europe.

The tranfaAions of the kingdoms in the North

of Europe have been felddm ,attended to in the
course of this history.

Russia remained buried in that barbarism and

obscurity, from which it was called about the
beginning of the present century, by the crea.
tive genius of Peter the Great, who made his
country known and formidable to the reft of
Europe.

In Denmark and Sweden, during the reign of

Charles V. great revolutions happened in their
confiitutions, civil as well as ecclesiastical. In
the former kingdom, a tyrant being degraded
from the throne, and expelled the country, a new
prince was called by the voice of the people to
afTume the reins of government. In the latter,
a fierce people roused to arms by injuries and op-
pression, shook off the IDanifh yoke, and con-
ferred the regal dignity on its deliverer Guflavus

Ericson,

EMPEROR CHARLES V. 299

Ericson, who had all the virtues of a hero and of
a patriot. Denmark, exhauftedby foreign wars,
or weakened by the dissensions between the king
and the nobles, became incapable of such efforts
as were requisite in order to recover the ascendant
which it had long poffeffed in the North of
Europe. Sweden, as soon as it was freed from
the dominion of firangers, began to recruit its
strength, and acquired in a (hort time such in-
ternal vigour, that it became the firif kingdom
in the North. Early in the subsequent century,
it rose to such a high rank among the powers of
Europe, that it had the chief merit in forming,
as well as conduding, that powerful league,
which protefed not only the protestant religion,
but the liberties of Germany, againit the bigotry
and ambition of the house of Aufiria.

INDEX

# INDEX TO THE SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH VOLUMES.

INDEX

TO THE

SECOND, THIRD, AND FOURTH

VOLUMES.

N. B. The Roman Numerals direa to the Volume, and the

Figures to the Page.

A

ABSOLUrION, the form of that sfed by father Tettel

in Germany, ii. 9., Note.

Adorni, the facion of, afliTRs the Imperial general Colonna

in the redussion of Genoa, ii. '74.

Adrian of Utrecht, made preceptor to Charles V. under Wil.

liam de Croy, lord of Chievres, ii. zg. His charaaer,
ibid. Sent by Charles with power to afrume the regency
of CafRile on the death of his grandfather, ibid. His claimn
admitted by cardinal Xi menes, and executed in conjunailon,
23. Authorized by Charles to hold the Cortes of Valen-
cia, which refuses to assemble before him, 73. Made
viceroy of Catlle on the departure of Charles for Ger-
many, 76. His eletion remonltrated against by the
Caftilians, 77. Is chosen pope, r71. Retrofpea of his
conduat in Spain during the abhence of Charles, aSa.
Sends Ronquillo to reduce the Segovians, who repulse him,
183. Sends Fonseca to beliege the city, who is repulsed
by the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, 584, '85*
Apologizes for Fonfeca's condu& to the people, i85. Re-
calls Fonleca, and difmilfes his troops, ibid. His authority
dilclaimed by the holy Junta, 157. Deprived of power
by them, 590. His xll reception on his arrival at Rome
on being chosen to the papacy, 258. Relrores the terri-
tories acquired by his predecessor, z19. Labours to unite
the contending powers of Europe, ibid. Pubhilhes a bull
for a three years truce among them, zzsa Accedes to the
league againat the French king, ibid. His death, 229.

,ol. IV. 0 5.) The

The sentiments and behaviour of the people on that occas
Lron, 229. A retrofpe& of his condua towards the re-
formers, 240. His brief to the diet at Nuremberg,
ibid. Receives a liii of grievances from the diet, 243.
His condua to the reformers, how efleemed at Rome,
245.

Africa, the Spanilh troops Cent by cardinal Ximenes against

Barbarossa, defeated there, ii. 45.

Aigues Mortes, interview betweeen the emperor Charles and

Francis there, iii. 138.

Aix-la-Chapelle, the emperor Charles crowned there, ii. 89.

Ferdinand his brother crowned king of the Romans there,
mi. 49.

Ala-rcn, Don Ferdinand, Francis I. of France, taken prisoner

at the battle of Pavia, committed to his cufrody, ii. 264.
Conduts Francis to Spain, 275. Delivers up Francis in
pursuance of the treaty of Madrid, 292. Is sent ambaffa.
-dor to Francis to require the fulfilment of his treaty, 309.
Pope Clement VII. taken prisoner by the Imperialists, is
committed to his cufiody, 330.

Albany, John Stuart, duke of, commands the French army

Cent by Francis1. to invade Naples, ii. 258.

Albert of Brandenburgh, grand master of the Teutonic

order, becomes a convert to the doarines of Luther, ii.
S303. Obtains of Sigismund king of Poland the inveti-
Cure of Prufia, ereaed into a dutchy, 304. Put under
the ban of the empire, ibid. His family fixed in the is-
heritance of Pruftia, ibid. Commands a bodyof troops in
behalf of Maurice of Saxony, but endeavours to alfert an
independency, iv. 72. Defeats and takes the duke d'Au-
anale prifoeer, and joins the emperor at Metz, 95. Is
condemned by the lmperial chamber for his demands on
the bishops of Bamberg and Wortlburg, io0. A league
formed againit him, 0o6. Is defeated by Maurice, 107.
Is again defeated by Henry of Brunswick, so9. Is driven
out of Germany, and dies in exile, ibid. His territories
refoied to his collateral heirs, Ito.

Albert, eledor of Mentz, the publication of indulgences in

Germany committed to him, ii. 93.

Alcxaoder VI. pope, remarks on the pontificate of, ii. azo.
.lexander.di Medici. See Medici.
Algiers, how it was feizedhby Barbarossa, iii. 84. Is seized

by the brother of the fame name, on the death of the
former, ibid. Is taken under the proteion of the Porte,

85.

95. Is governed by Hafcen Aga in the absence of Bar.
baroffa, Io0. Is besieged by the emperor Charles V.
so6. Charles forced to re-embark by bad weather, 207.
Alracbhid, brother of Muley Hafcen king of Tunis, solicits

the protebion of Barbaroffs againfi him, iii. 86. His
treacherous treatment by Barbarossa, 88.
Alua, duke of, adheres to Ferdinand of Aragon, in his dif-

pute with the archduke Philip concerning the regency of
CafRile, ii. g. Forces the Dauphin to abandon the liege
of Perpignan, iii. 218. Prelides at the court-martial
which condemns the ele&or of Saxony to death, 369. De.
tains the landgrave prisoner by the emperor's order, 379.
Commands under the emperor the army deffined againlP
France, iv. 94. Isappointed commander in chief in Pied-
mont, 547. Enters the eccleliaftieal territories and seizes
the Campagna Romana, 20s. Concludes a truce with
the pope, ibid. Negotiates a peace between Philip and the
pope, with cardinal Caraffa, zz3. Goes to Rome to aflk
pardon of the pope for his hostilities, ibid. Is rent to Paris
in the name of Philip to espouse the princels Elizabeth,
269.
Aerferff, a nobleman of Holland, affociastd by Charles V.

with cardinal Ximenes, in the regency of Caitile, ii. 39.
Anabaptis, the origin of that fe& deduced, iii. 65. Their

principal tenets, 66. Their (ettlement at Manlier, 67.
Charader of their principal leaders, ibid. They seize the
city of Munfler, 68. They eltablifh a new form of go-
vernment there, ibid. Choose Bocold king, 70. Their
licentious praaices, 72. A confederacy of the German
princes formed againtr them, 73. Are blockaded in
Munfler by the bishop, 74. The city taken, and great
slaughter made of them, 75. Their king put to death, 76.
CharaRer of the fe& since that period, 77. See Miat.
tbias and Bocold.

Angleria, his authority cited in proof of the extortions of the

Flemilh miniflers of Charles V. ii. 5a.

Anbalr, prince of, avows the opinions of Martin Luther,

i. 239-
Annots to the court of Rome, what, ii. t33*
Aragon, how Ferdinand became poffeffed of that kingdom,

ii. a. The Cortes of, acknowledges the archduke Philip's
title to the -crown, 3. Ancient enmity between this king-
dom and Caoile, 7. Navarre added to this crown by the

002 arts

Cortes not allowed to assemble in his name, 53. The
refradtory behaviour of the Aragonians, ibid. They refuse
reflitution of the kingdom of Navarre, 5. Don John
Lanuza appointed regent, on the departure of Charles for
Germany, 76. Who compoiej the ditturbances there,
t5. 'The moderation of Charles towards the insurgents
on his arrival in Spain, 257. See Spain.

'4rdres, an interview there between Francis I. and Henry

VIII. of England, ii. 87.

4purias, Charles son of Philip and Joanna, acknowledged

prince of, by the Cortes of Cailile, ii. 15.

4ug/burg, a diet called there by Charles V, iii. 42. His

public entry into that city, ibid. The confeffion of faith
named from this city, drawn up by Melandhon, 43. Re.
solute behaviour of the proteltant princes at, 44. Its form
of government violently altered, and rendered fubmillive to
the emperor, 409. The diet re-assembled there, iv. 9.
The diet takes part with the emperor againle the city of
1/'agdeburg, ,6. Is seized by Maurice of Saxony, 60.
Anoth-r diet at, opened by Ferdinand, 554. Cardinal
Noron8 attends the diet as the pope's nuncio, s!6,
voront departs on the pope's death, s58. Recess of the
diet on the fubjea of religion, oso. Remarks on this
secers, z66. The diet again assembled there, 387. II
intimidated by being surrounded by the emperor's Spanilk
troops, 388. The emperor re eiablihes the Romilh
worlhip in the churches of, ibid. The diet, by the em,
peror's order, petitions ihe pope for the return of the council
to Trent, 395' A lyfRem of theology laid before the diet
by the emperor, 401. Theaichbilhop of Mentz declares,
without authority, the diet's acceptance of it, ibid.
siLa, a convention of the malecontents in Spain held there,
ii. 187. A confederacy termed the holy Junta, formed
there, ibid. Which disclaims the authority of Adrian,
ibid. The holy Junta reqsoved to Tordeljias, 589. Sec
snta.

4ufria, by what means the haufe of, became so formidable

in Germany, ii. 333. The extraordinary acquisitions of
the houof of, in the perlon of the emperor Charles Vt
iv, Z72*. t76

.arbaroa,,

B

BSrbarofa, Horuck, his rife to the kingdom of Algiers and

Tunis, ii. 45. Defeats the Spanilh troops sent againit
him by cardinal Ximenes, ibid. His parentage, iii. 83.
Commences pirate with his brother Hayradin, ibid. How
he acquired poffefison of Algiers, 84. Infests the coast of
Spain, ibid. Is reduced and killed by Comares the Spanilh
governor of Oran, ibid.
- .. Hayradin, brother to the former of the fame
name, takes polfeion of Algiers on his brother's death,
iii. 83. Puts his dominions under the proteaion of the
Grand Signior, ibid. Obtains the comnnand of the Turk.
ilh fleer, ibid. His treacherous treatment of Alrafchid,
brother to the king of Tunis, 86. Seizes Tunis, 88.
Extends his depredations by sea, ibid. Prepares to relifb
the emperor's armament agoinft him, g9. Goletta and
his fleet taken, ibid. Is defeated by Charles, 93. Tunis
taken, 94. Makes a descent on Italy, azll. Burns
Rheggio, ibid. Befaiges Nice in conjunaion with the
French, but is forced to retire, zz9. Is difmilfed by
Francis, 242.
Barbary, a summary view of the revolutions of, iii. Ba. Its

division into independent kingdoms, ibid. Rife of the
piratical lates, 83. See Barbarofa.
Barcdlona, the public entry of the emperor CharlesV. into

that chy as its count, iii. 33. The treaties of Charles with
theItalian Rates, publilhed there, 37.
Bayard, chevalier, his charabler, ii. 159. His gal-

lant defence of Meziers besieged by the Imperialists,
ibid. Obliges them to raise the siege, 235. His noble
behaviour at his death, 236. His refpeaful funeral,
237.

Bslasy, M. his erroneous account of the education of Charles

V. corre8ed, ll. 24, Note. His account of thedialatrous
retreat of the emperor Charles V. from his invasion of
Provence, iii. 125*

Bible, a translation of, undertaken by Martin Luther, and its

effef's in opening the eyes of the people, ii. 238.
Bi拢ccca, battle of, between Colonna and Marefchal Lautrec,

li. 573.

ieosld or Beukles, John, a journeyman-taylor, becomes a

leader of the atlaptifts at Muniler, iii. 67. Succeeds

I as3 Matihias

thufialtic extravagancies, ibid. Is cholesg king, ibid.
Marries fourteen wives, 73. Beheads one of them, 75,
Is put to a cruel death at the taking of Muniter, 76.
See Anabapijfls.

.o'bemia, the archduke Ferdinand cholen king of, ii. 332.

Ferdinand encroaches on the liberties of the Bohemians,
iii. 385. The reformation introduced by John Huss and
Jerome of Prague, ibid. Raise an army to no purpose,
386. Is clolely confined in the citadel of Mechlin, iv. as.

SonnniJet, admiral of France, appointed to command the

invasion of Milan, ii. 227. His charader, ibid. En.
ables Colonna to defend the city of Milan by his imprum
dent delay, 2z8. Forced to abandon the Milanese, 235.
Is wounded, and his army defeated by the Imperialists,
236. Stimulates Francis to an invasion of the Milanese,
253. Adviles Francis to besiege Pavia, 255. Advises
him to give battle to Bourbon, who advanced to the relief
of Pavia, 259. Is killed at the battle of Pavia, 263*

Bologna, an interview between the emperor Charles V and

pope Clement VII. there, jii. 33. Another meeting be-
tween them there, 54.

.suillon, Robert de la Marck, lord of, declares war against

the emperor Charles, at the infligation of Francis, ii. 157.
Is ordered by Francis to dilbnd his troops, 158. His
territories reduced by the emperor, ibid.

.osuiogee, belieged by Henry VIII. Qs England, iii. 248.

Taken, 257.

.Bourbon, Charles duke of, his charater, ii. 222. The

caults of his difcontrent with Francis I. ibid. Hisduchefs
dies, 223. Rej路as the advances of Louise the king's
mother, zz4. Hi elRate fequel'ered by her intrigues, ibid.
Negotiates secretly with the emperor, ibid. Is included
in a treaty between the emperor and Henry VIII. of
Eng and, 225. Is tined by the king with betraying him,
which he denies, 226. Escapee to Italy, ibid Diredl6
the mealures of rht Imperial army under Lannoy, 234'
Defeats the French on the banks of the Se~lia, z35. In.
itigates Charles to an invadon of France, a48. Advances
to the relef of Pavia, 259. Defeats Francis, and takes
him prifo er, 263. Hallens to Madrid to secure his own
interelts in the interview between Charles and Francis,
177. His kind reception by Charles z84* Obtains a grant

of the dutchy of Mikln, and is made general of the Impe.
nra army, 285. Obliges Sforza to farrender Milan, 352.
Is forced to oppress the Milanese to satisfy his troops mu-
finying for pay, 357. Sets Morond at I berty,and makes
him his confident, ibid. Appoints Leyva governor of
Milan, and advances to invade the pope's territories, 3I9,
32o. His disappointed troops mgtiny, 320. He deter-
mines to plunder Rome, 324. Agrives at Rome, and
assaults it, 326. Is killed, 327.

Brandenburgb, eleator of, avows the opiniung of Luther,

ii. 239.

Albert of. See Albert.

iruges, a league concluded there between the emperor and

Henry ViIi. of England, against France, ii. s6a.

Brsnf'wick, duke of, avows the opinions of Luther, ii. s39*
,-- Henry duke of, driven from his dominions by

the protestant princes of the league of Smalkalde, iii. 235.
Raises men for Francis, but employs them to recover his
own dominions, 270. Is taken prisoner, ibid.

,guda, fsege of, by Ferdinand king of the Romans, iii. a93,

JB tteacheroufly seized by Sultan Solymao, ibid.

C

Cajelan, cardinal, the pope's legate in Germany, appointed to

examine the do&rines of Martin Luther, ii. 103. Requires
Luther peremptorily to retra& his errors, 104. Requires
the eledtor of Saxony to surrender or banilk Luther, ao6.
His condu& jufifsed, so8.
'ala is, an ineifedlual congrers there, between the emperor

and Francis, under the mediation of Henry VIII. ii. s60.
The careless manner in which it was guarded in the reign
of Mary queen of England, iv. 235. Ineffe&ual remon..
itrances of Philip, and lord Wentworth the governor5
concerning its defenceless h ate, 236. Is inverted and taken
by the duke of Guise, 237. The Engliih inhabitants
turned out, ibid. Stipulations Concerning, in the treaty
of Chateau-Cambress, 265.
avnmbray, articles of the peace concluded there between the
emperor Charles, and Francis of Fraspce iv. 153, Re-
marks on this treaty, x 54.

Crn, pace of4 bew;94Hopry VII, aA4 Francis, iiL. 3op.

EampejdiO,

to the second diet at Nuremberg, li. 246. Publilhes
articles for reforming the inferior clergy, 247. Advises
Charles to rigorous measures againit the protestants,
Ill. 45.

Capitrlation of the Germanic body, signed by Charles V. and

prescribed to all his successors, ii. 69.

Carafa, cardinal, his precipitate eleaion, iv. 172. Is ap-

pointed legate to Bologna, ibid. Reasons of his difgult

路 with the emperor, 173. Persuades the pope to solicit an

alliance with France againit the emperor, ibid. 574. 179.
His infiduous commilifon to the court of France, 196.
His public entry into Paris, ibid. Exhorts Henry to
break his truce with the emperor 597. Ablolves Henry
from his oath, 598. Negotiates a peace between the
pope and Philip, with the duke d'Alva, 228. The
fate of him and his brother on the death of pope Paul,

269. Carlojiadius, imbibes the opinions of Martin Luther, at Wit-
temberg, ii. a14. His intemperate zeal, 237. Awed by
the reproofs of Luther, 238.

Carignan, besieged by the count d'Enguin, and defended by

the marquis de Gualbo, iii. 242. Guaflo defeated in a
pitched battle, 245. The town taken, 246.

Cajaldo, marquis of Piadeno. See Piadeno,.
Castile, how Isabella became poffeffed of that kingdom, ii. 2.

The archduke Philip's title acknowledged by the Cortes of
* that kingdom, 3.- Isabella dies, and leaves her hulband

Ferdinand of Aragon, regent, 5. Ferdinand religns the
crown of, 7. Ferdinand acknowledged regent by the
Cortes, ibid. Enmity between this kingdom and Aragon,
ibid. The particular dillike of the Calbilians to Ferdinand,
ibid. The regency of, jointly velred in Ferdinand, Philip
and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, 13. Declares
againit Ferdinand, ibid. The regency of, religned by
Philip to Ferdinand, 14. Philip and Joanna acknowledgcd
king and queen by the Cortes, 55. Death of Philip, ibid.
The perplexity of the Caffilians on Joanna's incapacity for
government, s6. Ferdinand gains the regency and the
good-will of the Caf'ilians by his prudent adminif'ration,
20. Oran and other places in Barbary annexed to thit
kingdom by XiSmezet, ibid. 'Iimenes appointed regent by

Ferdinand's

Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles V. z8,
Charls assumes the regal title, 32. Ximenes procures its
acknowledgment, 33. The nobility deprefled by Xime.
nes, 34, 35. The grandees mutiny againil Ximenes, 36.
The mutiny fuppreed, ibid. Ximenes resumes the grants
made by Ferdinand to the nobles, 37. The bold reply of
Ximenes to the discontented nobles, 38. Other associates
in the regency appointed with Ximenes at the initigation
of the F emilh courtiers, 39. Ximenes dies, 49. Charles
acknowledged king by the Cortes, on his arrival, with a
reservation in favour of his mother Joanna, So. The
CalRilians receive unfavourable imprefions of him, ibid.
Disgusted by his partiality to his Flemilb minillers, gr.
Sauvage made chancellor, ibid William de Croy appointed
archbilhop of Toledo, p卤. The principal cities confede-
rate, and complain of their grievances, 54. The clergy
ps, refule to levy the tenth of benefices granted by the
pope to Charles V. 71. Interdiaed, but the interdi&
taken off, by Charles's application, 7卤. An infurreeion
there, 75. Increase the dilaffedlion, ibid. Cardinal Adrian
appointed regent, on the departure of Charles for Germany,
77. The views and pretensions of the commons, in their
infurreaions, 185. The confederacy called the holy
Junta formed, 187. The proceedings of which are car-
red on in the name of queen Joanna, g89. Receives cir-
culatory letters from Charles for the insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promises of pardon, r9t. The
nobles undertake to suppress the inforgents, 096. Raif:
an army againit them under the Conde de Haro, 199.
Harn gets poffelion of Joanna, zoo. Expedients by
which they raise money for their troops, 卤o0. Unwilling
to proceed to extremities with the Junta, o03. The army
of the Junta routed and Padilla executed, 卤06, 卤07. Dif-
solution of the Junta, lo9. The moderation of Charles
towards the insurgents on his arrival in Spain, 卤07. He
acquires the love of the Calilians, z13. See Spain.

Catbarine of Aragon, is divorced from Henry VIII. of Eng-

land, iii. 6o. Dies, 144.

Carbarine i Boria, a nun, flies from her cloilter, and marries

Martin Luther, ii. 30卤.

Catbarine di Medici. See Medici.
Cavi, peace concluded there between pope Paul IV. and

hilip l, ofSpsin, 17, adrm, Cercomps

Philrp II. of Spain, and Henry II. of France, iv. zgo,
259. The negotiations removed to Chateau-Cambrelts,
400. See Chateau-Cambrefo.

Cbaralers of men, rules for forming a proper el'rmate of

them, iii. 282. Applied to the cafe of Luther, ibid.

Charles IV. emperor of Germany, his oblervations on the

manners of the clergy, in his letter to the archbilhop of
Metz, ii. 1zz, Note.

Charles V. emperor, his descent and birth, ii. I. How he

came to inherit such extenfsve dominions, 2. Acknow-
ledged princeof Allurias by the Cortes of Cafhile, e5. His
father Philip dies, ibid. Jealousy and hatred of his grand-
father Ferdinand towards him, 21. Left heir to his do-
minions, 23. Death of Ferdinand, ibid. His education com-
mitted to William de Croy, lord ofChievres, ibid. Adrian of
Utrecht appointed to be his preceptor, 25. The firiR
opening of his charader, 26. Assumes the government
of Slanders, and attends to bufsnefs, ibid. Sends cardi-
nal Adrian to be regent of CafRile, who executes it jointly
with Ximenes, 30. Assumes the regal title, 32. His
title admitted with difficulty by the Caltilian nobility, 33.
Persuaded to add associate regents to Ximenes, 39. His

- Flemith court corrupted by the avarice of Chievres, 42.

Perluaded by Ximetes to visit Spain, but how that jour.
ney is retarded, ibid. 43. The prerent slate of his affairs,
ibid. Concludes a peace at Noyen with Francis I. of France,
and the conditions of the treaty, 44. Arrives in Spain,
46. His ungrateful treatment of Ximenes, 48. His
public entry into Valladolid, 49. Is acknowledged king
by the Cortes, who vote him a free gift, 50. The Cafti-
lians receive unfavourable impressions of him, ibid. Dif-
gulls them by his partiality to his Flemish miniffers, ibid.
Sets out for Aragon, 52. Sends his brother Ferdinand to
visit their grandfather Maximilian, ibid. Cannot assemble
the Cortes of Aragon in his own name, 53. The oppo.
fition made by that assembly to his desires, ibid. Refuses
the application of Francis I. for relhitution of the kingdom
of Navarre, ibid. Negledts the remonutrances of the CafG
tilians, ibid. Death of the emperor Maximilian, 55. View
of the present hate of Europe, 60. How Maximilian was
obllruded in securing the empire to him, 56. Francis I.
aspires to the Imperial crown, 57. Circumitanccs favour-

able

able to the pretenlions of Charles, 61. The Swits Can-
tons efpoode his cause, ibid. Apprehensions and condua
of Pope Leo X. on the occafson, 62,63. Assembling
of the diet at Francfort, 64. Frederic dukeof Saxony re-
fules the offer of the empire, and votes for him, 65.
And refuses the presents offered by his ambaLfladors, 66.
Concurring circumitances which favoured his eledion,
ibid. His eleaion, 68. Signs and condirms the capicu-
lation of the Germanic body,'ibid. 69. The eleaion no-
tified to him, ibid. Affoumes the title of majelty, 70.
Accepts the Imperial dignity offered by the count Palatine,
ambassador from the eleaor, 71. The clergy of Cafiie
refuse the tenth of benetices granted him by the pope, ibid.
Procures the interdi& the kingdom is laid under for re-
fufal, to be taken off, 72. Empowers cardinal Adrian to
hold thtCoetes of Valencia, 73. The nobles refuse to as-
femble without his presence, ibid* 74. Authorises the
insurgents there to continue in arms, ibid. Summons the
Cortes of Castile to meet in Galicia, ibid. Narrowly es-
capes with his Flemilh minilbers from an infurreaion on
that account, ibid. Obtains a donative from the Cortes, 76.
Prepares to leave Spain, and appoints regents, 77. Em-
barks, ibid. Motives of this jotrney, 77. Rife of the
rivalihip between him and Francis I. 78. Courts the fa-
aour of Henry VIII. of England and his minilter cardinal
Wolsey, 83. Vilats Henry at Dover, 86. Promises Wol.
fry his istereft for the papacy, ibid. Has a second inter-
view with Henry at Gravelines, 87. Offers to submit
his differences with Francis to Henry's arbitration, ibid.
His magnificent coronation at Aix-la-Chapelle, 89. Calls
a diet at Worms, to check the reformers, 90. Caufee
which hindered his efpouling the party of Martin Luther,
142. Grants Luther a fafe-condua to the diet of
Worms, 143. An edid prublidhed againlt him, 145. Hie
embarrafnfent at this time, s46. Concludes an alliance
with the pope, a52. The conditions of the treaty, 153.
Death of his minifher Chievres, and its advantages to him,
ibid. s54. InvaTion of Navarre by Francis, ibid. The
French driven out, and their general L'Efparre taken pri-
Loner, 156. War declared againit him by Robert de la
Marck, lord of Bouillon, who ravages Luxemburg, ibid.
i58. Reduces Bouillon, and invades France, ibid. His
demands at the congrefa at Calais, a6o. Has an inter-

view

league with Henry Viii. againit France, 16i. Pope
Leo declares for him againlt France, a65, a66. The
French driven out of Milan, s68. 173. Vifrts England
in his passage to Spain, 576. Cultivates the good-will of
cardinal Wolsey, and creates the earl of Surry his high
admiral, 177. Grants the iland of Malta to the knights
of St. John, expelled from Rhodes by Solyman the mag-.
nificent, 180. Arrives in Spain, ibid. A retrofpe& of
his proceedings in relation to the infurreaions in Spain,
195. Issues circulatory letters for the insurgents to lay
down their arms, with promises of pardon, ibid. His pru-
dent moderation towards the insurgents, on his arrival in
Spain, 192. Acquires the love of the Caflilians, 2卤3.
Enters into a league with Charles duke of Bourbon, 224.
Why he did not endeavour to get Wolsey eleded pope,
230. Invades Guienne and Burgundy, but without fuc-
eels, 233. His troops in Milan mutiny for want of pay,
but are pacified by Moroni, 2s.. Undertakes an invasion
of Provence, 248. Orders Pelcara to besiege Marseilles,
ibid. Pefeara obliged to retire, 250. Disconcerted by the
French overrunning the Milanese again, 253. The re.
venues of Naples mortgaged to raise money, 254. His
troops defeat Francis, and take him prisoner at the battle
of Pavia, 263. His affr-aed moderation at receiving the
alews, 264, 265. Avails himlelf of a treaty concluded
between Lannoy and pope Clement, but refuses to ratify
it, 270. His army in lavia mutiny, and are obliged to
be dilbanded, 27y. His deliberations on the proper im-
provement of his difadvan:ages, 卤7卤. His propositions to
Francis, 273. After many delays grants Sforza the
investiture of Milan, 77,. Moronk's intrigues betrayed
to him by Pescara, 280. Orders Pefcala to continue his
negotiarions with Mor' ni, z8s. His rigorous treatmentof
Franc s, 282. Vrlits Francis, 284. His kind reception
of theduke of Bou:bon, ,bid. Grants Bourbon the dutchy
of Milan, and appoints him general in chief of the Im-
perial army there, 2S6. Fruitless negotiations for the
delivery of Francis, ibid. Treaty of Marrid with Francis,
288. Delivers up Francas, 293. Marries Ifabelia of
Portugal, ibid. An alliance formed againlt him at Cog.
aac, 397. Sends ambassadors to Francis to require the
fulfilment of the treaty of Madrid, 309. Prepares for

war

war againfi Francis, 370. The Dope reduced to an accom-
modation with him, 355. The exhausted itate of his
finances, 377. HiS troops under Bourbon diffreffed and
mutinous for want of pay, ibid. Bourbon assaults Rome
and is amin, but the city taken, 327. The prince of
Orange general on Bourbon's death, takes the cafle of
St. Angelo, and the pope priloner, 330. The emperor's
condus on that occasion, ibid. His dissensions with the
pope, how far favourable to the reformation, 333. His
infiruEions to the diet at Spires, ibid. His manifesto
againit the pope,.and letter to the cardinals, 334. France
and England league against him, iii. 3. Is refafed sup-
plies by the Cortes of Caflile, B. Delivers the pope for a
ransom, ibid. His overtures to Henry and Francis, Is.
Their declaration of war agaistit him, s2. Is challenged
by Francis to fangle combat, ibid. Andrew Doria revolts
from Francis to him, 19. His forces defeat the French in
Italy, 20. 24. His motives for defsring an accommodation,
ibid. Concludes a separate treaty with the pope, 26.
Terms of the peace of Cambray concluded with Francis
by the mediation of Margaret of AulRria and Louise of
France, 27. Remarks on the advantages gained by him
in this treaty, and on his condua of the war, ibid. Viets
Italy, 32. His policy on his public entry into Barcelona,
33. Has an interview with the pope at Bologna, ibid.
Psotives for his moderation in Italy, 34. His treaties
with the fBates of, 35. Is crowned king of Lombardy and
emperor of the Romans, 37. Summons a diet at Spires to
confider the slate of religion, 39. His deliberations with
the pope, refpebing the expediency of calling a general
council, 40. Appoints a diet at Augsburg, 42. Makes
a public entry into that city, ibid. ils endeavours to
check the reformation, ibid. Resolute behaviour of the
protettant princes toward him, 44. His severe decree
againift the protestants, 45. Propoles his brother Ferdi.
nand to be eleaed king of the Romans, 49. Is opposed
by the proteliants, 50. Obtains his eleaion, ibid. Is
deitrous of an accommodation with the protestants, 5z.
Concludes a treaty with them at Nutemberg, ibid. Raise.
an army to oppose the Turks under Solyman, and obliges
him to retire, 53. Has another interview with the pope,
and presses him to call a general council, 54. Procures a
league of the Italian states to secure the peace of Italy, 56

Yoa.. i. E s Arrives

negotiations and meeting between the pope and Francis,
60. Undertakes to expel Barbarossa from Tunis, and
rellore Muley Hasten, 89. Lands in Africa, and befieges
Goletta, 91. Takes Goletta, and seizes Barbaroffa's feet,
9u, 9z. Defeats Barbarofia, and takes Tunis, 94. Refionrs
Muley Hafcen, and the treaty between them, 95. The glory
acquired by this enterprize, and the delivery ot the Chrilian
captives, 96. Seizes the dutchyof Milan on the death of
Francis Sforea, Ias. His policy with regard to it, ibid. Pre.
pares for war with Francis, ibid. His inveaive against Fran-
cis at Rome before the pope in council, Is1. Remarks on this
trarsaftion, I54. invades France, oI . Enters Provence and
binds it desolated, usa. liefeges Marleilles and Aries, o23.
His miserable retreat from Provence, szs. His invalionof
Picardy defeated, sz9. Is aecufed of poisoning the Dau.
phin, a27. Improbabiliry of its truth, sa8. Conjefture
concerning the Dauphin's death, ibid. Slanders invaded
by Francis, sgo. A fufpesfson of arms in Slanders,
how negotiated, a31. A truce in Piedmont, ibid. Motives
to these truces,.532. Negotiation for peace with Francis,
035. Concludes a truce for ten years at Nice, a37. Re.
marks on the war, ibid. His interview with Francis, 138.
Courts the friendihip of Henry VIII. of England, 144.
Indulges the proreltant princes, 146. Quiets their appre.
henfsons of the catholic league, 50. His troops mutiny,
X5a. Aflfembles the Cortes of Caddile, 153. Deliroys
the i5cment conflitution of the Cortes, 155. Inltance of
the haughty spirit of the Spanibh grandees, ibid. Desires
permidion of Francis to pass through France to theNether.
lands, 164. His reception in France, s65. His rigor.
ous treatment of Ghest, 168. Refuses to fulfil his
engagements to Francis, u70. Appoints a friendly con-
ference between a deputation of catholic and protel'ant
divines before the diet at Ratibon, 590. Refulc of this
conference, 093. Grants a private exemption from
oppreflions to the proteitants, 194.. Undertakes to reduce
Algiers, zor. Is near being calt away by a violent form,
.205. Lands near Algiers, ibid. His soldiers exposed to
a violent tempest and rain, 507. His fleet hlattreted, ibid.
His fortitude under these disasters, 2o9. Leaves his
enterprize and embarks again, ibid. Is difdreited with
another itorm at sea, ibid. Takes advantage of the French

iovalion

invafton of Spain to obtain subsidies from the Cortes, 9g.*
His treaty with Portugal, ibid. Concludes a league with
Henry VIII. ozs. Particulars of the treaty, 223.
Overruns Cleves, and his barbarous treatment of the town
of Duren, 226. His behaviour to the duke of Cleves,
ibid. Befreges Landrecy, 227. Is joined by an English
detachment,. ibid. Is forced to retire, zz8. Courts the
favour of the proteflants, 234. His negotiations with the
prortelants, at the diet of Spires, 236. Procures the
concurrence of the diet in a' war against Francis, 240.
Negotiates a separate peace with the king of Denmark,
ibid. Invades Champagne, and invelts St. Defsere, 247.
Want of concert between his operations and those of
Henry, who now invades France, 248. Obtains St. De-
here by artifice, 249. His distresses and happy move-
ments, 250. Concludes a separate peace with Francis,
252. His motives- to this peace, 253. His advantages
by this treaty, 2.6. Obliges himself by a private article
to exterminate the protefitant heresy, ibid. Is cruelly
afilided with the gout, 259. Diet at Worms, 260.
Arrives at Worms and alters his condu& toward the pro-
tellants, 263. His condu& on the death of the duke of
Orleans, 267. His diflimulation to the landgrave of
Helfe, 268. Concludes a truce with Solyman, 388.
Holds a diet at Ratilbon, 290. His declaration to the
protellant deputies, 294. His treaty with the pope, con-
cluded by the cardinal of Trent, ibid. His circular letter
to the protestant members of the Germanic body, 295.
The protei'ants levy an army againit him, 303. Is un-
prepared againi' them, 324. Puts them under the ban of
the empire, 306. The protestants declare war againlt him,
307. Marches tojoin the troops sent by the pope, 350.
Farnese, the pope's legate, returns in difgufr, aIs. His
prudent declensfon of an adion with the protestants, 354.
lojoined by his Flemibh troops, 355. Proposals of peace
made by the proteltants, 325. Their army disperse, 326.
His rigorous treatment of the protellant princes, 3 a*
1lrmiffes part of his army, 33s. The pope recalls his
troops, 332. His relierion on Fiefco's infurreaion at
Genoas, 348. Is alarmed at the hofitle preparations of
Francis, 352. Death of Francis, 354. A paralleldrawn
between him and Francis, ibid, Consequences of Francis's
death to him, 358. Marches against theeleaor of Saxony,

25 a 359*

359* Passes the Elbe, 36o. Defeats the Saxon army,
365. Takes the eledor prisoner, ibid. His harh reception
of him, ibid. Invells Witremberg, 366. Condemns the
eleaor to death by a court-martial, 309. The eledor by
treaty surrenders the eleaorate, 375. The har& terms
imposed by him on the landgrave of Helfer 374. His
haughty reception of the landgrave, 377. Detains hirn
1rifoner, 379. Seizes the warlike flores of the league,
384. His cruel exaaions, 385. Assembles a diet at
Auglburg, 387. Intimidates the diet by his Spanish
troops, 388. Re-eRablilhes the Romilh worlhip in the
churches of Augsburg, ibid. Seizes Placentia, 393*
Orders the diet to petition the pope for the return of the
council to Trent, 305. Protefs against the council of
Bolognas, 398 Caures a fyltem of faith to be prepared
for Germany, 399. Lays it befsre the diet, 401. The
Jtrerim oppofd, 406. And rejeaed by the Imperial
cities, 407 Reduces the city of Auglburg to folbmillion,
409. Repeats the fame violence at Ulm, ibid. Carries
theeledor and landgrave with him into the Low-Countries,
411. Procures his son Philip to be recognized by the
itates of the Netherlands, 452. Eflablifhea the Interim
there, 454. Re-assembles the diet at Augsburg, under
the influence of his Spanish troops, iv. 9. The city of
Magdeburg refuses to admit the Interim, and prepares for
refsltance, s6. Appoints Maurice eledor of Saxony to
reduce it, 17. Promises to protee the protestants at the
council of Trent, 59. Arbitrarily releases Maurice and
the eleaor of Brandenburgh from their engagements to
the landgrave for the recovery of his liberty, 20. Endea-
oours to secure the empire for his fan Philip, 22. His
brother Ferdinand refuses to relign his prereulians, 26.
Belieges Parma, but is repulled, 29. Proceeds rigoroullv
against the proteflants, 3S. Endeavours tofupport the
council of Trenr, 32. Pots Magdeburg under the ban of
the empire, 33. Ablolves the city, : Is involved in
disputes between the council and the protellant deputies,
concerning their fafe-condua, 40. Begins to fufpe&
Maurice ofSaxony, 54. Circumfiances which contributed
to deceive him with regard to Maurice, 55. Maurice
takes the field against him, 57. Maurice seconded by
Henry II. of France, 59. His distress and conifernation,
o. An inefedtual negotiation with Maurice, 6 . Flies

haom

from Infpruck, 65. Releases the eledor of Saxony, 67.
Is solicited to satisfy the demands of Maurice, 74. His
present difficulties, 75. Refuses any direa conmpliance
with the demands of Maurice, 80. Is disposed to yield
by the progress of Maurice's operations, ibid. Makes a
peace with Maurice at Paffau, 63. Refleaions on this
treaty, 84. Turns his arms against France, 90. Lays
siege to Mete, 94. Is joined by Albert of Brandenburgh,
94. His army diltreffed by the vigilance of the duke of
Guise, 95. Raises the siege and retires in a ihatteredcondi-
5ion, 98. Cosmo di Medici asserts his independency againi'
him, too. Siena revolts againit him, ibid. Is dejeated
at his bad success, 0o3. Takes Terrouane, and demo-
lifhea it, irr. Takes Hefden, ibid. Proposes his son
Philip as a husband to Mary queen of England, 224. The
articles of the marriage, 227. Marches to oppose the
French operations, 135. Is defeated by Henry, a36.
Invades Picardy, ibid. Grants Siena, subdued by Colmo
di Medici, to his son Philip, 137. A diet at Auglburg
coened by Ferdinand, 154. Leaves the interior admini-
diration of Germany to Ferdinand, s58. Applies again
to lherdinand to relign his pretentions of fuccellion to
Philip, but is refused, r59 Recefsof the diet of Augf.
burg on the fubjea of religion, s6s. A treaty concluded
between pope Paul IV. and H-enry II. of France against
him, 579. Refsgns his hereditary dominions to his son
Philip, o80. His motives for retirement, a8s. Had
long neditated this relignation, 184. The ceremony of
this deed, zS5. His speech on this occation, 186. Re-
signs also the dominions of Spain, sgo. His intended re-
tirement into Spain retarded, 090. A truce for five years
concluded with France, 193. Endeavours in vain to fe.
cure the Imperinl crown for Philip, 203. Religns the
Imperial crown to Ferdinand, 2o4. Sets out for Spain,
205. His arrival and reception in Spain, zo6. Is dif-
trelfed by his fon's ungrateful neglea in paying his
penflon, 207. Fixes his retreat in the monaliery of St.
Julius in Placentia, acS. The iatuation of this monas.
tery, and his apartments, described, -ibid. Contrast
betneen the condua of Charles, and the pope, 209.
His manner of life and his retreat, 250. His death preci-
pitated by his monastic severities, 253. Celebrates his
own funeral, ibid. Dies, 24. Hisicharatter, 255. A

Z E 3 review

acquisitions to the crown of Spain, 2 '4.

Cbateau-Cambrejis, the conferences for peace between Philip

II. of Spain, and Henry II. of France, removed thither
from Cercamp, iv. 263. The peace retarded by the de.
mand of Elizabeth of England for refsitution of Calais,
ibid. Particulars of the treaty signed there between
England and France, 265 Terms of the pacidication
between Philip and Henry, 267.

Cheregato, nuncio from the pope to the diet at Nuremberg,

his infiruaions, ii. 244. Oppoles the assembling a gene.
ral council, 242.

Ckiervres, William de Croy, lord of, appointed by Maximilian

to superintend the education of his grandson Charies, ii.
24. Adrian of Utrecht made preceptor under him, a5.
His direaion of the fludies of Charles, 26. His avarice
corrupts the Flemilh court of Charles, 42. Negotiates a
peace with France, 44, 45. Endeavours to prevent an
interview between Charles and Ximenes, 45. Attenda
Charles to Spain, 46. His ascendancy over Charles, 50.
His extortions, 5r. His death and the supposed caues
ofit, 153.

Cbriflians, primitive, why averse to the principles of tolers.

tion, iv. 162.

Clement VII. pope, his eletion, 1i. 229. His charater, ibid.

Grants cardinal Wolsey a legatine commition in England
for life, 23o. Refuses to accede to the league against
Francis, 234. Labours to accommodate the difference
between the contending parties, ibid. His proceedings
with regard to the reformers, 245. Concludes a treaty of
neutrality with Francis, 257. Enters into a reparate treaty
with Charles after the battle of Pavia, and the consequences
of it, aso. Joins in an alliance with Francis Sforza and
the Venetians, againfi the emperor, 307. Absolves
Francis from his oath to observe the treaty of Madrid, ibid.
Cardinal Colonna seizes Rome, and invests him in the
caile of St. Angelo, 314, 315. Is forced toan accommo-
dation withthe Imperialifis, 3rS. His revenge against the
Colonna family, 359. Invades Naples, ibid. His ter.
ricories invaded by Bourbon, and his perplexity on the
occaftion, j32. Concludes a treaty with Lasmnoy viceroy
of Naples, 3"2. His conflernation on Bourbon's motions
towards Rome, 3a5. Rome taken, and himself be.

siege4

leged in the caltle of St. Angelo, 327. Surrenders
himself prisoner, 335. The Florentines revolt againlt
him, hii. 3. Pays Charles a ransom for his liberty, with
other stipulations, so. Makes his escape from confine-
nent, ibid. Writes a letter of thanks to Lautrec, ibid.
Is jealous of the intentions of Francis, and negotiates
with Charles, a6. His motives and iteps towards an ac-
commodation, 24. Concludes a separate treaty with
Charles, a6. His interview with the emperor at Bologna,
33. Crowns Charles king of Lombardy and emperor of
the Romans, 37. His representations to the emperor
against calling a general council, 41. Has another inter-
view with Charles at Bologna, and the difficulties railed
by him to the calling a general council, 54. Agrees to a
league of the Italian Plates for the peace of Italy, 56. His
interview and treaty with Francis, 60. Marries Catherine
di Medici to the duke of Orleans, ibid. His protrasion
of the affair of the divorce foicited by Henry VIII. 6s.
Reverses Cranmer's sentence of divorce, under penalty of
excommunication, 62. Henry renounces his supremacy,
ibid. His death, 63. Refeieians on his pontificate,
6g5

Clergy, Romilh, remarks on the immoral lives of, and how

they contributed to the progress of the reformation, ii. 521.
The facility with which they obtained pardons, 123.
Their ufurpations in Germany, during the disputes con-
cerning invelbitures, I25. Their other opportunities of
aggrandizing themselves there, ibid. Their personal imn
munities, rs6. Their encroachments on the laity, z28.
The dreadful effeas of spiritual censures, ibid. Their
devices to secure their ufurpations, az9. The united
eftea of all these circumirances, 134. .Oppose the ad-
uancement of learning in Germany, 138-

rvcJes, invaded and overrun by the emperor Charles V.

iin. 226. Cruel treatment of Duren, ibid. Humiliating
fubmiflion路 of the duke, ibid.

Cnipperdoling, a leader ofthe anabap:ifts at Munfler, an

account of, iii. 68. See Anabapt Vis.

Cognac, an alliance formed there againaR Charles V. by the

pope, the Venetians, the duke of Milan, and Francis I.
U. 307.

Cligny, admiral, governor of Picardy, defends St. Quintin

against the Spaniih genesal Emanuel Philibert duke of

Savoy,

Savoy, iv. r38. His brother d'Andeloe defeated in Mi
endeavour to join the garrison, 219. But d'Andelot
enters the town, ibid. His charaaer, z卤4. The town
taken by assault, and himfeif taken prisoner, ibid.

Cologne, Ferdinand king of Hungary and Bohemia, brotheir

to the emperor Charles V. elkeed king of the Romans by
the college of elefhors there, iii. 48.
-路 Herman, count dr Wied, archbishop and eledor of,

inclines to the reformation, and is opposed by his canons,
who appeal to the emperor and pope, iii. 265. Is deprived
and excommunicated, 286. Resigns, 330.

Colonna, cardinal Pompeo, his charaaer, and rivallhip with

pope Clement VIL. ii. 354. Seizes Rome, and invests the
pope in the calfle of St. Angelo, 315, 36. Is degraded,
and the reft of the family excommunicated by the pope,
319. Is prevailed on by the pope, when prisoner with
the Imperialists, to solicit his delivery, iii. 9.
- Prosper, the Italian general, his charader, ii. s65.
Appointed to command the troops in the invasion ofMilan,
ibid. Drives the French out of Milan, s68. His army
how weakened at the death of pope Leo X. 169. De.
feats marefchal de Lautrec, at Bicocca, 173. Reduces
Genoa, 174. The bad Bate of his troops when the
French invade Milan, 卤z8. Is enabled to defend the
city by the ill conduca of Bonnever the French com.
mander, 129. Dies, and is succeeded by Lannoy, 234.

Conrbillas, an Aragonian gentleman, employed by Ferdinand

of Aragon to obtain Joanna's consent to his regency of
Cal'ile, ii. 9. Thrown inzo a dungeon by the archduke
Philip, 0o.

Csnfeffen of Auglburg. drawn up by Melanahon, iii. 43.
COnjlance, the p.ivi!eges of that city taken away by the

emperor Charles V. for difobadience to the Irterim,
in. 454-

Corjairs of Barbary, an account of the rife of, iii. 82. See

A'lgiers, Barbai-r7.

Corres of Aragrn, acknoliedge the archduke Philip's title to

the crown, ii .

3 Nor ahooied t.o llh able in :he name

of Charles V. 53. Their rpp!irtian to his d-lfies, x4.
Is prevaied on by the em. eror to recogaize lils onl Philip
as fiicceiior t'. thit kinud m ill 2 a. S e So in.

~-.of Caliile, ackiossledges rhe z cojsk2 W.ia's 路itle to

the crown, ii. 3. 1a p..a .ss co t:o sntsoVaejg leo.i-

nand

onand regent according to Ifabelia's will, 7. Acknow-
ledges Philip and Joanna king and queen of Caflile, and
their son Charles, prince of Aflurias, 05. Declares
Charles king, and votes him a free gift, 5o. Summoned
by Charles to meet at Compollella in Galicia, 74. Tu-
multuary proceedings thereupon, 75. A donative voted,
76. Loses all its influence by the dissolution of the holy
Junta, z i. Its backwardness to grant supplies for the
emperor's wars in Italy, 357. Refuses his prefifngfolicit-
ations for a supply, hii. 9. Assembled at Toledo to grant
supplies to the emperor, 553. The remonfirances of,
J54. The anctent constitution of, subverted ly Charles,
155. SeeSpain.

Cortes of Valencia, prevailed on by the emperor Charles V.

to acknowledge his son Philip fucceflbr to that kingdom,
iii. 209. See Spain.

Cortona, cardinal di, governor of Florence for the pope, ex-

pelled by the Florentines, on the pope's captivity, ih. 330.

Cosmo di Medici. See Medici.
Cranmer, archbilhop of Canterbury, annuls the marriage of

Henry VIII. with Catharine of Asagon, which was refused
to Henry by the pope, iii. 61. His fetence reversed by
thepope, 62.

Crefpy, peace of, between the emperor and Francis, iii. 252.
Cro, William de, nephew to Chievres, made archblihop of

Toledo,byCharlesV. ii. 52. Dies, 2I0.

D

D'Aidert, John, expelled from his kingdom of Navarre by

Ferdinand of Aragon, 11. 20. Invades Navarre, but is
defeated by cardinal Ximenes, 40.

D'Alembert, M. his observation on the order of Jesuits, iii.

584, Note.

D'Andelot, brother to Coligni, is defeated by the duke of

Ssxony in an endeavour to succour St. Qu~intin, iv. 259.
But enters the town with the fugitives, azo. The town
taken by assault, 224.

Dauphin of France, eldest son of Francis I. is delivered up

with the duke of Orleans to the emperor Charles V. in
exchange for his father, as hostages for the performance of
the treaty of Madrid, ii. 293. His death imputed to
Doifsn, iii. g27. Themoft probable cause ofit, azz.

DJaupbina

Dauphin, late duke of Orleans, second son of FrancisI.

commands an army, and invades Spain, iii. z16. Isforced
to abandon the liege of Perpignan, 217. Is dilTatisfied at
the peace of Crelpy, zjS. Makes a secret proteltstium
against it, ibid.

- of France, Con of Henry II. contraaed to Mary

the young queen of Scotland, iii. 394. Is married to
her, iv. 141.

Denmark, a summary view of the revolutions in, during the

sixteenth century, iv. 298.

- king of, joins the protellant league at Smalkalde,

uI. 549.

De Rero, cardinal, writes a hiffory of Fiefco's conspiracy

while a youth, iii. 347, Nore.

Diana of Poitiers, mistress to Henry II. of France, afifdl

the Guiles in persuading Henry to an alliance with pope
Paul IV. againlt the emperor, iv. a77 Induers Henry
- to break the treaty of Vaucelles, 199. Marries her grand-

daughter to one of Montmorency's sons, 248. Joins
Montmorency againlt the Guises, 54.9.

Doria, Andrew, alif'ts Lautrec in subduing Genoa, iii. 6.

Conquers and kills Moncada in a fea-engagement before
the harbour of Naples, e6. His charauer, 17. Is di(.
guffed with the behaviour of the French, a8. Revolts
to the emperor, a9. Opens to Naples a communication
by sea, ibid. Rescues Genoa from the French, so.
Reltores the government of, to the citizens, zz. The
refpe& paid to his memory, 23. Attends the emperor
Charles in his difaltrous expedition againfr Algiers, o04.
His partial fondness for his kinsman Giannetino, 335.
His narrow elcate in Lavagno's infurredtion, 344. Re-
turns on Lavagno's death, and the difperlion of his party,
347. See Gen'a and La-ragno.

- Giannerino, his charafter, iii. 335. IS murdered

by Lavagno's conipirators, 344.

Dower, an interview there between Henry VIII. and the

emperor Clharics V. ii. 86.

Dragut, a corsair, commands the Turki& fleet which ravages

the coafi of Naples, iv. J03.

Du Pratt, chancellor of France, his charafer, li, 124.

Commences a law-suit againit Charles duke of Bourbon,
for his ellate, at the initigation of Louise the king's mo-
heiar, ibid.

LDueling,

Dssuling, the cufrom of, how rendered general, iii, 12. Its

influence on manners, 23.

Duren in Cleves, taken by the emperor Charles V. the inha-

bitants put to the sword, and the town burnt, iii. az6.

E

Eceius, an adversary of Luther's, holds a public disputation

with him at Leiplic, on the validity of the papal authority,
11. ItO.

EccleJiofiical censures of the Romith church, the dreadful

effedls of, ii. iz8.
-- - reservation, in the recess of the diet of Augsburg,
remarks on, iii. 53.

Edrhburgh plundered and burnt by the earl of Hcrtford,

iii. 247.

Edwerd VI. of England, his chara~er, iv. 124.
Egmrnt, count of, commands the cavalry at the battle of

St. Qintin, and puts Montmorency's troops to flight, iv.
220, 221. Engages marihal de Termes, and defeats him
by the casual .riival us an English squadron, 243.

Egypt, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire,

ii. 5S.

Ehremberg, the catle of, taken by Maurice of Saxony,

iv. 64.

Eignurr, a faaion in Geneva so termed, an account of,

iii. ac6.
1inzabesh, lifter of Mary, her acceflmon to the crown of
England, iv. 259. Her charaser, ibid. Is addressed by
Philip of Spain, and Henry of France, for marriage, 260.
Ber prudent condua between them, z6s. How deter-
mined againlt Henry, 262. Her motives for reje&ing
Philip, 263. Returns Philip an evative answer, ibid.
Demands rel'itution of Calais, at the conferences at Cha-
teau-Cambrefis, ibid. Ellablifhes the protelsant religion
in England, 264. Treaty between her and Henry ligned
at Chateau-Cambrefis, 265.

Emrrmanuel Philibert, duke of Savoy. See Sa-oy.
England, by what means that kingdom was freed from the

papal supremacy, and received trh doarines of the reform-
ation, ill. 62. Mary queen of, marrien to prince Philip,
son of the emperor Charles V. contrary to the fene of the
nation, iv. szz. The marriage ratified by parliament,

Jio.

in the war againit France, zag. Mary levies money by
her prerogative, to carry on the war, ibid. Calais taken
by the duke of Guise, 237. Guifnes and Hames taken,
ibid. Death of Mary, and accession of Elizabeth, 259.
The protefiant religion eltablifhed by Elizabeth, 264.
Treaty with France signed at Chateau-Cambrelis, 265.
Its interior ithrength how increased by the condu& of
Henry VIII. 28z. Its power no longer fruitlessly waRed
on the continent, 283. Alteration of its condua towards
Scotland, 284.

Enguien, the count de, belieges Carignan, ii. 242. D-e

fires of Francis permission to engage Gualbo, ibid. Defeats
GuafRo in a pitched battle, 245.

Erard de la Mark, ambaffodor of Charles V. to the diet of

Frankfort, his private motives for thwarting the preteri
fions of Francis I. of France to the Imperial crown, ii. 67.
Signs the capitulation of the Germanic body on behalf of
Charles, 68.

Erafmue, some account of, ii. 138. Preceded Luther in

his cenfisres against the Romilh church, 139. Concurs
with him in his intentions of reformation, 540. Motives
which checked him in this, ;bid.

Escurial, palace of, built by Philip II. in memory of the

battle of St. Quintin, iv. 226.

.Erope, a short view of the Rate of, at the death of the em-

peror Maximilian, ii- 55. The contemporary monarcha
of all, illbutrious at the time of Charles V. 89, 90. The
method of carrying on war in, how improved beyond the
pradice of earlier ages, zoo. The sentiments of, on
Charles's treatment of the pope, iii. a. A review of the
slate of, during the reign of the emperor Charles V. iv.
270. The remarkable change in, at this period, z's.
How affeaed by the revolt of Luther againlt the church
of Rome, 286.

Butemi, king of Algiers, engages Barbarossa in his service,

and is murdered by him, iii. 83.

Excommunication in the Romilh church, the original inflituo

tion of, and the use made of it, ii. 028.

Farnetj, Alexander, his unanimous eleebion to the papacy,

iii. 63. See Paul IH.

Farnese,

Farnese, cardinal, accompanies the troops sent by the pope

to the emperor, against the army of the proteltant league,
iii.qs s. Returns disgusted, ibid. Leads the troops home
again by the pope's order, 932. Contributes to the elec-
tion of cardinal di Monte to the papacy, iv. 6.
- Odavio, grandson of pope Paul III. endeavours to
surprise Parma, and enters into treaty with the emperor,
iv. 3. Is confirmed in1Parma, by Julius, 26. Procures
an alliance with France, 28. Is attacked by the Im-
perialilts, but fuccefsfully proteaed by the French,
29. Placentia refrored to him by Philip II. of Spain,
229:
- Peter Lewis, natural (on of pope Paul III. obtains

of his father the dutchies of Parma and Placentia, iii. 268.
His charaaer, 391. Is affailinated, 395.

Ferdinand cing of.Aragon, how he acquired his kingdoms,

ii. 2. Invites his daughter Joanna, and her hulband,
Philip archduke ofAutlia, to Spair, ibid. Becomes
jealous of Philip, 3. Carries on his war with France
sigoroufly, notwithitanding Philip's treaty with Lewis, 5.
His queen Isabella dies, and leaves him regent of Caffile,
under reftriaions, ibid. Refagns the kingdom of Castile,
and is acknowledged regent by theCortes, 7. His cha.
railer, ibid. His maxims of government odious to the
Caltiliana, 2. Required by Philip to relign his regency,
9. Joanna's letter of consent procured by him, intercepted
by Philip, and herself confined, so. Is deserted by the
Cal'ilian nobility, ibid. Determines to exclude his daughter
fromtheluccefion by marrying, so. Marries Germaine
de Foix, niece to Lewis XII. of France, 1s. A treaty
between him and Philip at Salamanca, by which the regency
of Callile is jointly veiled in them and Joarnsa, ibid. Pre-
,ails on Henry VII. of England to detain Philip for three
months, when driven on that coad, 13. The Caflilians
declare againlt him, ibid. Resigns the regency of CalRile
by treaty, 14. Interview between him and Philip, ibid.
Is ablent, at Naples, when Philip died, 18. Returnsand
gains, with the regency of Caltile, the good-will of the
natives by his prudent adminillration, 20. Acquires by
dilhonourable means the kingdom of Navarre, as. How
he deltroyed his confritution, ibid. Endeavours to diminilh
his grandson Charles's power, by a will in favour of Ferdi-
nand, 22. Alters his will in favour of Charles, 23.
Dies,ibid. Review of his adminitration, 27. Ximenea

VOL.Iv. ar appointed,

of Charles V. 28.

Ferdinand, second son of Philip archduke of Auifria, born,

ii. 5. Left regent of Aragon, by his grandfather Ferdi-
nand, zz. This revoked by a fublequent will, by which
he obtainsonly a pension, 3s. Discontented with his dif-
appointment, he is taken to Madrid under the eye of
cardinal Ximenes, ibid. Sent by Charles V. to visit their

. grandfather Maximilian, 52. Is eledted king of Hungary

and Bohemia, 332. Signs a deed called theReverfe, 333-
The emperor endeavours to get him eleted king of the
Romans, ill. 47. He is opposed by the protellants, 48.
Is crowned king of the Romans, ibid. Forms a confe-
deracy againfi the anabaptills at Munfier, 73. Opposes
the restoration of Uiric duke of Wurtemberg, 77. Re-
cognizes his title, and concludes a treaty with him, 73.
His kingdom of Hungary wrested from him by John
Zapol Scaepius, 195. Befreges the young king Stephen
and his mother in Buda, but is defeated by the Turks,
197. His mean offers of submission to the Porte, 091.
Which are rejefted, 199. Courts the favour of the
proteflants, 235. Opens the diet at Worms, 260. Re-
quires it to submit to the decilions of the councilof Trent,
349. Agrees to pay a tribute to Solyman for Hungary,
376. Encroaches on the liberties of Bohemia, 385. His
rigorous treatment of Prague, 387. Difarns the Bohe-
mians, ibid. Obtains the sovereignty of the city of Con-
itance, 414. Invades Transylvania by invitation of Mar-
tinuzzi, iv. 43. Obtains the refsgnation of Transylvania
from queen Isabella, 44. Orders Martinuzzi to be affaf-
finated, 47. Enters into negotiation with Maurice on
behalf of the emperor, 74. His motives for promoting
the emperor's agreeing with Maurice, 78. Isabella and
her Con Stephen recover possession of Transylvania, s;4*
Opens a diet at Augsburg, and excites furpicions in the
proteffants, 154. The emperor leaves the internal admi-
nifration of German affairs to him, s58. Is again applied
to by the emperor to refrgn his pretentions of fuccelion to
Philip, but refuaes, ibid. Endeavours therefore to gain
the friendihip of the diet, a60. Again refuses the em-
peror's folicitations, 204. Charles resigns the Imperial
crown to him, ibid. Assembles the college of eledhurs at
Frankfort, which acknowledges him emperor of Germany,
238. The pope refuses to acknowledge him, >39.

Eudal

Feudal government, a view of, as it existed in Spain, ii. a85.
Fiefro, count of Lavagna. See Lasagna.
- Jerome, engages in his brother s conspiracy, and fails

in lecuring Andrew Doria, iii. 343. His imprudent vanity
on his brother's death, 345. Shuts himself up in a fort
on his eflate, 345. Is reduced and put to death, 353.

Slanders. See Netberlands.
Florence, the inhabitants of, revolt against pope Clement

VII. on the news of his captivity, and recover their
liberty, iii. 3. Are reduced to fubjeaion to Alexander
di Medici, by the emperor, 37. Alexander di Medici,
duke of, affaflinated by his kinsman Lorenzo, a40.
Cosmo di Medici advanced to the sovereignty, 141.
Cosmo supported by the emperor, defeats the partisans of
Lorenzo, 142. Cosmo asserts his independency on the
emperor, iv. 100.

Fonfeua, Antonio de, commander in chief of the forces in

Spain, ordered by cardinal Adrian to besiege the insurgents
in Segovia, ii. 584. Is denied liberty of taking military
flores, by the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, ibid.
Attacks and almol' burns the whole town, ibid. Is re-
pulsed, s85. His houle at Valladolid burnt, ibid.

France, the acquifstions of that kingdom during the reign of

the emperor Charles V. iv. 277. The charaaer of the
people of, 279. The good consequences of the civil
wars in that kingdom to the reib of Europe, aSo.

Francis I. king of France, concludes a peace with Charles V.

and the conditions of the treaty, ii. 44. Sends a fruitless
embassy to Charles for the restitution of Navarre to the
young king, 53. Aspires to the Imperial crown at the
death of Maximilian, 57. Reasons by which he supported
his pretensions, ibid. Remarks on the equipages of his
ambahladors to the German slates, 60. His pretensions
adopted by the Venetians, 61. Loses the eleaion, 68,
Rife of the rivalihip between him and Charles, 78.
Courts the favour of cardinal Wolsey, 84. Promises
Wolsey his interest for the papacy, 87. Has an inter-
view with Henry VIIl. of England, ibid. Wreltles with
Henry, and throws him, 88, Note. His advantages over
Charles, at the commencement of hollilicies between them,
148. Concludes anailiance with the pope, 552. Invades
and reduces Navalre, in the name ofHenry d'Albret, son
of Joha, the former king, 154* The French driven out

rar by

by the imprudence of P'Elparre their general, who is taken
prisoner by the Spaniards, 55, x56. Retakes Moufon
from the Imperialilts, 559. Invades the Low-Countries,
but lores the opportunities of success by imprudence, ibid.
Rejets the demands of Charles at the congress at Calais,
i60. A league concluded between Charles and Henry
VIII. against him, 161. His imprudent appointment
of the marechol de Foix to the government of Milan, 164.
De Foix attacks Reggin, but is repulsed by the governor
Cuicciardini the hiflorian, 165. The pope declares againit
him, ibid. His embarraffments on the invalion of Milan,
i66. His mother seizes the money appointed for pay-
ment of the Milanese troops, ibid. Milan taken, and
the French driven out, 165. Levies a bodyof Swiss, 27:,
Who inmift on giving a precipitate battle to the Imperialifrs,
which is lofl, x73. War declared against him by Henry
VIII. 075. His expedients to supply his treasury, ibid.
The plan pursued by him to refilt the incursions of the
Englilh, 177. Picardy invaded by Henry, ibid. The
Venetians league with the emperor against him, 220. To
which pope Adrian accedes, zzr. His expeditious move.
ment againfl the Milanese, ibid. Difeoncerted by the
duke of Bourbon's conspiracy, 2s2. Taxes him with
betraying his cause, which Bourbon denies, zz6. Bour-
bon efeapes to Italy, and Francis returns, ibid. Appoints
the admiral Bonnivet to command againlt the Milanese,
227. Picardy invaded by the duke of Suffolk, who is
driven back, z3*. Repulses the invasion of Guienne and
Burgundy by Charles, 233. His fuccefsful close of the
campaign, ibid. His prudent care to disappoint the Im-
perialills in their invalion of Provence, 250. Assembles
an army, which causes the Imperialilts to retire from Mar.
(eilles, ibid. Determines to invade the Milanese, zsz.
Appoints his mother Louise regent during his ablence,
253. Enters Milan, and takes poffeffion of the city, ibid.
Advised by Bonniset to beliege Pavia, 255. His vigorous
attacks on Pavia, ibid. Concludes a treaty of neutrality
with pope Clement, 257. His imprudent invasion of
Naples, zjS. Resolves, by Ionnivet's advice, to attack
Bourbon's army, adranced to the relief of Pavia, 26z.
Is routed at the battle of Pavia, ibid. Is taken prisoner,
263. Is sent to the cattle of Pizzitchitone under the
euitody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, 164, z65. RefCers the

tre propoirions made to him by Charles, 274. Is carried
to Spain on his defireof a personal interview with Charles,
ibid. Is rigorously treated in Spain, 252. Falls danger-
oully ill, z83. Is vifsted by Charles, 254. Resolves to
relign his kingdom, 287. Is delivered from this cap-
tivity by the treaty of Madrid, 289. His secret protest-
ations against the validity of this treaty, 2g9. Marries
the queen of Portugal, ibid. Recovers his liberty, and
the Dauphin and the duke of Orleans delivered up hoit-
ages to Charles for the perfomance of the treaty of Madrid,
29z. Writes alettei of acknowledgment to Henry VIII.
of England, 305. His reply to the Imperial ambassadors,
ibid. Enters into a league with the pope, the Venetians,
and Sforza, againlt Charles, 306. Is absolved from his
oath to oblerve the treaty of Madrid, 307. His behaviour
to the emperor's second embassy, 309. Is dispirited by
his former ill success, 310. Enters into a treaty with
Henry VIII. of England againlt the emperor, iii. a. Suc.
cefies of his general Lautre in Italy, 7. His reply to the
emperor's overtures, as. Declares war againit him, and
challenges him to fsngle combat, 52. Treats Andrew
Doria ill, who revolts from him to the emperor, 19. His
army, under Saluces, driven outof Jtaly, 21. Histroops
in Milan routed, 24. His endeavours toward an accom.
modation, ibid. Terms of the peace of Cambray, con.
cluded by the mediation of his mother Louise and Margaret
of Aulria, 27. Rerbarks on the sacrifices made by him
in this treaty, and on his condu& of the war, 27. Leagues
secretly with the protefrant princes, 50. His measures to
elude the treaty of Cambray, 58. His negotiations with
the pope, ibid. His interview and treaty with the pope,
60. Gives the drke of Orleans in marriage to Catharine
di Medici, ibid. Negotiates a treaty with Francis Sforza,
duke of Milan, 98. His envoy Merveille executed at
Milan formurder, S. Is difappoiated in his endeavour4
to negotiate alliances againlT the emperor, ibid. invites
MelanaBon to Paris, zoo. Evidences his zeal for the
Romilh religion, moa. Causes of his quarrel with the
duke of Savoy, 1o4. Seizes the duke's territories, ibid.
His pretenlions to the dutchy of Milan, on the death of
Francis Sforaa, ISo. The emperor's inveative againlt
him before the pope in council, 552. Is invaded by
CharIsc zzJ. *ils prudent plan of defence, azo. Joins

F F the

227. Obtains a decree of the parliament of Paris against
the emperor, 129. Invades the Low-Countries, o30.
A fuipenlion of arms in Slanders, and how negotiated, 53X.
A truce in Piedmont, ibid. Motives to these truces, 532.

- Concludes an alliance with Solyman the Magnificent, 033.

Negotiatmons for a peace with the emperor, 135. Con.
cludes a truce for ten years at Nice, 537. Relle&ions on
the war, ;bid. His interview with Charles, 538. Mar-
ries Mary of Guise to James V. of Scotland, 144. Re-
fuses the offers of the deputies of Ghent, 162. Informs
Charles of the offer ma le by them, ibid. Grants the em-
peror leave to pass through Franceto the Netherlands, 163.
His reception of the emperor, s66. Ia deceived by the
emperor in refpeato Milan, 169. His ambassador to the
Forte, Rincon, murdered by the Imperial governor of the
Milanese, zsz. Prepares to resent the injury, 213.
Attacks the emperor wih five armies, 2z6. His firlt
attempts rendered abortive, by the imprudence of the duke
of Orleans, 217. Renews his negnriations with Sultan
Solyman, 213. invades the Low-Countries, 225. Forces
the emperor to raiSe the siege of Land ecy, 227. Difmiffei
Barbarossa, 242. Gives the count d'Enguien permillioq
to engage Guaflo, 243. Relieves Paris, in danger of
being surprised by the emperor, asr. Agrees to a fepa.
rate peace with Charles, 252. Henry's haughty return
to his overtures of peace, asy. Death of the duke of
Orleans, 267. Peace of Campe, 301. Perceives a ne-
ceffity of checking the emperor's ambitious designs, 349.
Forms a general league againht him, 350. Dies, 354.
His life and charader fummaiily compared with chose of
Charles, ibid. Consequences of his death, 358.

Francis ii. his accehion to the crown of France, and cha.
* raaer, iv. 269.
Francfort, the diet of, aifembled for the choice of an em-

peror at the death of Maximilian, ii. 64. Names ahd
views of the eleaors, ibid. The empire offered to Fre.
derick of Saxony, 65. Who rejeas it, with his reasons,
ibid. Chooses Charles V. emperor, 68. His confirm-
ation of the Germanic privileges required and agreed to,
69. City of, embraces the reformed religion, 239. The
college of eledors aliembled there by Ferdinand, who is
acknowledged emperor of Germany, iv. p3. Frederkh~

Frederick duke of Saxony, assembles with the other ekdtors

at the dirt of Frankfort, to choose an emperor, ii. 64.
The empire offered to him, 65. Rejeas it, and votes
for CharlesV. ibid. Refuses the presents of the Spanilh
ambassadors, 66. This difintereited behaviour confirmed
by the teffimony of hiltorians, 67, Note. Chooses Martin
Luther philosophical profeffor at his univerrity of Wit.
temberg, 96. Encourages Luther in his opposition toindul-
gences, 99. Prote&a him againlt Cajetan, s05. Causes
Luther to be leized at his return from the diet of Worms,
and conceals him at Warrburg, 545. Dies, 3o3.

Fregofo, the French ambassador to Venice, murdered by the

marquis del Guato, the Imperial governor of the Milan.
efe, iii. zsz.

Fronfperg, George, a German nobleman, some account of,

he joins the army of Charles V. ii. 357.

G

General of the Jesuits, an inquiry into his office and despotic

authority, iin. 075.

Geneva, an account of its revolt against the duke of Savoy,

iii. so6.

Genoa, reduced by Lautrec, the French general, iii. 4. The

French endeavour to prejudice its trade in favour of Sa-
vona, I3. Is rescued from the French by Andrew Doria,
zz. The government of, fettled by the disinterestedness
of Doria, 2i. The honour paid to Doria's memory, 23.
Is visited by the emperor, 33. A scheme formed to
overturn the conititution of, by Fiefco count of Lavagno,
337. He assembles his adherents, 339* The confpira.
tors (ally forth from Lavagno's palace, 343. Deputies
Lent to know Lavagno's terms, 344. Lavagno drowned,
345. The infurredion ruined by the imprudence of his
brother Jerome Fiefco, ibid. The conspirators disperse,
346. Jerome reduced and put to death, 353.

Germanada, an association in Valencia, so termed, on what

occalion formed, ii. 2rz. Refuse tolaydown their arms,
s13. Their resentment levelled at the nobility, who raise
an army againlft them, ibid. Defeat the nobles in several
adtions, ai4. But are routed and difperled by them,

Germany,

Germany, fate of, at the death of the emperor Maximilian,

ii- 55, 56. Charles V. of Spain, and Francis I. of France
form pretensions to the Imperial crown, 57( Their re-
(peaive reasons offered in favour of their claims, 58.
Views and interests of the other European Itates in rela-
tion to the competitors, 60. Henry VIII. of England
advances a claim, 6a. But is discouraged from profecut-
ing it, ibid. How the papacy was likely to be affeaed in
the choice of an emperor, ibid. Advice of pope Leo X.
to the German princes, 63. Opening of the diet at
Frankfort, 64. In whom the eleaion of an emperor is
yeied, ibid. Views of the eledors, ibid. The empire
offered to Frederick of Saxony, 65. Who reje~ts it, and
his reasons, ibid. Charles V. chosen, 68. The capitu.
9ation of the Germanic privileges confirmed by him, 69.
Charles sets out for, 77. Charles crowned at Aix-la-
Chapelle, 89. Commencement of the reformation there,
by Martin Luther, 90. Treatment of the bull of ex-
communication publilhed againht Luther, siz. The
ufurpations of the clergy there, during the disputes con-
cerning invehtitures, 525. The clergy of, moliy foreign-
ers, 530. The benefices of, nominated by the pope,
13!. The expedient of the emperors for restraining this
power of the pope, ineffedual, Is32. The great progress
of Luther's do.rines in, 239路 Grievances of the pea.
fants, 294. Infurreaion in Suabia, 295, 196. The
memorial of their grievances, ibid. The infurreftion
quelled, 297. Another isfurredhion in Thuringia, 298.
How the house of Auhiria became so formidable in, 333.
Proceedings relating to the reformation there, ibid. Great
progress of the reformaion there, iii. 37. Ferdinand
king of Hungary and Bohemia, brother to CharlesV.
eleaed king of the Romans, 45. The proteftantreligion
eliablithed in Saxony, i s. The protestant religion elta-
blilhed in the Pahatinate, 27o. The league of Smalkalde
raise an army againf the emperor, 3c2. Are put under
the ban qs the empir-, 306. The proteftlnt army dif.
perled, 326, The Ieterim enforced by the errperor, 40o,
IrJaurice of Saxrny raises an army, and declares in favour
of the prote(tarts, iv. s7. Maurice favoured even by the
cath-!ic rrinces, and why, rS. Treaty of Paffau, be.
6ween the emperor and Maurice of Saxony, 8. Truce

3 be:wcca

between the emperor and Henry of France, 593. Charles
religos the Imperial crown to his brother Ferdinand, 205.

Gbent, an infurreaion there, iil. 557. The pretensions of

the citizens, ibid. Form a confederacy againit the queen-
dowager of Hungary their governers, s58. Their depu.
ties to the emperor, how treated by him, I59. Offer to
submit to Fiance, 159. Is reduced by Charles, 167.

GhibeLne fafion in Italy, a view of, ii. 3t3.
Giron, Don Pedro de, appointed to the command of the

army of the holy Junta, ii. 1g8. Religns his commililon,
and Padilla replaced, zoo.

Golesta in Africa, taken by the emperor CharlesV. iii. go.
Gonzago, the Imperial governor of Milan, procures cardinal

Farnese to be afhaffinated, and takes poffelfion of Placentia
for the emperor, iii. 393. Prepares to seize Parma, iv.
27. Is repulsed by the French, zs.

Goufer, Cent by Francis I. king of France, to negotiate a

peace with Charles V. ii. 44.

Granevelle, cardinal, his artifice to prevail on the count de

Sancerre to surrender St. Difiere to the emperor, iii. 249.
Endeavours to lull the proteflants into security with regard
to the emperor's condua towards them, 278. Is com-
missioned by Philip to address the assembly at the empe.
ror's resignation of his hereditary dominions, iv. a89.

Grovelineo, an interview there between the emperor Charles

V. and Henry VIIi. of England, ii. 58.

Crapper, canon of Cologne, is appointed a manager of the

proseflant and catholic conferences before the diet at
Ratibon, iii. 59r. Writes a treatise to compole the dif-
ferences between them, ibid. The sentiments of both parties
on this work, 192.

Granada, archbilihop of, president of the council of Caflile,

his imprudent advice to cardinal Adrian, relating to the
infurrefion in Segovia, li. 183.

Guaafo, the marquis del, appointed governor of Milan, by

the emperor, iii. sz6. Procures Rincon, the French am-
baflador to the Porte, to be mu:dered on his journey
thither, 22z. Defends Carrignan against the French, 242.
Defeated by d'Enguien in a pitched battle, 244.

Guicciardini, his account of the publication of indulgences

contradiaed, ii. so0, Note. Defends Reggio againit the
French, 拢64. Repufaes an attack upon Parma by the

French,

Lannoy viceroy of Naples, 322.

Guire, Francis of Lorrain, duke of, is made governor of Meta

by Henry II. of France, iv. 45. His charader, ibid.
Prepares to defend it against the emperor, 92. His
brother d'Aumale taken priLoner by the Imperialists, 9q.
The emperor raises the liege, 98. His humane treac-
ment of the diitreffed and lick Germans left behind, ibid.
Persuades Henry to an alliance with pope Paul IV. 577.
Marches with troops into Italy, 2so. Is unable to effebt
any thing, ibid. Is recalled from Italy after the defeat
of St. QWintin, 227. His reception in France, 233.
Takes the field againlt Philip, ibid. Invests and takes
Calais from the Englilh, 137. Takes also Guifnes and
Hames, ibid. Takes Thionville in Luxembourg, 243.

Guse, Mary of, married to James V. of Scotland, iii. 144.

Fruerates the intended marriage between her daughter
Mary and prince Edward of England, iii. 240.

Gark, cardinal de, why he favoured the eledtion of Charld.

V. to the Imperial crown, ii. 67. Signs the capitulation
of the Germanic body on behalf of Charles, 69.

Gufman, chancellxr to the emperor Ferdinand, is sent to

pope Paul IV. to notify the cledtion, who refuses to fee
him, iv. 239.

F.amburg, city of, embraces the reformed religion, ii. 240.
Ilaro, the Conde de, appointed to command the army of the

Cahlilan nobles against the holy Junta, ii. 599. Attacks
Tordefillas, and gets poffeflion of queen Joanna, 200.
Roots the army of the Junta, and takes Padilia priloner,
who is executed, 206.

Hafcen Aga, deputy-governor ofAlgiers, his piracies againit

the Christian hates, iii. 20o. Is besieged in Algiers by
the emperor Charles V. 204. Makes a fuccefstnl sally,
zag. The emperor forced by bad weather to return back
again, 209.
Ia:yrodin, a potter's fan of Lelbot, commences pirate, iii.

82. See .Barbaro]Ia.

Helrrens, ancient, why the principles of mutual toleration

were generally admitted among them, iv. 163. HleldJ,

Heldo, vice-chancellor to Charles V. attends the pope's

nuncio to Smalkalde, iii. 247. Forms a catholic league
in opposition to the protestant one, s49.

Henry ii. king of France, his motives for declining an all!

ance with pope Paul III. againlt the emperor, iii. 395.
Procures for Scotland a peace with England, iv. 28. The
young queen Mary contraaed to the Dauphin, and sent
to France for education, ibid. Enters into an alliance
with Oelavia Farnese duke of Parma, ibid. Protests
againlt the council of Trent, 31. Makes alliance with
Maurice eleeior of Saxony, 49. Seconds the operations
of Maurice, 59. His army marches and seizes Metz, 6z.
Attempts to surprise Strafburgh, 70. Is firongly solicited
tofpareit, 71. Returns, ibid. The emperor prepares
for war againlt him, 90. Inlligates the Turks to invade

- Naples, bzo. Terouanne taken and demollihed by

Charles, sr. Hefden taken, ibid. Leads an army into
the Low-Countries againlt Charles, 513. Endeavours to
obltru& the marriage of Mary of England with Philip of
Spain, 532. The progress of his arms againlt the em-
peror,133. EngagesCharles,136. Retires,ibid. Cos.
mo di Medici, duke of Florence, makes war againtt him,
538. Appoints Peter Strozzi commander of his army
in Italy, 139. Strozzi defeated, xq. Siena taken, 44*.
Pope Paul iV. makes overtures to an alliance with him
againit the emperor, 174. Montmorency's arguments
again(t this alliance, 575. Is persuaded by the Guises to
acceptit, 176. Sends the cardinal of Lorrain with powers
to conclude it, 177. The pope signs the treaty, 579.
Atruce for five years concluded with the emperor, 192.
Is exhorted by cardinal Caraffa to break the truce, 196.
Is absolved from his oath, and concludes a new treaty with
the pope, 9g9. Sends the duke of Guise into Italy, 253.
The conibable Montmorency defeated and taken prisoner
at St. Qgintin, air. Henry prepares for the defence of
Paris, zzz. St. Quintin taken by assault, 224. Colleds
his troops and negotiates for uallftance, 225. His kind
reception of the duke of Guise, 234. Calais taken by
GuiTe, 237. Empowers Montmorency to negotiate a peace
with Philip, 249. Honours him highly on his return to
France, 250. Writes to queen Elizabeth withpropofals of
marriage, 259. How he failed is his suit, i6r. His daugh-
$er married to Philip, and his liter to the duke of Savoy,

* . 46y.

The marriage of his filter and daughter celebrated with
great pomp, 269. His death, ibid.

Henry VII. of England detains the archduke Philip and his

duchess when driven on his coast, three months, at the in.
ltigation of Ferdinand, ii. 53.

Henry VIII. of England sends an ambassador to Germany to

propose his claims to the Imperial crown, ii. 62. Is difcou.
raged from his pretensions, and takes no part with the
other competitors, ibid. His personal charader and po-
litical influence in Europe, 81. Entirely guided by car-
dinal Wolsey, 83. Receives a vilit from the emperor
Charles V. 86. Goes over to France to vitlt Francis,
ibid. Wreltles with Francis, and is thrown by him, 87,
Note. Has another interview with Charles at Gravelines,
88. Charles offers to submit his differences with Francis
to his arbitration, ibid. Publilhes a treatise on the Seven
Sacraments, againlb Martin Luther, a47. Obtainsof the
pope the title of Definder of the Faith, 148. Takes part
with Charles againlt Francis, s49. Sends Wolsey tone-
gotiate an accommodation between the emperor and Fran-
cia, 160. Concludes a league with Charles againlft Francis,
161. His avowed seasons for this treaty, ibid. His pri-
vate motives, s62. Declares war againlt Francis, 075.
Is vilited by Charles, 176. Makes deicents upon the coae
of France, s77. Advances with an army into Picardy,
*ibid. Obliged to retire by the duke de Vendome, idid.
Enters into a treaty with the emperor and Charles duke of
Bourbon, 224. How he raised supplies for his wars be-
yond the grants of his parliament, 232. Sends the duke
of Sufflrk to invade Picardy, who penetrates almost to
Paris, hut is driven back, ibid. Engages to assist Charles
an an invafron of Provence, 248. Causes of his not sup-
porting the Imperialists, 250, 257. EffeeCs of the battle
of Pavia, and captivity of Fiancis, on him, 267. Par-
ticulars of his embalfy to Charles, 269. Concludes a de-
fenfave alliance with France, 275. Is declared protefsor
of the league of Cognac againlt the emperor, 307. His
motives for allifling the pope againlt the emperor, iii. 2.
Enters into a league with Francis, and renounces the English
claim to the crown of France, 3. Declares war againfi the
emperor, zz. Concludes a truce with the govermers of
the Low.Countries, 17. Projeats his divorce from Ca-

2. thaine

tharine of Aragon, 30. Motives which withheld the pope
from granting it, 31. Acquiesces in the peace of Cambray,
32. Sends a supply of money to the protefRant league in
Germany, 49. Procures his marriage to be annulled by
Cranmer archbilhop of Canterbury, 6s. The divorce re-
verted by the pope under penalty of excommunication, 62.
Renounces the papal (upremacy, ibid. Refutes to acknow-
ledge any council called by the pope, So. Oppotes
James V. of Scotland marrying Mary of Guite, z44-
His ditguits with Francis and intercourse with the empe-
ror, ibid. Concludes a league with Charles, ii,. Makes
war with Scotland, i2z. Particulars of his treaty with
Charles, zsg. Invades France, and invel's Boulogne, 248.
Refuses the emperor's plan of operations, 252. Is deterted
by the emperor, 256. Takes Boulogne, 257. His
haughty proposals to Francis, ibid. Peace of Campe,
30!. Is succeeded by his ton Edward VI. iv. 355. A
review of his policy, zS8r.

Hertford, earl of, plunders and burns Edinburgh, ill. 247.

Jsins Henry after, in his invasions of France, ibid.

Heje, the landgrave of, procures the restoration of his kint-

man, Ulric duke of Wurtemburg, iii. 77. His views
compared with thote of the eled'or of Saxony, 276. The
emperor's deceitful profeflions to him, 卤84. Quiets the
apprehensions of the proteitant league with regard to the
emperor, ibid. Is appointed joint commander of the army
of the league with the eleaor of Saxony, 309. Their
charasers compared, ibid. Urges an attack of the em-
peror, but is oppoted by the eleaor, 353. His letter to
Maurice duke of Saxony, 322. The army of the league
路 ditperfe, 326. Is reduced to accept haroh terms from

Charles, 375. His humiliating reception by the emperor,
377. Is detained in confinement, 379. His offers of
fubmiflion Ilighted by the emperor, 407. Is carried by
the emperor with him into the Netherlands, 41!. Re-
news his endeavours for liberty, iv. ao. Charles releates
arbitrarily the eled'or of LBrandenburgh, and Maurice,
路 from their engagements to him, 2s. Obtains his liberty

by the treaty of Paffaiu, 83. Is arrected by the queen of
Hungary, but freed by the emperor, 87. The effedis of
his confinement on him, 88.

Hesrerrus, his account of Lewis XII. shewn to contradi& the

relations given by Bellay,.and othqr French historians, of
the education of Charles V. ii. 24, Note.

vOL. Iv. a G Hly

Holy Junta. See Junta.
Holy League, against the emperor Charles V. formed at

Cognac, under the proteaion of Henry VIII. of England,
ii. 306, 307.

Roruc, a potter's son of Lelbos, commences pirate, with his

brother Hayradin, iii. B. See Barbaro/a.

Hungary, is invaded by Solyman the Magnificent, and its

king Lewis IL. killed, ii. 331. His successes, and the
number of prisoners carried away, 332. The archduke
Ferdinand eleaed king of, together with Bohemia, ibid.
John Zapol Scapius wrents it from Ferdinand, iii. S95.
Stephen succeeds on the death of his father John, 196.
Is treacherouly seized by Solyman, 599. See Isabella and
Mlartinuszi.

I

7ames V. of Scotland levies troops to afsilt Francis in Pro-

vence, but his intention fruffrated, lll. 143. His nego-
tiations for marriage with Francis's daughter, 544. Mar-
ries Mary of Guilfe, ibid. Dies, and leaves Mary hio
infant daughter to fiucceed him, 222. See Mary.
effits, the order of, by whom founded, ii. I56. Chara~ter of

that order, ibid. Charader of Ignatio Loyola their founder,
71s. The order confirmed by the pope, ibid. An exami.
nation into the conflitution of the order, 573. Oflice and
power of their general, 175. The rapid progress of the
order, 178. Engage in trade, and eltabliih an empite in
South America, ibid. Bad tendency of the order, s8z.
Are refponfsble for molt of the pernicious effeas of popery
since their inititution, ibid. Advantages resulting from
their inltitution, 183. Civilize the natives of Paraguay,
184. Their precautions for the independency of their
empire there, 185. How the particulars of their govern-
ment and inhlitution came to be diflofed, iS8. Summary
of their charader, 189.

Indulgences, in the Romilh church, the doarine of, ex.

plained, ii. 92. By whom first invented, 93. Martin
Luther preaches againit them, 95. Writes againht them,
to Albert eledor of Mentz, 97.- A bull iflued in favour
of, roS. The sale of, opposed in Switzerland by Zuin-
glius, sIIs.

Ifasntcdo, duke of, his haughty resentment of a eafual blow

on his horse, iii. 156. Is protected by the conitable of
Cahtile, ibid.

Iooccnt,

Innocent, a young domestic of cardinal di Monte, obtains

his cardinal's hat on his eleaion to the papacy, iv. 6.

Jnterim, a fyllem of theology so called, prepared by order of

the emperor Charles V. for the use of Germany, iii.
401. Is disapproved of, both by protellants and papilts,

Inveftures, ufsrpations of the Romith clergy in Germany,

during the disputes between the emperors and popes, con-
cerning, ii. 5z5

Joanna, daughter of Ferdinand, and mother of Charles V.

vilits Spain with her hulband Philip archduke-of Auliria,
ii. a. Is Ilighted by her husband, 3. Her charaaer,
ibid. Is abruptly left in Spain by her hslband, 4. Sinks
into melancholy on the occalion, and is delivered of her
,second (on Ferdinand, 5. Her letter of consent to her
father's regency of CalRile intercepted, and herself confined,
so. Made joint regent of Callile with Ferdinand and
Philip, bythetreatyofSalamanca, sz. SetsoutforSpain
with Philip, are driven on the coast of England, and de-
tained three months by Henry VII. 13. Acknowledged
queen by the Cortes, a5. Her tenderners to her hulband
in his fscknefs, and extraordinary attachment to his body
when dead, a6. Is incapable of government, a7. Her
(on Charles affomes the crown, 32. TheCortes acknow-
Jedge her Con king, with a reservation in her favour, 49.
Her reception of Padilla the chief of the Spanish malecon-
tents, a88. The holy Junta removed to Tordesllas, the
place of her residence, 189. Relapses into her former
melancholy, ibid. The proceedings of the holy Junta car-
ried on in her name, ibid. Is seized by the Conde de
Hare, aoo. Dies, after near fifty years confinement,
iv. 185.

John Zapol Scapius, by the a~flanee of Sultan Solyman,

eiablilhes himself in the kingdom of Hungary, iii. a95.
Leaves the kingdom to his son Stephen, 596. See Hun-
gary, Isabella, and Martinuzzi.

Ijuaella, daughter of John II. of Castile, and wife of Ser-

dinand king of Aragon, her hilrory, ii. a. Her concern
at the archduke Philip's treatment of her daughter Joanna,
4. Her death and chnrader, 6. Appoints Ferdinand
regent of Cartile, under rehtriions, 7.

---- daughter to Sigismund king of Poland, married to

John king of Hungary, iii. 196. Her charader, 597.

002 Ii

vaniaby Sultan Solyman, 198. The government of this
province and the education of her Con committed to her
jointly with Martinuzzi, iv. 43. Is jealous of Marti.
nuzzi's influence, and courts the Turks, ibid. Is
prevailed on to refsgn Transylvania to Ferdinand, 44.
Retires to Silesia, 45. Recovers poffeffion of Tranfyl-
vanma, 104.

Ijabella of Portugal, married to the emperor Charles V. ii.

093.

Italy, consequences of the league between pope Leo X. and

the emperor Charles V. to, ii. a63. The charaaers of
the Italians, Spaniards, and French, contrasted, ibid.
State of, at the acceflion of Clement VII. to the papacy,
234. Views of the Italian States with refpe&t to the
emperor and Francis on the expulsion of the French from
Genoa and the Milanese, 243. Their apprehensions on
the battle of Pavia and captivity of Francis, 270. The
principal fates join in the holy league against the empe.
ror, 306. Are disgusted at the tardiness of Francis, 353.
A view of the Ghibeline faaion, ibid. Sentiments of
the Gates of, on the peace of Cambray, ill. 3o. Is vilited
by the emperor Charles, 32. The motives of his mode.
ration towards the slates of, 34. A league among the
frates of, formed by Charles, 60. Placentia granted to
Ofaavio FarneCe by Philip II. of Spain, iv. 229. The
invef'itusre of Siena given by Philip to Cosmo di Medici,
252. The consequence of these grants, ibid.

Juntra, holy, a view of the confederacy in Spain, to termed,

ii. 517. The authority of Adrian disclaimed by, ibid.
Removed to Tordefitas, where queen Joanna refsded,
289. Their proceedings carried on in the name of Joanna,
ibid. Receives letters from Charles to lay down their.
arms, with promises of pardon, 195. RemonRrance or
grievances drawn up by, 192. The particulars of this
remonfirpnce, ibid. Remarks on the fpirir of it, 195.
Are intimidated from prelenting it to Charles, 597. Pro,
poue to deprive Charles of his royalty during the life of
Joanna, 919. Take the field, ibid. Charaaer of their
army, ibid. The queen seized by the Conde de Hars,
399. How they obtained money to support their army,
2os. Lose time in negotiating with the nobles, 002.
Propole to make their peace with Charles at the expence

army defeated by Harm, and Padilla taken prisoner, 206.
Padilla executed, 207. His letters to his wife, and the
city of Toledo, ibid. Note. The ruin of the confederacy,
209.

Jslius II, pope, oblervations on the pontificate of, ii. azo.

.. Ill. pope, his charader, iv. 5. Beaows his cardinal's
hat infamously, 6. Is averse to the calling a council, 7.
Summons one at Trent, S. Asserts his supreme authority
peremptorily in the bull for it, IS. Repents confirming
Odlavio Farnese in Parma, 27. Requires Oavio to re.
linquih his alliance with France, 28, The manner of his
deaths, 57.

La Chou, a Flemilh gentleman, associated by Charles V.

with cardinal Ximenes in the regency ofCaftile, il. 39*

Landrecy, siege of, by the emperor Charles V. iii. 2z7, Is

abandoned by him, zsS.

Lennoy, mortgages the revenues of Naples, to supply the

exigencies of the emperor, ii. 254. Francis surrenders
himself prisoner to him at the battle of Pavia, 263. His
cautious difpolal of him, 264. Delivers him up in pur-
inance of the treaty of .Madrid, and receives the duke of
Orleans and the Dauphin, as holiages in exchange, 292.
Is sent ambassador to Francis to require his fulfilment of
the treaty of, 3og. Concludes a treaty with the pope,
322. Marches to join the Imperialiita at Rome, where
the troops refuse to obey him, iso. 5*

Laizuza, Don John de, made viceroy of Aragon, on the de-

parture of Charles V. for Germany, ii. 76. Composes
the disturbances there, sz5.

Laavgna, John Lewis Fiefco, count of, his charaaer, iii.

336. Meditates subverting the government of Genoa,
337. His preparations, M33. His artful method of as-
fembling his adherents, 339. Hi exhortation to them,
341. His interview with his wife, 342. Sallies forth,
343. Andrew Doria escapes, 344. Deputies sent to
know his terms, ibid. Is drowned, 345. His brother's
vanity ruins their designs, ibid. See Fiefcs.

Lawurec, Odet de Foix, marefchal de, the French governor

of Milan, hisi haraaer,ii. s64. Alienates the affehions

G03 of

but is repulsed by Guicciardini the hifiorian, then gover,
nor, s65. Is excommunicated by the pope, ibid. The
money for paying his troops seized by Louise of Savoy,
166. Is left by his Swiss troops, 167. Is driven out of
the Milanese territories, 69. A new body of Swiss under
him infsft on giving battle to the Imperialists, who defeat
him, 173. The Swils leave him, 574. Retires into
France with the residue of his troops, ibid. Delivers up
the Dauphin and duke of Orleans in exchange for Francis I.
as hoitages for the performance of the treaty of Madrid,
293. Is appointed generaliflimo of the league againit
the emperor, iii. 5. His successes in Italy, 6. Motives
which withheld him from subduing the Milaneee, 7.
Obliges the prince of Orange to retire to Naples, 14.
3lockades Naples, 15. His army waited, and himself
killed by the pefrilence, zo.

Learning, the revival of, favourable to the reformation of

religion, ii. 136.

Leipfic, a public disputation held there by Martin Luther,

and Ectiss) on the validity of the papal authority,
11. IIO.

Leo X. pope of Rome, his charabler, ii. 6z. His apprehensions

on the eledtion of an emperor of Germany, at the death
of Maximilian, 63. His counsel to the German princes,
ibid. Grants Charles V. a tenth of all ecclefiasiical bene-
fices in Caflile, 71. Lays Callile under an interdibt, but
takes it offatthe initance of Charles, 72. Hiscondu son
the profpe& of war between Charles and Francis, 73.
Situation of the papacy at his accellion, and his views of
policy, 9 n. His inattention to Martin otuher's contro-
verfy with the Dominicans, concerning indulgences, bor.
Is inl'igated againit him, and fiummons him to Rome, los.
Defsres the eletor of Saxony not to prtte& him, ibid.
Is prevailed on to permit Luther's doarines to be examined
in Germany, *oe. CardinalCajetan appointed to try him,
ibid. Iflites a bull in favour of indulgences, roS. A
suspension of proceedings against Luther, and why, ISo.
Publilhes a bull of excommunication againil him, ssz.
1The political views of his condua between Charles and
Francis, srs. Concludes a treaty with Francis, 552.
Concludes a treaty also with Charles, ibid. The conditions
of the treaty with Charles, 153. Its coafequences to

Italy,

Italy, 163. Is disappointed in a scheme formed by Mo-
rone, chancellor of Milan, for attacking that dutthy, 064.
Excommunicates marefvhal de Foix for his attackofReg-
gio, and declares againit France, s65. Takes a body of
Swiss into pay, ibid. The French driven out of the
Milanese, 169. He dies, 070. The fpirie of the con.
federacy broken by his death, ibid.

L'Efparre, Foix de, commands the French troops in Na.

varre for Henry d'Albret, ii. I55. Reduces that king.
dom, ibid. His imprudent progress into Caltiles 56.
Is taken prisoner by the Spaniards, and the French driven
out of Navarre, ibid.

Leonard, Father, forms a scheme of betraying Mets to the

Imperialists, iv. r49. Introduces soldiers clad like friars,
s50. Is deteaed, rS5s Is murdered by his monks,
152.

Levejque, Don, his account of the motives which induced

the emperor Charles V. to resign his hereditary dominions,
iv. 183, Note.

Lewis II. king of Hungary and Bohemia, his chara~ler, ii.

332. Is invaded and killed by Solyman the Magnificent,
ibid.

- XII. king of France, receives homage of the archduke

Philip, for the earldom of Slanders, ii. i. Concludes a
treaty with him, while at war with Ferdinand of Aragon, 5.
Bellows his niece, Germain de Foix, on Ferdinand, and
concludes apeacewith him, 12. Loses the cons dence
of Philip on that occalion, 24, Note. Bellows his eldef'
daughter, already betrothed to Charles V. on the count of
Angouldme, ibid.

Ley'va, Antonio de, defends Pavia for the emperor againlt

Francis, ii. 256. His vigorous defence, 257. Sallies
out at the battle of Pavia, and contributes to the defeat of
Francis, 262. Is left governor of Milan by the duke of
Bourbon, 359. Defeats the forces there, iii. 24. Is
appointed generalissimo of the Italian league, 57. Dire~s
the operations of the invasion of France, under the em-
peror, 507. Dies, oz5.

Literature, its obligations to the order of Jesuits, ill. 183.
Lorenzo di Medici. See Medici.
Loafe of Savoy, mother of Francis I. of France, her cha.

rafter, ii. 166, r67. Her motives for seizing the money
appointed for payment of marechal Laulrec's troops, ibid.

Cause

Cause of her aversion to the house of Bourbon, zz卤.
Her advances towards a marriage with Charles duke of
Bourbon, rejeaed by him, 223, 224. Determines to
ruin him, 224. Inlligates a law-suit againli him forhis
eslates, ibid. Goes to dissuade Francis from his intended
*invasion of the Milanese, who will not wait for her, 5*z.

Is appointed regent during his absence, 253. Her pro.
* dent condu& on the defeat of Pavia, and captivity of her

son Francis, 266. Concludes a defeniive alliance with
Henry VIII. 275. Ratifies the treaty of Madrid for the
recovery of her fon's liberty, 292. Undertakes with
Mai garet ofSavoy to accommodate the differences between
the emperor and Francis, iii. 25. Articles of the peace
of Cambray, 27.

Loyola, Ignatio, commands the caolie of Pampelina in Na.

varre, and is wounded in its defence, ii. 055. His en,
thosalaric turn of mind, ibid. The founder of the society
of Jesuits, ibid. Prevails on the pope to. efiahlilh the
order, iii. 57z. An examination into the conltitution
of the order, 173. Office and power of the general,
175. The rapid progress of the order, 178. See
7efefits.

Lorrain, cardinal of, persuades Henry II. of France, to

accept the offered alliance with pope Paul IV. and is sent
to Rome to negotiate it, iv. 577. His imprudent beha.
viour towards the duchess of Valentinois, 248.

Lanenburgb, duke of, avows the opinions of Luther, ii. 239.
auther, Martin, the happy consequences of the opinions

propagated by him, ii. 9o. Attacks indulgences, 95.
His birth and education, ibid. Chosen philosophical
profeffor at the university of Wittemberg, 96. Inveighs
againlt the publithers of indulgences, ibid. Writes to
Albert eleaor of Mentz against them, 97. Compofea
theses againil indulgences, 98. Is supported by the Au-
gultinians, and encouraged by Frederick eleaor of Saxony,
99. Is summoned to Rome by pope Leo, aoz. Obtains
of the pope leave to have his dodlrines examined in Ger-
many, 0o3. Appears before cardinal Cajetan at Augf-
burg, 04.. His resolute reply to the peremptory order
of Cajetan, to retradl his principles, ibid. Withdraws
from Auglburg, and appeals from the pope ill-informed,
to the pope when better informed, concerning him, aol.
Appeals to a general council, Io8. The death of Mai-

milian,

inilian, how of service to him, 5o9. Questions thepapal
authority in a public dilputation, tzo. His opinions
condemned by the universities of Cologne and Louvain,
sII. A bull of excommunication publilhed againR him,
a12. Pronounces the pope to be antichrist, and bums
the bull, 513. Refle&ions on the condua of the court
of Rome toward him, a 15. Refleaions on his condu&,
ii6. Causes which contributed to favour his oppofstion
to the church of Rome, IIS. Particularly the art of
printing, 135. And the revival of learning, 136. He
is summoned to appear at the diet of Worms, 143. A
fafe-condu& granted him thither, ibid. His reception
there, 544. Refuses to retraa his opinions, ibid. De-
parts, 545. An edia published against him, ibid.
He is seized and concealed at Wartburgh, ibid. Progress
of his doarines, 146. The university of Paris publishes
a decree against him, 147. Wrote against by Henry
VIII. of England, ibid. Answers both, s43. With-
draws from his retreat to check the inconsiderate zeal of
Carlofladius, 238. Undertakes a translation of the Bible,
ibid. His doflines avowed by several of the German
princes, ibid. His moderate and prudent condua, 302.
Marries Catharine P Boria, a nun, ibid. The great pro.
grefs of his doarines among the Germanic States, iii. 37.
Encourages the protellants, dispirited by the emperor's
decree againfR him, 46. His concern at the praaices of
the anabaptills at Munster, 74. Is invited to Leipfic, by
Henry duke of Saxony, a 52. His opinion of Gropper's
treatise to unite the proteirants and catholics, 192. Dies,
279. Summary of his characer, 280. Extrad from
his lalt will, 283, Note. See Protefiants. A view of
the extraordinary effeas of his revolt from the church of
Rome, on that court, and on Europe in general, iv. 285.

Luxrmburgb, invaded by Robert de la Marck, lord of Bonil.

lon, ii. 158. Invaded and overrun by the duke of Orleans1
iii. sy. Is again invaded by Francis, 225.

M

Madrid, treaty of, between the emperor Charles V. and his

prisoner Francis I. king of France, ii. 288, 2ig. Senti.
ments of the public with regard to this treaty, 2go. Magdrburga

forced by Charles V. and prepares for defence, iv. 16.
Maurice eledor of Saxony appointed to reduce it, 17.
Is put under the ban of the empire, 33. The territories
of, invaded by George of Mecklenburgh, ibid. The
inhabitants defeated in a sally, 34. Maurice of Saxony
arrives and befseges the city, ibid. Surrenders, 35.
The senate elebs Maurice their burgrave, 37*

Mabmed, king of Tunis, hiffory of his sons, iii. S6.
M4'ajorca, an infurre&ion there, ii. zr5* Which is quelled

with difliculty, ibid. The moderatiorn of Charles towards
the insurgents, on his arrival in Spain, 216.

Majfly, the appellation of, assumed by Charles V. on his

ele&ion to the Imperial crown, and taken by all the other
monarchs of Europe, ii. 70.

JMalines, council of, an account of, iii. X59*
Malta, the iland of, granted by the emperor CharlesV. to

the knights of St. John expelled from Rhodes by the
Turks, ii. I80.

.1damaluikes, extirpated by Sultan Selim II. ii. 58.
Mammelukes, a faftion in Geneva, Co termed, some accounet

of, iii. so6.

Manuel, Don John, Ferdinand's ambassador at the Imperial
.court, pays his court to the archduke Philip pn queen

Ifabeila's death, ii. Sq. Intercepts Joanna's letter of
consent to Ferdinand's regency of Castile, 1n. Negoti.
ates a treaty between Ferdinand and Philip, ra. Declares
for Maximilian's regency on Philip's death, 17. Is made
Imperial ambassador at Rome, and goncludes an alliance
between CharlesV. and Leo X. 52. The conditions of
the treaty, 153. Procures Adrian of Utrecht to be eleated
pope, 17!.

Marcellus 11. pope, his charaaer, iv. a68. Dies, ibid.
Marciano, battle of, between Peter Strozzi and the marquis

de Marignano, iv. 141.

Margaret of Aul'ria, and dowager of Savoy, aunt toCharles

V. undertakes with Louise, mother of Francis I. of
France, to accommodate the differences between those two
monarchs, iii. 25. Articles of the peace of Cambray,
27.

Marignano, marquis of, appointed commander of the Flo.

Centinc army, ading against the French, iv. n33. Defeats

the

the French army under Peter Strozzi, 141. Lays siege
to Siena, 241. Converts the siege into a blockade, 143.
Siena surrenders, ibid. Reduces Porro Ercole, 546.
His troops ordered into Piedmont by the emperor, 147.

}Marck, Robert de la, lord of Bouillon, declares war againlt

the emperor CharlesV. ii. s 7. Ravages Luxemburgh
with French troops, 15g. Is commanded to dilband his
troops by Francis, ibid. His territories reduced by the
emperor, 159.

Marseilles, besieged by the Imperialifs, ii. 25o. Rescued

by Francis, ibid. Interview and treaty there between the
pope and Francis, iii. 6o.

Martinuzzi, biihop of Waradin, is appointed guardian to

Stephen king of Hungary, iii. 196. His charater, 597.
Solicits the affisiance of Sultan Solyman againlt Ferdinand,
a98. Solyman feiaes the kingdom, 199. Is appointed
to the government of Transylvania and the education of
the young king, jointly with the queen, iv. 41. Nego-
tiates with Ferdinand, ibid. Prevails with the queen to
relign 'Tranfylvania to Ferdinand, 43. Is appointed
governor of Transylvania, and made a cardinal, 45. Ia
siliidinated by Ferdinand's order, 47.

Mar tyr, Peter, his authority cited in proof of the extortions

of the Flemith minillers of Charles V. ii. 55.

Mlary of Burgundy, contraded to Lewis XII. of France,

but married to the emperor Maximilian, ii. a.

Mary of England, her accellion, iv. 514. Receives pro.

pufals from the emperor Charles V. of marrying his son
Philip, a25. The Englih averse to this union, ibid.
The house of commons remonifrates againlt the match,
az6. The articles of marriage, '27. The marriage
ratified by parliament and completed, ago. Re-ellablilhes
the Romish religion, ibid. Persecutes the reformers, a3s.
Invites Charles to England on his refsgnation and passage
to Spain, which he declines, 206. Is engaged byPhilip
to affil him in his war againit France, aa6. Levies
money by her prerogative to carry on the war, ibid. Her
negle in the security of Calais, 235. Calais invefled
and taken by the duke of Guise, 237. Die,, 259.

Mary, daughter of James V, of Scotland, succeeds to the

crown an infant, ill. 222. Is contrared to the Dauphin
ox France, 394. Is educated at the court of France,

iv.

title and arms of England on the death of Mary, 26s.
1attbias, John, a baker, becomes a leader of the anabap-

tifts at Muniter, iii. 67. Seizes the city, and el'ablilhes
a new form of government there, 6S. Repulses the bi.
shop of Muniter, 75. Is killed, ibid. See Boccold and
Anabaptifs.

Maurice, duke of Saxony, his motives for not acceding to

the proeeltant league of Smalkalde, iii. 23路. Marches
to the asfifcance of Ferdinand in Hungary, ibid. His
difference with his cousin the eledor, 232. His condua
at the diet of Worms, 264. Joins the emperor againi the
proteRants,304. Hismotives, 318. Hisinfidiouscon.
du& toward the eleaor, 320. Seizes the eledorate of
Saxony, 323. Saxony recovered by the ele6'or, 330.
His ineffeaual endeavours to reduce Wittemberg for the
emperor, 367. Obtains poffefion of the eledtorate, 373.
Is formally invered at the diet of Auglburg, 403. Be-
comes diflatisfied with the emperor, iv. 9. His motives
to dilcontent explained, so. His address and caution in
his condu&, sz. Enforces the Interim in his territories,
53. Makes, nevertheless, profellions of his attachment to
the reformation, 14. Undertakes to reduce Magdeburg
to submit to the Interim, I5. Protefis againut the council
of Trent, ibid. Is commissioned by the emperor to reduce
Magdeburg, 18. Joins George of Mecklenburg before
Magdeburg, 33. The city capitulates, 35. Begins to
intrigue with count Mansfeldt, 36. Is ele6ed burgrave
of Magdeburg, 37. Dismisses his troops, 39. His ad-
drels in amusing the emperor, ibid. Makes an alliance
with Henry II. of France, to make war on the emperor,
49. Makes a formal requisition of the landgrave's liberty,
Sr. Joins his troops, and publilhes a manifesto, 58.
Takes poffelfion of Augsburg and other cities, 60. An
ineffeaual negotiation with Charles, 6,. Defeats abody
of the emperor's troops, 64. Takes the cafRle of Ehren.
burg, ibid. Is retarded by a mutiny in his troops, 65.
Enters infpruck, and narrowly misses taking Charles, 66.
A negotiation between him and Ferdinand, 74 Belieges
Francfort on the Maine, 80. His inducements to an ac-
commodation, 82. Signs a treaty with the emperor at
Paitau, 83. Rcflediona on his condua in this war, 84.

Marches

Marches into Hungary to oppose the Turks, 87. Is placed
at the head of the league against Albert of Brandenburgh,
ao6. Defeats Albert, but is killed in the battle, ao7.
His charader, soS. Is succeeded by his brother Au.
gul'us, Ilo.

Maximilian, emperor of Germany, claims the regency of

Castile on his Con Philip's death, ii. s7. Is (upported in
his claim by Don John Manuel, i8. Loses it, io. Ob-
tains the government of the Low-Countries by the death
of Philip, 23. Appoints William de Croy, lord of
Chievres, to superintend the education of his grandson
Charles, 25. Concludes a peace with France and Venice,
44. Dies, 55. State of Europe at this period, ibid.
His endeavours to secure the Imperial crown to his grand.
son Charles, 56. How obltruaed, ibid.

Mecklenburg, George of, invades the territories of Magde-

burg for the emperor, iv. 33. Defeats the Magdeburgers,
who sally out on him, 34. Is joined by Maurice of
Saxony, who assumes the supreme command, ibid.
Medicino, John James. See Marignano.
Mediti, Alexander, rettored to the dominions of Florence,

by the emperor Charles, iii. 36. Is affaflfnated, 39.

-- cardinal de, eleaed pope, and assumes the title of
* Clement VII. ii. 229. See Clement VII.
-- Catharine di, is married to the duke of Orleans, iii.

60. Is conjeaured, by the emperor Charles V. to have
poisoned the Dauphin, sa8.

.--Cosmo de, made duke of Florence, iii. 1.1a. Is

frpported by the emperor, and defeats the partisans of
Lorenza, 41s. Asserts his independency against the empe.
ror, iv. loo. Offers to reduce Siena for the emperor, 138*
Enteis into a war with France, ibid. See Marignano. His
addrels in procuring the inveltiture of Siena from Philip II.
of Spain, o30. It is granted to him, 232
--- Lorenzo de, affaffinates his kinsman Alexander, ill.

140. Flies, ibid. Attempts to oppose Cosmo, but is
defeated, 141.

Medina drl Campo, the inhabitants of, refuse to let Fonseca

take the military flores there for the siege of the infur-
gents in Segovia, ii. 184. The town almoff burnt by
Fonseca, ibid. The inhabitants repulse him, a85. Sur-
renders after the battle of Villalar, and dissolution of the
holy Junta, 1o9.

VOL路. l, at a Melaealseon~

Is employed to draw up a confefion of faith by the pro-
tefant princes at the diet of Auglburg, iii. 43. Is de.
jeted by the emperor's decree againlt the protellants, but
comforted by Luther, 46. Is invited to Paris by Francis,
aoo. His conference with Eckins, 0go. Is prevailed
on to favour the Interim enforced by the emperor, iv. 53.

Melito, Conde de, made viceroy of Valencia, on the depar-

ture of Charles V. for Germany, ii. 76. Appointed to
command the troops of the nobles againil the Germanada,
S14. Defeated by them in several adtions, ibid. Deltroys
the association, 2s5.

Mentz, archbilhop of, arfully declares before the emperor,

the diet of Auglburg's acceptance of the Interim, without
being authorised by it, iii. 40o.

Merveille, a Milanese gentleman, employed as envoy from

Francis I. to Francis Sforza, duke of Milan, his fate,
iii. 98. 路

Metz, seized by Montmorency the French general, iv. 62.

The duke of Guise made governor of, gr. Is besieged
by the emperor, 94. The emperor defihls, and retires in
a diirfired condition, 97. A scheme formed by father
Leonard to betray the city to the Imperialifls, 148. The
conspiracy de:eed by the governor, 151. Leonard mur-
dered by his monks, and his afociates executed, a5a.

Mezieres, in France, besieged by the Imperialils, ii. 159.

Gallant defence of, by ten chevalier Bayard, ibid. The
flege raised, ibid.

AMian, marechal de Foix, appointed to be the French

governor of,ii. 164. His charader, ibid. The Milan-
efe alienated from the French by his oppreflions, ibid.
Invaded by the eccleialtical troops under Prosper Colonsa,
a65. The French driven out, 167. Oppressed by the
Imperial troops, zao. Invaded by the French, 228. Who
are driven onu by Colonna, ibid. The Imperial troops
there mutiny for pay, but are appeased by Morono, 234.
Abandoned by the French, 253. Overrun again by Francis,
who seizes the city, 253. The French retire on news of
the battle of Pavia, 254. The investiture of, granted to
Sforza, 277. Taken from him and granted to the duke
of Bourbon, 286. Disorders committed by the Imperial
troops there, 307. Opprefive meafares of Bourbon to
supply his sattinous troops, 3ry. The French forces there

-defeated

defeated by Antonio de Leyva, iii. 24. Is again granted
by the emperor to Sforza, 36. Death of Sforza, o09.
The pretensions of Francis to that dutchy, ibid. Is
feised by the emperor, Iso. The marquis del Guallo
appointed governor, 1x6.

Mobhcz, battle of, between Solyman the Magnificent and

the Hungarians, ii. 332.

Monafic orders, inquiry into the fundamental principles of,

lii. 573. Peculiar conititution of the order of Jesuits,
175.

Moncado, Don Hugo di, the Imperial ambassador at Rome,
- his intrigues with cardinal Colonna, againit pope Clement,

ii. 3r4. Reduces the popeto an accommodation, ibid. Is
defeated and killed by Andrew Doria in a naval engage-
ment before the harbour of Naples, iii. s6.

iMonlue, is Cent by the count d'Enguien to Francis for per-

million to give battle to the marquis del Guaflo, iii. 242.
Obtains his suit by his spirited arguments, 243. Com-
mands in Siena, when belieged by the marquis de Ma-
rignano, iv. 142. His vigorous defence, ibid. Is re.
duced by famine, and capitulates, 144.

Monte Alcino, numbers of the citizens of Siena retire thither

after the redutlion of that city by the Florentines, and
ellablilh a free government there, iv. 545.

Montecuculi, count of, accused and tortured for poisoning the

Dauphin, charges theemperor with infligating it, iii. zz8.

Montmorency, marefchal, his cbaraaer, iii. azo. Francis

adopts his plan for refilling the emperor, and commits the
execution to him, zz2. His precautions, ibid. His
troops derpife his condua, 123. Observations on his
operations, s 6. Is disgraced, a r.5 Conduss the army
of Henry II. to join Maurice of Saxony,and Ceizes Metz,
iv. 6z. Dififuades Henry from accepting the offered alli-
ance with popePaullIV. r16. Commands the French
army against the duke of Savoy, 259. Detaches d'Ande-
lot to relieve St. Quintin, ibid. Exposes himfeif impru-
dently to an adion, and is defeated, zzo. Is taken pri.
toner, zar. Negotiates a peace between Philip and Henry,
249. Returns to Francis, and is highly honoured by
Henry, ibid. His affiduityin forwarding the negotiations,
a63. His expedienc for promoting the treaty of Chateau-
Cambrelis, 266.

n n Montpelier,

Montpelier, a fruitlels conference held there for the relfitution

of the kingdom of Navarre, ii. 54.
lorsroe, Jerome, chancellor of Milan, his chara&er, ii. 164..
Retires from the French exaaions in Milan to Francis
Sforza, ibid. His intrigues, how rendered abortive, 165.
Quiets the mutiny of the Imperial tioops in Milan, 234.
Is difguoted with the behaviour of Charles, 276. In-
trigues againit the emperor wibhPeicara, 278. Is betrayed
to the emperor by Petcara, i8o. Is arreted at his visit
to Pescara, iSs. Is set at liberty by the duke of Bour-
bon, and becomes his contident, 317.

MIoufon in France, taken by the Imperialists, 1i. 158. Re-

taken by Francis, z59.

Mlulbaufen, ha tie of, between the emperor Charles V. and

the eledor of Saxony, iii. 36t.

.luley Hafcen, king of Tunis, hbs inhuman treatment ofhib

father and brothers, iii. 86. Is expelled by Barbarossa,
ibid. Engages the emperor Charles V. to restore h;m, 89.
Is elrablifhed again by the surrender of Tunis, 95. His
treaty with Charles, ibid.

S'2uncer, Thomas, a disciple of Luther, opposes him with

fanatical notions, ii. i93. Heads the infurre~lmon of the
peasants in Thuringia, 300. His extravagant schemes,
ibid. Is defeated and put to death, 3or.

Munier, the first settlement of the anabapti(ts in that city,

iii. 67. The city seized by them, 68. They elRabliih
a new form of government there, ibid. Is called Mount
Sion, 69. The bishop of, repulsed by them, 70. Is
blockaded by the bihop, 74. The city taken, 75. See
Anabaptifis.

Murder, the prices of composition for, by the Romish clergy,

ii. 123.

Mufapha, the declared heir to Sultan Solyman the Magnifi-

cent, is invested with the adminifirarion of Diarbquir,
iv. 119. His father rendered jealous of his popularity,
by the arts of Roxalana, ibid. Is irangled by his father's
order, six. His only Con murdered, Is3.

N

naples, the revenues of, mortgaged by Lannoy to supply the

emperor id his exigencies, ii. 254. Invaded by the French

under

ander the duke of Albany, 258. Invaded by pope Cle-
enent VII. 3t9. Treaty between the pope and Lannoy
viceroy of, 322. The prince of Orange retreats thither
before Lautrec, iii. rs. Is blockaded by Lautrec, ibid.
Sea.engagement in the harbour of, between Andrew Doria
and Moncada, ibid. Causes which disappointed the French
operations againlt, 16. Doria revolts, and opens the com-
smunication by sea again, 19. Oppressed by the Spanilh
viceroy Don Pedro de Tokdo, becomes difa.ffeed to the
emperor Charles V. iv. so2. Is harassed by a Turkish
fleet, so3.

Nafau, count of, invades Bouillon at the head of the Im-

perialills, ii. 258. Invades France, takes Moulon, and
befieges Mezieses, but is repulsed, I59.

Na'varre, the kingdom of, unjuffly acquired by Ferdinand

of Aragon, ii. io. D'Albret's invasion of, defeated by
cardinal Ximenes, 40. Its cafiles dismantled, except
Pampeluna, which Ximenes Psrengthens, 41. Invaded by
FrancisI. in thenameof Henryd'Albret, I55. Re-
duced by l'Efparre, the French general, ibid. The
French driven out by the Spaniards, and I'Efparre taken
prisoner, s56.

1therlands, the government of, finr' alfumed by Charles V.

31. 26. The Flemings averle to Charles's going to Spain,
46. Invaded by FrancisI. king of France, 159. A truce
concluded with, by Henry VIII. of England, lii. s7. In-
vaded by Francis again, 530. A suspension of arms there,
a gs. An infurre&ion at Ghent, 157. See Ghbnt.
Is once more invaded by Francis, 225. Refsgned by
the emperor to his son Philip, iv. 185. A review of the
alterations in, during the fsxteenth century, 297, 298.

lice, a truce for ten years concluded there between the em-

peror and Francis, iii. 237. Besieged by the French and
Turks, 229.

J'oyon, treaty of, between Charles V. and Francis I. of

France, ii. 45. The terms of, negleAed by Charles, 79.

JN~remberg, the city of, embraces the reformed religion, ii.

239. Diet of, particulars of pope Adrian's brief to,
refpeaing the reformers, 240. The reply to, 245. Pro.
poses a general council, 242. Presents a liit of griev-
ances to the pope, 243. The recess, or edia of, ibid.
This diet of great advantage to the reformers, 244. Pro.
credings of a second diet there, 246. Recess of the diet,

lH a3 247.

emperor Charles V. and the protelbants, iii. 52.

0

Orar, and other places in Barbary, annexed to the crown of

CafRile, by Ximenes, ii. 20.

Oratge, Philibert de Chalons, prince of, general of the Im-

perial army on the death of the duke of Bourbon, takes
tee caile of St. Angelo, and pope Clement VII. prilon.
er, ii. 329. Retires to Naples on the approach of Lautrec,
iii. 'S. Takes his successor, the marquis de Saluces,
prfoner at Averfa, zo.

Orleans, duke of, delivered up to the emperor Charles V.

with the Dasphin, as hoflages for the performance of the
treaty of Madrid, ii. 293. Is married to Catharine di
Medici, iii. 60. Becomes Dauphin by the death of his
brother, I29. See Dauphin.

- duke of, brother to the former, commands the

army appointed by Francis i. for the invasion of luxem-
bourg, iii. z27. Is prompted by envy to abandon his
conquefis, and join his brother the Dauphin in Rouslilon,
ibid. Dies, 267.

Pachrc, Donna Mains, wife to Don John de Padilla, her

artful scheme to raise money to supply the army of the
holy Junta, ii. oso. Her hulband taken prisoner and
executed, 207. His letter to her, ibid. Note. Raises
forces to revenge his death, z2o. Is reduced, and retires
to Portugal, 211.

Padilla, Don John de, his family and charafter, ii. o8r.

Heads the infurretion at Toledo, ibid. Routs the troops
under Ronquillo, 583. Calls a convention of the male-.
contents at Avila, 587. Forms the confederacy called
'Tbe Holy sunra, ibid. Difelaims Adrian's authority, 188.
Gets poffedion of queen Joanna, ibid. Removes the holy
Junta to Tordefillas, the place of her reiidence, I8q. Sent
with troops to Valladolid, and deprives Adrian of all power
of government, 190. Is superseded in the command of
the army of the Junta, by Don Pedro de Giron, 598. Is
appointed commander at the reignation of Giron, 2oo.

2. His

His army fopplied with money by an expedient of his
wife, 202. Befieges Torrelobaton, 204. Takes and
plunders it, ibid. Concludes a truce with the nobles,
eo5. Is wounded and taken prisoner in an aaion with
the Conde de Haro, z06. Is put to death, 2o7. His
letter to his wife, ibid. Note. His letter to the city of
Toledo, ZO8, Nate.

palatinate, the reformation efiablilhed there by the eleaop

Frederick, iii. .70.

Palatine, count, ambassador from the diet at Francfori,

brings Charles V. the offer of the hsperial crown, which
he accepts, ii. 70.

Pampeluna, caltle of, in Navarre, its fortifications flrength-

ened by cardinal Ximenes, ii. 4!. Taken by I'Efparre,
the French general, for Henry d'Albret, 156. Retaken
from the French, 057.

Papacy, how liable to be affeaed by the disposal of the Im,

perial crown, 11. 63.

Paraguay, a sovereignty eflablilhed there by the order of

Jeluits, iii. o84. The inhabitants of, civilised by them,
185. Precautions pled by the Jesuits to pieferve the in-
dependency of their empire there, ibid.

Paris, a decree publilhed by the university of, againo Martin

Luther the reformer, ii. a47. A decree of the parliament
of, publithed againlt the emperor Charles V. 111. g29.

Pairma, the dutchy of, confirmed to O&avio Farnese, by

pope Julius III. iv. 27. Is attacked by the Imperialists,
and fuccefsfully proteaed by the French, 29.

Pafiu, a treaty concluded there between the emperor Charles

V. and Maurice of Saxony, iv. 83. Refiedions on this
peace, and the condus of Maurice, 84.

Pa.uia, belieged by Francis I. of France, ii. 256. Vigorously

defended by Antonio de Leyva, ibid. Battle of, between
Francis and the duke of Bourbon, a6s. The Imperial
troops in that city mutiny, 270.

Paul III, pope, ele&ed, lii. 63. His ehara&er, 64. Pro-

poses a general council to be held at Mantua, 79. Nego.
tiates personally between the emperor and Francis, 035.
lifuem a bull for a council at Mantua, 546. Prorogues
and transfers it to Vicenza, 048. A partial reformation
of abuses by, ibid. Summons the council of Trent, 234.
P'rorogues it, ibid. Summons it again, 260. Grants the

dutchies

268. Deprives and excommunicates the eleloral bilhop
of Cologne, 286. Presses the emperor to declare againit
the protefiants, 287. Concludes an alliance with him
againll the protestants, 卤94. Indiscreetly publitlses this
treaty, ibid. His troops join the emperor, 315. Recalls
them, 33卤. Removes the council from Trent to Bo-
logna, 390. Refuses the emperor's requelt to carry the
council back to Trent, ibid. His refeotment against the
emperor for the murder of his son cardinal Farnese, 393.
Is petitioned by the diet of Auglburg for the return of the
council to Trent, 395. Eludes the complying with this
requelt, 397. His sentiments of the Interim, published by
Charles, 40o. Dismisses the council of Bologna, 415.
Annexes Parmaand Placentia to the holy fee, iv. 卤. Dies, 3.
The manner of his death inquired into, ibid.

Paul IV. pope, eleaed, iv. s68. His character and hiltory,

169. Founds the order of Thesrines, 170. Is the prin-
cipal occasion of eliablifhing the inquisition in the papal
territories, 575. Lays afade his austerity on his eleaion,
172. His partiality to his nephews, ibid. Is alienated
from the emperor by his nephews, z74. Makes over-
tures to an alliance with France, 575. Is enraged by the
recess of the diet of Auglburg, 177. Signs a treaty with
France, 179. Is included in the fruce for five years,
concluded between the emperor and Henry, 193. His
inlidious artifices to defeat this truce, 195. Abtolves
Henry from his oath, and concludes a new treaty with
him, 599. His violent proceedings againlt Philip, now
king of Spain, ibid. The Compagna Romana seized by
the duke d'Alva, 2o0. Concludes a truce with Alva,
i6id. Contrail between his condusc and that of Charles,
209. Renews his hoflilities againi Philip, 210. Is un-
provided for military operations, zzs. Is reduced to
make peace with Philip, by the recall of the duke of
Guise after the defeat of St. Quintin, zz8. Receives an
ambassador from the emperor Ferdinand to notify his elec-
tion, but refuses to fee him, or to acknowledge the em-
peror, ibid. Dies, 270.

Paulin, a French officer, tent ambassador from Francis I. to

Sultan Solyman, iii. 2Z4, His uccefsful negotiations at
the Porte, ibid.

Pembrose,

rembroke, earl of, (ent by queen Mary of England with a

body of men to join the Spaniih army in the Low-Coun-
tries, iv. z,6.

Perpignao, the capital of Routilon, belieged by the Dauphis

of France, iii. 7. The siege raised, ibid.

PefearC , marquis de, takes Milanbyaffault, ii. 169. Drives

Bonnivet back to France, 235; His generous care of the
chevalier Bayard, 236. Commands in the invasion of
Provence, 247. Befieges Marseilles, 250. His army
retires toward Italy, on the appearance of the French
troops, ibid. Resigns Milan to the French, 153. Pre-
vails on the Spanilh troops not to murmur at prelent for
their pay, z25. Contr butes to the defeat of Francis at
the battie of Pavia, z6z. Is difgualed at Francis being
taken to Spain without his concu rence, 277. His re.
Lentment iotlamed by Moronl, 280. Betrays Moronb's
designs tothe emperor, 231. ArrefRs Moroni, ibid. Dies,
286.

Jbilip, archduke of Audria, and father of Charles V. visits

Spain, with his wife Joanno, ii 2. Does homage by the
way to Levis XII. of France for the earldom of Flan-
ders, 3. His title to the crown acknowledged by the
Cortes, ibid. Is difgrlred with the formality of the Spa.
nlb court, 4. Ferdinand becomes jealous of his power,
ibid. Slights his wife, ibid. His abrupt departure from
Spain, ibid. Passes through France, and enters into a
treaty with Lewis, 5. His sentiments on Ferdinand's ob-
taining the regency of CalRile, 8. Requires Ferdinand to
retire to Aragon, and resign his regency of Caltile, 9.
The regency of Catlile vefied jointly In him, Ferdinand,
and Joanna, by the treaty of Salamanca, ii. Sets out
for Spain, and is driven on the coall of England, where
he is detained three months by Henry VII. 13. Arrives
at Corunna, ibid. The Caffilian nobility declare openly
for him, ibid. Ferdinand resigns the regency of Caltilo
to him, 54. Interview between them, ibid. Acknow.
ledged king of Callile by the Cortes, a5. Dies, ibid.
Joanna's extraordinary condu& in regard to his body, s6.
See 7rarnna.

Phiirp, prince, son to the emperor Charles V. his right of

frcellion recognized by the Cortes ot Aragan and Vdleen.
cia, iii. z29. Is acknowledged by the slates of the Ne-

thersands,

414. His charater, iv. 24. Is married to Mary queen
of England, z27. s3o. The Englihh parliament jealous
of him, '32. His father religns his hereditary domi-
nions to him, I80. Is called by his father out of England,
185. Theceremony of investing him, ibid. His father's
address to him, 186, 287. Commissions cardinal Gran-
ville to address the assembly in his name, 189. Mary
queen -dowager of Hungary resigns her regency, ibid. The
dominions of Spain resigned to him, 590. His unpolite.
ness to the French ambassador Coligni, 193, Note. The
pope's violent proceedings againlt him, 199. His fcru-
ples concerning commencing hostilities againit the pope,
zoo. His ungrateful negle& in paying his father's pen-
lion, 2o7. The pope renews holtilities againlt him, Ian.
Assembles an army in the Low-Countries against France,
z.4. Goes over to England to engage that kingdom in
the war, zx5. Visits the camp at St. Q.tintin, after the
viaory, 223. Opposes the scheme of penetrating to Pa.,
ris, and orders the siege of St. Qgintin to be prosecuted,
ibid. St. Qgintin taken by assault, 224. The small ad-
vantages he reaped by these successes, 226. Builds the
Escurial in memory of the battle of St. Qgintin, ibid.
Concludes a peace with the pope, 228. Rel'ores Pla.
centia to Oaavio Farnese, 229. Grants the inveltiture
of Siena to Cosmo di Medici, 232. Enters into nego.
tiations for peace with his prisoner Montmorency, 249.
Death of queen Mary, 259. Addresses her iacceffor
Elizabeth for marriage, ibid. Elizabeth's motives for re-
j jering him, 262. Her evasive answer to him, 263.
Supplants his son Don Carlos, and marries Henry's daugh-
ter Elizabeth, z66. Articles of the treaty of Chateau.
Cambrefis, 267.

Phil//bert, Emanuel, duke of Savoy. See Sa'eoy.
Philliyino, nephew to Andrew Doria, defeats Moncada in a

Iea-engatement before the harbour of Naples, iii. IS.

Piadeina, marquis de, invades Transylvania for Ferdinand,

iv. 41. Misrepresents cardinal Martinuzzi to Ferdinand,
and obtains a commidion to aflislinate him, 47. Is forced
to abandon Transylvania, 114.

Picaray, invaded by Henry VIII. ii. 177. Henry forced by

the duke de Vendome to retire, 178. Invaded again

under

to Paris, but is driven back, 232, 233. Inefteatual in-
valion by the Imperialists, iii. az6.

Placentia, the dutchy of, granted together with that of Par-

ma by pope Paul IlI. to his natural son, cardinal Farnese,
iii. 268. Farnese affalinated there, 392. Is taken pof.
session of by the Imperial troops, 393. Restored to Ota-
vio Farnese, by Philip II. of Spain, iv. 229.

Pole, cardinal, arrives in England with a legatine commis-

sion, iv. 30. Endeavours to mediate a peace between
the emperor and the king of France, without success,
553. Is recalled from the cosrt of England by pope
Paul IV. 2It.

Printing, its effeas on the progress of the reformation, ii.

a35*

Prague, its privileges abridged by Ferdinand king of Bohe-

mia, iii. 387.

Prsoteejants, the derivation of the name, i11* 41. Of whom

they originally confilted, ibid. A severe decree publilhed
againfr them by the emperor, 44. They enter into a
league, 45. See .Smalkalde. Renew their league, and
apply to Francis king of France, and Henry VIII. of
England, for protedlion, 49. Are secretly encouraged by
Francis, So. Receive a supply of money from Henry,
ibid. Terms of the pacification agreed to between them
and the emperor at Nuremburg, 52. Aflfst the emperor
againfR the Turks, 53. Their negotiations with the pope,
relative to a general council, 55. Renew the league of
Smalkalde for ten years, 80. The motives for refuling
to assist the king of France against the emperor, 1o0.
Refule to acknowledge the councilfummoned by the pope
at Mantua, 147. A conference between their principal
divines and a deputation of catholics, at Ratilbon, 190.
This conference how rendered fruitless, 192. Obtain a
private grant from Charles in their favour, a94. Drive
the duke of Brunswick from his dominions, iii. 235. All
rigorous edias againlt them suspended by a recess of the
diet of Spires, 238. Their remonf'rances to Ferdinand at
the diet of Worms, z63. Their inflexible adherence to
the recers of Spires, 264. Disclaim all conneaion with
the council of Trent, ibid. Are firengthened by the ac-
ceflion of Frederick eleaor palatine, z7s. Are alarmed
at the proceedings of the emperor, ibid. 292. The em-

3 peror

to reflf the emperor, 298. Levy an army, 30c. The
operations of the army dil'ra&ed by the joint commanders,
3ro. The army dafperfed, 326. The eledor of Saxony
reduced, 364. The landgrave deceived by treaty, and
confined, 378, 379. The emperor's cruel treatment of
him, 384. The Interim, a fyllem of theology recom-
mended by the emperor to the diet at Auyfburg, 40r.
Are promiled proteaion by the emperor at the council of
Trent, iv. 29. The emperor proceeds rigorously against
them, 31. Their deputies obtain a fafe-condu& from
the emperor, but are refused by the council, 40. Mau-
rice of Saxony raifeo an army in their cause, 57. See
JVlaurice. Treaty of Paffau, 83. The protestant princes
again unite to 拢Rrengthen the protefiant interell, 159.
Recess of the diet of Aughburg on the fubje6h of religion,
161. Why originally averse to the principles of tolera-
tion, r66.

Prowence, is laid waite by the marefchal Montmorency on the

approach of the emperor Charles V. iii. izs. Is entered
by the emperor, szt. The difaitrous retreat of the em-
peror from, 1z5.

Prufia, when conquered by the Teutonic order, ii. 304. I1

ereaed into a dutchy, and finally into a kingdom, and en-
joyed by the houle of Brandenburg, ibid.

R

Ratiibon, a conference between a deputation of protel'ant and

catholic divines, before the emperor and diet th-re, iii.
190. This conference how rendered fruitlels, 192. A
diet opened there by the emperor, 290. The catholic
members of, assert the authority of the council of I rent,
295. The protestants present a memorial againift it, ibid.
The protefiant deputies retire, 2路.t3

Reformation in religion, the rife of, explained, ii. 90. The

diet at Worms caled by Charle, V. to cheok the progrfs
of, ibid. Account of Martin Luth r, the iefnrmer, 95.
Beginning of, in Switzerland by Zuingirus, rIo S.are
of, in Germany, at the arrival of Chatles V. 5 3. Re-
fleaions on the conduia of the court of Rome toward
Luther, I IC. And on Luthers connuru , I 6 Inquiry
into the caufta which contributed to the progress of, InS.

Observations

Observations on the pontificate of Alexander VI. and
Julius II. 2ao. The immoral lives of the Romilh clergy,
zII. The progress of, favoured by the invention of
printing, 135. And the revival of learning, a36. The
great progress of, in Germany, 239. Advantages de-
rived to, from the diet at Nuremberg, 244. Its tendency
in favour of civil liberty, 299. The dissensions between
the emperor and the pope, favourable to, 334. The
great spread of, among the German princes, iii. 37. The
confeffion of Augiburg drawn up by Melanflhon, 43.
Caules which led to that of England, 61. The excesses it
gave rife to, 63. See Protestants, Maur4ice, and Smalkalde.
Is eltablilhed in Saxony, 5 p. The great alteration occa.
fioned by, in the court of Rome, iv. 285. Contribowed
to improve both the morals and learning of the Romish
church, 291.

Rrggio, invefled by the French, who are repulsed by the go.

vernor Guicciardini the historian, ii. 164.

Remonstrance of grievances drawn up by the holy Junta, the

particulars of, ii. r92, 193. Remarks on, 595.

Reverse, a deed so called, signed by the archduke Ferdinand

on being ele&ed king of Bohemia, ii. 333.

Rbeggwi, plundered and burnt by Barbarossa, iii. 228.
Rhodes, the island of, betieged by Solyman the Magnilicent,

ii. 17. Taken by him, 179. The island of Malta
granted to the knights of, by the emperor Charles V.
i8o.

Ricblieru, cardinal, his remarks on De Retz's hifrory of Si.

efco's conspiracy, lii. 347, Note.

Rincon, the French ambassador at the Porte, the motives of

his return to France, iii. 211. Is murdered in his joir.
ney back to Confiantinople, by order of the Imperial go.
vernor of the Milanese, 212.

Rome, refleaions on the condu& of the court of, refpe&.

ing the proceedings against Martin Luther, ii. Ia5. The
exorbitant wealth of the church of, previous to the re.
formation, 114. Venality of, 133. How it drained orher
countries of their wealth, ibid. The city seized by car.
dinal Colonna, and pope Clement VII. besieged in the
castle of St. Angelo, s a5. The city taken by the Impe.
rialifls, and Bourbon killed, ibid. Is plundered, ibid.
The great revolution in the court of, during the 6xteenth
century, iii. 296.. How affeded by the revolt of Luther,
297. The spirit of its government changed by, '99.

V.OL. IV. I 拢 Ransuille,

Ronquillo, sent by cardinal Adrian with troops to suppress

the infurreerion in Segovia, ii. a83. Is routed by the in-
furgents, ibid.

Ro.erk, Francesco Maria de, reflored to his dutchy of Ur-

bino by pope Adrian, ii. 219.

Roxalana, a Ruflian captive, becomes the favourite mil'refs

of Sultan Solyman the Magnificent, iv. i15. Her only
daughter married to Ruolan the grand vizier, ur6. Pro-
cures herlelf to be declared a free woman by the sultan,
557. Is formally married to him, ibid. Renders Soly-
man jealous of the virtues of his son Mullapha, az3.
Multapha itrangled, 2zz.

1ujian, grand vizier to Solyman the Magnificent, is married

to his daughter by Roxalana, iv. ir6. Enters into Roxa-
lana's scheme to ruin Solyman's son Multapha, ibid. 1a
sent with an army to deliroy him, szs. Draws Selyman
to the army by falle reports, ibid.

S

Salamanca, treaty of, between Ferdinand of Aragon, and

his fon-in-law Philip, ii. is.

Salerno, prince of, heads the ditaffedbed Neapolieans, againlt

the oppreflions of the viceroy Don Pedro de Toledo, iv.
oz0. Solicits aid from Henry II. of France, who initi-
gates the Turks to invade Naples, 103.

.Saiuces, marquis de, succeeds Lautree in the command of

the French army before Naples, iii. 20. Retires to Averfa,
where he is taken prisoner by the prince of Orange, is.
Betrays his charge in Piedmont, szo.

Sancerre, count de, defends St. Difiere againit the emperor

Charles, iii. 247. Is deceived into a surrender by lhe
cardinal Gianville, 249.

Sasrage, a Fleming, made chancellor of Castile by Charles,

on the death of Ximenes, ii. ps. His extortions, ibid.

.Savona, is fortified, and its harbour cleared by the French,

to favour its rivalihip with Genoa, iii. IS.

Sauvs, Charles duke of, marries Beatrix of Portugal, flfter

to the emperor Charles V. iii. so4.. The caue of Francis's
displeasure against him, ibid. His territories overrun by
the French troops, 504. Geneva recovers its liberty, so6.
His situation by the truce at Nice, between the emperor
and Franeis, 137. 25 befseged at Nice, by the French
and Turks, 229.

Sa'sy, Emanuel Philibert, duke of, appointed by Philip of

Spain to command his army in the Low-Countries, iv. zs6.
Invefis St. Quintin, 217. Defeats d'Andelot in an en-
deavour to join the garrison, 259. But dues not hinder
him from entering the town, ibid. Defeats the conflable
Montmorency, and takes him prisoner, 220. Is gracioully
visited in the camp by Philip, 222. Takes St. Quintin
by afault, 224. Aflifts Montmorency in negotiating
peace between Philip and Henry, 249. Marries Henry'a
fsfler Elizabeth, 267. 269.

Saxony, eledor of, appointed joint commander of the army

of the proteltant league, with the landgrave of Hesse, iii.
309. Their charaaers compared, ibid. Opposes the
landgrave's intention of giving battle to the emperor,
3T4. His eleaorate seized by Maurice, gs3. The army
of the league disperse, 326. Recovers Saxony, 330.
Is amused by Maurice with a negotiation, ibid. Raises
an army to defend himself against the emperor, 359. Is
irresolute in his measures, 360. Charles passes the Elbe,
36a. Is attacked by the Imperialifta, 364. Is taken
prisoner and harshly received by the emperor, 365. Is
condemned to death by a court-martial, 369. His refo.
lution on the occasion, 37S. Is induced by regard to his
family to furtender his eleaorate, ibid. Refuses the em-
peror's desire of his approving the Interim, 405. The
rigour of his confinement increased, 406. Is carried by
the emperor with him into the Netherlands, 415. Is
released by the emperor on Maurice's taking arms against
him, but chooses to continue with the emperor, iv. 66.
Obtains his liberty after the treaty of Paffau, 88.
L- George, duke of, an enemy to the reformation,
iii. r S. His death an advantage to the reformation, ibid.
The proteltant religion efeablifhed by Henry duke of, ibid.
Henry is succeeded by his son Maurice, 231. His mo-
tives for not acceding to the league of Smalkalde, ibid.
Marches to the affiltance of Ferdinand in Hungary, ibid.
Joins theemperor against the protellants, 303. 320. See
Maurice.

Scbretl, Seballian, a commander in the army of the proteitant

league, his vigorous commencement of hoflilities, iii. go8.
Is injudicioully recalled, 309. Is expelled from Augf.
buig on the dispersion of the proteflant army, 328.

Sotlatd, James V. of, married to Mary of Guise, duchels-

dowager of Longueville, iii. 44. Death of James and

a a acceffon

traded to the Dauphin of France, 394* The marriage
celebrated, iv. 242. Mary assumes the title and arms of
England on the death of Mary of England, 26a. Included
in the treaty of Chateau-. ambrefis, 266. Alteration in
the condu& of England toward, 284.

&S&Es in religion, refletioon on the origin of, iii. 64.
Segovia, an infurre&ion there, on account of their represent.

ative Tordefillas voting. for the donative to Charles V. ii.
13S. Is killed by the populace, s8S. The insurgents
there defeat Ronquillo, sent to fupprees them by cardinal
Adrian, 583. Surrenders after the battle of Villasar, 209.

露elim il. Sultan, extirpates the Mamalukes, and adds Egypt

and Syria to his empire, ii. 58. Considered as formidable
to the European powers, ibid.

Sfrra, obtains of Charles V. the investiture of Milan, ii.

277. Forleitsthedutchy, by his intrigues with Moropst,
282. Joins in a league againli Charles for therecovery of
Avilan, 306. Is forced to surrender Milan to the Im.
perialfs, 3sn. Obtains again of the emperor the inveffi'
ture of Milan, iii. 36. Enteis into a private treaty with
Francis, 95. Merveille, Francis's envoy, executed for
murder, 99. Dies, o9..

Siena, the inhabitants of, implore the affiulance of the em-

peror Charles V. to defend them againif their nobles, iv.
los. The Imperial troops endeavour to enslave them,
ibid. Regain polfellion of their city, aos. Repulfeat
attack of the Germans, 053. Are belieged by the mar.
quis de Marignano, 545. The commander Monluc re-
pulles the allaults vigorounfly, 142. The town reduced
by famine, 544. Numbers of the ritip'ns retire, and
el'ablik a free government at Monte Alcino, 145. The
remaining citizens oppre(fed, ibid. And flock to Monte
Alcino, ,bid.. Is granted by the emperor to his son
Philip, 146.. The investiture given by Philip to Cosmo
di Medici, 232.

Siervrrhaufen, battle of, between Maurice of Saxony and Al-

bert of Bra denburg, iv. 107.

Sion, cardinal of, his scheme for weakening the French army

in he Milanele, ii. o68. Lesves the Imperial army to
attend the conclave on the deatlh of Leo X. 070.

SmRaliade, the protetrants enter into a league there for their

mutual lupport, iii. 45. 'Ihe league renewed at a lecond
serting there, 49. The league of, renewed for ten yea ,

So.

St. A manife(to, refusing to acknowledge a council
called by the pope, 147. The king of Denmark joins
the league, 149. The princes of,. protest againlt the au-
thotity of the Imperial chamber, and the recers of the
diet at Nuremburg, 230. Publilh a manifesto againol the
proceedings of the council at Trent, 274. Are alarmed at
the proceedi:sgs of the emperor, ibid. A want of unity
among the members, 276. The views of the eleaor of
Saxony, and the landgrave, explained, ibid. Appear at
the diet of Ratilbon by deputies, 290. Their deputies
protest against the council of Trent, 292. Their depu-
ties, alarmed at the emperor's proceedings and declara.
tions, leave the diet, 293. The emperor leagues with
the pope against them, 294. Prepare to relifR the em-
peror, 295. Are disappointed in their application to the
Venetians and Swiss, 299. As also with Henry VIII.
and Francis, 30o. Alfemble a large army, 30o. Are
put under the banof the empire, 306. Declare war againli
the emperor, 307. Hoffilities begun by Schertel, 308.
They recall hbm, ibid. The eletor of Saxony and land.
grave of Helfe appointed joint commanders of their army,
309. The charaaers of the two commanders compared,
ibid. Their operations diftraded by this joint command,
310. Cannonade the emperor's camp, 355. Make
overtures of peace to the emperor, 325. Their army
disperse, 326. The eledor of Saxony reduced, 365*
The landgrave deceived and confined, 378* Their war-
like hores seized by the emperor, 384. See Manrire.

Solyman the Magnificent ascends the Ottoman throne, ii.

89. Invades Hungary and takes Belgrade, 178. Takes
the illand of Rhodes, ibid. Defeats the Hungarians at
Mohscz, 332. His successes, and the number of pri-
foners he carried away, ibid. Belieges Vienna, 5th 34.
Enters Hungary again with a vast army, but is forced to
retire by the emperor Charles, St. Takes Barbarossa the
pirate under his protedion, 85. Concludes an alliance
with Francis king of France, 133. Prepares to invade
Naples, 134. Prorebhs Stephen king of Hungary, and
defeats Ferdinand, iii. '97. Seizes Hungary for himself,
198. Overruns Hungary again, in fulfilment of his
treaty with Francis, 228. Concludes a truce with the
emperor, 288. Loses Transylvania, iv. 45. Ravages
the coath of'Ialy, 78. 503. Carries a mighty army into

1 1 3 Hungary,

Hungary, 80. Re- Ilablilhes If bela and her (on in
Tranlylvania, 1r4. His violent at achment to his concu-
bine Roxalana, ea5. Is prevailed on to declare hera free
woman, 117. Formally marries her, ibid. Is rendered
jealous of the virtues of his son Multapha, by the arts of
Roxalana, avs. Orders him to be fIrangled, ezz. Orders
the murder of Musiacha's son, 123.

Spain, the state of, at the death of Ferdinand of Aragon, ii.

27. Charles king of, aspires to the Imperial crown on
the dea~h of Maximilian, 57. Is eleded emperor, 68.
Refleaions of the Spaniards on that event, 71. Charles
appoints viceroys, an4 departs for Germany, 76. Infur-
refions there, i80. A view of the feudal fyllem in,
l3s. An account of the confederacy termed the holy
Junta, 187. Causes which prevented an union of the
malecontents in the refpeaive provinces, 2,6. The
moderation of Charles toward them on his arrival, 2a7,
Inflance of the haughty spirit of the grandees, iii. 55*
Is invaded by the Dauphin, 2r.7 The dominions of,
resigned by Charles to his son Philip, iv. 8S. The
arrival of Charles, and his reception there, 206. The
place of his retreat described, 2o8. The regal power in,
how enlarged by Charles, 275. The foreign acquisitions
added to, ibid. See Aragon, Caflile, Galicia, 'alencia,
Cortes, Germanada, and Holy Junta.

Spires, diet of, its proceedings relative to the reformation,

ii. 333. Another diet called there by the emperor, iii.
39. Another diet at, 23a4. Recess of, in favour of the
protefrants, 239.

Spiritual censures of the Romish church, the dreadful cffeds

of, ii. 128.

St. DiFier, in Champagne, invelled by the emperor, iii. 247.

Is obtained by the artifice of cardinal Granvelle, 249.

St. juflus, monastery of, in Placentia, is chosen by the

emperor Charles V. for his retreat after his resignation,
iv. 2o0. His situation described, ibid. His apartmentP5
ibid.

St. Quinrin, inveied by the Spanish troops, and defended by

admiral Coligni, iv. 2.7. D'Andelot defeated in an en-
deavour to join the garrison, ur9. But enters the town,
ibid. Mootmorency defeated by the duke of Savoy, 1o.
The town taken by assault, 12..

StrezSi,

Strozzi, Peter, Come account of, iv. 139. Is entruiled with

the command of the erench army in Italy, ego. Is de-
seated by the marquis de Marignano, 54!.

Srabia, an infurredlion of the peasants againlt the nobles

there, ii. 296. They publibh a memorial of their grieve
ances, ibid. The insurgents difierfed, 297. The pro.
teftant religion suppressed there by the emperor Charles V.
iv. 32.

Sufo!k, duke of, invades Picardy, penetrates almol1 to Paris,

but is driven back, ii. 232.

Surrey, earl of, created high admiral to the emperor Charles

V. ii. 177. Obliged to retire out of Picardy by the duke
d路 Vendome, 178.

Sweden, a summary view of the revolutions in, during the

liceenth century, iv. 2 8.

Switzerland, the Cantons of, etpoufe the pretenfrons of

Charles V. to the Imperial crown, ii. 61. Commence-
ment of the reformation there by Zuinglius, ix. The
regulation under which they hire out their troops, s67.
The precipitate battle, infilted on by their troops under
Lautrec, loll, 173.

Syria, how and by whom added to the Ottoman empire,

ii. 38.

rmeasts, marefchal de, governor of Calais, takes Dunkirk

by lrorm, iv. 244. Engages the count of Egmont, and
is defeated by the accidental arrival of an Englilh fquadroz
on the coall, itid. Is taken prisoner, 245.

Terauane, taken and demoliihed by the emperor Charles V.

IV. III.

'fetzel, a Dominican friar, his Ihameful condu& in the sale

of indulgences in Germany, il. 9. His form of abfolu.
tion, and recommendation of the virtues of indulgences,
ibid. Note. His debauched course of life, 95. Pub.
li1hes-thefes against Luther, 9Q.

Zesutonic order, a charaaer of, ii. 303. Conquer the pro-

vince of Prullia, 304. Their grand-mailer Albert made
duke of Prullia, ibid.

Theatines, the order of, by whom founded, iv. 170.
'dionssiIe, in Luiembourg, taken by the duke of Guise, iv.

243. irburingla,

nobility, ii. 248. The fanatical notions inspired into
them by Thomas Muncer, 299. Their disorderly army
defeated, 30s.
uledo, infurre6'ion in, at the departure of Charles V. for

Germany, ii. 77. i80. The cathedral of, fitripped of its
riches to support the army of the holy Junta, ros. Pa.
dilla's letter to, at his execution, 207, Note. Is infli-
gated to continue in arms by Padilla's wife, 209. Is re.
duced, asr.

%'ledo, Ludovico de, nephew to Cosmo di Medici, oent by

his uncle to negotiate with Philip II. of Spain, for the in-
veftiture of Siena, iv. 23r.

- Don Pedro de, viceroy of Naples, oppresses the Nea.

politans, iv. ioz. And occalions the Turks to ravage the
coafis of Naples, ibid.

?Toleration, refietions on the progress of, in Germany, iv.

r6r. Why nsutually allowed among the ancient Hea-
thens, 163. How the primitive Christians became averse
to, ibid.

%'merri, Paul, a Franciscan monk, archbilhop of Golocza,

is made general of the Hungarian army against Solyman
the Magnificent, and is defcated by him, ii. 232*

'rdeJflas, the residence of queen Joanna, the confederacy of

mnalecontents called the Holy Junta removed thither, ii.
189. The queen taken there by the Conde de Harm, zoo.

-- one of the repreferitatives of Segovia, killed by

the populace for voting the donative to Charles V. at the
Cortes alfembled in Galicia, ii. 181.

Tranfyljvania, is surrendered to Ferdinand king of the Ro-

man,, by queen Ifahella, iv. 45.

露Tremsuillc, La, drives the Englilh under the duke of Suffolk

out of Picardy, ii. 233.
Trenh, the council of, summoned, iii. 234. Progogued,

ibid. Again summoned, r6o. Is opened, 271. The
council, on rumours of an infetion in the city, is tranf-
lated to Bolognas, 39o. Henry II. of France protests
agalnit the council, iv. 30. The council breaks up on the
approach of Maurice of Saxony, 67. Hitorical remarks
on this council, 68. Charadlers of its hillorians, 69.

'irent, cardinal of, sent by the emperor Charles V. to con-

elude an alliance with the pope, iii. a9g. The nature of
this treaty, 294. flnis,

2unis, the means of its coming under the power of Bar-

baroffa, traced, iii. 86. The emperor and other ChrifRian
powers unite to expel Barbarossa, and refiore Muley
Hafeen, 89. Is taken by the emperor, 94. Muley
Hafcen restored, and his treaty with Charles, 9S.

Tuscany, a review of the hate of, during the sxtseenth cen.

tury, iv. z96.

V

Valencia, an infurrefioon in, ii. ya. The people therq

greatly oppressed by the nobles, ibid. The nobles refuCe
to assemble the Cortes except the king is present, 73.
Charles authorises the people to continue in arms, 74.
They expel the nobles, ibid. Associate under the Germa.
sada, and appoint their own magifirates, ibid. Don DiegG
de Mendoza, Conde de Melito, appointed regent, on the
departureof Charles for Germany, 76. The Germanada
refuse to lay down their arns, 253. Defeat the nobles
in several adtions, 254. Are at length routed by the
Conde de Melito, ibid. The moderation of Charles so.
ward the insurgents on his arrival, 217.

Paleneinois, duchess of. See Diana of Poitirs.
Valladolid, the [1rt public entry of Charles V. to that city,

ii. 49. The inhabitants rife, burn Fonfeca's house, and
fortify the town, 184. Surrenders after the battle of
Villalar, and dissolution of the holy Junta, lo9.

Faucelles, treaty of, between Charles V. and Henry II. of

France, iv. 592.

Vendome, duke of, his plan of operations in oppolinig the

progress of the invasion of Picardy by Henry VIIl. ii. 177.
Obliges him to retire, 178.

Venice, the republic of, incline in favour of the pretensions

of Francis I. of France, to the Imperial crown, ii. 6s.
Their views and apprehenflons on the approaching rup.
ture between the emperor Charles V. and Francis, 80.
Leagues with the emperor againlr Francis, 255. A final
accommodation between, and the emperor, iii. 35. Re-
fuses to enter into the league of the Italian States, formed
by the emperor, ;7. A review of the dtate of that repub.
lic during the fixt-enth century, iv. 294.

Ferrina, the confident of the count of Lavagna, encourages

him in his (cheme of overturning the government of Ge-

noa,

conspiracy, 353.

Fielleville, the French governor of Metz, deteas Father

Leonard's conspiracy to betray the city to the Imperialists,
iv. r5z. Executes the conspirators, a55*

Virfna, isbelieged by Sultan Solyman the Magnificent, iii. 34.
Villalar, battle of, between Padilla and the Conde de Haro,

ii. zo6.

Villena, marquis de, his (pirited reply to the requeRt of the

emperor to lodge Bourbon in his palace, ii. 285.

film, the government of that city violently altered, and its

reformed ministers carried away in chains, by the emperor
Charles V. iii. 409.

United Provinces of the Netherlands, a brief view of their

revolt against the dominion of Spain, iv. 297.

V'rbino, restored by pope Adrian to Francesco Maria de Rovert,

1i. az9.

W

Wallop, Sir John, joins the emperor Charlea V. at the siege

of Landrecy, with a body of Englilh troops, iii. 227.

War, the method of carrying on, in Europe, how improved

at this period from the pralice of earlier ages, ii. 231'
General refleaions on the vicissitudes of, iv. 270.

Waanburg, Martin Luther concealed there by the ele&or of

Saxony, ii. 545.

Wecntraorth, lord, governor of Calais, remonstrates in vain

with the English privy council to provide for its security,
iv. 235. Is attacked by the duke of Guise, and forced to
capitulate, 236.
Vittemberg, invefited by the emperor Charles V. and de.
fended by Sybilla of Cleves, wife to theeleaor of Saxony,
iii. 366.

lWolfey, cardinal, his rife, charater, and isfluence over

Henry VIII. of England, ii. 33. Receives a pension
from Francis i. of France, 34. And from the emperor
Charles V. 86. Detached from the French interelr by
the latter, ibid. Inclines Henry to join the emperor
againlt Francis, 149. Sent by Henry to Calais, to nego-
tiate an accommodation between the emperor and Francis,
160. Has an interview with Charles at Bruges, and con-
cludes a league with him on the part of Henry, againlt

France,

second disappointment of the Dapacy by the eledion of
Clement VII. 230. Obtains of Clement a legatine com-
milion in England for life, 231. Negotiates a league with
Francis againlt the emperor, iii. 3.

WoVrm, a diet called there by Charles V. to check the pro.

grefs of the reformers, ii. 90. Proceedings of, 41t.
Martin Luther cited before it, 543. Refuses to retra&
his opinions, s44. An edia pubilihed againlt him, '45*
Diet at, opened, iii. 44.

Wurtemburg, Ulric duke of, why expelled his dominions,

Jii. 77. Recovers his dominions by the afil'sance of
Francis king of France, and receives the protcetant religion,
7S.

Wyat, fir Thomas, raises an infurretion in Kent againf

queen Mary of England, on account of the Spanilb match,
iv. 529. Is subdued and punilhed, ibid.

x

Ximenes, archbilhop of Toledo, adheres to Ferdinans of

Aragon, in his dispute with the archduke Philip concern-
ing the regency of Caflile, ii. so. Espouses Ferdinand'sr
claim to the regency of Castile on Philip's death, a9.
Conquers Oran, and other places in Barbary, for the
crown of Caflile, 20. Appointed regent of Castile, by
Ferdinand's will, until the arrival of Charles V. in Spain,
28. His rife and charader, ibid. Admits the claim to
the regency of cardinal Adrian sent with that commission
by Chorles, and executes it jointly with him, 3i. Takes
the infant Don Ferdinand to Madrid under his own eye,
ibid. Procures Charles, who assumed the regal title, to
be acknowledged by the Castilian nobility, 33. Schemes
to extend the regal prerogative, ibid. Depresses the nobi-
lity, 34. Frees the king from the feudal limitations, and
el'abhilhes a regal army to check the barons, 35. Sup-
presses a mutiny headed by the grandees, 36. Resumes
the grants of Ferdinand to his nobles, ibid. His prudent
application of the revenue, 37. His bold assertion of his
authotity to the difconteuted nobles, 3S. Other alfociates
in the regency appointed at the infligation of the Flemish
courtierS, 39. Retains the superior management, ibid.
Defeats John d'Albret's invasion of Navarre, ibid. Dif.

snantles

strengthens, 41. The troops sent by him against Barba.
roffa defeated, and his equanimity on that occasion, ibid.
Alarmed at the corruption of the Flemish court, he per.
fuades Charles to visit Spain, 43. Falls lick on his
journey to meet Charles at his arrival, 47. His letter of
counlel to Charles, 49. Requests an interview, ibid. The
ingratitude of Charles to him, ibid. His death, ibid. His
*ch ara er, ibid. Reverence paid tohi s memory by the Spani-
ards, ibid.

Z

iemora, bilhop of, raises a regiment of priests to defend
* Tordefillas, for the holy Junta, which is forced by the

Conde de laro, ii. 199.

Zuinglius attacks the (ale of indulgences at Zurich in Swit-

zerland, ii. a r.

THE END.
