UNIVERSITV LIBIRARV CAMBRIDGE

FROM TIIE LIBRARV OF
FRANCIS JENKINSON

LIBIRARIAN

1923
\U\ 5 7j.

HI .S, T ORY

-- ,
H I S T O R Y

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY

in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the Roman Em-
pire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURCH, and

HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESIY for SCOTLAND.

VO L. 1.

D U BLIN.

Printed for W. S MITH, A. L L

Al .
IL , G.

FAULKNER, S. IOWELL, P. WLSON, J. EXSHAW, H.
SAUNDIRS, W. WilrT'STONI., W.SLEArTR, L. FLIN,
E. LYNCH, D. CHAMBERLAINE, J. POTTS, D. lAY,
J. HOEV, iun. J. WILiIAIMS, J. MITCHELI., W.
COLI.S, J. MILLIK;EN, C. INCII.AM, and J. PORI r,
Book fellers.

MDCCI NII.

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

S I R,
I PRESUME to lay before Your Majelly

the Hiatory of a Period, which, if the
abilities of the Writer were equal to the

dignity of the Subject, would not be unworthy
the attention of a Monarch, who is no less a
Judge than a Patron of Literary Merit.

HISTORY claims it as her prerogative to

offer instruction to KINGs, as well as to their
people. What reflections the Reign of the
Emperor CHARLES V. may suggest to Your
MajeRfy, it becomes not me to conjecture. But
your Subjects cannot observe the various calami-
ties, which that Monarch's ambition to be di-
itinguiihed as a Conqueror, brought upon his
dominions, without recollecting the felicity of'
their own times, and looking up with gratitude
to their Sovereign, who, during the fervour of
youth, and amdft the career of vitory, pof-
sessed such felf-command, and maturity of
judgment, as to set bounds to his own triumphs,
and prefer the bleflings of peace to the fplen-
dot:r of militarv glory.

A 2 Pos-

POSTERITY will not only celebrate the

Wisdom of Your Majesty's choice, but will
enumerate the many Virtues, which render
Your Reign conspicuous for a sacred regard to
all the duties, incumbent on the Sovereign of
a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the influence of

these Virtues; and to live under the dominion
of a Prince, who delights more in promoting
the Publick Welfare, than in receiving thejuft
Praise of his royal beneficence. I am,

S I R,
YOUR MAJESTY's

Mos faithful Subjet,

And most dutiful Servant,

WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

T HE

# THE PREFACE.

THE
P R E F A C E.

O period in the history of ones own country can
be confidered as altogether uninterefling.

Such tranfaaions as tend to illufirate the progress of
its constitution, laws, or manners, merit the utmost
attention. Even remote and minute events are ob-
jeas of a curiosity, which, being natural to the hu-
man mind, the gratification of it is attended with
pleasure.

BUT, with rcfpc& to the hiltory of foreign States,

we mufi set other bounds to our desire of infor-
mation. The universal progress of science during
the two last centuries, the art of printing, and
other obvious causes, have filled Europe with such
a multiplicity of hiltories, and with such vast col-
letions of hiflorical materials, that the term of
human life is too short for the fIudy or even the
perusal of them. It is necessary, then, not only
for those who are called to conduct the affairs of
nations, but for such as inquire and reason concern-
ing them, to remain satisfied with a general know-
ledge of difiant events, and to confine their fludy
of history in detail chiefly to that period, in which
the several States of Europe having become intimate-
ly conneted, the operations of one power are so
felt by all, as to influence their councils, and to rc-
gulate their measures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed in
order to fcparate these periods. An awra Ihould be

A 3 pointed

pointed out, prior to which, each country, little
connected with those around it, may trace its own
history apart; after which, the transactions of every
considerable nation in Europe become interefling
and inftrucive to all. With this intention I under-
took to write the history of the Emperor CHARLES
V. It was during his adminifiration that the powers
of Europe were formed into one great political fvf-
tem, in which each took a flation, wherein it has
since remained with less variation, than could have
been expecled after the shocks occasioned by so many
internal revolutions, and so many foreign wars. 'I le
great events which happened then have not hitherto
spent their force. The political principles and max-
ims, then eflablifhed, still continue to operate. The
ideas concerning the balance of power, then introdui-
ced or rendered general, frill influence the councils of
nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may therefore be con-.

fidered as the period at which the political Rate of
Europe began to assume a new form. I have endea-
voured to render my account of it, an introdution
to the history of Europe subsequent to his reign.
While his numerous Biographers describe his personal
qualities and a&ions; while the historians of different
countries relate occurrences the conlequences iof
which were local or transient, it hath been my pur-
pose to. record only those great tranfations in his
reign, the effecs of which were universal, or con-
tinue to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little inflruction from

such a history of the reign of CHARLES V. without
some information concerning the state of Europe pre-
vious to the sixteenth century, my desire of Iuppl)-
ing this has produced a preliminary volume, in which
I have attempted to point out and explain the great
causes and events, to whose operation all the improve-
ments in the political slate of Euw'pe, from the sub-

vcrficn

rerfion of the Roman Empire to the beginning of
the sixteenth century, must be ascribed. I have ex-
hibited a view of the progress of society in Europe,
not only with refpec: to interior government, laws
and manners, but with refpec to the command of
the national force requisite in foreign operations; and
I have described the political constitution of the prin-
cipal fates in Europe at the time when CHARLES V.
began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led into feve-

ral critical disquisitions, which belong more properly
to the province of the lawyer or antiquary, than to
that of the hitforian. These I have placed at the end
of the firlt volume, under the title of Proofs and II-
luftrationt. Many of my readers will, probably, give
little attention to such researches. To some they may,
perhaps, appear the most curious and interesting part
of the work, I have carefully pointed out the four-
ces from which I have derived information, and have
cited the writers on whose authority I rely with a
minute exa&nefs, which might appear to border upon
ostentation, if it were poflible to be vain of having
read books, many of which nothing but the duty of
examining with accuracy whatever I laid before the
publick, could have induced me to open. As my in-
quiries conduaed me often into paths which were ob-
fcure or little frequented, such conflant recourse to
the authors who have been my guides, was not only
necessary for authenticating the faas which are the
foundations of my reasonings, but may be useful in
i, inting out the way to such as (hall hereafter hold the
lime courfc, and in enabling them to carry on their
redcaiches with greater facility and success.

EvE.RY intelligent reader will obfcrve one omission

in my work, the reason of which it is necessary to ex-
plain. I have given no account of the conquefis of
Mexico and Peru, or of the cflablifhment of the
Spanish colonies in the continent and islands of Ame-

A 4 rica.

rica. The hiflory of these events I originally intended
to have related at considerable length. But upon a
nearer and more attentive consideration of this part
of my plan, I found that the discovery of the new
world; the state of Co.icry among its ancient inhabi-
tants, their charaaers, manners, and arts; the genius
of the European settlements in its various provinces,
together with the influence of these upon the f),ftems
of policy or commerce in Europe, were fubjeos so
splendid and important, that a superficial view of them
could afford little fatisfa&ion; to treat of them as ex-
tenfively as they merited, mufl produce an episode,
disproportionate to the principal work. I have there-
fore reserved these for a separate hifiory; which, if
the performance now offered to the publick shall re-
ceive its approbation, I propose to undertake.

THOUGH, by omitting such considerable but de-

tached articles in the reign of CHARLES V. I have
circumscribed my narration within more narrow limits,
I am yet persuaded, from this view of the intention
and nature of the work which I thought it necelfary
to lay before my readers, that the plan mutl flill ap-
pear to them too extensive, and the undertaking too
arduous. I have often felt them to be so. But my
convi&ion of the utility of such a history prompted
me to persevere. With what success I have executed
it, the publick muff now judge. I wait, in folici-
tude, for its decision; to which I shall submit with a
rcfpecful filcnce.

A VIEW

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

A
V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E U R 0 P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION I.
View of the Progrefi of Society in Europe, with refpef to

interioi Government, Laws atnd anners.
T W O great revolutions have happened in the SECT. I.

political state, and in the manners of the Euro- t,"~
pean nations. The first was occasioned by the The effeas
progress of the Roman power; the second by of the Ro-

the subversion of the Roman Empire. When the spirit nl"hOpoe
of conquest led the armies of Rome beyond the ate of En.
Alps, they found all the countries which they invaded, "to
inhabited by people whom they denominated barbarians,
but who were nevertheless brave and independent.
These defended their ancient pofCetlions with obstinate
valour. It was by the superiority of their discipline,
rather than of their courage, that the Romans gained
any advantage over them. A single battle did not, as

among

SBCe. I. among the effeminate inhabitants of Aria, decide the

_YVw ffate of a slate. The vanquished people resumed their

arms with fresh spirit, and their undisciplined valour,
animated by the love of liberty, supplied the want of

The deol conduct as well as of union. During there long and
tion which fierce fruggles for dominion or independence, the coun-
it occasion- tries of Europe were fucceflively laid wafle, a great
cd' part of their inhabitants perished in the field, many

were carried into slavery, and a feeble remnant, inca-
pablc of further refiflancc, Submitted to the Roman
power.

The im. THE Romans having thus desolated Europe, set
provements themfe!ves to civilize it. The form of government
which it in- which they established in the conquered provinces,
trOduced. though revere, was regular, and preserved publick tran-

quillity. As a consolation for the loss of liberty, they
communicated their arts, sciences, language, and man-
ners, to their new lubje&s. Europe began to breathe,
and to recover ftrcngth after the calamities which it
had undergone; agriculture was encouraged; popu-
lation encreafed; the ruined cities were rebuilt; new
towns were founded; an appearance of prosperity fuc-
ceeded, and repaired, in some degree, the havock of

war.

The bad THIS Rtate, however, was far from being happy, or
conicquen- favourable to the improvement of the human mind.

ti hir The vanquished nations were disarmed by their conque-

rors, and overawed by soldiers kept in pay to restrain
them. They were given up as a prey to rapacious gover-
nors, who plundered them with impunity; and were
drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes imposed
with so little attention to the situation of the provinces,
that the impositions were generally encreafed in propor-
tion to their inability to support them. They were de-
privred of their mofd enterprizing citizens, who resortcd
to a diflant capital in quell of preferment, or of riches;
and were accuflom d in all their adions to look up to a
superior, and tamely to receive his commands. Under
all these depreing circumstances, it was impofiible that
they could retain vigour or gencrofity of mind. The
martial and independent spirit, which had diflinguifhcd
their anceflors, became extint among all the people
fubjc&ed to the Roman yoke; they loft not only the
habit but even the capacity of deciding for themselves,
or of ading from the impulse of their own minds; and

the

the dominion of the Romans, like that of all great SicT. I.
Empires, degraded and debased the human species [A]. IV_

A SOCIETY in this slate could not subsist long. There The irrup

were defecs in the Roman government, even in its mos tion of tilm
perfec form, which threatened its difrolution. Time natio
ripened these original feeds of corruption, and gave
birth to many new disorders. A conflitution, unsound,
and worn out, must have fallen in pieces of itself, with-
out any external flock. The violent irruption of the
Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other barbarians haflened
this event, and precipitated the downfall of the Empire.
New nations seemed to arise, and to rush from unknown
regions in order to take vengeance on the Romans for
the calamities which they had inflited on mankind.
These fierce tribes either inhabited tfe various provinces
in Germany, which had never been subdued by the Ro-
mans, or were scattered over the vast countries iti the
north of Europe, and north-wefl of Asia, which are
now occupied by the Danes, se Swedes, the Poles, the
fubjets of the Ruffian empire, and the Tartars. Their
condition, and tranfaaions previous to their invasion of
the Empire are but little known. All our information
with refpea to these is derived from the Romans; and
as they did not penetrate far into countries which were
at that time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts of
their original late given by them are extremely imper-
sec. The rude inhabitants themselves, deflitute of
science, and of records, without leisure or curiosity to
enquire into remote events, retained, perhaps, omen
indiftina memory of recent occurrences, but beyond
these, all was buried in oblivion, or involved in darknefb,
and in fable [B].

THE prodigious swarms which pourred in upon the State or the

Empire from the beginning'of the fourth century to cOuntli:s
the final extincion of the Roman power, have given ty iffcd.
rife to an opinion that the countries whence they
issucd were crowded with inhabitants; and various
theories have been formed to account for luch an ex-
traordinary degree of population as hath procured these
countries the appellation ot The Storehouse of Nations.
But if we confider that the countries pcfftffed by the
people who invaded the Empire were of vafi extent;
that a great part of these was covered with woods and

[A). NOTE I.
[(j. NOTE IU.

mnarhes;

SrTr. I. marshes; that some of the motl considerable of the

V barbarous nations subsisted entirely by hunting, or

pasturage, in both which tfates of society large traats
of land are required for maintaining a few inhabi-
tants; and that all of them were firangers to the
arts, and industry, without which population cannot
incrcafe to any great degree, it is evident, that there
countries could not be lo populous in ancient times
as they are at present, when they still continue to
be leTs peopled than any other part of Europe or of
Asia.

The people BUT if these circumstances prevented the barba-
I fordring rous nations from becoming populous, they contribut-

ed to inspire, or to strengthen the martial spirit by
which they were diltinguifhed. Inured by the rigour
of their climate, or the poverty of their foil, to hard-
ships which rendered their bodies firm, and their
minds vigorous; accuflomed to a course of life which
was a continual preparation for acion; and disdain-
ing every occupation but that of war; they under-
took, and prosecuted their military enterprizes with
an ardour and impetuosity, of which men,foftened by
the refinements of more polished times, can scarce
form any idea [C].

The mo- THEIR fitlt :nroads into the Empire proceeded
tgCs of rather from the love of plunder, than from the de-
timr si:-s:
eur,,ins. fire of new settlements. Roused to arms by some

enterprizing or popular leader, they sallied out of
their forests; broke in upon her frontier provinces with
irresistible violence; put all who opposed them to the
sword; carried off the most valuable effets of the in-
habitants; dragged along multitudes of captives in
chains; wafted all before them with fire or sword;
and returned in triumph to their wilds and faflnefces.
Their success, together with the accounts which they
gave of the unknown conveniences and luxuries that
abounded in the countries better cultivated, or bless-
ed with a milder climate than their own, excited new
adventurers, and exposed the frontier to new devafia-
tions.

[C]. NOTE IlI.

WHEN

WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the adjacent SECT. I.

provinces ravaged by frequent incursions, they march- kV
ed farther from home, and finding it difficult, or Theiorea-

sons for set-

dangerous to return, they began to fettle in the ling in the
countries which they had subdued. The sudden and countries
short excursions in queRl of booty, which had alarm- chnqierth
ed, and disquieted the Empire, ceased; a more dread-
ful calamity impended. Great bodies of armed men
with their wives and children, and slaves and flocks,
issued forth, like regular colonies, in quest of new
settlements. People who had no cities, and seldom
any fixed habitation, were so little attached to their
native foil, that they migrated without reluEance from
one place to another. New adventurers followed
them. The lands which they deserted were occupied
by more remote tribes of barbarians. These, in The extent
their turn, pushed forward into more fertile coun- oftheir set-
tries, and like a torrent continually increasing, rolled dmcnt'
on, and swept every thing before them. In less than
two centuries from their first irruption, barbarians of
various names and lineage, plundered and took pof-
feflion of Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and
at last of Italy, and Rome itself. The vaR fabrick
of the Roman power which it had been the work of
ages to perfeC, was in that short period overturned
from the foundation.

MANY concurring causes prepared the way for The cir-

cumftanc¢

this great revolution, and ensured success to the na- which oce-
tions which invaded the Empire. The Roman corn- (ioned the
monwealth had conquered the world by the wisdom ofthe Romanlf
its civil maxims, and the rigour of its military dif- Empire.
cipline. But, under the Emperors, the former were
forgotten or despised, and the latter was gradually re-
laxed. The armies of the Empire in the fourth
and fifth centuries bore scarce any resemblance to
those invincible legions which had been victorious
wherever they marched. Instead of freemen, who
voluntarily took arms from the love of glory, or of
their country, provincials and barbarians were bribed
or forced into service. They were too feeble, or too
proud to submit to the fatigue of military duty.
They even complained of the weight of their defen-
five armour, as intolerable, and laid it aside. Infan-
try, from which the armies of ancient Rome derived
their vigour and flability, fell into contempt; the

effeminate

SECT. I. effeminate and undisciplined soldiers of later times
%Y_ _ could scarce be brought to venture into the field but

on horseback. Theie wretched troops, however,
were the only guardians of the Empire. The jea-
lousy of defpotiim had deprived the people of the
use of arms; and fubjeds oppressed and rendered
incapable of defending themselves, had neither spirit
nor inclination to refill their invaders, from whom
they had little to fear, becaule they could scarce
make their condition more unhappy. As the mar-
tial spirit became extint, the revenues of the Em-
pire gradually diminished. The tale for the luxuries
of the East increased to such a pitch in the Imperial
court, that great fums were carried into India, from
whence money never returns. By the vail subsidies
paid to the barbarous nations a still greater quantity
of species was withdrawn from circulation. The fron-
tier provinces, wafted by frequent incursions, became
unable to pay the customary tribute; and the wealth
of the world, which had long centered in the capital
of the Empire, ceased to flow thither in the fame
abundance, or was diverted into other channels. The
limits of the Empire continued to be as extensive as
ever, while the spirit requisite for its defence declin-
ed, and its resources were exhausted. A vaiR body,
languid, and almost unanimated, became incapable of
any effort to save itself, and was easily overpowered.
The Emperors, who had the abfplute direcion of this
disordered syRem, funk in the softness of Eastern lux-
ury, (hut up within the walls of a palace, ignorant
of war, unacquainted with affairs, and governed en-
tirely by women and eunuchs, or by minitlers equally
effeminate, trembled at the approach of danger, and
under circumflances which called for the utmost vi-
gour in counsel as well as in aaion, discovered all the
impotent irresolution of fear, and of folly.

The cir- IN every refpe&, the condition of the barbarous
ctmftinces nations was the reverse of that of the Romans.
which con- Among them, the martial spirit was in full vigour;
tributcd to
thc fucces their leaders were hardy and enterprizing; the arts
,f the bar- which had enervated the Romans were unknown

,',,"
l"'. among them; and such was the nature of their mi-

litary institutions, that they brought forces into the
field without any trouble, and supported them at little
cxpence, The mercenary and effeminate troops

stationed

Stationed on the frontier, astonished at their fierceners, SECT. 1J
either fled at their approach, or were routed in the vI
first onset. The feeble expedient to which the Em-
perors had recourse, of taking large bodies of the
barbarians into pay, and of employing them to re-
pel new invaders, instead of retarding, hastened the
deftru&ion of the Empire. They soon turned their
arms againfi their maflers, and with greater advan-
tage than ever: for, by serving in the Roman armies,
they had acquired all the discipline, or (kill in war,
which the Romans still retained; and upon adding
there to their native ferocity, they became altogether
irresistible.

BUT though from these, and many othercaufes,The spirit
the progress and conquefis of the nations which over- with whijt

they carried

ran the Empire, became so extremely rapid, they on war.
were accompanied with horrible devastations, and an
incredible destruction of the human species. Civiliz-
ed nations which take arms upon cool reflection,
from motives of policy or prudence, with a view to
guard againfi tome distant danger, or to prevent
some remote contingency, carry on their hoflilities
with so little rancour, or animosity, that war among
them is disarmed of half its terrors. Barbarians are
firangers to such refinements. They ruth into war
with impetuosity, and prosecute it with violence.
Their sole objec is to make their enemies feel the
weight of their vengeance, nor does their rage sub-
fide until it be satiated with inflicing on them every
possible calamity. It is with fueh a spirit that the
savage tribes in America carry on their petty wars.
It was with the fame spirit that the more powerful
*and no less fierce barbarians in the north of Europe,
and of Asia, fell upon the Roman Empire.

WHR.EVERl they marched, their route was marked The defola.

with blood. They ravaged or deflroyed all around tion which
them. They made no diftinEtion between what was thy
sacred, and what was profane. They rcfpeaed no uo. Eu-
age, or sex, or rank. What escaped the fury of the rope.
firl inundation perilhed in those which followed it.
The most fertile and populous provinces were con-
verted into defarts, in which were scattered the ruins of
villages and cities, that afforded shelter to a few
miserable inhabitants whom chance had preserved,
or the sword of the enemy, wearied with dcitroying,

had

SECT. I. had spared. The conquerors who firll fettled in the
%YIV countries which they had wafted were expelled or

exterminated by new invaders, who coming from re-
gions farther removed from the civilized parts of the
world, were still more fierce and rapacious. This
brought new calamities upon mankind, which did not
cease until the north, by pouring forth fucceflive
swarms, was drained of people, and could no longer
furnish initruments of defirucion. Famine and pes-
tilence, which always march in the train of war,
when it ravages with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged
in every part of Europe, and compleated its sus-
ferings. If a man were called to fix upon the pe-
riod in the history of the world, during which the
condition of the human race was mofi calamitous and
affli&ed, he would, without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Theodosius the
Great, to the eflablifhment of the Lombards in Ital)[c.
The contemporary authors who beheld that scene of
desolation, labour and are at a loss for expreflions to
describe the horror of it. The scourge of God, The
dejlroyer of nations, are the dreadful epithets by which
they diftinguilh the mofi noted of the barbarous
leaders; and they compare the ruin which they had
brought on the world, to the havock occasioned by
earthquakes, conflagrations, or deluges, the moll for-
midable and fatal calamities which the imagination of
man can conceive.

'rheunier- BUT no expreflions can convey so perse& an idea
fal change of the deftruAive progress of the barbarians, as that
which they which mull firike an attentive observer, when he con-
occasioned
n the Lftae templates the total change, which he will discover
of Lurop,. in the slate of Europe when it began to recover

some degree of tranquillity towards the close of the
sixth century. The Saxons were by that time maf-
tcrs of the southern, and more fertile provinces of
Britain; the Franks of Gaul; the Huns of Panno-
nia; the Goths of Spain; the Goths and Lombards
of Italy and the adjacent provinces. Scarce any vef-
tigc of the Roman policy, jurisprudence, arts, or lite-
rature remained. New forms of government, new
laws, new manners, new dresses, new languages, and

[c] Theodosius died A. D. 395. The reign of Alboinusin Lombardy,
begi A.D. 571, b othat thil period was 176 year,.

new

new names of men and countries, were every where SECT. I.
introduced. To make a great or sudden alteration BYV'
with refpe& to any of there, unless where the anci-
ent inhabitants of a country have been almost to-
tally exterminated, has proved an undertaking be-
yond the power of the greatest conquerors [D].
The total change which the settlement of the barba-
rous nations occasioned in the slate of Europe, may,
therefore, be confidered as a more decisive proof, than
even the testimony of contemporary historians, of
the detlruAive violence with which they carried on
their conquefrs, and of the havock which they had
made from one extremity of this quarter of the globe
to the other [E].

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this From this

state tf difo

general wreck of nations, we must search for the feeds order the
of order, and endeavour to discover the firfl rudi- laws of go-
ments of the policy and laws now established in Eu- vernmen
rope. To this source, the historians of its different hlilhed mult
kingdoms, have attempted, though with less attention b traced.
and industry than the importance of the enquiry
merits, to trace back the institutions, and cufRoms pe-
culiar to their countrymen. It is not my province
to give a minute detail of the progress of govern-
ment and manners in each particular nation, whose
tranfations are the objet of the following hiRfory.
But in order to exhibit a juRl view of the tfate of
Europe at the opening of the sixteenth century, it
is necessary to look back, and to contemplate the
condition of the northern nations upon their first set-
tlement in those countries which they occupied. It
is necessary to mark the great fleps by which they
advanced from barbarism to refinement, and to point
out those general principles and events which by
their uniform as well as extensive operation condud-
ed all of them to that degree of improvement in
policy and in manners which they had attained at the
period when Charles V. began his reign.

WHeN nations subjed to despotic government make The princi-

conquefis, these ftrve only to extend the dominion pies on
and the power of their mafler. But armies corn- which the
posed of freemen conquer for themselves, not for nations
their leaders. The people who overturned the Ro- m-de their

cttlements

[D] NOTE IV. [E] NOTE V.
VOL. I. B man

SECT. I. man Empire, and fettled in its various provinces,

y were of the latter class. Not only the different na-

tions that issued from the north of Europe, which
has always been confidered as the feat of liberty, but
the Hurls and Alans who inhabited part of those
countries which have been marked out as the pecu-
liar region of servitude [f], enjoyed freedom and inde-
pendence to filch a high degree as seems to be fcarcc
compatible with a state of social union, or with the
lubordination necessary to maintain it. They follow-
ed the chieftain, who led them forth in queil of new
settlements, not by constraint, but from choice; not
as soldiers whom he could order to march, but as
volunteers who offered to accompany him [F].
They confidered their conquests as a common pro-
perty, in which all had a title to share, as all had
contributed to acquire them [G]. In what manner,
or by what principles, they divided among them the
lands which they had seized, we cannot now deter-
mine with any certainty. There is no nation in Eu-
rope whose records reach back to this remote period;
and there i:; little information to be got from the un-
inftruaive and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers
ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with the
proper obje&s of history.

The feudal THIS new division of property, however, together
government with the maxims and manners to which it gave rife,
cftabli&d gradually introduced a species of government former-
among ly unknown. This singular institution is now dif-
them. tinguifhed by the name of the Feudal fyjlem: and

though the barbarous nations which framed it, set-
tled in their new territories at different times, came
from different countries, spoke various languages,
and were under the command of separate leaders,
the Feudal policy and laws were eflablifhed, with lit-
tle variation, in every kingdom of Europe. This
amazing uniformity hath induced some author. [i] to be-
lieve that all thele nations, notwithflanding Jo many
apparent circumfrances of diflinaion, were originally
the fame people. But it may be aftribcd with
greater probability to the similar (late of society and

rs] Dc L'cfprit des leoi, liv. 17. rc. 3. [F] NOTE VI. [G]

NOTE VII. [i] Procop. dc BIlo VandaL ap. 'cript. Byz. cd.t.
ea. vol i. p. 34S.

of

of manners to which they were accuflomed in their SEcT. L
native countries, and to the similar situation in which uV'%
they found themselves on taking poffeflion of their
new domains.

As the conquerors of Europe had their acquisitions National

to maintain, not only againfi such of the ancient in- defi:.ce the
habitants as they had spared, but against the for- f feaual
midable inroads or new invaders, felf-defence was policy.
their chief care, and seems to have been the sole
obje& of their firfl institution and policy. Instead of
those loose associations, which, though they scarce
diminished their personal independence, had been sus-
ficient for their security while they remained in their
original countries, they saw the necessity of confe-
derating more closely together, and of relinquishing
some of their private rights in order to attain pub-
lick safety. Every freeman, upon receiving a por-
tion of the lands which were divided, bound him-
self to appear in arms against the enemies of the
community. This military service was the condition
upon which he received and held his lands, and as
they were exempted from every other burden, that
tenure, among a warlike people, was deemed both
easy and honourable. The King or general, who
led them to conquest, continuing still to be the head
of the colony, had, of course, the largest portion al-
lotted to him. Having thus acquired the means of
rewarding past services, as well as of gaining new
adherents, he parcelled out his lands with this view,
binding those on whom they were befllowed, to fol-
low his flandard with a number of men in propor-
tion to the extent of the territory, which they re-
ceived, and to bear arms in his defence. His chief
officers imitated the example of the sovereign, and
in distributing portions of their lands among their
dependants, annexed the fame condition to the grant.
Thus a feudal kingdom resembled a military establish-
ment, rather than a civil institution. The vicorious
army cantoned out in the country which it had feiz-
ed, continued ranged under its proper officers, and
filbordinate to military command. The names of a
soldier and of a freeman were fynonimous [k]. Every
proprietor of land, girt with a sword, was ready to

[k] Du Cange Gloflar. voc, Milke

3 2 march

SECT. 1. march at the summons of his superior, and to take

A _9Vy the field against the common enemy.

The feudal BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so ad-
governmentI mirably calculated for defence against the assaults of
defective in
its provifi- any foreign-power, its provisions for the interior or-
ons for in- der and tranquillity of society were extremely defec-

cri,,r or'er tive. The principles of disorder and corruption are

discernible in that constitution under its best and
mos perfect form. They soon unfolded themselves,
and spreading with rapidity through every part cf
the fyflem, produced the most fatal effets. The
bond of political union was extremely feeble; the
sources of anarchy were innumerable. The monar-
chical and ariflocratical parts of the constitution, hav-
ing no intermediate power to balance them, were
perpetually at variance, and jufiling with each other.
The powerful vassals of the crown soon extorted a
confirmation for life of those grants of land, which
being at firfi purely gratuitous, had been bellowed
only during pleasure. Not satisfied with this, they
prevailed to' have them converted into hereditary
poffeflions. One ftep more compleated their ufurpa-
tions, and rendered them unalienable [H]. With an
ambition no less enterprising, and more preposterous,
they appropriated to themselves titles of honour, as
well as offices of power or trust. These personal
marks of diflin&ion, which the publick admiration
befiows on illustrious merit, or which the pub:ick
confidence confers on extraordinary abilities, were an-
nexed to certain families, and transmitted like fiefs,
from father to son by hereditary right. The crown
vaflals having thus fccured the poiTeflion of their
lands and dignities, the nature of the Feudal inftitu-
tions, which though founded in subordination, verged
to independence, led them to new, and till more
dangerous encroachments on the prerogatives of the
lbvcreign. They obtained the power of supreme
jurifdidion both civil and criminal within their own
territories; the right ot coining money; together
with the privilege of carrying on war against their
private enemies in their own name, and by their
own authority. The ideas of political fubjecion were
almost entirely loft, and frequently Icarce any ap-

[H] NOTE Vlll.

pearance

pearance of feudal subordination remained. Nobles SECT. I'
who had acquired such enormous power, scorned to sYu
confider themselves as subjeCts. They aspired openly
at being independent: the bonds which conneEted the
principal members of the conltitution with the crown,
were dissolved. A kingdom considerable in name and
in extent, was broken into as many separate princi-
palities as it contained powerful barons. A thousand
causes of jealousy and discord fubfifled among them,
and gave rife to as many wars. Every country in
Europe, wafted or kept in continual alarm during
there endless contests, was filled with cafiles and places
of strength, erected for the security of the inhabi-
tants, not against foreign force, but against internal
hostilities. An universal anarchy, deflrucive, in a
great measure, of all the advantages which men ex-
pee to derive from society, prevailed. The people,
the most numerous as well as the most useful part
of the community, were either reduced to a slate of
adual servitude, or treated with the fame insolence
and rigour as if they had been degraded into that
wretched condition [I]. The King, firipped of al-
most every prerogative, and without authority to
ena' or to execute salutary laws, could neither pro-
tee the innocent, nor puniih the guilty. The nobles,
superior to all restraint, harafled each other with
perpetual wars, opprefled their fellow fubjeds, and
humbled or insulted their Sovereign. To crown all,
time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable this
pernicious fyflem, vhich violence had eflablifhed.

SUCH was the state of Europe with refpe& to the It prevented
interior adminifiration of government from the fe- nati"t like-

wife from

venth to the eleventh century. All the external aOing ith
operations of its various states, during this period, vigour in

their exeer-

were, of course, extremely feeble. A kingdom dif- al,,p1 t
membered, and torn with diflention, without any tios.
common interest to rouze, or any common head to
conduct its force, was incapable of aging with vi-
gour. Almost all the wars in Europe, during the
ages which I have mentioned, were trifling, indeci-
five, and producive of no considerable event. They
resembled the short incursions of pirates or banditi,
rather than the feady operations of a regular army.

[1] NOTE IX

B 3 Every

SrCT. I. Every baron at the head of his vaifals, carried on

y-_i some petty enterprize to which he was prompted by

his own ambition, or revenge. The state itself,
deflitute of union, either remained altogether inac-
tive, or if it attempted to make any effort, that
served only, to difcovet its impotence. The superior
genius of Charlemagne, it is true, united all these
disjointed and discordant members, and forming them
again into one body, refcored that degree of acivity
to government which diftinguiff his reign, and ren-
der the tranfations of it, objcts not only of atten-
tion but of admiration to more enlightened times.
But this tfate of union and vigour, not being natu-
ral to the feudal government, was of short duration.
Immediately upon his death, the spirit which animat-
ed and fuflained the vafi fyflem which he had efla-
blifhed, being withdrawn, it broke into pieces. All
the calamities which flow from anarchy and discord,
returning with additional force, afficed the different
kingdoms into which his Empire was split. From that
time to the eleventh century, a fucceflion of unintereft-
ing events; a series of wars, the motives as well as
the consequences of which were equally unimportant,
fill and deform the annals of all the nations in Eu-
rope.

The ital To these pernicious effeas of the feudal anarchy,
seas of may be added its fatal influence on the charaaer and
his Rt of improvement of the human mind. If men do not en-
¢cienccsu al Joy the protection of regular government, together
art with the certainty of personal security which naturally

flows from it, they never attempt to make progress
in science, nor aim at attaining refinement in taste,
or in manners. That period of turbulence, oppref-
sion, and rapine, which I have described, was ill suit-
ed to favour improvement in anyof these. In less
than a century after the barbarous nations fettled in
their new conquest, almof all the effe&s of the know-
ledge and civility which the Romans had spread through
Europe disappeared. Not only the arts of elegance
which minister to luxury, and are supported by it,
but many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were neglea-
ed or loft. Literature, science, tafle, were words
scarce in use during the ages we are contemplating;
or if they occur at any time, eminence in them is

ascribcd

ascribed to persons and producions so contemptible SECT. I.
that it appears their true import was little under- %'
flood. Perlons of the highest rank, and in the mot
eminent flationj; could not read or write. Many of
the clergy did not underfiand the breviary which they
were obliged daily to recite; some of them could
scarce read it [K]. All memory of pals tranfadions
was loft, or preserved in annals filled with trifling
events, or legendary tales. Even the codes of laws
published by the several nations which eflablifhed them-
selves in the different countries of Europe, fell into
disuse, while in their place, cufloms, vague and ca-
pricious, were substituted. The human mind, ne-
gleced, uncultivated, and depressed, funk into the mofl
profound ignorance. Europe did not produce, dur-
ing four centuries, one author who merits to be read,
either on account of the elegance of his comp6fi-
tion, or the justness and novelty of his sentiments.
There is scarce one invention useful or ornamental
to society of which that long period can boast.

EVEN the Chrifian religion, though its precepts Upon reli.

are delivered, and its inAtitutions are fixed in scrip- g&on.
ture with a precision which ihould have exempted
them from being misinterpreted or corrupted, dege-
nerated, during those ages of darkness, into an illibe-
ral superstition. The barbarous nations when con-
verted to Christianity changed the objec, not the
spirit, of their religious worship. They endeavoured
to conciliate the favour of the true God by means
not unlike to those which they had employed in
order to appease their false deities. Inflead of afpir-
ing to fanaity and virtue, which alone can render
men acceptable to the great author of order and of
excellence, they imagined that they satisfied every
obligation of duty by a scrupulous observance of ex--
ternal ceremonies [L]. Religion, according to their
conception of it, comprehended nothing else; and the
rites, by which they persuaded themlelves that they
could gain the favour of heaven, were of such a
nature as might have been expeted from the rude
ideas of the ages which deviscd and introduced them.
They were either so unmeaning as to be altogether
unworthy of the Being to whose honour they were

[K] NOTE X. L] NOTE XI.

B 4 con.

SzCT. T. consecratcd; or so absurd as to be a disgrace to rea-

!V on and humanity [M]. Charlemagne in France, and
;Alfred the Great in England, endeavoured to dispel
this darkness, and gave their fubjets a short glimpse
of light and knowledge. But the ignorance of the
age was too powerful for their efforts and inflitu-
tions. The darkness returned, and fettled over Eu-
rope more thick and heavy than formerly.

Upon the As the inhabitants of Europe, during these centu-
and virtue, ries, were firangers to the arts which embellish a po-
of the hu- lifhed age, they were destitute of the virtues which
man mind. abound among people who continue in a simple state.

Force of mind, a sense of personal dignity, gallantry
in enterprise, invincible per'everance in execution,
and contempt of danger and of death, are the clia-
racterific virtues of uncivilized nations. But these
are all the offspring of equality and independence,
both which the feudal inflitutions had deflroyed. The
spirit of domination corrupted the nobles; the yoke
of servitude depressed the people; the generous fen-
timents inspired by a sense of equality were extin-
guifhed, and nothing remained to be a check on fe-
rocity and violence. Human society is in its moit
corrupted Rate at that period when men have loft
their original independence and simplicity of manners,
but have not attained that degree of refinement which
introduces a sense of decorum and of propriety in con-
duct, as a restraint on those pafilons which lead to
heinous crimes, Accordingly, a greater number of
those atrocious actions which fill the mind of man
with astonishment and horror, occur in the history
of the centuries under review, than in that of any
period of the fame extent in the annals of Europe.
If we open the history of Gregory of Tours, or of
any contemporary author, we meet with a series of
deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so wild and
enormous as almost to exceed belief.

From the BUT, according to the obfcrvation of an elegant
beinning and profound historian['3, there is an ultimate point
enth cen- of dprefflion, as well as of exaltation, from which
tury go- human affairs naturally return in a contrary progrces,
dernmcnt and beyond which they seldom pass either in their
and matner
.b~,. to
mprowve. [M] NOTE X1I.

[a] MhUme History of England, rol. ii. p. 441.

advance-

advancement or decline. When defets, either in the SFCx. I.
form, or in the administration of government, occa- _ _V
sion fuich disorders in society as are excessive and in-
tolerable, it becomes the common interefi to discover
and to apply such remedies as will moil effecually
remove them. Slight inconveniencies may be long over-
looked or endured, but when abuses grow to a certain
pitch, the society muff go to ruin, or muff attempt to
reform them. The disorders in the feudal fyflem, to-
gether with the corruption of taste and manners confe-
quent upon these, which had gone on increasing during
a long course of years, seemed to have attained their
utmost point of excess towards the close of the eleventh
century. From that era, we may date the return of
government and manners in a contrary direction, and
can trace a succession of causes and events which con
tributed, some with a nearer and more powerful, others
with a more remote and less perceptible influence, to
abolish confusion and barbarism, and to introduce order,
regularity, and refinement.

IN pointing out and explaining these causes and Ncedlry

events, it is not necessary to observe the order of time to point out
with a chronological accuracy; it is of more impor- and, eents
tance to keep in view their mutual connection and de- which con-
pendence and to ihew how the operation of one watrdi tho
event, or of one cause, prepared the way for another, improve-
and augmented its influence. We have hitherto been mcnt.
contemplating the progress of that darkness which
spread over Europe from its first approach, to the
period of greatest obscuration; a more pleasant exercise
begins here, to observe the firlf dawnings of returning
light, to mark the various acceflions by which it gra-
dually increased and advanced towards the full fplcndor
of day.

I. THe Crusades, or expeditions in order to rescue The ten-

the Holy Land out of the hands of Infidels, fccm to th rY Of
be the firfi event that rouzed Europe from the lethargy lades to in.
in which it had been long funk, and that tendcd to in- ti"duce a
troduce any change in government, or in manners. Iover^ment
It is natural to the human mind to view those places andmmn-
which have been distinguished by being the rcfidencec "r"
of any illufRrious personage, or the fcenc of any
great tranfaaion, with some degree of delight and
veneration. From this principle flowed the super- The more
fiitious devotion with which Christians, from the ear- re, o therf

liefi eapeditioni

SECT. I. lied ages of the church, were accuflomed to visit that
L.IWY country which the Almighty had seleCted as the inheri-

tance of his favourite people, and in which the son of
God had accomplished the redemption of mankind. As
this distant pilgrimage could not be performed without
considerable expence, fatigue, and danger, it appeared
the more meritorious, and came to be confidered as
an expiation for almost every crime. An opinion
which spread with rapidity over Europe about the
close of the tenth and beginning of the eleventh cen-
tury, and which gained universal credit, wonderfully
augmented the number of these credulous pilgrims, and
encreafed the ardour with which they undertook this
useless voyage. The thousand years mentioned by St.
John [I were supposed to be accomplished, and the
end of the world to be at hand. A general confter-
nation seized mankind; many relinquished their pof-
fefions; and abandoning their friends and families, hur-
ried with precipitation to the Holy Land, where they
imagined that Chrifi would quickly appear to judge
the world l]. While Palestine continued subjea to
the Caliphs, they had encouraged the retort of pilgrims
to Jerusalem; and confidered this as a beneficial fpe-
cies of commerce, which brought into their dominions
gold and silver, and carried nothing out of them but
relicks and consecrated trinkets. But the Turks having
conquered Syria about the middle of the eleventh cen-
tury, pilgrims were exposed to outrages of every kind
from thele fierce barbarians. This change, happening
precis ly at the jundure when the panic terror which
I have mentioned rendered pilgrimages mos frequent,
filled Europe with alarm and indignation. Every per-
son who returned from Paletine related the dangers
which he had encountered, in visiting the holy city,
and dcfcribed with exaggeration the cruelty and vexa-
tions of the Turks.

'he immre- WVHEN tlce minds of men were thus prepared, the
diate occa- zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived the idea of
ir,nots leading nil ihe forces of Chrifendom against the in-
them. fidels, and of driving them out of the Holy Land

tl RIevel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
u] Chro.ic. Will. Goclli np. Bouquet Recueil des Hifloicen de

Fr4nce. tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abboni, ibid. p. 1tl. Chronic. S.
I'anrlecon;i ir E c.rd. Corp. Script. mcJii vi, vou. i. p. Ap. JA-
"ulan S.xtn. ibid. f/6.

by

by violence, was sufficient to give a beginning to that SECT. L
wild enterprize. Peter the hermit, for that was the /Y
name of this martial apostle, ran from province to
province with a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes
and people to this Holy war, and wherever he came
kindled the fame enthusiastic ardour for it with which
he himself was animated. The council of Placentia,
where upwards of thirty thousand persons were as-
fembled, pronounced the scheme to have been fug-
gefled by the immediate inspiration of heaven. In
the council of Clermont, fill more numerous, as soon
as the measure was proposed, all cried out with one
voice, " It is the will of God." Persons of all
ranks were smitten with the contagion; not only the
gallant nobles of that age, with their martial fol-
lowers, whom the boldness of a romantic enterprize
might have been apt to allure, but men in the more
humble and pacific flations of life; ecclefiaflics of
every order, and even women and children engaged
with emulation in an undertaking which was deemed
sacred and meritorious. If we may believe the con-
curring testimony of contemporary authors, fix mil-
lions of persons assumed the cross x], which was the
badge that distinguished such as devoted themfelvcwsto
this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the Princess Anna
Comnena, torn up from the foundation, seemed ready
to precipitate itself in one united body upon Asia [y.
Nor did the fumes of this enthusiastic 7.eal evaporate
at once: the frenzy was as lasting, as it was extra-
vagant. During two centuries, Europe seems to have
had no obje& but to recover, or keep pollefion of the
Holy Land, and through that period, vafi armies con-
tinued to march thither [N].

THE firfi efforts of valour animated by enthusiasm The (uccele

were irrefiflible; part of the lenser Asia, all Syria and of the Cm-
Palestine were wrested from the infidels, the banner of fa
the cross was displayed on Mount Sion; Conflantinople,
the capital of the Christian empire in the East, was
seized by a body of these adventurers, who had taken
arms againfi the Mahometans, and an Earl of Slanders,

[x] Fuchlerius Carnotenfu ap. Bongarfii Gest Dei per Francos, vol.

i. 317. edit. Han. 1611.

[y] Alcaiu. lib. a. Byz. fcrlpt vol.

*xi .
44. ,

£sj NOT'Eg :Lu.and

SECT. I. and his descendants, kept poffeflion of the Imperia

A _VY throne during half a century. But though the first

impression of the Crusaders was so unexpe&ed that
they made their conquests with great ease, they found
infinite difficulty in preserving them. Eftablifhmcnts
so diflant from Europe, surrounded by warlike nations,
animated with fanatical zeal scarce inferior to that of
the Crusaders themselves, were perpetually in danger
A. D. 191z. of being overturned. Before the expiration of the

thirteenth century, the Christians were driven out of
all their Asiatic poffeflions, in acquiring of which in-
credible numbers of men had perished, and immense
fums of money had been wafted. The only common
enterprize in which the European nations ever engaged,
and which all undertook with equal ardour, remains
a singular monument of human folly.

The benefi- BVT from these expeditions, extravagant as they
cial effes were, beneficial consequences followed, which had
of the Cru- neither been foreseen nor expeted. In their progress
manner.. towards the Holy Land, the followers of the cross

marched through countries better cultivated, and more
civilized than their own. Their firfi rendezvous
was commonly in Italy, in which Venice, Genoa,
Pisa, and other cities had begun to apply themselves
to commerce, and had made some advances towards
wealth as well as refinement. They embarked there,
and landing in Dalmatia, pursued their route by land
to Constantinople. Though the military spirit had been
long extinc in the eastern empire, and a despotism of
the worst species had annihilated almofR every public
virtue, yet Constantinople, having never felt the def-
trutive rage of the barbarous nations, was the greatest,
as well as the most beautiful city in Europe, and the
only one in which there remained any image of the
ancient elegance in manners, and arts. The naval
power of the eaflern Empire was considerable. Ma-
nufaturcs of the moit curious fabrick were carried
on in its dominions. Conflantinople was the only
mart in Europe for the commodities of the FaRl In-
dies. Although the Saracens and Turks had torn
from the Fmpire many of its richest provinces, and
had redlceud it within very narrow bounds, yet great
wtalAh flowed into the capital from these various lour-
c:, whirli not only cherished such a tafle for mag-
n.fictn:c, but kept alive such a reliih for the fcicnces

as

as appear considerable when compared with what was SECT. I.
known in other parts of Europe. Even in Asia, the v
Europeans who had assumed the cross found the re-
mains of the knowledge and "arts which the example
and encouragement of the Caliphs had diffused
through their empire. Although the attention of the
hitforians of the Crusades was fixed on other ob-
jects than the rtate of society and manners among the
nations which they invaded, although moit of them
had neither tafie nor discernment enough to describe
them, they relate, however, such signal aAs of hu-
manity and generosity in the condu& of Saladin as
well as some other leaders of the Mahometans, as
give us a very high idea of their manners. It was
not pofible for the Crusaders to travel through so
many countries, and to behold their various cufRoms
and inflitutions without acquiring information and im-
provement. Their views enlarged; their prejudices
wore off; new ideas crowded into their minds; and
they mufi have been sensible on many occasions of
the rusticity of their own manners when compared
with those of a more polished people. These impref-
sions were not so flight as to be effaced upon their
return to their native countries. A close intercourse
subsisted between the East and Weft during two cen-
turies; new armies were continually marching from
Europe to Asia, while former adventurers returned
home and imported many of the customs to which
they had been familia ized by a long residence abroad.
Accordingly, we discover, loon after the commence-
ment of the Crusades, greatr splendour in the courts
of Princes, greater pomp in public ceremonies, a more
refined taste in pleasure and amusements, together
with a more romantic spirit of enterprize spreading
gradually over Europe; and to thefl wiid expeditions,
the efftet of fuperltition or folly, we owe the first
gleams of light which tended to dilpel barbarity and
ignorance.

BuT these beneficial consequences of the Crusades Therin'u

took Place slowly; their influence upon the slate of fatcuflpro-
property, and consequently ot power, in the different prty.
kingdoms of Europe, was more immediate as well as
dliicclrible. The nobles who alfumed the cross, and
bound themselves to march to the Holy Land, soon
perceived that great lumls were ncccliary towards de-

fraying

Srcr. r. fraying the expences of such a dillant expedition,
N"V'- and enabling them to appear with suitable dignity at

the head of their vassals. But the genius of the feu-
dal system was averse to the imposition of extraordi-
nary taxes; and fubjets in that age were unaccuf-
tomed to' pay them. No expedient remained for
levying the fums requifiLe, but the sale of their pof-
feflions. As men were inflamed with romantic ex-
petations of the splendid conquefs which they hoped
to make in Asia, and possessed with such zeal for
recovering the Holy Land as swallowed up every
other pailion, they relinquished their ancient inheri-
tances without any relutance, and for prices far be-
low their value, that they might sally forth as ad-
venturers in quest of new settlements in unknown
countries. The Monarchs of the different kingdoms,
none of whom had engaged in the firfl Crusade,
eagerly seized this opportunity of annexing confide-
rable territories to their crowns at small expence [a].
Besides this, several great barons who perished in the
Holy war, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted
of course to their refpe&ive sovereigns, and by these
accessions of property as well as power taken from the
one scale and thrown into the other, the regal autho-
rity increased in proportion as that of the aritfocracy
declined. The absence, too, of many potent vassals,
accuflomcd to controul and give law to their fove-
reigns, afforded them an opportunity of extending their
prerogative, and of acquiring a degree of weight in
the constitution which they did not formerly possess.
To these circumstances, we may add, that as all who
aflumed the cross, were taken under the immediate
protedcion of the church, and its heaviest anathemas
were denounced againil such as should disquiet or an-
noy thoec who had devoted themselves to this service;
the private quarrels and hostilities which banished tran-
quillitv from a feudal kingdom were suspended or ex-
tinguifhed; a more general and steady adminifiration of
justice began to be introduced, and some advances were
made towards the eflablifment of regular government
in the several kingdoms of Europe [b] [0].

] Willelm. Malmlb. uilbert Abbas. up. Bongarf. vol. i. 481.
db] Du Cange iloffar. voc. Crucc fignatti, tiuiL Abbl: ap. Bon-
[.rr. vol. i. 480, 482.

[O] NOT'E XIV.

THE

THE commercial effees of the Crusades were not SECT. I.

less considerable than those which I have already men- 'v"%
tioned. The first armies under the standard of the Their ccm-

merclal cf-

cross which Peter the hermit and Godfrey of Bouil- fa e
Ion led through Germany and Hungary to Conftan-
tinople, suffered so much by the length of the march,
as well as the fierceness of the barbarous people who
inhabited those countries, that it deterred others from
taking the fame route; so that rather than encoun-
ter so many dangers, they chose to go by sea. Venice,
Genoa, and Pisa furnished the transports on which
they embarked. The fum which these cities receiv-
ed merely for freight from such numerous armies
was immense [d]. This, however, was but a small
part of what they gained by the expeditions to
the Holy Land; the Crusaders contraced with them,
for military stores and provisions; their fleets kept on
the coast as the army advanced by land; and supply-
ing them with whatever was wanting, engrossed all
the profits of that lucrative branch of commerce.
The success which attended the arms of the Crufa-
ders was productive of advantages still more permanent.
There are charters yet extant, containing grants to
the Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese of the most ex-
tensive immunities in the several settlements which the
Christians made in Asia. All the commodities which
they imported or exported are thereby exempted from
every imposition; the property of entire suburbs in
some of the maritime towns, and of large fireets and
houles in others, is vested in them; and all questions
arising among persons fettled within their precincts, or
who traded under their protection, are appointed to be
tried by their own laws and by judges of their own ap-
pointment [e]. When the Crusaders seized Conflanti-
nopic, and placed one of their own number on the Im-
perial throne, the Italian Rfates were likewise gainers
by that event. The Venetians who had planned the
enterprizc,and took a confidcrable part in carrying it into
execution, did not neglect to secure to themselves the
chief advantages redounding from its success. They
made themfelvcs maiters of part of the ancient Pele-
ponnefus in Greece, together with some of the moR
fertile islands in the Archipelago. Many valuable

[d] Muratori Anti4uit. Itaic, mcdii Wvi, vol. ii. 905.
eC Murat. ibiJ. go0, &c.

branches

SECT. I. branches of the commerce, which formerly centered in

V Conflantinople, were transferred to Venice, Genoa or

Pisa. Thus a fucceflion of events occasioned by the
Holy war, opened various sources, from which wealth
flowed in such abundance into these cities [f], as ena-
bled them, -in concurrence with another inflitution
which shall be immediately mentioned, to secure their
own liberty and independence.

The efta- II. THE inflitution to which I alluded was the
blifbment offorming of cities into communities, corporations, or
tis favour- bodies politick, and granting them the privilege of mu-
able to go-nicipal jurifdi&ion, which contributed more, perhaps,
ernmcnt than any other cause, to introduce regular govern-
a·d order. · . . ,

ment, police and arts, and to diffuse them over Eu-
rope. The feudal government had degenerated into a
fyflem of oppression. The usurpations of the nobles
were become unbounded and intolerable: they had re-
duced the great body of the people into a tfate of
aaual servitude: the condition of those dignified with
the name of freemen, was often little preferable to
that of the other. Nor was such oppreflion the por-
tion of those alone who dwelt in the country, and
were employed in cultivating the estate of their maf-

The ancient ter. The cities and villages held of some great lord,
fta O c' on whom they depended for protetion, and were no

less fubje& to his arbitrary jurifdi&ion. The inhabi-
tants were deprived of the natural, and most unalien-
able rights of humanity. They could not dispose of
the effecs which their own induitry had acquired,
either by a latter will, or by any deed executed dur-
ing their lifc[g]. They had no right to appoint guar-
dians for their children, during their minority. They
were not permitted to marry without purchasing the
content of the Lord on whom they depended [h]. If
once they had commenced a law suit, they durst not ter-
minate it by an accommodation, because that would
have deprived the lord in whose court they pleaded, of
the pcrquifites due to him on palling fentencc[i]. Ser-
vices of various kinds, no less disgraceful than opprcf-

[f] Villchardouin hil. deContant. fous 1'Empreur Francois, los, &c.
[(] Dacbclii piteleg. tuom xi. 374, 375. edit. in 4to. Ordonancce

deo Kois de France, tom iii. o04. No. z. 6.

[hi Ordonanccs dcs olou e krance, tom. i. p 12. tom. iii. 203.

Nu. i. Murat. Anti. ltu. vol. iv. p. -o. Dachcr. Spicci. vol. xi.
31s. 14'.
[Ij Ucbchr. Spiccl. wol, is. IS;.

five

five were exated from them without mercy or mode- SECT. I.
ration. The spirit of indufiry was choaked in some

r r

cities by absurd regulations, and in others by unreason-
able exactions: nor would the narrow and oppreflive
maxims of a military aristocracy have permitted it ever
to rife to any degree of height or vigour [k].

BUT as soon as the cities of Italy began to turn Te free-

their attention towards commerce, and to conceive dom of c;-
some idea of the advantages which they might derive ties sird -
fiom it, they became impatient to shake off the yoke Italy.
of their insolent lords, and to efiablifh among them-
selves such a free and equal government as would ren-
der property secure, and induflry flourishing. The
German Emperors, especially thole of the Franconian
and Suabian lines, as the feat of their government was
far distant from Italy, poffefted a feeble and imperfet
jurifdi&ion in that country. Their perpetual quarrels
either with the Popes or with their own turbulent vas-
fals diverted their attention from the interior police of
Italy, and gave conRtant employment to their arms.
These circumfiances encouraged the inhabitants of some
of the Italian cities, towards the beginning of the ele-
venth century, to assume new privileges, to unite to-
gether more closely, and to form themselves into bodies
politick, governed by laws established by common con-
fentil]. The rights, which many cities acquired by
bold or fortunate usurpations, others purchased from
the Emperors, who deemed themselves gainers when
they received large fums for immunities which they were
no longer able to withhold; and some cities obtained
them gratuitouly from the generosity or facility of the
Princes on whom they depended. The great increase
of wealth which the Crusades brought into Italy, oc-
cafioned a new kind of fermentation and a&ivity in
the minds of the people, and excited such a general
pasion for liberty and independence, that before the
conclusion of the laR Crusade all the considerable cities
in that country had either purchased or had extorted
large immunities from the Emperors [P].

I[k M. 'Abbe Mably obervat. fur 'hist dc France, tom. ii. p. a,

96.
[1] Murat. antiquit. Ial. vol. iv. p. 5.

[P] NOTE XV.
VOL. I. C THIz

SzeCT. I. THIS innovation was not long known in Italy before

_V" it made its way into France. Louis the Gross, in

Is introdu- order to create some power that might counterbalance
eed into
rance and thole potent vassals who controlled, or gave law to
intoot-cr the crow.rf, firfl adopted the plan of conferring new
countries of ·

·

Europe privileges on the towns situatcd within his own do-
A. D. Io11 maine. These privileges w-ere called cbarters of com-

1-37. nunitv, by which he entranchifed the inhabitants, abo-

lifhed all marks of servitude, and formed them into
corporatious or bodies politick, t- be governed by a
council and magiltrates of their own nomination.
These magifrates had the right of adminitlring jus-
tice within their own precincts, of levying taxes, of
embodying and training to arms the militia of the
town, which took the field when required by the
sovereign, under the command of officers appointed by
the community. The great barons imitated the ex-
ample of their monarch, and granted like immunities
to the towns within their territories. They had waft-
ed such great fums in their expeditions to the Holy
Land, that they were eager to lay hold on this new
expedient for raifirg money, by the sale of these char-
ters of liberty. Though the institution of communi-
ties was as repugant to their maxims of policy, as it
was adverse to their power, they disregarded remote
consequences, in order to obtain present relief. In
lcfs than two centuries servitude was abolished in most
of the towns in France, and they became free cor-
porations, inflcad of dependant villages without jurif-
diation or privileges [Q1. Much about the fame
period, !Ih great cities in Cermany began to acquire
like immunities, and laid the foundation of their prc-
sent liberty and independence [R]. The praAice spread
quickly over Furope, and was adopted in Germany,
Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other feudal
kingdoms [S].

Its harpy THE good eftcots of this new inflitution were im-

ci'ts uionn mcdiaeclv t lt, and its influet;ce on goverrment as

the conalti . ,

u

on of the well as manners was no Icfs ex;cnfive than salutary.
inhabitantr A great bod) of the p,' ple was rclcafid from fervi-

tude, and from all the arbitrary and grievous impofi-
[Q] NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII. [S N-sTE XVIII.

tions

tions to which that wretched condition had fubijeed SECT. I.
them. Towns, upon acquiring the right of commu- ~ Y"
nity, became so many little republicks, governed by
known and equal laws; and liberty was deemed such
an essential and charactcriflic part in their conlitu-
tion, that if any slave took refuge in one of ther,
and resided there during a year without being claim-
ed, he was inflantly declared a freeman, and admitted
as a member of the community [q].

As one part of the people owed their liberty to Upon the
rte crccion of communities, another was indebted to power of

She nobility;

them for their fccurity. Such had been the slate of
Furope during fcveral centuries, that fclf-prefervation
obliged every man to court the patronage of rome
powerful baron, and in times of danger his caffle
was the place to which all resorted for safety. But
towns surrounded with walls, whose inhabitants were
regularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, as
well as by the most solemn engagements, reciprocally
to defend each other, afforded a more commodious
and secure retreat. The nobles began to be confi-
dered as of lets importance, when they ceased to be
the sole guardians to whom the people could look up
for protection against violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution of their Upon the

credit and power by the privileges granted to the ci- power of
ties, the crown acquired an increafc of both. Asthecrown;
there were no regular troops kept on foot in any of
the feudal kingdoms, the Monarch could bring no
army into the field but what was composed of fol-
diers furnished by the crown-vaffals, always jealous of
the regal authority, and often in rebellion against it;
nor had he any funds for carrying on the publick ser-
vice, but such as they granted him with a very spar-
ing hand. But when the members of communities were
permitted to bear arms, and were trained to the use
of these, this in some degree supplied the first defect,
and gave the crown the command of a body of men
independent of its great vafflls. The attachment of
the cities to their fovcrcigns, whom they refpecded
as the first authors of their liberties, and whom they

[q] Starut. Humberti Pellojoci. Da.her. Spied. vcl. ix. iSz, tS5.
Charta Comic. Forenf. ibid. al3.

C 2 were

SECT. I. were obliged to court as the protcEors of their im-
%VVYV munities against the domineering spirit of the nobles,

contributed somewhat towards removing the fccond
evil, as it frequently engaged them to grant the
crown such supplies of money as added new force to
government [r].

Upon the THE acquisition of liberty made such a happy
increase of change in the condition of all the members of com-
indunry. munities, as routed them from that flupidity and inac-

tion into which they had been funk by the wretch-
ednefs of their former state. The spirit of induftly
revived. Commerce became an objec of attention,
and began to flourifl. Population increased. Inde-
pendence was eflablifhed; and wealth flowed into
cities which had long been the feat of poverty and
oppreflion. Wealth was accompanied by its usual
attendants, oflentation and luxury; and though the
former was inelegant and cumbersome, and the latter
indelicate, they led gradually to greater refinement
in manners, and in the habits of lte. Together with
this improvement in manners, a more regular species
of government and police was introduced. As cities
grew to be more populous, and the occasions of in-
tercourfe among men increased, flatutes and regula-
tions multiplied of course, and all became sensible that
their common safety depended on observing them with
cxatncfs, and on punishing luch as violated them,
with promptitude and rigour. Laws and fubordina-
tion, as well as polished manners, took their rife in
cities, and diffused themselves insensibly through the
reft of the society.

Th inhabi- III. THE inhabitants of cities having obtained per-
tms of ci- fonal freedom and municipal jurifdioion, soon acquir-
ties acqire ed civil liberty and political power. It was a fun-
powr as damental principle in the feudal fyflcm of policy, that
members of no freeman could be governed or taxed unlets bh his
the confli-
rut,.o. own consent. In conicnuence of this, the vafials of

every baron were called to his court, in which they
cflablifhed by mutual consent such regulations as they
deemed molt beneficial to their fniall tlcictv, and
granted their filperior such supplies of money as were
proportionable to their abilities, or to his wants. The
[r] Ordoa, des Roi de France, tom, i. o60, 785. tom. ii. 318,

barons

barons themselves, conformably to the fame maxim, SECT. J.
were admitted into the fuprcme affemb!y of the na- b
tion, and concurred with the Sovereign in enacing
laws, or in imposing taxes. As the superior lord, ac-
cording to the original plan of feudal policy, retain-
ed the dirct property of those lands which he grant-
ed, in temporary poffeflion, to his vassals, the law,
even after fiefs became hereditary, still supposed this
original prattice to subsist, and a baron continued to
be confidered as the guardian of all who resided with-
in his territories. The great council of each nation,
whether diflinguifhed by the name of a parliament,
a diet, the Cortes, or the flates general, was corn-
posed entirely of such barons and dignified ecclkfiaf-
ticks, as held immediatelv of the crown. Towns,
whether situated within the royal domaine, or on the
lands of a subject, depended for protection on the
lord of whom they held. They had no kgal name,
no political existence, which could entitle them to be
admitted into the legislative assembly, or could give
them any authority there. But as soon as they were
enfranchised, and formed into Bodies Corporate, they
became legal and independent members of the confli-
tution, and acquired all the rights essential to free-
men. Amongst these, the moss valuable, was the pri-
vilege of a decisive voice in enacing laws, and in
granting subsidies. It was natural for cities, accuf-
tomed to a form of municipal government, according
to which no regulation could be eflablifhcd, and no
money could be raised without their own consent, to
claim this privilege. The wealth, the power and con-
fideration which they acquired on recovering their
liberty added weight to their claim; and favourable
events happened, or fortunate conjunctures occurred
in the different kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated
or forwarded their obtaining poffeflion of this impor-
tant right. In England, one of the firtl countries in
which the representatives of boroughs were admitted
into the great council of the nation, the barons who
took arms againfl Henry III. summoned them to at- A. D. z:s.
tend parliament in order to add greater popularity to
their party, and to firengthen the barrier against the en-
croachmcnts of regal power. In France, Philip the
Fair, a Monarch no less sagacious than enterprising,
confidered them as infrllments which might be em-

C 3 ployed

SSeT. I. ployed with equal advantage to extend the royal pre-
'V`%Y rogative, to counterbalance the exorbitant power of the

nobles, and to facilitate the imposition of new taxes.
With there views, he introduced the deputies of futh
towns as were form-d into communities into the flates
general of the nation [s. In the Empire, the wealth
and immunities of the Imperial cities placed them on a
level with the moil considerable mcrr.bces of tl;e Ger-
D. 1293. manic body. Cornfcious of their ov0n power and dig-

nity, they pretended to the privilegt ot' forming a fcpa-
rate bench in the diet; and made rood their pretcn-
sion it].

The happy BUT in what way soever the representatives of cities
cf Op.n firfi gained a place in the legiflalure, that event had
th,' upon

,enm- great influence on the form and genius of governmein.
micnt. It tempered the rigour of ariftocratical oppicllion, with

a proper mixture of popular liberty: It lecured to the
gr-at bod; of the people, who had formerly no repre-
feiiative:, active and powerful guardians of their rights
and pr.vileg,-s: It eftabllhcd an intermediate power be-
tw. n the King and nobles, to which each had recourse
alternatelv, and which at some times opposed the ufur-
pations of the former, on other occasions checked the
encroachments of the latter. As soon as the reprefcnta-
tives of communities gained any degree of credit and in-
fluence in the legislature, the spirit of laws became dif-
ferent from what it had formerly been; it flowed from
new principles; it was direed towards new objets;
equality, order, the publick good, and the redress of
grievances, were phrases and ideas brought into use, and
which grew to be familiar in the ltatutes and jurifpru-
dence of the European nations. Almoit all the eflorts
in favour of liberty in every country of Europe have
been made by this new power in the legislature. In pro-
portion as it rose to consideration and influence, the fe-
vcrity of the ariftocratical spirit decreased ; and the pri-
vileges of the people became gradually more extenfivc
as the ancient and exorbitant jurifdi&ion of the nublcs
was abridged [T].

The people IV. 'THE inhabitants of towns having been declared
a cqUrly - fibee by the chartels of communities, that part of the
franchilc- people which resided in the country, and was cmployed
:ncat.

rh] PaIquicr Recherches dc la France, p. Si. edit. Par. 1633.
[t, PIcff.! Abrnc dc I'hiltoire & drolt J'AUlm;tnju,i, p. 408, 451.

[1'2 NoUI .XIilx.

in

in agriculture, began to recover liberty by enfranchife-SECT. I,
ment. During the rigi ur of feudal government, as IY
hath been already observed, the great body of the lower
people was reduced to servitude. They were slaves fix-
ed to the foil which they cultivated, and together with
it were transferred from one proprietor to another, by
sale, or by conveyance. The spirit of feudal policy did
not favour the enfranchiftment of that order of men.
It was an eflablifhed maxim tl at no va.ssal could legally
diminish the value of a fief, to the detriment of the
lord from whom he had received it. In consequence
of this, manumnifion by the authori:vof the immediate
master was not valid; and unlels it vas confirmt' by
the superior lord of whom he held, slaves of this fpe-
cies did not acquire a compleat right to their liberty.
Thus it became necefiTry to alccnd through all the gra-
dations of feudal holding to the King, the Lord Para-
mount tx]. A form of procedure so tedious and trouble-
some difcouragced the pracice of maqumifion. Do-
mesic or personal slaves often obtained liberty from the
humanity or beneficence of their maftcrs, to whom they
belonged in absolute property. The condition of slaves
fixed to the foil was much more unalterable.

BUT the freedom and independence which one part The mo-
of the people had obtained by the inflitution of corn- ives nd

?rogrcf of

munities, inspired the other witl the moln ardent desire thijrf
of acquiring the fame privileges; and their superiors,
sensible of the benefits which they thcmfclves had de-
rived from former concefsons, were lets unwilling to
gratify them by the grant of new immunities. The
enfranchisement of slaves became more frequent; and
the Monarchs of France prompted by necellity, no less
than by their inclination to reduce the power of the
nobles, endeavoured to render it general. Louis X. A.D. s3 ,
and his brother Philip illued ordinances, declaring, and i3i1.'
' That as all men were by nature ireeborn, and as their
kingdom was called the kingdom of Franks, they deter-
mined that it should be so in reality as well as in name;
therefore they appointed that enfiranclillments should he
granted throughout the whole kingdom, upon just and
reasonable conditions Ey]." T'hcfc edi&s were carried
into immediate execution within the royal domaine.

[x] Etablilfement de St. Louis, liv. ii. ch. 34. Ordon. tom. i. a83.

not. (a).
[y] Ordoa wm. i. p. 583, 653.

C 4 The

SEcr. I. The example of their fovereigRs, together with the ex-
! -V0 pecation of the considerable fums which they might

raise by this expedient, led many of the nobles to set
their dependants at liberty; and servitude was gradually
abolished in almofi every province of the kingdom [U].
In Italy, the eflablifhment of republican government
in their great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were extremely different from those of the feudal po-
licy, together with the ideas of equality which the pro-
grefs of commerce had rendered familiar, gradually in-
troduced the pracice of enfranchising the ancient pre-
dial slaves. In some provinces of Germany, the per-
sons who had been subjec' to this species of bondage,
were released; in others, the rigour of their slate was
mitigated. In England, as the spirit of liberty gained
ground, the very name and idea of personal servitude,
without any formal interposition of the legifature to
prohibit it, was totally banishcd.

The hffspn THE effe&s of such a remarkable change in the con-
the im- dition of so great a part of the people, could not fail of
pronment being considerable and extensive. The husbandman,
of fity. mafler of his own indufiry, and secure of reaping for

himself the fruits of his labour, became the farmer of
the fame fields where he had formerly been compelled
to toil for the benefit of another. The odious names
of master and of slave, the most mortifying and depref-
sing of all difiin&ions to human nature, were abolished.
New profpe&s opened, and new incitements to ingenui-
ty and enterprize presented themselves, to those who
were emancipated. The expetation of bettering their
fortune, as well as that of raising themselves to a more
honourable condition, concurred in calling forth their
activity and genius; and a numerous clafsof men, who
formerly had no political existence, and were employed
merely as instruments of labour, became useful citizens,
and contributed towards augmenting the force or riches
of the fociet-, which adopted them as members.

The intro- V. THE various expedients which were employed
dution of a in order to introduce a more regular, equal, and vigo-
njor rgu- *
Ihr .niani- rous adminifration of jufRice, contributed greatly to-
tration of wards the improvement of society. What was the par-
jitt'. con- ticular mode of dispensing jufRice in the several barba-
theimprove- ruuo ,iaLions Whicll over-ran the Roman lmpire, and
mcnt of l&-
Crfty. [tI' NOTE .:X,

took

took poffeflion of its different provinces, cannot now SECT. I.
be determined with certainty. We may conclude from %sVuI
the form of government established among them, as well
as from their ideas concerning the nature of society, that
the authority of the magiitrate was extremely limited,
and the independence of individuals proportionably great.
liftory and records, as far as they reach back, jiltify
this conclusion, and represent the ideas and exercise of
justice in all the countries of Europe, as little different
from those which must take place in a state of nature.
To maintain the order and tranquillity of society by the
regular execution of known laws; to inflit vengeance
on crimes deftru&ive of the peace and fafe4y of indivi-
duals, by a prosecution carried on in the name, and by
the authority of the community ; to confider the punish-
ment of criminals as a public example to deter others
from violating the laws; were objecs of government
little understood in theory, and less regarded in practice.
The magistrate could scarce be said to hold the sword of
justice; it was left in the hands of private persons. Re-
fentment was almofi the sole motive for prosecuting
crimes; and to gratify that passion, was the end and
rule in punishing them. He who suffered the wrong,
was the only person who had a right to pursue the ag-
greffor, and to exa& or to remit the punishment. From
a system of judicial procedure, so crude and defective
as seems to be scarce compatible with the subsistence of
civil society, disorder and anarchy flowed. Superstition
concurred with this ignorance concerning the nature of
government, in obftru&ing the administration of juflice,
or in rendering it capricious and unequal. To provide
remedies for these evils, so as to give a more regular
course to jultice, was, during several centuries, one
great objec of political wisdom. The regulations for
this purpose, may be reduced to three general heads: to
explain thele, and to point out the manner in which
they operated is an important article in the hiflory of
society among the nations of Europe.

I. TH firfl considerable flep towards eflablifhing This elret.
an equal adminiflration of juflice, was the abolilhment d ly abo-

-·hing the

of the right which individuals claimed of waging war pratice f
with each other, in tc;tr own name, .nnd by their own private war.
authority. To repel Injuaies, and to revenge wrongs,
is no less natural to man than to cultivate friend-

ship;

SECT. I. ship; and while society remains in its moi simple slate,

the former is confidered as a personal right no less un-

argifni alienable than the latter. Nor do men in this situation
corncrning deem that they have a title to rcdrefs their own wrongs
justice. alone; they are touched with the injuries of those

with whom they are connected, or in whose honour
theybare iniercfled; and are no less prompt to avenge
them. The savage, how imperfecly soever he may
comprehend the principles of political union, feels
warmly the sentiments of social affecion, and the ob-
ligations arising from the ties of blood. On the ap-
pearance of an injury or affront offered to his family
or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pursues the authors
of it with the keenefd resentment. He confiders it as
cowardly to expect redress from any arm but his own,
and as infamous to give up to another the right of
determining what reparation he should accept, or with

lhat engcance he should reft satisfied.

There lead THE maxims and practice of all uncivilized nations,
t, the prac- with respect to the prosecution and punishment of of-
ticc of pri. fenders, particularly those of the ancient Germans, and

other Barbarians who invaded the Roman empire, are
perfecly conformable to these ideas [a]. While they re-
tained their native simplicity of manners, and continued
to be divided into small tribes or societies, the defets
in this imperfet fyfiem of criminal jurisprudence (if it
merits that name) were less sensibly felt. When they
came to fettle in the extensive provinces which they had
conquered, and to form themselves into great monar-
chies; when new obje&s of ambition presenting them-
filcs, increased both the number and the violence of
their diffTntions, they ought to have adopted new max-
ims concerning the redress of injuries, and to have re-
gulated by general and equal laws, that which they
formerly left to be dire&ed by the caprice of private
paflion. Eut fierce and haughty chieftains, accustom-
ed to avenge themselves on such as had injured them,
did not think of rclinquifhing a right which they con-
fidered as a privilege of their order, and a mark of their
independence. Laws enforced by the authority of
Princes and Magifirates who possessed little power,
commanded no great degree of reverence. The ad-
[a] Tacit. dc Mor. Gcrman. cap. a2. Veil. Pat'rc. lib. ii. c.

mininfration

miniitration of jutfice among rude illiterate people, was SECT. I.
noL so accurate or decisive, or uniform, as to induce 'V
nien to submit implicitly to its determinations. Every
ofiended baron buckled on his armour, and lought re-
c!rcfs at the head of his vassals. His adversary met lfim
in like hollile array. Neither of them appealed to im-
potent laws which could afford them no protccion.
Neither of them would submit points, in which their
pafilons were warmly interefled, to the flow detcrmi-
nation of a judicial enquiry. Both trufled to their
swords for the decision of the contefi. The kindred
and dependants of the aggressor, as well as of the de-
fender, were involved in the quarrel. They had not
even the liberty of remaining neutral. Such as refused
to aE in concert with the party to which the), bLlong-
ed, were not only exposed to infamy, but tubjeded to
legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn and Theperni-

afflided, during several centuries, by intestine wars, ex- c' si
cited by private animofities, and carried on with all the
rage natural to men of fierce manners, and of violent
pallions. The eflate of every baron was a kind of in-
dependent territory, disjoined from those around it,
and the hostilities between them were perpetual. The
evil became Io inveterate and deep-rooted, that the
form and laws of private war were ascertained, and re-
gulations concerning it made a part in the system of
jurisprudence [b], in the fame manner as if this pra-tice
had been founded in some natural right of humanity,
or in the original conflitution of civil lociety.

So great was the disorder, and fu.zh the calamitiesvaio umc.

which these perpetual hostilities occasioned, that vari- thod em-
ous efforts were made to wrest from the nobles this ti dYecd
pernicious privilege which they claimed. It was the bolifhit
-interest of every sovereign to abolish a praicice which
almost annihilated his authority. Charlemagne prohi-
bited it by an express law, as an invention of the devil to
destroy the order and happiness of lociety [c]; but the
reign of one Monarch, however vigorous and adive,
was too short to extirpate a custom o firmly efiablifh-
ed. Inftcad of enforcing this prohibition, lis feeble

tb] Baclmumoir Couftumce de Bcauvoifu, ch. 59, ct Iks notes Jd
Thaumaflicre, p. 447.
t[e CapituL A.P. 80l. .Edit. Blluz. L i. ". 371.

fuccef;ors

SECT. I. successors durfl venture on nothing more than to apply

Y palliatives. They declared it unlawful for any person

to commence war, until he had sent a formal defiance
to the kindred and dependants of his adversary; they
ordained that, after the commiflion of the trespass or
crime which gave rife to a private war, forty days mutl
elapse befdre the person injured should attack the vas-
fals of his adversary; they enjoined all persons to sus-
pend their private animofities, and te cease from hofti-
lities when the king was engaged in any war againfi
the enemies of the nation. The church co-operated
with the civil magistrate, and interposed its authority
in order to extirpate a pracice so repugnant to the
spirit of Christianity. Various councils issued decrees,
prohibiting all private wars; and denounced the hea-
vieft anathemas againfi such as should diflurb the tran-
quillity of society, by claiming or exercising that bar-
barous right. The aid of religion was called in to com-
bat and subdue the ferocity of the times. The Al-
mighty was said to have manifefled, by visions and re-
velations to different persons, his disapprobation of that
spirit of revenge, which armed one part of his creatures
againfi the other. Men were required, in the name
of God, to (heath their swords, and to remember the
sacred ties which united them as Chriflians, and as
members of the fame society. But this juncion of
civil and ecclesiastic authority, though firengthened by
every thing most apt to alarm and to overawe the
credulous spirit of those ages, produced no other es-
ie& than some temporary suspensions of hoililities, and
a cessation from war on certain days and seasons con-
fecrated to the more solemn a&s of devotion. The
nobles continued to aftert this dangerous privilege;
they refused to obey some of the laws calculated to
annul or circumscribe it; they eluded others; they pe-
titioned; they remonfirated; they firuggled for the
right of private war as the highest and, mos honour-
able difRin&ion of their order. Even so late as the
fourteenth century, we find the nobles in several pro-
vinces of France contending for their ancient method
of terminating their differences by the sword, in prese-
rence to that of submitting them to the decision of
any judge. The final abolition of this pracice in that
kingdom, and the other countries in which it prevail-
ed, is 'ot to be ascribed so much to the force of fla-

tutce

tutes and decrees, as to the gradual increase of the Sz.T. I.
royal authority, and to the imperceptible progress of AY_
juster sentiments concerning government, order, and
public security [X].

2. THE prohibition of the form of trial by judicial The prohi-

combat, was another considerable ftep towards the in- bitionoftri-
troduCion of such regular government as secured pub- al cyba't,
lick order and private tranquillity. As the right of pri- another im.
vate war left many of the quarrels among individuals to proverment
be decided, like those between nations, by arms; the nftration of
form of trial by judicial combat, which was established juticc.
in every country of Europe, banished equity from courts
of justice, and rendered chance or force the arbiter of
their determinations. In civilized nations, all tranlac-
tions of any importance are concluded in writing. The
exhibition of the deed or instrument is full evidence of
the fa&, and ascertains with precision what each party
has stipulated to perform. But among a rude people, Defies in
when the arts of reading and writing were such uncom- the judicial
mon attainments, that to be a mafler of either, intitled of the rnd-
a person to the appellation of a clerk or learned man, di ages.
scarce any thing was committed to writing but treaties
between Princes, their grants and charters to their sub-
jets, or such tranfations between private parties as
were of extraordinary consequence, or had an exten-
five effe&. The greater part of affairs in common life
and business were carried on by verbal contraEts or pro-
mises: This, in many civil questions, not only made it
difficult to bring proof sufficient to eftablilh any claim,
but encouraged falsehood and fraud, by rendering them
extremely easy. Even in criminal cafes, where a par-
ticular sac mull be ascertained, or an accu ation be
disproved, the nature and effect of legal evidence was
little underflood by barbarous nations. To define with
accuracy that species of evidence which a court had
reason to exped; to determine when it ought to infifl
on positive proof, and when it should be satisficd with
a proof from circumfiances; to compare the teflimony
of discordant witneft's; and to fix the degree of credit
due to each; were dilcuffions too intricate and subtile
for the jurilprudence of igl.orant ages. In order to
avoid encumbering tl!tmrtlvcs with theft, a more

[X] NOTE XCxI.

simple

SECT. I. simple form of procedure was introduced into court3
LdVow_ as well civil as criminal. In all cafes, where the noto-

riety of the sac did not furnish the clcarefi and most
direc evidence, the person accused, or he against whom
an ation was brought, was called legally, or offered vo-
luntarily to purge himself by oath; and upon his de-
claring his innocence, he was instantly acquitted Eel.
This absurd pracice effectually screened guilt and fraud
from detetion or punishment, by rendering the tempta-
tion to perjury so powerful, that it was not easy to re-
fill it. The pernicious effecs of it were sensibly felt;
and in order to guard against them, the laws ordained
that oaths should be administered with great solemnity,
and accompanied with every circumstance which could
inspire religious reverence, or superstitious terror If].
This, however, proved a feeble remedy: these cere-
monious rites became familiar, and their impreflion on
the imagination gradually diminished; men who could
venture to disregard truth, were not apt to startle at
the folemnities of an oath. Their observation of this,
put legiftators upon devising a new expedient for ren-
dering the purgation by oath more certain and fatisfac-
tory. They required the person accused to appear with
a certain number of freemen, his neighbours or rela-
tions, who corroborated the oath which he took, by
swearing that they believed all that he had uttered to be
true. These were called Compurgators, and their num-
ber varied according to the importance of the subjea in
dispute, or the nature of the crime with which a per-
son was charged [g]. In some cafes, the concurrence of
no less than three hundred of these auxiliary witnesses
was requisite to acquit the person accused [h]. But
even this device was found to be ineffectual. It was a
point of honour with every man in Europe, during fc-
vcral ages, not to desert the chief on whom he depend-
ed, and to flard by those with whom the ties of blood
connected him. Whoever then was bold enough to

[e] L'g. Burfund. Tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. ?9. Leg. Baiwar.
Tit. 8 5. 1. &c.

Js] Du Cange GloT.r. voc. Juramentum, vol. iii. . 1607. Edit. Be-

ne ift.

f[] Du (ange, ihid vl . ii. p. e199.
[li Srelman Gloflar. voc. Allath. Grrgor. Tltron. Hli. lib.
viij. C. 9.

violate

violate the laws, was sure of devoted adherents, will- SECT. I.
ing to abet, and eager to serve him in whatever man-
ner he required. The formality of calling Compur-
gators, proved an apparent, not a real security, againfl
falsehood and perjury; and the sentences of courts,
while they continued to refer every point in question to
the oath of the defendant, became so flagrantly iniqui-
tous as excited universal indignation againfl this method
of procedure Ci].

SENSIBLE of these defe&s, but strangers to the man- There in-

troduced

ner of correcting them, or of introducing a more pro- the pratice
per form, our ancestors, as an infallible method of dif- of appealing
covering truth, and of guarding against deception, ap- to hc.veL
pealed to Heaven, and referred every point in dispute
to be determined, as they imagined, by the decisions
of unerring wisdom and impartial juflice. The person
accused, in order to prove his innocerce, submitted,
in some cafes, to trial, by plunging his arm in boiling
water; by lifting a red hot iron with his naked hand;
by walking bare-foot over burning plough-shares; or
by other experiments equally perilous and formidable.
On other occasions, he challenged his accuser to fight
him in single combat. All these various forms of trial bPyjuicil
were conducted with many devout ceremonies; the mi- combat.
nifters of religion were employed, the Almighty was
called upon to interpose for the manifestation of guilt,
and for the protection of innocence; and whoever
escaped unhurt, or came off vicorious, was pronoun-
ced to be acquitted by the Judgment of Gad [k].

AMONG all the whimsical and absurd institutions he intro-

which owe their existence to the weakness of human duion of
reason, this, which submitted queflions that affected this praaice

favoured by

the property, the reputation, and the lives of men, to the uperfti-
the determination of chance, or of bodily fircngth and tion of the
address, appears to be the mofi extravagant and prepof- middale a
terous. There were circumstances, however, which
led the nations of Europe to confider this equivocal
mode of deciding any point in contest, as a direct ap-
peal to heaven, and a certain method of discovering its
will. As men are unable to comprehend the manner
in which the Almighty carries on the government of

ril Leg. La. gnbard. lib. ii. tit. 5.. § 4.
[k] Mlurat. Diiertratio dc judicil D i. Antiquit. Italic. vol. iii.
b 61t:..

the

Srcr. I. the unlverfe, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they
%y_-v^^ are apt to ima.rine that in every cafe which their pal-

sions or intcreft render important in their own eyes,
the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to display his
power, in vindicating innocence and punishing vice. It
requires no inconsiderable degree of science and philo-
sophy to corrcd this popular error. But the lentiments
prevalent in Europe during the dark ages, inflead of
correcting, fsrengthened it. Religion, for several cen-
turies, confidcd chiefly in believing the legendary his-
tory of those faints whose names crowd and disgrace the
Romish calendar. The fabulous tales concerning their
miracles, had been declared authentic by the bulls of
Popes, and the decrees of councils; they made the great
subjed of the infirudions which the clergy offered to
the people, and were received by them with implicit
credulity and admiration. By these, men were accuf-
tomed to believe that the etlablifhed laws of nature
might be violated on the mofi frivolous occasions, and
were taught to look rather for particular and extraordi-
nary acs of power under the divine adminifiration, than
to contemplate the regular progress and execution of a
general plan. One fuperflition prepared the way for
another; and whoever believed that the Supreme Being
had interposed miraculously on those trivial occasions
mentioned in legends, could not but expea his interven-
tion in matters of greater importance, when solemnly
rcirred to his decision.

an! like- rWTH this fuperititious opinion, the martial spirit
wife by of Europe, during the middle ages, concurred in es-
·ine. tablilhing the mode of trial by judicial combat. To

be ready to maintain with his Iword whatever his lips
had uttered, was the first maxim of honour with every
gentleman. To aftert their own rights by force of
arms, to inflic vengeance on those who had injured
or affronted them, were the diftindion and pride of
high-lpirited nobles. The form of trial by combat co-
inciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified these
passions. l'very man was the guardian of his own ho-
nour, and of his own life; the jutlice of his cause, as
well as his future reputation, depended on his own
courage and prowess. This mode of decision was con-
fidered, accordingly, as one of the happierf efforts of
wile policy; and as loon as it was introduced, all the

forms

forms of trial by fire or water, and other superstitious SECT. 1.
experiments, fell into disuse, or were employed only in V 'Y
controversies between persons of inferior rank. The
trial by combat was authoriled over all Europe, and re-
ceived in every country with equal fatisfation. Not
only queflions concerning uncertain or contested fa&s,
but general and abftrad points in law were determined
by the issue of a combat; and the latter was deemed a
method of dilcovtring truth more liberal as well as
more fatisfacorv, than that by examination and argu-
ment. Not only might parties, whose minds were ex-
alperatcd by the cagernefs and the hoflility of oppofi-
tion, defy their antagonist, and require him to make
good his charge, or to prove his innocence, with his
Iword; but witnesses, who had no interefl in the issue of
the queflion, though called to declare the truth by laws
which ought to have afforded them protection, were
equally exposed to the danger of a challenge, and e-
qually bound to assert the veracity of their evidence by
dint of arms. To complete the absurdities of this mili-
tary jurisprudence, even the characer of a judge was
not sacred from its violence. Any one of the parties
might interrupt a judge when about to deliver his opi-
nion; might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in
the most reproachful terms, and throwing down his
gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his integrity in
the field; nor could he, without infamy, refuse to ac-
cept the defiance, or decline to enter the lifts againfl
such an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other abu- t becomes

fes, spread gradually, and extended to all persons and univcrl-l.
almotl to all cafes. Ecclesiastics, women, minors, fu-
perannuated and infirm persons, who could not with
decency or jultice be compelled to take arms, and to
maintain their own cause, were obliged to produce
champions, whom they engaged by affetion, or rewards,
to fight their battles. The lolemnities of a judicial
combat were such as were natural in an acion, which
was confidered both as a formal appeal to God, and
as the final decision of questions of the highest mo-
ment. Every circumstance relating to them, was regu-
lated by the edics of Princes, and explained in the
comments of lawyers, with a minute and even super-
fititious accuracy. Skill in thefc laws and rites was the

VOL. I. D only

SEcr. r. only science of which warlike nobles boafled, or which
IVJ they were ambitious to attain [1].
The pcmi- BY this barbarous custom the natural course of pre-
cious cffc ceeding, both in civil and criminal queflions, was en-

tirely perverted. Force usurped the place of equity in
courts of judicature, and juflice was banished from her
proper mansion. Discernment, learning, integrity,
were qualities less necessary to a judge than bodily
flrength, and dexterity in the use of arms. Daring cou-
rage, and superior vigour or address, were of more mo-
ment towards securing the favourable issue of a suit,
than the equity of a cause, or the clearness of the
evidence. Men, of course, applied themselves to cul-
tivate the talents which they found to be of greatefi
utility. As flrength of body and address in arms were
no less requisite in those lifts which they were obliged to
enter in defence of their private rights, than in the
field of battle, where they met the enemies of their
country, it became the great objea of education, as
well as the chief employment in life, to acquire these
martial accomplifiments. The adminiitration of jus-
tice, instead of accustoming men to liften to the voice
of equity, or to reverence the decisions of law, added
to the ferocity of their manners, and taught them to
confider force as the great arbiter of right and wrong.

Varionus ex- THESE pernicious effects of the trial by combat were
teblnits so obvious, that they did not altogether escape the view
for abolilh-
ing this of the unobfcrving age in which it was introduced. The
praaice. clergy, from the beginning, remonfirated againfi it as

repugnant to the spirit of Christianity, and subversive
of juflice and order [m]. But the maxims and paflions
which favoured it, had taken iuch hold of the minds
of men, that they disregarded admonitions and censures,
which, on other occasions, would have struck them with
terror. The evil was too great and invcttrate to yield
to that remedy, and continuing to cnireat( , the civil
power at length found it neccffary to intcrp, e. Con-
fcious, however, of their own limited auth. rny, mo-
narchs proceeded with caution, and ih ir fir t attempt
to restrain, or to set any bounds to this pradticc, were
extremely feeble. One of the earlieflt rfiridions of

[1] See a curious diCrourre concerning the laws of judhial combat,

by l'humas of Wooditock, Duke of Cloucefter, uncle to Richard 11.
in Spelman' Glollar. voc. Campus.
[m] Du Cman Gclofau. voc. Duclium, vol. ii. p. 1675.

this

this pratice which occurs in the hiitory of Europe, is SECT. I.
that of Henry I. of England. It extended no farther iV_
than to prohibit the trial by combat in questions con-
cerning property of small value [n]. Louis VII. of
France imitated his example, and issued an edic to the
fame effet [o]. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legislator,
were far superior to those of his age, endeavoured to in-
troduce a more perse& jurisprudence, and to substitute
the trial by evidence, in place of that by combat. But
his regulations, with refped to this, were confined to
his own domains; for the great vassals of the crown,
possessed such independent authority, and were so fondly
attached to the ancient pracice, that he durit not
venture to extend it to the whole kingdom. Some
barons voluntarily adopted his regulations. The spirit
of courts of juflice became averse to the mode of deci-
sion by combat, and discouraged it on every occasion.
The nobles, nevertheless, thought it so honourable to
depend for the security of their lives and fortunes on
their own courage alone, and contended with so much
vehemence for the preservation of this favourite privi-
lege of their order, that the successors of St. Louis,
unable to oppose, and afraid of offending such power-
ful fubjeas, were obliged not only to tolerate, but to
Authorise the pracice which he had attempted to abo-

fli [P]. In other countries of Europe, efforts equally
zealous were employed to maintain the established cuf-
tom; and similar conceflions were extorted from their
refpetive sovereigns. It continued, however, to be an
obje& of policy with every monarch of abilities or vi-
gour, to explode the trial by combat; and various edits
were issued for this purpose. But the observation which
was made concerning the right of private war, is equal-
ly applicable to the mode of trial under review: No
custom, how absurd soever it may be, if it has fubfilled
long, or derives its force from the manners and preju-
dices of the age in which it prevails, was ever abolish-
ed by the bare promulgation of laws and flatutes. The
sentiments of the people muff change, or some new
power sufficient to counteract it mud be introduced.
Such a change, accordingly, took place in Europe, as
science gradually increased, and society advanced towards

[in] BrafTei Ufge des Fie&, sol. ii. . g61. [o] Ordon. tom. i.
p. 6, t[p] Ordon. tom. i. p. 3ai, 3Uo 435.

L) a more

Secr. I. more perfet order. In proportion as the prerogative
%IVu. of Princes extended, and came to acquire new force, a

power, interested in suppressing every practice favoura-
ble to the.independence of the nobles, was introduced.
The firuggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several centu-
ries; sometimes the new regulations and ideas kemed
to gain ground; Sometimes ancient habits recurred; and
though, upon the whole, the trial by combat went more
and more into difufc, yet inflanccs of it occur, as late
as the sixteenth century, in the hiltory both of France
and of England. In proportion as it declined, the re-
gular administration of juflice was restored, the pro-
ceedings of courts were direEted by known laws, the
fludy of these became an objec of attention to judges,
and the people of Europe advanced fafi towards civi-
lity, when this great cause of the ferocity of their
manners was removed [Y].

The privi- 3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from the
Iegeofap- courts of the Barons to those of the Kinz, and sub-
from the jeaing the decisions of the former to the review of the
courts of latter, a new ftep, not less considerable than there which
the barons, I have already mentioned, was taken towards eflablifh-
great im- ing the regular, confilent, and vigorous admirifilia n
provement of juflice. Among all the encroachments of the feudal
in the admi .
nitrationof nobles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their
justice. usurping the adminiffration of juflice with 'fuprcme

authority, both in civil and criminal caules, within the
precincs of their own eflates, was the rr.of singular.
In other nations, fubjeafs have contended with their
Princes, and have endeavour d to extend their ovwn
power and privileges; but in the hiflorv of their
firugglcs and prctenfions, we dlcover nothing fmilar
to this right which the feudal barons claimed, and ac-

Origin of quired. It must have been !omething pcculiar in their
the lupremc genius and manners that figg flled this idea, and
pcndent prompted them to insist on such a claim. Among the
jurll.Jhton rude people who conquered the various provinces (r tihe
o ity. Roman Empire, and eflab!ifhed new kingplms the Ic,

the pallion of resentment, too impetuous to bear controul,
was permitted to remain almoll unieflrain(d b, thl au-
thority of la s. The perion offended, as I as been ct-
fclvcd, retained not only the It:ht of prof. uting but
of punishing hib advcitf.ry. lol.im it bclci,:cl to ii.flct

[Y] ';OTE XXII.

such

such vengeance as satiated his rage, or to accept of SECT. I.
such fatisfaEtion as appeared it. But while fierce barba- _ _Y`
rians continued to be the sole judges in their own cause,
their enmities were implacable and immortal; they set
no bounds either to the degree of their vengeance, or
to the duration of their resentment. The excesses
which this occasioned, proved so deflru&ive of peace
and order in society, as forced them to think of some
renedy. At firfi, arbiters interposed, and by persuasion
or intreatv prevailed on the party offended to accept of
a fine or composition from the aggressor, and to drop
all farther pro'ecution. But as fubmiflion to persons
who had no legal or magisterial authority, was alto-
gether voluntary, it became necessary to establish judges
with power sufficient to enforce their own decisions.
The leader whom they were accuflomed to follow and
to obey, whose courage they relpe&ed, and in whose
integrity they placed confidence, was the person to
whom a martial people naturally committed this im-
portant prerogative. Every chieftain was the com-
mander of his tribe in war, and their judge in peace.
Every baron led his vassals to the field, and administer-
ed juflice to them in his hall. Their high-fpirited de-
pendants would not have recognized any other authority,
or have submitted to any other jurifdi&ion. But in
times of turbulence and violence, the exercise of this
new fun&ion was attended not only with trouble, but
with danger. No person could alTume the characer of
a judge, if he did not possess power sufficient to prote&
the one party from the violence of private revenge,
and to compel the other to accept of such reparation as
he enjoined. In consideration of the extraordinary es-
forts which this office required, judges, besides the fine
which they appointed to be paid as a compensation to
the person or family who had been injured, levied an
additional fum as a recompense for their own labour;
and in all the feudal kingdoms the latter was as pre-
cifcly ascertained, and as regularly exa&cd, as the for-
mer.

THUS, by the natural operation of circumfiances pc- The extent
culiar to the manners or political slate of the feudal and bad es-

fee's of chit

nations, separate and territorial jurifdicions came not privilege.
only to be eflablifhed in every kingdom, but were
citabliihcd in such a way, that the intercft of the barons

D 3 con-

SECT. I. concurred with their ambition in maintaining and ex"

'y^v- tending them. It was not merely a point of honour

with the feudal nobles to dispense justice to their vas-
fals; but from the exercise of that power arose one
capital branch of their revenue; and the emoluments of
their courts were frequently the main support of their
dignity. It was with infinite zeal that they asserted and
defended this high privilege of their order. By this in-
ftitution, however, every kingdom in Europe was split
into as many separate principalities as it contained power-
ful barons. Their vassals, whether in peace or in war,
were scarce sensible of any authority, but that of their
superior lord. They felt themselves fubje& to no other
command. They were amenable to no otherjurifdiaion.
The ties which linked together these smaller confede-
racies became close and firm; the bonds of public union
relaxed, or were dissolved. The nobles trained their in-
vention in devising regulations that tended to ascertain
and perpetuate this diftintion. In order to guard against
any appearance of fitbordination in their courts to those
of the crown, they confirained their monarchs to pro-
hibit the royal judges from entering their territories, or
from claiming any jurifdiaion there; and if, either
through mifRake, or from the spirit of encroachment, any
royal judge ventured to extend his authority to the vas-
£als of a baron, they might plead their right of exemp-
tion, and the lord, of whom they held, could not only
rescue them out of his hands, but was entitled to legal
reparation for the injury and affront offered to him.
The jurifdi&ion of the royal judges scarce reached be-
ond the narrow limits of the King's demesnes. In-
ead of a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledg-
ing the authority of the fame general laws, and looking
up to these as the guides of their decisions, there
were in every feudal kingdom a thousand independent
tribunals, the proceedings of which were dirt (ed by local
cufloms and contraditory forms. 'he collision of jurif-
diaion between these numerous courts, often retarded the
execution of juflice: The vtriety and caprice of their
modes of procedure must have for ever kept the admini-
firation of it from attaining any degree of uniformity or
perfection.

Fxpedient, ALL the monarchs of Europe perceived these en.
ernmoyed in croachments on their jurifdition, and bore them with
limit or impaticnce. But the usurpations of the nobles were To
abolil it. firmly

firmly eflablilhed, and the danger of endeavouring to SECT. I.
overturn them by open force was so manifeff, that they A _'*
were obliged to remain satisfied with attempts to under-
mille them. Various expedients were employed for this
purpose; each of which merit attention, as they mark
the progress of law and equity in the several kingdoms
of Europe. At sirs, Princes endeavoured to circumscribe
the jurifdition of the barons, by permitting them to take
cognizance only of smaller offences, reserving those of
greater moment, under the appellation of Pleas of the
i aown, and Royal Causes, to be tried in the King's
courts. This affected only the barons of inferior note;
the more powerful nobles scorned such a diflintion,
and not only claimed unlimited jurifdi&tion, but obliged
their sovereigns to grant them charters, conveying or
recognizing this privilege in the mofi ample form. The
aitempt, nevertheless, was produtive of rome good con-
sequences, and paved the way for more. It turned the
attention of men towards a jurifdiEtion dilfin& from that
of the baron whose vassals they were; it accuflomed them
to the pretensions of fiperiority which the crown claim-
ed over territorial judges; and taught them, when op-
prefled by their own superior lord, to look up to their
sovereign as their protecor. This facilitated the intro-
duacion of appeals, by which Princes brought the deci-
sions of the baron's courts under the review of the
royal judges. While trial by combat subsisted in full
vigour, no point decided according to that mode, could
be brought under the review of another court. It had
been referred to the judgment of God; the issue of bat-
tle had declared his will; and it would have been im-
pious to have called in question the equity of the divine
decision. But as soon as that barbarous cullom began to
fall into disuse, Princes encouraged the vasals of the
barons to sue for redress, by appealing to the royal courts.
The progress, however, of this pra:tice, was flow and
gradual. The first instances of appeals were on account
of the delay, or the refiufal ofjuflice in the baron's court;
and as these were countenanced by the ideas of fobordina-
tion in the feudal confitution, the nobles allowed them
to be introduced without much opposition. But when
there were followed by appeals on account of the injuf-
ri.e or iniquity es the fnttnet, the nobles then began to
be sensible, that if this innovation became general, the
lhadow of power alone would remain in their hands, and

D 4 all

SECT. I. all real authority and jurifdi&ion would centre in thbfe

_^^h courts which possessed the right of review. They il-

flantly took the alarm, remonitrated against the encroach-
mea.t, and contended boldly for their ancient privileges.
But the monarchs in the diffeient kingdoms of Europe
pursued their plan with fleadinefs and prudence. Thougil
forced to suspend their operations, on some occafiins,
and seemingly to yield when any formidable confederacy
of their vassals united againlt them, they relumed their
measures, as soon as they observed the nobles to be re-
miss or feeble, and pushed them with vigour. They ap-
pointed the royal courts, which originally were ambula-
tory, and irregular with refpea to their times of meeting,
to be held in a fixed place, and at flared fcafons. They
were solicitous to name judges of more diftnguifhed abi-
lities than such as presided in the courts of the barons.
They added dignity to their character, and splendor to
their aflemblies. They laboured to render their forms
regular, and their decrees consistent. Such judicatories
became, of course, the objets of public confidence as
well as veneration. The people, relinquilhing the par-
tial tribunals of their lords, were eager to bring every
fubje& of contest under the more equal and discerning eye
of those whom their sovereign had chosen to give judg-
ment in his name. Thus Kings became once more the
heads of the community, and the dispensers of justice to
their fubjeas. The barons, in some kingdoms, ceased to
exercise their right of jurifdiEtion, because it funk into
contempt; in others, it was circumscribed by such regu-
lations as rendered it innocent, or it was entirely abolish-
ed by expre(s flatutes. Thus the adminifiration of jus-
tice, taking its rife from one source, and following one
direcion, held its course in every tfate with more unifor-
mity, and with greater force [Z]J.

The regu- VI. THE forms and maxims of the canon law, which
laions of were become universally refpe&able from their authority
the canon
law pro- in the spiritual courts, contributed not a little towards
mote a -these improvements in jurisprudence which I have enume-
set,,. rated. If the canon law be conlidered politically, either
iftration. as a fyfiem framed on purpose to assist the clergy in usurp-

ing powers and jurifdi&ion no less repugnant to the nature
of their function, than inconfifient with the order of
government; or as the chief instrument in eftablifling the
dominion of the Popes which {hook the throne, and en-

[ZJ NOTE XXIII.

dangered

dangered the liberties of every kingdom in Europe, weSEcT. I.
must pronounce it one of the moss formidable engines vY
ever formed against the happiness of civil iociety. But
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws respecting
the rights and property of individuals, and attend only
to the civil effects of its decisions concerning these, we
muff view it in a different, and a much more favourable
light. In ages of ignorance and credulity, the minitiers The pro-
of religion are the objecs of fuperflitioui veneration. grei of ecc
When the barbarians who over-ran the Empire fiu 1 em- clfpaftioan.
braced the Chritfian faith, they found the clergy in pof-
fcffion of considerable power; and they naturally trans-
ferred to these new guides the profound fubmniffion and
reverence which they were accustomed to yield to the
priefis of that religion which they had forsaken. They
deemed their persons to be as sacred as their funtion;
and would hlue confidered it as impious to subje&t them
to the profane jurisdiction of the laity. The clergy
were not blind to the advantages which the weakness of
mankind afforded them. They established courts in
which every question relating to their own chara&er,
their funtion, or their property, was tried. They
pleaded, and obtained an almost total exemption from
the authority of civil judges. Upon different pretexts,
and by a multiplicity of artifices, they communicated
this privilege to so many persons, and extended their
jurifdiEtion to such a variety of cafes, that the greater
part of those affairs which gave rile to contefi and liti-
gation, was drawn under the cognizance of the spiritual
courts.

BUT in order to dispose the laity to fitffer there The plan of

usurpations without murmuring or opposition, it was eccelcdilti-
necefiary to convince them, that the adminiflration of Cpl jrlnc
juflice would be rendered more perfet by the eflablifl- m( re per-
ment of this new jurifdidcon. This was not a difficuit fLst than

that in the

undertaking, at the period when the clergy carried on civil couta
their encroachments with the greatefi success. That
scanty portion of fciencc which served to guide men in
the ages of darknu;ls, was wholly cngroffed by the clergy.
They alone were accultomed to read, to enquire, and
to reason. Whatever knowledge of ancient jurifpru-
dence had been preserved, either by tradition, or in such
books as had escaped the deflruJlve rage of barbarians,
was possessed only by them. Upon the maxims of
that excellent fyftcm, they founded a code of laws con-

lonant

SECT. I. sonant to the great princirles of equity. Being diret-

V ed by fixtd and knou n rules, the forms of their courts

werc ascertaincd, and their decisions became uniform
and consisten!. Nor did they want authority fufliclent
to enforce their fenrt nces. Lxcommunication and other
ccclcfiafiical cenjures, were puniinm(nts more tormida-
blc than an vthat civil judges could inflict in lupport
of their decrees.

The good IT is not furprifi!ig, then, that ecclifiaflical jurif-
ereits of
cmi.ogf pru'lnce should become such an cb jct of admirat on

im.tatmg R.

and dop- and respect ; that exemption from civil jurildicion
ing it. was courted as a privilege, and conferred as a reward. It

is not flrpriling, that even to rude people, the maxims
of the canon law should appear more equal and just
than that il;-digefted jurisprudence which dircaed all
proceedings in the civil courts. According to the lat-
ter, the differences between contending. barons were
terminattd, as in a l'ate of nature, by the sword; ac-
cording to the former, every mattcr was fubjeclcd to
the decision of laws. The one, by permitting judicial
combats, left chance and force to be arbiters of right
or wrong, of truth or falfhood; the other, passed
judgment with refpet to these by the maximsof equity,
and the testimony of wirneffes. Any error or iniquity
in a sentence pronounced by a baron to whom feudal
juirifdiaion belonged, was irremediable, because origi-
nally it was fubje& to the review of no superior tribu-
nal; the ecclesiastical law established a regular grada-
tion of courts, through all which a cause might be car-
ried b) a;?pcal, until it was determined by that autho-
rity which was held to be supreme in the church. Thus
the genius and principles of the canon law prepared men
for approving thefc three great alterations in the feudal
jurisprudence which I have mentioned. But it was not
with refpc to these points alone that the canon law
fuggefled improvements beneficial to focicty. Many of
the regulations, now deemed the barriers of personal
security, or the safe-guards of private property, are
contrary to the spirit, and repugnant to the maxims of
the civil jurisprudence, known in Europe during icveral
centuries, and were borrowed from the rules and prac.
tice of the ecclesiastical courts. By observing the
wisdom and equity of the decisions in there courts,
men began to perceive the neceflity either of detert-

ing

ing the martial tribunals of the barons, or of attempt- SECT. I.
ing to reform them [AA]. -_ l

VII. THE revival of the knowledge and ftidv of ' he re'ival

' rof tl e Ro-

the Roman law, co-operated with the causes whith If m, lOw
haive mentioned, in introducing more just and liberal coitti!,utes
ideas concerning the nature of government, a.d th, i res olral
administration of justice. Among the calamities which ccrni,, jinf-
the devaflations of the barbarians who broke in upon ticc and
the Empire brought upon mankind, one of the grtatcft order.
was their overturning the system of Roman jurifpru-
dence, the noblkf monument of the wisdom of that
great people, formed to subdue and to govern the world.
The laws and regulations of a civilized communit, The cir-
were altogether repugnant to the manners and ideas of (umftances
these fierce invaders. They had refpea to objets, of frGtm hich
which a rude people had no conception; and were law fell into
adapted to a slate of society with which they were n-,°bivion-
tirely unacquainted. For this reason, wherever they
fettled, the Roman jurisprudence soon funk into olli-
vion, and lay buried for some centuries under the load
of those inititutions which the inhabitants of Europe
dignified with the name of laws. But towards the mid-
dle of the twelfth century, a copy of Juflinian's Pan-
de&s was accidentally difcoveied in Italy. B) that time, Circumftan-
the state of society was so far advanced, and the ideas ces which

favoured the

of men so much enlarged and improved by the occur- reviyalofit.
rences of several centuries, during which they had con-
tinued in political union, that they were firuck with ad-
miration of a system which their anceflors could not
comprehend. Though they had no, hitherto attained
such a degree of refinement, as to catch from the an-
cients a relish for true philosophy, or Ipeculative Icience;
though they were till insensible to the beauty and ele-
gance of claflical composition; they were lufficiently
qualfied to judge with refpe& to the merit of their
system of laws, in which all the points most inierefling to
mankind, and the chief obje&s of their attention in
every age, were fettled with difcerrment, precision and
equity. All men of letters fludied this new science with
eagerners; and within a few years after the difcovcr) of
the Pande&s, professors of civil law were appointed, who
taught it publickly in molt countries of Europe.

THE effets of having luch a perlea model to itudv The cfr-(ts
and to imitate were soon manifefi. Men, as loon as fchis upon

as e fie,. of
[AAJ] NOT XU1V. men.dna jhe

the dfpcniitio
ty of justice.

SrCT. I. they were acquainted with fixed and general laws, per.
vY^ ceived the advantage of them, and became impatient to

ascertain the principles and forms by which judges should
regulate their decisions. Such was the ardour with
which they carried on an undertaking of so great irn-
portance to focicty, that before the close of the twelfth
century, the feudal law was reduced into a regular sys-
tem; the code of canon-law was enlarged and metho-
dized; and the loose uncertain customs of different
provinces or kingdoms, were collected and arranged with
an order and accuracy acquired from the knowledge of
Roman jurifprudencc. In some countries of Europe
the Roman law was adopted as subsidiary to their own
municipal law; and all cafes to which the latter did
zot extend, were decided according to the principles of
the former. In others, the maxims as well as forms
of Roman jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with
the laws of the country, and had a powerful, though
lels sensible, influence, in improving and perfecting them
[BB].

From all THESE various improvements in the system of jurif-
thdi aroe prudence, and adminitfration of justice, occasioned a
a diftinfion
in proffi- change in manners of great importance, and of exten-
,m*. five effec. They gave rife to a diftintion of profef-

sions; they obliged men to cultivate different talents,
and to aim at different accomplishments, in order to
qualify themselves for the various departments and func-
tions which became necessary in society [r]. Among un-
civiliztd nations, there is but one profession honourable,
that of arms. All the ingenuity and vigour of the hu-
man mind are exerted in acquiring military skill, or ad-
dress. The funtions of peace are few and simple;
and require no particular course of education or fludy,
as a preparation for discharging them. This was the
ilate of PEurope during several centuries. Every gentle-
man, born a Ibldier, lcorned any other occupation; he
mas taught no Icicnce but that of war; even his ex-
ercifcs and pafimes were feats of martial prowess. Nor
did the judicial character, which persons of noble birth
were alone cntitled to assume, demand any degree of
knowledge beyond that which such untutored boldiers
poffcfTed. To rtcollect a few traditionary cufloms

[BB] NOTE XXV.

[r] Dr. rTrgufon's Lfiay on the history of Civil Society, parte iv.
IeCt. i.

which

which time had confirmed, and rendered refpetable; SECT. I.
to mark out the lifts of battle with due formality; to Vy
observe the issue of the combat; and to pronounce
whether it had been conducted according to the laws
of arms; included every thing that a baron, who ated
as a judge, found it necefiary to understand.

BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were fix- The effcl

ed, when the rules of decision were committed to writ- of this oa
ing, and collected into a body, law became a science, fociey.
the knowledge of which required a regular course of
study, together with long attention to the pradice of
courts. Martial and illiterate nobles, had neither lei-
sure nor inclination to undertake a talk so laborious, as
well as so foreign from all the occupations which they
deemed entertaining, or suitable to their rank. They
gradually relinquished their places in courts of justice,'
where their ignorance exposed them to contempt. They
became weary of attending to the discussion of cafes,
which grew too intricate for them to comprehend. Not
only the judicial determination of points which were
the subjec of controversy, but the conduc of all legal
business and tranfaaions was committed to persons train-
ed by previous itudy and application to the knowledge
of law. An order of men to whom their fellow-citizens
had daily recourse for advice, and to whom they looked
up for decision in their most important concerns, natu-
rally acquired consideration and influence in focietv.
They were advanced to honours which had been con-
fidered as the peculiar rewards of military virtue. They.
were entrufled with offices of the highest dignity, and
most extensive power. Thus, another profeflion than
that of arms, came to be introduced among the laity,
and was reputed honourable. The functions of civil life
were attended to. The talents requisite for discharging
them were cultivated. A new road was opened to
wealth and eminence. The arts and virtues of peace
were placed in their proper rank, and received their due
recompense [CC].

VIII. WHILe improvements so important with re- The Cp t

fpet to the slate of focictv, and the adminilfration i f of rh;vairy
juflice, gradually made progress in Europe, lcntiment.s introduc
more liberal and generous had begun to animate the lcntirmens,
nobles. Tlihle were inspired by the spirit of Chivalry, and mo.e
which, though confidered, commonly, as a wild infti- gmanne,.

[CC] NOTE XXVI.

tution,

SECT. I. tution, the effe& of caprice and the source of extrava.

_"EVL gance, arose naturally from the slate of society at that

period, and had a very serious influence in refining the

rigin of manners of the European nations. The feudal slate
chivalry, was a slate of perpetual war, rapine, and anarchy;

during which the v.eak and unarmed were exposed
every moment to insults or injuries. The power of the
sovereign was too limited to prevent these wrongs; and
the adminifsration of juiRice too feeble to redress them.
There was scarce any proteaion against violence and
oppression, but what the valour and generosity of pri-
vate persons afforded. The fame spirit of enterprize
which had prompted so many gentlemen to take arms
in defence of the opprefied pilgrims in Palefline, incited
others to declare themselves the patrons and avengers of
injured innocence at home. When the final reducion
of the Holy Land under the dominion of Infidels put
an end to these foreign expeditions, the latter was the
only employment left for the activity and courage of ad-
venturers. To check the insolence of overgrown op-
pressors; to succour the difireffed; to rescue the helpless
from captivity; to protec, or to avenge women, or-
phans, and ecclesiastics, who could not bear arms in
their own defence; to redress wrongs and to remove
grievances; were deemed a&s of the highest prowefis
and merit. Valour, humanity, courtesy, juflice, ho-
nour, were the chara&eriftick qualities of chivalry.
To these were added religion, which mingled itself with
every paflion and institution during the middle ages, and
by infusing a large proportion of enthufiaflic zeal, gave
them such force, as carried them to romantic excess.
Men were trained to knighthood by a long previous
discipline; they were admitted into the order by folem-
nities no less devout than pompous; every person of
noble birth courted that honour; it was deemed a dif-
tintion superior to royalty; and monarchs were proud
to receive it from the hands of private gentlemen.

Its benefici- THIS singular institution, in which valour, gallantry,
al ctlcas. and religion, were To firangely blended, was wonderfully

adapted to the taste and genius of martial nobles; and
its effects were soon visible in their manners. War
was carried on with less ferocity, when humanity came
to be deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than
courage. More gentle and polished manners were in-
troduced, whpe courtesy was recommended as the moil

amiable

amiable of knightly virtues. Violence and opprei-: . ~

. I.

decreared, when it was reckoned meritorious to check G'y¥
and to puniti them. A scrupulous adherence to truth,
with the most religious attention to fulfill every engage-
ment, became the diitinguifhing charaaeriftic of a gen-
tleman, because chivalry was regarded as the school of
honour, and inculcated the moil delicate sensibility with
refpet to that point. The admiration of these quali-
ties, together with the high ditfinoions and preroga-
tives conferred on knighthood in every part of Europe,
inspired persons of noble birth on some occasions with a
species of military fanaticism, and led them to extrava-
gant enterprizes. But they imprinted deeply in their
minds the principles of generosity and honour. These
were strengthened by every thing that can effect the
senses, or touch the heart. The wild exploits of those
romantic knights who sallied forth in quest of adven-
tures, are well known, and have been treated with pro-
per ridicule. The political and permanent effects of the
spirit of chivalry have been less observed. Perhaps,
the humanity which accompanies all the operations of
war, the refinements of gallantry, and the point of ho-
nour, the three chief circumstances which distinguish
modern from ancient manners, may be ascribed in a
great measure to this whimsical institution, seemingly
of little benefit to mankind. The sentiments which
chivalry inspired, had a wonderful influence on manners
and condua, during the twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth,
and fifteenth centuries. They were so deeply rooted,
that they continued to operate after the vigour and
reputation of the inflitution itself began to decline.
Some considerable transactions, recorded in the following
history, refemrble the adventurous exploits of chivalry,
rather than the well regulated operations of found
policy. Some of the motl eminent personages, whose
characters will be delineated, were strongly tinctured
with this romantic spirit. Francis I. was ambitious to
diltinguifh himfclf by all the qualities of an accomplished
knight, and endeavoured to imitate the enterprising ge-
nius of chivalry in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy
during peace. The fame which he acquired by these
splendid actions, so far dazzled his more temperate rival,
that he departed on some occasions from his usual pru-
dence and moderation, and emulated Francis in deeds of
prowess, or of gallantry [DI)].

[DD] NOTE XXVIL.

IX.

SECT. T. IX. THE progress of science and the cultivation
^V" of literature, had considerable effet in changing the
The pro- manners of the European nations, and introducing
grefs of si-
ence has that civility and refinement by which they are now dif-
great influ- tinguifhed. At the time when their Empire was over-
cncc on the turned, the Romans, though they had loft that corret
mannt's ailld.
charaatcrsof taste which has rendered the productions of their ancef-
men. tors the flandards of excellence, and models for imitation

to succeeding ages, still preserved their love of letters,

Ignoranc- and cultivated the ar:s with great ardour. But rude bar-
ot the mid-
dle ages. barians were so far from being firuck with any admiration

of these unknown accompliihments, that they despised
them, They were not arrived at that slate of society,
in which those faculties of the human mind, that have
beauty and elegance for their objects, begin to unfold
themselves. They were firangers to all those wants and
desires which are the parents of ingenious invention;
and as they did not comprehend either the merit or uti-
lity of the Roman arts, they destroyed the monuments of
them, with indufiry not inferior to that with which their
posterity have since fludied to preserve or to recover
them. The convulsions occasioned by their settlement
in the Empire; the frequent as well as violent revolu-
tions in every kingdom which they eflablifhed; toge-
ther with the interior defecs in the form of government
which they introduced, banished security and leisure;
prevented the growth of taflc, or the culture of science ;
and kept Europe, during several centuries, in that state
of ignorance which has been already described. But the
events and institution, which I have enumerated, produ-
ced great altera ions in society. As soon as their opera-
tion, in restoring liberty and independence to one part
of the community, began to be felt ; as soon as they
began to communicate to all the members of society Come
taste of the advantages arising from commerce, from
public order, and from personal security, the human mind
became conscious of powers which it did not formerly
perceive, and fond of occupations or pursuits of which
it was formerly incapable. Towards the beginning
of the twelfth century, we discern the firfl symptoms
of its awakening from that lethargy in which it had
long been funk, and ohIferve it turning with curiosity
and attention towards new objects.

[DD] NOTE XXVII.

THE

THE first literary efforts, however, of the Euro-SECT. I.

pean nations in the middle ages, were extremely ill- IV_
direced. Among nations, as well as individuals, the te li-
powers of imagination attain some degree of vigour be- forts .1 di-
fore the intelletual faculties are much exercised in fpe- reaed, and
culative or abftra& disquisition. Men are poets before ofth,
they are philolophers. They feel with sensibility, and
describe with force, when they have made but little
progress in investigation or reasoning. The age of
Homer and of Hesiod long preceded that of Thales, or
of Socrates. But, unhappily for literature, our ancef-
tors, deviating from this course which nature points out,
plunged at once into the depths of abfirufe and metaphy-
fical inquiry. They had been converted to the Chris-
tian faith, soon after they fettled in their new conquefis.
But they did not receive it pure. The presumption of
men had added to the simple and inftruaive docrines of
Christianity, the theories of a vain philosophy, that at-
tempted to penetrate into myReries, and to decide quef-
tions which the limited faculties of the human mind are
unable to comprehend, or to resolve. These over-curi-
ous speculations were incorporated with the system of
religion, and came to be confidered as the most effen-
tial part of it. As soon, then, as curiosity prompted
men to inquire and to reason, these were the subje&s
which first presented themselves, and engaged their at-
tention. The fcholaltic theology, with its infinite train
of bold disquisitions, and subtile diftin&ions concerning
points which are not the objeA of human reason, was
the first producion of the spirit of enquiry after it be-
gan to relume some degree of acivity and vigour in Eu-
rope. It was not this circumflance alone that gave such
a wrong turn to the minds of men, when they began
again to exercise talents which they had so long neg-
ltaed. Mot of the persons who attempted to revive
literature in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, had
received inftru&ion, or derived their principles of science
from the Greeks in the eallern Empire, or from the
Arabians in Spain and Africa. Both these people,
acute and inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences
which they cultivated. The former rendered theology
a system of speculative refinement, or of endless con-
troverfy. The latter communicated to philosophy a
spirit of metaphysical and frivolous fubtlcty. Miiled

VOL. I. E by

SECT. I. by there guides, the persons who firfl applied to science

were involved in a maze of intricate inquiries. In-
stead of allowing their fancy to take its natural range,
and to produce such works of invention as might hale
improved.their tafle, and refined their sentiments; in-
flead of cultivating those arts which embellish l-u-
man life, and render it comfortable; they were set-
tered by authority, they were led afiray by example,
and wafted the whole force of their genius in fpecula-
tions as unavailing as they were difficult.

They had, BUT fruitless and ill-direced as these speculations
however, were, their novelty rou7.cd, and their boldnets interefl-
considerable
cfreas. ed the human mind. The ardour with which men pur-

sued these uninviting fludies, was astonishing. Genuine
philosophy was never cultivated, in any enlightened age,
with greater zeal. Schools, upon the model of those
intituted bv Charlemagne, were opened in every ca-
thedral, and almolt in every monaflery of note. Col-
leges and universities were ereCted, and formed into
communities or corporations governed by their own
laws, and invested with separate and extensive jurifdic-
tion over their own members. A regular course of
lftudies was planned. Privileges of great value were
conferred on masters and scholars. Academical titles
and honours of various kinds were invented, as a re-
compenfe for both. Nor was it in the schools alone
that superiority in science led to reputation and autho-
rity; it became the objec of respect in life, and ad-
vanced such as acquired it to a rank of no inconsiderable
eminence. Allured by all these advantages, an incre-
dible number of fludents resorted to these new feats
of learning, and crowded with eagerness into that new
path which was opened to fame and diflinCion.

A circum- BUT how considerable bfoeer thcfc sirs efforts may
nlancc appear, there was one circumfrance which prevented
ented their the cffcSs of them from being as extensive as they
bring more ought to have been. All the languages in Europe, dut'
extclfivc. ing the period under review, were barbarous. T'hey

were dfltitute of elegance, of force, and even of per-
fpicuity. No attempt had been hitherto made to im-
prove or to polilh them. 'he Latin tongue w as con-
tfcrated by the church to religion. Cuflom, with
authority Icarce less sacred, had appropriated it to lite-
rature. All the fcicnccs cultivated in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, were taught in Latin. All Looks

with

with refped to them were written in that language. SEcT. I.
To have treated of any important fubjt-e in a modcrn
language, wouldhave been deemed a degradation of
it. This confined science within a very narrow ch-cle.
The learned alone were admitted into the temple of
knowledge; the gate was shut against all others, who
were allowed to remain involved in their former dark-
ncfs and ignorance.

BUT though Icience was thus prevented, during fe- Its innu-

ver:l ages, from diffusing itself through focietv, and its ecnce Cn
influence was circumlcribed; the progress of it may merits at-
be mentioned, nevertheless, among the great causes tcnuon.
which contributed to introduce a change of manners
into Europe. That ardent, though ill-judged spirit of
inquiry which I have described, occafiored a fermenta-
tion of mind which put ingenuity and invention in
motion, and gave them vigour. It led men into a new
employment of their faculties, which they found to be
agreeable as well as intercfling. It accustomed them
to exercises and occupations which tended to soften
their manners, and to give them tome rclifh for those
gentle virtues, which are peculiar to nations among
whom science hath been cultivated with success [EE].

X. THE progress of commerce had considerable The pro-

influence in polishing the manners of the European grefs of
nations, and in leading them to order, equal laws, and h"' grrat
humanity. The wants of men, in the original and influenceon
most simple state of society, are so few, and their dc- malners
fires lo limited, that they reft contented with the na- aldaoVern"
tural productions of their climate and foil, or with
what thev can add to these by their own rude indufiry.
They have no luperfluities to dispose of, and few nc-
ceffities that demand a supply. Every little community
subsisting on its own domeitick flock, and satisfied with
it, is either unacquainted with the flates around it, or
at variance with them. Society and manners muff be Low ftlte
considerably improved, and many provisions muff be ot corm-

merce in

made for public order and perlonal security, before a the middle
liberal intercourse can tak- place between different na- ae"r.
tions. We find, accordingly, that the firlt effec& of
the lcttlenient of the barbarians in the Empire, was
to divide those nations which the Roman power had
united. Europe was broken into many fcparate com-

[IlE] NOTE XXVIII.

E a munities.

Sacr. I.munities. The communication between these divided
AgyV states ceased almost totally during several centuries.

Navigation was dangerous in seas infested by pirates;
nor could strangers trust to a friendly reception in the
ports of uncivilized nations. Even between distant
parts of the fame kingdom, the intercourse was rare
and difficult. The lawless rapine of banditti, together
with the avowed exaaions of the nobles, scarce less
formidable and oppreflive, rendered a journey of any
length a perilous enterprize. Fixed to the spot in
which they resided, the greater part of the inhabitants
of Europe lotl, in a great measure, the knowledge of
remote regions, and were unacquainted with their
names, their situations, their climates, and their com-
modi ties.

Caures of VARIOUS causes contributed to revive the spirit of
its revivv. commerce, and to renew in some degree the inter-

course between different nations. The Italians, by
their conne&ion with Constantinople and other cities
of the Greek empire, preserved in their own country
some relish for the precious commodities, and curious
manufacures of the Eall. They communicated some
knowledge of these to the countries contiguous in Italy.
This commerce, however, was extremely limited, nor
was the intercourse considerable which it occasioned
between different nations. The Crusades, by leading
multitudes from every corner of Europe into Asia,
opened a more extenfivc communication between the
East and Weft, which fubfifled for two centuries; and
though the objec of these expeditions was conquest and
not commerce; though the issue of them proved as
unfortunate, as the motives for undertaking them were
wild and enthufialtic, their commercial effets, as hath
been shewn, were both beneficial and permanent.
During the continuance of the Crusades, the great
cities in Italy and in other countries of Europe ac-
quired liberty, and together with it such privileges as
rendered them refpedable and independent communi-
ties. Thus, in every Rlate, there was formed a new
order of citizens, to whom commerce presented itself
as their proper objet, and opened to them a certain
path to wealth and dignity. Soon after the dole of
the Holy war, the mariner's compass was invented,
which, by rendering navigation more secure as well
as more adventrous, facilitated the communication be-

tween

tween remote nations, and brought them nearer to SIcr. I.
each other. _ Y_

THE Italian States, during the fame period, eRfablifh- Firt among

ed a regular commerce with the East in the ports of the Itali.
Egypt, and drew from thence all the rich produts of
the Indies. They introduced into their own territories
malufaaures of various kinds, and carried them on
with great ingenuity and vigour. They attempted new
arts; and transplanted from warmer climates, to which
they had been hitherto deemed peculiar, several natu-
ral producions which now furnish the materials of a
lucrative and extended commerce. All there commo-
dities, whether imported from Asia, or produced by
their own (kill, they disposed of to great advantage
among the other people of Europe, who began to
acquire some taste of elegance unknown to their ancef-
tors, or despised by them. During the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, the commerce of Europe was al-
moRi entirely in the hands of the Italians, more com-
monly known in those ages by the name of Lombards.
Companies or Societies of Lombard merchants fettled
in every different kingdom. They were taken under
the immediate protetion of the several governments.
They enjoyed extensive privileges and immunities.
The operation of the ancient barbarous laws concern-
ing strangers was suspended with refpea to them.
They became the carriers, the manufacurers, and the
bankers of all Europe.

WHILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, cul- Then by

tivated trade with such indufRry and success, the corn- the Haca.-
mercial spirit awakened in the north, towards the mid- tick.
die of the thirteenth century. As the nations around
the Baltick were, at that time, extremely barbarous,
and infested that sea with their piracies, this obliged the
cities of Lubeck and Hamburgh, soon after they be-
gan to open some trade with thcfe people, to enter
into a league of mutual defence. They derived such
advantages from this union, that other towns acceded
to their confederacy, and, in a short time, eighty of
the most considerable cities scattered through those vait
countries which firetch from the bottom of the Baltick
to Cologne on the Rhine, joined in the famous Han-
featick league, which became so formidable, that its al.
liance was courted, and its enmity was dreaded by the
greatelt monarchs. The members of this powerful

E 3 afflociatioa

SiCT. I. association formed the first fyflematick plan of com-
_ VLr merce known in the middle ages, and conducted it by

common laws enaaed in their general aflenblics.
They supplied the reft of Europe with naval flores,
a:id pi:.chd on different towns, the mofi eminent of
wihic:h wvs Bruges in Slanders, where thev eflablifhcd
staples in which their commerce was regularl\ carried
on. Thither the Lombards brought the productious of
India, together with the manufaaures of Ital., and
exchanFcd therm for the more bulky, but not le/s useful
commurd.sics of the North. The Hanfeatick merchants
dllpoled of the cargoes which they received from the
Lombards, in the ports of the Baltick, or carried them
up the great rivers into the interior parts of Germany.

Commerce THIS regular intercourse opened between the Norih
ms in the and South of Europe, made them Icnfible of their
Nether. mutual wants, and created such new and vast demands
la4. ffor commodities of every kind, that it excited among

the inhabitants of the Netherlands a more vigorous
spirit in carrying on the two great manufactures of
wool and flax, which seem to have been considerable in
that country as far back as the age of Charlemagne.
As Bruges became the centre of communication be-
tween the Lombard and Hanfeatick merchants, the
Flemings traded with both in that city to such extent
as well as advantage, as spread among them a general
habit of industry, which long rendered Slanders and
the adjacent provinces the moit opulent, the mofi po-
pulous, and befl cultivated countries in Europe.

AndlinEng- STRUCK with the flourishing fate of these provinces,
land, of which he discerned the true cause, Edward 1ll. of

England, endeavoured to excite a spirit of induflrv
among his own fubjecs, who, blind to the advantagsc
of their situation, and ignorant of the source frcm
which opulence was deflined to flow into their countsr,
totally negleced commerce, and did not even attempt
those manufatures, the materials of which the'v ifr-
nibsed to foreigners. By alluring Flemilh artisans to
fettle in his dominions, as well as by many wile laws
for the encouragement and regulation of trade, he
gave a beginning to the woolen manufacurcs of Eng-
land, and firll turned the acive and enterpri.inlr
genius of his people towards those arts which have
rauled the Englllh to the highetl rank allong commer-
cial nations.

q'H t~

THIS increase of commerce, and of intercourse be- SICT. I.

tween nations, how inconsiderable soever it may appear _V'
in refpet of their rapid and extensive progress during ThI. lneai
the lafi and present age, seems vati, when we compare of thi.
it with the fiate of both in Europe previous to the
twelfth century. It did not fail of producing great
effecs. Commerce tends to wear off those prejudices
which maintain diftincion and animosity between na-
tions. It softens and polishes the manners of mnen. It
unites them, by one of the firongeft. of all ties, the
desire of supplying their mutual wants. It disposes
them to peace, by eflablifhing in every state an order
of citizens bound by their interest to be the guardians
of publick tranquillity. As soon as the commercial
spirit begins to acquitervigour, and to gain an afcen-
dant in any society, we discover a new genius in its
policy, its alliances, .its wars, apd its negotiations.
Conspicuous proofs of this occur in the history of the
Italian States, of the Hanfeatick league, and the cities
of the Netherlands during the period under review.
In proportion as commerce made its way into the dif-
ferent countries of Europe, they fucceflively turned
their attention to those objecs, and adopted those man-
ners, which occupy and diftinguilt polimed natioh
[FS].

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

E4 A VIEW

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

V I E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

IN
EU ROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTIO N II.
View of the Progrefi of Society in Europe, with refpet to

the command of the national force refuifite in foreign
operations.

SZCT. II.
s4'-~ U CH are the events and inflitutions, which by
State of so-
cietygreatly S their powerful operation contributed, gradually, to
improved at introduce more regular government and more polilhed
nthibegn manners into the various nations of Europe. When we
filttMnth survey the Rate of society, or the charater of indivi-
eieitury. duals, at the opening of the fifteenth century, and then

turn back to view the condition of both at the time
when the barbarous tribes which overturned the Roman
power compleated their settlement in their new con-
quefis, the progress which mankind had made towards
order and refinement will appear immense.

GOVEIN-

GOVERNMENT, however, was still far from having SECT. Il.

attained that state, in which extensive monarchies a&t -V
with united vigour, or carry on great undertakings with Stil dcfc-
perseverance and success. Small tribes or communities, rcfipct to
even in their rudest state, may operate in concert, and the com-
exert their utmost force. They are excited to a& not natioal
by the diltant objecs, and subtile speculations, which force.
interest or asset men in polished societies, but by their
present feelings. The insults of an enemy kindle re-
fentment; the success of a rival tribe awakens emula-
tion; these pafiions communicate from breast to breast,
and all the members of the community, with united
ardour, rush into the field in order to gratify their re-
venge, or to acquire diftintion. But in widely ex-
tended dates, such as the great kingdoms of Europe at
the beginning of the fifteenth century, where there is -
little intercourse between the distant members of the
community, and where every great enterprize requires
previous concert and long preparation, nothing can rouse
and call forth their united firength, but the absolute
command of a Despot, or the powerful influence of re-
gular policy. Of the former the vast Empires in the
East are an example; the irresistible mandate of the
Sovereign reaches the moll remote provinces of his do-
minions, and compels whatever number of his subje&s
he is pleated to summon, to follow his flandard. The
kingdoms of Europe, in the present age, are an instance
of the latter; the Prince, by the less violent, but no
less effe&ual operation of laws and a well regulated
government, is enabled to avail himself of the whole
force of his ilate, and to employ it in enterprizes which
require firenuous and persevering efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, the The powr

political contfitution in all the kingdoms of Europe was ofMonarchl
very different from either of there states of govern- veyimiea .
ment. The several monarchs, though they had some-
what enlarged the boundaries of prerogative by fuc-
cefsful encroachments on the immunities and privileges
of the nobility, were polfeffed of an authority ex-
tremely limited. The laws and interior police of king-
doms, though much improved by the various events
and regulations which I have enumerated, were till
feeble and imperfect. In every country, a numerous
body of nobles, Itill formidable notwithstanding the

various

SECT. II. various expedients employed to depress them, watched
%OV^-Y all the motions of their fovcreign with a jealous at-

tention, which set bounds to his ambition, and either
prevented his forming schemes of extensive enterprizc,
or thwarted the execution of them.

Their reve- THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were so
nucs small. extremely small as to be inadequate to any great un-

dertaking. He depended for extraordinary Iupplies
on the good will of his fubjecs, who granted them
often with a relufant and always with a sparing hand.

Their ar- As the revenues of Princes were inconsiderable, the
mies unfit armies which they could bring into the field were
<for Ca- unfit for long and effeEtual service. Inflead of being

able to employ troops trained to skill in arms, and
to military subordination, by regular discipline, Mo-
narchs were obliged to depend on such forces as their
vafTals conducted to their standard in consequence of
their military tenures. These, as they were bound to
remain under arms only for a short time, could not
march far from their usual place of residence, and
being more attached to the lord of whom they held,
than to the Sovereign whom they served, were often
as much disposed to counterac as to forward his
schemes. Nor were they, even if they had been more
fubje& to the command of the monarch, proper in-
firuments to carry into execution any great and ar-
duous enterprize. The strength of an army formed
either for conquest or defence lies in infantry. To
the stability and discipline of their legions, consisting
chiefly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their victories;
and when their descendants, forgetting the institutions
which had led them to universal dominion, lo far
altered their military fy)icm as to place their princi-
pal confidence in a numerous cavalry, the undifciplin-
cd impetuosity of the barbarous nations who fought
moflly on foot, was fufficicnt, as I have already ob-
served, to overcome them. Tlhcfe nations loon after
they fettled in their new conqucfis, uninftruaed by
the fatal error of the Rornans, rclinquifhtd the cul-
toms of their anceflors, and converted the chief force
of their armies into cavalrv. Among the Romans
this change was occasioned by the effeminacy of their
ltoops, who could not endure the fatigues of service,

which

v.hich their more virtuous and hardy ancestors fuf-SECT. II.
tained with cafe. Among the people who eitablifh- -V^
cd the new monarchies into which Europe was di-
vided, this innovation in military discipline seems to
have flowed from the pride of the nobks, who, scorn-
ing to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at
being distinguishcd from them in the field, as well
as during peace. The institution of chivalry, and
the frequency of Tournaments, in which knights, in
complete armour, entered the lifts on horseback with
extraordinary splendour, displaying amazing address,
and force, and valour, brought cavalry into still greater
cieem. T'he fondness for that service increased to
farch a degree, that, during the thirteenth and four-
teenth centuries, the armies of Europe were compos-
ed almost entirely of cavalry. No gentleman would ap-
pear in the field but on horseback. To serve in any
other manner he would have deemed derogatory to
his rank. The cavalry, by way of diftinEqion, was
called, The battle, and on it alone depended the fate
of every acion. The infantry, colleced from the
dregs and refute of the people, ill armed and worse
disciplined, was of no account.

As these circumstances rendered the operations of They ar

particular kingdoms less considerable and less vigorous, incapable of
lo they long kept the Princes of Europe from giv- formingany
ing such attention to the schemes and tranfations of gtniv
their neighbours, as led them to form any regular plan of ope-
system of publick security. They prevented them r'"luo
from uniting in confederacy, or from acing with con-
ccrt, in order to tftablifh such a distribution and ba-
lance of power, as (hould hinder any state from ri-
sing to a superiority, which might endanger the gene-
ral liberty and independence. During several centu-
ries, the nations of Europe appear to have confider-
ed themselves as leparate societies, scarce conneded
toge:her by any common interest, and little concern-
ed in each others affairs or operations. An exten-
five commerce did not afford them an opportunity of
observing and penetrating into the fchemnes of every
different fIate. They had not ambassadors residing
constantly in every court to watch and give early
intelligence of all its motions. The expecation of
remote advantages, or the profpet of difiant and

contingent

SECT. II. contigent evils were not sufficient to excite nations to
ImVm take arms. They only, who were within the sphere

of immediate danger, and unavoidably exposcd to in-
jury or insult, thought themselves interested in any
contefi, or bound to take precautions for their own
fafet-.

They were WHOEVER records the tranfaaions of any of the
little con-
rlited with more considerable European fiates during the two last
each other. centuries, mull write the hiflory of Europe. Its

various kingdoms, throughout that period, have been
formed into one great system, so closely united, that
each holding a determinate flation, the operations of
one are so felt by all, as to influence their counsels
and regulate their measures. But previous to the
fifteenth century, unless when vicinity of territory ren-
dered the occasions of discord frequent and unavoida-
ble, or when national emulation fomented or embit-
tered the spirit of hostility, the affairs of different
countries are seldom interwoven. In each kingdom of
Europe great events and revolutions happened, which
the other powers beheld with the fame indifference
as if they had been uninterested fpe&ators, to whom
the effct of these tranfaaions could never extend.

Aconfirma- DURING the violent struggles between France and
ion o this England, and notwithltanding the alarming progress
."m the as-
firs of which was made towards rendering one Prince the
Frac. marter of both there kingdoms, hardly one measure

which can be confidered as the result of a sagacious
and prudent policy, was formed in order to guard
againfl an event so fatal to Europe. The Dukes of
Burgundy and Bretagne, whom their situation would
not permit to remain neutral, engaged, it is true, in
the contell; but they more frequently took the part
to which their palions prompted them, than that
which a juIt discernment of the danger which threat-
ened themselves and the tranquillity of Europe should
have pointed out. The other Princes, seemingly un-
aflfctcd by the alternate successes of the contending
parties, left them to decide the quarrel, or interpolsd
only by feeble and ineffecual negotiations.

Fron thofic NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hollilities in
of Spain. which the various kingdoms of Spain were engaged

during several centuries, and the fuCccciive occurten-

ces

ces which visibly tended to unite that part of the SECT. II.
continent into one great monarchy, the Princes of AV
Europe scarce took a single ftep, which discovers that
they gave any attention to that important event. ?hey
permitted a power to arise imperceptibly, and to ac-
quire strength there, which soon became formidable
to all its neighbours.

AMIDST the violent convulsions, with which the From those

spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and the of Ger-
turbulent ambition of the German nobles, agitated many'
the Empire, neither the authority of the Popes, fe-
conded by all their artifices and intrigues, nor the
solicitations of the Emperors, could induce any of
the powerful monarchs in Europe to engage in their
quarrel, or to avail themselves of many favourable
opportunities of interposing with effea and advan-
tage.

THIS amazing inacivity, during tranfacions so in- This inaei-
terefling, is not to be imputed to any incapacity of vity occas-

oned entire-

discerning their political consequences. The power of ly by the
judging with sagacity, and of ading with vigour, is Itate of go-
the portion of men in every age. The Monarchs who vcrnent.
reigned in the different kingdoms of Europe during
several centuries were not blind to their particular
interefi, negligent of the publick safety, or firangers
to the method of securing both. If they did not adopt
that salutary system, which teaches modern politicians
to take the alarm at the profped of diflant dangers,
which prompts them to check the first encroachments
of any formidable power, and which renders each
state the guardian, in some degree, of the rights and
independence of all its neighbours, this was owing
entirely to the imperfections and disorders in the civil
government of each country, which made it impof-
fible for sovereigns to ac suitably to those ideas which
the posture of affairs, and their own observation mull
have suggested.

BuT during the course of the fifteenth century, Events hap

various events happened, which, by giving Princes pcncJ du-
more entire command of the force in their refpedlvc 5ithcentury
dominions, rendered their operations more vigorous which ren-
and extensive. In consequence of this, the affairs of o theof ne-
different kingdoms becoming more frequently as well tions meJr

as Powtrlul

iend c.aca*
five.

SECT. II. as more intimately connected, they were gradually ac-

_oV w customed to aa in concert and confederacy, and

were insensibly prepared for forming a system of poli-
cy, in order to eltablifh or to preserve such a balance
of power aas as nmof confifent with the general fe-
cuity. It' was duri;n: the reign of Charles the fifth,
that the ideas, on which this fyflem is founded, first
came to be fully understood. It was then, that the
maxims by which it has been uniformly maintained
since that aera were universally adupted. On this ac-
count, a view of the causes and events which contri-
buted to etiablifh a plan of policy more salutary and
extensive than any that has taken place in the con-
dua of human affairs, is not only a neceffarv intro-
duclion to the following work, bu: is a capital object
in the hiltory of Europe.

The first of THE sirs event, that occasioned any considerable
tlhe dpriv- alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Europe,
ingthcgng- was the annexation of the extensive territories, which
lih of their England possessed on the continent, to the crown of
en the cn- France. While the Englilh were marters of several
tincet. of the most fertile and opulent provinces in

France, and a great part of its most martial inhabi-
tants were bound to follow their standard, their mo-
narchs confidered themselves rather as the rivals, than
as the vaflals of the fovcreign of whom they held.
The Kings of France, circumscribed and thwarted
in their schemes and operations by an adversary no
less jealous than formidable, durst not venture upon
any enterprize of importance or of difficulty. The
English were always at hand, ready to oppose them.
They disputed even their right to their crown, and
being able to penetrate, with cafe, into the heart of
the kingdom, could arm againfi them those very hands
which ought to have been employed in their defence.
Timid counsels, and feeble efforts were natural to
monarchs in such a lituation. France, difmrnembrcd
and over-awed, could not attain its proper flation in
the fyflem of Europe. But the death of Henry of
England, happily for France, and not unfortunately
for his own country, delivered the French from the cala-
mity of having a foreign mafler feated on their
throne. The weakncrf of a long minority, the dif-
fenfions in the English court, together with the un-
fieady and languid conduct which thelc occasioned,

afforded

afforded the French a favourable opportunity of reco- SECT. IT.
vering the territories which they had loft. The na- -
tive valour of the nobility of t;rance heightened to
an enrhufialtick confidence, by a supposed interpofi-
tion cf heaven in their behalf; conducted in the field
by skilful leaders; and direted in the cabinet by a
prudent monarch; was exerted with such vigour and
fucccfs, during this favourable juncure, as not only
wrested from the English their new conquelts, but
fiript them of their ancient poffeflions, and-reduced
them within the narrow precincts of Calais, and its
petty territory.

As soon as so many considerable provinces were re- The effet

united to their dominions, the Kings of France, con- of this on
fcious of this acquisition of strength, began to form ioreainof
holder schemes of interior policy, as well as of so- the French
reign operations. They immediately became formi- mOnarChy-
dabie to their neighbours, who began to fix their at-
tention on their measures and motions, the impor-
tance of which they fully perceived. From this aera,
France, poffiffed of the advantages which it derives
from the situation and contiguity of its territories, as
well as from the number and valour of its people,
rose to new influence in Europe, and was the first
power in a condition to give alarm to the jealousy or
fears of the states around it.

NOR was France indebted for this increase of im- On the Ibte

portance merely to the re-union of the provinces "f'r te mi-
which had been torn from it. A circumfiance attend- the nation.
ed the recovery of these, which, though less confide-
rable, and less observed, contributed not a little to
give additional vigour and decision to all the efforts
of that monarchy. D)uring the obstinate struggles be-
tween France and England, all the defecs of the
military system under the feudal government were fen-
libly felt. A war of long continuance languished,
when carried on by troops bound and accutomrnd to
keep the field only for a few weeks. Armies, com-
posed chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, were unfit either
tor the attack or the defence of the many towns and
cafiles, which it became neceflary to guard or to re-
duce. In order to obtain such permanent and effec-
Tive force, as became requisite during these lengthen-
ed contrft-, the Kings of France took into their pay
confider4ble bands of mercenary soldiers, levied omne-

times

SECT. II. times among their own fubjeds, and sometimes in
SVo-v foreign countries. But as the feudal policy provided

no sufficient fund for such extraordinary service, there
adventurers were difinifed at the close of every cam-
paign, or upon any profpea of accommodation; and
having been little accuflomed to the restraints of dif-
cipline, they frequently turned their arms against the
country which they h.ad been hired to defend, and
desolated it with no less cruelty than its foreign ene-
mies.

It rrcafi:ns A BODY of troops kept conltantly on foot, and
the intro- regularly trained to military subordination, would
duaion of m

it,., b

i. . t i

standing ar- have supplied what was wanting in the feudal con-
mnir. flitution, and have furnished Princes with the means

of executing enterprizes, to which they were then un-
equal. Such an eflablifhment, however, was so repug-
nant to the genius of feudal policy, and so incompa-
tible with the privileges and pretensions of the nobles,
that during several centuries no monarch was either
so bold, or To powerful, as to venture on any ltep
towards introducing it. At last, Charles VII. avail-
ing himself of the reputation which he had acquired
by his fuccefles against the Englifl, and taking advan-
tage of the impressions of terror which such a formi-
dable enemy had left upon the minds of his subje&s,
executed that which his predecessors durst not attempt.
Under pretence of keeping always on foot a force
sufficient to defend the kingdom againfi any sudden
A. D. 445. invasion of the English, he, at the time when he

disbanded his other troops, retained under arms a bo-
dy of nine thousand cavalry, and of sixteen thousand
infantry. He appropriated funds for the regular pay-
ment of thfee; he stationed them in different places
of the kingdom, according to his pleasure; and ap-
pointed the officers, who commanded and disciplined
them. The prime nobility courted this service, in
which they were taught to depend on their sovereign,
to execute his orders, and to look up to him as the
judge and rewarder of their merit. The feudal mi-
litia, composed of the vaflals whom the nobles could
call out to follow their flandard, as it was in no
degrce comparable to a body of soldiers regularly train-
ed to war, funk gradually in reputation. The frength
of armies came to be estimated only by the number
of difciplin)d men which they contained. In less than

a century,

a century, the nobles and their military tenants, though SECT. II.
sometimes summoned to the field, according to anci- Lo'VY
ent form, were confidered as an incumbrance upon the
troops with which they aated; and were viewed with
contempt by soldiers accultomed to the vigorous and
leady operations of regular service.

THUS the regulations of Charles the seventh, by The effc/ts

efRablilhing the firfl flanding armv known in Europe, o'f his.
occasioned an important revolution in its affairs and
p(,licv. By depriving the nobles of that direcion of
the military force of the slate, which had raised them
to such high authority and importance, it gave a deep
wound to the feudal aristocracy, in that part where
its power seemed to be mofi complete.

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular troops,

at a time when there was scarce a squadron or com-
pany kept in constant pay in any other part of E.u-
rope, acquired such advantages, either for attack or
defence, over its neighbours, that fclf-prefervation
made it necessary for them to imitate its example.
Mercenary troops were introduced into all the confi-
derable kingdoms on the continent. They gradually
became the only military force that was employed or
trufled. It has long been the chief objec of policy
to increase and to support them, and the great aimr
of Princes or ministers to discredit and to annihilate all
other means of national acivity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the fiart of other powers The mo
in c(tablifling in their dominions a military force, nachs of

France en.

whiich enabled them to carry on foreign operations oraged ',
with more vigour, and to greater extent, so they were cetcnd their
the first who effedually broke the feudal ariflocracy, rrerogativ'.
:ind humbled the great vassals of the crown, who by
their exorbitant power had long circumfclibed the royal
prerogative within very narrow limits, and had ren-
dered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe in-
coniidcrable. Many things concurred to undermine,
.laduially, the power of the feudal atiflocracy in
1 ;ance. The wealth and property of the nobility
"ere greatly impaired during the long wars, which
,he kinp.dom was obliged to maintain with the Eng-
lih. ']'he extraordinary zeal with which the) exert-
ed thcmfelves in defence of their counitry a.ninft
'it ancient enemies, exhaufl.cd the fortunel of fnme

VOL. 1. F great

SE r. II tret families. As almofl every province in the kirg-

"'" l dJom was, in its turn, the feat of war, the lands ci

others were exposed to the d: predatiors of the enemy,
were ravaged by the mercenary trocps which their
sovereigns hired occafionall'-, but could not pay, or
were delblated with rage still more (leirrllrive by the
peasants, in their different in!urrceions. At the tame
time, the necessities of government having forced their
Kings upon the desperate expedient of making gre..t
and Hudden alterations in the current coin of the kinL-
dom, the fines, quit-rents, and other pa men s, fixdi
by ancient cuflom, funk much in value, and the rc c-
nues of a fief were reduced far below the fum \,hl;ci
it had once yielded. During their contests with the
English, in which a generous nobility courted every
flation where danger appeared, or honour could be
gained, many families of note became extinct, and
their fiefs were reunited to the crown. Other fiefs,
in a long course of years, fell to female heirs, and
were divided among them; were diminished by prc-
fuse donations to the church, or were broken and split
by the fuccfflion of remote collateral heirs [a].

The pro- ENCOURAGED by these manifest symptoms of de-
grets of the line in that body which he wished to depress, Charles
I" -Al power Egad
under VII. during the first interval of peace with England,
chlalesVlI. made several efforts towards eflablifhing the regal

prerogative on the ruins of the ariflocracy. But his
obligations to the nobles were so many, as well as
recent, and their services in recovering the kingdom
so splendid, as made it necessary for him to proceed
with moderation and caution. Such, however, was
the authority which the crown had acquired by the
progress of its arms againfl the English, and so much
was the power of the nobility diminished, that, witl;-
out any oppofihion, he soon made innovations of great
consequence in the constitution. He not only cflab-
lifhed that formidable body of regular troops, which
has been mentioned, but he was the firfl monarch ot
France, who, bV his royal edi&, without the cor-
currence of the States-general of the kingdom, levi-
A. D. 1440. ed an extraordinary subsidy on his people. He pre-

vaikd likewise with his fuhjeis, to render several
tax s perpetual, which had formerly been impoftd
i[] Boulainvillier Hiloire Jc GouYcrncmcnt de France, Letter xii.

occasionally,

occasionally, and exaced during a flort time. By SECT. II.
m.'ans of all these, he acquired such an increale of _%
power, and extended his prerogative b tsar beyor.d
its ancient limits, that, from being the molt depen-
dant Prince who had ever fat upon the throne or
'r:ncc, he came to pofTefs, during the latter years of
hib reign, a degree of authority which none of his
F r'decitl;ns had enjoyed for fevcral ages [b].

'l'THAT plan of humbling the nobility which Charles 'nder

foi,ntmd, his son Louis XI. carried on with a bolder Louis XI.
[,ilit, and with greater success. Louis was formed
hlv nai;e to be a tyrant; and at whatever period he
ha.d been called to ascend the throne, his reign nmiif
lhave abunded with schemes to oppress his people,
and to render his oxwn power absolute. Subtle, un-
feeling, cruel; a itranger to every principle of inte-
.;-ity, and regardlcs of decency, he scorned all the re-
liraints which a sense of honour, or the desire of fame,
impole even on ambitious men. Sagacious, at the fame
ime, to discern his true interest, and influenced by
that alone, he was capable of pursuing it with a per-
fevering industry, and of adhering to it with a fyfle-
matic Ipirit from which no objet could divert, and no
danger could deter him.

THE maxims of his administration were as pro- j;rmea-

found as they were fatal to the privileges of the filrs for
nobility. He filled all the departments of govern- humbliln
ment with new men, and often with persons, whom "'"" bi:
hc called from the lowest as well as mofi delpifed func-
tionI in life, and railed at pleasure to stations of great
power or trust. These were his only confidants, whom
he contulted in forming his plans, and to whom he
committed the execution of them: W hile the nobles,
accufltomed to be the companions, the favourites, and
the ministers of their fovcreigns, were treated xvi1i
such fludied and mortifying negleCt, that if they
would not submit to follow a court, in which they
appeared without any shadow of their ancient power,
they were obliged to retire to their caflles, v here
ithy remained unemployed and forgotten. Not satis-
fled with having rendered the nobles of lets conli-

[h] Hin;ire de France p:,r Vlly & Villarct. tom. xv. 33j. &c. 389.
tom. xvi. 3:4. Variatiolis IJc 1 Mu;ii.chic francoilc, tom. iii. 161.

F'z . derations

SECT. II. deration, by taking out of their hands the sole direc-

uVv^ tion of affairs, Louis added insult to neglect; and by

violating their most valuable privileges, endeavoured
to degrade the order, and to reduce the members of
it to the fame level with other lubjcc's. Persons of
the higheft-rank among them, if so bold as to op-
pose his schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken
the jealousy of his capricious temper, were prosecuted
with rigour, from which all who belonged to the order
of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they were tried
by judges who had no right to take cognizance of
their ations; and were subjected to torture, or con-
demned to an infamous death, without regard to their
birth or condition. The people, accustomed to fee
the blood of the most illuifrious personages shed by
the hands of the common executioner, to behold them
shut up in dungeons, and carried about in cages of
iron, began to view the nobility with less reverence
than formerly, and looked up with terror to the royal
authority, which seemed to have humbled or annihi-
lated every other power in the kingdom.

And ofdivi- AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that op-
ding them. position might rouze the nobles, whom the rigour of

his government had intimidated, or that felf-prefer-
vation might teach them, at last, to unite, dexterous-
ly scattered among them the feeds of discord; and in-
duftrioufly fomented those ancient animofities between
the great families, which the spirit of jealousy and
emulation, natural to the feudal government, had
originally kindled and fill kept alive. To accompliih
this, all the arts of intrigue, all the myiteries and rc-
finements of his fraudulent policy were employed, and
with such success, that at a juncure which required
the mofl firenuous efforts, as well as the mofi per-
feE union, the nobles never a&ed, except during one
short sally of resentment at the beginning of his reign,
either with vigour or with concert.

He aWs to As he stripped the nobility of their privileges, he
the number added to the power and prerogative of the crown.
cr fce" In order to have at command such a body of soldiers

as might be sufficient to crush any force that his
difaffetaed fubjces could draw together, he not only
kept on foot the regular troops which his father had
raised but took into his pay fix thousand Swiss, the

bell

belt difcip!ined and most formidable infantry, at that SECT. II
time in Europe [IC. From the jealousy natural to SYW
tyrants, he confided in these foreign mercenaries, as
the moll devoted instruments of oppreflion, and the
mors faithful guardians of the power which he had
acquired.

GREAT funds were requisite, not -only to defray He aug-

the expence of this additional establishment, but to ment the
supply the fums employed in the various enterprizes reenue o
which the restless acivity of his genius prompted him
to undertake. But the prerogative that his father
had assumed of levying taxes, without the concur-
rence of the tfates-general, which he was careful
not only to retain but extend, enabled him to pro-
vide in some measure for the increasing charges of go-
vernment.

WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was, could His addref

not furnish, his address procured. He' was the firfl in mana` g
monarch in Europe who discovered the method oi femblyof
managing those great assemblies, in which the feudal fates.
policy had veiled the power of granting subsidies and
of imposing taxes. He firtt taught other Princes the
fatal art of beginning their attack on publick liberty,
by corrupting the source from which it should flow.
By exerting all his power and address in influencing
the ele&ion of representatives, by bribing or overaw-
ing the members, and by various changes which he
artfully made in the form of their deliberations,
Louis acquired such entire direcion of these aflem-
blies, that, from being the vigilant guardians of the
privileges and property of the people, he rendered
them tamely fubfervicnt, in promoting the most odi-
ous measures of his reign [d]. As no power remain-
edto set bounds to his exacions, he not only con.
tinued all the taxes imposed by his father, but made
immense additions to them, which amounted to a

[c] Mem. de Cominc, tom. i. 367. Dan. Hil. de la Milice Francoifc,
tom. i. iSa.

dlMcom. de Comin. tom. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid. tom. ii. p,

F 3 fum

Sc-. TI. fiirn that appeared astonishing to his contempora-
S»^"Nr ries [cl *
ic cliarges NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the
t, bSunds crown that Louis increaftd; he extended its territo-
Fte.mrh mo- ries by acquisitions of various kinds. He got poffelF
nmrchy. sion ol Roufillon by purchase; Provence was con-

veyed to him by the will of Charles de Anjou; and
upon the death of Charles the Bold, he seized with
a strong hand Burgundy and Artois, -hich had belong-
ed to that Prince. Thus, during the courfc of a
lingle reign, France was formed into one compact
kingdom, and the ileady unrelenting policy of Louis
XI. not only fiubdued the haughty spirit of the feu-
dal nobles, but cflablifhcd a Ipccics of government,
icarce less ab!olute, or lfis tcrrible, than eatiern dcf-
potifm.

By allthere BUT fatal as his adminiifratioln was to the liber-
the French ties of his 'ubjecs, the autholity wlich he acquired,
givernment the rcfources of which he became maifer, and his
rendered
mnore active freedom from rfitraint both in concerting his plans
and enter- and in executing them, rendered his reign active and
prizn"S enterprizing. Louis negotiated in all the courts of

Europe; he observed the motions of all his neighbours;
he engaged, either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in
ecvry great tranfaEtion; his relolutions were prompt;
his operations vigorous; and upon every emergence
he could call forth into action tle whole force of his
kingdom. From the ara of his reign, inflead of the
feeble efforts of monarchs fetteltd and circumlcribed
by a jealous nobility, the Kings of France, more
maiters at home, have exerted themf(lvi.. more abroad,
have formed more extensive lchemcs of foreign con-
quests, and have carried on war with a lfiirt and vi-
gour long unknown in Europe.

Steps taken '.THE example which Louis let was too inviting not
towards eh- to be imitated by other Princes. lenry \'I. as soon
tcn~ita, the
poverf't he as he was fIated on the tltnei of L]lgland, formed
('r,,wn ill
.nigland, re] Mem. de Corn tom. i. 334.

* l1a,le, VII. levied taxte o thte amount of ,800oo,oo0 franc;

Louir XI. raiicd 4,700,o00. Thel tnrmer had in pay 9ooo cavalry,
ind 16,oo0 infantry. The latter augmented the cavalry to s5,ooo,
man the infantry to 25,oo0. Mem dc Comines, i. 384. During the
latter yeara of' his reign, he kept the greatcr part of thelt encampcJ
in one place, and acady to marci on the Ihoatcft warning. Ibid.

the

the plan of enlarging his own prerogative, by brcak- SEc'. II.
ing the power of the nobility. ' he circuinfanccs ,s Y
under which he undertook to execute it, were lels
favourable than thofc under which Charles VII. had
made the fame attempt; and the spirit with which he
conduaed it, was very different from that of Louis
XI. Charles, by the success of his arms against the
English, by the merit of having expelled them out
of so many provinces, had cfRablifhed himself so firm-
Iv in the confidence of his people, as encouraged him
to make bold encroachments on the ancient conftitu-
tion. The daring genius of Louis broke through
every barrier, and endeavoured to overturn or to re-
move every obitacle that flood in his way. But
Henry held the sceptre by a disputcd title; a popu-
lar faction was ready every moment to take arms
against him; and after long civil wars, during which
the nobility had often displayed their power in creat-
ing and deposing Kings, he felt that the regal au-
thority had been so much relaxed, and that he en-
tered into poffefion of a prerogative so much abridg-
ed, as made it neceiTarv to carry on his measures de-
liberately, and without any violent exertion. He en-
deavoured to undermine that formidable flrucure,
which he durfl not attack with open force. His
schemes, though cautious and flow in their onera-
tion, were prudent, and productive in the end of
great effecs. By his laws, permitting the barons to
break the entails of their eflates, and to cxpofe them
to sale; by his regulations to prevent the nobility
from keeping in their service those numerous bands
of retainers, which rendered them formidable, and
turbulent; by encouraging population, agriculture and
commerce; by fccuring to his subjects, during a long
reign, the enjoyment of the bleflings which flow from
the arts of peace; by acculloming them to an ad-
ministration of government, under which the laws
were executed with fleadinefs and vigour; he mnlde
i;mprccptibly such alterations in the English confli-
tution, that he transmitted to his filcceflor authoritv
so extensive, as rendered him one of the mllt ahlo-
lute Monarchs in Europe, and capable of the grcatcft
and mofl vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crnwns hv the mar- ind ir
riage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory that they) SP'"n

F 4 acquired

SECT. II. acquired by the conquest of Granada, which brought
'VV/ the odious dominion of the Moors to a period; the

command of the great armies which it had been ne-
ceffary to keep constantly on foot, in order to ac-
complifh this; the wisdom and fleadinefs of their ad-
ministration; and the address with which they avail-
ed them'clves of every incident to humble the no-
bility, and to extend their own prerogative, confpir-
cd in raising thcfe monarchs to such eminence and
authority, as none of their predecessors had ever en-
joyed. Though several causes, which shall be ex-
plained in another place, prevented their attaining the
fame extensive powers with the Kings of France and
England, and preferrcd the feudal conflitution in
Spain longer entire, their great abilities supplied the
defects of their prerogative, and improved with such
dexterity all the advantages which they possessed, that
Ferdinand carried on all his foreign operations, which
were very extensive, with extraordinary vigour and
effet.

.Events hap- WHILE there Princes were thus enlarging the
Rened, boundaries of prerogative, and taking such Reps to-
which call-
ed the feve- wards rendering their kingdoms capable of aaing with
al mo- union and with force, events occurred, which called
narchstoex- them forth to exert the new powers w hich they had
crt the new
powers acquired. These engaged them in such a series of
which they enterprizes and negotiations, that the affairs of all
ead acqul- the considerable nations in Europe came to be infcnfil

bly interwoven with each other ; and a great politi-
cal fyftcm was gradually formed, vhich grew to be
an object of universal attention.

The hrft of I HE first event which merits notice, on account
therh events of its influence in producing this change in the slate
·as the F h A
marriage oO Europe, w'as the marriag e of

the aughter of

the heiress Charles the Bold, the sole liricles of the house of
of'tehhuf" Bugundv. For bome years before her father's death,
es Bar-
.jndy. she had been tolfidered as the apparent fucceffior to

his t.ririoliei, and Charles had made proposals of
marrying lher to several different Princes, with a view
pi alluring them, by that offer, to favour the
Ichemes which his restless ambition was continually
forming.

ie.,mpr.r TJ'IS1 rendered the alliance with her an obje& of
t.enfefdilit general attention ; and all the advantages of acquiring
t, terp.e. poirfflrutn of her territoies, the niof olplent at that

time

time and best cultivated of any on this fide of the SEsT. II.
Alps, were perfecly understood, As loon, then, as D"7
the untimely death of Charles opened the fucceflion, January7
the eves of all the Princes in Europe were turned
towards Mary, and they felt themselves deeply in-
terested in the choice which the was about to make
of the person, on whom she would bellow that rich
inheritance.

Louis XI. from whose kingdom several of the views of

provinces which Ihe poffefled had been difmemhered, Louis X.
and whose dominions firetched along the frontier of 'ith. rp
her territories, had every inducement to court her
alliance. He had, likewise, a good title to expe&
the favourable reception of any reasonable proposition
he Ihould make, with refpe& to the disposal of a
Princcfs, who was the vassal of his crown, and de-
Iccnded from the royal blood of France. There were
only two propositions, however, which he could make
with propriety. The one was the marriage of the
Dauphin, the other that of the Count of Angouleme,
a Prince of the blood, with the heiress of Burgundy.
By the former, he would have annexed all her ter-
ritories to his crown, and have rendered France at
once the moit refpeaable monarchy in Europe. But
the great disparity of age between the two parties,
Mary being twenty, and the Dauphin only eight years
old; the avowed resolution of the Flemings, not to
choose a matter poffefTed of such power as might
enable him to form schemes dangerous to their liber-
ties; together with their dread of falling under the
odious and oppressive government of Louis, were ob-
ltacles in the way of executing this plan, which it
was vain to think of surmounting. By the latter, the
accomplishment of which might have been attained
with ease, Mary having discovered some inclination to
a match with the Count of Angouleme [f], Louis would
have prevented the dominions of the house of Bur-
gundy from being conveyed to a rival power, and in
return for such a splendid eftablilhment for the Count
of Angouleme, he must have obtained, or would have
extorted from him concessions highly beneficial to the
crown of France. But Louis had been accultomed to
long to the intricacies of a crooked and insidious po-
licy, that he could not be satisfied with what was obvious
[r] M. do C-owei, i 35l.

and

SECT. II. and i;mplc; anid was so fond of artifice and refinement,
^/' iat
i h he came to confider these as his ultimate object,

not as the mcars only of conducRing affairs. From
this principle, ro leis than from his unwillirrgnels to
aggrandize any of his own fubjeas, or from his de-
fire of oppfefling the house of Burgundy, which lie
hated, he ncgleEted the course which a Prince less able
and artful would have taken, and followed one more
suited to his own genius.

The fingu- HE proposed to render himself mailer, by force of
)ar courie arms, of those provinces, which Mary held of the
fohi'he Ccrown of France, and even to push his conquefrs into

her other territories, while he amused her with in-
sising continually on the impracticable match with the
Dauphin. In prosecuting this plan, he displayed won-
derful talents and induitrY, and exhibited such scenes
of treachery, faliehood and cruelty, as are amazing
even in the hitfory of Louis XI. Immediately upon
the death of Charles, he put his troops in motion, and
advanced towards the Netherlands. He corrupted the
leading men in the provinces of Burgundy and Artois,
and seduced them to desert their sovereign. He got
admiflion into some of the frontier towns by bribing
the governors; the gates of others were opened to him
in consequence of his intrigues with the inhabitants.
He negotiated with Marv; and, in order to render her
odious to her fubjecs, he betrayed to them her moll
important fecrcts. He carried on a private correfpon-
dencc with the two minilters whom she chiefly trust-
ed, and thcn communicated the letters which he had
received from them to the ftatcs of Slanders, who,
enraged at their perfidy, brought them immediately to
tlial, tortured them with mosl extreme cruelty, and,
anmoved by the tears and intreatics of their fovercign,
who knew and approved of all that the ministers Lad
done, they beheaded them in her precfnce [gJ.

The tflf.t VWIIL: Louis, by this conduct, unworthy of a great
tLf !i. i, nmornarch,l was securing the poffeflion of Eurgundy,
r'Lactji lArtois, :ind the towns on the Somme, the flares (,1
ul,. ti, i. l.,,dl.rs carried on a negotiation with the iE.mp.ror
heir c11' l'Fileciti k Ill. and concluded a treaty of railri;ige be-
,i^u"ru, ti'tweI their so cicign and his Ion Maximilian, Arch-

duke ol Auifria. The illufirious birth of that Prince,

[g M,:ci. dc Coniincs, liv. v. dl. 15. p. 3Q9, &c.

as

as w., ' a; the high dignity of which he ha . the SECT. II.
pr'oftct, endrered the alliance honourable for Mary, '"
while, from the distance of his hereditary territories,
and the scantiness of his revenue', his power was so
inconsiderable as did not excite the jealuufy or fear of
the Flemings.

THUS Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and the Tle influ-

cxcef, of his refinements, put the house of Auflria in ence of tiiat
polciflion of this noble inheritance. By this acquisition, on the natc
the foundation of the future grandeur of Charles V. ofkaropc-
was laid ; and he became mafler of those territories, which
eiabied him to carry on his most formidable and decisive
operatiens against France. Thus, too, the fame monarch
.whil first united the interior force of France, and efta-
bilhed it on such a footing, as to render it formidable
to the reft of Europe, contributed, far contrary to his
intention, to raise up a rival power, which, during ttvo
centuries, has thwarted the meafuies, opposed the arms,
and checked the progress of his fuccefilrs.

THE next event of consequence in the fifteenth cen-The next

tury, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into Italy. consiicrahle
This occasioned revolutions no less memorable; produ- event wso
ced alterations, which were more immediately perceiv- he invasion
ed, both in the military and political fvlte n; rouzed Charles
the flates of Europe to bolder effortb; and blended vItL. A.D.
their affairs and interests more closely together. The 1494.
mild administration of Charles, a weak but generous Themoti'es
Prince, seems to have revived the spirit and genius offi
the French nation, which the rigid defpotifmi cf his
father had depressed, and almost extinguished. The ar-
dour for military service, natural to the French nobility,
returned, and their young monarch w.s Inmpatielt to
distinguish his reign by fume splendid enterprize. While
he was uncertain toward, what quarter he should turn
his arms, the solicitations and intrigues of an Italian
politician, no lefb infamous on account of his crimes,
than eminent for his abilities, Jcterminled his choice. Lu-
dovico Sforza, having formed the design of deposing
his nephew the Duke of Milan, and of placing himself
on the ducal throne, was so much afraid of a combi-
nation of the Italian powers to thwart this measure,
and to fupptr t hie injjred Prince, with whom mot of
them were coilleede by blood or alliance, that he saw
the neceflity of fLcuring the aid of some able pro-
tedor. The King of France was the pcrfon to whom

he

Sr.cTr IT. he applied ; and without disclosing to him his own
A,_L intentions, he laboured to prevail with him to march

into Italy, at the head of a powerful army, in or-
der to seize the crown of Naples, to which he had
pretensions, as heir of the house of Anjou. The right
to that kingdom, claimed by the Angevin family,
had been conveyed to Louis XI. by Charles of An-
iou, Count of Maine and Provence. But that saga-
cious monarch, though he took immediate poffeflion
of those territories of which Charles was really ma-
fter, totally disregarded his ideal title to a kingdom,
over which another Prince reigned in tranquillity and
uniformly declined involving himself in the labyrinth of
Italian politicks. His son, more adventurous, ormore
inconsiderate, embarked eagerly in this enterprize;
and contemning all the remonstrances of his moss ex-
perienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on with the
utmost vigour.

Hi rerour- CHARLES wanted not power equal to such a great
<et for this undertaking. His father had transmitted to him such

an ample prerogative, as gave him the entire com-
mand of his kingdom. iHe himself had added con-
fiderably to the extent of his dominions, by his pru.
dent marriage with the heiress of Bretagne, which
rendered him master of that province, the last of the
great fiefs that remained to be annexed to the
crown. He soon assembled forces which he thought
sufficient; and so impatient was he to enter on his
career as a conqueror, that sacrificing what was real,
for what was chimerical, he reltored Roufillon to
Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's acquifi-
tions in Artois, to Maximilian, with a view of in-
ducing there Princes not to moles} France, while he
was carrying on his operations in Italy.

is prepara- But so different were the efforts of the States of
tions forit Europe in the fifteenth century, from those which we

fliall behold in the course of this history, that the ar-
my, with which Charles undertook this great enter-
prize, did not exceed twenty thousand men. The
train of artillery, however, the ammunition, and war-
like flores of every kind provided for its use, were
so great as to bear fume resemblance to the immenfc
apparatus of modern war [g].

[g) M:czeray Hilt. tom. ii. 777.

WH1.

XVHEN the French entered Italy, they met with SECT. II.

nothing able to resist them. The Italian powers hav- 'V^
ing remained, during a long period, undiflurbed by the Its fucces.
invasion of any foreign enemy, had tormed a fyiRem
with refped to their affairs, both in peace and war,
peculiar to themselves. In order to adjust the inte-
refts, and balance the power of the different flates into
which Italy was divided, they were engaged in per-
petual and endless negotiations with each other, which
they conduced with all the subtlety of a refining
and deceitful policy. Their contefis in the field,
when they had recourse to arms, were decided in mock
battles, by innocent and bloodless viEtories. Upon the
first appearance of the danger which now impended,
they had recourse to the arts which they had fludied,
and employed their utmost skill in intrigue, in order
to avert it. But this proving ineffe&ual, their effe-
minate mercenaries, the only military force that re-
mained in the country, being fit only for the parade
of service, were terrified at the aspec of real war, and
shrunk at its approach. The impetuosity of the French
valour appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pisa,
and Rome opened their gates as the French army ad-
vanced. The profpea of this dreadful invasion struck
one king of Naples with such panic terror, that he
died (if we may believe historians) of the fright.-
Another abdicated his throne from the fame pufillani-
mous spirit. A third fled out of his dominions, as
soon as the enemy appeared on the Neapolitan frontiers.
Charles, after marching thither from the bottom of the
Alps, with as much rapidity, and almost as little oppo-
fition, as if he had been on a progress through his
own dominions, took quiet potfefflon of the throne of
Naples, and intimidated or gave law to every power
in Italy.

SUCH was the conclusion of this expedition, which must effea.

be confidered as the sirs great exertion of those new pow- particularly
ers which the Princes of Europe had acquired, and now in Si"lrkfe

Po th: yltem

began to exercise. Its effeas were no les considerable concerning
than its filccefs had been astonishing. The Italians, un- a balance of
able to refilf the impression of the enemy which broke power.
in upon them, permitted him to hold on his course
undi urbed. They quickly perceived that no single
power, which they could rouze to acsion, was an equal
match for a monarch, who ruled over such extensive

territories,

FrCT. II. territories, and was at the head of such martial people;

V ut that a confederacy might accoinplifh what the ic.

parate members of it durst not attempt. To this ex.
pedient, the only one that remained to deliver or to
prefcive them from the yoke, they had recoui fc. While
Charles inconfiJeratcly wafted his time at Naples, in
festivals and triumphs, on .ccount of his pail fucceiieC,
or was fondly dreaming of future conquefis in tne :,;;l,
to the empire of which he now aspircd, they formncd
against him a powerful combination of almnoft all the
Ita!ian fares, supported by the Emperor Mlaximilian,
and Ferdinand King of Aragon. The union of fb
many powers, who fufpen.ed or forgot all their par-
ticular animofties, that they might ait in conceit
againfi an enemy who had become so turmidable to thenl
all, awakened Charles from his thoughtlefi fecuity.
He saw now no profpeA of safety but in returning
to France. An army of thirty thousand men, ffermb!ed
by the allies, was ready to obflrua his march; and thougil
the French, with a daring courage, which more than
counterbalanced their inferiority in number, broke
through that great body, and gained a victory, which
opened to their monarch a safe palahge into his own
territories, he was itripped of all his conquefits in Italy
in as ihort a time as it had cost him to acquire
them; and the political system in that country re-
fumed the fame appearance as before his invasion.

This bec THE sudden and decisive effect of this confederacy,
gcatlc th eems to have initruoed the Princes and fatefnien of
,F policy, Italy as much, as the irruption of the French had dif-
first in Ialy, concerted and alarmed them. They had now extend-
.an then in
E;uroCc. ed to the affairs of Europe, the maxims of that po-

litical science which had hitherto been applied only to
regulate the operations of the petty fates in their own
country. They had discovered the method of prevent-
ing any monarch from rising to such a degree of pow-
er, as was inconfiflent with the general liberty; and
had manifcfled the importance of attending to that great
Iecret in modern policy, the prefcrvation of a proper
diflribution of power among all the members of the
fvltem into which the flates of Europe are formed.
DJ)ring all the wars of which Italy now became the
t!icaitre, and amidst the hostile operations which the
imprudence of Louis X1I. and the ambition of Ferdi-
nand of Aragon, carried on in that country, with little

interruption,

i:ltelrui;tion, from the close of the fifteenth century, SECT II
to t'iat period at which the fubfeque-z hidtory corn- v
ict:ces, the maintaining a proper balance of power bc-
tween the contending parties, became the great object
or a:tetetion to the itatefinen of Italv. Nor tv.a. the
ildca confined to them. Seif-preferva:ion taught other
p,')ers to ad:opt it. It grew to be tafhionable and
universal. From this ara we can trace the pirgrefs
o0 that intercourse between nationc, which has linked
the powers of Europe so closely together; and can dif-
cein the operations of that provident policy, which,
during peace, guards against remote and contingent
dangers, which, in war, hath prevented rapid and de-
lirui ive conquests.

THIS was not the only effel of the operations The warsin

which the great powers of Europe carried on in Italy. Ita!Yr'ed"ar
They contributed to render such a change, as the mics ga
French had begun to make in the state of their troops, ral.
general; and obliged all the Princes, who appeared on
this new theatre of ation, to establish the military
firce of their kingdoms on the fame footing with
that of France. When the feat of war came to be
remote from the countries which maintained the con-
tefl, the service of the feudal vassals ceased to be of
any use; and the necessity of employing troops regu-
larly trained to arms, and kept in constant pay, came
at once to be evident. When Charles marched into
Italy, his cavalry was entirely composed of those com-
panies of Gendarmes, embodied by Charles VII. and
continued by Louis XI. his infantry confidled partly of
Swiss, hired of the cantons and partly of Gafconz,
armed and disciplined after the Swiss model. To there
Louis XII. added a body of Germans, well known
in the wars of Italy by the name of the Black Bands.
But neither of these monarchs made any account of
the feudal militia, or ever had recourse to that mili-
tary force which they might have com:nanded, in vir-
tue of the ancient inflitutions in their kingdom. Maxi-
milian and Ferdinand, as soon as they began to aEt
in Italy, employed the fame inRtruments, and trufed
the execution of their plans entirely to mercenary
troops.

THIS innovation in the military fyftm was quickly Teacli the
ifllowed by another, which the cuflom of employinkg L'';trrcats

hlie s perior

Swiss in the Italian wars, was the occasion ct' intro- importance
ducing. The arms and discipline of the Swils were of iftanrly

different i w".

SECT. II. different from those of other European nation. -.
%'v-vS During their long and violent firuggles in defence of

their liberties, against the house of Austria, whose ar-
mies, like those of other considerable Princes, confifed
chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, the Swiss found that
their poverty, and the small number of gentlemen re-
fiding in their country, at that time barren and un-
cultivated, put it out of their power to bring into
the field any body of horse capable of facing the ene-
my. Necefiity compelled them to place all their
confidence in infantry; and in order to render it ca-
pable of withstanding the shock of cavalry, they gave
the soldiers breast-plates and helmets as defensive ar-
mour; together with long spears, halberts, and heavy
swords as weapons of offence. They formed them
into large battalions, ranged in deep and close array,
so as to present on every fide a formidable front to
the enemy [hb. The men at arms could make no
impreflion on the solid firength of such a body. It
repulsed the Auffrians in all their attempts to conquer
Swifferland. It broke the Burgundian Gendarmerie,
which was scarce inferior to that of France, either
in number or reputation: And when firfl called to
at in Italy, it bore down by its irrefiflible force eve-
ry enemy that attempted to oppose it. These re-
peated proofs of the decisive effec of infantry, exhi-
bited on such conspicuous occasions, restored that ser-
vice to reputation, and gradually re-eflablifhed the opi-
nion, which had been long exploded, of its superior
importance in the operations of war. But the glory
which the Swiss had acquired, having inspired them
with such high ideas of their own prowess and con-
sequence, as rendered them mutinous and insolent, the
Princes who employed them became weary of depend-
ing on the caprice of foreign mercenaries, and began
to turn their attention towards the improvement of
their national infantry.

National in- THE German powers having the command of men,
fa'ntry eta. whom nature has endowed with that fReady courage,
blilh, d in
OGcrmany. andl persevering firength, which forms them to be

fuldicrs, loon modelled their troops in such a manner
th:,t they vied with the Swiss both in discipline and
valour.

[hj Michinvcl Art of War, b. ii p. ii. p. 4Si. Tp

THEa

THE French monarchs, though more slowly, and SECT. II.

with greater difficulty, accufiomed the impetuous spirit _Vt
of their people to subordination and discipline; and were In France.
at such pains to render their national infantry refpet-
able, that as early as the reign of Louis XII. fevcral
gentlemen of high rank had so far abandoned their an-
cient ideas, as to condelcend to enter into that service [i].

THE Spaniards, whose situation made it difficult to In Spain.

employ any other than their own national troops, in
the southern parts of Italy, which was the chief scene
of their operations in that country, not only adopted
the Swif discipline, but improved upon it, by min-
gling a proper number of soldiers armed with heavy
mulkets in their battalions; and thus formed that fa-
mous body of infantry, which, during a century and a
half, was the admiration and terror of all Europe. The
Italian flates gradually diminished the number of their
cavalry, and, in imitation of their more powerful neigh-
bours, brought the tfrength of their armies to consist
in foot soldiers. From this period the nations of Eu-
rope have carried on war with forces more adapted to
every species of service, more capable of acing in every
country, and better fitted both for making conquefis,
and for preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Europe to The Italian
these improvements in the art of war, they gave them wars occafi-

on an in-

likewise the first idea of the expence which accompanies crease of
great and continued operations, and accustomed them the publirk
to the burden of those impositions, which are necessary Evenues I"
for lupporting them. While the feudal policy fubfifled
in full vigour, while armies were composed of mili-
tary vassals called forth to attack some neighbouring
power, and to perform, in a short campaign, the ser-
vices which they owed to their sovereign, the expence
ot war was extremely moderate. A small subsidy
enabled a Prince to begin and to finish his greatftl
operations. But when Italy bccnme the theatre on
which the powers of Europe contended for superiority,
the preparations requisite for luch a dillant expedition,
the pay of armies kept constantly on foot, their lub-
filtance in a foreign country, the sieges to be under-
taken, and the towns to be dfcetided, swelled the
charges of war immenfelv, and by creating demands
unknown in less adive times, multiplied taxes in cvtly

[i] Brantomc, tom. x. 18. Mem. o Flcuranc,,, 143.
¥ OL. 1. G kingdom.

Szic. IT. kingdom. The progress of ambition, however, was Co
I _Vl% rapid, and Princes extended their operations lo said,

that it was impossible at first to eltablifh funds pro-
portional to the increase of expence which these occa-
sioned. When Charles VIII. invaded Naples, the fums
requisite for carrying on that enterprise so far exceed-
ed those which France had been accuflomed to contri-
bute, that before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his
treasury was exhausted, and the domeflick resources, of
which his extensive prerogative gave him the command,
were at an end. As he durst not venture to lay any
new imposition on his people, oppressed already with
the weight of unusual burdens, the only expedient that
remained was, to borrow of the Genoese as much
money as would enable him to continue his march.
But he could not obtain the fum that was requisite,
without consenting to pay annually the exorbitant in-
terest of forty-two livres for every hundred that he re-
ceived [k. We may observe the fame disproportion
between the efforts and revenues of other Princes, his
contemporaries. From this period, taxes went on in-
creasing; and during the reign of Charles V. such fums
were levied in every itate, as would have appeared pro-
digious at the close of the fifteenth century, and gra-
dually prepared the way for the more exorbitant exac-
tions of modern times.

The league TRE last tranfa&ion, previous to the reign of Charles
of Cambray V. that merits attention on account of its influence
ortahnt c- upon the state of Europe, is the league of Cambray.
currencc. To humble the republick of Venice, and to divide its

territories, was the objet of all the powers who united
in this confederacy. The civil constitution of Venice,
established on a firm basis, had suffered no confidera-
ble alteration for several centuries; during which, the
slate conducted its affairs by maxims of policy no lets
prudent than vigorous, and adhered to there, with an
uniform confiletnt spirit, which gave that common-
wealth great advantage over other states, whose views
and measures changed as often as the form of their
government, or the persons who administered it. By
these unintermitted exertions of wisdom and valour,
the Venetians enlarged the dominions of their com-
monwealth, until it became the mofi considerable
power in Italy. While their extcnfivc commerce, the
[k] Ma. de Comainc, lib. vii. c. S. p. 440.

u.rf£l.

useful and curious manufatures which they carried on, SECT. II.
together with their monopoly of the precious commo- V
dities of the Ealt, rendered Venice the mofl opulent
state in Europe.

THEIR power was the objed of terror to their Ita- The mo-

lian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed with envy tives of it.
by the greatest monarchs, who could not vie with their
private citizens in the magnificence of their buildings,
in the richness of their dress and furniture, or in lplen-
dor and elegance of living []. Julius II. whose am-
bition was superior, and his abilities equal, to those of
any Pontiff who ever fat on the Papal throne, formed
the idea of this league against the Venetians, and en-
deavoured, by applying to there passions which I have
mentioned, to periuade other Princes to join in it. By
working upon the fears of the Italian powers, and upon -
:he avarice of the monarchs beyond the Alps, he in-
duced them, in concurrence with other caufcs, which it
is not my province to explain, to form agailft there
haughty republicans one of the most extcnfivc confe-
deracies Europe had ever beheld.

THE Emperor, the King of France, the 1 ing of Th rap;d

Aragon, the Pope, were principals in the league prgLc oC
of Cambray, to which almost all the Princes ofr t"c
Italy acceded, the least considerable of them ho-
ping for some ibare in the spoils of a state, which
they already deemed to be devoted to deflrution. The
Venetians might have diverted this norm, or have
broken its force; but with a presumptuous rashness, to
which there is nothing similar in the course of their
history, they waited its approach. The impetuous
valour of the French rendered ineffecual all their pre-
cautions for the safety of the rcpublick; and the fatal
battle of Ghiarradadda entirely ruined the army, on
which they relied for defence. Julius seized all the
towns which they held in the ecclefiaRlical territories.
Ferdinand re-annexed the towns of which they had
got poffeflion on the coafi of Calabria, to his Neapoli-
tan dominions. Maximilian, at the head of a po;\cr-
ful army, advanced towards Venice on the one fide.
The French pushed their conquefs on the other. The
Venetians, surrounded by so many enemies, and left
without one ally, funk from the height of presumption
to the depths of derpair; abandoned all their territo-
[1] Hclarni oratio a*ud Goldatum in polit Imperial. p. 9e.

G ' rie*

SECT. II. ties on the continent; and shut themselves up in their
AVVm^d capital, as their last refuge, and the only place which

they hoped to preserve.

Divfion THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the con-
arifesmong federacy. The members of it, united while engaged

in seizing their prey, began to feel their ancient jea-
lousy and animofities revive, as soon as they had a prof-
pe& of dividing it. When the Venctians observed these
symptoms of alienation and diflrufl, a ray of hope broke
in upon them; the spirit natural to their councils re-
turned; they resumed such wisdom and firmness, as
made some atonement for their former imprudence and
dejeEtion; they recovered part of the territory which
they had loft; they appeared the pope and Ferdinand by
well-timed conceflions in their favour; and at length
dissolved the confederacy, which had brought their com-
monwealth to the brink of ruin.

New objeas JULIUS, elated with beholding the effects of a league
of their which he himself had planned, and imagining that no-
policy and thing was too arduous for him to undertake, conceived

the idea of expelling every foreign power out of Italy,
and bent all the force of his mind towards executing a
scheme to well suited to his vaftand enterprizing genius.
He direEted his firfi attack agai:.ft the French, who,
on many accounts, were more odious to the Italians,
than any of the foreigners who had acquired dominion
in their country. By his activity and address, he pre-
vailed on moss of the powers, who had joined in the
league of Cambray, to turn their arms against the King
of France, their former ally; and engaged Henry VIII.
who had lately ascended the throne of England, to
favour their operations by invading France. Iouis
XII. rcfifled all the efforts of this formidable and un-
cxpctcd confederacy, with undaunted fortitude. Hof-
tilities were carried on, during fcvcral campaigns, in
Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy, with
alternate success. Exhaufled, at length, by ihe variety
as well as extent of his operations; unable to withfland
a confederacy which brought againll him superior force,
conducted with wisdom and aaing with perft vcrance;
he found it ntceffary to conclude fcparate treaties of
peace with his enemies; and the war termipated with
the lois of every thing which the French had acquired
in Italy, except the cattle of Milan, and a few incon-
fiderable towns in that dutchy.

Tl'HE

THE various negotiations carried on during this busy SLCT. II.

period, and the different combinations formed among _V
powers hitherto little conne&ed with each other, greatl By this the
increased that intercourse between the nations of Eu- among the
rope, which I have mentioned as one effe& of the Eur.pean

nations m-

events in the fifteenth century. While the greatness of creafei.
the objects at which they aimed, the distant expedi-
tions which they undertook, as well as the length and
obstinacy of the conterts in which they engaged, pbli-
ged them to exert themselves with a vigour and per-
severance unknown in the preceding ages.

THOSE a&ive scenes which the following History They are

will exhibit, and the variety and importance of those prepared tbr
tranfacions which distinguish the period to which it ex- tho toranfac
tends, are not to be ascribed solely to the ambition, to fi>tcenth
the abilities, or to the rivalfhip of Charles V. and of century.
Francis I. The kingdoms of Europe had arrived at
such a degree of improvement in the internal adminif-
tration of government, and Princes had acquired such
command of the national force which was to be exert-
ed in foreign wars, that they were in a condition to en-
large the sphere of their operations, and to increase the
vigour of their efforts. Their conteits in Italy, which
led them first to try the extent of the power that they
had acquired, gave rife to so many opposite claims and
pretensions, excited such a spirit of dilcord and rival-
ship between nations, and laid the foundation of so
many quarrels, as could not fail of producing extraor-
dinary convulsions in Europe; and the sixteenth ten-,
tury opened with the certain profpe& of its abouniiing
in great and interefing events.

G 3 A VIEW

# A VIEW OF THE PROGRESS OF SOCIETY IN EUROPE, FROM THE SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE, TO THE BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

V. I E V

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
E U R O P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY,

SECTION 1II.
Piew of thc political Con/litution of the principal Statre

in Europe, at the Commencement of tbe fixteentb Cen-
tury.
SECT. 11 1. A V I N G thus enumerated the principal causes

H--v- J and events, the influence of which extended to

A covnidera all the Rates in Europc, and contributed cither to im-
inthe con- prove their internal government and police, or to en-
flitution of large the fpherc of their acivity, and to augment their
the different
n.ttllns of national force; nothing remains, in order to prepare
Europc. nlm reade-rs for entering with full information upon pe-

ruling the Hliflory of the Reign of Charles V. but to
give some view of the particular conflitution and form
of civil government, in each of the nations which
afted any considerable part during that period. While
tlfel institutions and occurrences, which I have men-

tioned,

tioned, formed the people of Europe to resemble each SECT. nI.
other, and conduced them from barbarism to refine. s
ment, in the fame path, and with almof equal fleps,
there were other circumfiances which occasioned a dif-
ference in their political eRfablifhments, and gave rife
to those peculiar modes of government, which have
produced such variety in the characer and genius of
nations.

IT is no less necessary to become acquainted with Neceffaryto

the latter, than to have contemplated the former. ex'Plain th
The view which I have exhibited of the causes and each, when
events, whose influence was universal, will enable my Charles V.
readers to account for the flirprizing resemblance among began his
the nations of Europe in their interior police, and g.
foreign operations. But, without a distinct knowledge
of the peculiar form and genius of their civil govern-
ment, a great part of their tranfations must appear al-
together myfrerious and inexplicable. The hiflorians
of particular States, as they seldom extended their
views farther than to the amusement or inftruaion of
their fellow-citizens, by whom they might presume
that all domeflick cufloms and inflitutions were per-
fecly underflood, have often negleced to descend into
such details with refpet to there, as are sufficient to
convey to foreigners full light and information concern-
ing the occurrences which they relate. But a history,
which comprehends the tranfations of so many diffe-
rent countries, would be extremely imperfcct, without
a previous survey of their constitution and political slate.
It is from his knowledge of there, that the reader muff
draw those principles, which will enable him to judge
with discernment, and to decide with certainty con-
cerning the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar forms

and regulations in every country, would lead to de-
ducions of immeasurable length. To Iketch out the
great lines which ditfinguifh and characerize each go-
vernment, is all that the nature of my present work
will admit of, and all that is neccffary to illutlrate the
events which it records.

AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the poli-TheStatof

tical face of Italy was extremely different from that ol Ltay.
any other part of Europe. Instead of those extensive
monarchies, which occupied the reft of the continent,

G4 that

SECT. III. that delightful country was parcelled out among many
_mV%. small fates, each of which possessed sovereign and in-

dependent jurifdiaion. The only monaichy in Italy
was that of Naples. The dominion of the Popes was
of a peculiar species, to which there is nothing similar
either in ancient or modern times. In Venice and
Florence, a republican form of government was efta-
blifhed. Milan was subjec to sovereigns, who had as-
fumed no higher title than that of Dukes.

The Papal THE Pope was the first of these powers in dignity,
hgnhitt in and not the leafi considerable by the extent of his ter-
Zurope. ritories. In the primitive church, the jurifdi&ion of

bishops was equal and co-ordinate. They derived,
perhaps, some degree of consideration from the dig-
nity of the See in which they presided. They poffefTed,
however, no real authority or pre-eminence, but what
they acquired by superior abilities, or superior san&ity.

Origin and As Rome had so long been the feat of Efinpire, and
progress of capital of the world, its bishops were on that account
powPpal entitled to respect; they received it; but during several

ages they claimed and received nothing more. From
these humble beginnings, they advanced with such an
adventurous and well-direaed ambition, that they efla-
blifhed a spiritual dominion over the minds and senti-
ments of men, to which all Europe submitted with im-
plicit obedience. Their claim of universal jurifdi&ion,
as heads of the church, and their pretensions to infal-
libility in their decisions, as successors of St. Peter,
are as chimerical, as they are repugnant to the genius
of the Christian religion. But on these foundations, the
fuperflition and credulity of mankind enabled them to
erea an amazing fuperflruaure. In all ecclefiaflical
controversies, their decisions were received as the in-
fallible oracles of truth. Nor was the plenitude of
their power confined to these alone; they dethroned
monarchs; disposed of crowns; absolved fubjecs from
the obedience due to their sovereigns; and laid king-
donls under interdits. There was not a slate in Eu-
rope which had not been disquieted by their ambititn.
There was not a thrtne which they had not shaken;
nor a Prince who did not tremble at their power.

Theterrito- NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire ab-
ries ofthe solute, and lo eltablit, it on the ruins of all civil au-
Pupte inadc -
,Putt,pf- thority, but that the Popes should have polftfcd such a
ort their degree
fpirital ju-
rJldWtna.

Idcree of temporal power, as was sufficient to second SECT. III.
and enforce their spiritual decrees. Happily for man- NY
kind, while their spiritual jurildiaion was mofr exten-
file, and at its greatest height, their temporal pro-
perty was extremely limited. They were powerful
jontiffs, formidable at a diflance; but they were petty
I'linces, without any considerable domeflick force.
'They had early endeavoured, indeed, to acquire ter-
ritory by arts, similar to those which they had employ-
ed in extending their jurifdi&ion. Under pretence of
a donation from Conflantine, and of another trom
Charlemagne or his father Pepin, they attempted to
take poffeflion of some towns adjacent to onmc. But
these donations were fictitious, and availed them little.
The benefacions, for which they were indebted to the
credulity of the Norman adventurers, who conquered
Naples, and to the superstition of the countess Matilda,
were real, and added ample domains to the Holy See.

BUT the power of the Popes did not increase in Their au-

proportion to the extent of territory which thty had thorny in
acquired. In the dominions annexed tu the Holy See, their own
as well as in those lubje& to other Princes in Ita'!, exrrcmey
the sovereign of a state was far from having the corn- limited.
mand of the force which it contained. During the
turbulence and confusion of the middle ages, the power-
ful nobility or leaders of popular fations in Italy, had
fcized the government of different towns; and after
firengthening their fortifications, and taking a body of
mercenaries into pay, they set up for independence.
The territory which the church had gained, was filled
with such petty tyrants, who left the Pope hardly the
Ihadow of dominion.

As thcfe usurpations almofi annihi'atcd the Papal It wascir-

power in the greater part of the towns fub.jit to the cumfcrtca,
church, the Roman barons frequently disputed th. bcti ns tihe
authority of the Popes, even in Rome itlelt. In tl;e K-mauba-
twelfth century, an opinion bggar t, be prona;at'l,,rt ;
" That as the function of ecclcdlafics wis purcly Iliri-
tual, they ought to poffels no propel tv, and to claim
no temporal jurifdition; but, acord:ng to tle l.id-
able example of their p "oc' e(f-rs ii :he pinlitlive
church, should fubfiflR uoil, ,is-on kih': l;*'es, or
upon the voluntary oliations of he people .]." This
[a] Otto Frifinogens de G~dt fii&cr. Imp. lib. ii. cap. :o.

dodrine

SECT. III. docirine being addressed to men, who had beheld the
%vy_. scandalous manner in which the avarice and ambition

of the clergy had prompted them to contend for
wealth, and to exercise power, they listened to it
with fond attention. The Roman barons, who had
felt most sensibly the rigour of ecclesiastical oppref-
sion, adopted these sentiments with such ardour, that
they set themselves instantly to shake off the yoke.
LD. 1143. They endeavoured to reflore some image of their an-

cient liberty, by reviving the inflitution of the Ro-
man senate, in which they velted supreme authority;
committing the executive power sometimes to one
chief senator, sometimes to two, and sometimes to a
magistrate dignified with the name of Tbe Patrician.
'Ihe Popes exerted themselves with vigour, in order
to check this fatal encroachment on their jurifdiaion.
One of them, finding all his endeavours ineffe&ual,
was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut short
his days. Another, having ventured to attack the
senators at the head of some armed men, was mor-
tally wounded in the fray [b]. During a considerable
period, the power of the Popes, before which the
greatefi monarchs in Europe trembled, was circum.
fcribed within such narrow limits in their own capi-
tal, that they durfi scarce exert any aS of authority
without the permiflion and concurrence of the fe-
nate.

and by the ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal
wtoucnce authority, not only by the usurpations of the Roman
of the Ro-
manpeople, nobility, but by the mutinous spirit of the people.
from During seventy years of the fourteenth century, the
ADt 308. opes fixed their rcfidence in Avignon. The inha-
AD.i 377. bitants of Rome, accuflomed to confider themselves

as the dcfcendants of the people who had conquered
the world, and had given laws to it, were too high-
spirited to submit with patience to the delegated au-
thority of those persons, to whom the Popes com-
mitted the government of the city. On many oc-
cafions, they opposed the execution of the Papal

[b] Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii. cap. 17, 3. 1d. de Gecf. Frid.
lib. i. c. 7. Miaratori Anaafl d'ltala vol. ix. 398, 404.

mandates,

mandates, and on the flightefi appearance of inno-SscT.III.
vation or oppression, they were ready to take arms f
in defence of their own immunities. Towards the
middle of the fourteenth century, being instigated by
Nicholas Rienzo, a man of low birth and a fediti-
ous spirit, but of a popular eloquence, and an enter-
prizing ambition, they drove all the nobility out of
the city, eflablifhed a democratical form of govern-
ment, ele&ed Rienzo Tribune of the people, and in-
veRted him with extensive authority. But through the
frantick proceedings of the tribune soon overturned
this new fyfRem; though the government of Rome
was reinflated in its ancient form; yet every fresh
attack contributed to weaken the papal jurifdition;
and the turbulence of the people concurred with the
spirit of independence among the nobi'liy, to cir-
cumfcribe it within very narrow bounds l]. Gregory
VII. and other domineering Pontiffs, accomplished
those great things which rendered them so formida-
ble to the Emperors with whom they contended,
not by the force of their arms, or by the extent of
their power, but by the dread of their spiritual cen-
fures, and by the effect of their intrigues, which
excited rivals, and called forth enemies againfi every
Prince, whom they wified to depress or to deflroy.

MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not only Alexander
to humble these usurpers, who lorded it over the c;- vI. and
ties in the ecclefiaRlical Rate, but to break the turbu- Idu, the
lent spirit of the Roman people. These were lorg Popes oni-
unsuccessful. At last Alexander VI. with a policy no rabl.
lefi artful than flagitious, subdued and extirpated most
of them, and rendered the Popes matlers of their own
dominions. The enterprizing ambition of Julius 1I.
added cenquefts of no inconsiderable value to the pa-
trimony of St. Peter. Thus the Popes, by degrees,
became powerful temporal Princes. Their territories,
in the age of Charles V. were of greater extent
than at present; their country was better cultivated,
and more populous; and as they drew large contri-

[c] Historic Fiorentine de Giov. Villani, lib. xii. c. 9,. so4. ap.

Murat. Script. Rcrum Ital. vol. xiii. Vita de Cola di Rienzo, ap.

urat. Antiq. Ital. vol iii. p. sp', Sac. lit. de Nic. Ricnzy, par M.
loifprcux, p. p1, Ac,

butions

SECT. I. butions from every part of Europe, their revenues far

_mV'% exceeded those of the neighbouring powers, and ren-

dered them capable of more sudden and vigorous es-
forts.

Defft in THE genius of the Papal government, however,
the nature was better adapted to the exercise of spiritual domi-
of edefiaf- nion, than of temporal power. With refpe& to the
icaldoni- former, all its maxims were steady and invariable.

Every new Pontiff adopted the plan of his predecef-
for. By education and habit Ecclesiastics were so form-
ed, that the characer of the individual was funk in
that of the profeflion; and the paflions of the man
were sacrificed to the interest and honour of the or-
der. The hands which held the reins of adminifira-
tion might change; but the spirit which conducted
them was always the fame. While the measures of
other governments flucuated, and the objects at which
they aimed varied, the church kept one end in view;
and to this unrelaxing conflancy of pursuit, it was
indebted for its success in the boldest attempts ever
made by human ambition.

BUT in their civil adminifiration, the Popes follow-

ed no such uniform or confifdent plan. There, as in
other governments, the charater, the paflions, and
the interests of the person who had the supreme di-
re&ion of affairs, occasioned a variation both in ob-
jects and measures. As few Prelates reached the fum-
mit of ecclefiaftcal dignity, until they were far ad-
vanced in life, a change of maflers was more fre-
quent in the Papal dominions than in other states,
and the political fyflem was, of course, less stable and
permanent. Every Pope was eager to make the mofi
of the short period, during which he had the profpe&
of enjoying power, in order to aggrandize his family,
and to attain his private ends; and it was often the
firfl business of his successor to undo all that he had
done, and to overturn what he had established.

As ecclcfiaflicks were trained to pacifick arts, and

early initiated in the myflerics of that policy, by
which the court of Rome extended or supported its
spiritual dominion, the Popes were apt to conduct
their temporal affairs with the fame spirit; and in
all their measures were more ready to employ the
refinements of intrigue, than the force of arms. It

was

n-as in the Papal court that address and subtlety inS cT.III.
negotiation firfR became a science; and during the fix- T.'V _
teenth century, Rome was confidered as the school in
which it could be best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclefiaflical charaaer pre-

vented the Popes from placing themselves at the head
of their armies, or taking the command, in person,
of the military force in their dominions, they were
afraid to arm their subje&s; and in all their opera-
tions, whether offensive or defensive, they trusted en-
tirely to mercenary troops.

As their power and dominions could not descend

to their posterity, the Popes were less solicitous than
other Princes to form or to encourage schemes of pub-
lick utility and improvement. Their tenure was only
for a short life; present advantage was all that they
attended to; to squeeze and to amass, not to melio-
rate, was their objec. They ereded, perhaps, some
work of oflentation, to remain as a monument of
their Pontificate; they found it necessary, at some
times, to establish useful institutions, in order to tooth
and silence the turbulent populace of Rome; but
plans of general benefit to their subje&s, and framed
with a view to futurity, were rarely obje&s of at-
tention in the Papal policy. The patrimony of St.
Peter was worse governed than any part of Europe;
and though a generous Pontiff might suspend for a
little, or counterac the effecs of those vices which
are peculiar to the administration of ecclefiafticks; the
disease not only remained incurable, but has even gone
on increasing from age to age; and the decline of the
slate has kept pace with its progress.

ONE circumitance, farther, concerning the Papal The Popes

government, is so singular, as to merit attention. As derive some
the fpirituLl supremacy and temporal power were f^rom'
united in one person, and uniformly aided each other union of
in their operations, they became Co blended together, theirfirit.
that it was difficult to separate them, even in imagi- ansa tern.

1 poral autho.

nation. The potentates who found it necessary to rity.
oppose the measures which the Popes pursued as tem-
PN)ral princes, could not divcfd themselves of the re-
verence which they imagined to be due to them as
.aJds of the church, and vicars of Jesus Christ. It
ewas with relucance that they could be brought to a

rupture

SECT.IL rupture with them; they were averse to push their
.eV~d operations againfi them to extremity; they liftcned

eagerly to the first overtures of accommodation, and
were willing to procure it almost upon any terms.
Their confcioufncfs of this encouraged the enterpri.
zing Pontiffs, who filled the Papal throne about the
beginning of the sixteenth century, to engage in
schemes seemingly the moRt extravagant. They trufl.
ed, that if their temporal power was not sufficient to
carry them through with success, the refpea paid to
their spiritual dignity would enable them to extricate
themselves with facility and with honour[d]. But
when Popes came to take part more frequently in
the contefis among Princes, and to engage as princi.
pals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in Europe,
this veneration for their sacred characer began to
abate; and flriking inkances will occur in the fol-
lowing hiflory, of its being almofR totally extin&.

Conflitu- OF all the Italian powers, the republick of Venice,
tin of the next to the Pope, was most conneced with the relt
Venic,with of Europe. The rife of that commonwealth, dur-
its ric and ing the inroads of the Huns in the fifth century;
rv-Orcii the singular situation of its capital in the small isles

of the Adriatick gulf; and the more singular form of
its civil conflitution, are generally known. If we view
the Venetian government as calculated for the order
of nobles alone, its inflitutions are so excellent; the

[d] The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook and

carried on war against Jliau II. remarkably illufra this odrvation.
Louis Colemnly conlilted the dergy of France, whether it was Ilufi
to take arms againf a Pope, who-had wantonly kindled war in rropc,
and whom neither the faith of treaties, nor gratitude for Fourn re-
ceived, nor the decorum of hi charater, could reftnin roim the mot
violent aftions, to which the lust of power prompts ambitiou Pria.
Though his cley authorized the war, yet Anne of Bretan, hi
Queen, enmrtainelfcruples with regard to the lawfubae of i. The
Kiny himself, from rome fuperftiion of the fame kind, csrrid It on
faintly; and, upon every frch advantage, renewed his propfitions of
peace. Mezeray, Hist. de France, fol. edit. sa65. tom. l 8#1. i1 fall
produce another proof of this r~rence fur the Papal ch~ Itill
more firiking. Guicciardni, the mol figacioo, prhaps, of all modrm
hifit rian, and the boldest in painting the vice and ambitio of the
P( ,er, rcprcfents the death o' Migliau, a Spiilh oiecr, who ~w
kil.ed during the siege of Naplea, aa * pmflet inlied on him
by heaven. on account of his having opposed the fiting of Clemen
VII. at liberty. G(wc. liuria d'ltli tia -,. a645, vol. ii. lib. 1
p. 467.

deliberativc,

deliberative, legislative and executive powers are so SECT. IU1
admirably distributed and adjusted, that it must be re- dy¥.
garded as a perse& model of political wisdom. But
if we confider it as formed for a numerous body of
people fubje& to its jurifdi&ion, it will appear a rigid
and partial ariltocracy, which lodges all power in the
hands of a few members of the community, while it
degrades and oppresses the reft.

THE spirit of government, in a commonwealth of Dea&in

this species, was, of course, timid and jealous. The iT gonm-
Venetian nobles diftruRed their own fubjets, and c tfy%
were afraid of allowing them the use of arms. They ref.btoip
encouraged among them the arts of industry and corn- m y
merce; they employed them in manufactures and in o
navigation; but never admitted them into the troops
which the slate kept in its pay. The military force
of the republick confifed entirely of foreign mercena-
ries. The command of these was never trusted to
noble Venetians, left they ihould acquire such influ-
ence over the army, as might endanger the publick
liberty; or become accustomed to the exercise of such
power, as would make them unwilling to return to
the condition of private citizens. A soldier of for-
tune was placed at the head of the armies of the
commonwealth; and to obtain that honour, was the
great obje& of the Italian C idottieri, or leaders of
bands, who, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries,
made a trade of war, and raised and hired out fol-
diers to different fates. But the fame suspicious po-
licy, which induced them to employ these adventurers,
prevented their placing entire confidence in them. Two
noblemen, appointed by the senate, accompanied their
army when it took the field, with the appellation of
Proeditori, and like the field-deputies of the Dutch
republick in later times, observed all the motions of
the general, and checked and controled him in all
his operations.

A XlPUBLICK, with such civil and military infti-

tutions, was not formed to make conquerts. While
its fubjets were disarmed, and its nobles excluded
from military command, it carried on its warlike en-
terprizes with great disadvantage. This ought to have
taught the Venetians to make felf-prcfervation, and
the enjoyment of domeltick fccurity, the objelts of

their

Secr. III. their policy. But republicks are apt to be (educed
%.V% by the spirit of ambition, as well as Princes. When

the Venctians so far forgot the interior defets in
their government, as to aim at extensive conquefis,
the fatal blowv, which they received in the war ex-
cited by the league of Cambray, convinced them of
the imprudence and danger of making violent efforts,
in opposition to the genius and tendency of their con-
ltitution.

Ecellence IT is not, however, by its military, but by its
of it' naval naval and commercial power, that the importance of

the Venetian commonwealth mull be estimated. In
the latter, the real force and nerves of the slate
confiffed. The jealousy of government did not ex-
tend to this department. Nothing was apprehend-
ed from this quarter, that could prove formidable to
liberty. The senate encouraged the nobles to trade,
and to serve on board the fleet. They became mer-
chants and admirals. They encreafed the wealth of
their country by their induitry. They added to its
dominions, by the valour with which they conduced
its naval armaments.

The extent THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible
of ascm- source of opulence. All the nations in Europe de-
tncmc pended upon them, not only for the commodities of

the East, but for various manufa&ures fabricated by
them alone, or finished with a dexterity and elegance
unknown in other countries. From this extensive
commerce, the slate derived such immense supplies,
as concealed these vices in its conltitution, which I
have mentioned; and enabled it to keep on foot such
armies, as were not only an over-match for the force
which any of its neighbours could bring into the
field, but were sufficient to contend, for some time,
with the powerful monarchs beyond the Alps. Dur-
ing its struggles with the Princes united againit it by
the league of Cambray, the republick levied fums
which, even in the present age, would be deemed
considerable; and while the King of France paid the
exorbitant interest which I have mentioned for the
money advanced to him, and the Emperor eager to
borrow, but deflitute of credit, was known by the
name of Maxi.'.ilian the Mncrlefi, the Venetians raised

whatever

whatever fums they pleased, at the moderate premium SECT. III.
of five in the hundred [el.

THE constitution of Florence was perfectly the re- The confni

verse of that of Venice. It partook as much of the ruton of
democratical turbulence and licentiousness, as the other
of ariflocratical rigour. Florence, however, was a com-
mercial, not a military democracy. The nature of its
inflitutions were favourable to commerce, and the ge-
niusof the people was turned towards it. The val:
wealth which the family of Medici had acquired by
trade; added to the magnificence, the generosity, and
the virtue of the first Cosmo, gave him such an afcen-
dant over the affetions as well as the councils of his
countrymen, that though the forms of popular govern-
ment were preserved, though the various departments
of adminiftrarion were filled by magifirates diflinguifh-
ed by the ancient names, and eleced in the usual man-
ner, he was in reality the head of the commonwealth,
and in the station of a private citizen he possessed fu-
preme authority. Cosmo transmittcd a considerable de-
gree of this power to his descendants; and during the
greater part of the fifteenth century, the political state
of Florence was extremely singular. The appearance
of republican government subsisted, the people were
pafionately attached to it, and on rome occasions con-
tended warmly for their privileges, and yet they per-
mitted a tingle family to assume a direcion of their as-
fairs, almofR as absolute as if it had been formally in-
vested with sovereign power. The jealousy of the Me-
dici concurred with the commercial spirit of the Flo-
rentines, in putting the military force of the republick
upon the fame footing with that of the other Italian
states. The troops, which the Florentines employed in
their wars, confifed almofs entirely of mercenary fol-
diers, furnished by the Cendottieri, or leaders of bands,
whom they took into their pay.

IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the sovereignty The cointi.

of the island of Sicily was annexed, the feudal govern- tutinn of
ment was eflablihed in the fame form, and with the the king-

dom ot

lime defecs, as in the other nations of Europe. TIhe dople
frequent and violent revolutions which happened in that
monarchy, had considerably increased there defe&s, and
rendered them more intolerable. The fuc(eflion to the
[] Hist. de liae itue fc Cambray pr M. IAbbe Ie 3So. lib. v.
Indi. storia Civil vecanrim, lib. viii. c. 16. p. 891, Tc.
VOL. 1. H crown

SFCT. II. crown of Naples had been so often interrupted or al-
OvY'" tered, and so many Princes of foreign blood had taken

poffeflion of the throne, that theNeapolitan nobility had
loft, in a great measure, that attachment to the family
of their ibvereigns, as well as that reverence for their
persons, which, in other feudal kingdoms, contributed
to set some bounds to the encroachments of the barons
upon the royal prerogative and power. At the fame
time, the different pretenders to the crown, being oblig.
ed to court the barons who adhered to them, and on
whose support they depended for the success of their
claims, they augmented their privileges by liberal con-
ceflions, and connived at their boldest usurpations. Fvcn
when feated on the throne, it was dangerous for a
Prince, who held his sceptre by a disputed title, to ven-
ture on any ftep towards extending his own power, or
circumscribing that of the nobles.

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples was

the most turbulent of any in Europe, and the au-
thority of its Monarchs the leafl extensive. Though
Ferdinand I. who began his reign in the year one
thousand four hundred and fixty-eight, attempted to
break the power of the ariflocracy; though his son
Alfonso, that he might crush it at once by cutting off
the leaders of greatest reputation and influence among
A. D. 1487. the Neapolitan barons, ventured to commit one of the

most perfidious and cruel ations recorded in hiflory;
the order of nobles was nevertheless more exafperattd
than humbled by the blow [f]. The resentment which
there outrages excited was so violent, and the power
of the malecontent nobles was Itill so formidable, that
to these may be ascribcd, in a great degree, the ease
and rapidity with which Charles VIII. conquered the
kingdom of Naples [g].

State or the THE event that gave rife to the violent contefRs con-
dirputc con- cerning the fuccefiion to the crown of Naples and Sicily,
ering the which brought so many calamities upon these king-
fucediontodoms, happened in the thirteenth century. Upon the
the crown. death of the Emperor Frederick II. Manfred his na-
A.D. 24. tural son aspiring to the Ncapolitan throne, murdered

(if we may believe contemporary historians) his brother

[f] Giannone, book xxvi. chap. a. vol. ii. p. .4, &c.

;[f~ -c i
idP. p. .the

the Emperor Conrad, and by that crime obtained pof- SECT. IIL.
feclion of it [h]. The Popes, from their implacable _V
enmity to the ho'use of Swabia, not only refused to re-
cognize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to excite
againfl him some rival capable of wrcffing the sceptre
out of his hand. Charles Count of Anjou, the brother
of St. Louis Kingof France, undertook this; and he
received from the Popes, the invcfliture of the king-
dom of Naples and Sicily as a fief held of the holy
See. The Count of Anjou's efforts were crowned
with success; Manfred fell in battle and he took
possession of the vacant throne. But soon after, Charles
sullied the glory which he had acquired, by the in-
justice and cruelty with which he put to death, by
the hands of the executioner, Conradin, the lafi Prince
of the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of the
Neapolitan crown. That gallant young Prince afiert-
ed his title, to the lafi, with a courage, worthy of a
better fate. On the scaffold, he declared Peter, at that
time Prince, and soon after King of Aragon, who had
married Manfred's only daughter, his heir; and throw-
ing his glove among the people, he entreated that it
might be carried to Peter as the symbol by which he
conveyed all his rights to him [i]. The desire of aveng-
ing the insult offered to royalty by the death of Con-
radin concurred with ambition, in prompting Peter to
take arms in support of the title, which he had ac-
quired. From that period, during almost two centu-
ries, the houses of Aragon and Anjou contended for the
crown of Naples. Amidfi a fuccefion of revolutions
more rapid, as well as of crimes more atrocious, than
what occur in the hiflory of almost any other kingdom,
Monarchs Sometimes of the Aragonefe line, and some-
times of the Angevin, were feated on the throne. At A.D. s434.
length the Princes of the house of Aragon obtained such
firm poffefTion of this long-difputed inheritance, that
they transmitted it quietly to a ballard branch of their
family (ti.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was not Pretnfon,

extint; nor had they relinquished their title to the of the
Neapolitan crown. The count of Maine and Provence, French ,an
the heir of this family, conveyed all his rights and pre- nach.

h] Struy. corp. hiR. Germ. 1. 481. Gianaoan, book xviii. ch. 5.
i Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. S 1.
[k Giannont, book Axvi. ch. a.

H- a tentios

Scr. III. t.nfons to Louis XI. and to his successors. Charles
%^s"V% VIII. as I have already related, crossed the Alps at the
A. D. 1494. head of a powerful army in order to prosecute his claim

with a degree of vigour far superior to that, which
the Princes, from whom he derived it, had been capa-
ble of exerting. The rapid progress of his arms in
Italy, as well as the short time during which he en-
joyed the fruits of his success, are well known. Fre-
derick the heir of the illegitimate branch of the Ara-
gonefe family, soon recovered the throne of which
Charles had difpofTeffed him. Louis XII. and Ferdi-
nand of Aragon united againfl this Prince, whom both,
though for different reasons, confidered as an usurper,
A. D. iroi. and agreed to divide his dominions between them. Fre-

derick, unable to refill the combined Monarchs, each
of whom was far his superior in power, resigned his
sceptre. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had con-
curred in making the conquefl, differed about the divi-
sion of it; and from allies became enemies. But
Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly by the exertion of such
military talents as gave him a just title to the appel-
lation of the Great Captain, which the Spanish hiflo-
rians have bellowed upon him; and partly by such
shameful and frequent violations of the most solemn
engagements, as leave an indelible slain on his me-
mory; tripped the French of all that they possessed in
the Neapolitan dominions, and secured the peaceable
poffefiion of them to his mailer. These, together with
his other kingdoms, Ferdinand transmitted to his grand-
son Charles V. whose right to possess them, if not al-
together uncontrovertible, seems, at leaf, to be as well
founded as that, which the Kings of France set in op-
position to it [1].

State of the THERE is nothing in the political constitution, or
duchy of interior government of the dutchy of Milan so re-
the right of markable, as to require a particular explanation. But
fuccinato as the right of lucceflion to that fertile province was

the Cause or the pretext of almofi all the wars car-
ried on in It;rlA during the reign of Charles V. it is
necefiry to trace these disputes to their sburce, and
to inquire into the pretensions of the various competi-
tors.

[1] Droitla de Roi dc France Su

1Im dc Sil. MI. Conm.
*di. do Feaboy, ton. iv. pun ii. p. 5.

DVINaao

DutrNG the long and fierce conteits excited in Italy SecT. lL

by the violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline fa&ions, A._t
the family of Visconti rose to great eminence among Rife a o
their fellow-citizens of Milan. As the Visconti had ad- the dispute
hered uniformly to the Ghibelline or Imperial interest, concerning
they, by way of recompense, received, from one Empe- A. D. 354.
ror, the dignity of perpetual vicars of the Empire in
Italy [m]. They were created by another, Dukes of A.D. 1395.
Milan, and together with that title, the poffeflion of
the city and its territories, was bellowed upon them as
an hereditary fief 1n]. John King of France, among
other expedients for raising money, which the calami-
ties of his reign obliged him to employ, condescended
to give one of his daughters in marriage to John Ga-
leazzo Visconti the firfl Duke of Milan, from whom
he had received considerable fums. Valentine Visconti
one of the children of this marriage married her cousin,
Louis Duke of Orleans, the only brother of Charles
VI. In their marriage-contra& which the Pope con-
firmed, it was flipulated that, upon failure of heirs-
male in the family of Visconti, the dutchy of Milan
Should descend to the posterity of Valentine and the
Duke of Orleans. That event took place. In the
year one thousand four hundred and forty-feven, Philip
Maria the last Princeof the ducal family of Visconti
died. Various competitors pretended to the fucceflion.
Charles Duke of Orleans pleaded his right to it, found-
ed on the marriage-contrat of his mother Valentine
Visconti. Alfonso King of Naples claimed it in con-
sequence of a will made by Philip Maria in his favour.
The Emperor contended that upon the extinaion of
male issue in the family of Visconti the fief returned:
to the superior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to
the Empire. The people of Milan, smitten with that
love of liberty which prevailed among the Italian
States, declared againf the dominion of any mailer,
and efiablifhed a republican form of government.

BUT during the firuggle among so many competitors,

the prize for which they contended was seized by one
from whom none of them apprehended any danger.
Francis Sforza, the natural son of Jacomuzzo Sforza,

m] Petmrd ep~it. ap. t orpv. i 6o.
[n, L4iboit. cod jur. geet. ip .
lo . 1i. 1i.

1 3 whom

SECT. II. whom his courage and abilities had elevated from the

_V.o rank of a peasant to be one of the moil eminent and

powerful of the Italian Condottieri, having succeeded
his father in the command of the adventurers who fol-
lowed his flandard, had married a natural daughter of
the lali Duke of Milan. Upon this ihadow cf a title
Francis founded his pretensions to the dutchy, which
he supported with such talents and valour as placed him
at lafi on the ducal throne. The virtues as well as
abilities with which he governed, inducing his fibjc¢ts
to forget the defets in his title, he transmitted his
dominions quietly to his son; from whom they delcend-
ed to his grandson. He was murdered by his grand
uncle Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, who took poflf!-
sion of the dutchy ; and his right to it was confirmI:l
by the invefliture of the Emperor Maximilian in the
year one thousand four hundred and ninety-four [oi.

Louis XI. who took pleasure in deprefling the

Princes of the blood, and who admired the political
abilities of Francis Sforza, would not permit the Duke
of Orleans to take any ftep in prosecution of his right
to the dutchy of Milan. Ludovico the Moor kept up
such a close connexion with Charles VIII. that during
the greater part of his reign, the claim of the family
of Orleans continued to lie dormant. But when the
crown of France devolved to Louis XII. Duke of Or-
leans, he inflantly afterted the rights of his family with
the ardour which it was natural to expec. Ludovico
Sfor7.a, incapable of contending with luch a rival, was
firipped of all his dominions in the space of a few
days. The King, clad in the ducal robes, entered Mi-
lan in triumph; and soon after, Ludovico having been
betrayed by the Swiss in his pay, was dent a prisoner
into France, and fliut up in the castle of Loches,
where he lay unpitied during the remainder of his days.
In cnnfequence of one of the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the history of the Milanese, his
son Maximilian Stor/.a was placed on the ducal throne,
of which he kept polffflion during the reign of Louis
XII. His lucceffor Francis I. was too high-fpirited

[o] Ripalm. h;fl. Mediol. lh. vi. 654. pSur. corp. i. 91o. Du
Moin C urps Diplom. tum. iii. y. ii. 333. ibid.

and

and enterprizing tamely to relinquish his title. As soon SECT. III.
as he was feated upon the throne, he prepared to in- l
vade the Milanese; and his right of succession to it, A. D. 1512
appears from this detail, to have been not only more
natural but more just than that of any other competi-
tor.

IT is unneceflary to enter into any detail with ref-

peq to the form of government in Genoa, Parma,
Aio;tena and the other inferior States of Italy. Their
names, indeed, will often occur in the following his-
tory. But the power of these States themselves was so
inconsiderable, that their fate depended little upon their
own efforts; and the frequent revolutions which they
underwent, were brought about by the operations of
the Princes who attacked or defended them, rather than
by any thing peculiar in their internal conltitution.

OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the Alps, The conti-

Spain is one of the moit considerable; and as it was tution and
the hereditary domain of Charles V. as well as the government
chief source of his power and wealth, a diltina know- of SPain.
]edge of its political constitution is of capital impor-
tance towards understanding the tftnfaaion of his
reign.

THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the Ro- Conquered

man pnwer in Spain, etfablifhed a form of govern- by the Van.
ment in that country, and brought in cufloms and dae,
laws, perfecly similar to those which were introduced
into the reft of Europe, by the other vitorious tribes
which acquired Settlements there. For some time, so-
ceet:, advanced, among the new inhabitants of Spain,
by the fame steps, and seemed to hold the fame course,
a- in other European nations. To this progress, a A. D. 12.
fu:!dcn stop was put by the invasions of the Saracens
or Moors. The Goths could not withiland the efforts and by the

t,' their enthufiaftick valour, which subdued Spain, with Moon

the fame impetuous rapidity that diftinguilhes all the
lreratinns of their arm<. The conquerors introduced
into the country in which they fettled the Mahometan
religion, the Arabick language, the manners of the East,
tlether with that taste for the arts, and that love of
tlerance and splendour, which the Caliphs had begun
to cultivate among their fubjets.

H 4 SuCH

SECT. I. SUCH Gothick nobles, as disdained to submit to the
tsVum_ Moorish yoke, fled for refuge to the inaccefllble moun-
The Chris- tains of Aflurias, and comforted themselves with enjoy-
dually re- ing there the exercise of the Chriflian religion, and
cover domi- with maintaining the authority of their ancient laws.
nion in Being joined by many of the boldefr and mofi war-
spain. like among their countrymen, they sallied out upon the

adjacent settlements of the Moors, in small parties; and
making short excursions, were satisfied with plunder and
revenge, without thinking of conquest. By degrees,
their strength increased, their views enlarged, a regular
government was eflablifhed among them, and they be-
gan to aim at extending their territories. While they
pushed on their attacks with the unremitting ardour
excited by zeal for religion, by the detire of vengeance,
and by the hope of rescuing their country from oppref-
sion; while they conduaed their operations with the
courage natural to men who had no other occupation
but war, and who were Itrangers to all the arts which
corrupt or enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft
many of the advantages, to which they had been in-
debted for their i4t~ success. They threw off all de-
pendence on the Caliphs *; they negleaed to preserve
a close conneaion with their countrymen in Africa;
their Empire in Spain was split into many small king-
doms; together with the arts which they cultivated, the
luxury to which these gave rife, relaxed, in some mea-
sure, the force of their military infRitutions, and abat-
ed the vigour of their warlike spirit. The Moors,
however, continued fill to be a gallant people, and pof-
sessed great resources. According to the magnificent stile
of the Spanish historians, eight centuries of almost un-
interrupted war clapsed. and three thousand seven hun-
149:. dred battles were fought before the last of the Moorish

kingdoms in Spain submitted to the Christian arms.

The union As the Christians made their conquests upon the
es i vai- Mahometans at various periods, and under different
domn. leaders, each formed the territory which he had wrest-

ed from the common enemy, into an independent
State. Spain was divided into as many separate king-
doms, as it contained provinces, and in each city of
· Jo,. Sim. Affcnannu JliRfr. Ital. Scriptore. Vol. iii. p. il3.

note,

note, a petty Monarch established his throne, and as- SECT. 11N.
fumed all the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years, _V
however, by the usual events of intermarriages, or le-
gal fucceflion, or conquest, all these inferior principali-
ties were annexed to the more powerful kingdoms of
Castile and of Aragon, and at length by the fortu-
nate marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella, the former
the hereditary Monarch of Aragon, and the latter raif-
cd to the throne of Castile by the affedion of her
subje&s, all the Spanish crowns were united, and dcf- 148r.
cended in the fame line.

FROM this period, the political confitution of Spain Their anci-

began to assume a regular and uniform appearance; the ent cufloms
genius of government may be delineated, and the pro- d laws re
grefs of its laws and manners may be treated with cer- midst all
tainty. Notwithfanding the singular revolution which theirrevolw-
had happened in Spain, and the peculiarity of its fate, tlon';
its being so long fubjeted to the Mahometan yoke,
the customs introduced by the Vandals and Goths had
taken such deep root, and were so thoroughly incor-
porated with the frame of its government, that in
every province which the Christians recovered from
the Moors, we find the condition of individuals, as
well as the political constitution, nearly the fame as in
other nations of Europe. Lands were held by the which ren-
fame tenure; justice was dispensed in the fame form; den thcir
the fame privileges were claimed by the nobility; and fme 'degri
the fame power exercised by the Cortes, or general similar to
assembly of the kingdom. Several circumstances con- hat of o-

/ ther nations

tributed to secure this permanence of the feudal infti- of uirp.
tutions in Spain, notwithstanding the conquest of the
Moors, which seemed to have overturned them. Such
of the Spaniards, as preserved their independence, ad-
hered to their ancient customs not only from attach-
ment to them, but out of antipathy to the Moors, to
whose ideas concerning property and government theft
customs were so totalfy repugnant. Even among the
Christians, who submitted to the Moorish conquerors,
and consented to become their fubjecs, ancient cuf-
toms were not entirely abolished. They were per-
mitted to retain their religion; their laws concerning
private property; their forms of administering justice;
and their mode of levying taxes. The followers of

Mahomet

SICT. I. MMahomet are the only enthufiafls, who have united
_'V. the spirit of toleration with zeal fur making proselytes,

and who, at the fame time that they took arms to
propagate the doarine of their prophet, permitted such
as would not embrace it to adhere to their osvn ten,-ts
and to practise their own rites. To this peculiarity in
the genius of the Mahometan religion, as well as to
the desire of the Moors to reconcile the Chriflians t,
their yoke, it was owing that the ancient manners and
laws in Spain survived the violent shock of a conlqueil,
and continued to fubiilt, notwithstanding the intiodut -
tion of a new religion and a new form of goveuli-
ment into that country. It is obvious from all these
particulars, that the Chriflians mufl have found it ex-
tremely easy to re-efabli/h manners and government
on their ancientfoundations, in those province' of Spain,
which they wrested fucceflively from the Moors. A
considerable part of the people retained such a foiId-
ness for the cultoms, and Iuch a reverence for the laws
of their ancestors, that they wiflhed to fee them ref-
tored with full authority, and were not only willing
but eager to observe the former, and to recognize the
authority of the latter.

Cenrtan p- BUT though the feudal form of government, with
c-fi'citi nin all the inflitutions that charadterize it, was thus pre-

°' costi- served entire in Castile and Aragon, as well as in all

the kingdoms which depended on these crowns, there
were certain peculiarities in their political conflitutions
which distinguish them from those of any other country

The prero- in Europe. The regal prerogative, extremely limited
mic'ed, " in ever) feudal kingdom, was circumfcrihed, in Spain,
the immu- within such narrow bounds, as reduced the power of
naitiof the the sovereign almost to nothing. The privileges of the
Pe, more nobility were vast in proportion, and extended so far

tper i
ave.

as to border on absolute independence. The immu-
nities of the cities were great, they pofleffed confi-
derable influence in the Cortes or supreme affnmblies
of the nation', and they aspired at obtaining more.
Such a Late ,1 Society, in which the political machine
was so ill adjited, and the several members of the
legiflaturc so improperly balanced, produced interior
difr,rd rs in the kingdoms of Spain, which rose be-
yond the pitch of turbulence and anarchy, usual under

the

the feudal government. The whole tenor of the Spa- SicT. II.
rifh history confirms the truth of this observation; huV
and when the mutinous spirit, to which the genius of
their policy gave birth and vigour, was not refirain-
cd and overawed by the immediate dread of the
Moorish arms, it broke out into more frequent infur-
retions against the government of their Princes, as
wvtll as more outrageous insults on their dignity, than
occur in the annals of any other country. These
aere accompanied at rome times with more liberal
tcatiments concerning the rights of the people, at
other times with more elevated notions concerning
the privileges of the nobles, than were common in
other nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which was annex- Inftce of

ed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impatience of the thi.'
people to obtain the redress of their grievances hav-
ing prompted them to take arms againit their fove-
reign John II. they, by a solemn deed, recalled theA.D. 461.
oath of allegiance which they had sworn to him, de-
clared him and his pofierity to be unworthy of the
throne [P], and endeavoured to establish a republican
form of government, in order to secure the perpetual
enjoyment of that liberty, after which they aspired [q].
Nearly about the fame period, the indignation of the
Castilian nobility againll the weak and flagitious ad-
minifiration of Henry IV. having led them to com-
bine againfi him, they arrogated as one of the privi-
leges belonging to their order, the right of trying and
of pafling sentence on their sovereign. That the cx-
ercife of this power might be as publick and solemn,
as the pretension to it was bold, they summoned all A. D. 465.
the nobility of their party to meet at Avila; a fpaci-
ous theatre was ere&ed in a plain without the walls
of the town, an image representing the King, was
feated on a throne clad in royal robes, with a crown
on its head, a sceptre in its hand, and the sword of
justice by its fide. The accusation against the King
was read, and the sentence of deposition was pronoun-
ced, in presence of a numerous aftimbly. At the close
of the first article of the charge, the archbishop of

[p Zurita Analeide Arag. tom. iv. illr, 1, Jtc.
q] ikrrerat hifd EIpaltc, tom. vi. p. P.

Orlad' revlo.

P

Eagnc, tom. iii p. 3p5.

I . Mariaur Sranu de reb. Hipma. rdd
vtauti cript. HiClPu. vol. 429.

Toledo

SscT. II. Toledo advanced, and tore the crown from the head

% of the image; at the close of the second, the Conde

de Placentia snatched the sword of juflice from its
fide; at the close of the third, the Conde de Bene-
vente wrefled the sceptre from its hand; at the close
of the lall, Don Diego Lopez de Stuniga tumbled it
headlong from the throne. At the fame inflant, Don
Alfonso, Henry's brother, was proclaimed King of Caf-
tile and Leon in his Read [rJ.

THE most daring leaders of faAion would not have

ventured on these measures, nor have conduEed them
with such publick ceremony, if the sentiments of the
people concerning the royal dignity, had not been so
formed by the laws and policy, to which they were ac-
cultomed both in Caflile and Aragon, as prepared them
to approve of such extraordinary proceedings, or to
acquiesce in them.

The confli- IN Aragon, the form of government was monarchi-
ueiou and cal, but the genius and maxims of it were purely re-
of Angon. publican. The Kings, who were long elecive, retain-

ed only the shadow of power; the real exercise of it
was in the Cortes or parliament of the kingdom. This
supreme assembly was composed of four different arms
or members. The nobility of the firt rank. The
Equefirian order, or nobility of the second class. The
representatives of the cities and towns, whole right to
a place in the Cortes, if we may give credit to the
historians of Aragon, was coeval with the constitution.
The eccclefiaftial order, composed of the dignitaries of
the church, together with the representatives of the
inferior clergy []. No law could pals in this assembly
without the affcnt of every single member who had a
right to vote MJ. Without the pcrmition of the
Cortes, no tax could be imposed; no war could be de-
clared; no peace conclded ; no money could be coin-
ed; nor any' alteration be made in the current specie [u].
The power of reviewing the proceedings of all inferior
courts, the privilege of infpecing every department of
adminifiraiion, and the right of redrefling all grievan-
ces belonging to the Cortes. Nor did those who con-

[r} Marian. hist. lib. xviii. c. 9.

Forma de cclebr. Cortte en Aragos. por Oeron. Martcl.

/t] Martcl. ibid. p. a.
[u Hier ica co r.
omn rcr. Arajon. apud Schot. script. Hilpmn.

~i~ii. p. ?7So.eived

ceived

ceived themselves to be aggrieved address the Cortes SIT.III.
in the humble tone of supplicants, and petition for re- v
dress; they demanded it as the birth-right of free-men,
and required the guardians of their liberty to decide
with refpe& to the points which they laid before
them Ex]. This sovereign court was held, during feve-
ral centuries, every year; but, in consequence of a re-
gulation introduced about the beginning of the four-
teenth century, it was convened from that period only
once in two years. After it was assembled, the King
had no right to prorogue or diflolve it without its own
consent; and the session continued forty days [y].

NOT satisfied with having ereaed these barriers

againfi the encroachments of the royal prerogative, nor
willing to rely for the preservation of their liberties on
the vigilance and authority of an assembly, similar to
the diets, flates general, and parliaments, in which the
other feudal nations placed so much confidence, the
Aragonefe had recourse to an institution peculiar to
themlelves, and eleced a Yu/fiza or supreme judge. ffice and
This magifirate, whose office bore some resemblance to juriRicion
that of the Ephori in ancient Sparta, aaed as the .thJu
guardian of the people, and the comptroller of the
Prince. The person of the Juftiza was sacred, and his
power and jurifdi&ion almoil unbounded. He was the
supreme interpreter cf the laws. Not only inferior
judges, but the Kings themselves were bound to con-
fult him in every doubtful cafe, and to receive his re-
fponfes with implicit deference *. An appeal lay to him
from the royal judges, as well as from those appointed
by the barons within their refpe&ive territories. Even
when no appeal was made to him, he could interpose
by his own authority, prohibit the ordinary judge to
proceed, take immediate cognizance of the cause him.
self, and remove the party accused to the Manifeflation
or prison of the slate, to which no person had access
but by his permiflion. His power was exerted with
no lets vigour and effe& in superintending the ad-
miniltration of government, than in regulating the

[x] Martel. Forml de ceebr. p. a.
1y] Itier. Blaunca comment. 763.

Blanca ha preserved two relonla of the Juftiza to James II. who
reigncd towards the cldu of the thincirth century. Blanca 748.

course

SICT. Il, course of juflice. It was the prerogative of the Jus-
h*Y_ tiza to infpe& the conduc of the King. He had a

title to review all the royal proclamations and pa-
tents, and to declare whether or not they were
agreeable to law, and ought to be carried into execu-
tion. He, by his sole authority, could exclude an)
of the King's ministers from the condue of affairs,
and call them to answer for their mal-adminifiration.
He himself was accountable to the Cortes alone, for
the manner in which he discharged the duties of this
high office, and performed funcions of the greatef
importance that could be committed to a subjcd
[GG] ez3.

Th real IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the pri-

power ar- vileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as of the
cumrcribed rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a very small por-
withinnar- tion of power remained in the hands of the King.

The Aragonefe seem to have been solicitous that
their Monarchs should know and feel this slate of im-
potence, to which they were reduced. Even in swear-
ing allegiance to their Sovereign, an aA which ought,
naturally, to be accompanied with profeflions of sub-
miflion and refpet, they devised an oath, in such a
form, as to remind him of his dependance on his sub-
jeas. " We," said the Juftiza to the King in
name of his high-fpirited barons, " who are each
of us as good, and who are altogether more power-
ful than you, promise obedience to your government,
if you maintain our rights and liberties; but if not,
not." Conformably to this oath, they eflablilhed it
as a fundamental article in their constitution, that
if the King should violate their rights and privile-
ges, it was lawful for the people to disclaim him as
their sovereign, and to elea another in his place [a].
The attachment of the Aragonefe to this singular
constitution of government, was extreme, and their
refpe& for it approached to superstitious venera-

[GG] NOTE XXX.

[z] licr. BlancA Comment. p. 747-755.
a] Hicr. Blsanc Comment. 710.

tlon

tion [HH]. In the preamble to one of their laws, SECT. UI
they declare that such was the barrenness of their ' `"*
country, and the poverty of the inhabitants, that if it
were not on account of the liberties by which they
were distinguished from other nations, the people would
abandon it, and go in quefl of a settlement to some
more fruitful region [b].

IN Castile, there were not such peculiarities in the ConfRitutio

forin of government, as to eftabliih any remarkable dif- and gover' -
tinclion between it, and that of the other European ctikc.
nations. The executive part of government was com-
mitted to the King, but with a prerogative extremely
limited. The legislative authority resided in the Cor-
tes, which was composed of the nobility, the dignified
ecclefiaflicks, and the representatives of the cities.
The assembly of the Cortes in Castile was very an-
cient, and seems to have been coeval with the confti-
tution. The members of the three different orders,
who had a right of suffrage, met in one place, and
deliberated as one collective body; the decisions of
which were regulated by the sentiments of the ma-
jority. Tle right of imposing taxes, of enacing laws,
and of redrefling grievances belonged to this assembly;
and in order to secure the assent of the King to such
statutes and regulations, as were deemed salutary or
beneficial to the kingdom, it was usual in the Cortes,
to take no flep towards granting money, until all bufi-
ness relative to the publick welfare was concluded. The
representatives of cities seem to have obtained a feat
very early in the Cortes of Castile, and loon acquired
such influence and credit, as were very uncommon, at
a period when the splendour and pre-eminence of the
nobility had eclipsed or annihilated all other orders of
men. The number of members from cities bore such
a proportion to that of the whole collective body, as
rendered them extremely refpetable in the Cortes 11I].
''he degree of consideration, which they pofleffed in
the slate, may be eflimatcd by one event. Upon the
death of John I. a council of regency was appointed A.D. 190.
to govern the kingdom during the minority of his

[HH] NOTE XXXI.
[b] Hicr. B!anca Corn. p. 751.

Liiu NOTE XXXI.

son.

SECT. m. son. It was composed of an equal number of noble-

men, and of deputies chosen by the cities; the latter
were admitted to the fame rank, and inveRted with the
fame powers, as prelates and grandees of the firlt
order [c]. But though the members of communities
in Castile were elevated above the condition wherein
they were placed in other kingdoms of Europe; though
they had attained to such political importance, that
even the proud and jealous spirit of the feudal ariflo-
cracy could not exclude them from some ihare of go-
vernment; yet the nobles, notwithilanding these ac-
quifitions of the commons, continued to assert the pri-
vileges of their order, in opposition to the crown, in a
tone extremely high. There was not any body of no-
bility in Europe more diftinguiihed for independence of
spirit, haughtiness of deportment, and bold pretensions,
than that of Castile. The hiltory of that monarchy
affords the mot striking examples of the vigilance
with which they observed, and of the vigour with
which they opposed every scheme of their'Kings, that
tended to encroach on their jurifdi&ion, to diminiih
their dignity, or to abridge their power. Even in their
ordinary intercourse with their Monarchs, they preferv-
ed such a consciousness of their rank, that the nobles
of the first order claimed it as a privilege to be cover-
ed in the royal presence, and approached their fove-
reigns rather as equals than as fubjeds.

THE conflitution of the subordinate monarchies,

which depended on the crowns of Caflile and Aragon,
nearly resembled that of the kingdom to which they
were annexed. In all of them, the dignity and inde-
pendence of the nobles were great; the immunities and
power of the cities were considerable.

Various AN attentive observation of the singular situation of
caufrcofthe Spain, as well as of the various events which occurred
limited au- there, from the invasion of the Moors to the union of
the ,ni fl its kingdoms under Ferdinand and Isabella, will discover
Monarchs those causes, to which all the peculiarities in its poli-

tical constitution, that I have pointed out, ought tp be
ascribed.

As the provinces of Spain were wrested from the
Mahometans gradually and with difficulty, the nobles,

[c] MAuia bit ib. IB. c. ic .
1

, ho
: *V

who followed the flandard of any eminent leader in SeCT.III.
there wars, conquered not for him alone, but for them- dYV
selves. They claimed a share in the lands which their
valour had torn from the enemy, and their prosperity
and power increased, in proportion as the territory of
the Prince extended.

DURING their perpetual wars with the Moors, the
Monarchs of Spain depended so much on their nobles,
that it became necessary to conciliate their good will by
fucceflive grants of new honours and privileges. By
the time that any Prince could eftablilh his dominion
in a conquered province, the greater part of the pro-
perty was parcelled out by him among his barons,
with such jurildi&tion and immunities as raised them
almoif to sovereign power.

Ar the fame time, the kingdoms ereaed in so many

different corners of Spain were extremely inconfidera-
ble. The petty Monarch was but little elevated above
his nobles. They, feeling themselves to be almost
his equals, aced as such. The Kings of such limit-
ed domains could neither command much refpe&, nor
polfefs great power; and noblemen, so nearly on the
fame level, could not look up to them with that re-
verence, with which the sovereigns of the great
monarchies in Europe were viewed by their fubjeas
[KK].

THESE circumstances concurred in exalting the no-

bility, and in deprefling the royal authority; there were
others, which raised the cities in Spain to consideration
and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the
Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excursions of
the enemy, with whom no peace or truce was so
permanent as to prove any lafling security, felf-pre-
iervation obliged persons of all ranks to fix their re-
tidence in places of strength. The castles of the
barons, which, in other countries, afforded a commo-
dious retreat from the depredations of banditti, or
from the transient violence of any interior commo-
tion, were unable to refilf an enemy whose opera-
'ions were conduced with regular and persevering
vigour. Cities, in which great numbers united for

[CKK NOTE XXX1I.
VoL. J. I their

SECT. .IItheir mutual defence, were the only places to which
AV_ people could retire with any profpe& of safety. To

this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in
Spain of which the Chriflians recovered poffeflion.
All who flea from the Mootifh yoke resorted to them,
as to an asylum; and there, the greater part of those,
who took the field againRf the Mahometans, eRfablifh-
ed their families.

EACH of these cities, during a longer or shorter

course of years, was the capital of a little slate, and
enjoyed all the advantages, which accelerate the in-
crease of inhabitants in every place that is the feat of
government.

The number of cities in Spain, at the beginning of

the fifteenth century, was considerable, and they were
peopled far beyond the proportion which was common
in other parts of Europe, except in Italy and the
Low-Countries. The Moors had introduced manufac-
tures into these cities, while under their dominion.
The Chriflians, who, by intermixture with them, had
learned their arts, continued to cultivate these. The
trade of several of the Spanish towns appears to have
been considerable; and the spirit of commerce conti-
nued to preserve the number of their inhabitants, as
the sense of danger had sirs induced them to crowd to-
gether.

As the Spaniih cities were populous, many of the

inhabitants were of a rank fupcrior to those who re-
fided in towns in other countries of Europe. That
caufc, which contributed chiefly to their population,
affe&ed equally perfors of every condition, who flock-
ed thither promilcuoufly, in order to find shelter, or
in hopes of making a fland there against the enemy,
with greater advantage than in any other flation. The
persons eleed as their representatives in the Cortcs
by the cities, or promoted to offices of trust and dig-
nity in the government of the community, were often,
as will appear from tranfa&ions which I shall hereafter
relate, of such considerable rank in the kingdom, as
refleted lufire on their conlituents, and on the flations
wherein they were placed.

As it was impoflible to carry on a continual war

againfi the Moors, without some other military force,
than that which the barons were obliged to bring into

the

the field, in consequence of the feudl tenures, it be- Scr. III.
came necessary to have some troops, particularly a
body of light cavalry, in conflant pay. It was one
of the privileges of the nobles, that their lands were
exempt from the burden of taxes. The charge of
supporting the troops requisite for the publick safety,
fell wholly upon the cities; and their Kings, being
obliged frequently to apply to them for aid, foundit
necessary to gain their favour by concessions, which
extended their immunities, and added to their wealth
and power.

WHEN the influence of all these circumstances, pe-

culiar to Spain, is added to the general and common
causes, which contributed to aggrandize cities in other
countries of Europe, this will fully account for the
extensive privileges which they acquired, as well as
the extraordinary consideration to which they attain-
ed, in all the Spanish kingdoms [LL].

BY these exorbitant privileges of the nobility, and McaCurcs of

this unusual power of the cities in Spain, the royal different
prerogative was hemmed in on every hand, and re- Princes 'i
duced within very narrow bounds. Sensible of this, tend their
and impatient of such reflraint, different Monarchs en- power,

particularly

deavoured, at various juncures, to enlarge their own f Fedi-
jurifdi&ion, and to circumscribe that of their fubjets. nand and
Their power, however, or their abilities were so un- labCa.
equal to the undertaking, that their efforts were at-
tended with little success. But when Ferdinand and
Isabella found themselves at the head of all the unit-
ed kingdoms of Spain, and delivered from the danger
and interruption of domeftick wars, they were not
only in a condition to resume, but were able to prose-
cute with advantage, the schemes of extending the
prerogative, which their ancestors had attempted in
vain. Ferdinand's profound sagacity in concerting his
measures, his persevering industry in condu&ing them,
and his uncommon address in carrying them into ex-
ecution, fitted him admirably for an undertaking
which required all these talents.

As the overgrown power, and high pretensions ofFcrl;nmd.

the nobility were what the Monarchs of Spain felt diferent
molt sensibly, and bore with the greatest impatience, I'ridmsn

the priva-
[LIJ NOTE XXXIV. Ieg" and

I* 2 th pwer of

a 2 the the nobility.

SETr. [U. the great obje& of Ferdinand's policy was to re-
v'Y duce these within more moderate bounds. Under va-

rious pretexts, sometimes by violence, more frequently
in consequence of decrees obtained in the courts of
law, he wtelted from the barons a great part of the
lands, which had been granted to them by the incon-
fiderate bounty of former Monarchs, particularly dur-
ing the feeble and piofufe reign of his predeceflor
Henry IV. He d.d not give the entire condu& of
affairs to persons of noble birth, who were accuf-
tomed to occupy every department of importance in
peace or in war, as if it had been a privilege pecu-
liar to their order, to be employed as the sole coun-
fellors and ministers of the crown. He often tranf-
ated business of great consequence without their in-
tervention, and committed many offices of power and
trust to new men, devoted to his interefl [d]. He
introduced a degree of slate dignity into his court,
which being unknown in Spain, while it remained
split into many small kingdoms, taught the nobles to
approach their Sovereign with more ceremony, and
gradually rendered him the obje& of greater defe-
rence and refpet.

Paricular. THE annexing the masterships of the three military
ly by an- orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and Alcantara, to the
rnemg the crown, was another expedient, by which Ferdinand
firhiip, of greatly augmented the revenue and power of the
the three Kings of Spain. These orders were intfituted in imi-
t'rders to
the crown; tation of those of the Knights Templars and of St.

John of Jerusalem, on purpose to wage perpetual
war with the Mahometans, and to protet the pil-
grims who visited CompoRella, or other places of
eminent san&ity in Spain. The zeal and fuperfiition
of the ages, in which they were founded, prompted
persons of every rank to beflow such liberal dona-
tions on these holy warriors, that, in a short time,
they engrossed a considerable share in the property
and wealth of the kingdom. The maflerfhips of thele
orders came to be stations of the greatest power and
opulence to which a Spanish nobleman could be ad-
vanced. These high dignities were in the disposal
of the Knights of the Order, and placed the persons

[dJ Zariu uarlles Arag. tom. vi. P. s

83

en whom they conferred them almofi on a level with SECT. II.
their sovereign [MM]. Ferdinand, unwilling that the rV"
nobility, whom he confidered as already too formida-
ble, should derive such additional credit and influence
from poffefling the government of these wealthy fra-
ternities, was solicitous to wrest it out of their hands,
and to vest it in the crown. His measures for ac A. D. 1476,
complifhing this, were wifely planned, and executed and 1493.
with vigour c]. By address, by promires, and by
threats, he prevailed on the Knights of each Order
to place Isabella and him at the head of it. Inno-
cent VIII. and Alexander VI. gave this electian the
fantion of papal authority [f]; and subsequent Pon-
tiffs rendered the annexation of these maflerfhips to
the crown perpetual.

WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, diminished the and by cir-

power and influence of the nobility, and added new cumfcrihing
lufire or authority to the crown, he was taking other thon of the
important fleps with a view to the fame objet. The nobility.
sovereign jurifdition which the feudal barons exer-
cifed within their own territories, was the pride and
diftintion of their order. To have invaded openly
a privilege which they prized so highly, and in de-
fence of which they would have run so eagerly to
arms, was a measure too daring for a Prince of Ser-
dinand's cautious temper. He took advantage, how-
ever, of an opportunity which the slate of his kingr
doms and the spirit of his people presented him, in-
order to undermine what he durfl not assault. The
incessant depredations of the Moors, the want of dif,
cipline among the troops which were employed tp
oppose them, the frequent civil wars between the
crown and the nobility, as well as the undifcerning
rage with which the barons carried on their private
wars with each other, filled all the provinces of Spain
with disorder. Rapine, outrage, and murder, became
so common, as not only to interrupt commerce, but
in a great measure to fufpcnd all intercourse between

[MU] NOTE XXXV.

[c] Marian. his. lib. xrn. c. 5.
[f] Zurita anaie tomr. v. p. 2a. Alii Anton. Nebrilenis rorum a Fcrt
Ja:td lizabe gcftrum dicada ii. apud choc. script. Hifpa. i. 60o.

13 one

SECT. I. one place and another. That security and protecion

'yVV' which men expeQ from entering into civil fociti,

ceased almost totally. Interior order and police, while
the feudal inflitutions remained in vigour, were so
little objecs of attention, and the administration of
jutlice was so extremely feeble, that it would have
been vain to have expeced relief from the eftablilh-
ed laws or the ordinary judges. But the evil became
so intolerable, and the inhabitants of cities, who were
the chief sufferers, grew so impatient of this anarchy,
that felf-prefervation forced them to have recourse to
..o. an extraordinary remedy. About the middle of the

thirteenth century, the cities in the kingdom of Ara-
gon, and after their example those in Castile, formed
themselves into an association, distinguished by the
name of the Holy Brotherbood. They exa&ed a cer-
tain contribution from each of the associated towns;
they levied a considerable body of troops, in order
to protec travellers, and to pursue criminals; they
appointed judges, who opened their courts in various
parts of the kingdom. Whoever was guilty of mur.
der, robbery, or of any a& that violated the pub-
lick peace, and was seized by the troops of the
Brotherbood, was carried before their own judges, who,
.without paying any regard to the exclusive and fove-
reign jurifdition which the lord of the place might
claim, tried and condemned the criminals. By means
of this, the prompt and impartial administration of
juflice was refored; and together with it, internal
tranquillity and order began to return. The nobles
alone murmured at this salutary infiitution. They
complained of it as an encroachment on one of their
rnoft valuable privileges. They remonfirated againli
it in an high tone; and, on some occasions, refufrcd
to grant any aid to the crown, unless it were abolish-
ed. Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of
the good effecs of the Holy Brotherhood with re-
fpe& to the police of his kingdoms, but perceived its
tendency to abridge, and at length to annihilate the
territorial jurifdiflion of the nobility. He countenan-
ced the infltiution on every oocafion. He supported
it with the whole force of royal authority; and be
fides the expedients employed by him in common with
the other monarchs of Europe, he availed himself of

this

this institution, which was peculiar to his kingdom, SBcT. IIL
in order to limit and abolish that independent jurif- 'dV_
dition of the nobility, which was no less inconfif-
tent with the authority of the Prince, than with the
order of society [NN].

BUT though Feidlnand by there measures confi Notwith-

derably enlarged the boundaries of prerogative, and iteudin11
acquired a degree of influence and power far beyond government
what any of his predecefTors had enjoyed, yet the of Spaintill
limitations of the royal authority, and the barriersc 'cm ely
againfi its encroachments, continued to be many and
strong. The spirit of liberty was vigorous among the
people of Spain; the spirit of independence was high
among the nobility; and though the love of glory,
peculiar to the Spaniards in every period of their his-
tory, prompted them to support Ferdinand with zeal
in his foreign operations, and to afford him such aid
as enabled him not only to undertake but to execute
great enterprizes; he reigned over his subjects with
a jurifdi&ion less extensive than that of any of the great
monarchs in Europe. It will appear from many pal.
fages in the following hiflory, that, during a confi-
derable part of the reign of his successor Charles V.
the prerogative of the Spanish crown was equally cir-
cumfcribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France so Conlitu-

nearly resembled those of the other feudal kingdoms, ino-
that such a detail with refpe& to them as was necessary, of France.
in order to convey some idea of the nature and es-
sets of the peculiar inflitutions which took place in
Spain, would be Iuperfluous. In the view which I
have exhibited of the means by which the French
monarchs acquired such full command of the national
force of their kingdom, as enabled them to engage
in extensive (chemes of foreign operation, I have al-
ready pointed out the great leps by which they ad-
vanced towards a more ample pofeflion of political
power, and a more uncontroled exercise of their royal
prerogative. All that now remains is to take notice
of such particulars in the constitution of France, as
serve either to dit:inguifh it from that of other coun-
tries, or tend to throw any light on the tr4nfaions

[NN] NOTE XXJVI,

4 of

SECT.I. of that period to which the following hiflory ex.
'V%. tends.
Power of UNDFR the French monarchs of the firfl race, the
^e Gensral royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. The Gene-
indert'e ral Assemblies of the nation, which met annually at
si-ft race of fated seasons, extended their authority to every dc-

" partment of government. The power of eledng

Kings, of enacing laws, of redrcffing grievanccs, 0o
passing jundgment in the lafi refoit, with rtfpcd t
ever!- I) ron and to every cause, and of conferring do-
nations on the Prince, resided in this great convention
Under the of the nation. Under the second race of Kings, not-

"eLUL. withflanding the power and fplrndour which the ctn-

quests of Charlemagne added to the crown, the gen(-
ral assemblies of the nations continued to poffci exten-
five authority. The right of determining which of the
royal family should be placed on the throne was vefied
in them. The monarchs eleced by their fuffiage were
accustomed regularly to call and to consult them. uith
refpe& to every affair of importance to the state, and
without their confcnt no law was passed, and no new
tax was levied.

Under the BUT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the father of
third. the third race of Kings, took possession of the throne

of France, such changes had happened in the politi-
cal slate of the kingdom, as considerably asseted the
power and jurifdition of the general assembly of the
nation. The royal authority in the hands of the de-
generate poficrity of Charlemagne, had dwindled
into insignificance and contempt. Every confiderabl
proprietor of land had formed his territory into a
barony, almofi independent of the sovereign. The
dukes or governors of provinces, the counts or go-
vernors of towns and small difirias, and the great
officers of the crown, had rendered thele dignities.
originally granted only during plcafure or for life, he-
reditary in their families. Each of these had ufirped
all the rights which hitherto had been deemed the dii-
tinEtions of royalty, particularly the privileges of dii-
pensing justice within their own domains, of coining
money, and of waging war. Every difiria was go-
verned by local cufloms, acknowledged a diflin& lord,
and pursued a separate interelt. The formality of
doing homage to their bovereign, was almolt the only

*ar

ae of fubjedion which haughty barons would perform, SECT. 11I.
and that bound them no farther than they were will- 'yV
ing to acknowledge its obligation [00].

IN a kingdom broken into so many independent batr The power

ronies, hardly any common principle of union remain- of the Ge-
cd; and the general assembly in its deliberations could Lebly eIi
scarce confider the nation as forming one body, or considerable
eflablifh common regulations to be of equal force in and vcten'
every part. Within the immediate domains of the
crown the King might publish laws, and they were
obeyed, because there he was acknowledged as the only
lord. But if he had aimed at rendering these gene-
ral, that would have alarmed the barons as an en-
croachment upon the independence of their jurifdiAion.
The barons, with no less care, avoided the enacing of
general laws, because the execution of them mud have
been veiled in the King, and would have enlarged that
paramount power which was the objet of their jea-
lousy. Thus, under the descendants of Hugh Capet,
the States General (for that was the name by which
the supreme aflembly of the French nation came then
to be diflinguifhed) loft their legislative authority, or
at least entirely relinquished the exercise of it. From
that period, the jurifdidion of the States General ex-
tended no farther than to the imposition of new taxes,
the determination of queflions with refpeet to the
right of fucceflion to the crown, the fettling of the
regency when the preceding monarch had not fixed it
by his will, and the presenting remonstrances enumerat-
ing the grievances of which the nation withed to ob-
tain redress,

As, during several centuries, the monarchs of Eu-

rope seldom demanded extraordinary subsidies of their
subje&s, apd the other events which required the in-
terpofition of the States, rarely occurred, their meet-
ings in France were not frequent. They were fum-
moned occasionally by their Kings, when compelled by
their wants or by their fears to have recourse to their
aid; but they did not, like the Diet in Germany, the
Cortes in Spain, or the Parliament in England, form
an essential member of the constitution, the regular
exertion of whose powers was requisite to give vigour
and order to government.

fooJ NOTE XXXm

WagIe

SECT. II. WHEN the States of France ceased to exercise le.
'{V*-' giflative authority, the Kings began to assume it.
The crown They ventured at first on aas of legislation with great
a(ui're le- reserve; and after taking every precaution that could
giltatlve au- prevent their fubjets from being alarmed at the cxer-
thority, cife of a new power. They did not at once issue their

ordinances in a tone of authority and command. They
treated with their fubjeds; they pointed out what was
belf; and allured them to comply with it. By de-
grees, however, as the prerogative of the crown ex-
tended, and as the supreme jurisdiction of the royal
courts came to be eflablifhed, the Kings of France as-
fumed more openly the stile and authority of lau-
givers, and before the beginning of the fifteenth cen-
tury, the complete legislative power was vefied in them
[PP].

and the HAVING secured this important acquisition, the
[oF `.'f fleps that led to the right of imposing taxes were rcn-
taxes. dered few and easy. The people, accuflomed to fee

their sovereigns, by their sole authority, issue ordinan-
ces which regulated points of the greatest consequence
with refpe& to the property of their fubjeas, were
not alarmed when they were required, by the royal
edi&s, to contribute certain fums towards supplying the
exigencies of government, and carrying forward the
measures of the nation. When Charles VII. and
Louis XI. firR ventured to exercise this new power,
in the manner which I have already described, the gra-
dual increase of the royal authority had so impercepti-
bly prepared the minds of the people of France for
this innovation, that it excited no commotion in the
kingdom, and seems scarce to have given rife to any
murmur or complaint.

Gorrn- WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrossed
ment of every power which can be exerted in government;
corne, pure- when the right of making laws, of levying money, of
ly momir- keeping an army of mercenaries in conflant pay, of
Cd1c"al. declaring war and of concluding peace centered in the

crown, the constitution of the kingdom, which, under
the firfi race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which,
under the second race, became an ariltocracy, termi-
nated, under the third race, in a pure monarchy. Every
thing that tended to preserve the appearance, or revive

[PP] NOTE XXXVIIL

the

the memory of the ancient mixed government, seems SECT. III.
from that period to have been induftriouflv avoided. _r
During the long and aaive reign of Francis I. the va-
riety as well as extent of whole operations obliged him
to lay many heavy impositions on his fubjeEts, the
States General of France were not once assembled,
nor were the people once allowed to exert the power
of taxing themselves, which, according to the original
ideas of feudal government, was a right essential to
every free-man.

Two things, however, remained, which moderated The xer-

the exercise of the regal prerogative, and refrained it cife of prc-
within such bounds as preserved the constitution of gat re-
France from degenerating into mere despotism. The the privi-
rights and privileges claimed by the nobility mult be Igecs of the
confidered as one barrier against the absolute dominion uQbl ¥y
of the crown. Though the nobles of France had loft
that political power which was vested in their order
as a body, they still retained the personal rights and
pre-eminence which they derived from their rank.
They preserved a consciousness of elevation above other
classes of citizens; an exemption from burdens to which
they were fubje&; a contempt of the occupations in
which they were engaged; the privilege of assuming
ensigns that indicated their dignity; a title to be treat-
ed with a certain degree of deference during peace;
and a claim to various diftin&ions when in the field.
Many of these pretensions were not founded on the
words of flatutes, or derived from positive laws; they
were defined and ascertained by the maxims of honour,
a title more delicate, but no less sacred. These rights,
eflabliihed and proteced by a principle equally vigilant
in guarding, and intrepid in defending them, ate to
the Sovereign himself obje&s of refpe& and veneration.
Wherever they fiand in its way, the royal prerogative
is bounded. The violence of a Despot may extermi-
nate such an order of men; but as long as it subsists,
and its ideas of personal diftin&ion remain entire, the
power of the Prince has limits [fl.

rl] Da Ejprits de Lolx, llr. ii. c. 4, Dr. Fcrgufoa'( Effiy on the
His. of Civil Society, part . fie. eco.

As

Szcr. TII. As in France, the body of nobility was very nu-
_V, nimcrous, and retained an high sense of their own pre-

eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a great measure,
the mode of exercising the royal prerogative which
peculiarly distinguishes the government of that king-
dom. An intermediate order was placed between the
Monarch and his other fubjeas, and in every at of
authority it became necessary to attend to its privi.
leges, and not only to guard againfi any real violation
of these, but to avoid any suspicion of its being pof-
fible tpat they might be violated. Thus a species of
government was established in France, unknown in the
ancient world, that of a monarchy, in which the power
of the sovereign, though unconfined by any legal or
constitutional restraint, has certain bounds set to it by
the ideas which one class of his subje&s entertain con-
cerning their own dignity.

ni by the THE jurifdiEtion of the Parliaments of France, par-
jurildaition ticularly that of Paris, was the other barrier which
of e par- served to confine the exercise of the royal preroga-
liaments,
parcictiarly tive within certain limits. The parliament of Paris
gat of was originally the court of the Kings of France, to

which they committed the supreme adminiflration of
jutfice within their own domains, as well as the power
of deciding with refpe& to all cafes brought before it
by appeals from the courts of the barons. When the
time and place of its meeting were fixed, when not
only the form of its procedure, but the principles on
which it decided, were rendered regular and confifent,
when every cause of importance was finally determined
there, and when the people became accustomed to re-
fort thither as to the supreme temple of juflice, the
parliament of Paris rose to high efimation in the
kingdom, its members acquired dignity, and its de-
crees were submitted to, with deference. The Kings
of France, when they first began to assume the legil-
lative power, in order to reconcile the minds of their
people to this new exertion of prerogative, produced
their edias and ordinances in the parliament of Paris,
that they might be approved of and regifiered there,
before they were published and declared to be of au-
thority in the kingdom. During the intervals between
the meetings of the States General of the kingdom,
or under thole reigns when the States General were

not

not assembled, the Monarchs of France were accuf- SeCT.IIL
tomed to coniult the parliament of Paris with refpeca 0CY
to the most arduous affairs of government, and fre-
quently regulated their condut by its advice, in de-
claiing war, in concluding peace, and in other tranf-
adions of publick concern. Thus there was erected in
the kingdom a tribunal which became the great depo-
fiorv of the laws, and by the uniform tenor of its
decrees it eftabiifhed principles of juflice and forms of
proceeding which were confidered as so sacred, that
even the lovcreign power of the Monarch durif not
venture to disregard or to violate them. The mem-
bers of this illustrious body, though they neither pof-
fess legislative authority, nor can be confidered as the
eprrefentatives of the people, have availed themselves
of the reputation and influence which they had acquir-
ed among their countrymen, in order to make a fland
to the utmost of their ability againit every unprece-
dented and exorbitant exertion of the prerogative. In
every period of the French history, they have merited
the praise of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of
the rights and privileges of the nation [ QQ].

THE kingdom extends to the confines of the Ger- Conftituoo

man Empire, from which Charles V. derived his title and govel-
of highest dignity. In explaining the political confli- Gcrman
tution of this vafi and complex body at the beginning Empire.
of the sixteenth century, I shall avoid entering into
such a detail as would involve my readers in that in-
extricable labyrinth, which it formed by the multipli-
city of its tribunals, the number of its members, their
interfering rights, and by the endless difcuflions or re-
finements of the publick lawyers of Germany with
refpe& to all these.

THE Empire of Charlemagne was a flru&ure ere&- Its fnte Un

ed in so short a time that it could not be permanent. adr ncharle
Under his immediate fucceflor it began to totter; and his dclfca-
it soon fell to pieces. The crown of Germany wasdlta
leparated for ever from that of France, and the defcen-
dants of Charlemagne established two great monar-
Ilies so situated as to give rife to a perpetual rivallhip
::nd enmity between them. But the Princes of the
race of Charlemagne, who were placed on the Imperial

[ 0Q] NOTE XXXIX.

throne,

SECT. T. throne, were not altogether so degenerate, as those of
I _4V% the fame family who reigned in France. In the hands

of the former the royal authority retained some vigour,
and the nobles of Germany, though possessed of ex-
tensive privicges as well as ample territories, did not
so early attain independence. The great offices of the
crown continued to be at the disposal of the sovereign,
and during a long period, fiefs remained in their origi-
nal Hate, without becoming hereditary and perpetual in
the families to which they had been granted.

Other fami- AT length the German branch of the family of
lie arceraif- Charlemagne became extina, and his feeble dcfcen-
ed to the
Imperial dants who reigned in France had funk into fich con-
dignity. tempt, that the Germans, without looking towards

them, exercised the right inherent in a free people;
A. D. 9"1. and in a general assembly of the nation eleed Conrad,

Count of Franconia, Emperor. After him Henry of
Saxony, and his descendants the three Othos, were
placed, in fucceflion, on the Imperial throne, by the
suffrages -r their countrymen. The extensive territo-
ries of the Saxon Emperors, their eminent abilities and
enterprizing genius not only added new vigour to the
Imperial dignity, but raised it to higher power and pre-
. D. 952. eminence. Otho the Great marched at the head of

a numerous army into Italy, and after the example of
Charlemagne, gave law to that country. Every power
there recognized his authority. He created Popes and
deposed them by his sovereign mandate. He annexed
the kingdom of Italy to the German Empire. Elated
with his success, he aTfumed the title of Cefar Auguf-
tus [h]; and a Prince born in the heart of Germany
pretended to be the fuccellor of the Emperors of anci-
ent Rome, and claimed a right to the fame power and
prerogative.

The Ger- BUT while the Emperors, by means of there new
-n n"oili titles, and new dominions, gradually acquired addi-
ucJ,.,t tional power and splendour, the nobility of Germany

oad Cove- went on at the fame time extending their privileges and
reign u- jarifdiaion. The situation of affairs was favourable to

their attempts. The vigour which Charlemagne had
given to government quickly relaxed. The inability of
ome of his fuccefors was such, as would have en-
couraged vasTals less enterprizing than the nobles of that
-fb] Atoalibt Suo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. 1. P 146.

age,

age, to have claimed new rights and to have assumed SECT. 1I.
new powers. The civil wars in which other Empe- V
rors were engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court
to their itbjeits on whose support they depended, and
not en!l to connive at their ulurpations, but to p: rnit
and even to authorize them. Fiets became gradually
hereditary. They were transmitted not only in the di-
ret, but in the collateral line. The invfftiture of them
was demanded not only by male but by female heirs.
Every baron began to exercise sovereign jull'd;ction
within his own domains; and the Dukes and Coun s of
Germany took wide fltps towards rerdering their ter-
ritories diftind and independent States [i]. ' he Saxon
Emperors observed their progress, and were aware of
its tendency. But as they could not hope to humble
vassals already grown too potent, unless they had turr, d
their whole force as well as attention to that cniclprize,
and as they were extremely intent on their expeditions
into Italy, which they could not undertake without the
concurrence of their nobles, they were solicitous not
to alarm them by any direct attack on their privileges
and jurifdicions. They aimed, however, at under- The G
mining their power, and inconsiderately bestowed addi- man ctc.
tional territories, and accumulated new honours on the raifedtoth
clergy, in hopes that this order might serve as a coun- time
terpoile to that of the nobility in any future firuggle [k] power.

THE unhappy effets of this fatal error in polic, The ftal

were quickly felt. Under the emperors of the Fran- ecita of
conian and Swabian lines, whom the Germans by their 'g tsdi-
voluntary eletion placed on the Imperial throne, a cLrgy.
new face of things appeared, and a scene was exhibited A. 1. o4
in Germany, which astonished all Christendom at that
time, and which in the prelent age appears almost in-
credible. The Popes, hitherto dependent on the Fm-
perors, and indebted for their power as well as dignity
to their beneficence and protetion, began to claim a
superior jurifdidion; and in virtue of authority which
they pretended to derive from heaven, tried, condemn-
ed, excommunicated and deposed their former malters.
Nor is this to be confidered merely as a frantic sally of
paflion in a pontiff intoxicated with high ideas con-
cerning the extent of priestly domination, and the

i] Pfffel. abrege, p. i zo. z15. Lb. Feudor, tit. i.
Ik] *fcffcl. abregc, p. 154.

plenitude

SeCT. III. plenitude of papal power. Gregory VII. was able as
_V%( wawell as daring. His presumption and violence were ac-

companied with political discernment and sagacity. He
had observcd that the Princes and nobles of Germany,
had acquired.fuch considerable territories and such ex-
tensive jurifidieion as rendered them not only formid-
able to the Emperors, but disposed them to favour any
attempt to circumscribe their power. He foresaw that
the ecclefiatticks of Germany, raised almofl to a level
with its Princes, were ready to support any person who
would fland forth as the protecor of their privileges
and independence. With both of these Gregory ne-
gotiated, and had secured many devoted adherents
among them, before he ventured to enter the lifts
against the head of the Empire.

The con- HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a pre-
tclt be- text that was popular and plausible. He complained of
twCen Cthe venality and corruption with which the Emperor
Popes and ,i

,mperors, had granted the investiture of benefices to ecclesias-
andthe con- ticks. He contended that this right belonged to him

Unceo as head of the church; he required Henry to confine

himself within the bounds of his civil jurifdition, and
to abltain for the future from such Sacrilegious en-
croachments on his spiritual dominion. All the censures
of the church were denounced against Henry, because
he refused to relinquish those powers which his prede-
ceffors had uniformly exercised. The most considerable
of the German Princes and ecclefiafiicks were excited
to take arms against him. His mother, his wife, his
sons were wrought upon to disregard all the ties of
blood as well as of duty, and to join the party of his
enemies [']. Such were the fuccetsful arts with which
the court of Rome inflamed the fuperflitious zeal and
conduced the fadious spirit of the Germans and Ita-
lians, that an Emperor, diflinguifled not only for many
virtues, but poffcffld of considerable talents, was at
length obliged to appear as a tupplicant at the gate of
the caflle in which the Pope resided, and to sand there,
three days, barefooted, in the depth of winter, ini-
A. D. 1077. ploring a pardon, which at length he obtained with dit-

ficulty [RIJ.

[I] AnnaL German. ap. Struv. i. p. 3a5.

LRR] NOTi.i XL.T

TaIl

THIS a& of humiliation degraded the Imperial dig- Slcr. Ill

nity. Nor was the depreflion only momentary. The VA
contefl between Gregory and Henry gave rife to the
two great factions of the Guelfs and Ghibellines; the
former of which supporting the pretensions of the Popes,
and the latter defending the rights of the Emperor,
kept Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation during
three centuries. A regular system for humbling the Em-
perors and circumicribing thoir power was formed, and
adhered to uniformly throughout that period. The The Impe-
Popes, the free States in Italy, the nobility and eccle- ral aiutho-
fillicks of Germany, were all intcrctled in its fuccels; ally de-
and notwithstanding the return of some (hort intervals c'in-.
of vigour, under the administration of a few able Em-
perors, the Imperial authority continued to decline.
During the anarchy of the long interregnum subsequent A. D. 1256.
to the death of William of Holland, it dwindled down
to nothing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder of A.D.1173.
the house of Austria, and who first opened the way to
its future grandeur, was at length eleced Emperor, not
that he might re-ellablilh and extend the Imperial au-
thority, but because his territories and influence were so
inconsiderable as not to excite the jealousy of the Ger-
man Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms
of a constitution, the power and vigour of which they
had deftroved. Several of his fucceflors were placed on
the Imperial throne from the fame motive; and almost
every remaining prerogative was wrested out of the
hands of feeble Princes unable to exercise or to defend
them.

DutRIN this period of turbulence and confufon the A total

constitution of the Germanick body underwent a total thange ,it
change. The ancient names of courts and magistrates, con/titution
together with the original forms and appearance of po- ot the /m-
lic' were preserved; but such new privileges and ju- prc.
rilditcion were assumed, and so many various rights
etlablifled, that the fame species of government no
longer subsistcd. The Princes, the great nobility, the
dignified ecclefiafticks, the free cities had taken advan-
tage of the interregnum, which I have mentioned, to
efltblith or to extend their usurpations. They *aimed
and exerciscd the right of governing their repesive ter-
ritori:s with full lovereignty. They acknowledged no
t'perior with refped to any point, relative to the in-
terior adminilfration and police of their domains. They

X\OL. 1. K enaaed

scT. III. enaced laws, imposed taxes, coined money, declared

war, concluded peace, and exerted every preroga:ive
peculiar to independent States. The ideas of order and
political union which had formed the various provil-
ces of Germany into one body were entirely loft; and
the society mulf have difiolved, if the forms of feudal
subordination had not preserved such an appearance of
conne&tion or dependence among the various members
of the community, as preserved it from falling to pieces.

txpedientr THIS bond of un;on, however, was extremely feeble;
for putting and no principle remained in the German conflitution
an end to
thh state soss sufficient force to maintain publick order, and hardly
anarchy. to ascertain personal security. From the acceflion of

Rodulph of Hapfburgh, to the reign of Maximilian,
the immediate predeccffor of Charles V. the Empire
felt every calamity which a late must endure when the
authority of government is so much relaxed as to have
loft all vigour. The causes of dissention among that
vast number of members which composed the Germa-
nick body, were infinite and unavoidable. These gave
rife to perpetual private wars, carried on with all the
violence of resentment when unrefirained by fupericr au-
thority. Rapine, outrage, exations, became univer-
fal. Commerce was interrupted; indufiry suspended;
and every part of Germany resemblcd a country which
an enemy had plundered and laid desolate [m]. The
variety of expedients employed with a view to reflore
order and tranquillity, prove that the grievances occa-
sioned by this state of anarchy had grown intolerable.
Arbiters were appointed to terminate the differences
among the several fates. The cities united in a league,
the obje& of which was to check the rapine and
extortions of the nobility. The nobility formed con-
federacies, on purpose to maintain tranquillity among
their own order. Germany was divided into fevtral
Circles, in each of which a provincial and partial juril-
di&ion was ellabliflied, to supply the place of a publick
and common tribunal n[].

Particularly BUT all these remedies were so fruitless, that they
by the In- served only to demonftiate the violence of that anarchy

"itutio of whichiprevailed, and the inefficacy of the means em-
Chmuber.

[m] See aboe, page 43 end note ai. Dett. de pace publica Imper. p.

as. nt. 53. p. as, no. 6. P. 3, no. l.

In] Datt, pa. Scruv.
Sr urp. Hill. i. 51o, &c.

ployed

ployed to correa it. At length Maximilian, by infti-SEcT. II.
tuting the Imperial chamber, a tribunal composed of l JVm
judges named partly by the Emperor, partly by the A.D. 1495,
ieveral States, and veiled with authority to decide final-
ly concerning all differences among the members of
the Germanick body, re-eftablifled publick order in the
Empire. A few years after, by giving a new form to A. D. 1512.
the Aulick council, which takes cognizance of all feu-
dal caties, and such as belong to the Emperor's imme-
diate jilrifdiction, he restored some degree of vigour to
the Imperial authority.

BUT notwithstanding the salutary effecs of these A the be-

regulation, and improvements, the political constitution ginning of
of the German Empire, at the commencement of the thefi"teeth

century, the

period of which I propose to write the hiflory, was of Empirc an
a species so peculiar, as not to resemble perfefly any afrotiatlon
form of government known either in the ancient or otfcrCiu.
modern world. It was a complex body, formed by the
association of several States, each of which polleffed
sovereign and independent jurifdi&ion within its own
territories. Of all the members which composed this
united body, the Emperor was the head. In his name,
all decrees and regulations with refpe&: to points of
common concern, were issued; and to him the power
of carrying them into execution was committed. But
this appearance of monarchical power in the Emperor
was more than counterbalanced by the influence and au-
thority of the Princes and States of the Empire in every
act of administration. No law extending to the whole
body could pass, no resolution that affeaed the general
interest could be taken, without the approbation of the
Diet of the Empire. In this assembly, every sovereign
Prince and State of the Germanick body had a right to
be present, to deliberate, and to vote. The decrees
or Recesss of the Diets were the laws of the Empire,
which the Emperor was bound to ratify and enforce.

UNDER this aspet the constitution of the Empire Peculiaritie

appears a regular confederacy, similar to the Achsean inthenature
league in ancient Greece, or to that of the United of .hi ltu1"
Provinces and of the Swiss cantons in moderir' times.
But if viewed in another light, firiking peculiarities in
its political slate present themselves. The Germanick
body was not formed by the union of members alto-
gether diflind and independent. All the Princes and

K 2 States

SZCT. TII. States joined in this aiTociation, were originally fubieca

V to the Emperors, and acknowledged them as fox.e-

reigns. Besides this, they originally held their lands as
Imperial fiefs, and in consequence of this tenure owed
the Emperors all those ferviccs whicl: f: udal vassals are
bound to perform to their liege lord. But though this
political fubjeEtion was entirely at an end, and the in-
fluence of the ttudal relation much dimiriflled, the an-
cient forms and infliiutions iniroduL.d when the Empc-
rors governed Germany with authority, not inferior to
that which the other monarchs of Europe possestd,
Rill remained. Thus an opposition was eitablifhed be-
tween the genius of the govcrnn.ent, and the forms of
administration in the German Empire. The former
confidered the Emperor only as the head of a confede-
racy, the members of which, by their voluntary choice,
have raised him to that dignity; the latter seemed to
imply, that he is really inverted with sovereign power.

The defea&sBy this circumfiance, such principles of hostility and
in the ce,-difcord were interwoven in the frame of the Germa-
:itution of
tte £mpire. nick body, as affeded each of its members, rendering

their interior union incomplete, and their external ct-
forts feeble and irregular. The effecs of this vice or
disorder inherent in the constitution of the Empile are
so considerable, that, without attending to them, i; is
impoflible to comprehend many tranfa&ions in the reign
of Charles V. or to form just ideas concerning the
genius of the German government.

Aring from THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning of
the limited the sixteenth century, were distinguished by the modl
power of
rhe Empt- pompous titles, and by such ensigns of dignity as inti-
rorn mated their authority to be superior 'to that of all

other monarchs. The glcatcft Princes of the Empire
attended and served them on some occasions, as the of-
ficers of their houfhold. They exercised prerogatives
which no other sovereign ever claimed. They retain-
ed pretensions to all the extensive powers which their
predecessors had enjoyed in any former age. But at the
fame time, instead of pofefling that ample domain
which had belonged to the ancient Emperors of Ger-
many, and which firetched from Basil to Cologne, along
both banks of the Rhine [o), they were 1tript of all
[o] Pfcfl. Abregc, &c. p. a41.

territorial

territorial property, and had not a single city, a single Szc. III.
caitle, a single foot of land,'that pertained to them as'-
heads of the Empire. As their domain was alienated,
their fated revenues were reduced almost to nothing;
and the extraordinary aids which on a few occasions
they obtained, were granted sparingly, and paid with
rcludcance. The Princes and States of the Empire,
though they seemed to recogniz.e the Imperial autho-
rity, were fubjeds only in name, each of them posTef-
sing a complete municipal jurifdiCion within the pre-
cinds of his own territories.

FROM this ill-compactd frame of government, es- From the

sets that were unavoidable resulted. The Emperors, nature of
dazzled with the Iplendour of their titles, and the ex- and pretcn-
tenor signs of vaif authority, were apt to imagine them- ficnb.
selves to be the real sovereigns of Germany, and were
led to aim continually at recovering the exercise of
those powers and prerogatives which the forms of the
constitution seemed to veil in them, and which their
predecessors Charlemagne and the Otho's had atually
enjo!ed. The Princes and States, aware of the nature
as well as extent of their pretensions, were perpetually
on their guard, in order to watch all the motions of '"
the Imperial court, ard to circumscribe its power with-
in limits fiill more narrow. The Emperors, in support
o! their claims, appealed to ancient forms and inftitu-
tions, which the States held to be obsolete. The
States founded their rights on recent practice and mo-
dern privileges, which the Emperors confidcred as ulur-
p;itions.

TmIes jealousy of the Imperial authority, together rom the

with the opposition between it and the rights of the manner in
States, increased considerably from the time that the which they
I-mperors werc eleced, not by the collecive body of"er' clc-
German nobles, but by a few Princes of chief dignity.
During a long period, all the members of the Germa-
nick body afe-mbled, and made choice of the pcrfon
whom they appointed to be their head. But amidst
the violence and anarchy which prevailed for several

nilturies in the Empire, seven Princes who pofflefed
the mofi extensive territories, and who had obtained an
hereditary title to the great offices of the State, ac-
quired the cxclufive privilege of nominating the Em-
1tLror. This right was confirmed to them by the

K 3 Golden

SECT. III. Golden Bull; the mode of exercising it was ascertain-
IoV_' ed, and they were dignified with the appellation of

Elefiors. The nobility and free-cities being thus strip-
ped of a privilege which they had once enjoyed, were
les~ conneSted with a Prince, towards whose elevation
they had not contributed by their suffrages, and came
to be more apprehensive of his authority. The Elec-
tors, by their extensive power, and the diflinguifling
privileges which they poffefled, became formidable to
the JPmperors,. with whom they were placed almost on
a level in several ats of jurifdlition. Thus the in-
trodution of the Electoral college into the Empire,
and the authority which it acquired, inflead of dimi-
nifhing, contributed to strengthen the principles of hul-
tility and discord in the Germanick constitution.

From the THESE were further augmented by the various and
differentt
dffirg ns repugnant forms of civil policy in the several States
government which composed the Germanick body. It is no easy
established matter to render the union of independent States per-
in hchcsttsfeQt and entire, even when the genius and forms of
posed the their refpeeive governments happen to be altogether
Germanick similar. But in the German Empire, which was a
bcdy. confederacy of Princes, of Ecclefiafticks, and of free-

cities, it was impoflible that they could incorporate
thoroughly, The free-cities were small republicks, in
which the maxims and spirit peculiar to that species
of government prevailed. The Princes and nobles to
whom supreme jurifdiAion belonged, possessed a fort of
monarchical power within their own territories, and
the forms of their interior adminifiration nearly rc-
femb!ed those of the great feudal kingdoms. The in-
tcrells, the ideas, the ohje&s of States so differently
conflituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could their
common deliberations be carried on with the fame
spirit, while the love of liberty and attention to com-
merce were the reigning principles in the cities; and
ardour for military glory, together with the desire of
power, were the governing passions of the Princes and
nobility.

From- the THe secular and ecclesiastical members of the Em-
eppofition pire were as little fitted for union as the free-cities

t l and the nobility. Vast territories were annexed to

nd cccltc- several of the German bilhopricks and abbeys, and the
ofticalmem- dignified ecclefiafRicks held some of the highcft ofices
be. Iin

in the Empire by hereditary right. The younger sons SECT. Ill.
of noblemen of the second order, who had devoted AV
themselves to the church, were commonly promoted to
these stations of eminence and power; and it was no
small mortification to the Princes and great nobility to
fee persons trised from an inferior rank to the fame
level with themselves, or even exalted to superior dig-
nity. The education of these church-men, the genius
of their profeflrin, and their connection with the court
of Rome, rendered their character as well as interest
different from those of the other members of the Ger-
manick body, with whom they were called to aEt in
concert. Thus another source of jealousy and vari-
ance was opened, which ought not to be overlooked
when we are searching into the nature of the German
constitution.

'To all these causes of dissention may be added one From the

more, arising from the unequal distribution of power unequal di-
and wealth among the States of the Empire. The welth ani
electors, and other nobles of the highest rank, not power .-
only poffefied sovereign jurifdiaion, but governed such rMnithe
extentive, populous, and rich countries, as rendered
them great Princes. Many of the other members,
though they enjoyed all the right of sovereignty, rul-
ed over futh petty domains, that their real power
bore no proportion to this high prerogative. A well-
compacted and vigorous confederacy could not be
f,.rncd of such dilimilar states. The weaker were
jealou, timid, and unable either to assert or to defend
ther just privileges. Ihe more powerful were apt to
aflIne and to oecome opprelfive. The Elc6tors and
Emperors endeavoured by turns to extend their own
authority,, by encroaching on the rights of these fee-
ble members of the Germanick body: and they, over-
awed or corrupted, tamely gave up their privileges,
or meanly favoured the deiigns formed againRt them
[SSj.

AFTER contemplating all these principles of difi- All thef

nion and opposition in the contfitution of the G(erman rcnder the
iEmpire, it will be eafv to account for the want of bedm in^k
concord and uniformitv, conspicuous in its councils and p.hfe of
proceeding. That flow, dilatory, difiruflful and irrc- At"ing with

vigw)ur.
[SS] NOTE XLI.

K 4 solute

SEcT.III. solute spirit, which characterizes all its deliberation,
_yv will appear natural in a body, the jun6tion of whose

members was so incomplete, the different parts of
which were held together by such feeble ties, and set
at variance-by such powerful motives. But the Em.
pire of Germany, neverthclefs, comprehended countries
of such vast extent, and was inhabited by such a mar.
tial a:id hardy race of men, that when the abilities of
an. .Emperor, or zeal for any common cause, culd
ruuze this unwieldly body to put forth its strength, it
aSted with irreliflible force. In the following hiflory
we ihall find, that as the measures on which Charles
V. was most intent, were often thwarted or rendered
abortive by the spirit of je.tlouly and division pecuiiar to
the Germanick con;iit;nion; so it was by the influence
which he acquired over the Princes of the Empire, and
by engaging them to co-operate with him, that he was
enabled to make some of the greatest efforts which dil-
tinguifh his reign.

Vicw ofthe TIHE Turkilh hiflory is so blended, during the reien
Turkilh go- of Charles V. with that of the great nations in Eu-
vcrnmaci. rope, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so often, and

with such decisive influence, in the wars and negotia-
tions of the Christian Princes, that some previous ac-
count of the slate of government in that great Empire,
is no less necessary for the information of my readers,
than those views of the constitution of other kingdoms
which I have already exhibited to them.
Its ergin. IT has been the fate of the more southern and ser-

tile parts of Asia. at different periods, to be conquer-
ed by that warlike and hardy race of men, who il-
habit the vafl country known to the ancients by the
name of Scythia, and among the moderns by that of
Tartary. One tribe of thele people, called Turks or
Turcomans, extended its conquefis, under various lea-
ders, and during fevcral centurits, fiom the shore of
the Cafplan to the firaits of the Dardanelles. To-
wards the middle of the fifteenth century, these for-
midable conquerors took Conflantinople by florm, and
cflablilhcd the feat of their government in that Impe-
rial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and the other
provinces of the ancient kingdoms of Thrace and Ma-
cecdll;,t, together with part of Hungary, were sub-
jeCted to their power.

Its dfpotic Bu.r though the feat of the Turkith government was
g'm. fixed in Europe, and the Sultais obtained poffcflion of

such

sech extensive dominions in that quarter of the globe, SECT. II.
the genius of their policy was purely Afiatick; and may A
be properly termed a despotism, in contradiftinftion to
these monarchical and republican forms of government
which we have been hitherto contemplating. The fu-
p:eme power was vested in Sultans of the Ottoman race,
that blood being deemed so sacred, that no other was
thought worthy of the throne. From this elevation,
these fovcreigns could look down, and behold all their
subjects reduced to the fame level before them. The
maxitns of Turkish policy admit not any of those infli-
tutions, which, in other countries, limit the exercise, or
moderate the rigour of monarchical power. No great
court with constitutional and permanent jurifdiltion to
interpose both in the enacment and execution of laws.
No body of hereditary nobles, whose sense of their own
pre-eminence, whose consciousness of what is due to
their rank and characer, whose jealousy of their privi-
leges circurifcribe the authority of the Prince, and serve
rnot only as a barrier against the excesses of his caprice,
bat fland as an intermediate order between him and the
people. Under the Turkifl government, the political
condition of every subjet is equal. To be employed in
the service of the Sultan, is the only circumfRance that
confers dflRintion. Even this diftintion is annexed so
closely to the flations in which persons serve, that it is
scarce communicated to those who are placed in them.
The highest dignity in the Empire does not give any
rank or pre-emninence to the family of him who enjoys
it. As every man, before he is raised to any flation of
authority, muff go through the preparatory discipline of a
long and servile obedience [p), the moment he is deprived
of power, he and his posterity return to the fame con-
dition with other fubjeas, and fink back into obscurity.
It is the diftinguilhing and odious chiraderiftick of the
Eastern despotism, that annihilates all other ranks of
men, in order to exalt the monarch; that it leaves no-
thing to the former, while it give every thing to the lat-
ter; that it endcavours to fix in the minds of those who
are fubjcEt to it, the idea of no relation between men,
but that of a raiter and of a slave, the former deflined to
command and to punish, the latter formed to tremble and
to obey [TT].
[P] Snt of the Turkibh Empire by ycaut, P. iS.

[TTJr NOTE4 XWLLB

BUT

SECT.II. BUT as there are circumstances which frequently

..V.r obftruE or defeat the salutary effets of the beft-reou.

p-,,wcr of late] governments, there are others which contribute to
limited by

' migate the evils of the most vicious forms of policy.
rec.gion; There can,. indeed, be no conflitutional refiraints on

the will of a Prince in a despotic government; but
there may be such as are accidental. Abfo!ute as the
Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves circum.
fcribed both by religion, the principal on which their
authority is founded [q], and by the army, the infiru-
ment which they must employ in order to maintain
it. Wherever religion interposes, the will of the Sove.
reign must submit to its decrees. When the Koran
hath prescribed any religious rite; hath enjoined any
moral duty ; or hath confirmed, by its fandion, any
political maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot
overturn that which an higher authority hath efta-

nid by the bliihed. The chief reftri-tion, however, on the will
mhliLary. of the Sultans, is imposed by the military power.

An armed force must surround the throne of every
Despot, to maintain his authority, and to execute his
commands. As the Turks extended their empire over
nations, which they did not exterminate, but reduce
to fubjceion, they found it neceflary to render their

Origin of military establishment numerous and formidable. Amu-
the Janiza- rath, their third Sultan, in order to form a body of
es. devoted troops, that might serve as the immediate
A. D. guards of his person and dignity, appointed his officers

to seize annually, as the Imperial property, the fifth
part of the youth taken in war. These, after being
infiruited in the Mahometan religion, inured to obe-
dience by severe discipline, and trained to warlike ex-
ercifes, were formed into a body diftinguithed by the
name of 'Janizaries, or new soldiers. Every senti-
ment which enthufiafin can inspire, every mark of
diflinlion that the favour of the Prince could confer,
were employed in order to animate this body with
martial ardour, and Wvith a consciousness of its own
pre-eminence [r]. The Janizaries soon became the
chief slrength and pride of the Ottoman armies; and
by their number as well as reputation, were diftin-
guifhed above all the troops, whose duty it was to
attend on the person of the Sultans [UU].

fq] Rycaut, p. . [r] Prince Cantemir's History of the Othman
Fmpire, p. ,7 . [LU] NOTE XLIII.

THUS

THUS, as the supreme power in every society is SecT. IIL.
possessed by those who have arms in their hands, this V-
formidable body of soldiers, deflined to be the inffru-'Their Ca
ments of enlarging the Sultan's authority, acquired, the Turkiih
at the fame time, the means of controling it. The gvecrn-
Janizaries in Conltantinople, like the Pretorian bands mc"t
in ancient Rome, quickly perceived all the advantages
which they derived from being stationed in the capi-
tal; from their union under one flandard; and from
being masters of the person of the Prince. The Sul-
tans became no less sensible of their influence and im-
portance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of the Porte, was
the only power in the Empire that a Sultan or his
Vifier had reason to dread. To preserve the fidelity
and attachment of the Janizaries, was the great art
of government, and the principal object ot attention
in the policy of the Ottoman court. [Under a mo-
narch, whole abilities and vigour of mind fit him for
command, they are obsequious instruments; execute
whatever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible.
Under feeble Princes, or such as are unfortunate, they
become turbulent and mutinous; atfume the tone of
Matters; degrade and exalt Sultans at pleasure; and
teach those to tremble, on whose nod, at other times,
life or death depend.

FROM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, to Progrer of

Solyman, who began his reign a few months after the Turks
Charles V. was placed on the Imperial throne, a fuc-toward, do-
ceflion of illufirious Princes who ruled over the Turkilh o
Empire. By their great abilities, they kept their
lubjeds of every order, military as well as civil, sub-
miflive to government; and had the absolute command
of whatever force their vast Empire was able to ex-
ert. Solyman, in particular, who is known to the
Chriflians chiefly as a conqueror, but is celebrated
in the Turkish annals as the great lawgiver who es-
tablifhed order and police in their Empire, governed
during his long reign with no less authority than wis-
dom. He divided his dominions into several difricts ;
he appointed the number of soldiers which each should
furnish; he appropriated a certain proportion of the
lands in every province for their maintenance: he
regulated, with a minute accuracy, every thing rela-
tive to their discipline, their arms, and the nature of
their service. He put the finances of the Empire into

an

SECT. I. an orderly train of administration; and though the taxes
_oYV' in the Turkish dominions, as well as in the other delpo-

tic monarchies of the East, are far from being confi-
derable, he supplied that detect by an attentive and fe.
vere ceconomy.

Mbtages NOR was it only under such Sultans as Solyman,
which they whose talents were no less adapted to preserve interior
ov the order, than to condu& the operations of war, that the
Chritian Turkish Empire engaged with advantage in its contefls
P0"'_fin with the Chriitian flates. The long fucceflion of able
~th nbca- Princes, which I have mentioned, had given such vigour
tiy. and firmners to the Ottoman government, that it seems

to have attained, during the sixteenth century, the highest
degice of perfection of which its constitution was capa-
ble. Whereas the great monarchies in Christendom were
frill far from that state, which could enable them to act
with a full exertion of their force. Besides this, the
T'urkish troops in that age pofelfed every advantage
which arises from superiority in military discipline. At
the time when Solyman began his reign, the Janizaries
had been embodied near a century and a half, and dur-
ing that long period the severity of their military difci-
pline had in no degree relaxed. The soldiers drawn
from the provinces of the Empire had been kept almost
continually under arms, in the various wars which the
Sultans had carried on with hardly any interval of peace.
Against troops thus trained and accuflomed to fervicc, the
forces of the Chrifian powers took the field with great
diCadvantiag . The molf intelligent as well as impartial
auttors of the sixteenth century, acknowledge and la-
nent the superior attainments of the Turks in the mili-
tary art [XXJ. rhe success which uniformly attended
their aims in all their war,, demonitrates the juflnefs of
thrs observation. The Christian armies did not acquire
that fup-rioriry over the Turks, which they now poffels,
until the long eftiblilhnent of standing forces had im-
proved military discipline among the former; and until
variou, causes and events, which it is not my province to
explain, h:ad corrupted or abolished their ancient warlike
inltitutions among the latter.

[XX] NOTE XLIV.

PROOFS

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. SECT. 1. P. 11. [A].
Ti -H E consternation of the Britons, when invadect

by the Pids and Caledonians after the Roman
legions were called out of the island, may give,
some idea of the degree of debasement to which

the human mind was reduced by long servitude under
the Romans. In their supplicatory letter to Actium,
which they call the groans of Britain, "' We know
not (fay they) which way to turn us. The barbarians
drive us to the sea; and the sea forces us back on the bar-
barians; between which we have only the choice of two
deaths, either to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be
butchered by the sword." Hiltor. Gilda. ap. Gale. Hit.
Britan. Script. p. 6.-One can scarce believe this dastardly
race, to be the descendants of that gallant people, who
repu!fed Caesar, and defended their liberty so long againlt
the Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. I. p. i1. [BJ.

THE barbarous nations were not only illiterate, but

regarded literature with contempt. They found the in-
habitants of all the provinces of the Empire funk in es-
feminacy, and averse to war. Such a character was the
o bjec of scorn to an high-fpirited and gallant race of
men. "1 When we would brand an enemy," fays
Liutprandus, "' with disgraceful and contumelious ap-
pellations, we call him a Roman; hoc solo, id eft Romani
nomine, quicquid ignobilitatis, quicquid timiditatis, quic-
quid avaritia, quicquid luxurix, quicquid mendacii,
immo quicquid vitiorum eft conmprehendentes." Liut-
prandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic. vol. ii. pars
1. p. 481. This degeneracy (, manners, illiterate bar-
barians imputed to their love of learning. Even after
they fettled in the countries which they had conquered,

they

they would not permit their children to be inffruóed in
any science; " for, (said they), inftruftion in the
sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and depress the
mind; and he who has been acciiftomed to tremble
under the rod of a pedagogue, will never look on a
sword or spear with an undaunted eye." Procop. de
bello Gothor. lib. i. p. 4. ap. Script. Byz. vol. i. A
considerable number of years elapled, before nations so
rude, and so unwilling to learn, could produce hifo-
rians capable of recording their tranfadtions, or of der-
cribing their manners and infitutions. By that time,
all memory of their ancient condition was loft, and 1no
monument remained to guide their firit writers to any
certain knowledge of it. If one expects to receive
any fatisfadory account of the manners and laws of the
Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during their residence in
those countries where they were originally feated, from
Jornandes, Paulus Warnefridus, or Gregory of Tours,
the earliest and mofi authentick historians of there
people, he will be miserably disappointed. Whatever
imperfec view has been conveyed to us of their an-
cient Rfate, we owe not to their own writers, but to the
Greek and Roman historians.

NOTE III. SECT. I. p. 12. [C].

A cIRCUMSTANCE related by Prifcus in his hiflory

of the embassy to Attila, King of the Huns, gives a
firiking view of the enthufiaflick paflion for war, which
prevailed among the barbarous nations. When the en-
tertainment to which that fierce conqueror admitted the
Roman ambafladors was ended, two Scythians advanced
towards Attila, and recited a poem in which they cele-
brated his victories, and military virtues. All the Huns
fixed their eyes with attention on the bards. Some seem-
ed to be delighted with the verses; others, remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with joy; while
those who were become feeble through age, burst out into
tears, bewailing the decay of their vigour, and the slate
of inactivity in which they were now obliged to remain.
Excerpta ex hiforia Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant. Hiftur.
Script. edit. Venet. v. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SEcr. I. p. 17. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts of this
r eafoning occurs in the history of England. The Saxons

carried

carried on the conquest of that country with the fame
deftrutive spirit, which diftinguified the other barbarous
nations. The ancient inhabitants of Britain were either
exterminated; or forced to take shelter among the
mountains of Wales; or reduced into servitude. The
Saxon government, laws, manners and language were
of consequence introduced into Britain; and were so per-
feetly established, that all memory of the institutions
previous to their conquest was abolished. The very re-
verse of this happened in a subsequent revolution. A
single victory placed William the Norman on the throne
of England. The Saxon inhabitants, though oppressed,
were not exterminated. William employed the ut-
moll efforts of his power and policy to make his new
fubjeas conform in every thing to the Norman ftan-
dard; but without success. The Saxons, though van-
quifhed, were far more numerous than their conque-
rors; when they began to incorporate, their laws and
manners gradually gained ground. The Norman infti-
tutionw were unpopular and odious; many of them fell
into disuse; and in the English constitution and lan-
guage, at this day, many efiential parts are manifestly
of Saxon, not of Norman extrad.

NOTE V. SECT. I. p. 17. [EJ.

PaocoPrus, the hiflorian, decline;, from a princi-

ple of benevolence, to give any particular detail of the
cruelties of the Goths; " Left, fays he, I fllould
transmit a monument and example of humanity to fuc-
ceeding ages." Proc de bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. io.
ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 126. But as the change, which
I have pointed out as a consequence of the settlement
of the barbarous nations in the countries formerly sub-
je5t to the Roman Empire, could not have taken
place, if the greater part of the ancient inhabitants had
not been extirpated, an event of such importance and
influence merits a more particular illustration. This
will justify me for exhibiting fame part of that melan-
choly spectacle, over which humanity prompted Proco-
pius to draw a veil. I (hall not, however, difguf my
readers by a long detail; but reft satisfied with col.
Ieting fomn instances of the devastations made by two
of the many nations which fettled in the Empire. The
Vandals were the first of the barbarians who invaded
Spain. It was one of the richelt and modt populous

of

of the Roman Provinces; the inhabitants had been
diftinguified for courage, and had defended their li.
berty against the arms of Rome, with greater obstinacy,
and during a longer course of years, than any nation
in Europe. But 1b entirely were they enervated by their
fubje&tion to the Romans, that the Vandals, who en-
tered the kingdom A. D. 4.09, compleated the conquest
of it with such rapidity, that in the year 411, there
barbarians divided it among them by casting lots. The
desolation occasioned by their invasion is thus described
by Idatius an eve witmefs. " The barbarians walled
every thing with hostile cruelty. The peflilence was
no less deftruaive. A dreadful famine raged, to such a
degree, that the living were constrained to feed on the
dead bodies of their fellow-citizens; and all there ter-
rible plagues desolated at once the unhappy kingdoms."
Idatii Chron. ap. Biblioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. 1233.
edit. Lugd. 1677. The Goths having attacked the
Vandals in their new settlements, a fierce war ensued;
the country was plundered by both parties; the cities
which at first escaped were laid in ashes, and the in-
habitants exposed to susser every thing that the wanton
cruelty of barbarians could inflica. Idatius describes
there, ibid. p. 1235, b. 1236. c. f. A similar account
of their devaflations is given by Ifidorus Hifpalenfis,
and the contemporary writers. Ifid Chron. ap. Grot.
hist. Goth. 732. From Spain the Vandals paused over
to Africa, A.D. 428. Africa was, next to Egypt, the
most fertile of the Roman provinces. It was one of
the granaries of the Empire, and is called by an an-
cient writer, the foul of the commonwealth. Though
the army with which they invaded it, did not exceed
30,000 fighting men, they became absolute mailers of
the province in less than two years. A contemporary
author gives a dreadful account of the havock which
they made: " They found a province well cultivated,
and enjoying plenty, the beauty of the whole earth.
They carried their deftrurtive arms into every corner
of it; they difpeopled it by their devallations; exter-
minating every thing with fire and sword. 'hey did
not even spare the vines, and fruit trees, that those to
whom caves and inacceflible mountains had afforded a
retreat, might find no nourithment of any kind. Their
hofiilc rage could not be satiatcd, and there was no

place

place exempted from the effeas of itt They tortur-
ed their prisoners with the most exquisite cruelty,
that they might force from them a discovery of their
hidden treasures. The more they discovered, the
more they expe&ed, and the more implacable they
became. Neither the infirmities of age nor of sex;
neither the dignity of nobility, nor the fantity of the
Sacerdotal office, could mitigate their fury; but the
more illutrious their prisoners were, the more bar-
baroufly they insulted them. The publick buildings
which refilfed the violence of the flames, they level-
led with the ground. They left many cities without
an inhabitant. When they approached any fortified
place, which their undisciplined army could not re-
duce, they gathered together a multitude of prifo-
ners, and putting them to the sword, left their bodies
unburied, that the fiench of the carcasses might oblige
the garrison to abandon it." Vitor Vitenfis de per-
fecutione Africana. ap. Bibl. Patrum. vol. viii. p. 666.
St. Auguftin, an African, and a contemporary author
gives a similar description of their cruelties, opera v.
x. p. 372. edit. 1616.-About an hundred years after
the settlement of the Vandals in Africa, Belisarius
attacked and difpofTefled them. Procopius, a contem-
porary hifiorian, describes the devatlation which that
war occfioned. " Africa, fays he, was so entirely
difpeopled, that one might travel several days in it
without meeting one man; and it is no exaggeration
to fay, that in the course of the war five millions of
persons perished." Proc. hidl. Arcana. cap. 18. ap.
Byz. Script. vol. i. 315.-I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, because they are def-
cribed not only by contemporary authors, but by eye-
witnesses. The present slate of Africa confirms their
testimony. Many of the most flourishing and popu-
lous cities with which it was filled, were so entirely
ruined, that no vefiiges remain to point out where
they were situated. That fertile territory which sus-
tained the Roman Empire lies in a great measure un-
cultivated; and that province, which Viaor in his
barbarous Latin called SpecioJitai totiut terra flcrernti,
is now the retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHILE the Vandals laid wafle one part of the Em-

pire, the HunM desolated the reft of it. Of all the
VOL. I. L barbarous

barbarous tribes they were the fierccft and mout for.
midable. Ammianus Marcellinus, a contemporary au-
thor, and one of the bed of the later historians, gives
an account of their policy and manrers. ' hey r;tari!y
resemble those of the Scythians described by the an-
cients, and of the Tartars known to the moderns. In
some parts of their charaer,, and in several of their
cufloms, they resemble the savages in North America.
Their pailion for war and acion was extreme. " As
in poliihed societies (fays Ammianus) ease and tranquil-
lity are courted, they delight in war and dangers. He
who falls in battle is reckoned happy. They who die
of old age or of disease are deemed infamous. They
boast, with the utmost exultation, of the number of
enemies whom they have slain, and as the modt glorious
of all ornaments, they fafen the scalps of thole who have
fallen by their hand to the trappings of their horses."
Ammian. Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd.
1693.-Their incursions into the Empire began in the
fourth century; and the Romans, though no firangers,
by that time, to the effecs of barbarous rage, were
astonished at the cruelty of their devastations. Thrace,
Pannonia, and Illyricum were the countries which they
firfi laid desolate. As they had no thoughts of fettling
in Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Procopius
computes that in each of these, at a medium, two hun-
dred thousand persons perished or were carried off as
slaves. Procop. hist. Arcan. ap. Byz. script. vol. i. 316.
Thrace, the belt cultivated province in that quarter of
the Empire, was converted into a defart, and when
Prifcus accompanied the ambassadors sent to Attila,
there were no inhabitants in some of the cities, but
a few miserable people who had taken ihelter among
the ruins of the churches; and the fields were cover-
ed with the bones of those who had fallen by the
sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol. i. 34. Attila be.
came King of the Huns, A.D. 434. He is one of
the greateRf and moil enterprizing conquerors men-
tioned in hiflory. He extended his empire over all
the vail countries, comprehended under the general
names of Scythia and Germany in the ancient divi-
sion of the world. While he was carrying on his
wars againlt the barbarous nations, he kept the Ro-
man Empire under perpetual apprehensions, and ex-

torted

torted vafi subsidies from the timid and effeminate mo-
narchs who governed it. In the year 451, he entered
Gaul, at Ate head of an army cotnpofed of all the
various nations which he had subdued. It was more
numerous than any with which the barbarians had
hitherto invaded the Empire. The devaltations which
he committed were horrible; not only the open country,
but the most flourishing cities were defola:ed. The
extent and cruelty of h s devastations are described by
Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei. edit. Baluz. Par. 1669. p.
139, &c. and by Idatius ubi supra, p. 1235. Aetius
put a flop to his progress in that country by tle fa-
mous battle of Chalons, in which (if we may believe
the historians of that age) three hundred thousand per-
sons perished. Idat. ibid. Jornandes de rebus Geticis
ap. Grot. hist, Gothor. p. 671. Amft. 1665. But next
year he resolved to attack the centre of the Empire,
and marching into Italy, wafted it with rage, inflam-
ed by the sense of his late disgrace. What Italy sus-
sered by the Huns exceeded all the calamities which the
preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought
upon it. Conringius has colleted several passages
from the ancient historians, which prove that the de-
vaftations committed'by the Vandals and Huns in the
countries situated on the banks of the Rhine, were no
leTs cruel and fatal to the human race. Exercitatio de
urbibus Germanie. Opera, vol. i. 489. But it is
endless, it is shocking to follow these destroyers of man-
kind through so many scenes of horror, and to con-
template the havock which they made of the human
species.

BuT the slate in which Italy appears to have been,

during several ages, after the barbarous nations fettled
in it, is the most decisive proof of the cruelty as wcll
as extent of their devastations. Whenever any coin-
try is thinly inhabited, trees and shrubs spring up inlthe
uncultivated fields, and spreading by degrees form
large forests; by the overflowing of rivers, and the
flagnating of waters, other parts of it are converted
into lakes and marihes. Ancient Italy, the feat of the
Roman elegance and luxury, was cultivated to the
highest pitch. But so effetually did the devafrations
of the barbarians destroy all the effeas of their in-
dufiry and cultivation, that in the eighth century Italy

L 2 appears

appears to have been covered with forests and marshes
of vaR extent. Muratori enters into a long detail
concerning the situation and limits of these; and proves
by the moR authentick evidence, that great tracts of
territory, in' all the different provinces of Italy, were
either over-run with wood, or laid under water. Nor
did these occupy parts of the country naturally barren
or of little value, but were spread over diflrics, which
ancient writers represent as extremely fertile, and which
at present are highly cultivated. Muratori antiquita-
tes Italice mcdii aevi, dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, 153,
&c. A firong proof of this occurs in a description of
the city of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars. ii. p. 691.
The state of desolation in other countries of Europe
seems to have been the fame. In many of the mofi
early charters now extant, the lands granted to monas-
teries or to private persons, are diftinguiihed into such
as are cultivated or inhabited, and luch as were eremi,
desolate. In many inflances, lands are granted to per-
sons because they had taken them from the desert, ab
eremo, and had cultivated and planted them with in-
habitants. This appears from a charter of Charle-
magne, published by Eckhart de rebus Francia Oricn-
talis, vol. ii. p. 864, and from many charters of his
successors quoted by Du Cange, voc. Eremur.

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and ninth

centuries, Italy was greatly insetted by wolves and
other wild beafs; another mark of its being destitute
of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq. vol. ii. p. 163. T'hus
Italy, the pride of the ancient world for its fertility
andcultivation, was reduced to the slate of a country
newly peopled, and rendered habitable.

I AM sensible, not only that tome of the dcfcriptions

of the devaflations which I have quoted, may be cx-
aggerated, bnt that the barbarous tribes proceeded in
diflirtnt manners, in making their new set lenuntis.
Some of them seemed to be bent on exterminating the
ancient inhabitants; others werc more disposcd to in-
colppc: aL with thr:m. It is rot my province either to
enq,,ce into she cau:es which occasiontd this variety in
the condlul of the conqutrorb, or to describe the slate
of those ccuntrits where the ancient inlabitants were
treated mol nmildly. ' he fats which I have produced

are

are sufficient to prove that the deftrution of the hu-
man species, occasioned by their hostile invasions of the
northern nations, and their subsequent settlements, was
much greater than the generality of writers seem to
imagine.,

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 18. [F].

I HAVE observed, Note II. that our only certain

information concerning the ancient Rfate of the barba-
rous nations muit be derived from the Greek and Ro-
man writers. Happilv an account of the institutions
and customs of one people, to which those of all the
reft teem to have been in a great measure similar, has
been transmitted to us by two authors, the most ca-
pable, perhaps, that ever wrote, of observing them with
profound discernment, and of describing them with
propriety and force. The reader must perceive that I
have Cefar and Tacitus in my eye. The former
gives a short account of the ancient Germans in a few
chap';ers of the sixth book of his commentaries: The
la .r wrote a treatise expressly on that fubje&. These
a: :he most precious and inftruaive monuments of
antquitv to the present inhabitants of Europe. From
th-m we 1 arn,

R. THAT the slate of Society among the ancient

Germans, was of the rudest and most simple form.
They uUbfifted entirely by hunting or by pafRurage.
CeI. lib. vi. c. 21. They negle&ed agriculture, and
lived chiefly on milk, cheese, and flesh. Ibid. c. 22.
Tacitus agrees with him in most of these points; de
morib. Germ c. 14, 1S, 23. The Goths were equal-
ly negligent of agriculture. Prif. Rhet. ap. Byz. Script.
vol. i. p. 31. B. Society was in the fame late among
the Huns, who disdained to cultivate the earth, or to
touch a plough. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475.
'The fame manners took place among the Alans; ibid.
P. 477. While society remains in this simple slate, men
by uniting together scarce relinquish any portion of
their natural independence. Accordingly we are in-
formed, 2. That the authority of civil government was
extremely limited among the Germans. During times
of peace they had no common or fixed magifRrate, but
the chief men of every difridt dispensed justice, and
accommodated differences; Ca C ibid. c. 23. Their
Kings had not absolute or unbounded power; their

L 3 authority

authority confifled rather in the privilege of advising,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of small
consequence were determined by the chief men; affairs
of importance by the whole community. Tacit. c. 7,
I. The Huns, in like manner, deliberated in com-
mon concerning every business of moment to the so-
cetv ; and were not fubjeEt to the rigour of regal
authority. Amm. Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every
individual among tire ancient Germans was left at li-
berty to choose wlitther he would take part in any mi-
litary enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed on
him by publick authority. " When any of the chief
men proposes any expedition, such as approve of the
cause and of the leader rife up, and declare their in-
tention of following him; and those who do not ful-
fil this engagement, are confidered as deserters and
traitors, and are looked upon as infamous." Cef.
ibid. c. 23. Tacitus plainly points at the fame cuf-
tom, though in terms more obscure. Tacit. c. ii.
4. As every individual was so independent, and mafler
in so great a degree of his own a&ions, it became, of
consequence, the great objea of every person among
the Germans who aimed at being a leader, to gain
adherents, and attach them to his person and interest.
These adherents Cefar calls Ambafli and Clientes, i. e.
retainers or clients; Tacitus, Comites, or companions.
The chief diftin&ion and power of the leaders, con-
fired in being attended by a numerous band of chosen
youth. This was their pride as well as ornament
during peace, and their defence in war. The favour
of these retainers the leaders gained or preserved by
presents of armour, and of horses; or by the prorule,
though inelegant hospitality, with which they enter-
tained them. Tacit. c. 14, 15. 5. Another confe-
quenLe of the pcrfonal liberty and independence which
the Germans retained, evtn after they united in so-
ciety, was their circumscribing the criminal jurifdic-
tion of the magifirate within very narrow limits, and
their not only claiming but exercising almof all the
rights of private refentncnt and revenge. Their ma-
gilirates had not the power either of imprisoning, or
of infliaing any corporal punlfhment on a free man.
racit. c. 7. Lvery person was obliged to avenge the

wrongl

wrongs which his parents or friends had fuflained.
Their enrnTiies were hereditary, but not irreconcile-
able. Even murder was compensated by paying a cer-
tain number of cattle. Tac. c. 21. A part of the
fi:le weii to the King, or state, a part to the person
who had been injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

THESE particulars concerning the institutions and

manners of the Germans, though well known to every
perion corverfant in ancient literature, I have thought
proper to arrange in this order, and to lay before such
of my readers as may be less acquainted with these
fEs, both because they confirm the account which I
have given of the slate of the barbarous nations, and
tend to illustrate all the obiervations that I shall have
occasion to make concerning the various changes in their
government and customs. The laws and customs in-
troduced by the barbarous nations into their new set-
tlements, are the best commentary on the writings of
Caear and Tacitus; and their observations are the best
key to a perse& knowledge of these laws and cufloms.

ONE circumrt ance with refpe& to the testimonies of

Cafar and Tacitus concerning the Germans, merits at-
tention. CaeCar wrote his brief account of their man-
ners more than an hundred years before Tacitus com-
po ed his treatise de moribus Germanorum. An hun-
dred years make a co iderable period in the progress
of national manners, tpecially if, during that time,
those people who are rude and unpolifhed have had
much communication with more civilized tfates. This
was the cafe with the Germans. Their intercourse
with the Romans began when Cwefar crossed the Rhine,
and increased prodigiously during the interval between
that event and the time when Tscitus flourished. Be-
fides this, there was a confidcrable difference between
the slate of lociety among the different tribes of Ger-
mans. The Suiones were so much improved, that they
began to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44. The Fenni
were so barbarous, that it is wonderful how they were
able to fitbfift. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever undertakes
to describe the manners of the Germans, or to found
any political theory upon the Rate of society among
them, ought carefully to attend to both these circum-
nances.

L 4 Btrou

BEFORE I quit this fubje&, it may not be impro.

per to observe, that though successive alterations in
their institutions, together with the gradual progrcfs
of refinement, have made an entire change in the man-
ners of the various people, who conquered the Roman
Empire, there is still one .race of men nearly in t:e
fame political situation with that in which they werc
when they firfi fettled in their new conquefs: I mean
the various tribes and nations of Savages in North Ame-
rica. It cannot then be confidered either as a digreflion,
or as an improper indulgence of curiosity to inquire,
whether this similarity in their political slate has occa.
sioned any resemblance between their character and
manners. If the likeness turns out to be flriking, it is
a stronger proof that a jufi account has been given of
the ancient inhabitants of Europe, than the teflimony
even of Caesar or of Tacitus.

i. THE Americans fubfisl chiefly by hunting and filh-

ing. Some tribes ncglec agriculture entirely. Among
those who cultivate some small spot near their huts, that,
together with all works of labour, is performed by the
women. P. Charltvoix Journal Hiilorique d'un Voy-
age de L'Amerique, 4°. Par. 1744. p. 334. In such 3
state of foeiety, the common wants of men being few,
and their mutual dependence upon each other frmall,
their union is extremely imperfect and feeble, and they
continue to enjoy their natural liberty almofi unim-
paired. It is the first idea of an American, that every
man is born free and independent, and that no power on
earth hath any right to diminish or circumscribe his na-
tural liberty. There is scarce any appearance of
ordination either in civil or domefiic government. Every
one does what he pleases. A father and mother with
their children, live like perlons whom chance has
brought together, and whom no common bond unites.
Their manner of educating their children is fuittable to
this principle. They never chaltife or punish them,
even during their infancy. As they advance in years,
they allow them to be entirely mailers of their own
actions, and responsible to no body. Id. p. 272, 273.
-2. The power of their civil magiflrates is extremely
limited. Among mod of their tribes, the Sachem or
chief is elecive. A council of old men is chosen to
assisi him, without whose advice he determines no affair

of
*

of importance. The Sachems neither possess nor claim
any great degree of autl.ority. They propose and en-
treat rather than command. The obedience of their
people is altogether voluntary. Id. p. 266, 268.-3.
They engage in any military enterprize, not frum con-
firaint, but choice.. When war is resolved; a chief
arises, and offers himself to be the leader. They who
are willing (for. they compel no person) flard up one
after another, and sing their war song. But if after
this, any of these ihould refute to follow the leader, to
whom they have engagrd, his life would be in danger,
and he would be confider-d as the most infamous of
all men. Id. p. 217, 218.-4. Such as engage to fol-
low any leader, expet to be treated by him with great
attention and refpe&; and he is obliged to make them
presents of considerable value. Id. p. 218.-5. Among
the Americans, the magistrate has scarce any criminal
jurifdicion. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any injury,
the person or family offended may infli& what punish-
ment they please on the person who was the author of
it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment and desire of ven-
geance are excessive and implacable. Time can neither
extinguish or abate it. It is the chief inheritance pa-
rents leave to their children; it is transmitted from
generation to generation, until an occasion be found of
satisfying it. Id. p. 309. Sometimes, however, the
offended party is appealed. A compensation is paid for
a murder that has been committed. The relations of
the deceased receive it; and it consists moil commonly
of a captive taken in war, who being substituted in
place of the person who was murdered, assumes his
name, and is adopted into his family. Id. p. 274.
The resemblance holds in many other particulars. It
is sufficient for my purpose to have pointed out the
similarity of those great features wlictr difRinguifh and
characerize both people. Pochar;, and other philo-
logifts of the laR century, who .i:lh more erudition
than science, endeavoured to trace tie migrations of
various nations, and who are apt, upon thie slightest ap-
pearance of resemblance, to find an affinity between
nations far removed from each other, and to conclude
that they were delcended from the lame ancestors, would
hardly have ailed, on viewing ;uch an amazing fini-
larity, to pronounce with confidence, " That the Ger-
mans and Americans mull be the lane people." But a

philosopher

philosopher will satisfy himself with observing, "That
the characers of nations depend on the slate of so-
ciety in which they live, and on the political intfitutions
eflabliihed among them; and that the human mind,
whenever it is placed in the fame situation, will, in
ges the most distant, and in countries the mos remote,
aflume the fame form, and be diifnguilhed by the fame
manners.

I HAVE pulhed the comparison between the Ger-

mans and Americans no farther than was neceflary for
the illuitration of my subjet. I do not pretend that
the slate of society in the two countries was perfecly
fnnilar. Many of the German tribes were more civi-
lized than the Americans. Some of them were not
unacquainted with agriculture; almost all of them had
flocks of tame cattle, and depended for the chief part
of their subsistence upon these. Most of the American
tribes subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and more
firnple state than the ancient Germans. The refemb-
lance, however, between their condition is greater per-
haps than any that we know between two races of men,
and this has produced a furprizing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SECT. I. p. 8. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonging to an army.

The King himself had no part of it but what he ac-
quired by lot. A remarkable intfance of this occurs in
the hiflory of the Franks. The army of Clovis, the
founder of the French monarchy, having plundered a
church, carried off, among other sacred utensils, a vase
of extraordinary size and beauty. The bishop sent de-
pities to Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase,
that it might be again employed in the sacred services
to which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired the
deputies to follow him to Soissons, as their booty was
to be divided in that place, and promised that if the
lot should give him the disposal of the vase, he would
grhtt what the bilhop desired. When he came to Soif-
lnis, and all the booty was placed in one great heap in
the middle of the army, Clovis entreated, that before
making the division, they would give him that vase over
and above his (hare. All appeared willing to gratify
the King, amr to comply with his request, when a fierce
wad haughty Coldier lifted up his battle-ax, and firiking
the vase with the utmost violence, cried out with a loud
voice, " You shall receive nothing here but that to

which

which the lot gives you a right." Gregor. Turon.
Hifior. Francorum. lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. I6 o.

NOTE VIII. SECT. I. p. 20. [H].

THE history of the establishment and progress of

the feudal system, is an interesting objec to all the
nationsof Europe. In some countries, their jurifpru-
der:e and laws are fill in a great measure feudal. In
others, many forms and pratices eflablifhed by custom,
or founded on statutes, took their rife from the feudal
law, and cannot be understood without attending to the
ideas peculiar to it. Several authors of the highest re-
putation for genius and erudition, have endeavoured to
illustrate this fubje&, but they have left many parts of
it obscure. I shall endeavour to trace, with precision,
the progress and variation of ideas concerning property
in land among the barbarous nations; and {hall attempt
to point out the causes which introduced there changes,
as well as the effets which followed upon them. Pro-
perty in land seems to have gone through four fuccef-
five changes among the people who fettled in the va-
rious provinces of the Roman Empire.

I. WHILE the barbarous nations remained in their

original countries, they had no fixed property in land,
and no certain limits to their poffeflions. After feed-
ing their flocks in one diftri&, they removed with them,
their wives and families, to another; and abandoned
that likewise in a short time. They were not, in con-
sequence of this imperfec species of property, brought
under any positive or formal obligation to serve the
community; all their services were purely voluntary.
Every individual was at liberty to choose how far he
would contribute towards carrying on any military en-
terprize. If he followed a leader in any expedition, it
was from attachment, not from a sense of obligation.
The clearest proof of this has been produced in Note
VI. While property continued in this fiate, we can
discover nothing that bears any resemblance to a feudal
tenure, or to the subordination and military service
which the feudal fyfiem introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they sub-

dued, the vi&orious army divided the conquered lands.
That portion which fell to every soldier, he seized as
a recompense due to his valour, as a settlement ac-
quired by his own sword. He took poffefion of it as

a free

a free man in full property. He enjoyed it during his
own life, and could dilpole of it at pleasure, or tranf-
mit it as an inheritance to his children. Thus property
in land became fixed. It was at the fame time al6diui,
i. e. the possessor had the entire right of property and
dominion; he held of no sovereign or superior lord, to
whom he was bound to do homage, and perform service.
But as thele new proprietors were in some danger (as
has been observed in the text) of being disturbed br
the remainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in still
greater danger of being attacked by barbarians as fierce
and rapacious as themlelves, they, saw the neceflity of
coming under obligations to defend the communit,
more explicit than those to which they had been fubjedt
in their original habitations. On this account, imme-
diately upon their fixing in their new settlements, every
freeman became bound to take arms in defence of the
community, and if he refused or negleced Co to do,
was liable to a considerable penalty. I do not mean that
any contrac of this kind was formally concluded, or
mutually ratified by any legal solemnity. It was, like
the other compaas which hold society together, efta-
blifhcd by tacit content; and their mutual security and
preservation made it the interest of all to recognize
its authority, and to enforce the observation of it. We
can trace back this new obligation on the proprietors
of land to a very early period in the hiflory of the
Franks. Chilperic, who began his reign A. D. 562,
exacted a fine, bannos juift exigi, from certain persons
iho had refused to accompany him in an expedition.
Gregor. Turon. lib. v, c. 26. p. 21l. Childibert, who
began his reign A.D. 576, proceeded in the fame
manner against others who had been guilty of a like
crime. Id. lib. vii. c. 42. p. 342. Charlemagne or-
dained, that every freeman who possessed five manfi,
i. e. sixty acres of land, in property, should march in
perlon against the enemy. Capi'ul. A. D. 807. Louis
Ic Debonnaire, A. D. 815, granted lands to certain
Spaniards who fled from the Saracens, and allowed them
to fettle in his territories, on condition that they should
serve in the army like ther jree men. Capitul. vol. I.
p. soc. By land poffelfed in property, which is men-
tioned in the law of Charlemagne, we are to under-
fland, according to the itle of that age, allodial land;
allodeJ and proprietta, alodum and prsprium being words

perfedtly

perfecly fynonimous. Du Cange, Ital. voce Alodis.
The clearest proof of the diftinEion between allodial and
beneficiary poffeflion, is contained in two charters pulb
lifjed by Muratori, by which it appears that a perSon
might posses one part of his estate as allodial which
he could dispose of at pleasure, the other as a benefi-
cium, of which he had only the ufufrut, the property
returning to the superior Lord on his demire. Antiq.
Ital. medii aevi, vol. i. p. 559, 565. The fame diftinc-
tion is pointed out in a Capitulare of Charlemagne,
A.D. 812. edit. Baluz. vol. i. p. 49T. In the curious tef-
tament of count Everard, who married a daughter of
Louis le Debonnaire, by which he difpofcs of his vast
estate among his children, he diftinguilhes between
what he poffefted proprietate, and what he held beneicio,
and it appears that the greater part was allodial. A.D.
837. Aub. Mirti Opera Diploratica, Lovan. 1723.
Vol. p. 19.

IN the fame manner Liber bomo is commonly op-
posed to lafus or Vaffallus; the former denotes an
allodial proprietor, the latter one who held of a fupe-
rior. Thee free men were under an obligation to serve
the tate; and this duty was confidered as so sacred,
that free men were prohibited from entering into holy
orders unless they had obtained the consent of the fove-
reign. The reason given for this in the statute is re-
markable, " For we are informed that lome do so, not
lo much out of devotion, as in order to avoid that mi-
litary service which they are bound to perform. Capi-
tul. ib. i. . 114. If upon being summoned into the
field, any tree man refused to obey, a full Herebannum,
i. . a fine of sixty crowns, was to be exaAed from
him according to the law of the Franks." Capit. Car.
magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. §. 13. p. 539.
This expreflion, according to the law of the Franks,
seems to imply that both the obligation to terve, and
the penalty on those who disregarded it, were ceqval
wiih the laws made by the Franks at their sirs fettle-
mint in Gaaul. This fine was levied with such rigour,
" That it anv person was intolvtnt, lie was r duced to
ferviiude, and continutd in that flait until fitch time as
his labour liouid amount to the val c of the her'r.cn-
1,,.-'" Ibid. .

Th- I'.l).pror Lothlariu rendcr.,d 'he
penalty llill more levere; and if any perlon polifling

luch

such an extent of property as made it incumbent on
him to take the field in perobn refused to obey the
simmons, all his goods were declared to be forfeited,
and he himself might be punished with banishment.
Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars ii .
p. 153.

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become fixed

and fubje& to military service, another change was in-
troduced, though slowly, and slep by flep. We learn
from Tacitus that the chief men among the Germans
endeavoured to attach to their persons and interefis
certain adherents, whom he calls Comites. These fought
under their flandard, and followed them in all their en-
terprizes. The fame cuRfom continued among them in
their new settlements, and those attached or devoted
followers were called fideles, antruvfioaew, hominet in
trufle Dominica & leuder. Tacitus informs us, that the
rank of a Comes was deemed honourable; De morib.
Germ. c. 13. The composition, which is the flandard
by which we muf judge of the rank and condition of
persons in the middle ages, paid for the murder of
one in trufte Dominica, was triple to that paid for the
murder of a freeman. Leg. Salicor. Tit. 44. §. x. &
2. While the Germans remained in their own country
they courted the favour of these Comites by presents of
arms and horses, and by hospitality. See note VI.
While they had no fixed property in land, there were
the only gifts that they could beflow, and the only re-
ward which their followers desired. But upon their
fettling in the countries which they conquered, and
when the value of property came to be underflood
among them, inflead of these flight presents, the Kings
and chieftains beflowed a more fubflantial recompense
in land on their adherents. These grants were called
beneficia, because they were gratuitous donations; and
honores, because they were regarded as marks of diftinc-
tion. What were the services originally exa&ed in
return for these beneficia cannot be determined with ab-
solute precision; because there are no records so ancient.
When allodial pofefelions were sirs rendered feudal,
they were'not, at once, fubjeaed to the feudal fervi-
ces. The transition here, as in all other changes of
importance, was gradual. As the great objec of a
feudal vaflal was to obtain protection, when allodial
prietors first consented to become vairali of any power-

ful

ful leader, they continued to retain as much of their
ancient independence as was confident with that new
relation. The homage which they did to the superior
of whom they chose to hold, was called homagium
planum, and bound them to nothing more than fidcliiy,
but without any obligation either of military forvice,
or attendance in the courts of their superior. 0t this
bomgium planum rome traces, though obfcurc, may
fRill be discovered. Brufiel, tom. i. p. 97. Among the
ancient writs published by D. D. De Vic & Vailette
hil. de Langued. are a great many which they call
homagia. They seem to be an intermediate flep be-
tween the homagium planum mentioned by Bruffel,
and the engagement to perform complete feudal service.
The one party promiies protecion, and grants certain
castles or lands, the other engages to defend the per-
son of the granter, and to aflift him likewise in defend-
ing his property as often as he shall be summoned to
do so. But these engagements are accompanied with
none of the feudal tormalities, and no mention is
made of any of the feudal services. They appear
rather to be a mutual contract between equals, than
the engagement of a valfal to perform services to a
superior Lord. Preuves de 1' hist de Lang. tom. ii.
173, & passim. As loon as men were accuflomed to
thelk, the other feudal services were 'gradually intro-
duced. M. de Montesquieu confiders these bensficia as
fiefs, which originally fubjeaed those who held them
to military service. L'Efpr. des Loix. 1. xxx. c. 3, &
I6. M. L'Abbe de Mably contends that such as held
these were at first fubje&ed to no other service than
what was incumbent on every free man. Obfeiva-
tions fur l'hifloire de France, I. 356. But upon com-
paring their proofs and realonings and conje&urcs, it
seems to be evident, that as every free man, in ccrIe-
quence of his allodial property, was bound to Iertt the
community under a revere penalty, no good rcalol: can
be afilg.ied for conferring these beneficia, if they did
not lubject filch as received them to some new oblga-
tion. Why fheuld d King have stripped himftrlf of his
domain, if he h.idl rno expectd, that, by parcelling
it out, he might acquire a right to services to which
he had formerly no title? We may then warrantably
conclude, "t That as allodial property fubjc&cd thole

who

who possessed it to serve the community, so beneficia
subjected such as held them, to personal service and
fidelity to him from whom they received there lands.
These beneficia were granted originally only during
pleasure. No circumfiance relating to the cultoms of
the middle ages is better ascertained than this; and in-
numerable proofs of it might be added to these pro-
duced in L'Efprit des Loix, 1. xxx. c. 16. and by Du
Cange, voc. beneficium & feudum.

IV. BUT the pofleflion of benefices did not conti-

nue long in this slate. A precarious tenure during
pleasure was not sufficient to satisfy and attach those
who held it to their superior Lord, they soon obtained
the confirmation of their benefices during life. Feu-
dor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange produces several quotations
from ancient charters and chronicles in proof of this;
Gloss. voc. Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain
or extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary, firfi in
the dire& line, then in the collateral, and at lafi in the
female line. Leg. Longob. lib. iii. tit. 8. Du Cange,
voc. Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time when

each of these changes took place. M. l'Ab. Mably
conje&ures with some probability, that Charles Martel
first introduced the pratice of granting beneficia for
life: Obfervat. tom. i. p. 103, 160; and that Louis
le Debonnaire was among the first who rendered them
hereditary, is evident from the authorities to which he
refers; Id. 429. Mabillon however has published a
placitum of Louis le Debonnaire, A.D. 860, by which
it appears that he fill continued to grant some bene-
ficia only during life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p.
35.. In the year 889, Odo King of France granted
!ands to Ricabodo fideli suo jure beneficiario & fruc-
uario during his own life; and if he Ihould die, and
ft on were born to him, that right was to continue

during the life of his son. Mabillon ut lupra, p. 556.
This was an intermediate ftep between fiefs merely
during life, and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity. While
beneficia continued under their first form, and were
held only during pleasure, he who granted them not
only exercised the Dominium or prerogative of fupe-
rior Lord; but he retained the property, giving his
vaifa only the ufufrufl. But under the latter form,

when

when they became hereditary, although feudal lawyers
continued to define a beneficium agreeably to its origi-
nal nature, the property was in effec taken out of
the hands of the superior Lord, and lodged in those
of the vassal. As soon as the reciprocal advantages of
the feudal mode of tenure came to be understood by
superiors as well as vafrals, that species of holding be-
cnme so agreeable to both, that not only lands, but
ca!ual rents, such as the profits of a toll, the fare
paid at ferries, &c. the salaries or perquifities of of-
tices, and even pensions themselves, were granted and
hcld as fiefs; and military service was promised and
cxaced on account of these. Morice Mem. pour
fIrvir de preuves a l'hifl. de Bretagne, tom. ii. p. 78,
C6o. Blruffel, tom. i. p. 41. How absurd soever it may
feim to grant or to hold such precarious and casual
property as a fief; there are inftanccs of feudal tenures
1i11 more singular. The profits arising from the
maffcs said at an altar were properly an ecclesiastical
r\venue, belonging to the clergy of the church or
monaflery which performed that duty, but these were
sometimes seized by the powerful barons. In order to
ascertain their right to them, they held them as fiefs
of the church, and parcelled them out in the fame
manner as other property to their fub-vaffals. Bou-
quet recueil des hilt. vol . x .

p. 38, 480. The fame

spirit of encroachment which rendered fiefs hereditary,
led the nobles to extort from their sovereigns heredi-
tary grants of offices. Many of the great oflices of
the crown became hereditary in most of the kingdoms
in Europe, and so conscious were monarchs of this
tpirit of usurpation among the nobility, and so soli-
(ctous to guard against it, that, on tome occasions,
they obliged the persons whom they promoted to any
ofice of dignity, to grant an obligation that neither
ihoy, nor their heirs, ihould claim it as belonging to
tlem by hereditary right. A remarkable infance of
this is produced, Mem. de l'Acad. dcs Infcript. tom.
xxx. p. 595. Anotler occurs in the Thefaur. ann('clot.
publithed by Martene & Durand. vol. i. p. 873.-Tlis
revolution in property occasioned a change corrclpond-
ing to it in polit cal government; the great vaflals of
the crown, as they aiquired loch extensive posses-
sions, usurped a proportional degree of power, de-

VoL. 1. M prcfied

pressed the jurifdition of the crown, and trampled on
the privileges of the people. It is on account of this
connection, that the tracing the progress of feudal
property becomes an objec of attention in hiltory;
for upon discovering in what slate property was at any
particular period, we may determine with precision what
was the degree of power poffi:fed by the King or by
the nobility at that junEure.

ONE circumstance more, with refpet to the changes

which property underwent, deserves attention. I have
shewn that when the various tribes of barbarians di.
vided their conquests in the fifth and sixth centuries,
the property which they acquired was allodial; but
in several parts of Europe property had become almoll
entirely feudal by the beginning of the tenth century.
The former fpccies of property seems to be so much bet.
ter and more desirable than the latter, that such a change
appears surprising, especially when we are informed
that allodial property was frequently converted into
feudal, by a voluntary deed of the possessor. The
motives which determined them to a choice so repug-
nant to the ideas of modern times concerning property,
have been investigated and explained by M. de Mon-
tefquieu with his usual discernment and accuracy, lib,
xxxi. c. 8. The moR considerable is that of which we
have an hint in Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer
quoted by Du Cange, voce A'odi. In those times of
anarchy and disorder which became general in Europe
after the death of Charlemagne; when there was scarce
any union among the different members of the com-
munity; and individuals were exposed, single and un-
defended by government, to rapine and oppreflion, it
became necessary for every man to have a powerful
protecor, under whose banner he might range him-
self, and obtain security against enemies, whom he
could not singly oppose. For this reason he relinquish-
ed his allodial independence, and fubjcaed himself to
the feudal services, that he might find safety under the
patronage of some refpe&able superior. In some parts
of Europe, this change from allodial to feudal pro-
perty became so general, that he who possessed land
had no longer any liberty of choice left. He was
obliged to recognize Come liege Lord, and to hold of
him. Thus Beaumanoir informs us, that in the colun

tile

ties of Clermont and Beauvois, if the Lord or Count
discovered any lands within his juiifdi&.ion, for which
no service was performed, and which paid to him no tax
or custom, he might inflantlv seize it as his own ; for,
fa',s he, according to our custom no man can hold al-
lodial property. Couff. ch. 24. p. 123. Upon the
arme principle is founded a maxim, which has at length
become general in the 'aw of France, Nula! t.rre fans
Seigneur. In other provinces of France allodial pro-
perty seems to have remained longer unaliena'ed, and
to have been more highly valued. A vafi number of
charters containing grams, or tales, or exchanges of
allodial lands in the province of Languedoc are pub-
I fh-d Hiil. gener. de Languid. par D. D. De Vic &
Vaifctte, tom. ii. During the ninth, tenth, and greater
part of the eleventh century, the property in that pro-
vince seems to have been entirely allod'al; and !carce any
mention of feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that
country. The slate of property, during these centu-
ries, seems to have been perfetly similar in Catalo-
nia, and the country of Roussillon, as appears from
the original charters published in the appendix to
Petr. de la Marca's treatise de Marca five limite His-
panico. Allodial property seems to have continued in
the Low-Countries, to a period frill later. During
the eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, this
species appears to have been of considerable extent.
Miraei opera Diplom. vol. i. p. 34, 74, 75, 83, 117,
296, 842, 847, 578. Some velfiges of allodial pro-
perty appear there as late as :he fourteenth century.
Idid. 218. The notions of men with refpe& to pro-
perty, vary according to the diversity of their under-
sandings, and the caprice of their passions. At the
fame time that some persons were fond of relinquish-
ing allodial property, in order to hold it by feudal
tenure, others seem to have been solicitous to con-
vert their fiefs into allodial property. An infiance of
this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debonnaire, pub-
lilhed by Eckhard, Commentarii de rebus Franciz Ori-
entalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Another occurs in the year
1299. Reliqui3e MSS. omnis aevi, by Ludwig, vol. i.
P. 209. and even one as late as the year 1337. ib.d.
vol. vii. p. 40. The fame thing took place in the Low-
Countries. Mirai oper. i. 5?.

M IN

IN tracing these various revolutions of property, I

have hitherto chiefly confntd myself to what happen.
ed in France, becaufc the ancient monuments of that
nation have.either been more carefully preservcd, ,r
have been more clearly illufirated than those of any
people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in pro-

perty, and succeeded each other in the fame order.
There is some ground, however, for conjeturing that
allodial property continued longer in eflimation among
the Italians, than among the Frcnch. It appears that
many of the charters granted by the Emperors in the
ninth century conveyed an allodial right to lard.
Murat. antiq. med. avi. v. i. p. 575, &c. But in the
eleventh century, we find oIme examples of persons
who resigned their allodial property, and received it
back as a feudal tenure. Ib. p. 610, &c. Muratori
observes, that the word feudum, which came to be
substituted in place of beneficium, does not occur-in
any authentic charter previous to the eleventh centurv,
Id. 594. A charter of King Robert of France, A. D.
iooS, is the earliest deed in which I have met with
the word feudum. Bouquet recueil des hifloriens de
Gaule & de la France, torn . p. 593. b. This word
occurs indeed in an edict, A.D. 790, published by
Bruffel, vol. i. p. 77. But the authenticity of that
deed has been called in queflion, and perhaps the fre-
quent use of the wold feudumi in it, is an additional
reason for doing so. The account which I have given of
the nature bo h of allodial and feudal poffeilions receives
some confirmation from the etymology of the words
themselves. Alode or allodium is compounded of the
German particle an and lot, i. e. land obtained by lot.
Wachteri Gloffar. Germanicum, voc. Allodium p. 35.
It appears from the authorities produced by him ard
by Du Cange, voc. forr, that the northern nations di-
vided the lands which they had conquered in this man-
ner. Feodum is compounded of od poffeflion or estate,
and feo wages, pay; intimating that it was Rliptndiary
and granted as a recompense for service. Wachtcrus
ibid. voc. feadum, p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal fyflem among the Ger-
mans was perfectly similar to that which we have

traced

traced in France. But as the Emperors of Germany,
efpcially after the Imperial crown passed from the def-
cendants of Charlemagne to the house of Saxony, were
far superior to the contemporary Monarchs of Fiance,
in abilities, the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early
to independence, nor did they so soon obtain the pri-
vilege of poflfefing their benefices by hereditary right.
Conrad 11. on the Salic, was the first Emperor, ac-
cording to the compilers of the Libri Feudorum,
who rendered fiefs hereditary. Lib. i. tit. i. Conrad
began his reign A. .

D 024. Ludovicus Pius, under

whose reign grants of hereditary fiefs were frequent in
France, succeeded his father, A. D. 814. Not only
was this innovation so much later in being introduccd
among the vaflials of the German Emperor;, but even
after Conrad had eflab;ifhed it, the law continued fa-
vnurable to the ancient pracice, and unless the charter
of the vassal bore exprefly that the fief descended to
his heirs, it was presumed to be granted only during
life. Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the alteration made
by Conrad, it was not uncommon in Germany to grant
ficfs only for life; a charter of this kind occurs as late
as the year 1376. Charta ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur.
feud. p. 361. The transmission of fiefs to collateral and
female heirs, took place very slowly among the Ger-
mans. There is extant a charter, A.D. 1201, con-
veying the right of succession to females, but it is
granted as an extraordinary mark of favour, and in re-
ward of uncommon services. Boehmer. ibid. p. 365.
In Germany, as well as in France and Italy, a confi-
derable part of the lands continued to le allodial long
after the feudal mode of tenure was introduced. It
appears from the Codex Diplomaticus Monafterii Buch,
that a great part of the lands in the marquisate of Mif-
nia was fill allodial as late as the thirteenth century.
1N 31, 36, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scriptoles hilt. German.
cyra :ichoctgcnii & Kreyfigii. Altenb. 1755 vol. ii. 183,
&c. Allodial property fecms to have been common in
atiother difirict of the fame province during the fame
period. Reliqiia Diplomatica San'limonial. Bcutiz.
a'17, 36, 58. ibid. 374, &c.

M 3 NOTE

NOTE IX. SEC T. I. P. 21.

As I fliall, in another note, have occasion to re-

present the condition of that part of the people who
dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this to con-
fider the slate of the inhabitants of the country.
The persons emplo)ed in cultivating the ground d:r-
ing the ages under rev.cw may be divided into three
classes: I. Servi or slaves. l his seems to have been
the most numerous class, and consisted either of cap-
tives taken in war, or of peifons the property in whom
wa, acquired in some one of the various methods enuc
merated by Du Cange, voc. fervus. v. 6. p. 44;.
The wretched condition of this numerous race of
men will appear from several circumfiances. I. Their
mailers had ablolute dominion over their persons.
They had the power of punishing their slaves capi-
tally, without the intervention of any judge. This
dangerous right they possessed not only in the more
early periods, when their manners were fierce, hut
it continued as late as the twelfth century. Joach.
Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum. Lemgov. 1736. 4to.
lib. ii. cap. i. §. 4, 0o, 13, 24.. Even after this jl-
rifdiEtion of mailers came to be restrained, the life
of a slave was deemed to be of so little value, that
a very flight compensation atoned for taking it away.
Idem, lib. iii. c. 6. If masters had power over the
lives of their slaves, it is evident that almost no hounds
would be set to the rigour of the punishments which
they might inflic upon them. The Codes of ancient
laws prescribed punishments for the crimes of slaves
different from those which were infliced on free men.
The latter paid only a fine or compensation, the
former were fubjeled to corporal punilhments. The
cruelty of these was in many inflances excessive.
Slaves, on very flight occasions, might be put to the
rack on question. The laws with respect to there
points are to be found in Potgieflerus, lib. iii. cap. 7.
2. If the dominion of mailers over the lives and per-
sons of their slaves was thus extensive, it was no les
so over their actions and property. They were not
originally permitted to marry. Male and female slaves
were allowed and even encouraged to cohabit toge-
ther. But this union was not confidered as a marriage,
it was called cntubernium, not nuptia or matrimonium.

Potgieff.

Poteieff. lib. ii. c. 2. §. i. This notion was so much
eflablifhed, that during several centuries after the bar-
barous nations embraced the Chriflian religion, slaves
who lived as husband and wife, were not joined to-
gether by any religious ceremony, and did not re-
ceive the nuptial benedition from a priest. Ibid. §.
o1, 11. When this conjunction between slaves came
to be confidered as a lawful marriage, they were not
permitted to marry without the content of their ma-
fter, and such as ventured to do so without obtaining
alh:t, were punished with great severity, and Sometimes
were put to death. Potgiefl' i'id. §. 12, &c. Gregor.
Turon. hiftor. lib. v. c. 3. When the manners of the
European nations became more gentle, and their ideas
moie liberal, slave,, who married without their mafler's
co;,elnt, were fubjeced only to a fine. Potgief. ibid.

2^. I)u Cange G(iof. voc. Forifmaritagium. 3. All

the chil ren ot slaves, were in the fame condition
with their parent-, and became the property of the
master. Du Clnge Gloss voc. fervus, vol. 6. p. 450.
Murat. antiq. tal. vol. i. p. 766. 4. Slaves were so
entirely the property of their masters, that th y could
fell them at pleasure. While domeftick slavery con-
tinued, the property in a slave was fold in the fame
manner with that which a person had in any other
moveable. Afterwards slaves became adfcripti glebae,
and were conveyed by sale together with the farm or
eflate to which they belonged. Potgiefflrus has col-
le0ed the laws and charters which illustrate this well-
known circumfiance in the condition of slaves. Lib. ii.
c. 4. 5. Slaves had a title to nothing but fubfiftance
and cloaths from their master ; all the profits of their
labour accrued to him. If a mailer, from indulgence,
gave his slaves any peculium or fixed allowance for
their fubfiltance, they had no right of property in
what they saved out of that. All that they accumu-
lated belonged to their malter. Potgieff. lib. ii. c. Ic.
Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 768. Du Cange, voc./er'vus,
vol. vi. p. 451. Conformably to the lime principle,
all the effects of slaves belonged to their mailer at
their death, and they could not dispose of them by
testament. Potgiiet. lib. ii. c. 1 . 6. Slaves were dif-
tinguifhed from free men by a peculiar dress. -
Among all the barbarous nations, long hair was a
mark of dignity and of freedom, slaves were for that

M 4 reason

reason oblized to shave their heads; and by this diL.
tinEtion, how indifferent soever it may be in its
own nature, they were reminded every moment oft!;e
inferiority of their condition. Potgief li. li. iii. c.
For the fame reason it was enated in the laws of
almost 'all the nations of Europe, that no slave should
be admitted to give evidence against a free man in
a court of justice. Du Cange, voc. fervus, vol. yi
p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

7. Villaiw. They were likewise adf/ripti gleba or

vill, from which they derived tile;r name, and
were tian ferable along with it. Du Cange, voc. vi:.
lanus. But in this they differed flom slaves, that they
paid a fixed rent to their malter for the land whih
they cu;tivated, and after paying that, all the frui;,
of their labour and induitry belonged to themselves ih
property. This diftitioll is marked by Piere de
Fintaine's Confcil. Vie de St. Louic par Joinville, .
I9. edit. de Du Calige. Several cafes decided agret.
ably to this principle are mentioned by Murat. Ibid,
F- 77.-

3. THE lafR class of persons employed in agricul.

ture were free men. These are diltinuiihed by va.
rious names among the wiiteis of the middle ae,
Arimanni, conditionales, originlarii, t ibutale, c,
There seem to have been persons who poflcffed fume
small allodial property of their own, and besides that,
cultivated some farm belonging to their more wealthy
neighbour,, for which they paid a fixed rent; ;.l
bound themfeyves likewise to peifurm fevcral small
services in plato vel in ntmejr, in aratura vil in vitna,
such as ploughing a certain quantity of their land-
lord's ground, assisting him in harvefl and vintage
work, &c. The c!eareft proof of this may be found
in M uratori, v. i. p. 712. and in Du Cange under the
refpedive words above-nenltioned. I hive not been
able to dircover whed)er these arimavii, &c. were re-
moveable at p!eafure, or held their f.lrms by leafi tr
a certain nunmier of years. ''he former, if we may
judge from :hc genius and maxims of the age, seems
to be nimft prhaiblr. These persons, however, were
confiJcred a. free men in the most holmour.ble sense
of the word they enjoyed all the privileges of that
cjndition, andi were even called to flrve in war; an
i.on:ur to which no flve was adniittcd. Murat.

Antiq.

Antiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This account
of the condition of there three different classes of per-
sons, will enable the reader to apprehend the full
force of an argument which I (hall produce in con-
firmation of what I have said in the text concerning
the wretched slate of the people. Notwithstanding
the immense difference between the first of these
c;affe and the third, such was the spirit of tyranny
which prevailed among the great proprietors of land,
and so various their opportunities of opprefling those
who were fettled on their estates, and of rendering
their condition intolerable, that many freemen, in def-
pair, renounced their liberty, and voluntarily furren-
dered themselves as slaves to their powerful matters.
This they did, in order that their maflers might be-
come more immediately interested to afford them pro-
teEtion, together with the means of fublifing them-
selves and their families. The forms of such a fur-
render, or oinoxiatio, as it was then called, are pre-
served by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28 ; and by the anony-
mous collector of formula publilbed by Bignon, c.
16. together with Marculfus. In both, the reason for
the obnoxiatio, is the wretched and indigent condition
of the person who give- up his liberty. It was fill
more common for free men to surrender their liberty
to bishops or abbots, that they might partake of the
security which the vaflals and laves of churches and
monasteries enjoyed, in consequence of the superstitious
veneration paid to the faint under whose immediate
protecion they were supposed to be taken. Du
Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. 1286. That condi-
tion must have been milerable indeed, which could
induce a free man voluntarily to renounce his liberty,
and to give up himself as a slave to the disposal of
another. The number of slave. in all the nations of
Europe was prodigious. The greater part of the in-
ferior class of people in France were reduced to this
state, at the commencement of the third race of
King,. L'efpr. de. Loix, liv. xxx. c. Xl. The fame
was the cafe in England. Brady Pref. to Gen. Hist.
Many curious faas with refpe& to the ancient state
of il.'ains or naves in England, are published in ob-
fervatrons on the statutes, chiefly the more ancient,
2d edit. p. 244. N

NOTE

NOTE X. SEC T. . . p.23.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced.

Many charters granted by persons of the highefl rank
are preserved, from which it appears that they could
not subscribe their name. It was usual for persons who
could not write, to make the sign of the cross in con.
firmation of a charter. Several of there remain, where
King, and persons of great eminence affix fignum crucis
manu propria pro ignoratione literarum. Du Cange,
voc. Crux, vol. iii. p. 191. From this is derived the
phrase of signing inflcad of subscribing a paper. In the
ninth century, Herbaud Comes Palatii, though supreme
judge of the Empire by virtue of his office, could not
fubfcr;be his name. Nouveau Traitd de Diplomatique
par deux Benedictins, 4to. ton. ii. p. 422. So late as
the fourteenth century, Du Guefclin, constable of France,
the greatelt man in the state, and one of the greatelt
men of his age, could neither read nor write. St. Pa>
laye Memnires fur l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82.
Nor was this ignorance confined to laymen; the greater
part of the clergy was not many degrees superior to them
in science. Many dignified ecclefiafticks could not sub-
scribe the canon, of those councils, in which they fat as
mcnmbers. Nouv. Traite de diplom. tom. ii. p. 424.
One of the questions appointed by the canons to be put
to persons who were candidates for orders was this,
' Whether they could read the gospels and epistles, and
explain the fenle of them, at least literally?" Regino
Prumienfis ap. Bruck. Ilif. Philof. v. iii. p. 631. Al-
fred the Great complained, that from the Humber to
the Thames there was not a pricf who understood the
liturgy in his mother tongue, or who could translate the
easiest piece of Latin; and that from the Thames to the
sea, the ecclefiafticks were fill more ignorant. Aflerus
de rebus geflis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c. p.
25. The ignorance of the clergy is quaintly described
h) an author of the dark ages. " Potius dcditi guL!
quamn Glofln; potius colligunt libras quam legunt libros,
lilentiuis iiituentur Alartham quam Marcum; malunt
Icgere in Salmone quam in Solomone. Alanus de art.
Predicat. ap. Lebeuf. Diflirt. tom. ii. p. 21. To the ot-
vious caures of such universal ignorance arising from the
Rfate of government and manners, from the seventh to the
eleventh century, we may add the scarcity of books, and
the difficulty of rendering them more common during

that

that period. The Romans wrote their books either on
parchment or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.
The latter being the cheapet,, was of course the molf
commonly used. But after the Saracens conquered Egvpt
in the seventh century, the communication between that
country and the people fettled in Italy or in other pal ts of
Europe, was almoit entirely broke off, and the papyrus
was no longer in use among them. They were obliged,
on that account, to write all their books upon parchment,
and as the prce of that was high, books became ex-
tremely rare and of great value. We may judge of the
scarcity of the materials for writing them from one cir-
cumftance. There flill remains several manuscripts of
the eighth, ninth, and following centuries, wrote on
parchment, from which some former writing had been
erased, in order to substitute a new compolition in its
place. In this manner, it is probable, that fcveral works
of the ancients periihed. A book of Livy or of Tacitus
might be erased, to make room for the legendary tale of
a faint, or the superstitious prayers of a missal. Murat.
Antiq. Ital. v. iii. p. 833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that
the greater part of the manuscript- on parchment which
he has seen, those of an ancient date excepted, are writ-
ten on parchment from which some former treatise had
been erased. Mem. de L'Acad. des infcript. tom. ix. p.
325. As the want of materials for writing, is one rea-
son why so many of the works of the ancients have
perilhed, it accounts likewise for the small number of
manuscripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh cen-
tury, when they began to multiply from a cause which
ihall be mentioned. Hist. Liter. de France, tom. vi. p.
6. Many circumflances prove the (carcity of books dur-
ing there ages. Private persons seldom poflniid any
books whatever. Even monafleries of considerable note
had only one mifial. Murat. Antiq. v. ix. p. 789.
Lupus, abbot of I'errieres, in a letter to the Pope, A. D.
855, bcfeeches him to lend him a copy of Cicero de
Oratore and Quintilian's Inflitutions, " for," fays he,
" although we have parts of thole books, there is no
complete copy of them in all France." Murat. Ant. v. iii.
P. 835. The price of books became lb high, that per-
sons of a moderate fortune could not afford to purchase
them. The countess of Anjou paid for a copy of the
Homilies of Haimon, bishop of Halberfadt, two hun-
dred lheep, five quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity

of

of rye and millet. Hifioire Literaire de France par de
Religieux Benodiains, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as th~
year 1471, when Louis XI. borrowed the works ,
kafts, the Arabian physician, from the faculty of red1.
cine in Paris, he not only deposited as a pledge a cnnfi.
derable quantity of plate, but was obliged to procure
nobleman to join with him as surety in a deed, bindine
himself under a great folfeiture to retfore it. Gabr
N.Iude Addit. a l'hiltoire de Louys Xl. par Comines, ed',
de Freinoy, tom. iv. p. 281. Many curious circumfan.
flances with refpett to the extravagant price of books in
the middle ages, are colleted by that induflrious compi.
ler, to whom I refer such of my readers as deem this
finall branch of literary hiltory an objec of curiofits,
Whien any person made a present of a book to a church ;r
a monatlery, in which were the only libraries during thelf
ages, it was deemed a donative of such value, that he ui.
sered it on the altar pro remedio anima j]ue, in order t,
obtain the forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p.
836. Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trai:,
du Diplomat. par deux Benediclins, 4to. tom. i. p. 481.
Jn the eleventh centumy, the art of making paper in the
manner now become universal, was invented; by means
of that not only the number of manuscripts increased,
but the (tudy of the fcienccs was wonderfully facilitated.
Mlurat. ib. p. 871. The invention of the art of making
paper, and the invention of the art of printing, are two
considerable events in literary history. It is remarkable
that the former preceded the first dawning of letters and
improvement in knowledge towards the close of the
eleventh century; the latter u(hered in the light which
spread over Europe at the ,ra of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SEcr. 1. p. 23.

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the daik

ages are a proof of this. I {hail produce one remarlk
able teflimoiy in confirmation of it, from an author cl-
nonizcd by the church ot Rome, St. Eloy or Egidii,,
bishop of Noyon, in the seventh century. " Hte ib a
good Chriltian who comes frequently to church ; hhu
peiefcts the oblation whith is offered to God uponi lli
ailar; who doth not tafie of the fluits of hi, own il:-
tuflry until he has coiilccrdted a pait of them to God;
wvho, when the holy feltivals tliall approach, hvc,
thall.lv esenl with his own wtic during ICvL-ra! dl.sy, that
vi.h ';c<to;...c ' i;. nay Jd.w iaLr to t;;c altar

G J;

God; and who, in the las place, can repeat the Creed
and the Lord's Prayer. Redeem then your fouls from
detruloion while you have the means in your power;
offer prelents and tythes to churchmen; come more fre-
i,,ently to church; humbly implore the patronage of the
faints; for if you observe thelf things, you may come
with security in the lass day to the tribunal of the eternal
Judge, and fay, " Give to us, 0 Lord, for we have
given unto thee." Dacherii Specilegium Veter. Script.

i. p. 94. The learned and judicious translator of Dr.

Mofheim's Ecclesiastical Hillory, from one of whose ad-
ditional nntes I have borrowed this passage, subjoins a
very proper reflection; "We fee here a large and
ample description of a good Christian, in which there is
not the least mention of the love of God, resignation to
his wll, obedience to his laws, or of justice, benevolence,
and charity towards men." Moth. Eccles. Hist. v. i. p.
324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. p. 24.

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the church of
Rome, whose doarine of infallibility renders all such in-
ltitutions and ceremonies as have been once universally
received, immutable and everlasting, that she must con-
tinue to observe in enlightened times, those rites which
were introduced during the ages of darkness and credu-
lity. What delighted and edified the latter, must difguit
and shock the former. Many of these rites appear mani-
fely to have been introduced by a (uperfittion of the
lowest and most illiberal species. Many of them were
borrowed, with little variation, from the religious cere-
monieq eftabliffhed among the ancient Heathens. Some
were so ridiculous, that if every age did not furnilh in-
fiances of the fascinating influence of superstition, as well
as of the whimsical forms which it aflures, it mult ap-
pear incredible that they should ever be received or to-
lerated. In several churches of France, they celebrated a
fecfival in commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight into
Egypt. It was called the fealt of the Ass. A young girl
richl) drefled, with a child in her arms, was set upon an
ass superbly caparifonedl. Theas(s was led to the altar inl
Iolemn procellion. High Mass was said with great pomp.
T he ass was taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn no
lefi childi(h than impious was sung in his praise: And
when the ceremony was ended, the pries, infiead of the
usual words with which he difiniired the people, brayed

three

three times like an ass; and the people, instead of their
usual response, We bless the Lord, bi ayed three times in
the tame manner. Du Cange, voc. Ital. v. iii. p. 424.
This ridiculous ceremony was not, like the feffival of
son s, and some other pageants of those ages, a mere far-
cica; entertainment exhibited in a church, and mingled,
a, was then the custom, with an imitation of some re-
liWiou- rites; it was an a& of devotion, performed by the
mitiiters (f religion, and by the authority of the church.
H.-'ever, a, thi practice did not prevail universally in
the Cathulics church, it, absurdity contributed at latl to
abolih it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. p. 27.

As there is no event in the history of mankind more

fineular than that of the Crusade,, every circumfiance
that tends to explain or to give any rational account of
this extraordinary frenzy of the human mind is interesting.
I have afferred in the text, that the mind, of men were
prepared gradually for the amazing effort which they made
in consequence of the exhortations of Peter the hermit, by
several occurrences previous to his time. A more parti-
cular detail of this curious and obscure part of history,
may perhaps appear to Come of my readers to be of im-
portance. That the end of the world was expected about
the close of the tenth and beginning of the eleventh cen-
tury ; and that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident
from the authors to whom I refer in the text. This be-
lief was so universal and so firong, that it mingled itself
with their civil tran'ations. Many charters in the lat-
ter part of the tenth century begin in this manner: " Ap-
propinquante mundi termino," &c. As the end of the
world is now at hand, and by various calamities and judg-
ments the signs of its approach are now manifef. Hilt.
de Langued. par D.D. de Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves,
p. 86, 89, 90, 117, 158, &c. Oneeffecl of this was,
that a great number of pilgrims retorted to Jerusalem,
with a resolution to die there, or to wait the coming of
the Lord; Kings, Earls, Marquifles, Bilhops, and even
a great number of women, belides persons of inferior rank
flocked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Rodulph. Hist. chez
Bouquet Recueil, torn. x. p. 50, 52. Another hiflorian
mcntlons a vas cavalcade of pilgrims who accompanied
the count of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year 1026.
Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. ihz. Theie pilgrims filled
Europe with lamentable accounts of the Hate of Christians

in

in the Holy Land. Willerm. Tyr. Hiil. ap. Gest. Dei
per Franc. vol. ii. p. 636. Guibert. Abbas. Hist. ibid.
vol. i.p. 476. Besides this, it was usual for many of
the Christian inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as of
other cities in the East, to travel as mendicants througi
Europe; and by describing the wretched condition of the
professors of the Christian faith under the dominion of In-
fidels, to extort charity, and to excite zealous persons to
make some attempt in order to deliver them fiom op-
preflion. Baldrici. Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefsa Dei,
&c. vol. i. p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbert, archbishop
of Ravenna, afterwards Pope Silvefter II. addrefled a let-
ter to all Christians in the name of the church of Jeru-
falem. It is eloquent and pathetic, and contains a formal
exhortation to take arms against the Pagan oppreflors, in
order to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Gerberti
Epifiole ap. Bouquet, Recueil, tom. x. p. 426. In con-
sequence of this spirited call, some subje&s of the repub-
lick of Pisa equipped a fleet, and invaded the territories
of the Mahometans in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic.
vol. iii. p. 400. The alarm was taken in the East, and
an opinion prevailed, A. D. o0Io, that all the forces of
Christendom were to unite, in order to drive the Maho-
metans out of Palerline. Chron. Ademari ap. Bouquet,
tom. x. p. 52. It is evident from all there particulars,
thatthe ideas which led the Crusaders to undertake their
wild enterprize were gradually formed; so that the uni-
versal concourse to the itandard of the cross when ereaed
by Urban II. will appear less furprizing.

IF the various circumstances which I have enumerated

in this note, as well as in the history, are sufficient to
account for the ardour with which such vast numbers
engaged in such a dangerous undertaking, the extensive
privileges and immunities granted to those who assumed
the cross, serve to account for the long continuance of
this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempted from pro-
fecutions on account of deN!t during the time of their be-
ing engaged in this holy service. Du Cange, voc. Crutis
privilegiun, v. ii. p. 1194.-2. They were exempted
from paying interest for the money which they had bor-
rowed. Ibid.-3. They were exempted either entirely,
or at leaf during a certain time, from the payment of
taxes. Ibid. Ordonances des Rois de France, tom. i.
P. 33.-4. They might alienate their lands without the

<olll:ilt

consent of the superior lord of whom they held. Ib. 5.
Their persons and effecits were taken under the proteaion
of St. Peter, and the anathemas of the church were de-
nounced against all who should niolefi them, or carry on
any quarrel or hostility against them, during their ab-
fence, on account of the holy war. Du Cange, lb.
Guibertus Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480, 482.--. T'hev
enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclefiafticks, and were no;t
hound to plead in any civil court, but were declared sub-
jed to the spiritual juri''dition alone. Du Cange, Ih.
Ordon. des Rois, tOm. i. p. 34, 174.-7. TIhey ob-
tained a plenary remission of all their fins, and the gates
of heaven were set open to them, without requiring any
proof of their penitence, but their engaging in this e>-
pedition, and thus gratifying their favourite passion, the
love of war. Guibert. Ahbas, p. 480. When we be.
hold the civil and ecclesiastical powers vying with each
other, and straining their invention in order to devire ex-
pedients for encouraging and adding firength to the spirit
of fuperflition, can we be furprized that it ihould be-
come so general as to render it infamous, and a mark of
cowardice to decline engaging in the holy war ? \Wil
lierm. Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf. vol. ii. p. 641. The hifto-
ries of the Crusades written by modern authors, who
are apt to substitute the ideas and maxims of their own
age in the place of those which influenced the persons
whose acions they attempt to relate, convey a very im-
perfet notion of the spirit at that time predominant in
Europe. The original historians, who were animated
themselves with the fame paflions which poffefled their
contemporaries, exhibit to us a more fIriking piaure of
the times and manners which they describe. 'he en-
thufiaflic rapture with which they account for the cffells
of the Pope's discourse in the council of Clermont; the
exultation with which they mention the numbers who de-
voted themrelves to this holy warfare; the confidence
with which they rely on the divine protection; the ec-
flafy of joy with which they describe their taking pielf-
sion of the holy city, will enable us to conceive in fume
degree the extravagance of that zeal which agitated the
minds of men with luch violence, and will figgellt as
many singular rcflertions to a philosopher, as any oc-
curience in the hiltlry of manktind.--lt is unnccf-
fary to fcle&t the particular pafliges in the fcvcral hilto-

rians

rians which confirm this observation. But left there
authors may be suspected of adorning their narrative
with any exaggerated description, I illall appeal to one
of the leaders who conduzced the enterprize. 'here is
extant a letter from Stephen, the earl of Chartres and
Blois, to Adela his wife, in which he gives her an ac-
count of the progress of the Crusader. He describes
the Crusaders as the chosen army of Christ, as the ser-
vants and foldicrs of God, as men who marched under
the immediate protection of the Almighty, being con-
duolted by his hand to viaory and conquest. He (Ipeaks
of the Turks as accursed, sacrilegious, and devoted by
heaven to deftru-ion ; and when he mentions the fol-
diers in the Christian army who had died, or were
killed, he is confident that their fouls were admitted di-
recly into the joys of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegium,
vol. iv. io. 257.

' HE expence of conduEcing numerous bodies of men
from Europe to Asia, mull have been excessive, and
the difficulty of raising the necefalay fums mutt have
been proportionably great, during ages when the pub-
lick revenues in every nlation of Europe were ex-
tremely small. Some account is preserved of the ex-
pedients employed by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne,
in order to levy the money requilite towards equip-
ping him for the Crusade, A. D 1346. There I shall
mention, as they tend to ftew the considerable in-
fluence which the Crufa 'e had, both on the state of
property and of civil government. i. He exposed to
tale part of his domains; and as the price was destined
for such a sacred service, he obtained the consent of the
French King, of whom these lands were held, ratifying
the alienation. Hilt. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. 332, 335.
-2. He issued a proclamation, in which he promised
to grant new privileges to the nobles, as well as new
immunities to the cities and towns, in his territories,
in consideration of certain fums which they were in-
ftantly to pay on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512.
Many of the charters of community, which I shall
mention in another note, were obained in this man-
ner.-3. He exacted a contribution towards defraying
the charges of the expedition from all his fubjets,
whether ecclefiafticks or laymen, who did not accom-
pany him in person to the Ealt. Ibid. torn. i. p. 335.
"4. He appropriated a considerable part of his usual

VOL. 1. N revenucs

revenues for the support of the troops to he employed
in this service; Ibid. tom. ii. p. 518.- c. He exaded
confiderabie fums not only of the Jews fettled in his
dominions, but also of the Lombards and other ban.
kers who. had fixed their residence there. Ibid. torn. i.
p. 338. tom. ii. 528. Notwithfianding the variety of
these resources, the Dauphin was involved in such ex.
pence by this expedition, that on his return he was
obliged to make new demands on his fuibjeds, and to
pillage the Jews by frein exalions. Ibid. tom. i. p.
344, 347. When the count de Foix engaged in the
sirs Crusade, he railed the money neccffary for de.
fraying the expences of that expedition, by alienating
part of his territories. Hit. de Langued. par D. D. de
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In like manner Bald.
win, count of Hainaut, mortgaged or fold part of his
dominions to the bishop of Liege. h.D. c96. Du
Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i. p. 59. At a later
period, Baldwin, Count of Namur, fold part of his es-
tate to a monastery, when he intended to aflume the
cross. A. D. 1239. Mirei oper. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. SEC T. I. p. 30.

THE usual method of forming an opinion concern-

ing the comparative state of manners in two different
nations, is by attending to the taAs which historians
relate concerning each of them. Various palages
might be felEted from the Byzantin historians, de-
scribing the splendor and magnificence of the Greek
Empire. P. de Montfaucon has produced from the
writings of St. Chrysostom a very full account of the
elegance and luxury of the Greeks in his age. That
father in his sermons enters into such details concerning
the manners and customs of his cortemporaries, as aSp
pear strange in discourses from the pulpit. P. de Mont-
faucon has collected these descriptions, and ranged them
under different heads. The court of the more early
Greek Emperors seems to have resembled those of Eallern
monarchs, both in magnificence and in corruption of man-
ners. The Emperors in the eleventh century, though
inferior in power, did not yield to them in ostentation
and splendour. Memoires de 1'Acad. des Infcript. toim.
xx. p. 197.-But we may decide concerning the com-
parative tlate of manners in the Eaztcrn Empire, altd

among

among the nations in the weft of Europe by another
method, which, if not more certain, is at least more
ftrikinp. As Conflantinople was the place of rendez-
vous fur all the armies of the Crusaders, this brought
together the people of the eafl and weft as to one
great interview. T'here are extant several contemporary
authors, both among the Greeks and Latins, who were
witnefles of this singular congress of people formerly
frangers, in a great measure, to each other. 1 hey
describe, with simplicity and candour, the imprefion
which that new fpeaacle made upon their own minds.
This may be confidered as the moRl lively and just
piSure of the real character and manners of each peo-
p!e. W;hen the Greeks speak of the Franks, they de-
scribe them as barbarians, fierce, illiterate, impetuous
and savage. They assume a tone of superiority, as a
more polished people, acquainted with the arts both
of government and of elegance, of which the others
were ignorant. It is thus Anna Comnena describes
the manners of the Latins. Alexias, p. 224, 231,
237. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. She always treats
them with contempt as a rude people, the very men-
tiorl of whose names was sufficient to contaminate
the beauty and elegance of history, p. 229. Nicetas
Choniatas inveighs again!f them with fill more vio-
lence, and gives an account of their ferocity and
devastations, in terms not unlike those which precc-
ding historians had employed in defcrihing the incur-
sions of the Goths and Vandals. Nicet. Chon. ap.
Byz. Script. vol. iii. p. 302, &c. But, on the other
hand, the Latin historians were fRruck with alfnifh-
ment at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which
they discovered in the Eaflern empire. "O what
a vail city is Constantinople (exclaims Fulcherius
Carnotenfis, when he firr beheld it) and how beau-
tiful ! How many monafleries are there in it, and
how many palaces built with wonderful art ! How
many manufactures are there in the city amazing to
behold ! It would be allonilhing to relate how it
abounds with all good things, with gold, silver, and
fluffs of various kinds; for every hour ship3 arrive in
its port laden with all things necellary for the ufc
of man, Fulcher. ap. Bongarf. vol. i. p. 386.

N 2 Willernus

Willermus Archbishop of Tyre, the mofi intelligent
historian of the crusades, takes frequent occasion t,
deicribe ihe elegance and splendour of the ccurt of
Conflantinople, and adds, that what they oblcrvcd
there exce'tded any idea which they could have fcrm.d
of it, noftrarum enim rerum modum & dignitarem Pe.
ceCunt; Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657, 664
Guntherus, a French monk, who wrote a hiflorv of ile
conqucft of Conftaimtinople by the cruladcrs in the
thirteenth century, speaks of the magnificence of tha
city in the fame tone of admiration, " Struculram
autcm Edificiorium in corpore civitatis, in ecclfi- vi-
delicet, & turribus, & in domibus magnatorum, vix
ullus vel defcribere poteft, vel credere dtfcribenti, nifi
iui ca oculata fide cognoverit." Hist. Conftantinop.
ap. Canifii LcEtiones Antiquas. fol. Antw. 1725. vcl.
iv. p. 14. Geoffrey de Villchardouin, a nobleman of
lhigh rank, and accuflomed to all the magnificence then
known in the weft, dcfcribes, in similar terms, the al-
tonifhment and admiration of such of his fellow soldiers
who beheld Conflantinople for the sirs time: "They
could not have believid, fays he, that there was a city
so beautiful and rich in the whole world. When theyi
viewed its high walls, its lofty towers, its rich palaces,
its superb churches, all appeared so great that they
could have formed no conception of this lovereign cj;),
unless they had seen it with their own eyes." lifloire
de la Conquete de Conflant. r. 49. From these un-
disguised repreftntatins of their own feelings, it is evi-
dent, that to the Creeks, the Latins appealed to he a
race of rude, urpolifhed barbarians; whereas the latter,
how much lotvcr they might contemn the unwarlikc
characetr of the t rrner, could not help regarding them
as far superior to ihlcmd.tves in elegance and arts-
That the slate of g(.vernmcnt and manners was much nort
improved in Ital th:in in the other countries of I..-
rope is evidcnt not only from the facts recorded in Ilil-
tory, but it appears that the more intelligent leaders (!
the cruladers were flitick with the diffcrence. Jacolb
dc Vitriaco, a French hiflorian of the holy \ ar, makes
an elaborate p}ancegric!, on the cli;:lactr and manners
of the Italians. tie viecs tlem as a moic crlilltd
pei'pl', and particularlv cerlbrat, s Ihi n for theIir love
of lIberty and civil 1\i:dn;i in confliis circunljeccti,

in

ill re fua publica procuranda diligentes & fiudiofi; fibi
in poflerum providentes; aliis fubjici renuentes; ante
omnia libertatem fibi defendentes; lub uno quem eli-
gunt capitaneo, communitate sue jura & inflituta dic-
tantes, & fimiliter observantes. Hiftor. Hierofol. ap.
Gdla Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p. 1085.

NOTE XV. SECT. . P.33.

The different eleps taken by the cities of Italy in

o der to extend their pov. er and dominion are remark-
ab)!. As boon as their lib.r:ies were eflablifhed, and
thi-v began to feel their own importance, thev endea-
voured to render themselves masters of the territory
round their walls. Under the Romans, when cities
enjoyed municipal privileges and jurifdiaion, the cir-
cumjacent lands belonged to each town, and were the
property of the community. But as it was not the ge-
nius of the feudal policy to encourage cities, or to shew
any regard for their polf lions and immunities, these
lands had been Seized, and shared among the conque-
rors. The barons to whom they were granted, erected
their castles almost at the gates of the city, and exer-
ciled their jurifdicion there. Under pretence of re-
covering their ancient property, many of the cities in
Itala- attacked there troublesome neighbours, and dif-
pofcfling them, annexed their territories to the com-
munities, and mad: thereby a confidcrable addiiion to
their power. Several inltances of this occur in the
erlventh, and beginning of the twelfth centuries.
~Murat. antiq. Ita!. vol. iv. p. 159, &c. Their ambition
increasing together with their power, they afterwards at-
tacked several barons situated at a greater dtflance from
thnm, and obliged these to engage that they should be-
come members of their community; that they should
take the oath of fidelity to their magifrates; that they
should subjea their lands to all burdens and taxes im-
poled by comtmon consent; that they lhould defend the
community against all its enemies ; and that they (hould
reside within the city during a certain specified time in
tach year. Murat. ibid. 163. This fubje&ion of the
nobility to the municipal government eflablifhed in ci-
ties, became almoRt univerlal, and was often extremely
grievous to persons accuflomed to confider themselves
as independent. Otto Frifingenfis thus describes the
ia:e of Italy under Frederick I. "1 The cities so much

N 3 assec

assec liberty, and are so felicitous to avoid the info-
lence of power, that almofi all of them have thrown
off every other authority, and are governed by their
own magistrates. Insomuch that all that country is
now filled with free cities, each of which have com-
pelled their bishops to reside within their walls, and
there is scarce any nobleman, how great soever his
power may be, who is not subjeA to the laws and go-
vernment of some city. De Geflis Frider. I. Imp. lib.
ii. c. 13. p. 453. In another place he obfervcs of the
Marquis of Montserrat, that he was almost the only
Italian baron, who had preserved his independence, and
had not become subjec to the laws of any city. See
also Muratori Antichita Eflcnfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412.
That slate into which some of the nobles were com-
pelled to enter, others embraced from choice. They
observed that high degree of security as well as of cre-
dit and estimation which the growing wealth and do-
minion of the great communities procured to all the
members of them. They were desirous to partake of
there, and to put themselves under such powerful pro-
tecion. With this view they voluntarily became citi-
zens of the towns in which their lands were most con-
tiguous, and abandoning their ancient castles, took up
their residence in the cities at leafi during part of the
year. Several deeds are still extant, by which some of
the most illufirious families in Italy are associated as citi-
zens of different cities. Murat. ib. p. 165, &c. A charter
by which Atto de Macerata is admitted as a citizen of
Ofimo, A. D. 1198, in the Marcha di Ancona, is flill
extant. In this he lipulates, that he will acknowledge
himself to be a burgers of that community; that he
will, to the utmolt of his power, promote its honour
and welfare; that he will obey its magistrates; that lie
will enter into no league with its enemies; that he will
reside in the town during two months in every year, or
for a longer time if required by the magillrates. The
community, on the other hand, take him, his family,
and friends, under their proteCtion, and engage to de-
fend him againfi every enemy. Fr. Ant. Zacharias
Anecdota mndii vvi. Aug. Taurn. 1755. fol. r. 66.
This privilege was deemed so important, that not only
laymen, but ecclcfiaflicks of the highest rank, condel
cended to be adopted as members of the great comml-
nilics, in l.tlt cfenjoying the safety and dignity

which

which that conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the
institution of communities, persons of noble birth had
no other residence but their castles. They kept their
petty courts there; and the cities were deserted, hav-
ing hardly any inhabitants, but slaves or persons of low
condition. But in consequence of the practice which I
have mentioned, cities not only became more popu-
lous, but were filled with inhabitants of better rank;
and a cuflom, which (fill subsists in Italy, was then in-
troduced, that all lamilies of diftin&ion reside more con-
ftantlv in the great towns, than is usual in other parts
of Europe. As cities acquired new consideration and
dignity by the accession of such citizens, they became
more solicitous to preserve their liberty and indepen-
dence. The Emperors, as sovereigns, had anciently
a palace in almost every great city of Italy; when they
vifi;ed that country they were accustomed to reside in
these, and the troops which accompanied them were
quartered in the houses of the citizens. This the citi-
7ens confidered both as ignominious and dangerous.
They could not help confidering it as receiving a maf-
ter and an enemy within their walls. They laboured
therefore to get free of this subjection. Some cities
prevailed on the Emperors to engage that they should
never enter their ga es, but take up their refuience with-
ou; the walls: Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24.
Others obtained the imperial l.cerre to pull down the
palace situated within their liberties, on condition that
they built another in the suburbs for the reception of
the Emperor. Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25.
These various encroachments of the Italian cities alarm-
ed the Empcrors, and put them on fchcmes for re-eflab-
li.thing the Imperial jurifdition over them on its an-
cient footing. Frederick Earbaroffa engaged in this
enterprize with great ardour. The free cities of Italy
joined together in a general league, and flood on their
defence; and after a long contett, carried on with al-
ternate success, a folcmn treaty of peace was concluded
at Constance, A D. 1183, by which all the privileges
and immunities granted b, former Emperors to the prin-
cipal cities in Italy were confirmed and ratified. Murat.
dissert. XLVIII. This treaty of Conflance was con-
fidcred as such an important article in the jurisprudence
of the middle ages, that it is usually publilhed together
'with the Libri Feudorum at the end of the Corpus

N 4 Juris

Juris Civilis. The treaty secured privileges of great
importance to the confederate cities, and though it re-
served a considerable degree of authority and jurifdic-
tion to the Empire, yet the cities persevered with such
vigour in their efforts in order to extend their immu-
nities, and the conjuncaures in which they made thtem
were so favourable, that, before the conclusion of the
thirteenth century, moif of the great cities in Italy had
ihaken off all marks of fubjedion to the Empire, ai d
were become independent sovereign republics. It is
not requisite that I should trace the various fleps by
which they advanced to this high degree of power 1o
fatal to the Empire, and so beneficial to the cause of
liberty in Italy. Muratori with his ufial indifiry has
collected many original papers which illit;rate this cu-
rious and little known part of hiflory. Murat. Antic.
tal. Dissert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanoi s hifi.
Laudis Pompeii five Lodi in Graev. Thef. Antiquit.
Ital. vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. p. 34.

LONG before the institution of cQmmunities in

France, charters of immunity or Franchise were grant-
ed to some towns and villages by the lords on whom
they depended. But thele are very different from such
as became common in the twelfth and thirteenth cen-
turies. They did not erect these towns into corpora-
tions; they did not establish a municipal government;
they did not grant them the privilege of bearing arms.
They contained nothing more than a manumission of
the inhabitants from the yoke of fcrvitudc; an cxtmp-
tion from certain services which were opprtflive and ig-
nominious; and the eftabliffmcnt of a fixed tax or rent
which they were to pay to their Lord in place of im-
positions which he could formerly lay upon tl em at
pleasure. Two charters of this kird to t o villages in
the county of Roufillan, one A. D. 974, the other
A. D. 1025, are still extant. Petr. de Mlarca Malrca,
five limes Hifpanicus. app. p. 909, 1038. Such corc(f-
sions, it is probable, were not unkrou n in other parts
of Europe, and may be confidered as a flep towards the
more extensive privileges conferred by Louis tl:e Giofs
on the towns within his domains. The communities
in France never aspired to the fame independence with
those in Italy. They acquired new privileges, and imn

munitics,

munities, but the right of sovereignty remain entire to
the King or baron within whose territories the refpec-
tive cities were situated, and from whom they received
the charter of their freedom. A great number of these
charters granted both by the Kings of France, and by
their great vassals, are publishcd by M. D'Achery in
his Specilegium, and many arc found in the collection
of the Ordonances des Ro!s de France. These convey
a very striking reprefen:ation of the wretched condition
of cities previous to the inflitution of communities,
when they were fiubject to the judges appointed by the
superior lords of whom they held, and had fcarcc any
other law but their will. Each conccflion in these char-
ters muvf be confidered as a grant of some new privi-
legc which the people did not formerly cnjoy, and each
regulation as a method of redressing some grievarce un-
dcr which they formerly laboured. The charters of
communities contain likewise the first expedients em-
ployed for the introdufaion of equal laws, and regular
government. On both these accounts they merit parti-
cular attention, and therefore inltead of rcf-rrring my
readers to the many bulky volumes in which the)' are
scattered, I shall give them a view of some of the moil
important articles in there charters, rarged under two
general heads. I. Such as refpe& perlonal safety. 1I.
Such as refpe& the security of pioperty.

I. DURING that slate of turbulence and disorder

which the corruption of the feudal government intro-
duced into Europe, personal falcty was the chief ob-
jec of every individual; and as the great military
barons alone were able to give lufficicnt protection to
their vassals, this was one great source of their power
and authority. But, by the inflitu:ion of comnmuniiics,
effecuual prevision was mndc for the lafety of indivi-
duals independent of the nobles. For, i. the funda-
mental artile in every char:e r was, that all the menbers
of it bound themfelvts hv oath to afTlil, defend, and
flard by each otliur agairnlt all aggrtilt rs, and that they
fhculd not susser any person to injure, dlltre's, or nrol. ft,
any of their tellow citizens. D'Achrr. picl. . 642.
xi. 341, &c.-2. Whoever rtfided in any town which
was made free, was obliged under a lev(re penalty to
accede to the community, and to take part in the mutual
defence of its members. D'Acher. Spic. xi. 344.-3.
The communities had the privilege of carrying arms;

of

of making war on their private enemies; and of exe-
citing by military force any lentence which their ma-
gittrates pronounced. D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi.
, 3.-4. The practice of making fatisfa&ion by a pe-
cun;i.arv compensation for murder, assault, or other acs
ot violence, mofl inconfiflent with the order of society,
and the fafetv of individuals, was abolished, and such as
committed these crimes were punished capitally, or with
rigour adequate to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Mirsi
opera Diplomatica, i. 292.-5. No member of a com-
munity was bound to justify or defend himself by bat.
tlc, or combat; but if he was charged with any crime,
hec could he convicted only by the evidence of witnesses,
:;id lthe r%,;lar course of legal proceedings. Miraens,
ibihl. D'Ach. xi. ',75, 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 263.-
6. If any man fufpeced himself to be in danger from
the malice or enmity of another, upr:. his making oath
to that effetic before a magifirate, the person fufpeced
va., b:)und under a severe pcnalty to give security for his
ptaccalk!? behaviour. D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the
fame fpccies of security which is still known in Scotland
under the name of Lawvbuirrows. In France it was first
introduced among the inhabitants of communities, and
having been found to contribute considerably towards
perforal safety, it was extended to all the other mem-
bers of the society. Eflablifflmens de St. Louis, liv. i.
cap. 2S. ap. Du Cange vie dc St. Louis, p. 15.

II. THE provisions in the charters of communities

concerning the security of property are not lets confi-
derable than thlte rclpcting personal safety. By the
ancient law of France no person could be arrested or
confined in prison on account of any private debt.
Ordon. des Rois de France, tomrn. i. 72, 8o. If any
person was arrcflcd upon any prctcxt, but his having
been guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to refcuc
him out of the hands of the officers who had seized him.
Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from arrefi on account of
debt seems likewise to have been enjoyed in other coun-
tries. Gudenus Svl!oge Diplon. 473. In society, while
it remained in its rudcll and molt simple form, debt
seems to have been confidered as an obligation merely
personal. Men had made rome progress towards re-
fineemnt before creditors acquired a right of seizing
the property of their debtors in order to recover pay-
ment. The expedients for this purpofc were all in-

troduced

troduced originally in communities, and we can trace
the gradual progress of them. i. The fimplefi ard moit
obvious species of security was, that the person who
fold any commodity should receive a pledge from him
who bought it, which he restored upon receiving pay-
ment. Of this custom there are vestiges in several
charters of community. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.-2.
When no pledge was given, and the debtor became re-
fraEory or insolvent, the creditor was allowed to seize
his effeas with a strong hand, and by his private au-
thority; the citizens of Paris are warranted by the
royal mandate, " ut ubicumque, et quocumque modo
potcrunt, tantum capiant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam
integre & plcnar.e habeant, & inde fibi invicem ad.ju-
tores exiftant." Ordon. &c. torn. i. p. 6. This rude
practice, suitable only to the violence of a (late of na-
ture, was tolerated longer than one can conceive to be
possible in any bfcietv, where laws and order were at all
known. The ordonance authorizing it was issued, A. D.
1134, and that which correts the law, and prohibits
creditors from seizing the effects of their debtors, un-
less by a warrant from a magistrate, and under his in-
fpecrion, was not published until the year 1351. Ordon.
torn. ii. 438. It is probable, however, that men were
taught, by observing the disorders which the former
mode of proceeding occasioned, to correa it in practice
long before a remedy was provided by a law to that
cffet. Every discerning reader will apply this obferva-
tion to many other customs and practices which I have
mentioned. New customs are not always to be alcribed
to the laws which authorize them. These flatutcs
only give a legal fancion to such things, as the expe-
rience of mankind has previously found to be pr(per
and benefician.-3. As soon as the interposition of the
magistrate became requisite, regular provifon was ma:de
for attaching or difiraining the movcable efFccas of a
debtor; and if his moveables were not lufficient to dif-
charge the dbt, his immoveable property, or estate in
land, was liable to the lame difirces, aiud gas luld for
the benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix. p. 184, 185.
xi. p. 348, 380. As this regu'ation afioid.d the nm.ft
complete <ccurity to the crcditor, it was corfidered as so
severe, that humanity pointed out several limitations in
the execution of it. Ci editors were prohibitcd Irom
seizing the wearing apparel of their debtors, their beds,

the

'the doer of their houfc, their infiruments of hufbandrv,
&c. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon the fame prin-
ciples, when the power of distraining cfftcts became
more general, the horse and arms of a gentleman could
not be seiz.ed. D'Ach. ix. S85. As hunting was tlie
favourile amuFiimcn-t of martial nobles, the Emperor
Lodovicus Pius prohibited the seizing of a hawk, on
account of any composition or debt. Capitul. lib. i
§ 21. But if the debtor had no other movcabjcs, (. n
tihfe privilcgcd articles might be fe ;..d.-4. In or,' r to
render the lecuritv of property cornpleat within P corn-
munitv, every per!on who wans admitted a mcnmbr of
it, was obliged to buy or build a hou'e, or to purchaic
landr, within its precincts, or at least to bring into tle
town a considerable portion of his moveables per qua
/,,liiarr f /f,''lt, /f qulid Jorte in cum qurrelhe evenrrit.
D'Ach. xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367. Libertates S. Geor-
fii (! .

F !r(prauncha. Hifl. de Datuphin, torn. i. p. 26.-

5. Thati fecuritv might be as perfect as poflible; in
forne towns, the members of the community seem to
have been bound for each other. D'Ach. x. 644.-6.
All questions with rcpe-t to property, were tried with-
in the community by magiflrates and judges, which
the citizens ele6ied or appointed. Their decisions were
more equal and fixed, than the sentences which de-
pended o; the capricious and arbitrary will of a baron,
who tho',gi.t himself superior to all laws. D'Ach. x.
644, 646. xi. 344, & paflim. Ordcn. iii. 204.-7. No
mimber of a community could be burdened kb any ar-
bitrary tax; for the ;uperior lord, who granted the char-
ter of community, accepted of a fixed census or duty in
lieu of all demands. Ordon. ,t. iii. 204. Libertatcs de
Calma. lift. de Dauphine, tom. i. p. i9. Libert. St.
Georeii de Eipcranchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could the
memcbers of a community be diffrerfed by an unequal
imrpoition of the fum to be levied on the community.
Rc-u;ations are infcrted in the charters of some com-
munities concerning the method of determining the
quota of any tax to be levied on each inhabitant.
D'Ach. xi. 350, 365. St. Louis publiflRd an ordonance
concerning ihis matter, which exidencd to all the coin-
iiunitics. Ordon. t. i. 186. Thele regulations are cx-
tremely favourable to liberty, as they vell the power of
pioportioning the taxes in a certain number ot citi7.ens

chosen

chofcn out of each parish, who were bound bv folmn
oath to d&'cide according to juftice.-That tlhe more
perfet security cf property was one great object of
tlio'e whlo inftiiuted communities, we learn, not only
jrt.m the rature of the thing, but from the exprels
words of several charters, of which I (hall only men-
tion that granted by Ae'inor, Quucen of 1lnglpd and
Dutchii s of Guicnne, to the comminity of 'oitiers,
, lit uai propiia ni.l.us dcfcndere pcffnt, & magis in-
tt ie cuflodirc." )u Cange voc. Ccn.mnunia, v. ii. p.
S63.-Cuch are some of the capital rcgi.laiions cfla-
lifihcd in communities during the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. These may be confidered as tie Erst rudi-
ments of law and order, and contributed grcatlv to
introduce regular government among all the menbers
of tuciety. As fuon as communities were instituted, high
fcntiments of liberty began to appear. When Hum-
bert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting a charter of com-
munity to the town of Belleviile, exaced of the in-
hab:!ants an oath of fidelity to himself and successors,
tl.cv stipulated, on their part, that he should swear to
maintain their franchises and liberties; and for their
greater security, they obliged him to bring twenty
gentlemen to take the fanme oath, and to be bound to-
githcr with him. D'A h. ix. IS3. In the fame man-
ner, the lord of M';oirens in Dauphir.e produced a cer-
tain number of ,xrlons as his sureties for the obfcila-
tion of thli. : .icles, con:iined in the c.arter of cor.-
munity to that town. Thelf were bound to furiender
themielves prisoners to the inhabi:ants of Moircns, if
their liege lord ihould violate any of their franchiifs,
and they promised to remain in cuflodv until he fliould
Frant them rcdrefs. HIirt. Id Dauphilii:, tom. i. p. 17.
If the mayor or chief magiftlate of a town did any
injury to a citizen, he was obliged to give security for
his appearance in judgment, in the fame rmanner as a
private person; and if cafi, was liable to the fame pe-
nalty. D'Ach. ix. 183. TIele are ideas of equi-
lity uncommon in the i'fudal times. Communities were
lo favourable to freedom, that they were difiinguiflecd
by the name of L;brrtatrs. Du Cange, v. ii. p. 863.
Tlhey were at firil extremely odious to the nobles, who
foresaw what a check they mull prcve to their power
and d')mination. Guibert Abbot of Nogent calls them
execrable inventions, by which, contrary to law and

jullicc,

juflice, laves withdrew themselves from that obedience
which they owed to their mailers. Du Cange, ib.
862. The zeal with which some of the nobles and
powerful ecciefialficks opposed the eflabliihment of com-
munities, and endeavoured to circumscribe their privi-
leges, was-extraordinary. A firiking inflance of this
occurs in the contests between the archbishop ot Reims,
and the inhabitants of that community. It was the
chief business of every archbishop, during a confider-
able time, to abridge the rights and jurrfdiiion of the
community; and the great objec of the citizens, el-
peciily when the fee was vacant, to maintain, to re-
cover, and to extend their jurifdition. Hiftoire civile
& politiquc de la ville de Reims par M. Anquetil, tom.
i. p. 287, &c.

THE ohfervations which I have made concerning the

fate of cities, and the condition of their inhabitants,
are confirmed by innumerable passages in the historians
and laws of the middle ages. It is not improbable,
however, that some cities of the sirs order were in a
better slate, and enjoyed a superior degree of liberty.
Ur.der the Roman government, the municipal govern-
ment efiablifhed in cities was extremely favourable to
liberty. The jurisdicion of the senate in each corpo-
ration, ard the privileges of the citizens, were both cx-
tensive. There is reason to believe, that some of the
greater citics which escaped the deflrufive rage of the
barbarous nations, till retained their ancient form of
government, at lealt in a great measure. They were
governed bv a council of citizens, and by magiflratcs
whom they themselves eleced. Very itrong prefurnp-
tions in favour of this opinion, are produced by M.
I'Abbe De Bos. His. Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i. p.
18, &c. tcm. ii. p. 524. edit. 1742. It appears from
some of the charters of communities to cities, granted
in the twclfih and thirteenth centuries, that the)' only
confirm the privileges ponss fd by the inhabitants, pre-
vious to the eflablifhment of the community. D'Achtr.
Specilcg. vol. xi. p. 345. Other cities claimed their
privileges as having pcfrifftd them without interrup-
tion from the t:mes of the Remans. Hifi. Crit. de la
.Mon. Franc. tom. ii. p. 333. But the number of cities
Vhich enjoyed luch immunities was lo imali, as in no
d:Free to diminiih the force of my conclusions in the
text.

NOTE

NOTE XVII. SECT. I. P.34.

HAVING given a full account of the cflablifhment,

as well as effeEts of communiines in I'alv and France,
it will be neceffarv to enquire with iome a:tc-ntion, in-
to the progress of cities and of municpal go',errnernt
in Germany. 'Tic arc,-;:nt Germans had no c. .r:.
Even in their hamnlets or villaces, they did rot build
their houtes ccntiguous to each other. 'l c. de MIor.
Gerrm. cap. 16. They cconfidercd it as a badge of fir-
itiide, to be obliged to dwell in a city furroui:ded with
walls. Wvhen one of their tribes had shaken off the
Roman yoke, their countrymen required cf them, as
an evidence of their having recovered libertv, to de-
molifh the walls of a town which the Remans had
built in their country. Even the fiercest animals, said
they, lose their spirit and courage when they arc cor.-
fined. Tac. Hiftor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built
several cities of note on the banks of the Rhine. But
in all the vast countries from that river to the coafis of
the Baltick, there was hardly one city previous to the
ninth century of the Christian ara. Conringius Exer-
citatio de Urbibus Germanie Oper. vol. i. § 25, 27,
31, &c. Heineccius differs from Conringius with re-
fpea to this. But even after allowing to his argu-
ments and authorities their utmost force, they prove
only, that there were a few places in those extensive
regions, on which some hifiorians have bfitowx.d the
name of towns. Elem. Jur. German. lib. i. § Ir2.
Under Charlemagne, and the Emperors of his li.m;iy,
as the political slate of Germany began to improve,
several cities were founded, and men became accufi;rmed
to associate and to live together in one place. ' Char-
lemagne founded two archbifhopricks and nine biflop-
ricks in the molt considerable tov ns of Germany. Aub.
Miraei Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. 16. His fuccef-
fors increased the number of these; and as the bishops
fixed their residence in these cities and performed reli-
gious funtions there, that induced many people to
lettle in them. Conring. ibid. § 48. But Henry, fir-
named the Fowler, who began his reign A.D. 920,
must be confidered as the great founder of the cities
in Germany. The Empire was at that time infcfed
by the incursions of the Hungarians and other barba-
rous people. In order to oppose them, Henry cn-

couratcd

couraged his subjects to fettle in citfes which he fur-
rounded with walls and tower,. He erjoined or per-
fuaded a certain proportion of tlhe nobil ty to fix their
refid nce in the towns, and thus rendered the condition
of citizens more honourable than it had been formerly.
Wi tikindus Arnal. lib.i. ap. Conring. § 82. I'rom
this period the number of cities continued to incrtate,
and they became more populous and more wc.l:v.
But cities were still destitute of municipal liberty or
jurildiion. Such of them as were fitua;cd in the Im-
perial demelncs, were subjea to the Emperors, and
their Comitcs, M/!i/, and other judges presided in them,
and dispensed jultice. Towns situated on the estate of
a baron, were part of his fief, and he or his officers
exere f-d a similar juri'didiLn in them. Conring. ibid.
§ 73, 74. Heinec. Elkm. Jur. Germ. lib. i. § 104.
''lhe GI mans borrowed the infitution of communiices
from the Itatians. Knipfchildius Tratatus Politico.
Hist. Jurid. de Civitatum Imperialum Juribus, vol. i.
lib. i. ca. 5. N ' 23. Frederick Barbarossa was the
firfl Emperor who, from the fame political confidera-
tion that influenced Lewis the Gross, multiplied com-
munities in order to abridge the power of the nobles.
Ffcffel Abrcge de l'H:ftoire & du Droit Publique d'Al-
lemagne, 4to. p. 297. From the reign of Henry the
F'owler, to the time when the German cities acquired
lull pofefcfion of their immunities, various circumfian-
ces contributed to their incrcafe. The establishment
of bifliopricks (already mentioned) and the bui'ding of
cathedrals, naturally induced many people to fettle there.
It became the cultom to hod councils and courts of
judicature of every kind, ccclefiaftical as well as civil,
in cities. In the eleventh century, many slaves were
tnfranchif(td, the greater part of lmhen fettled in
citics. Several mines were dilcovered and wrought in
difi'rent provinces, whith drew together luch a con-
courlf of people, as gave rile to ftveral cities. Con-
irng. § to5. The cities began in the thirteenth cen-
tury to form leagues for their mutual defence, and for
i prtfling the dllorders occasiontd by the private wars
aniong the barons, as well as by their exacions. This
iendcred the condition of the inhabitants of cities more
lecure than that of any order of men, and allured many to
become members of their communities. Conr § 94.
Thelre 'TCre inhabitants of three different ranks i,, the

town

to'n-.s of Germany. The nobles, or familis, the citi-
Lcnib, or liberi, and the artizans who were slaves, or ho-
mines proprii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29. N' 13.
H-nry V. who began his reign A.D. o16, infran-
chiti;d the slaves who were artisans or inhabitants in
;fveral towns, and gave them the rank of citizens, or
liberi. Pfeflel, p. 254.. Knipfcl-. lib. ii. C. 29. N' 113,
1g9. Though the cities in Germany did not acquire
libcrry so eaily as those in Franllc, ihey extended their
privilcges much farther. All the Imperial and free cities,
thi number of which is considerable, acquired the full
r;i;it of being immediate ; by which term in the Ger-
nir jurifprudeiice, we are to understand, that they
.re iubjct to the Empire alone, and possess within
their own precinas all the rights of compleat and in-
dcpendent sovereignty. The various privileges of the
Imperial cities, the great guardians of the Germanic
liberties, are enumerated by Knipfchild, lib. ii. The
great articles are generally known, and it would be im-
proper to enter into any dilquifition concerning minute
particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. P. 34.

THE Spanish historians are almost entirely silent con-
cerning the origin and progress of communities in that
kingdom; so that I cannot fix with any degree of cer-
tainty the time and manner of their firR introduccion
threr. It appears, however, from Mariana, vol. ii. p.
221, fol. Haga 1736, that in the year 135o, eighteen
:ilics had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile.
From the account which shall be given of their con-
ftitution and pretensions, SeQ. Ill. of this volume, it
is evident that their privileges and form of government
were the fame with those of the other feudal corpora-
tions; and this, as well as the perfec similarity of poli-
tical intfitutions and tranfadions in all the feudal king-
doms, may lead us to conclude, that communities were
introduced there in the fame manner, and probably
about the fame time, as in the other nations of Europe.
! Aragon, as I flall have occasion to observe in a sub-
Icquent note, cities seem early to ha\e acquired ex-
ttnfive irnmunities, together with a Ihare in the Icgifla-
lurc. In the year 1t 18, the citizens of Saragoifa had
not only attained political liberty, but they were de-
VOL. 1. clared

dared to be of equal rank with the nobles of the
second c'afs; and many other immunities, unknown io
persons in their rank of ife in other parts of Europe,
were conferred upon them. Zulita Anales de Arapon,
torn. i. p. 44. In England, the eftabliflmcnt of corn.
munities or corporations was poflerior to the Conoufit,
The practice was borrowed from France, and the pr:
vileges granttd bh' the crown were perfectly similar to
those which I have enumerated. But as this part n
hiflory is well known to most of my readers, I flail,
without entering into anv critical or minute dicflt!rn,
refer them to authors who have fully illufirattd il:
interefling point in the English hiflcrv. Brady's T'ea-
tife of Boroughs. Madox Firma Burgi, chap. i. IcZe
ix. Hume's }litfory of England, vil. i. apperc. . ard
ii. It is not improbable that some of the towns in
England were formed into corporations, under tht
Saxon Kings, and that the dlarters granted by the
Kings of the Norman race were not charters of ec-
franchifement from a state of flavcry, bu' a confirma-
tion of privileges which they alrcacy enjoyed. See L(rd
Lyttleton's History ot Hlenry II. vol. ii. p. 317. The
English cities, however, were veiy inconsiderable
in the twelfth century. A clear proof of this oc-
curs in the history to which I last referred. Fitzfe-
phen, a contemporary author, gives a de!cription of
the city of London in the rcign of Henry II. and the
terms in which he cpeakcs of its trade, its wealth, and
the splendour of its inhabitants, would fuggefl no in-
adequate idea of its slate at preltnt, when it is the
greatefl and moil opulent city ot Europt. But all id&,>s
of grandeur and magnificence are merely comparatlvc.
It appears from a contemporary author, Petel o f Elo;s,
arcl;deacon of London, who had good opportulitv ot
being well informed, that this cit\, of which Fitzficplen
gives such a pompous a.,ount, containtd no more than
forty thousand inhabitanis. Ibid. 315, 316. T'I
other cities were Imall in proportion, and in no c(tn
dition to extort any extenfivc privileges. ' hat the
- cnftitution of the boroughs in Scotland, in manm cir;
cumftances, resembled that of the towns in Fiaict arid
England, is manifelf fronm th- Leges Burgorunm a"'
nexed to the Regiam Majellatem. Nr.

NOT7E

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 38.

SOON after the introduceion of the third estate into

the national council, the spirit of liberty which that .-
cited in France began to produce conspicuous effecs.
in Ifveral provinces of France, the nobility and com-
rninities formed affuciations, w-hereby they bound them-
fclves to d',;end their rights ard priv\lk':es aeainfi ti.e
formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the King. The
count de Boulainvilliers has preserved a copy of one of
theft air.ciations, dated in the year 1314, twelve years
after the admiiflon of the deputies from towns into the
S':it.s General. Hiftoire de Pancien gouvernemenr de
la F'rnnce, tom. ii. p. 94. The vigour with which the
people affert:d and prepared to maintain their rights,
obliged their sovereigns to refped them. Six years
after this association, Philip the Long issued a writ of
summons, to the Community of Narbonne, in the fol-
lowing terms: " Philip, by the Grace, &c. to our
well-bDloved, &c. As we deiire with all our heart, and
above all other things, to govern our kingdom and
people in peace and tranquillity, by the help of Gcd:
and to reform our said kingdom in so far as it flands in
need thereof, for the publick good, and for the benefit
of our fubjets, who in times pail have been aggrieved
and oppreftcd in diverse manners by the malice of fun-
dry perolns, as we have learned bv common report, as
well as by the information of good men worthy of cre-
dit, and we having determined in our council which we
have called to meet in our good city, &c. to give re-
dress to the utmofi of our power, by all ways and
means possible, according to reason and juflice, and
willing that this should be done with solemnity and de-
lib:ration by the advice of the prelates, barons, and
good towns of our realm, and particularly of you, and
that it should be tran!ated agreeably to the will of
God, and for th' good of our people, therefore we
command," &c. Mably, obfervat. ii. App. p. 386. 1
shall allow these to be only the formal words of a pub-
lic and legal flle, b it the ideas are singular, and much
more liberal and enlarge d than one could exped in that
age. A pop.ul r monarch of Great Britain could hardly
address hims ls to parliament, in terms more favourable
to publick liberty. There occurs in the history of

0 2 France

France a striking inflance of the progress which the
principles of liberty had made in that kingdom, and of
the influence which the deputies of towns had acquired
in the S'at(s General. During the calamities in wl ilh
the war with England, and the captivity of King Joln,
had involvwd Fiance, the States Generalmade a I',.l
effort to extend their own privileges and jurisdiction.
The regulations efiablifhed by the States held A. D.
1355, concerning the mode of levying taxes, the ad.
min ftra!ton of wh:ch they vested not in the crown, but
in commilTioncrs appointed by the States; concernirg the
coining of money; concerning the redrcfs of the gri(-
vance of purvc\ance; concerning the regular adminif-
tration of iurfice; are much more fui:able to the ge-
nius of a republican government than that of a feudal
monarchy. This curious statute is published, Ordon.
t. iii. p. 19. Such as have an opportunity to consult
that large collection will find an abridgment of it, Hill.
de France par Villaret, torn. ix. p. 130. or in Hifloire
de Boulainv. tom. ii. 213. The French hifiorians rc-
present the bishop of Laon, and Marcel Provost of the
merchants of Paris, who had the chief direction of this
aflemblv, as seditious tribunes, violent, interested, am-
bitious, and aiming at innovations subversive of the
constitution and government of their country. That
may have been the cafe, but these men polfeffed the
confidence of the people; and the mcafures which they
proposed as the most popular and acceptable, plainly
prove that the spirit of liberty had spread wonderfull',
and that the ideas which then prevailed in France con-
cerning government were cxtremely liberal. The States
General held at Paris A. D. 1355, confifed of about
eight hundred members, and above one half of thelc
were deputies from towns. M. Secouffe Pref. a Ordon
tom. iii. p. 48. It appears that in all the different as-
femblics of the States, held during the reign of John,
the icprdcentatives of towns had great influence, and
in every refpeE the third State was confidered as co-
ordinate and equal to either of the other two. Ibid.
paflim. These spirited efforts were made in France long
before the House of Commons in England acquired ary
considerable influence in the legislature. As the feudal
system was carried to its utmost height in France
sooner than in England, so it began to decline sooner
in the former than in the latter kingdom. In England,

alilofl

almolt all attempts to eftablilh or to extend the li-
berty of the people have been fuccetsful; in France
they have proved unfortunate. What were the acci-
dental events, or political causes which occasioned
this difference, it is not my present business to en-
nure.

NOTE XX. SEC T. . p. 40.

In a former note, No. VIII. I have enquired into

the condition of that part of the people which was em-
ployed in agriculture, and have represented the various
hardships and calamities of their situation. When charters
of liberty and manumiilion were granted to such perlbns,
they contained four concefflons corresponding to the four
capital grievances to which men in a slate of fervi-
tjde are fuhljet. i. The light of disposing of their persons
by sale or grant was relinquished. 2. Power was given
to them of conveying their property and effects by will
or any other legal deed. Or if they happened to die
intestate. it was provided that their property lhould
go to their lawful heirs in the fame manner as the
property of other persons. 3. The services and taxes
which they owed to their superior or liege Lord,
which were formerly arbitrary and imposed at pleasure,
are precise.:, ascertained. 4. They are allowed the
privilege of marrying whatever person they chose, as
formerly they could contrat no marliage without their
Lord's permiflion, and with no person but one of his
slaves. All these particulars are found united ii tie
charter granted Habitatoribus Montis-Britolis. A. D.
1376. Hist. de Dauphin6, ton. i. p. 8;. Many c'r-
cumftances concurred with those which I have men-
tioned in the text in procuring them deliverance frum
that wretched slate. The gentle spirit (,f the (' rio-
tian religion, together with the do. rinc. w:":,: it
teaches, concerning the original equality of ma (.ml::!,
as well as the impartial eye with which tne \-
mighty regards men of every condition, and au- 's
them to a participation of his benefits, are incontif' t
with servitude. But in this, as in m.mny other .-
stances, considerations of Interest, and the maxims . f
faire policy led men to a conduE inconfilent with
their principles. They were so sensible, however, of
the inconsistency, that to set their fellow christians

3 at

at liberty from servitude was deemed an ad of piety
highly meritorious and acceptable to heaven. The hu-
mane spirit of the Chriflian religion flruggled with the
maximr and manners of the Aorld, and contributed
more than .any other circumflance to introduce the
practice of manumiTon. X\ hen Pope Gregory the
Great. who flo'ltiihcd toward the end ot the sixth
century, granted lihertv to sornei of his slaves, he gives
this reason for it, " Cum redemptor nofter, totius con-
ditor natura, ad hoc propit!atu, humanern carnem v\o
luerit affumere, ur divinitatis fuae gratia, dirempto (quo
tenebamur captivl) viuculo, prii'inae nos reftilueret li-
bertati; fatu'iriter agitur. 11 homines, quos ab initio
liberos natura protulit, & jus gentium jugo fultflituit
fcrvitutis, in ea, qua nati fuerant, manumittentis henc-
ficio libertate reddantur. Gregor. Mazn. ap. Potgiflf. lib.
4. . . .

§ . Several laws or charter' founded on

reasons similar to this, are produced by the fame au-
thor. Accordingly a great part of the charters of
manumiflion previous to the reign of Loui, X. are
granted pro amore dei, pro remedio animae, & pro
rnercede animz. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. Se9,
850. Du Cange, voc. manumijio. The form: lity us
manumiflion was executed in a church, as a rligious
solemnity. The person to be set free was led round
the great altar with a torch in his hand, he took hold
of the horns of the altar, and there the solemn words
conferring liberty were pronounced. Du Cange, lb. vol.
iv. p. 467. I shall transcribe a part of a charter of
nianumiflion granted A. D. 1056 ; both a- it con-
tains a full account of the ceremonies used in this
form of manuniflion, and as a specimen of the im-
perfcA knowledge of the Latin tongue in that har:;a-
rous age. It is granted by Willa the widow cf Hiugo
the Duke and Marquis, in favour of C!lriza one of
her slaves. £t ideo nos Domine \\ ille inclite come-
tifc-libera et ahfolvo te Cleriza filia Uherto-po ti-
more omnipotentis de!, & remedio luminiarie anilnl
bone memorie quondam fpilra scripto l)omini Ugo glo-
riulliflimo, ut quando illum li)niilus de hac vita mi-
grate, juflciit, parh iniqua nln abrat potestatem u'lam,
fed angelus Domini noltri Jtfu Chrfli colocarr digni-
tur ilium inter fanctos dile±lto suo, ; & bcatus Pc-
trus princeps apofioloumn, qisi haltet prtef{atem onm-
nium animarum ligandi et abfolvcndi, ut ipfi al)llv.at
aniatie cjus dc peccatis luf, ct aperiad ilium j.aillu pa-
rldi.i, pro cadein) vcro ratioli, in manlo nite te Bcnzo

prefbitcr,

prcsb ter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fandti Barthoomniei
apsiioli; traad te tribu' v:cibus circa altare ipfius ec-
cleiie cuam careo apprehe.ifum in manibuw tuis & ma-
nibus fuis; deinde exite ambulate in via quadrubio,
u.i quatuor vie fe devidunter. Statimq; pro remeclio
luminarLi anime bone men,)ric quondam supra fcripto
Domini Ugo, et ipt, prcfb:ter Benzo fecit omn'a, &
dixit, Ecce quatuor vie, ite et amrbulate in qtacu.q ;
parte;n tibi placucrit tarm tic supra script Cleiza, qua
norq.i tui hereJes, qui ab ac hora in antea niati, vel
prucreati fuerit utriuq ; fexus, &c." M'rrat. ih. p. S5,.
Alalny other charters mighi h.ve been fclclej, which
in point of grammnar or f(yle, are in i i wile futpe-
sior to this. Manunilfion was Irequen Iv granted on
death-bed or by latter-will. As the minds of men
arc at that tine awakened to sentiments of humanity
anJ pietv, thefc deed, proceeded from rtligious mo-
tives, and are grante pro redemptione anirmzs, in or-
der to o'tain acceptance with Gud. Du Cange ubi fu-
pra, p. 47". & v,'c Ifrv s, vol. vi. p. 45r. Another
inethcd of o-tainig libeity was by entering into holy
orJer', or taking the vow in a monaflery. This was
permitted for fume time; but so many (Idves escaped,
b; this mean;, out of the hands of their masters, that
the praft:ce wa afterwards restrained, and at last pro-
hi'.ited -v the t.w ,.f almost all the nations of Eu-
rope. Mur.,t. ib. p. 4.'. (C'onforiably to the fame
p;inciple,, P.rinccs, on the hirth of a son, or upon any
loher agreeable event, app.inted a certain number of
slavs to be enfranchised, as a teflimony of their gra-
tioude to God tor thnt benefit. vlarculfi Form. lib.
i. cap. 3Cr. There ale several forms of manumifliun
publiihed by hMaJulfus, and all of them are founded'
en religious confidcrati:,nl, in order to procuic the
favour of (God, or to obtain the forgiveneis of their
fins. Lib. ii. c. 23, 33, 34. edit. Baluz. The fame
obfcrvation holds with refpcst to the other collecAions
of Formu!a annexed to bMarculfus. As felstiments of
religion induced some to grant liberty to their fellow-
Cluifians who groaned under the yoke of servitude ;
so mistaken ideas cincernilig devotin led others to
relinquilh their liberty. When a prrfon conceived an
extraordinary respect for the fainit who was the pa-
tron of any church or monaflery in which he was
accuflonemd to attend religious worship, it was not
unusual among men polflefid with an excess of fu-

0 4 pcrfitioua

perfiitious reverence, to give up themselves and their
p,)ferity to be slaves of the faint. Mabillon. de re
Diplomat. lib. vi. 632. The oblati or voluntary slaves
of churches or monafier:es were very numerous, and
may be d:vided into three different classes. The firit
were luch as put themselves and effefts under the pro.
teetion of a particular church or monaflery, binding
themselves to defend its privileges and property ;gainlt
every aggressor. There were prompted to do (o, nnt
merely by devotion, but in order to obtain that fecuri.
ty which arose from the protection of the church. 'I hey
were rather vassals than slaves, and sometimes perfuns
of noble birth found it prudent to lecure the piotection
of the church in this manner. Persons of the fccond
class bound themselves to pay an annual tax or quit-
rent out of their estates to a church or monaflery.
Beside- this, the) sometimes engaged to perform cer-
tain services. They were called cenfuaies. The last
class confifed of such as atually renounced their li-
berty, and became slaves in the itrict and proper sense
of the word These were called mninijrriales, and en.
laved their bodies, as some of the charters bear, that
they might procure the liberty of their fouls. Pot-
giefferus de flatu fervorum, lib. i. cap. i. § 6, 7.
How zealous the clergy were to encourage the opini-
ons lhich led to this practice will appear from a
clause in a charter by which one gives up himself as
a slave to a monaflery. " Cur fit omni carnali inge-
nuitate generofius extremum quodcumq; Dei ferviti-
urn, scilicet quod, terrena nobllitas multos plerumq;
vitioru:n servos facit, fcrvitus vero Chrifti nob les vir.
tutibus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis virtutibus vitia
comparaverit, claret pro certo eum cife generofiorem,

ui fe Dei 'crvitio praxbuerit proniorem. Quod ego
Ragna!dus intelligens, &c." Another author lays, Lli-
gens magis efle fervus Dei quam libertus faculi, frmiter
credens & fciens, quod ferrire Deo, regnare elc, fum-
maque ingenuitas fit in qua lervitus comparabatur
Chrifli, &c. Du Cange, voc. el6atus, vol. iv. p. 12z6,
1287. It does not appear, that the enfranchisement of
slaves was a fiequent practice while the feudal fyfiem
prelervcd its vigour. On the contrary, there wele laws
which set bounds to this praSice as detrimental to
fuciety. Potgicfl. lib. iv. c. 2. § 6. lhe inferior

order

order of men owed the recovery of their liberty to the
jelite of that ariftocratical policy, which lodged the
,,ft ex-enfive power in the hands of a few members
of the society, and depressed all the reft. When Louit
X. issued his ordonance, several slaves had been so long
accuflomed to servitude, and their minds were so much
dcbatid by that unhappy situation, that they refused to
accept of tlie liberty which was offered them. D'Ach.
S5lcel. v. xi. p. 387. Long after the reign of Louis
X. several of the French nobility continued to assert
their ancient dominion over their slaves. It appears from
an ordonance of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin Con-
liable of France, that the custom of enfranchising them
was confidered as a pernicious innovation. Morice
Mem. pour fervir des preuves a l'hift. de Bret. tom.
ii . p.oo. In some instances when the pradial slaves
were declared to be free men, they were still bound to
perform certain services to their ancient masters; and
v.ere kept in a slate different from other fubjeas, being
rcftriaed either from purchasing land, or becoming
members of a community within tie precincs of the
manor to which they formerly belonged. Martene &
Durand. Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i. p. 914. This, how-
ever, seems not to have been comron.-There is no
general law for the manumiflion of slaves in the Statute-
book of England similar to that which has been
quoted from the ordonances of the Kings of France.
Though the genius of the English constitution seems
early to have favoured personal liberty, personal ser-
ri't;de, nevertheless, continued long in England in some
particular places. In the year 1514, we find a charter
of Henry VIII. enfranchising two slaves belonging to
one of his manors. Rym. Feeder. vol. xiii..p. 470.
A late as the year 1574, there is a commission from
Qclen Elizabeth with refpe& to the manumission of
cirtain bondmen belonging to her. Rymer. in Gbfer-
vat. on the flatules, &c. p. 251.

NOTE XXI. SECT. I. P. 4.

THERE is no cuflom in the middle ages more fingu-

lar than that of private war. It is a right of so great
implortance, and prevailed so universally, that the regu-
lations concerning it make a considerable figure in the
system of laws during the middle ages. M. de Mon-
tefquicu, who has unravelled so many intricate points in

feudal

feudal jurisprudence, and thrown light on so many cuf-
toms formerly obicure and unintelligible, was not led
by his subjea to confider this. I shall therefore give a
more minute account of the customs and regulations
which directed a practice so contrary to the prefcnt ideas
of civilized nations concerning government and order.
I. Among the ancient Germans, as well as other na-
tions in a similar state of focicty, the right of avenging
injuries was a private and personal right, exercised lb
force of armrn, withou! any reference to an umpire, or
any appeal to a magistrate for decision. The clearcf
proots of this were produced Note VI. 2. This prac-
tice lubfifl d among the barbarous nations after their
settlement in the prov.nces of the Empire which they
conquered; and as the causes of dissention among them
multiplied, their family feuds and private wars became
more frequent. Proofs of this occur in tifeir early l:ii-
tor ans. Greg. Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. 18.
lib. x. c. 27. and likewifi in the codes of their laws.
It was not only allowable for the relations to avenge
the injuries of their family, but it was incumbent on
then.. Thus by the laws of the Angli and Werini, ad
quLnmcunque hereditas terra pervenerit, ad ilium vLClis
b.ilica id elt lorica & ultio proximi, & Iolatio leudis,
dib.t pertinere. tit. vi. § 5. ap. Lindenbr. Leg. Salic.
tit. 6j. Leg. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 14 § lc.-3. None
but gentlemen, or per'ons of noble birth, had the right
of private war. Alldifputcs among slaves, villani, the
inhabitants of towns, and freemen of inferior condition,
were decided in the courts of justice. All disputes be-
tween gentlemen and persons of inferior rank were tcr-
minaled in the lIme manner. The right of private
war fuppoled nobility of birth, and equality of rank in
the contending partics. Beaumanoir Coultumes de
Bcauv. ch. lix. p. 300. Ordon. des Rois de France,
tom. ii. 39g. § xvii. 5'£ . § xv. &c. The dignified ec-
clcfiaflicks likeife cl.timed and eyercificd the right ot
private war; but as it \ias not alogtlhcer decent i'r
them to prolecute qtairels in person, ad.vocati or vidamnrs
were chosen by the levcral monafleries and bifhopricks.
] licti stere commonly men of high rank and rep'la-
tion, who became the proticors of the churches and
convents by whom they were cle:kd; espouscd their
quarrels, and fought their battles; armis omn:a quz

erant

cra;it ecclcfia viriliter defendebant, et vigilanter proce-
ch.ir. BrtlTfcl Ulage des fiefs, torn. i. 144. Du
C,!tc, voc. adic/vatzu. On many occations, the mar-
! id i!cas to Mhich ccckfiaftlcks or noble birth w.re
i:cfbtmrned, made them torg-t the pacifick fpitit of

tl eir profeilion, and led them into the field in person
,t h- head of their vassals, '" flamma, fcrro, c.lJe,
r(lCflfiones ecckfiarum pracati drtendt.bar.." Guido
'hbas ap. Du Cange. Ib. p. 79.-4. It was not every
injury or trespass that gave a gentleman a title to make
w:lr upon his adver(ary. Atrocious ads of viol:-:ce,
infuits and affronts publickly cor;m:ttcd, were legal and
Iremi:tcd motives for taking arms agaitfi tte auihers of
thcr. Such crimes as are now punified capitally in
ciSili7..d nations, at that time jullificd private hofiiiitits.
I3eauran. ch. lix. Du Cange DiTitrt. xxix. fur loinxille,
.3;i. But though the avenging of irjurts wasthe
oiilv motive that could legally authorize a pi ivate war,
\ct disputes concerning civil property, often gave rife
io hostilities, and were terminactd by tle fmord. Du
C.nge Dissert. p. 332.-5. All persons present when any
quarrel arose, or any ac of violence was committed,
were included in the war which it occasioned, for it was
f.ippofed to be impossible for any man in such a fitua-
tion, to remain neu:ral, without taking fide with one
or othcr of the contending parties. B auman. p. 300.
-6. All the kindred of the two princ:pals in the war

crc i cluded in it, and obliged to espouse the quarrel
o!' the chieftain wi;h whom they were conncred. Du
Cange, ib. 332. This was founded on the maxim of
1''! ancient Germans, " fuflipere tam inimicitias feu
pairis, feu propinqui, quam amicitias, neccfTe eft ;" a
mr:im natural :o all rude and simple nations, among
v l;ich the form of focietv, and poliical union flrength-
cni such a fentimcnt. The method of alcertairing the
(d rec of aflinity which obliged a person to take part
ilc te quarrel of a kinsman was curious. While the
thlrch prolwilitcd the marriage of perlons within the
fevcnth degree of affinity, the vengeance of private
war extended as far as this absurd prohibition, and all
whlo had such a remote connecion with any of the
principals were involved in the calamities of war. But
when the church relaxed somewhat of its rigour, and
lid not extend its prohibition of marr)ing beyond the

fourth

fourth degree of affinity, the fame reiridtion took place
in the conduc of private war. Beauman. 30,. I)u
Cange Dissert. 333.-7. A private war could not be car.
ried on between two full brothers, because both have the
fame common kindred, and consequently neither have
any perfoni bound to stand by him against the other,
in the contest; but two brothers of the half blood might
wage war, because each of them has a diltint kindred.
Beauman. p. 299.-8. The vassals of each principal in
any private war were involved in the contest, because
by the feudal maxims they were bound to take arms
in defence of the chieftain of whom they held, ana to
affill him in every quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the
feudal tenures were introduced, and this artificial con-
necion was cftablifhed between vafials and the baron of
whom they held, vassals came to be confidered as in the
fame slate with relations. Beauman. 30 o.-9. Private
wars were very frequent for several centurie,. Nothing
contributed more to increase those diobrders in govern-
ment, and that fercioty of manners which reduced the
nations of Europe to that wretched slate which diifin-
guifhed the period of hiflory which I am reviewing.
Nothing was such an obstacle to the introdu&ion of a
regular administration of jufitce. Nothing could more
effetually discourage indultry, or retard the progress and
cultivation of the arts of peace. Private wars were car-
ried on with all the dettrulive rage, which is to be
dreaded from violent resentment when armed with force,
and authorised by law. It appears from the laws pro-
hibiting or refiraining the exercise of private hoflilities,
that the invasion of the mofR barbarous enemy could not
be more desolating to a country, or more fatal to its in-
habitants, than those interline wars. Ordon. t. i. p. 701.
tom. ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The contemporary hilto-
rians describe the exceflcs committed in prosecution of
these quarrels, in such terms, as excite allonilhment and
horror. I shall mention only one pafage from the hiflory
of the Holy war, by Guibert, Abho! of Nogent: ' traL
eo tempore maximis ad invitem hofii!itatibus, to;ius Fran-
corum regni facta turhatio; crcbra ubiq; latrocinia, vin-
rum obfcllio: audiebantur pa.irn, immo fiebant incendia
infinita; nullis pr.eter sola & indomita cupiditatc cxiflcii-
tibus caufia extruebantur pr.;lia; & ut brevi totun clau-
dam, quicquid obtutibus cupidorum iubjacebat, iiufquam

attenddendo

attendendo cujus effet, prseda patebat." Gefta Dei per
Francos, vol. i. 4p. 2.

HAVING thus colleced the chief regulations which

custom had efiablilled concerning the right and exercise
of private war, I shall enumerate in chronological order
the various expedients employed to abolish or restrain
this fatal custom. i. The first expedient employed by
the civil magilirate in order to set some bounds to the
violence of private revenge, was fixing by law the fine
or composition to be paid for each different crime. The
illjured person was originally the sole judge concerning
the nature of the wrong which he had suffered, the de-
gree of vengeance which he should exac, as well as
tile species of atonement or reparation with which he
fiould reft satisfied. Resentment became of course as
implacable as it was fierce. It was often a point of
honour not to forgive, nor to be reconciled. This made
it necessary to fix those compositions which make so great
a figure in the laws of barbarous nations. The nature
of crimes and offences was estimated by the magistrate,
and the fum due to the person offended was ascertained
with a minute, and often a whimsical accuracy. Ro-
tharis, the legislator of the Lombards, who reigned about
the middle of the seventh century, discovers his inten-
tion both in ascertaining the composition to be paid by
the offender, and in increasing its value; it is, fays he,
that the enmity may be extingnifhed, the prosecution
may cease, and peace may be restored. Leg. Langob.
lib. i. tit. 7. 10o.-2. About the beginning of the ninth
century, Charlemagne firuck at the root of the evil,
and enaaed, "( That when any person had been guilty
of a crime, or had committed an outrage, he {hould im-
mediately submit to the penance which the church im-
pofied, and offer to pay the composition which the law
prescribed; and if the injured person or his kindred
should refute to accept of this, and presume to avenge
themselves by force of arms, their lands and properties
should be forfeited. Capitul. A. D. 802. edit. Baluz.
vl. i. 371.-3. But in this, as well as in other regu-
lations, the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the
spirit of his age. The ideas of his contemporaries con-
cerning regular government were too imperfe&, and
their manners too fierce to submit to this law. Private
wars, with all the calamities which they occasioned,

became

became more frequent than ever after the death of that
great monarch. His fucceflors were unable to reftr.,i;
them. The church found it neccffary to interpic
The moq early ot these interpositions now extan, ,
towards the end of the tenth century. In the year .-
several bithops in the south of France assembled, ,l'
publithed various regulations, in order to set rome boauti,
to the violence and trequency of private wars; if any
person within their dioceffes ihould venture to tranfcref.
they ordained that he lhould be excluded fron a!l Cihr::
tian privileges during his life, and be denied Chriiiial
burial after his death. Du Mont Corps Diploma-iquc,
tom. i. p. 41. There, however, were only part:al
remedies; and therefore a council was held at Linoae.,
A. l). 994. The bodies of the faint-, according to tne
custom of those ager, were carried thither; and by thcle
sacred relicks men were exhorted to lay down their arm-,
to extinguilh their animofities, and to swear that they
would no' for the future violate the publick peace by
their private hoflilities. Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. vol.
x. p. 49, 147. Several other councils issued decrees to
the fame effet. Du Cange Difiert. 343.-4. But the
authority of councils, how venerable soever in those aRe,
was not sufficient to abolish a custom which flattered the
pride of the nohle,, and gratified their fav'.urite palions.
The evil grew so intolerable, that it became necefliry to
employ supernatural means for fupprefling it. A bithop
of Aquitaine, A. D. 1032, pretended that an angel had
appeared to him, and brought him a writing from heaven,
enjoining men to cease from their hoftilitie1, and to I
reconciled to each other. It was during a season of pib-
lic calamity that he puhlifhed thi. revelation. The
minds of men were dilpofed to receive such pious im-
pretlions; and willing to perform any thing in order to
avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace and ce:i-
tion from holtilitie took place, and continued for seven
vear ; and a resolution was formed that no man shotld
in times to come attack or molest his adversaries during
the fiafion, ret apart for celebr:ting the great feflival, of
the church. or from the evening of Thursday in each
week to the morning of Monday in the week enili-
ing, the intervening days beine confidered as particu-
laly ho!y, our Lord's Paflion having happened on one
of thlee drys, and his Rclilrretion on another. A

change

change in the dispositions of men so sudden, and which
produced a resolution so unexpected, was conlidered as
miraculous; and the respite from holtilities which fl-
lowed upon it, was called The Truce of God. Glaber.
Roduihus Hillor. lib. v. up. Bouquet. vol. x. p 59.
This, from being a regulation or concert in one king-
dom, became a general law in Christendom, and was
confirmed by the authority of the Pope, and the vio!a-
ters were fubjeaed to the penalty of excommunication.
Corpus Jur. Canon. Decretal. lib. i. tit. 34. c. 1. Du
Cange Gloffar. voc. Treuga. An act of the council of
Toulujes in RoulTillon, A. D. 1i41, containing all the
flipulations required by the truce of God, is pubiifhed
by Dom de Vie & Dom Vaiflette Hill. de Languedoc,
torn. ii. Preuves, p. 206. A ceflation from hostilities
during three comp!eat days in every week, allowing
such a considerable space for the passions of the anta-
gonifts to cool, and for the people to enjoy a respite
fro.n the calamities of war, as well as to take mea-
fures for their own security, that, if this truce of God
had been exatly obierved, it muff have gone far to-
wards putting an end to private wars. This, however,
teems not to have been the care; the noblec, difre-
garding the truce, prosecuted their quarrels without i.i-
terruption as formerly. Qua nimirum tempeflate, uni-
verfic provinciae adeo devaftationis continuz importu-
nitate inquietantur, ut ne ipfa, pro obfe vatione divinae
pacis, profefia facramenta cuft,:diantur. Abbas UJper-
genfis apud Datt de pace imperil publica, p. 13. No 35.
The violent spirit of the nobility coulld not be restrain-
ed by any engagement. . The complaints of this were
frequent; and bishops in order to compel them to re-
new their vows and promise; ot ceasing fro:n their pri-
vate wars, were obliged to enjoin their clergy to luf-
pend the performance of divine fcrvice, and the exer-
cife of any religious function wizhiin the parishes of such
as were refractory and obstinate. Hilt. de Langued.
par. D D). de ic & Vailfete, torn. ii. Preuves, p.
t18.--5. The people, cac;r to o;btain relief fiorn
their sufferings, called in a I'tco.id time a pre-
tended revelation to their aid. I'owadid the end
of the twelfth century, a carpenter in Guienne
gave out that Jesus Chrilt, to;,;her with the liflied

Vigin,

Virgin, had appeared to him, and having commanded
him to exhort mankind to peace, had given him, as a
proof of his miflion, an image of the Virgin hol(lin,
her son in her arms, with this infcrition, La;lb /,
God, who takeft away the fins of the woId, give h,
peace. Th'is low fanatick addressed himfcf to an i':.
norant age, prone to credit what was marvellous. ie
was received as an inspired messenger of God. Mal;.
prelates and barons aflembled at Puy, and took an
oath, not only to make peace with all their own ene-
mies, but to attack such as refused to lay down their
arms, and be reconciled to their enemies. They form.ce
an afuociation for this purpose, and af;umed the h(-
nourable name of the Brotlherhoodof God. Robertus de
Monte Michacle ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. tom. i. Or-
don. p. 29. But the influence of this fuperflitious ter-
ror or devotion was not of long continuance.-6. The
civil magiflrate was obliged to exert his authority in
order to check a custom which threatened the difi-u
lution of government. Philip Augustus, as some ima-
gine, or St. Louis, as is more probable, publithcd a:
ordonance, A. D. 1245, prohibiting any person to corn-
mence hofti ities against the friends and vassals of his
adversary, until forty days after the commifflion of the
crime or offence which gave rife to the quarrel; de-
claring, that if any man presumed to tran(grels this
flatute, he should be confidered as guilty of a breach of
public peace, and be tried and puniffcd by the judge
ordinary as a traitor. Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This
was called the Royal Truce, and afforded time for the
violence of resentment to subside, as well as leisure for
the good offices of such as were willing to compose
the difference. The happy effeEts of this regulation
seem to have been considerable, if we may judge from
the Solicitude of succeeding monarchs to enforce it. -
7. In order to restrain the exercise of private war flill
farther, Philip the Fair, towarls the close of the fame
century, A. D. 1 296 publilhed an ordonance command-
ing all private hbftilitiec to ce 'e, while he was engaged
in war agaiift ihe enenies of the Itate. Ordon. tom. i.
p. 328, 390. '1'his regulation, which seems to be al-
moll essential to the existence and preservation of focicty,
was often renewed by his fucceflhrs, and being
enforced by the regal authority, proved a confiderab'c
check to the detruclive contelts of the nobles. -
Both there rcgulaiul;s, introduced first in France,
Wcre adopted by tie ot.er nations in Europe. -

8. The

8. The evil, however, was so inveterate, that it did not
yield to all these remedies. No sooner was publick peace
cfablifhed in any kingdom, than the barons renewed their
private hostilities. They not only firuggled to maintain this
pernicious right, but to secure the exercise of it without
any restraint. Upon the death of Philip the Fair, the
nobles of different provinces in France formed associations,
and presented remonfirances to his successor, demanding
the repeal of several laws, by which he had abridged the
privileges of their order. Among there, the right of pri-
vate war is always mentioned as one of the moil valuable;
and they claim, that the restraint imposed by the truce of
God, the royal truce, as well as that arising from the
ordonance of the year 1296, should be taken off. In some
instances, the two sons of Philip who mounted the throne
successively eluded their demands; in others, they were
obliged to make concessions. Ordon. tom. i. p. 551, 557,
561, 573. The ordonances to which I here refer, are of
fuh length that I cannot insert them, but they are extreme-
ly curious, and may be peculiarly inftrutive to an English
reader, as they throw considerable light on that period of
English hiflory in which the attempts to circurnfcribe the
regal prerogative were carried on, not by the people firug-
gling for liberty, but by the nobles contending for power.
It is not neceflary to produce any evidence of the continu-
ance and frequency of private wars under the fuccelfors of
Philip the Fair.---9. A pra&ice somewhat similar to the
royal truce was introduced, in order to strengthen and
extend it. Bonds of assurance, or mutual security, were
demanded from the parties at variance, by which they
obliged themselves to abflain from all hoflilities, either
during a time mentioned in the Bond, or for ever; and
became subjea to heavy penalties, if they violated this
ohligation. These bonds were sometimes granted volun-
tarily, but more frequently exaaed by the authority of the
civil magifirate. Upon a petition from the party who
felt himself weakest, the magifirate summoned his ad-
verfary to appear in court, and obliged him to give a bond
of afTurance. If, after that, he committed any farther
holililics, he became filhje& to all the penalties of trea-
sOn. This restraint on private war was known in the age
of St. Louis. Ef.abliffemens, liv. i. c. 28. It was fre-
quent in Bretagne, and what is very remarkable, such
bonds of assurance were given mutually between vassals
and the lord of whom they held. Oliver de Clifton grants

VOL. I. P one

one to the Duke of Bretagnc, his sovereign. Morice
Mem. pour fervir de preuves a I'hift. de Bret. tom. . p.
846. ii. p. 371. 'Many examples of bonds of aflurance in
otl'er provinces of France are colleced by Brufiel. tom. ii.
p. 856. The nobles of Burgundy remonfiratcd againll
this practicc, and obtained exemption from it as an en-
croachment on the privileges of their order. Ordon. torn.
i. p. 558. This mode of lecurity was firfl introduced in
citics, and tie good effects of it having been felt there,
was extended to the nobles. See Note XVI'. . 'I i!e
calamities occasioned by private wars, became at fonme
times to intolerable, that the nobles entered into voluntary
aflociations, binding themtlelves to refer all matters in difl
pute, whether conccrning civil property, or points of ho-
nour, to the determination of the majority of the aiToci-
ates. Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a l'hift. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. 728.- I I. But all these expedients proving
incffecual, Charles VI. A. D. 1413, issued an ordonance
exprefly prohibiting private wars on any pretext whatio-
ever, with power to the judge ordinary to compel all per-
sons to comply with this injunction, and to punish fich as
flould prove refiratory or disobedient, by imprisoning
their persons, leizing their goods, and appointing the of-
ficers of jufice, Mancurs & Gafteurs, to live at free
quarters on their eflate. If those who were disobedient to
this edia could not be personally arrelted, he appointed
their friends and vassals to be seized, and detained until
they gave surety for keeping the peace; and he abohlhed
all laws, customs, or privileges which might be pleaded
in opposition to this ordonance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138.
How flow is the progrels of reason and of civil order!
Regulations which to us appear to equitable, obvious, and
simple, required the efforts of civil and ecclefiaflical au-
thority, during several certuries, to introduce and cl-
tablifh them. Even poflerior to this period, Louis XI.
was obliged to abolish private wars in Dauphine, by a par-
ticular edi&, A. D. 1451. Du Canpe dliffrct. p. 348.

THIS note would swell to a dilfpoportiotial bulk, if I

should attempt to enquire wilh the tame minute attentibn
into the progrcfs of this pernicious cuflom in the othier
countries of Europe. In England, the ideas of the
Saxons concerning personal revenge, the right of private
wars, and the composition due to the party offended, let I1
to have been much the fame with those which prevailed on
the continent. The law of Ina de Vindicantibut, in the

eighth

tiChlh century, Iamb. p. 3; those of Edmund in the
tentil century, cl bhomricidi, Lamb. p. 72. & deinimicitiis,
p. 76; and those of Edward the ContelTor, in the eleventh
celtury, de ti'mptrilus C ditbus pacis, or Treuga Dei,
Xarmnb. p. 126, are perftdLly similar to the ordonances of
I;I French Kings their contemporaries. The laws of
Edwvard, de pare Ircdis, are fill more explicit than those of
tlie French Monarchs, and by several provisions in them,
dilcover that a more perfet police was eflablifhed in En-
rltind at that period. Lamb.ird. p. 128. fol. verf. Even
:ilcr ihe conqufel, private wars, and the regulations for
revcnting them, were not altogether unknown, as ap-
pears irom Madox Formulare Anglicanum, No. CXLV.
.,!d fron the extracs fromi Domeldlay Book, published by
(G.ic Scriptores hifl. Britan. p. 759, 777. The well
known claule in the form of an English inditment, which,
:! an aggravation of the criminal's guilt, mentions his
having aflaulted a pcrfon, who was in the peace of God
and of the King, seems to be borrowed from the Treuga
or Par Dei and the Pax Regis which I have explained.
But after the conquefl, the mention of private wars
among the nobility, occurs more rarely in the English his-
tory, than in that of any other European nation, and no
I.a s concerning them are to be found in the body of their
flatutes. Such a change in their own manners, and such
a variation from thole of their neighbours is remarkable.
Il it to be ascribcd to the extraordinary power which Wil-
lim the Norman acquired by right of conquefi, and tranf-
ml:ted to his successors, which rendered the execution of
jullice more vigorous and dccifive, and the jurifdition of
the King's court more extensive than under the monarchs
on the continent ? Or, was it owing to the settlement of
the Normans in England, who having never adopted the
p;iaice of private war in their own country, abolished it
in the kingdom which they conquered ? It is aferted in an
o0'l;iance of John King of F ance, that in all times
P ' persons of everv rank in Normandy have been pro-
lri!cl to sage var, and the practice has been deemed
unlaw\l l. Ordn. tiom. ii. p. 407. If this faE were cer-
ti'I, it wruld go far towards explaining the peculiarity
S'hiah I !'.avc menlioned. But as there are Come Fnglifh
Ads ot Parliament, which, according to the remark of
the learned author of the Obh/rvations on the Statutes,

,; yv the more. ancient, which recite falfhoods, it may be
aided, that this is not peculiar to the laws of that coun-

P 2 try.

try. Notwithltanding the positive assertion contained in
this publick law of France, there is good realon for ccn-
fidering it as a flatute which recites a falfhood. T-his,
however, is not the place for difciliing that point. It is
an inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of an English anti-
quarian.

IN Calliie, the pernicious practice of private war pre.

vailed, and wis :ilithorLtled by the cuofoms and law of the
kingdoin. Lr.ees ''auri. tit. 76. curn commentario Antin.
Gomez.i, p. 5 sI As the Caflilian nobles were no lets
turbulent :.an p vwerful, their quarrels and hostilities in-
volved their country in many calamities. Innumerable
proofs of this occur in Mariana. In Aragon, the right of
private revenge was likewise authorised by law; exercietd
in its full extent, and accrmpanied with the fame unhappy
confcquen-ces. I-leron. Blanca Comment. de rebus Arag.
ap. Schotti. Hifpan. illufirat. vol . ii. p 733. Iex Jacobi
1. A D. 1747. Fueros & Obtervancias del Reyno de
Aragon, lib. ix. p. 182. Several confederacies between
the Kings of Aragon and their nobles, for the refloring
of peace, founded on the truce of God, are fill extant.
Petr. de Marca. Marca fivi Limes Hispanic. App. 1303,
1388, 1428. As early as the year i165, we find a com
bination of the King and court of Aragon, in order to
abolish the right of private war, and to punish those who
presumed to claim that privilege. Anales de Aragon por
Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil was so inveterate, tlat
Charles V. A. D. 159, was obliged to publish a law,
enforcing all former regulations tending to suppress this
praEice. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lombards, and other northern nations who set.

tled in Italy, introduced the lame maxims concerning the
right of revenge in that country, and these were followed
by the fame effcAs. As the proFrefs of the evil mwa per-
sealy similar to what happened in France, the expedients
employed to check its career, or to extirpate it finally, re-
fembled those which I have enumerated. Murat. Ant.
Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany, the disorders and calamities occasioned by

the right of private war, were greater and more intole-
rable than any in other country of Europe. The Imperial
authority was so much ihaken and enfeebled by the vio-
lence of the civil wars, excited by the contefls between
the Popes and the Emperors of the Franconian and Sua-
bian lines, that not only the nobility but the cities acquired

almoit

almost independent power, and scorned all rubordination
and obedience to the laws. The frequency of thefefaide
or private wars, are often mentioned in the German an-
nals, and the fatal cffeAs of them are mofi pathetically
delcribed. Datt. de pace Imper. pub lib. i. cap. v. no. 3o.
& palim. The Germans early adopted the Treug:i Dei,
which was first established in France. This, however,
proved but a temporary and ineffetiual remedy. 'The
disorders multiplied so salt, and grew to enormous, that
tl-ev threatened the dissolution of society, and compelled
the Germans to have recoutfe to the only remedy of the
evil, viz. an absolute prohibition of private wars. The
Emperor William published ihis edia to this purpole, A. D.
125 5, an hundred and sixty years previous to the ordonance
of Charles VI. in France. Datt. lib. i. cap. 4. n'. 20. But
neither he nor his fiocceffors had authority to secure the
o!fervance of it. This gave rife to a pracice in-Ger-
many, which conveys to us a firiking idea bothl of the in-
tolerable calamities occasioned by private war,, and of the
feebleness of government during the twelfth and thirteenth
centuries. The cities and nobles entered into alliances and
associations, by which they bound themselves to maintain
the publick peace, and to make war on such as should
violate it. This was the origin of the lague of the Rhine,
of Suabia, and of many smaller confederacies diftinguifli-
ed by various names. The rife and beneficial effecs ot
these associations are traced by Datt with great accuracy.
Whalever degree of publick peace or of regular admini-
firation, was preserved in the Empire from the beginning
of the twelfth century to the close of the fifteenth, Ger-
many owes to these leagues. During that period, politi-
cal order, refpea tor the laws, together with the equal
adminiltration of juflice, made cnnfiderable progress in
Germany. But the final and perpetual abolition of the
right of private war was not actompli(hed until A. D.
1495. The Imperial authority was by that time more
firmly established, the ideas of men with rcfpet to go-
eernment and subordination were become more jnlf. That
barbarous and pernicious privilege which the nobles had to
l0ng poffelsed, was declared to be incompatible with the
happiness and existence of society. In order to terminalt
any differences which might arise among the various num-
bers of the Germanick body, the Imperial chamber wab
inflituted with supreme jurisdiction, to judge without ap-
peal in every quefiion brought before it. 'hat court has

P 3 fubfilfed

subsisted since that period, forming a very rcfpeaable tri-
bunal, of essential importance in the German confittu.
tion. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v. Pfeffel abreg6 de l'Hifloire du
Droit, &c. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. SECT. I.p. 56. [Y]

IT would be tedious and of little use to enumerate the

various modes of appealing to the jufticeof God, which
fuperftirion introduced during the ages of ignorance. I
shall mention only one, bccaufe we have an account of it
in a placitum or trial in the pretence of Charlemagne, from
which we may learn the imperfea manner in which jus.
tice was administered even during his reign. In the year
775, a contefl arose between the bishop of Paris and the
abbot of St. Denys, concerning the propelty of a Im'il
abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds and records, in or-
der to prove the right to be in them. Inflead of trying the
authenticity, or confidcring the import of there, the point
was referred to thec jrdicium crrcis. - Fach produced a prr-
son, who, during the celebration of mats, flood before
the cross with his arms expanded; and he whose reprefin-
tative firfl became wearys, and altered his posture, loft the
cause. The person employed by the bishop on this o(ca-
sion, had less .trenith or spirit than his adversary, and thc
queflion was decided in favour of the abbot. Mabillon tie
re Diplomat. lib. vi. p. 498. If a Prince so enlightened is
Charlemagne countenanced such an absurd mode of (Icci-
sion, it is no wonder that other monarchs fhotild tolerate it
so long. M. de Montcfquieu has treated of the trial by
judicial combat at considerable length. The two talents
which diftinuiifh that illuflrious author, industry in ta-
cing all the circumflances of ancient and obfcurc inflitutions,
and sagacity in penetrating into the causes and princil,!ct
which contributed to eflablith them, are equally confpi-
cuous in his observations on this subjec&. To there I reftr
the reader, as they contain molf of the principles by which
I have endeavoured to txplain this prascice. De l'Efpirt
des Loix, lih. xxviii. It seems to he probable from tllc
remarks of M. de 1\Montesquieu, as well as from the fa.s
produced hv Muratori, tom iii l)ifcrt. xxxviii. that the
appeals to the juf(ice of God hy the experiments with fire
and water, &c. were practised by the people who flctlcd
in the different provinces of the Roman Empire, before
they had recourse to the judicial combat. The judicial

combat.

combat, however, was the molt ancient mode of termi-
alting any controversy among the barbarous nations in
tleir original !ettlements. This is evident from TVllcius.
Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 118. who informs us, that all qliefti-
ons which were decided among the Romans by legal trial,
were terminated among the Germans by arms. The fanme
thing appears in the ancient laws and cufloms of the
Swedes, quoted by Jo. 0. Stiernhook de Ture Sueonum
& Gothorum vetuflo. 4to. Holnlic, 1682. lib. i. c. 7.
It i~ probable, that when the various tribes which invaded
tlhw Impire were converted to Chriflianity, the repug-
nince of the custom of allowing judicial combats to the
precepts of religion, was so glaring, that, for feme time,
t was abolifiled, and by degrees, several circumila)cce5
which I have mentioned, led them to resume it.

I-r seems likewi'e to be probable from a law quoted by

Sticrn6ooik in the treatise which I have mentioned, that
lic judicial combat was originally permitted, in older to
'L'ermine points refpeAing the personal charaEtcr or rc-
urtation of individuals, and was a'lterwards extendcd not
only to criminal cates, but to queflions concerning proper-
tv. The words of the law are, " if any man shall fas
to another there reproachful worez, " you are not a man
cquall to other men," or, " you have not the heart of a
man," and the other shall reply, " I am a man as good
a; you," let them meet on the highuay. If he who
si l gave offence appear, and the perlon offended ab!cnt
himself, let the latter he deemed worle than he .'a? called!;
let him not be admitted to give evidence in judgment,
either for man or woman, and let him not have the pri-
'ilege of making a teflament. If the perf n ofFend( d ap-
pear, and he who gave offence be ablent, let him call
upon the other thiice with a loud voice, and make a mark
upon the earth, and then let him wl.o absentcd him'clf,
be deemed infamous, hecaufe he uttered words whicll
he durlt not support. If both fliall appear properly arm.
el, and the person offended cliall fall in the conib:t, let a
hlalf compenlation be paid for his death. But if tle per-
lon who gave the offence fiall fall, let it be imputed to
lis own rashness. The petulance of his tongue haihli len
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without any co n-
penfation being demanded for his death." Lex Uplandica
ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial people were extremely ideli-
cite with refpec to every thing that aflfced their repu-
tatlin as soldiers. By tle laws of the Salians, if any mln

P 4 called

called another a bare, or accused him of having left his
shield in the field of battle, he was ordained to pay a large
fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4. 6. By the law of the
Lombards, if any one called another arga, i. e. a good for
nothing fellow, he might immediately challenge him to
combat. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. v. § I. By the law of
the Salians, if one called another cenitus, a term of re-
proach equivalent to arga, the fine which he was bound to
pay was very high. Tit. xxxii. § I. Paulus Diaconus
relates the violent impression which this reproachful ex-
preflion made upon one of his countrymen, and the fatal
effe&s with which it was attended. De Geftis Longobard.
lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas concerning the point of
honour, which we are apt to confider as a modern refine-
ment, as well as the pracice of duelling, to which it gave
rife, are derived from the notions of our anceflors, wh:le
in a (late of society very little improved.

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this subjet did not

lead him to confider every circumflance relative to judicial
combats, I (hall mention bome particular fats neceflary for
the illufiration of what I have said with refpe& to them.
A remarkable inRfance occurs of the decision of an abflra&
point of law by combat. A queflion arose in the tenth
century concerning the right of representation, which was
not then fixed, though now universally eflablifhed in every
part of Europe. " It was a matter of doubt and dilpute
(faith the hiflorian) whether the sons of a son ought to be
reckoned among the children of the family, and succeed
equally with their uncles, if their father happened to die
while their grandfather was alive. An affemblv was called
to deliberate (n this point, and it was the general opinion,
that it ought to be remitted to the examination and deci-
sion of judges. But the Emperor following a better
course, and desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided by battle
between two champions. He who appeared in behalf of
the right of children to represent their deceased father,
was vifaorious; and it was cflablifhed by a perpetual
decree, that they should hereafter share in the inheritance
together with their uncles. Wi;ickindus Corbeins, lib.
Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. Ordon. vol. i. p. xxxili.
If we can suppose the caprice of folly to lead men to any
aftion more extravagant than this, of fettling a point in
law by combat, it mull be that of referring the truth or
falsehood of a religious opinion, to be decided in the

fame

f.me manner. To the disgrace of human reason, it has
been capable even of this extravagance. A question was
aeitated in Spain in the eleventh century, whether the
l4iufarabic Liturgy and ritual which had been used in the
churches of Spain, or that approved of by the See of
Rome, which differed in many particulars from the other,
contained the form of worship, most acceptable to the
Deity. The Spaniards contended zeatoilfly for the ritual
of their anceflors. The Popes urged them to receive that
to which they had given their infallible fantion. A vio-
lent contest arose. The nobles proposed to decide the
controversy by the sword. The king approved of this
method of decision. Two knights in comrleat armour
entered the lifts. John Ruys de Matanca, the champion
of the Mufarabic Liturgy, was victoriou. But the
Queen and Archbishop of Toledo, who favoured the
other form, insisted on having the matter rubmitted to
another trial, and had interest enough to prevail in a re-
quefi, inconfiflent with the laws of combat, which being
confidered as an appeal to God, the dicifion ought to
have been acquiesced in as final. A great fire was kin-
dled. A copy of each Liturgy was cast into the flames.
It was agreed that the book which ftrod this proof, and
remained untouched, should be received in all the
churches of Spain. The Mufarabic Liturgy triumphed like-
wife in this trial, and if we may believe Roderigo de
Toledo, remained unhurt by the fire, when the other was
reduced to ashes. The Queen and Archbiflhop had power
or art sufficient to elude this decision also, and the use of
the Mufarabic form of devotion was permitted only in
certain churches. A determination no less extraordinary
than the whole tranfaCion. Re'dr. de Toledo, quoted by
P. Orleans, Hifi. de Revol. d'Ffpagne, tom. i. p. 217.
Mariana, lib. i. c. 18. vol. i. p. 378.-A rematkable proof
of the general use of trial by combat, and of the prc-
dilection for that mode of decision occurs in the laws of
the Lombards. It was a cuflom in the middle ages, that
any person might choose the law to which he would be fibh-
jected; and by the prescriptions of that law he was ob-
liged to regulate his tranfa(tions, without being bound to
comply with any pradice authorized by other codes of
law. Persons who had fubjeced themselves to the Roman
law, and adhered to the ancient jirifprudence, as far as
any knowledge of it was retained in those ages of igno-
rance, were exempted from paying any regard to the

torms

forms of proceedings eflablifhed by the laws of the Btir-
gundians, Lombardb, and other barbarous people. But
the Emperor Otho, in direa contradiction to this received
maxim, ordained, " That all persons, under whatever
law they lived, even although it were the Roman las\;
ihould be bound to conform to the edits concerning the
trial bv combat." Lee. Longob. lib. ii. tit. 55. § 38.
While the judicial combat lubfifled, proof by charters,
contracs, or other deeds, became ineffecdual; and wven
this species of evide nce, calculated to render the procetd-
insr of courts certain and decisive, was eluded. When a
charter or other infIrument was produced by one of the
parties, his opponent might challenge it, affirm that it
was false and orged, and offer to prove this by combat.
Leg. Longob. ib. § 34. It is true, that among the rea-
sons enumerated by Beaumanoir, on account of which
judges might refuse to permit a trial by combat, one is,

If the point in contefi can be clearly proved or afccr-

tained by other evidence." Couft. de Beauv. ch. 63. p.
323. But that regulation removed the evil only a fincle
flep. For the party wIho lufpected that a witness was
about to depose in a manner unfavourable to his caule,
might accuse him of being suborned, give him the lie, and
challenge him to combat; if the witness was vanquifh(d
in hattle, no other evidence was admitted, and the party
by whom he was summoned to appear loft his cause. Leg.
Baiv.r. tit. 16.§ 2. Leg. Burgund. tit. 45. Beauman. ch.
6i. p. 3t5. The reason given for obliging a witness to
accept of a defiance, and to defend himlelf bv combat, is
remarkable, and contains the fame idea which is fill the
foundation of what is called the point of honour; " for
it is jufr, that if any one affirms that he perfecAly knovs
the truth of any thing, and offers to give oath upon it,
that he should not hesitate to maintain the veracity of his
affirmation in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45.

THAT the trial by judicial combat was eflablifhed in

every country of Europe, is a fat well known, and re-
quires no proof. That this mode of decision was fre-
cquent, appears not only from the codes of ancient laws
which eflablifhed it, but from the earliest writers con-
cerning the practice of law in the different nations of Fu-
rope. They treat of this custom at great length; they
enumerate the regulations concerning it with minute ac-
curacy; and explain them with much folicilude. It
made a capital and extcnfive article in jurisprudence.

There

'I'ere is not any one subject in their system of law which
Beatumanoir, Defontaines, or tlhe compilers of the Affifes
,c ]erufalem seem to have confidered as of greater impor-
tance; and none on which they have btflo\ved so much
ai(tnlion. 'The fame obfcrvation will hold wi'h retpeat
to the early auihors of other nations. It appears from
Madox, that trials of this kind were so frequent in T:ng-
Ion'd, that fines, paid on these ocac:ifions, made no incon-
tiii.ralble branch of the King's revenue. Hill. of the

xchlieq. vol. i. p. 349. A very curious account of a ju-
dicial comibat between Mefirc Robert de Beaumanoir,
and lMefire Pierre tIournemine, in pretence (f the duke
of Bretagne, A. D. I38:, is publilhed by Mlaurice Mt. n.
pour fervir de preuvcs a i'hill. de Brciagne, tom. ii. p.
498. All the formalities ob!erved in such cxtraordinary
proceedings are there difcribed more minutely, than in
:iny ancient monument which I have had an opportunity
of confidering. Tournemine was acculed by BIaiimanoir
of having hnurdered lhis brother. The former was van-
quillied, but was saved from being hanged tpon the spot,
by the generous interceflon of his antagonifl. A good
:ccount of the origin of the laws concerning judicial com-
hb, is published in the hiflory of Pavia, hy Bernardo
Sacci, lib. ix. c. 8. in Graxv. Thef. Antiquit. Iral. vol. iii.
743.

THIS mode of trial was so accepta,!le, that ecclesia-

flicks, notwitliftanding the prohibitions of the church,
were constrained not only to connive at the practice, but
In anthorize it. A remarkable inflance of this is pro-
diccd by Pafquier Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 35(. 'The
abbot Witlikindu%, whose words I have produced in tlii
note, confidered tie determination of a point in law by
co(lmbat, as the belt and most honourable mode of decision.
In the year 978, a judicial combat was fought in the pre-
fclle of the Emperor Ilenry. The archbllhop Aldehbcit
advif(d him to terminate a contefl which had arisen hetwc.¢n
two noblemen of his court, hy this mode of decision.
'Ilie vanquished combatant, though a person of higtl
rank, was beheaded on the spot. Chronic. Ditmait
I pifc. Mlerh. chez Bouquet Recucil dcs Hist. tom. x. 1p.
121. Qujeftions concerning the property of churches and
inonafleries, were decided by combat. In the year 961,
a controversy concerning the church of St. Medard, vwhel
ther it belonged to the abbey of Beauliin, was terminated
by judicial combat. Bouquet Recucil des Hist. tom. ix.

p. 729.

p. 729. Ibid. p. 6i2. &c. The emperor Henry I. de-
clares, that his law authorising the pratice of judicial
combats, was enated with content and applause of many
faithful bilhops. Ibid. p. 231. So remarkably did the
martial ideas of thole ages prevail over the genius and
maxims of the canon law, which in other instances had
such credit and authority with ecclefiafticks. A judicial
combat was appointed in Spain, by Charles V. A. D.
1522. The combatants fought in the Emperor's pre-
fence, and the battle was conducted with all the rites pre-
fcribed by the ancient laws of chivalry. The whole tranf-
a&ion is described at great length by Pontus Heuterus ecr.
Aufiriac. lib. viii. c. I 7. p. 205.

THE last instance which occurs in the history of France,

of a judicial combat authorired by the magistrate, was the
famous one between M. Jarnac and M. de la Chaiftaigne.
rie, A.D. 1547. A trial by combat was appointed in
England, A. D. 1571. under the infpetion of the judges
in the court of common pleas; and though it was not car-
ried to the fame extremity with the former, Queen Fli-
zabeth having interposed her authority, and enjoined the
parties to compound the matter, yet in order to preserve
their honour, the lifts were marked out, and all the forms
previous to the combat were observed with much ceremo-
ny. Spelm. Gloss. voc. Campus, p. 103. In the year
1631. a judicial combat was appointed between Donald
Lord Rea, and David Ramfav, Efq; by the authority of
the Lord high Conflable, and Earl Marthal of Fngland;
but that qularrel likewise terminated without bloodlhed,
being accommodated by Charles 1. Another instance oc-
curs seven years later. Ruflworth in Observations on
the Statutes, &c. p. 266.

NOTE XXIII. SECT. I. p. 62. [Z]

THE text contains the great outlines which mark the

course of private and public jnrifdiaion in the several na-
tions of Europe. I shall here follow more minutely the
various fleps of this progress, as the matter is curiou, and
important enough to merit this attention. The payment
of a fine by way of fatisfascion to the person or family in-
jured, was the first device of a rude people, in order to
check the career of private resentment, and to extinguish
those Jaide, or deadly feuds which were prosecuted
among them with the utmolt violence. This cuRlom

may

may be traced back to the ancient Germans. Tacit. de
Morib. Ger. c. 21. and prevailed among other uncivilized
nations. Many examples of this are colleEted by the in-
g nious and learned author of Hiltorical Law-Tlraas, vol.
i. p 41. T1hese fines were ascertained and levied in three
different manners. At first they were fettled by voluntary
agreement between the parties at variance. When their
rage began to subside, and they felt the bad effecs of
their continuing in enmity, they came to terms of con-
cord, and the fatisfadion made was called a compofitiot,
implying that it was fixed by mutual consent. De l'Efprit
de, Loix, lib. xxx. c. 19. It is apparent from some of
the more ancient codes of laws, that when these were
compiled matters fill remained in that simple Rlate. In
certain cafes, the person who had committed an offence
was left exposed to the resentment of those whom he had
injured, until he should recover their favour, quoqto mo-.
do potuerit. Lex Frifion. tit. i . §. i. Tle next mode
of levying there fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem amicabilis com-
pofitor. lib. I I. c. 4. §. io. He could estimate the degree
of offence with more impartiality than the parties inte-
refted, and determine with greater quity what fatisfaEi-
on ought to be demanded. It is difficult to bring an au-
thentic proof of a cuflom previous to the records preferv-
ed in any nation of .urope. But one of the Formulae
Andegavenfes compiled in the sixth century, seems to al-
lude to a tranfation carried on not by the authority of a
judge, but by the mediation of arbiters. Bouquet Re-
cucil des Hiftor. torn. iv. p. 566. But as an arbiter
wanted authority to enforce his decisions, judges were ap-
pointed with compulsive power to oblige both parties to
acquiesce in their decisions. Previous to this last ftep, the
expedient of paying compositions was an imperfec reme-
dy against the pernicious effeEts of private resentment.
As soon as this important change was introduced, the ma-
giflrate, putting himself in place of the person injured, as-
certained the composition with which he ought to reft fa-
tisfied. Every poflible injury that could occur in the
course of human society, was confidered and eltimated,
and the compositions due to the person aggrieved were
fixed with such minute attention as discovers, in molt
cafes, amazing discernment and delicacy, in some inflan-
ces, unaccountable caprice. Besides the composition pay-
able to the private party, a certain fum, called afreduin,

was

was paid to the King or slate, as Tacitus exprelTs it, or
to the fil us, in tlle language of the barb:rous lax\s
Some au.hors, blending the refined ideas of modern poi;-
cy with their reaionings concerning ancient trarn'laioi,,
have imagined that the fredumn was a compensation (!lc
to the connmunitv, on acconiit ot the violation of the
publick peace. 13ut it is manifeflly the price paid to the
magifriaic fr the protecion which he afforded aiainlt
the iolence of icllcltment. T'he eniacing of this was a
confici.'able llp tlowiards improvemcnt in criminal jir-:!

Cpi .

'n e. In loie 't tle more ancient codes of 1.t,,,

ihe /;-,a are lto-,-r

a llher omittead, or to seldom mentioinci,

li:at it is evident tley weie but little known. In the lat-
ter ((ides the i ed(uin is as preciftly specified as the compo-
iltion. In comireon ca;cs it was equal to *he third part of
the composition. C:piltul vol. i. p. 52. In some extra-
firdinary ca!cs, where it wna more dflTicult to protect the
p';rfcn who had committed violence, the fredum was
aumltented. Capittil. vul. i. p. 515. Tl:ee trtda mai'de
a confidcrable branch in the revenues ot the barons; and
wherever territorial jurifidictlin w as granted, the ro\al
judges were prolihittd from levying any freda. In cx-
plai:ing tht na:ure of the fredum, I have followed, in a
grea:t reaftire, the opinion of Mi. de Monte!qicu, thougli
I know that fever.; learned antiquarians have taken t'e
word in a different fenle. De l'E'prlt des Loix, lib. xxx.
c. 20, &c. The great olijet of judges was to compel
the one party to give, and the other to accept the latiC-
fation prescribed. They multiplied regu .:,ions to this
purpose, and enlorced them by grievous penalties. - .eg.
,ongrob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 3. Ib. tit. 37. § I, 2. Capritl.
0ol. i. . 3 71. § 22. Tlhe pcrlbn who receivel a compofi-
tion wat obliged io cease from all farther hostility, and
to confnirn his reconciliation witlh the adverse party by an
oath. Leg. Longoh. lib. tii 9. § 8. AR an addional
and more permnanent evidence of reconciliation, he was
rtquirtd to grant a bond of tfcurity to the perlon from
whom he rcc.ivrd a composition, ahfolving him from all
farther profecurion. M\.larulfts and the other collectors
of ancient writs have prelcrvcd several different so ins of
stich bonds. iatic. lib. Ii. § iS append. § 23. Form.
Sirmrc.ndicra, 39. ' he l,'tJ,'rs o/ Slanes, known in the
law of Se'lland, are l'ericd'ly similar to there bonds of
fectiti '. By the le:lc;.s of Slanes, the heirs and relations
of a pcrfon who had been murdered, bound themilves,

in

n consideration of an Ajythment or composition paid to
them, to forgive, pals over, and for ever forget, and in
oblivion inter all rancour, malice, revenge, prejudice,
grudge and resentment, that they have or may conceive
,ilinf the aggressor or his posterity, for the crime which
ic had committed, and discharge him of all action, civil
or criminal, against him or his estate, for now and ever.
syActm of Stiles by Dallas of St. Martin's, p. 862. In the
ancient form of letters of Slanes, the private party not
only forgives and forgets, but pardons and grants remiflion
of the crime. This pracice, Dallas, reasoning according
to the principles of hisown age, confiders as an encroach-
ment on the rights of sovereignty, as none, fays he, could
pardon a criminal but the king. Ibid. But in early and
rude times, the punishment, and the pardon of criminals,
were all deeds of the private person who was injured.
Miadox has published two writs, one in the reign of Fd-.
ward I. the other in the reign of Edward 1. by which
private persons grant a release or pardon of all trefpafTes,
felonics, robberies, and murders committed. Formul.
Anglican. No. 702, 705. In the lait of these instruments,
lome regard seems to be paid to the rights of the Sovercign,
for the pardon is granted en quant que en nous efl. Even
after the authority of the magiltrate is interposed in pu-
nifiling criminals, the punishment of criminals is long con-
fidered chiefly as a gratification to the resentment of the
persons who have been injured. In Persia a murderer is
isll delivered to the relations of the person whom he has
fain, who put him to death with their own hands. If
they refute to accept of a fum of money as a compenfati-
on, the sovereign, absolute as he is, cannot pardon the
murderer. Tavernier's Voyages, book v. c. 5 and io.
By a law in the kingdom of Aragon as late as the year
1 54, the punishment of one condemned to death cannot
he mitigated but by consent of the parties who have been
injiied. Fueros & Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon.
p. 204. 6.

IF, after all the engagements to cease from enmity,

which I have mentioned, any person renewed hostilities,
and was guilty of any violence, either towards the perlbn
fiom whom he had received a composition, or towards his
relations and heirs, this was deemed a most heinous crime,
and punished with extraordinary rigour. It was an at of
direct rebellion against the authority of the magifirate,
and was repressed by the interposition of all his power.

Leg.

Ieg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9. § 8, 34. Capit. vol. i. p. 371
§ 22. Thus the avenging ol injuries was taken out of pri.
vate h-.nds, a legal composition was eftablilhed, and peate
and amity were reflored under the infpetion, and by the
authority of a judge. It is evident, that at the time when
the barbarians lettled in the provinces of the Roman Em.
pire, they had fixed judges eflablifhed among them with
compullive authority. Persons vetled with this charader
are muntilm-td by the earliest hiflorians. Du Cange, voc.
'fudiccr. The light oft erritorial jurisdiction was not al:o.
gether an ufuilpation ot the feudal barons. There is good
rea'on to belhe\e that the powerful leaders who seized
difeirent diitricts of the countries which they conquerr,,
snd kept pofueflion of Illem as allodial property, assured
at the fame time lthe ritht ot jurildidcion, and txerciltf it
within their own territories. T'his jurildiction was fu-
vreme, anJ exiendt' d to all causes. 'Ihe clearest proofs
,f ;his arc produiced by M. 13ouquer. Le Droit publiqae
dl Francs !clairci, &c. tom. i. p. 206, &c. The plivilege
ofjudgi.ig l-is own vilafTls, appears to have been originally
a righit inherent in every baron who held a fief. As tar
btck ab tle arhlives of nations can conduct us with any
cert.intl, we find the jurifiliEtion and fief united. One
it' thi earliest charters to a lavman wlhich I have met
with, is that of Ludovicus Pius, A. D. 814. And it con-
tains the right of territorial jurilfdi.ion, in the most (Xprefs
and extensive terms. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 1405. There
are many charters to churches and monasteries of more
early ,'ate, containing grants of similar juri!didion, and
prohibiting any ro\al judge to epter the territories of tho'e
churches or monailerics, or to perform any at of judicial
autthority tlere. Bouquet. Recueil des Hid. tom. iv. p.
628, 631, 633. torn. v. p. 703, 71o, 752, 762. lu-
r;tori has pubtlilhed many very ancient charters containing
the fame immunities. Antiq. Ital. Dissert. Ixx. In molt
of there deeds, the exatAing of Freda is particulaily pro-
hibited, , hich shes s that they confiiti;td a valuable part
of the publick revenue at that junaure. The expence of
ob:tilnng a sentence in a coirt of juflice during the middle
ages was lo confidelahle, that this circumftancc alkne was
fiuflicient to render men unwilling to decide any contest in
judicial lorm. It appears from a charter in the :hirteenth
century, that the baron uho had the right of justice, re-
ceived the fifth part of the value of every subjet, the
property of which was tried and determined in his court.

If

f, after the commencement of a law-suit, the parties ter-
mnlated the cunteft in an amicable manner, or by arbi-
tration, they were nevertheless bound to pay the fifth part
of the subjec contested, to the court before which the suit
h.d been brought. Hist. de Dauphine. Geneve, 1722,
tio. i. p. 22. Similar to this is a regulation in the charter
of liberty granted to the town of Fiiburg, A. D. 1120.
If two of the citiz7ens shall quarrel, and if one of them
shall complain to the superior Lord or to his judge, and
:'aer commencing the suit (hall be privately reconciled to
his adverlary; the judge, if he does not approve of this
reconciliation, may compel him to infilt in his law-suit;
.nd all who were present at the reconciliation shall forfeit
ihe favour of the fupcrior Lord. Hifloria Zaringo Ba-
lcnlis. Auaor. Jo. Dan. Schocpflinus. Carolfr. 1765,
4 to. vol.. p. 55.

\VHIAT was the extent of that jurifdliction which those

w ho held fiefs poiTeffcd originally, we cannot now deter-
mine with certainty. It is evident that, during the difor-
ders which prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, the
pFeat vassals took advantage of the feebleness of their Mo-
n:rir(ts, and enlarged their jurifdiQions to the utmofft. As
early as the tenth century, the more powerful barons had
ii!urped the right of deciding all causes, whether civil or
criminal. They had acquired the High 7u/lice as well as
thcL w. Eftabl. de St. Louis, lib..i.. 24, 25. Their
sentences were final, and there lay no appeal from them to
any superior court. Several firiking inltances of this are
cGlleEed by Bruifel. Traite des Fiefs, liv. iii. c. 1 , 12,
13. Not satisfied with this, the more potent barons got
their territories erected into Regalities, with almost every
royal prerogative and jurifdiEtion. InMtances of these were
frequent in France. Bruff. ih. In Scotland, where the
power of the feudal nobles became exorbitant, they were
"'ry numerous. I-liltorical Law Tracs, vol. i. trac. vi.
IEven in England, though the authority of the Norman
Kings circumscribed the jurifdilion of the barons more
than in any feudal kingdom, several counties palatine were
eretcd, into which the king's judges could not enter, and
O1l writ could come in the King's name, until it received
the feal of the county palatine. Spelman. GlofT. voc. Co-
;n't,' Platini; Blacki;one's Commentaries on the Laws

., Lngland, vol. iii. p. 78. Tlhce lords of regalities had

a right to claim or rescue their vassals from the King's
utlges, if they atTumed any jurifdiEtion over them.
VoL.L C BruWrl

BruITel ubi supra. In the law of Scotland this privilege
was termed the right of repledgintr ; and the frequency 0o
it not only interrupted the course of justice,. but gave rile
to great disorders in the exerci e of it. Hill. Iaw Tract
ib. The jurifdidion of the counties palatine was produc.
tive of like inconveniencies in England.

THE remedies provided by Princes againfl the bad es.

seas of there usurpations were various, and gradually ap-
plied. Under Charlemagne and his immediate dleiern.
dants, the regal prerogative still retained great vigour,
and the Duces, Comitrs, and Mist Dominici, the former
of whom were ordinary and fixed judges, the latter extra-
ordinary and itinerant judges, in the different provinces of
their extensive dominions, exercised a jurifdiaion co-ordi.
nate with the barons in some cafes, and superior to them
i'n others. Du Cange voc. Dur, Comites & A liMi. vMu
rat. Antiq. Dissert. viii. & ix. But under the feeble race cc
Monarchs who succeeded them, the authority of the ro,-
al judges declined, and the barons usurped that unlimited
jurifdi&ion which has been delcribed. Louis VI. o0
France attempted to revive the function of the Mijf Ds-
minici under the title of Juges des Exempts, but the ba-
rons were become too powerful to bear such an encroach-
ment on their jurifdi&ion, and he was obliged to desist from
employing them. Henaut. Abrege Chron. tom. ii. p. 73^.
His successors (as has been observed) had recourse to ex-
pedients less alarming. The appeal de defaute de Droil,
or on account of the refusal of juflice, was the firfi which
was attended with any considerable effet. According to
the maxims of feudal law, if a baron had not as many
vassals as enabled him to try by their peers, the parties
who offered to plead in his court, or if he delayed or re-
fused to proceed in the trial, the cause might be carried,
by appeal, to the court of the superior lord of whom the
baron held, and tried there. De I'Efprit des Loix, liv.
Xxviii. c. 28. Du Cange voc. defealus Juflitia. The
number of Peers or afTeflors in the courts of Barons was
frequently very considerable. It appears from a criminal
trial in the court of the viscount de Lautrec, A. D. 1299i
that upwards of two hundred persons were present, and
aflifted in the trial, and voted in pafling judgment. Hill
de Langued. par D. D. De Vic. & Vaifette, tom. 1i
Preuves, p. 114. As the right of jurifdi&ion had been
usurped by many inconsiderable barons, they were often
unable to hold courts. This gave frequent occasions t1

fucl

such appeals, and rendered the pracice familiar. By de-
grees, fiich appeals began to be taken from the courts of
the more powerful barons, and it is evident, from a deci-
sion recorded by Bruflel, that the royal judges were wil-
ling to give countenance to any pretext for them. Trait6
de, Fiels, tom. i. p. 235, 261. This species of appeal
had Iefs effec in abridging the jurisdiction of the nobles,
than the appeal on account of the injustice of the sentence.
When the feudal monarchs were powerful, and their
judges pofiTiTed exttenfie authority, such appeals seem to
have been frequent. Capitul. vol. i. p. 175, 180; and
they were made in a manner suitable to the rudeness of a
simple age. The persons aggrieved retorted to the palace
of their sovereign, and with outcries and loud noise called
to him for redress. Capitul. lib. iii. c. 59. Chronic.
Lawterbergienfe ap. Mencken. Script. German. vol. ii. p.
284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the appeals to the
fu/iiza or supreme judge were taken in such a form as
luppofed the appellant to be in immediate danger of death,
or of forne violent outrage; he rushed into the pretence
of the judge crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Fuerza,
Fucrza, thus imploring (as it were) the instant interposition
of that supreme judge in order to save him. Hier. Blanca
Comment. de rebus Aragon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Piftorii,
vol. iii. p. 753. The abolition of the trial by combat fa-
cilitated the revival of appeals of this kind. The effecs
of this subordination which appeals established, in intro-
ducing attention, equity, and consistency of decision into
courts of judicature, were soon conspicuous; and almoRt
all causes of importance were carried to be finally deter-
mined in the King's courts. Bruffel, tom. i. 252. Va-
rious circumstances which contributed towards the intro-
dution and frequency offuch appeals are enumerated. De
l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 27. Nothing, however,
was of such effeE as the attention which monarchs gave
to the conflitution and dignity of their courts of juflice.
It was the ancient cultom for the feudal monarchs to pre-
fide themselves in their courts, and to adminifier justice in
person. Marculf. lib. i. § 25. Murat. Dissert. xxxi. Char-
lemagne, whilfi he was dressing, used to call parties into
his presence, and having heard and confidercd the subjeR
of litigation, gave judgment concerning it. Eginhartus
vita Caroli magni cited by Madox Hilt. of Exchequer,
vol . i. 9. 1. This could not fail of rendering their courts

Q.2 refpecable,

refpecablc. St. Louis, who incouraged to the utmolt the
praaice of appeals, revived this ancient cuflom, and ad.
miniftred juflice in perlon with all the ancient simplicity,
" 1 have often seen the faint," lays Joinville, " fit under
the slade of an oak in the wood of Vincennes, when all
* ho had any complaint, freely approached him. At
other times he gave orders to spread a carpet in a garden,
and feating himself upon it, heard the causes that were
brought before him." Hist. de St. Louis, p. 13. cdit
176i. Princes of inferior rank, who poffefled the right
of justice, sometimes difpcnfed it in person, and presided
in their tribunals. Two inflances of this occur with re-
fpet to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hifl. de Dauphine,
ton i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257. But as Kings and Piinccs
could not decide every caule in person, nor bring them all
to be determined in the fame court; they appointed
Baillis, with a right of jurifdition, in different diltricij
of their kingdom. These possessed powers somewhat
similar to those of the ancient Conites. It was towards
the end of the twelfth century, and beginning of the thir-
teenth, that this office was firfi inflitutcd in France.
Bruffel, liv. ii. c. 35. When the King had a court es-
tabliflhed in different quarters of his dominions, this in-
vited his fubjeas to have recourse to it. It was the pri-
vate interest of the Bail/ls, as well as an obje& of public
policy, to extend their jurildi&ion. They took advantage
of every defect in the rights of the barons, and of every
error in their proceedings, to remove causes out of their
courts, and to bring them under their own cognizance.
There was a diflinaion in the feudal law, and an extremely
ancient one, between the high juflice and the low. Ca-
pitul. 3. A. D. 812. § 4. A. D. 815. § 3. Efabl. de St.
L.ouis, liv. i. c. 40. Many barons poflield the latter ju-
rifdi'ion who had no title to the former. 1 he former
included the right of trying crimes of every kind, evei
the highest; the latter was confined to petty trefpaflcs.
This furnified endless pretexts for obflru&ing, restraining
and reviewing the proceedings in the baron courts. Or-
don. ii. 457. 9 25. 458. § 29.-A regulation of greater
importance succeeded the inflitution of Baillis. The
King's supreme court or parliament was rendered fixed as
to the place, and conflant as to the time of its meetings.
In France, as well as in the other feudal kingdoms, the
King's court of juflice was originally ambulatory, fol-
lowed the person of the monarch, and was held only

during

dring some of the great feflivals. Philip Auguflus, A. D.
1305, rendered it sedentary at Paris, and continued its

-1rms during the greater part of the year. Pafquier
pRcherches, liv. ii. c. 2 and 3, &c. Ordon. tom. i. p.
,66, § 62. He and his successors veiled extensive powers
in that court; they granted the members .-f it several pri-
vileges and difiinaions which it would be tedious to enu-
nierate. Pafquier, ib. Velly hitl. de France, tom. vii. p.
i37. Persons eminent for integrity and skill in law were
annpinted judges there, ib. IBy degrees the final decision
of all cairfes of importance was brought into the parlia-
mlent of Paris, and the other parliaments which adminif-
ired jutice in the King's name, in different provinces of
the kingdom. This juriiriction, however, the parlia-
ment of Paris acquired very slowly, and the great v'af::ls
of the crown made violent efforts in order to obflruc the
attempts of this parliament to extend its authority. To-
vwards the close of the thirteenth century, Philip the fair
v.asoblired to prohibit his parliament from taking cogni-
1ince of certain appeals brought into it from the courts of
tle Count of Bretagne, and to recognise his right of fu-
rrcne and final jurfitic'iion. Memoirs pour fervir de
irenves a I'lliftoire de Bretagne par Morice, tom. i. p.
irc37, 1o74. Charles VI. at the end of the following cen-
tury was obliged to confirm the rights of the Dukes of
Pretagne in more ample form. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 580,
,SI. So violent was the opposition of the barons to this
right of appeal, which they confidered as fatal to their
privileges and power, that the authors of the Encyclopedie
have mentioned several instances in which barons put to
death, or mutilated, or confiscated the goods of such as
ventured to appeal from the sentences pronounced in their
courts, to the parliament of Paris; tom. xii. Art. Parle-
unllet, p. 25.

THE progrcfsof jtirifdition in the other feudal king-

doms was in a great measure similar to that which we have
traced in France. In England, the territorial jurisdiction
of the barons was both ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw.
Cons. N` 5 and 9. After the Norman conquest it became
more fliitly teudal; and it is evident from facts recorded
il the English hiflory, as well as from the inflitution oi
counties Palatine, which I have already mentioned, that
tile uufrpations of the nobles in England were not inferior
'othole of their contemporaries on the continent. The
!rmc cxpedients were employed to circumscribe or abolifr

Q3 theol

those dan erous jurifdiaions. William the Conqueror (:.
tablilhed a conflant court in the hall of his palace; fro;i
which the four courts, now entrusted with t!e adminifit.
tion of justice in England, took their rife. Henry II. di\i.
ded his kingdom into fix circuits, and sent itinerant judge,
to hold'their courts in them at stated seasons. Blackflone's
Commentaries on the laws of England, vol. iii. 57. Jef.
tices of peace were appointed in every county by fubce.
quent monarchs; to whose jurifdi&ion the people gradual-
ly had recourse in many civil cauCes. The privileges c*'
the counties Palatine were gradually limited ; with refpcEt
to some points they were abo!iflcd; and the adminirlla-
tion of jutice was brought into the King's courts, or b-
fore judges of his appointment. The several fleps tak.l
for this pupofe are enumerated in Dalrymplc's Hillory ot
Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland, the usurpations of the nobility were mo;c

exorbitant than in any other feudal kingdom. The pro-
grefs of their encroachments, and the methods taken i
the crown to limit or abolish their territorial and ind(pe.-
dent jurifdidions, both which I had occasion to conifid
and explain in a former work, difcfred very little frol
those of which I have now given the detail. 1-liltory t4
Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in the labr-

rinth of German jtrifprudence, were I to attempt to &-
lineate the progress of jurifdic'ion in the Einpile, with a
minute accuracy. It is sufficient to oblerve, that tie a:i-
thority which the Aulick council and Imperial chaniler
now possess, took its rile from the fiame abule of tcrnitori;l
jurifdidcion, and was Ecquircd in the fame manner that tile
royal courts attained influence in other countries. All tli,1
important faEts with relpecl to bolth tliefe particuliar,, mn:y
be found in Phil. Datt. de pace publica Imperii, lib. ir.
The capital articles are pointed out in 1'fcfltl Abregp de
l'Hifloire & Droit pulblique d'Allemagne, p. 556, 58;
and in Traite duDroit publiquede I'Empire par M. le C('q.
de Villeray. Both the two lad treatiies are of great at1-
thority, having been compc,li.d under the eye of M. S lhotp-
flin of Straibulgl, one of the ablell publick lavwyers 111
Germany.

NO'TE XXIV. StICT. I. . 65. [AA]'

Ir is nor cafv to fix with p ecifioll tie period, at h iich

F.cclefiaficks firll began to claim extimilpion froni the
civil jirifdiRion. It i; (ertain, tlat during thc early anll

rurcr

purest ages of the church, they pretended to no such im-
inunity. The authority of the civil magifirate extended
to all persons, and to all caifes. This fad has not only
been clearly established by Proteflant authors, but is ad-
mitted by many Roman Catholicks of cminence, and par-
ticularly by the writers in defence of the liberties of thb
GaHican church. There are several original papers pub-
lihhed by Muratori, which shew that in the ninth and tenth
centuries, causes of the greatest imporlance relating to
eclefiarficksuwere ilill determined by civil judges. Antiq
;tal. vol. v. DilTert. Ixx. lecclefiaflicks did not shake ofi
a1l at once their fubjecAion to civil courts. This privilege,
!tke their other usurpations, was gained slowly, and licp
Lv flep. This exemption seems at first to have been
merely an aEt of complaisance, flowing from veneration
'ur their character. Thus from a charter of Charle-
magne in favour of the church of Mlans, A. D. 796, to
iwhich MI. I'Abbe de Soy refers in his Notice de Diplomes,
t'm. . p. 201, that monarch direEs his judges, if any dif-
t.rence flloul- arise between the adminifirators of the re-
venucs of that church and any person whatever, not to
summon the adminiflrators to appear in malo publico;
iut firfl of all to meet with them, and to endeavour to
accommodate the difference in an amicable manner. Th,.
indulgence was in process of time improved into a legk,
exemption; which was founded on the fame fuperftitiou5
rcFpcet of the laity for the clerical character and function.
A remarkable inflance of this occurs in a charter of Fre-
derick Barbarossa, A. D. 1172, to the monastery of A!-
tenhurg. He grants them judiciur non tantum fanguino-
lentis plange, fed vite & mortis; he prohibits any of tl;h
royal judges from difcurbing their jurildiaion ; and the rea-
son which he gives for this ample conceflion Is, nam quo-
rum, ex Dei gratia, ratione livini miniftcrii orius leve efi.
& jugurm 1luae; nos penitus nolumus illius oppreflioni.
contumdria, ve manu Laica fatigari. Menckcn. Script.
rer. Germ. vol. iii. p. 1067.

IT is not necelTarv for illuftraling what is contained in,

the text, that I should describe the manner in which the
code of the canon law was compiled, and shew tliat the
doctrines in it nioll favourable to the power of the clergy,
are founded on ignorance, or supported by fraud and for-
gery. The reader xwil tind a full account of thele in
Gerard. Van Matflicil, Hiftoria Juris Ecclcfiaftici, & in

Q_+4 Science

Science de Government par M. Real, tom. vii. c. i. &
§ 2, 3, &c. The hilfory of the progrces and extent r,
ecclesiastical jurisdiction, with an account of the arts whij,
the clergy employed, in order lo draw causes of evel-
kind into the spiritual courts, is no less curious, and vouild
throw a great light upon many of the cufomrs and imfi.
tutions of the dark ages; but it is likcwife foreign frcln
the present subjet. Du Cange in his Glossary, vci.
Curia Cbrifliinitntir, has colleced molt of the causes .'i;r
refpet to which the clergy arrogated an exclusive iijt:.
dicion, and refers to the auihors or original papers, whiih
confirm his obferxfations. Giannone in the Civil Iifloer
of Naples, lib. xix. § 3. has ranged thcfe under proper
heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions of the church win:
his usual boldness and discernment. M. Fleury obfcrvc,
that the clergy multiplied at such a rate, the pretexts fin
extending the authority of the Ipiritual courts, that it w;i
in their power to withdraw every person and. every caue
from the jurifdiaion of the civil magiftratc. Hifi. Eccle:
tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But how.ill founded soever
thejurifdicion of the clergy may be, or whatever migri,
be the abuses to which their manner of exercising it gait
rife, the principles and forms of their jurisprudence wcre
far more perfet, than that which was known in the ciil
courts. It is probable, that ecclefiafticks never fubmittJd
during any period of the middle ages, to the laws contained
in the codes of the barbarous nations, but were governed
entirely by the Roman law. They regulated all thdr
tranfations by such of its maxims as were preserved by
tradition, or were contained in the Theodosian code, and
other books extant among them. This we learn from a
cuflom which prevailed univerfal!y in those ages. Every'
person was permitted to choose among the various codes of
laws then in force, that to which he was willing to con-
form. In any tranfaaion of importance, it was usual for
the perfonscontraaing to mention the law to which they
submitted, that it might be known how any controverly
that should arise between them was to be decided. Innu-
merable proofs of this occur in the chat ters of the middle
ages. But the clergy confidered it as such a valuable
privilege of their order to be governed by the Roman
law, that when any person entered into holy orders, it
was usual for him to renounce the laws to which he hadl
been formerly fibject, and to declare that he now submit-
'cd to the Roman law. ConRfat me Johanncm clericum,

filium

filirn quondam Verandi, qui profcffus fium, ex natione

en,, lege vivere Langohardorum, fed tamen, pro ho-

jnre ecclefiaitico, lege nunc videor vivere Romana. Charta
. DL. o172. Farulfus presbyter qli proftfTus iumn, more
ticcJotii mci, lege vivere Romina. Charia, A. D.
i-;5 Mluratori Antichita rlcllfi. vol. i. p. 78.

'i'lE code of the canon law began to be compiled enilv

il tile ninth century. Mcm. de I'Acad. dcs Infcript. toni.
xvii p. 346, &c. It was above two centuries attcr that
itcolre any colicaion was made of thole cufloms, which
were the rule of judgment in the courts of the barons.
Sniritualjudges decided, of course, according to wiitten
and known laws; Lay judges, left without any fixc.l
guidic, were direted by loole traditiotnary cu'omns. But
beitles this general advantage of the canon law, its loinlm
and principles were more consonant to rcaifon, and more
lti.ourable to the equitable decision of every point in con-
nroverfy, than tliore which prevailed in lay courts. It ap-
pcirs from Notes XXI. and XXI!. concerning priv.te
wirs, and the trial by combat, that the \whole spirit or
tcciefiariical urilprudence was adverse to these fangtlinar'v
customs which were defiruaive of juflice; and the whole
force of ecclcfiafRical authority was exerted to abolish
them, and to fubflitute trials by law and evidence in their
room. Almotl all the forms in lay courts swhLih contri-
bute to establish, and continue to prcelfrve ord.r ill judi-
cial proceedings, are borrowed from the canon law.
Fleury Inftit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52. St.
L1ouis in his Efiabliffemens confirms mniny of his new re-
guiltions concerning propcrty, and the adminifiration of
juflice, by the authority of the canon law, trom which
he borrowed them. Thus, for infltnce, the first hint of
attaching moveables for the recovery of a debt, was taken
from the canon law. 'llabl. liv. ii. c. 21 and 40. And
likcwife the cefilo bonorum, by a pcll'on wlh wa:, inoll-
vcnt. Ibid. In the fame manner, he cltalliflieil new ic-
tulations with refpeEt to the cfl.Es of perlols dyinr
intcelate, liv. i. c. 89. Thele and m.man otlier flutar) rc-
gullations, the Canonifis borrowed from the Roman law.
,lany other examples might be produced of more pcrftiet
iurifprudencc in the common law tlhan was known in lay
courts. For that realon it was decered an high pivi-
lege to be subjet to eccLlefafiicaljuAritiiton. Amo:ig the
many immunities, by wlich men weic alluded to en!lage
in the dangerous expeditions for the rcco cry of the 1 loly

Land,

Land, one of the moll considerable was the declaring
those who too! the Cross to be fubjeAc only to the spiritual
(ourts. See note XIII. and Du Cange, voc. crucis privi.
lgia.

NOTE XXV. SECT. I. p. 67. [BB]

TIIE rapidity with which the knowledge and fludyof

the Romam law spread over Europe, is amazing. '1'1h
copy of the Pandeas was found at Amalphi, A. D. x x3
Irnerius opened a college of civil law at Bologne a ttw
years after. Giann. Hifi book xi. c. 2. It began to be
taught as a part of academical learning in different parl,
of France bcfore the middle of the century. Vaccaiiul
gave It cres on the civil law at Oxford as early as the
year 1147. A regular fyflem of feudal law, formed
plainly in imitation of the Roman code, was composed by
two Milanese lawycrs alwhot ihe year 1 50. Gratian pub-
lif.ed the code of canon law, with large additions and
emendations, about the fame time. The earliest collcc-
tion of there ctloms, which servcd as the rules of ceci.
sion in the courts of jultice, is the Ajfifer de 7jerule,'.
They were compiled, as the preamlle informs us, in t}e
year I099, and are called jus Confuetudinarium quo rege-
hatur reenurn oricntale. VWillerm. Tyr. lib. xix. c. 2.
But peculiar circumflanccs were the occasion of this (arly
compilation. The viaoi ious Crusaders fettled as a colony
in a loreign country, and adventurers from all the different
nations of Europe composed this new society. It was ne-
ccf(Ta v on that actount to alcertain the laws and cufton'.
whiclh CIrc to regulate the tianfaRions of bufinels, ani
the a(lminiflration of juflice aniong them. But there
was at thnt time no collcftion of cufloms, and no attempt
to render law fixedl in any country of Europe. The firtf
mi:dirtatkir. of that kind was by Glanville, Iord CliLf
Justice of Fnagland, in his Tracaatus de Legibus & C!n-
I(tic ludinibis Angliac, cormpofed about the year l iSi. 'Th
l'.cgiaim Mljcftatcm in Scotland, ifcrilied to David I.
items to be an imitation, and a servile one of Glanvilc.
Picrre de Fontaincs, who lell; us that he was the firn w1ho
liad attcmptt d filch a work in France, compored his C(oiniel,
uvhil, containt an actount of the (floms of the cotniry
ot \'crmandois, in the reign of St. Louis, which bcgaii,
A. 1). 2. IBcramaroir, the author of the Ceoflumr'J ie
,(i ;.'7?ji, lived about ihe fame tinc. The jEltalit'lc.

imelS

niens of St. Louis, containing a large colleeion of the
customs which prevailed within the royal domains, were
,pblifhed by the authority of that monarch. As soon as
men became acquainted with tie advantages of having
wlitten cufloms and laws to which they could have re-
cot:le on every occasion, the method of collecing theln
bcamne common. Charles V11. of France, by an ordo-
rance, A. 1). 1453. appointed the cusqomary laws in every
province of France to be colleced and arranged. Veliy
anl Villaret, Hifloire, tom. xvi. p. 113. His fuccefior,
Louis XI. renewed the injunction. But ihis salutary un-
dertaking hath never been fully executed, and the French
jurisprudence remains more obscure and uncertain than if
tht-e prudent regulations of their monarch had taken es-
lect. A praaice was eftablifncd in the middle ages, ,which
affords the clearef proof that judges, while they had no
other rule to direa their decrees bu; unwritten and tradi-
tionary cufloms, were often at a loss how to find out the
f:,qs and principles, according to which thev \ ere bonrd
to decide. They were oblig d in dublious cafes to call a
ctriain number of old men, and to lay the cafe before them,
that they might inform them what was the practice or
cftornm with regard to the point. This was called En-
:..fle par tourbe. Du Cange, voc. 'Tura. Thle efrfet,
(f the revival of the Roman jurisprudence have been t x-
plainel by NM. de Montelqnieu, liv. xxviii. c. 42. and by
Mr. Hume, Hit, of .England, vol. ii. p. 441. 1 have
adopted many of their ideas. Who can preterd to review
any fibjec' which such writers have coniidcred, without
receiving from them light and information ? At tilc lame
inle I am convinced that the knowled:e of the Ro:l;an
I., \ was not lo entirely loft in Europe during the middle

ci. e, as is commonly believed. NViy fubiect does not

i,;iure me to examine this point. Many ftil'ing l.:('
\ re, air d to it are collcC (d by Don tlo Antonio )':As,
1) I:' Uio e autorila della ragione civiie nelle provinciu
(ill' Imperio )ccidcntale. Nap. i 7 S. 2 vol. Rvo.

THIAT the civil law is intimately conneLled uwtillh tl

municipal jurirprudence in feverll countliesr of Furgope, i
a fact so well known, that it needs no illtlfiraiion. l.ve
in Elngland, where the common law is fuppo'cd to form a
In.cem perfecly dillinc from the Roman code, and al-
though hlofe who apply in that country to the fludv ol tlh:
Collnion law bo.dt, with affclatiutn, of tlis diflinvtion,

it

it is evident that many of the ideas and maxims of the
civil law are incorporated into the English jurilprudence
''his is well illustrated by the ingenious and learned author
of Ohbervations on the Statutes, chiefly the more ancient
2d edit. p. 66.

N OT E XXVI. SECT. I. p. 69. [CC]

THE whole hiflory of the middle ages makes it e'i.

dent that war was the sole profeflion of gentlemen, and
the only fulje& attended to in their education. T.'en
after fomne change in manners began to take place, and the
civil arts of life had acquired some reputation, the ancient
ideas with refpea to the accomplishments necefFarv for a
person of noble birth, continued long in force. In the
Alemoires de Fleurangcs, p. 9, &c. we have an account
of the youthful exercises and occupations of Francis I. and
they are altogether martial and athletic. That father o,
letters owed his relish for them, not to education, butto
his own good sense, and good taste. The manners of lhe
superior order of ecclesiastics during the middle ages, tfr-
nifh the firongeft proof that the diftindion of profefilons
was scarce known in Europe. The funcions and charac-
ter of the clergy are obviously very different from tho'e oi
laymen; and among the inferior orders of churchmen,
this conflituted a diftinc characer, separate from that oi
thelr citizens. But the dignified ecclesiastics who were
frequently of noble birth,. were above filch a diftinaioil;
they retained the idea of what belonged to them as gen-
tlemen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes, or the ca-
nons of councils, they bore arms, led their vassals to the
field, and fought at their head in battle. Among them
the priefthlood was scarce a separate profeflion ; the milit:!.'i
accomplishments which they thought essential to them a,
gentklmen, were cultivated ; the theological science, aTld
pacific virtues suitable to their Ipiritual tun&ion, v.ce
negle&ed and despised.

As soon as the fcicnce of law became a laborious fludy,

and the pracice of it a separate profession, such as role
to eminence in it obtained honours formerly appropriated
to soldiers. Knighthood was the mofl illuflrious mark of
diflindion during several ages, and conferred privileges to
which rank or birth alone were not entitled. To this high
dignity persons eminent for their knowledge of law were
advanced, and by that, were placed on a level with thole

whom

hon their military talents had rendered conspicuous.
fils Juflitie, Miles Literatus became common titles.
atthew Paris mentions such knights as early as A. D.
251. If a judge attained a certain rank in the courts
t jftice, that alone gave him a right to the honour of
ngl'thood. Pafquier Recherches, liv. li. c. i5. p.
1t0. Dissertations hiftoriques fur la Chevalerie par Hono-
e de Sainte Marie, p. 64, &c. A profession which led
o1 offices that ennobled such as held them, grew into credit,
and the people of Europe became accustomed to fee men
rile to eminence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 72. [DD]

'sHE chief intention of these notes, was to bring at
ince under the view of my readers, such fafls and cir-
cumftances as tend to illustrate or confirm what is contain-
ed in that part of the history to which they refer. When
these lay scattered in many different authors, and were
taken from books not generally known, or which it would
be dilagreeable to consult, I thought it would be of ad-
vantage to colleC them together. But when every thing
neceiTary for the proof or illustration of my narrative or
reasonings may be found in any one book which is generally
known, or deserves to be lo, I shall satisfy myself with
referring to it. This is the cafe with refpea to Chivalry.
Almost every faEt which I have mentioned in the text,
together with many other curious and infirudive particu-
lars, concerning this singular institution, may be found
in MHemoires lur l'ancienne Chevalerie confideree comme
un eflabliffement politique & militaire, par M. de la
Curne de St. Palaye.

NOTE XXVIII. SECT. III. p. 76. [EE]

''HE subjeA of my enquiries does not call me to write

a hitlory of the progress of science. The fadts and obfer-
vations which I have produced are sufficient to illufirale
the effets of its progrels upon manners and the slate of
society. While science was altogether extint in the wet-
tern parts of Europe, it was cultivated in Conflantinople
and other parts of the Grecian Empire. But the subtile
genius of the Greeks turned almoir entirely to theological
dilputation. The Latins borrowed that spirit from them,
and many of the controversies which fill occupy, and

divide

di:ide 1 heologians, took their rife among the Greeks
from whom the otler Europeans derived a considerable
part of their knowledge. See the teflimony of JEneas
Svlvius 'ap Corinliium de antiq. academicis, p. 43. Iii:
tOirc literairedc Flrance, torn. vii. p. 13, &c. torn. ix. p.
1 i, &c. Soc;n aftcr the Fmpire cf the Caliphs wat
c':labliled in lthe I'a f, some illuifrious princes arose among
tic:n, uho cncour:gcd fcicnce. But lien the Arabians
ti! ncd their attention to the literature cultivated by ith
ancient Greekc and Romans, the chaste and corrct tafle

'f their v oi;s of genius appeared frigid, and unanimated
to a people of a more warm imagination. It was im.
porfihle for them to admire the poets and hiflorians oi
Atlhens, or of Rome. But they were fcnfible of the me-
rit of their Philosophers. 'IThe operations of the intellek
are more fixed and uniform than those of the fancy or tafle.
T'ruth makes an impression nearly the fame in every place;
the iueas of what is beautiful, elegant, or sublime, var in
eiffercnt climates. The Arabians, though they negleted
i-lomcr, translated the molt eminent of the Greek philo-
iophcrs into their own language; and, guided by their
precepts and discoveries, applied themfltves with great
..rdolur to the fludy of geometry, aflronomy, medicine,
cialectics and melaphyfics. In the three former they
mnrade considerable and ufeftil improvements, which have
contributed not a little to advance those sciences to that
high degree of perlceion which they have attained. In
the two latter, they chore Ariflotle for their guide, and
refining on the lubtle and diltinguifhing spirit which cha-
ra.-crizcs his philo!ophy, they rendered it altogether fri-
vjnlois or unintelligible. The schools eflablithed in the
1.':ds !for teaching and cultivating there sciences, were in
high reputation. They communicated their love of
liience to their countrymen, who conquered Asia and
· iain ; and the schools inllituted there were little inferior
in .a:ne to thole in the l aft. Many of the persons who
t',lilgiflied themselves by their proficiency in science in
tlhe t\welfth and thirteenth centuries, were educated among
til Arabians. Bruckerus collels many inflances of this,
-HiP.r. Iiiio!. v. iii. p. 68i, &c. Almost all the men
eminient tor fience during fevcral centuries, were inflruc-
-.t in the sciences by the Arabians. The first knowledge
of the Ariflotlian philosophy in the middle ages, was
acquired by translations of his works out of the Arabick.
'1 le Arabian commentators were deemed the molt kilful

st)l

and authentic guides in the fludy of his fylfem. Conring.
antiq. acad. D iii. ii. . 9, &c. Supplem. p. 241, &c.
jMurat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From them
the Schoolmen derived the genius and principles of their
philosophy, which contributed so much to retard the pro-
g.efs of true science.

T HE effablifhment of Colleges or universities i- a

remarkable Bra in literary hiflory. The schools in cathe-
dral, and monasteries confined themselves chiefly to the
teaching of grammar. There were only one or two
mailers employed in that office. But in colleges, profef-
fors were appointed to teach all the different parts of
fcicnce. The time that ought to be allotted to the study
of each was ascertained. A regular form of trying the
proficiency of fludents was prescribed; and academical
titles and honours were conferred on fach as acquitted
themselves with approbation. A good account of ihe
origin and nature of these is given by Seb. Bacmaillerus
Antiquitates Roftochienfes, five, Hiftoria Urbis& Aca-
demise Roftoch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. Germ. per
E.J. de Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. 781. Lips. 1743. The
firt obscure mention of there academical degrees in the
University of Paris, (from which the other univcrfities in
Europe have borrowed most of their cultors and infiitu-
tions) occurs, A. D. 1215. Crevier hill. de I' univ. de
Paris, tom. i. p. 296, &c. They were completely efta-
blifhed, A. D. 1231. Ib. 248. It is unneceffarv to enume-
rate the several privileges to which bachelors, mailers,
and dotors were entitled. One circumfiance is sufficient
to demonflrate the high degree of estimation in which they
were held. Doaors in the different faculties contended
with knights for the precedence, and the dispute was ter-
minated in many instances by advancing the former to the
dignity of knighthood, the high prerogatives of which I
have mentioned. It was even afterted, that a doaor had
a right to that title without creation. Bartolus taught
---dotorem afualiter regentem in jure civili per de-
cennium effici militem ipso facto. Honore de St. Marie
Dissert. p. 165. This was called Chevaleric de lecAures,
and the persons advanced to that dignity, milites Clerici.
These new eRablifhments for education, together with the
extraordinary honours conferred on learned men, greatly
encreafed the number offcholars. In the year 1262, there
were ten thousand fludents in the university of Bologna;
and it appears from the history of that univelfity, that

law

law was ihe only science taught in it at that time. In tile
year 340o, there were thirty thousand in the universit)y o
Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. Anderson's Chronol. Deduc.
tion of Commerce, vol . i. 72. In the fame century
t im thotiuand pc rlons voted in a queiflon agitated in tl;,
iiivclfil ot' I'l uis; and as graduates alune were admitted
to that privilcge, the number of fludents mufl have been
vastly great. V\cllv Hist. de France, tom. xi. p. 147
'I hcre rwcre itnceedi Itw universities in Europe at that tinie
htrt uch ncn nui:ber otf (Iudents miay nevertheless be pro(iu.
cci a'. pro(,lt the extraoidin:a- v ardour with which nie
lII:rd to the fhc tv of fciclice in tliofe aes; it shows like.
:!c tl:nt ;!i y ali-a2dy bhcan to confider other profefli;(:
th.in that of a !u!dJir as honourable and ufcful.

O T E XXIX. S EC . III. p. 82. LSS]

TI'r. reat varie:y of fnihjles which I have endcavolmr-

edi to ilifitrate, and the extent of this upon which I now
e;,tcr, will juiillify nm adrpting the words of M. de XMln-
leIfqi( it, s hcn ihe I't. ins to treat of commerce. " Tie

t" hilji. 'i li-ih ftlilows would require to be discusscd

' m(rc at larie ; lbut the n.tlire of this work does niot
" pernlit it. I wish to glide on a tranquil stream; but I

a nm lhurried a!;ni! hby a torrent."
MXNY pronis occur in hill ry of the little intcrcourre

hbrrc\ cc nations during the middle ages. Towards the
lole of the tenth centurv, Count Bouchard intending to
toI'nd a mrn.nacry at St. M:atir des SofTes, near Pari', ap-
pllctle to nn aliblot of Clthrny in Buirgurdv, famou, ftor his
:ncitv, intrca!ilng him to condiuct the monks t.itthcr.
'Ihe iant'uiage in which he addressed that holy man is
i/.:?1lar: I-c tells him, that he had undertaken tc.
1 ,mlir olt si h a great journey ; that he was faligued h
tlh lcnlih of it, there!ore hoped to obtain hi recluell, .id
trt hi s ioirnev into f!ch a diflant country shou3ld not hb in
.. i:. 'Ihe a:m' cr of the abbot is fill more xtraodid:i-
rv: fir refuled to comply wiih his desire, as it would ic
(tIrcem(ll f.atiging to po along with him into a 1franr c
snd lnko nvn rcoion. \Vita Bouchardi vencrahilis Comii s
r p. lioiqtlet Rec. des Hilt. vol. x. p. 35 . Fvcn so late as
th'e beginning of the twelfth century, the monks of Ser-
r.eres in the diocc c of Sens did not know that there was
f':ch a city as Toirrniy in Slanders ; and the monks of
St. Martin of Touriiiiy were equally unacquainted with

the

the situation of Ferrieres. A tranfaEion in which they
were both concerned, made it necessary for them to have
tome intercourse. The mutual interest of both monafte-
ries prompted each to find out the situation of the other.
After a long search, which is particularly described, the
dilcovery was made by accident. Herimannus Abbas de
Reftauratione St. Martini Tornacenfis ap. Dacher. Spicel.
vol. xii. p. 400 The ignorance of the middle ages with
rcfpeA to the situation and geography of remote countries
was ftlll more remarkable. The modl ancient geographi-
cal chart which now remains as a monument of the Rate
of that science in Furope during the middle ages, is found
in a manuscript of the Chronique de St. Denys. There
the three parts of the earth then known are so represented,
that Jerusalem is placed in the middle of the globe, and
Alexandria appears to be as near to it as Nazareth. Mem.
de I'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tom. xvi. p. 185. There
seem to have been no inns or houses of entertainment for
the reception of travellers during the middle ages. Murat.
Antiq. Ital. vol. iii. p. 581, &c. This is a proof of the
little intercourse which took place between different na-
tions. Among people whose manners are simple, and
who are seldom visited by itrangers, hospitality is a virtue
of the first rank. This duty of hospitality was so necessary
in that fate of society which took place during the middle
ages, that it was not confidered as one of those virtues
which men may pratife or not, according to the temper
of their minds, and the generosity of their hearts. Hof-
pitality was enforced by statutes, and those who negleted
this duty were liable to punishment. Quicumque hofpiti
venienti leeum, aut focum negaverit, trium felidorum
inlatione mul&etur. Leg. Burgund. tit. xxxviii. § i. Si
quis homini aliquo pergenti in itinere mansionem vetaverit
fexaginta folidos componat in publico. Capitul. lib. vi. §
82. This increase of the penalty, at a period so long after
that in which the laws of the Burgundians were published,
and when the slate of society was much improved, is
very remarkable. Other laws of the fame purport are
collected by Jo. Fred. Polac.SyftemaJurifprud. Germanicse,
Lips. 1733. p. 75. The laws of the Sclavi were more
rigorous than any that he mentions; they ordained, " that
the moveables of an inhospitable person should be confif-
cated, and his house burnt. They were even so solicitous
for the entertainment of firangers, that they permitted
the landlord to Real for the support of his guest." Quod

VOL. 1. R noau

no&u furatus fueris, cras appone hofpitibus. Rerurn
Mecleburgicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 1751
p. 50. In consequence of these laws or of that slate of
society which made it proper to enaa them, hospitality
abounded while the intercourse among men was inconi.
derable, 'and secured the i(ranger a kind reception under
every roof where he chose to take shelter. This too
proves clearly, that the intercourse among men was rare,
for as soon as this increased, what was a pleasure becamea
burden, ard the entertaining of travellers was converted
into a branch of commerce.

But the laws of the middle ages afford a proof Itill

more convincing of the small intercourse between different
nations. The genius of the Feudal fyflem, as well as the
spirit of jealousy which always accompanies ignorance,
joined in discouraging strangers from fettling in any coun.
try. If a person removed from one province in a king.
dom to another, he was bound within a year and a da),
to acknowledge himself the vassal of the baron in whose
estate he fettled; if he negle&ed to do so, he became
liable to a penalty; and if at his death he negleced to
leave a certain legacy to the baron within whose territo.
ries he resided, all his goods were confiscated. The hard.
ihips imposed on foreigners fettling in a firange country,
were still more intolerable. In more early times, the
superior lord of any territory, in which a foreigner fettled,
might seize his person, and reduce him to servitude. Very
firiking instances of this occur in the history of the middle
ages. The cruel depredations of the Normans in the
ninth century, obliged many inhabitants of the maritime
provinces of France, to fly into the interior parts of the
kingdom. But inflead of being received with that huma-
nity to which their wretched condition entitled them, they
were reduced to a iRate of fcrvitude. Both the civil ard
ecclefiafiical powers found it neceifary to interpose, in order
to put a flop to this barbarous pratice. Poigieffer. de
Statu Servor. lib. i. c. I. § 16. In other countries, the
laws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime provinces,
to reduce such asweie fhipwiecked on their coatl, to ser-
vitude. Ibid. § 17. This barbarous custom prevailed in
other countries of Europe. The practice of seizing the
goods of persons who had been shipwrecked, and of con-
fifcating as the property of the lord on whose manor they
were thrown, seems to have been universal. De Wcft-
phalen Monum. inedita Rer. Germ. vol. iv. p. go07, &c.

cl

ct Du Cange, voc Laganum, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p.
51". Among the ancient Welfll, th-ce forts of persons,
a madman, a firanger, and a leper, might be killed with
impunity. L cges Hoel Dda, quoted in tOblervat. on the
Statutes, chiefly the more ancient, p. 22. I!. de Lauriere
produces fcvcral ancient decds whiLh prove, that in diffe-
rent provinces of France, firangers became the slaves of
the lord on whose lands they fietled. Glolfairc du Droit
I'r.incois, Art. An/lLin, p. 92. Beaumanoir fays, " that
there are fcveral places in Fiance, in which, if a firaner
tixes his rclidlcnce for a year and day, he becomins the
laivc of the lord of the manor. Coufl. de BLauv. clh. 45.
p. 24. But as a praatice so contrary to humanity cuuld
not lu!filt, the luperior lords found it necesSary to reft
lalified with levying certain annual taxes from aliens, by
imposing upon them tome extraordinary duties or services.
But when any stranger died, he could not convey his
effects by a will; and all his real as well as personal estate
fell to the king, or to the lord of the barony, to the ex-
clufion of his natural heirs. This is termed in France
Droit d'Aubaine. Pref. de L.aurier. Ordon. tom. i. p. 15.
Bruffel. tom. ii. p. 9441 Du Cange, voc. Albani. Pas-
quier Recherches, p. 367. This pracice of confiscating
the effe&s of firangers upon their death, was very ancient.
It is mentioned, though very obscurely, in a law of Char-
lemagne, A. D. 813. Capitul. Baluz. p. 507. § 5. Not
only persons who were born in a foreign country were sub-
ject to the Droit d'Aubaine, but even such as removed
from one diocese to another, or from the lands of one
baron to another. Bruffel. vol. ii. p. 947, 949. It is scarce
poflible to conceive any law more unfavourable to the
intercourse between nations. Something similar to it,
however, may be found in the ancient laws of every king-
dom in Europe. With refpea to Italy, fee Murat. Ant.
vol. ii. p. 14. It is no small disgrace to the French jurif-
prudence, that this barbarous, inhofpitablccuflom, should
fill remain in a nation so highly civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded under a

feeble form of government, incapable of framing or exe-
cuting salutary laws, rendered the communication between
the different provinces of the fame kingdom extremely
dangerous. It appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot of
'errieres, in the ninth century, that the highways were
si much infefled by banditti, that it was necessary for tra-
ellers to form themfclves into companies or caravans, that

R 2 they

they might be Cafe from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet
Recueil des llift. vol. vii. 515. The numerous regulati.
ons published by Charles the Bald in the fame century
discover the frequency of these disorders; and such acs
of violence were become so common, that by many they
were hardly confidered as criminal; and for this reason,
the inferior judges called Centenarii, were required to
take an oath, that they would neither commit any rob.
bery them'elves, nor protet such as were guilty of that
crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz. vol. ii. p. 63, 68. The
historians of the ninth and tenth centuries give pathetic
descriptions of these disorders. Some remarkable passages
to this purpose are colleEted by Mat. Jo. Beehr. Rer,
Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They became so frequent and
audacious, that the authority of the civil magistrate wai
unable to repress them. The ecclesiastical jurifdition
was called in to aid it. Councils were held with great
solemnity, the bodies of the faints were brought thither,
and in presence of their sacred reliques, anathemas were
denounced againit robbers, and other violators of the pub-
lick peace. Bouquet Recueil des Hilt. tom. x. p. 360,
431, 536. One of these forms of excommunication
issued A. D. 988, is frill preserved, and is so singular, and
composed with eloquence of such a peculiar kind, that it
will not perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After
the usual introduaion, and mentioning the outrage which
gave occasion to the anathema, it runs thus, " Obtene-
brefcant occuli vefiri, qui concupiverunt; arefcant manu,
qua rapuerunt; debilitentur omnia membra, qua a!-
juverunt. Semper laboretis, nec requiem inveniati,
frutuque vefiri laboris privemini. Formidetis, & pa-
veatis, a facie perfequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis, ut
tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum Juda traditore
Domini, in terra mortis et tenebrarum; donec corda
veflra ad fatisfa&ionem plenam convertantur.- Nc
ceflent a vobis he malidiaiones, fcelerum veftrorum per.
fecutriccs, quamdiu permanebitis in peccato pervafionis.
Amen. Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib. p. 517.

WITH refpe& to the progress of commerce which I

hlave described, p. 69, &c. it may be observed that the
Italian fates carried on some commerce with the cities of
the Greek empire, as early as the age of Charlemagne,
and imported into their own country the rich commodities
ofthe eat. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 882. In the
tenth century, the Venetians had opened a trade with
Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The inhabitants of Amalphi

and

and Pisa had likewise extended their trade to the fame
ports. Murat. lb. p. 884, 885. The effecs of the
Crniades in increasing the wealth and commerce of the
lialian f{ates, and particularly that which they carried on
,wiih the EafR, I have explained page 3oth of this volume.
Tihcv not only imprted the Indian commodities from the
SI'lt but eflablifhed manulaFtures of curious fabric in
thcir own country. Several of there are enumerated by
.Murliori in his Differtalions concerning the arts and the
w.r:l'inig of the middle ages. Antiq. Ital. vol. ii. p. 349,
399. iThey made great progress particularly in the manu-
tai'tire of silk, which had long been peculiar to the
eastern provinces of Asia. Silk fluffs were of such high
price in ancient Rome, that only a few persons of the
firlf rank were able to purchase them. Under Aurelian,
A. D. 270, a pound of silk was equal in value to a pound
of gold. Abfit ut auro fila pen'entur. Libra enim ailri
t:nc libra ferici suit. Yopifcus in Aureliano. Juflinian,
in the sixth century, introduced the art of rearing lilk-
wiorms into Greece, which rendered the commodity some-
w'hat more plentiful, though Rill it was of such great
value, as to remain an article of luxury or magnificence,
reserved only for perfo: s of the firtl order, or for publick
folemnities. Roger I. King of Sicily, about the year
1130, carried off a number of artificers in the silk trade
from Athens, and fettling them in Palermo, introduced
the culture of silk into his kingdom, from which it was
communicated to other parts of Italy. Gianon. Hifd. of
Naples, b. xi. c. 7. This seems to have rendered silk so
common, that about the middle of the fourteenth century,
a thousand citizens of Genoa appeared in one proceflion
clad in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a producion of the
Fast. Some plants of the sugar cane were brought from
Asia; and the first attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was
made about the middle of the twelfth century. From
thence thev were transplanted into the southern provinces
of Spain. From Spain they were carried to the Canary
and Madeira isles, and at length into the new uolli.
I LudovicoGuicciardini, in enumerating the goods import-
ed into Antwerp, about the year 1560, mentions tho
sugar which they received from Spain and Portugal as a
confiderahle article. He describes that as the product
of the Madeira and Canary islands. Dcfcritt. de l'acli
lIafli, p. 180, 181. The sugar cane was either not in-
troduced into ths Wet-lIndies at that time, or the culti-

R 3 vation

vation of it was not so considerable ns to furnifl an article
in commerce. In the middle ages, though sugar was no:
railed in such quantities, or employed for so many pur.
poses, as to become one of the common necessaries f,
life, it appears to have been a considerable article in the
commerce of the Italian fates.

THESE various commodities with which the Italians

furnished the other nations of Europe, procured them z
favourable reception in every kingdom. They were
eftabliihed in France in the thirteenth century with mod
extensive immunities. 'They not only obtained every in-
dulgence favourable to their commerce, but personal riglih
and privileges were granted to them, which the nativeS
of the kingdom did not cnjoy. Ordon. tom. iv. p. 668.
By a special proviso, they were exempted from the droil
d'Aubaine. Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards engrosscd the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled, they be-
came masters of its cash. Money of course was in thrir
hands not only a sign of the value of their'commo(litit.,
but became an obj&t of commerce itself. They dc:il
largely as bankers. I! an ordonance, A. D. 1295, Ac
find them flikd mncrratc-es and car;:/frcr. They carried
on this as well as other branches of their commerce with
foniewhat of that rapacious spirit which is natural to
monopolixcrs, who are not restrained by the concurrence
of rivals. An absurd opinion, which prevailed in the mid-
dle ages, was, howevcr, in rome measure, the cause of
their exorbitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology
for them. Commerce cannot be carried on with advan-
tage unlcfs the persons who lend a fium are allowed a certain
premium for the ufc of their money, and as a compen-
i:ition for the risk which they run in permitting another
to traffick wiih their flock. This premium is fixed by
law in all commercial countries, and is called the legal
intercRf of money. But the Fathers of the church pre-
potferoufly applied the prohibitions of ufuly in scripture to
the payment of legal intercft, and condemned it as a fin.
The Ichoolmen, misled by Ariflotle, whose sentiments
they followed implicitly, and without examination, adopt-
ed the fame error, and enforced it. Blackstone's Corn
mentarics on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455. Thus
the Lombards found themselves engaged in a traffick
which was deemed criminal and odious. They were
liable to punishment if deteaed. They were not satisfied,
therefore, with that moderate premium, which they

might

might have claimed, if their trade had been open and au-
thorifed by law. They exaaed a fum proportional to the
ianger and infamy of a discovery. Accordingly, we find
that it was usual for them to demand twenty per cent. for
the use of money in the thirteenth century. Murat. An-
tiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 893. About the beginning of that cen-
tury, the countess of Slanders waas obliged to borrow mo-
ney in order to pay her husband's ransom. She procured
th faum requisite, either from Italian merchants or from
Jews. The lowest interest which she paid to them, was
above twenty per cent. and some of them exated near
thirty. Martene and Durand. Thefaur. Anecdotorum.
vol. i. p. 886. In the fourteenth century, A. D. 13 1,
Philip IV fixed the interefi which might be legally cx-
aced in the fairs of Champagne at twenty per cent. Or-
donan. tom. i. p. 484. The interest of money in Aragon
was fomcwhat lower. James I. A. D. 1 242, si xed it by
law at eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca. Miarca five
limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as the year 1490, it
appears that the interest of money in Placentia, was at
the rate of forty per cent. This is the more extraordina-
ry, because at that time the commerce of the Italian
States was become considerable. Memoire Storiche de
Piacenz2, tom. viii. p. 104. Piac. X 760. It appears from
lTud. Guicciardini, that Charles V. had fixed tae rate of
interest in his dominions in the Low-Countries at twelve
per cent. and at the time when he wrote, about the year
560, it was not uncommon to exacs more than that fum.
He complains of this as exorbitant, and points out its bad
effecs both on agriculture and commerce. Defcritt. di
Paefi Bassi, p. 172. This high interest of money, is
alone a proof that the profits on commerce were exorbi-
tant.-The Lombards were likewise eflablifhed in England,
in the thirteenth century, and a considerable street in the
city of London still bears their name. They enjoyed
great privileges, and carried on an extensive commerce,
particularly as bankers. See Anderson's Chronol. Deduc-
tion, vol. i. p. 137, i6o, 204, 231, where the flatutes or
other authorities, which confirm this, are quoted. But
the chief mart for Italian commodities was at Bruges.
Navigation was then so imperfect, that a voyage between
the Baltick and Mediterranean could not be performed in
one summer. For that reason, a magazine or fiorehoufe
half way between the commercial cities in the north, and
thore in Italy became neceflary. Bruges was pitched upon

R 4 as

as the most convenient station. That choice introduced
vaRl wealth into the Low-Countries. Bruges was at once
the staple for Engliih wool; for the woollen and linen ma.
nufacures of the Netherlands; for the naval flores, and
other bulky commodities of the north; and for the Indi.
an comrrfodities, as well as domeflick productions import.
ed by the Italian States. The extent of its commerce in
Indian goods with Venice alone appears from one fat. In
the year 1318, five Venetian galeafles laden with Indian
commodities arrived at Bruges, in order to dispose of their
cargoes at the fair. L. Guic. Defcritt. di Paefi Bafli, p,
174. Galeaffes were vefels of very considerable burden.
It was the greatest emporium in all Europe. Many proofs
of this occur in the historians and records of the thirteenth
and fourteenth centuries. But inflead of multiplying quo.
tations, I shall refer my readers to Anderson, vol. i. p. 12,
137, 213, 246, &c. The nature of this work prevents
me from entering into any long details, but there are some
detached fats, which give an high idea of the wealth
both of the Flemish and Italian commercial fates. The
Duke of Brabant contracted his daughter to the Black
Prince, son of Edward Ill. of England, A. D. 1339, and
gave her a portion which would amount to three hundred
thousand pounds of our present money. Rvmer's Fadera,
vol. v. p. 113. John Galeazzo Visconti Duke of Milan
concluded a treaty of marriage between his daughter aid
Lionel Duke of Clarence, Edward's third son. A. D. 135-,
and granted her a portion equal to two hundred thousand
pounds of our present money. Rymer Faeder. vol. vi. p.
547. There exorbitant fums so far exceeding what was
then granted by the molt powerful monarchs, and which
appear extraordinary even in the present age, when the
wealth of Europe is so much increased, muff have arisen
from the riches which flowed into there countries from
their extensive and lucrative commerce. The firfi source
of wealth to the towns situated on the Baltick sea, seems
to have been the herring fishery; the shoals of herring
frequenting at that time the coafis of Sweden and Den-
mark, in the fame manner as they now resort to the Bri-
tifh coais. The effe&s of this fishery are thus describcd
by an author of the thirteenth century. The Danes,
fays he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb of fail-
ors, are now cloathed in scarlet, purple and fine linen.
For they abound with wealth flowing from their annual
fithery on the coals of Schonen; so that all nations resort

to

to them, bringing their gold, silver and precious commo-
dities, that they may purchase herrings, which the divine
bounty belfows upon them. Arnoldus Lubecenfis ap.
Conring. de Urbib. German. § 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the moit powerful commer-
cial confederacy known in hiflory. Its origin towards the
close of the twelfth century, and the objects of its uni6n,
are described by Knipfcildt Tratatus Hilforico-Politico
Juridicus de Juribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Ander-
son has mentioned the chief tadts with refpedt to their
commercial progress, the extent of the privileges which
they obtained in different countries, their successful wars
with several monarchs, as well as the spirit and zeal with
which they contended for those liberties and rights without
which it is impoflible to carry on commerce to advantag e.
The vigorous efforts of a society attentive only to com-
mercial objrcEs, could not fail of diffusing over Europe
new and more liberal ideas concerning justice and order
wherever they fettled.

IN England the progress of commerce was extremelv

flow; and the causes of this are obvious. During the
Saxon heptarchy, England, split into many petty king-
doms, which were perpetually at variance with each
other, exposed to the fierce incursions of the Danes, and
other northern pirates, and funk in barbarity and igno-
rance, was in no condition to cultivate commerce, or to
pursue any system of useful and salutary policy. When a
better profpea began to open by the union of the king-
dom under one monarch, the Norman conquefl took
place. This occasioned such a violent shock, and flch a
ftrlden and total revolution of property, that the nation
did not recover from it during several reigns. By tl;c
time that the conflitution bcgan to acquire tome flability,
and the English had so incorporated with their conquerors
as to become one people, the nation engaged with no less
ardour than imprudence in filpport of their monarch's prc-
tensions to the crown of France, and long wafled its vi-
gour and genius in its wild efforts to conquer that kingdom.

l'hen by ill fticccfs, and repeated diliaplpoinmnents, a pe-

riod was at last put to this fatal frcnz.y, and the nation be-
ginning to enjoy some repose, had leisure to breathe and
to gather new flrcr.gth, the dcftruaive wars between the
houses of York and Lancafler broke out, ard involved
the kingdom in the wordl of all calamities. Thus, betides
the common obflrucions of commerce occasioned by the

naWure

nature of the feudal government, and the (late of manners
during the middle ages, its progress in England was re.
tarded by peculiar causes. Such a succession of events ad.
verse to the commercial spirit was sufficient to have check.
ed its growth, although every other circumfiance had fa.
voured it. The English were accordingly one of the last
nations in Europe who availed themselves of their natural
commercial advantages. Before the reign of Edward III.
all the wool of England, except a small quantity wrought
into coarse cloths for home consumption, was fold to the
Flemings or Lombards, and manufacured by them.
Though Edward, A. D. 1326, began to allure some of
the Flemilh weavers to fettle in England, it was long be-
fore the English were capable of fabricating cloth for so.
reign markets, and the export of unwrought wool fill
continued to be the chief article of their commerce. An-
derfon paflim.-All foreign commodities were brought in-
to England by the Lombard or Hanfeatick merchants.
The English ports were frequented by ships both from the
north and south of Europe, and they tamely allowed so.
reigners to reap all the profits arising from the supply of
their wants. The firfi commercial treaty of England on
record, is that with Haquin King of Norway, A.D.
121 7. Anders. vol. i. p. 108. But they did not venture
to trade in their own ships to the Baltick until the begin-
ning of the fourteenth century. Ib. 151. It was after
the middle of the fifteenth before they sent any (hip into
the Meditcrranean. Ib. p. 1 77. Nor was it long before
this period that their vefiels visited the ports of Spain or
Portugal. But though I have pointed out the flow pro-
grefs of the English commerce, as a fa& little attended to,
and yet meriting consideration; the concourse of foreign-
ers to the ports of England, together with the communi-
cation among all the different countrics in Europe, which
went on increasing from the beginning of the twelfth cen-
turv, is fuificient to juflify all the observations and reason-
ings in the text concerning the influence of commerce on
the f(ate of manners, and of society.

NOTE XXX. SECT. T1l. p. 126.

I AV r. not been able to discover the precise manner in

which the Junfiza was appointed. Among the claims of
tie junta or ulion formed against James I. A. D. 1264,
this wais one; that the King flould not nominate any pcr-

son

Ion to be Juftiza without the content or approbation of the
ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Aragon, vol.
i p. 8o. But the King in his answer to their remon-
ftrance aflerts, " that it was eltablifhed by immemo-
rial rrasice, and was -onformable to the laws of the king-
dom, that the King, in virtue of his royal prerogative,
nnied the Jufti/.a. Zurita, Ibid. 1SI. Blanca, 656.
From another passage in Zurita, it appears that while the
Aragonefe enjoyed the privilcge of the union, i. e. the
power of confederaling againfi their lovrreign as often as
til( conceived th'at he had violatcd any of their riglhts
andi immunities, the Jufti-7, was not only nominated by
the King, hut held his office during his pleasure. Nor
m\as this pracice attended with any bad cffet, as the
piivilege of the union was a sufficient and effectual check
t( any abuse of the royal prerogative. But when the pri-
\ilege of the union was abolished as dangerous to the or-
dr and peace of society, it was agreed that the lufliza
fiouuld continue in office during life. Several KirgF,
l:,wvevcr, attemptcd to remove the Juftizas lwho were cb-
isoxious to them, and they fometilnes fuiccceded in 1.c
aiiinlpt. In order to guard againfi this cncroachrr,n,
which would have deflroyed the intention of the inflituti-
on, and have rendered the Jufiia the dependant and tool
of the crown, instead of the guardian of the people, a
law was enacted in the Cortes, A. D. 1442, ordaining
:hat the Jufli7.a hould continue in office during life, and
should not be removed from it unless by the authority of
lie Cortes. Fueros & Obfervancial del Reyno de Arag.
h!. i. p. 22. By former laws the person of the Jufi/.a
l: I been declared sacred, and he was responsible only to
tl Cortes. Ibid. p. i 5. b. Zurita and Blanca, who botl
1'l,!lilled their hiflories, while the Jufti7.a of Aragon rc-
,,ined the fu'l cxrcifc of his privileges and juli'ifnion,
l..ve neglcaed to explain several circumfiances \i:h re-
;;.id to the office of that refperable magifirate, hcanife
they addresscd their works to their countrymen, who c.e c
'ctll acquainted with every particular concerning the fin:c-
lions of a judge, to whom they looked up as to slit guar-
;ian of their liberties. It is in vain to consult tie later
liiflorians of Spain, about any point, with rclpct to
which the excellent hiflorians whom I have named are li-
lent. 'he ancient confitution of their cot!itr v was ov\c -
turned, and despotism, eflablilied on the ruin of its libcr-
tics, when the writers of this and the preceding centuiv

ccompoffel

composed their hiflories, and on that account they had
little curiosity to know the nature of those institutions to
wvhich their anceflors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or
they were afraid to describe them with much accuracy.
'The ffirit with which Mariana, his continuator Minin;
and Ferreras, write their hiflories, is very different fruin
that of the two historians of Aragon, from whom I have
taken my account of the constitution of that kingdom.

Two circumfiances concerning the Jufiz.a, betide

those which I have mentioned in the text, are worth) of
o!Cervation, i. None of the ricos-hombrcs, or noblemen
of the firfl order, could be appointed Jufliza. iHe va,
taken out of the second class of cavallcros, who anfw.cr
nearly to gentlemen or commoners in Great-Britain.
Fueros & Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c. lib. i. p. 21. b.
The reason was. By the laws of Aragon, the ricos-hon-
bres were not subjet to capital punifliment; but as it was
neceflary for the lecurity of liberty, that the Jufliza should
be accountable for the manner in which he executed the
high trufi reposed in him, it was a powerful reltraint u'-
on him to know that he was liable to be punished with
the utmofl rigour. 3lanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita, tom
ii. 229. Fueros & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. 182. b. 183. It
appears too from many passages in Zurita, that the Jufti-
7.a was appointed to check the domineering and oppr-re
five spirit of the nobles, as well as to set bounds to t1h
power of the monarch, and therefore he was chosen from
an order of citizens equally interefled in opposing both.

2 A MAGISTRATE possessed of such vail powers as

the JufIi7a, miF;ht have cxcrcifcd them in a manner per-
nicious to the Iatec, if he himlcfl had been subjef to lo
contronl. A conflitutional remedy, however, was pro-
vided againfi this dnncgr. Seventeen persons were choren
by lot in each inmeting of the Cortes. These formced a
tribunal called the court of inquisition into the office of
Juftiza. This court met at three flated terms in each
year. Every person had liberty of complaining to it of
:'ny injury or nelec of duty in the Jufliza, or in the in-
terior jdgecs, who anced in .his name. 'The Jufliza and
his deputies wcre call d to anfwcr for their condut. The
nmtmbers of the court passed leInience by ballot. They
li;;lit punifli liy dtr,i;dation, confiscation of goods, or
cvn shilh death. The law x hich crefled this court, and
regulated the forms of its procedure, was enaacd A.D.
14t1. Zurita Analec, iv. l,2t. Elanca Comment. Rcr.

Aragon.

Aragon. 770. Previous to this period, inquiry was made
into the condua of the Jultiza, though not with the lame
formality. He was from the firfi inflitution of the office
fubjeat to the review of the Cortes. The constant dread
of such an impartial and severe inquiry into his behaviour,
was a powerful motive to the vigilant and faithful discharge
of his duty. A remarkable inflance of the authority of
the Juftiza when opposed to that of the King, occurs in
the year 1386. By the constitution of Aragon, the eldest
son or heir apparent of the crown poleeffed considerable
power and juriCdiE3ion in the kingdom. Fueros & Oh-
fervan. del Reyno de Arag. lib. r. p. *6. Peter IV. infli-
gated by a second wife, attempted to deprive his son of
this, and enjoined his fubjeas to yield him no obedience.
The prince immediately applied to the Juitiza; " the
safe guard and defence, fays Zurita, against all violence
and opprefiron." The Jufliza granted him the firmo de,
d.recbo, the effe& of which was, that upon his giving
surety to appear in judgment, he could not be deprived of
any immunity or privilege, which he possessed, but in
consequence of a legal trial before the JufRiza, and of a
sentence pronounced by him. This was puhlished
throughout the kingdom, and notwithstanding the procla-
mation in contradiction to this which had been issued by
the King, the Prince continued in the exercise of all his
rights, and his authority was universally recognized. Zu-
rita Anales de Aragon, ton. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. SECT. Il. p. 127.

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring testimony of

many refpe&able authors, to mention this as the confRitu-
tional form of the oath of allegiance, which the Arago-
nefe swore to their Sovereigns. I mull acknowledge,
however, that I have not found this singular oath in any
Spanish author whom I have had an opportunity to con-
fult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor Blanca, nor
Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all historiographers ap-
pointed by the Cortes of Aragon to record the tranfations
of the kingdom. All these writers porTess a merit, which
is very rare among historians. They are extremely ac-
curate in tracing the progress of the laws and confitition
of their country. Their silence with refpea to this, cre-
ates rome suspicion concerning the genuineness of the oath.
But a it is mentioned by so many authors, who produce

the

the ancient Spanifl words in which it is expressed, it i,
probable that they have taken it from some writer of cl.
dii, whose works have not fallen into my hands. li:e
Iririt of the oath is perfetly agreeable to the genius ot
the Aragonefe conflitution.

THE pirivilege of Union which I mentioned in the pre-

cediin noie, and alluded to in the next, is indeed one ot
the moll fingilar which could take place in a regular go.
veinmenl, and the oath that I have mentioned exprdlT.s
nothing more than this conftitiutional privilege enritled the
Aragoncle to perform. If the King or his miniiters violated
any of the laws or immunilies of the Aragonefe, and did
not grant immediate redress in consequence of their repre-
fentations and remonltrances, the nobles of the firit rank,,
or Ricos-hvm!'brcs de nafura, ds mnefiadla, the. cqilefiri:m
order, or the nobilitv of the fccond class, called Hidaln;,
& Irtfancirner, together w ith the magiflrates of citie;,
might either in the cortes, or in a voluntary affemblv,
join in union, and binding themselves by mutual oaths and
the exchange of holtages to be faithful to each other, they
might requ;re the King, in the name and by the authority
of his body corporate, to grant them redress. If tile
King resilcd to comply with their requefl, or took arms
in order to oppole them, they might, in virtue of the
privilege of union, inflanily withdraw their allegiance
from the King, refuse to acknowledge him as their Sove-
reign, and proceed to eleEt another Monarch; nor did
they incur any guilt, or b-come liable to any profccu-
lion on that account. Blanca Corn. Rer. Arag. 66i, 669.
'This union d;d not resemble the confederacies in other
feudal kingdoms. It was a conflilutional association, which
pretended to legal privileges, which issucd its mandates
un.cr a common flal, and proceeded in all its operations
by regular and artertained forms. This dangerous right

a.as no! only ciimed, but exercised. In the years 1287,
the A.r;ai;,oir-e tormed an union in opposition to Alfonla
111. and obliged the King not only to comply with their
demands, but to ratify a privilege so fatal to the power of
the clown. Zurita Anales, tom. i. p. 322. In the year
347, an union was formed against Peter IV. with equal
fitcels, and a new ratification of the privilege was ex-
torled. Zurita, tom. ii. p. 2oz. But soon after, the
Kinc having defeated the leaders of the union in battle,
the privilege of union was finally abrogated in the Cortes,
and all the laws or records which contained any confirma-

tion

tion of it, were cancelled or deitroyed. The King, in
presence of the Cortes, called for the a&t whereby he had
ratified the union, and having wounded his hand with his
poiniard, he held it above the record, " That privilege,
" fays he, which has been so fatal to the kingdom, and

so injurious to royalty, should be effaced with the blood
of a King." Zurita, tom. ii. p. 229. The law abo-

liflhing the union is published. Fueros & Obfcrvanc. lib.
ix. p. 178. From that period the Jufliza became the
constitutional guardian of publick liberty, and his power
and jurifdi&ion occiloned none of those violent convul-
sions which the tumultuary privilege of the union was apt
to produce. The constitution of Aragon, however, fill
remained extremely free. One source of this liberty was
from the early adiniflion of the reprefentatie'cs of cities
into the Cortes. It seems prolable, from Z'rita, that
burgesses were constituent members of the Cortes from its
firll institution. He mentions a meeting of Cortes, A. D.
1133, in which the procuradores de las ciudades y villas
were present. Tom. i. p. 5 t. This is the conflitutional
language in which their presence is declared in the Cor-
tes, after the journals of that court were regularly kept.
It is probable, that an historian so accurate as Zurita,
would not have used these words, if he had not taken
them from some authentick record. It was more than a
century after this period before the representatives of ci-
ties formed a conflituent part in the supreme assemblies of
the other European nations. The free spirit of the Ara-
gonefe government is conspicuous in many particulars.
The Cortes not only opposed the attempts of their Kings
to increase their revenue, or to extend their prerogative,
but they claimed right and exercised powers which will ap-
pear extraordinary even in a country accufiomed to the
enjoyment of liberty. In the year 1286, the Cortes
claimed the privilege of naming the members of the King's
council and the officers of his houihold, and they feerm
to have obtained it for some time. Zurita, tom. i. p.
303, 307. It was the privilege of the Cortes to name
the officers who commanded the troops raised by their au-
thority. This fecms to be evident from a passage in Zurita.
When the Cortes, in the year 1503, raised a body of
troops to be employed in Italy, it palsed an at empow-
ering the King to name the officers who Thould command
them. Zurita, tom. v. p. 274; which plainly implies that

without

without this warrant, it did not belong to him in virtue of
his prerogative. In the Fueros & Obfervancias del revno
de Aragon, two general declarations of the rights and pri-
vileges of the Aragone!e are puhlifled; the one in the
reign of PI dro I. A. D. t283, the other in that of James
II. A.1). 1325. They are of such length, that I can.
noit inlert them, but it is evident from there, that not only
the pri ilcegts of the nobility, hut the rights of the peo.
pie, perlbnal as well as political, were, at that period,
more extensive, and better underflood than any kingdom
in Europe. Lib. i. p. 7, 9. The oath by which the
King bound himself to ohferve those rights and liberties of
the people, was very fclcmn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p.5.
The Cortes of Aragon discovered not only thejealoufy an,
vigilance, which are peculiar to free flates, in guardirg
the cfi nti.al parts of the constitution, but they were fcru-
pulonfly attentive to ohberve the most minute forms and
ceremonies to which they were accuflomed. According
to the etlahlifled laws and customs of Aragon, no sot
reigner had liberty to e;.ter the hall in which the Cortes
afismbled. Ferdinand, in the year 1481, appointed his
OQleen, II.bell:t, regent of the kingdom, while he wau
ai!cnt during the course of the campaign. The law re-
quired that a regent should take the oath of fidelity in
pretence of the Cortes; but as liahella was a foreigner,
belhre Ihe could be admitted, the Cortes thought it ne-
ccflarv to pals an act authorizing the ferjeant-porter to
oipen the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;

"lo attentive were they, fays Zurita, to observe their

laws and forms, even such as may seem most minute."
Tom. iv. p. 1 3.

TlI t Aragonefe were no less solicitous to secure the per-

fonal rights of individials, than to maintain the freedom
of Ihe conlitiution; and the Ipirit of their flatutes with
relpcc.t to both was equally liberal. Two sacs relative to
this matter mcrit observation. By an express flatute in
th. yvcar 1325, it was declared to be unlawful to put any
r:aive Aragonefe to the torture. If he could not be con-
vi:tcd by the teflimony of wirneffei, he was inflantly ab-
Inl'ed. Zi7rit., tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the rc-
g.ti:tion with the fatisfaaion natural to an hiflorian, when
hre conempl:ttcs the humanity of his countrymen. He
tmoipares the laws of Aragon to those of Rome, as both
exenipted citi/.cns and freemen from such ignominious
andt cruel treatment, and had recourse to it only in the

trial

ri.al of slaves. Zurita had rearon to heflow such an en-
(cnmium on the law.s of his country. Torture was at that
t,lne permitted by the laws cf eversy other nation in Eu-
rolpe Even in England, from which the mild spirit of
leiflatioln has long banished it, torture was not, at that
time, inknown. Oblervations on the Statutes, chiefly the
more ancient, &c. p. 66.

'IHE other fac't hows, that the fame spirit which in-

flueieced the legislature. prevailed among the people. In
the ).car 1485, the religious zeal of Ferdinand and Ifa-
b!l;:, sproimped. them to introduce the inquisition into
Alag;on. Though the Aragonefe were no less fuperfti-
i;O;1:nv attached, than the other Spaniards, to the Roman
Ca!iiolick faith, and no less desirous to root out the feeds
ot error and of heresy which the Jews and Moors had
la'ttercd, yet they took arms againfl the inquisitors, mur-
r'ercd the chief inquisitor, and long opposed the eftablilh-
ment of that tribunal. The reason which they gave for
their conduc, wag, that the mode of trial in the inqui-
fition, was inconsistent with liberty. The criminal was
not confronted with the witnesses, he was not acquainted
with what they deposed against him, he was fubje&ed to
torture, and the goods of persons condemned were confif-
cated. Zurita Anales, tom. iv. p. 341.

THE form of Government in the kingdom of Valencia,
and principality of Catalonia, which were annexed to the
crown of Aragon, was likewise extremely favourable to
lilerty. The Valencians enjoyed the privilege of union in
the lame manner with the Aragonefe. But they had no
magiltrate resembling the Juftiza. The Catalonians
were no less jealous of their liberties than the two orher
nations, and no less bold in aflerting them. But it is
not neceflary for illufirating the following history, to enter
into any farther detail concerning the peculiarities in the
conflitution of these kingdoms.

NOTE XXXII. SECT. III. p. 127.

I H A VE searched in vain among the biflorians ofCaftile,

for such information as might enable me to trace the pro-
grefs of laws and government in Caflile, or to explain
the nature of the confiitution with the fame degree of
accuracy, wherewith 1 have described the political fate of
Aragon. It is manifefi, not only from the hiflorians of
Castile, but from its ancient laws, particularly the Fuero

VOL. I. S Juzgo,

Juzgo, that its monarchs were originally ele&ive. Ley
2, 5, 8. They were chosen by the bishops, the nobility,
and the people, ibid. It appears from the fame venerable
code of laws, that the prerogative of the Castilian mo-
narchs was extremely limited. Villaldiego in his com-
mentary on there laws, produces many fats and authori-
ties in confirmation of both these particulars. Dr. Geddes,
who was well acquainted with Spanish literature, com-
plains that he could find no author who gave a diflin&t ac-
count of the Cortes, or supreme assembly of the nation,
or who described the manner in which.it was held, or
mentioned the precise number of members who had a
right to fit in it. He produces, however, from Gil Gon-
zales d'Avila, who published a history of Henry II. the
writ of summons to the town of Abula, requiring it to
choose representatives to appear in the Cortes which he
called to meet A. D. I390. From this we learn, that
Prelates, Dukes, Marquiffes, the malters of the three
military orders, Conde's and Ricos-hombres were re-
quired to attend. These composed the bodies of ecclefi-
afticks and nobles, which formed two members of the le-
giflature. The cities which sent members to that meet-
i1ig of the Cortes, were forty-eight. The number of re-
presentatives (for the cities had right to choo.e more or
fewer, according to their refpetive dignity) amounted to
an hundred and twenty-five. Geddes Miscellaneous
Trafi, vol. i. 331. Zurita having occasion to mention
the Cortes which Ferdinand held at Toro, A. D. 1505,
in order to secure to himself the government of Caftiie
after the death of Isabella, records with his usual accu-
nrcy, the names of the members present, and of the ci-
ties which they represented. From that liRf it appears,
that only eighteen cities had deputies in this affemblv.
Analesde Aragon, tom. vi. p. 3. What was the occasion
of this great inequality, in the number of cities rcpre-
sented in these two meetings of the Cortes, I am unable
to explain.

NOTE XXXIII. SECT. III. p. 129.

A osRAT part of the territory in Spain was ingroffcd

byt the mability. L. Marintus Siculus, who composed his
treatise de Rebus HiMpania during the reign of Charles V.
gives a catalogue of the Spaniih nobility, together with
the yeariy rent of their cilates. According to his account,

whkit

he affirms was as accurate as the nature of the subjet
would admit, the fum total of the annual revenue of their
lands amounted to one million four hundred and eighty two
thousand ducats. If we make allowance for the vast dif-
ference in the value of money in the fifteenth century,
from that which it now bears, and confider that the cata-
logue of Marineus includes only the Titulados, or nobi-
litv, whose families swere diflinguifhed by some honorary
title, their wealth must appear very great. L. Marinaus
ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i. p. 323. The Com-
mons of Castile, in their contefis with the crown, which
I {hall hereafter relate, complain of the extensive pro-
perty of the nobility, as extremely pernicious to the king-
dom. In one of their manifesto's they assert, that from
Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia, which was an hundred
leagues, the crown did not possess more than three villa-
ges. All the reft belonged to the nobility, and could be
:ubje&ed to no publick burden. Sandov. Vida del Em-
peror. Carl. V. vol. i. p. 422.. It appears from the tef-
timony of authors quoted by Bovadilla, that these- valf
polTeflions were bestowed upon the Ricos-bombrts, bidalgos,
and cavalleros by the Kings of Castile, in reward for the
affiltance which they had received from them in expel-
ling the Moors. They likewise obtained by the fame
means, a considerable influence in the cities, many of
which anciently depended upon the nobility. Politica para
Corregidores. Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 442.

NOTE XXXIV. SECT. III. p. 131.

I HAVE been able to discover nothing certain, as I ob-

served Note XVIII. with relpect to the origin of commu-
nities or free cities in Spain. It is probable, that as soon
as there were recovered from the Moors, the inhabitants
who fixed their residence in them, being persons of dif-
tinflion and credit, had all the privileges of municipal go-
vernment and jurifdiLion conferred upon them. Many
firiking proofs occur of the Splendour, wealth, and power
of the Spanish cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a de-
scription of Barcelona in the year 1491, and compares the
dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and the ek-
gance of its buildings, the variety of its manufa&tures,
and the extent of its commerce to Florence. Hieron.
Paulus ap. Schottum. Script. Hifp. ii. 844. Marineus de-
scribes Toledo as a large and populous city. A great num-

S a ber

ber of its inhabitants were pcrfons of quality, and of il-
luftrious rank. Its commerce was great. It applied par-
ticularly to the manufadures of silk and wool; and the
number of its inhabitants employed in these two branches
of trade, amounted ncaily to ten thousand. Marin. ubi
supr. p. 308. I know no city, fays he, that I would pre.
ser to Valladolid for elegance and splendour. Ibid. p. 31 2.
WMe may form some estimate of its populousness from the
tollowing circumftancte. The citi.zens took arms in the
vear i S 16, in order to oppose a measure concerted by car-
dinal Ximenes, and they muttered in the city, and in the
territory which belonged to it, thirty thousand fighting
men. Sandov. Vida del Emper. Carl. V. torn. i. p. 8.
The manufacures carried on in the towns of Spain, were
not intended merely for home consumption, they were ex-
ported to foreign countries, and that commerce was a cc.::
fiderable source of wealth to the inhabitants. The mar;-
time laws of Barcelona, are the foundation of mercan.
tile jurisprudence in moderns times, as the Leges Rhodia
were among the ancients. All the commercial dtates in
Italy adopted there laws, and regulated their trade accor-
ding to them. Sandi Storia Civile Veneziana, Vol. ii.
865. It appears from Several ordonances of the Kings of
France, that the merchants of Aragon and Caflile were re-
ceived on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame pri-
vileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des Roys, &c.
ton. ii. p. 135. iii. 166, 504, 635. Cities in such a flou-
rifhing slate became a refpeeable part of the society, aii
were entitled to a considerable share in the legislature. The
magistrates of Barcelona aspired to the highest honour a
Spanish subjea can enjoy, that of being covered in the
presence of their sovereign, and of being treated as gran-
dees of the kingdom. Origin de la dignidad deGranie
de Caflilla por Don Alonlo Carillo. Madr. 1657. p. 18.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III p. 13-3.

THE military order of St. Jago, the molt honourable

and opulent of the three Spanish orders, was inflituted
about the year I 70o. The bull of confirmation by Alex-
ander III. is dated A. D. 1176. At that time a confider-
able part of Spain was subjea to the Moors, and the
whole country much exposed to the depredations, not only
of the enemy, but of banditti It is no wonder, thc£i,

that

that an institution, the obje&t of which was to oppose the
enemies of the Christian faith, and to restrain and punish
those who diflurbcd the publick peace, should be extremely
popular, and meet with general encouragement. The
wealth and power of the order became so great, that one
hiflorian fays, that the Gr.ind Master of St. Jago, was
the person in Spain of greatest power and dignity next to
the King. iEl. Anton. Nebriffenfis, ap. Schott. Scrip.
Hifp. i. 812. Another ol'ferves, that the order possessed
every thing in Caftilc that a King would mot desire to ob-
tain. Zurita Anales, v. 22. The knights took the vows
of obedience, of poverty, and of conjugal chaflitv. By
the former they were bound implicitly to obey the com-
mands of their grand master. The order could bring into
the field a thousand men at arms. Al. Ant. Nebrnf. p.
813. If thlefe men at arms were accompanied as wa,
,ital in that age, this was a formidable body of cavalry.
There belonged to this order eighty-four commanderies,
and two hundred priories and other benefices. Differta-
tions fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p. a.62. It
is easy to fee how forrrfidahle to his iovcreign the command
of there troops, the adminiflration of such revenues,' and
the disposal of so many offices, muff have rendered a'fub.
jet. The other two orders, though inferior to that of St.
lago in power and wealth, were nevertheless very con-
fiderabe. When the conquest of Granada deprived the
knights of St. Tago of those enemies againlf whom their
zeal was originally direced, superstition found out a new
object, in defence of which they engaged to employ theiF
courage. To their usual oath, they added the following
clause: " We fwcar to believe, to maintain, and to con-
tend in publick and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the
mother of God, our Lady, was conceived without the
Rtain of original fin." T.his singular addition was made
about the middl: of the fcventeenth century. Honori de
St. Marie Dissertations, &c. p. 263.

N O T E XXXVI. SEcT. III. p. 135.

I H AVE frequently had occasion to take notice of the

defe.';, in police during the middle ages, occasioned by the
feebleness of govcrnment, and the want of proper fuhor-
dination among the different ranks of men. I have ob-
terved in a former note, that this greatly interrupted the
intcrcourfe between nations, and even between different

S 3 places

places in the fame kingdom. The description which the
Spanish hitlorians give of the frequency of rapine, mur-
der, and every act of violence, in all the provinces of
Spain, are amazing, and present to us the idea of society
but little removed from the difordcr and turbulence of that
which has been called a iate of nature. Zurita Anales de
Arag. i. 175. AEl. Ant. Nebriflenfis rer. a Ferdin. gefiar.
Hist. ap. Schottum ii. 849. Though the excess of thde
disorders rendered the inflitution of the Santa Hermandad
necessary, great care was taken at first to avoid giving any
offence or alarm to the nobility. The jurifdiaion of the
judges of the Hermandad was expressly confined to crimes
that violated the publick peace. All other offences were
left to the cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a per-
son was guilty of the moil notorious perjury, in any trial
before a judge of the Hermandad, he could not punilh
him, but was obliged to remit the cafe to the ordinary
judge of the place. Commentaria in Regias Hifpan.
Conflitut. per Alph. de Azevedo, pars v. p. 220, &c. fcl.
Duaci, 1612. Notwi:hfianding these reftriaions, the
Barons were sensible how much the Hermandad would en-
croach on their jurifdidion. In Caflile, some opposition
was made to the institution; but Ferdinand had the ad-
dress to obtain the consent of the Constable to the intro.
duction of the Hermandad into that part of the kingdom
where his estate lay; and by that means, as well as the
popularity of the institution, he farmounted every obfta-
cle that flood in its way. /El. Ant. Nebriffen. 85 . In
Aragon, the Nobles combined againfl it with greater spirit;
and Ferdinand, though he supported it with vigour, was
obliged to make some conceflions in order to reconcile
them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. The power and
revenue of the Hermandad in Caflile seems to have been
very great. Ferdinand, when preparing for the war
against the Moors of Granada, required of the Herman-
dad to furnish him sixteen thousand beafis of burden, to-
gether with eight thousand men to condua them, and he
obtained what he demanded. iEl. Ant. Nebriff. 881.
The Hermandad has been found to be of so much use in
preserving peace, and restraining or detecing crimes, that
It is still continued in Spain, although it be no longer ne-
ceffary either for moderating the power of the nobility, or
extending that of the crown.

NOTE

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 137.

NOTHING is more common among Antiquarians, and

there is not a more copious source of error, than to de-
cide concerning the institutions and manners of past ages,
by the forms and ideas which prevail in their own times.
The French lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries having found their sovereigns in pofeflion of ab-
solute power, seem to think it a duty incumbent on them,
to maintain that such unbounded authority belonged to the
crown in every period of their monarchy. " The go-
vernment of France, fays M. de Real very gravely, is
purcly monarchical at this day, as it was from the begin-
ning. Our Kings were absolute originally as they are at
present." Science du Government, tom. ii. p. 31. It it
impo.rible, however, to conceive two flates of civil focie-
ty more unlike to each other, than that of the French
nation under Clovis, and that under Louis XV. It is
evident from the codes of laws of the various tribes which
fettled in Gaul and the countries adjacent to it, as well as
from the history of Gregory of Tours, and other early
annalists, that among all these people the form of govern-
ment was extremely rude and simple, and that they had
scarce begun to acquire the first rudiments of that order
and police which are ntceffary in extensive locieties. Tile
King or leader had the command of soldiers or compani-
ons, who followed his standard from choice, not by con-
firaint. I have produced the clearelt evidence of thi:,
Note VI. An event related by Gregory of Tours, lib. is.
c. 14. affords the most firiking proof of the dependance ot
the early French Kings on the sentiments and inclination-
of their people. Clotaire I. having marched at the hf::d
of his army, in the year 553, against the Saxons, that
people, intimidated at his approach, sued for peace, and
offered to pay a large furn to the offended monarch. Clo-
taire was willing to close with what they proposed. Bun
his army infifed to be led forth to battle. The King cma
ployed all his eloquence to persuade them to accept of
what the Saxons were ready to pay. The Saxons, in or-
der to sooth them, incrcafed their original offer. Thb.
King renewed his solicitations: But the army enraged,
rushed upon the King, tore his tent in pieces, dragged
him out of it, and would have slain him on the spot, it

S 4 he

he had not consented to lead them instantly againtf the
enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France potcffed such limited

authority, even whilc at the head of their army, thir
prerogative during peace will be found to be flill mole
confined. They arcended the throne not by any heredi-
tary right, but in consequence of the election of their fuIb-
jeEts. In order to avoid an unnecelfary number of quot.-
tions, I refer my readers to Hottomanni Francogallia,
cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where they will find the fullcti
proof of this from Gregory of Tours, Anmoinus, and the
most authentick liilorians of the Merovingian Kin,:.
The effea of this elecion was nit to invtfl them .wi;I
nbfolute power. Whatever related to the general \vdl-
fare of the nation, was submitted to publick deliberation,
and determined by the suffrage of the people, in the an-
nual assemblies called Les Champs de Mars, and Les
Champs de Mai. These assemblies were called Cha;ps,
because, according to the cuflom of all the barbarous na-
tions, they were held in the open air, in some plain capa-
ble of containing the vafi number of persons who had a
right to be present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Comitiis vete-
rum Germanorum. vol. i. § 19, &c. They were denomi-
nated Champs de Mars and de Mai, from the Months in
which they were held. Every free-man fcems to have
had a right to be present in these assemblies. Sorberts,
ibid. § 133, &c. The ancient annals of the Franks de-
scribe the persons who were present in the assembly hild
A.D. 788, in these words: In p'acito Ingelheimenfi con-
veniunt pontifices, majores, mirores, facerdotes, regubi,
duces, comites, prefe&i, cives, oppidani. Apud Sorber.
§ 304. There every thing that concerned the happiness
of their (ountry, fays an ancient hiflorian, every thing
that could be of benefit to the Franks was confidered, and
enjoined. Fredegarius ap. Du Cange Gloflar. voc. CNI
pus Martii. Chlotharius II. describes the business, and ac-
know ledges the authority of these assemblies. They are
called, fays he, that whatever relates to the common safe-
ty may be confidered and resolved by common deliberati-
on; and whatever they determine, to that I will conform.
Amoinus de Gcft. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Rccueil,
iii. i6. The flatutory clauses, or words of legislative au-
thority in the decrees issued in these afTemblies, run not in
the name of the King alone. "We have treated, fays
Clildcbert, in a declee A. D 532, in tie assembly or

March,

Mirch, together with our Nobles, concerning frne affairs,
and "'e now publish the conclusion, that it may come to
the knowledge of all." Childeb. Decret. ap. Bouquet
Rccinil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 3. We have agreed tncc-
liler with our vassals. Ibid. § 2. It is agreed in the aflem-
y .in which we were all united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic
lws, the moil venerable monument of Fiench juri'pri-
dernc, were enactcd in the fame manner. Diaavcrunt
alicanm leger proceres ipfius gentis, qui tunc tempolis
apiudeam crant Reaores. Sunt autem elicti de pluribus
i;ri quatuor-- qui per tres Mallos convenientes, omnes
cauiarum origines follicitl difcurrendo, trac(antcs dc fin-
gulis judicium decreverunt hoc modo. Prref. Leg. Salic.
.p. Bouquet. Ibid. p. 122. Hoc decreturn eft apud
rtgem & principes ejus, & apud cunEtium popluium chris-
tianum, qui infra regnum Merwingorum confiflunt. Ibid.
r. 124. Nay, even in their charters, the Kings of tle
si;lt race are carefll to specify that they were granted
vith the content of their vatTals. Ego Childeherius Rex
nia, curn confenfu & voluntate Francorum, &c. A. D.
s5S. Bouquet, ibid. 622. Chlotharius 111. unaS cur
palribus nollris epilcopis, optimatibus, cttcl-ifquce Valatii
nofil minifiris, A. D. 664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu
fidtlium nofirorum. Mably Obferv. torn. i.p. 239. The
hiltorians likewise describe the funsions of the King in
the national aifemblies in such terms, as imply that his
authoiity there was extremely small, and that every
thing depended on the court itself. Ipfe Rex (fays the
authors of Annales Francorum, speaking of the field of
March) fedebat in felia regia, circumftante extrcitu, prIE-
cipitbatque is, die illo, quicquid a Francis dt crctum erat.
Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647.

'I HAr the general aflemblies exercised fipreme juriC-

tiflion over all persons, and with relptca to all caures, is
so evident as to stand in need of no prcof. '-he trial of
Brunclaut, A. D. 613, how unjust focvtr the fentrce
against her may be, as related bv I'rcdtgal;is, Chro,.
cap. 42. Bouquet. ibid. 430. is in itelt huffacent proof
(It this. The notorious violence and iniquiiy of the (cn-
itnce serve to demonfirate tile extent of juritiittion whil
this afcembly pofflned, as a Prince Co fanguinaiy as Clo-
thlire 11. thought the fanEion of its authority would le
itifficint to juftity his rigorous treatment of tile mothcr
and grandmother of so many Kings.

\dIxx i

¥WITH refped to conferring donatives on the Prince,

we may observe, that among nations whose manners and
political inflittuions are finple, the publick, as well as
individuals, having few wants, they are unacquainted with
taxes, and free uncivilized tribes disdain to submit to any
flated impofiiion. This was remarkably the cafe of the
Germans, and of all the various people that issued from
that country. Tacitus pronounces two tribes not to be of
German origin, because they submitted to pay taxes. De
Morib. Germ. c. 43 ; and speaking of another tribe ac-
cording to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he fays " they
were not degraded by the imposition of taxes." Ibid. c.
29. Upon their settlement in Gaul, we may conclude
that while elated with the consciousness of victory, they
¥vould not renounce the high-fpirited ideas of their ancef.
tors, or voluntarily submit to a burden which they re-
garded as a badge of servitude. The evidence of the
earliest records and hiflorians justify this conclusion. M.
de Montesquieu in the twelfth and subsequent chapters of
the thirteenth book of l'Efprit des Loix, and M. de
Mably Obfervat. fur l'Hifl. de France, tom. i. p. 247.
have invefligated this fat with great attention, and have
proved clearly that the property of no free-man among
the Franks was subjet to any fated tax. That the slate
required nothing from persons of this rank but military
service at their own expence, and that they should enter-
tain the King in their houses when he was upon any pro-
grefs through his dominions, or his officers when sent on
any public employment, furnishing them with carriages
and horses. Monarchs fubfifled almoit entirely upon the
revenues of their own domains, and upon the perquisites
a rsing from the adminifiration of justice, together with a
ft.w small fines and forfeittres exacted from those who
ha\d been guilty of certain trespasses. It is foreign from
my subjet to enumerate these. The reader may find
them in Obfervat. de M. de Mably, vol. i. p. 267.

VM I EN any extraordinary aid was granted by free-men

tn their sovereign it was purely voluntary. In the annual
assembly of March or May it was the custom to make
the King a prcfent of money, of horses or arms, or of
some other thing of value. This was an ancient custom,
and derived from their anceflors the Germans. Mos eft
civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri principibus vel armen-
torumn vel frugum, quod pro honore acceptum, etiam
neccitatibus fubvenit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 5.

Thcfe

I'hese gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning them
from the general terms in which they are mentioned by
tlhe ancient hitlorians, were considerable, and made no
inall part of the royal revenue. Many pafTages to this
ptrpofe are produced by M. du Cange, Diffcrt. iv. fur
ioinville, 153. Sometimes a conquered people specified
the gift which they bound themselves to pay annually, and
it was etacted as a debt if they failed. Annales IMetenfes,
ap. Du Cange, ibid. p. 155. It is probable that the first
slep towards taxation was to ascertain the value of theie
gitts which were originally gratuitous, and to compel the
people to pay the fum at which they were rated. Still,
however, some memory of their original was preserved,
and the aids granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of
Europe were termed benevolences or fre - ifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were raised
to the throne by the eledion of the people, Pepinus Rex
pius, fays an author who wrote a few years after the
lr.nlfaaion which he records, per authoritatem Papa, &
linicionem fanti chrifmatis, & eletionem omnium Fran-
corum in regni folio fublimatus eft. Claufula de Pepini
confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des Hiflor. torn. v. p. 9.
At the fame time, as the chief men of the nation had
transferred the crown from one family to another, an oath
was exated of them that they should maintain on the
throne the family which they had now promoted ; ut nun-
quam de alterius lumbis regem in Tavo prefumant cligere.
Ibid. p. io. This oath the nation faithfully obfcrved dur-
ing a considerable space of time. The posterity of Pip-
pin kept poeftlion of the throne; but with refpec to the
manner of dividing their dominions among their children,
Princes were obliged to consult the general assembly of the
nation. Thus Pippin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his
two sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to reign as joint
sovereigns; but he did this, una cum confenfu Francorurn
& procerum fuorum feu & epifcoporum, before whom he
laid the matter in their general afTembly. Conventus
apud fanEum Dionyfium. Capitulhr. vol. i. p. 187. This
dlftination the French confirmed in a subsequent affcmbl-,
\wlich was called upon the death of Pippin; for, as Egin-
hart relates, they not only appointed them Kings, but by
their authority they regulated the limits of their refpeaivc
territories. Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom.
v. p. 90. In the fame manner, it was by the authority of
the supreme alfemblies that any dispute which arore among

the

the descendants of the royal family was determined. Char.
lemagne recognizes this important part of their jurifdi;tic
and confirms it in his charter concerning the partition of
his dominions; for he appoints, that, in cafe of any ut.
ccrtainty wi:h relpe& to the right of the several comle.
titors, he whom the people shall choose, shall succeed to
the crown. Capitular. vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the assembly of

the nation, difRinguifhed by the name of Conventus, Mlall;
Placita, were regularly aflemblcd once a year at least, and
frequently twice in the year. One of the most valuable
monuments of the hiflory of France is the treatise of
lmincmarus, archbifhopof Rheims, de ordine Palatii. t!e
died A. D. 882. only fixty-eight years after Charlemagne,
and he relates in that short discourse the fa&s which were
communicated to him by Adalhardus, a minister and con-
sident of Charlemagne. From him we learn that thll
great monarch never failed to hold the general affembl;
of his ftibljeas every year. In quo placito generalilas uni.
verforum majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum comne
niebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii. c. 29. p. 211.
In these assemblies, matters which related to the general
safety and slate of the kingdom were always discussed,
before they entered upon any private or less important
business. Ibid. c. 33. p. 213. His immediate flcceffcn
imitated his example, and tranfa&ed no affair of import-
ance without the advice of their great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of the

French government continued to be in a good measure
democratical. The nolcs, the dignified ecclesiastics, ard
the great officers of the crown, were not the only mem-
bers of the national council; the people, or the whole
body of free-men, either in perron, or by their reprefen-
tarivcs, had a right to he present in it. Hincmarus, in
describing the manner of hloling the general assemblics,
f.?s, that if the weather was favonrable, they met in the
open air, but, if otherwise, they had diflerent apartments
allotted to them, so that the dignified clergy were fepi-
lated from the laity, and the comitesvel hujufmodi prin-
cipes fibimet honorificabiliter a cttera multitudine fegre-
garentur. Ibid. c. 35. p. 114. Agobardus, archbi-
fl.op of Lvyons, thus de!cribes a national council in tle
xear 83', wherein he was present. Q.i ubique conrel-

tus exititi ex reverentiflimis epifcopis, & magnificentiffiTml
viris inludribu, collegio quoque abbatum d& comiumin,

promil-

promifcueque aetatis & dignitatis populo. The ceftera
,ni/ltitudo of Hincmarus is the fame with the populus of
Agobardus, and both describe the inferior order of free-
men, the fame who were afterwards known in France by
tile name of the third eflate, and in England by the name
,>f commons. 'The people, as well as the members of
i;ighcr dignity, were admitted to a share of the legislative
p,,wer. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803. it is ordained,
" that the queflion Shall be put to the people with relfpe.
to every new law, and if they shall agree to it, they shall
confirm it by their signature." Capit. vol. i. 394. There
aie two capitularia which convey to us a full idea of the
part which the people had in the adnriniflration of govern-
ment. When they felt the weight ot any grievance, they
hlad a right to petition the sovereign for redress. One ot
thele petitions, in which they desire that ecclefiaflicks
might be exempted from bearing arms, and from serving
in perlbn against the enemy, is fill extant. It is addgefl-
ed to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and exprefTed in luch
terms as could have been used only by men conscious ot
liberty, and of the extensive privileges which they poflcf-
fed. They conclude with requiring him to grant their
demand, if he wished that they lhould any longer continue
fai:hful subje&s to him. That great monarch, inflead of
being offended or furprized at the boldness of their peti-
tion, received it in a moil gracious manner, and signified
his willingness to comply with it. But sensible that he
himself did not possess legislative authority, he promilcs
to lay the matter before the next general aifembly, that
fulch things as were of common concern to all might be
there confidcred and etlablifhed by common content. Ca-
pitul. tom. i. p. 405-409. As the people by their peti-
tions brought matters to be proposed in the general assem-
hly, we learn from another capitulare the form in which
they were approved there, and enated as laws. The pro-
positions were read aloud, and then the people were re-
quired to declare whether they assented to them or not.
''hey signified their assent by crying three times, " We are
satisfied," and then the capitulare was confirmed by the
subscription of the Monarch, the clergy and the chief men
of the laity. Capitul. tom. i. p. 627. A. D. 822. It
seers probable from a capitulare of Carolus Calvus, A.
D. 851, that the sovereign could not refute his aftent to
whlat was propored and established by his fubjeas in the
general afTimbly. Tit.ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii p. 47. It

is

is unnecessary to multiply quotations concerning the legi.
flative power of the national assembly of France under
the second race, or concerning its rights to determine wivt
regard to peace and war. The uniform flyle of the Ca.
pitularia is an abundant confirmation of the former. The
reader who desires any farther information with refpe& to
tie latter, may conlult Les Origines ou l'Ancien GCu-
vernemcnt de la France, tom. ii . 87, &c. What hai
been said willh refpea to the admiflion of the people cr
their rcpreenztatives in the supreme assembly merits atten.
tion not only in tracing the progress of the French govern-
ment, but on account of the light which it throws upon a
similar queflion agitated in England, concerning the time
when the commons became part of the legislative body in
that kingdom.

NOTE XXXVIII. S C T. III. p. 138.

THAT important change which the conflitution of

France underwent, when the legislative power was tranf-
ftrred from the great council of the nation to the King,
Lh.s been explained by the French antiquarians with less
a:re, than they bestow in illuflrating other events in their
hitiory. For that reason I have endeavoured with the
greater attention to trace the fleps which led to this me-
morable revolution. I shall here add some particulars
which tend farther to illustrate it. The Leges Salica,
the Leges Burgundionum, and other codes publilhed by
the several tribes which fettled in Gaul, were general laws
extending to every person, to every province and diftiri
where their authority was acknowledged. But they leem
to have become obsolete; and the reason of their falling
into difure is very obvious. Almost the whole property of
tile nation was allodial when there laws were framed. But
when the feudal intlitutions became general, and gave
rife to an infinite variety of questions peculiar to that fpe-
cies of tenure, the ancient codes were of no uSe in decid-
ing with regard to these, because they could not contain
regulations applicable to cafes which did not exist at the
time when they were compiled. Thisconfiderable change
in the nature of property made it necelTary to publish the
new regulations contained in the Capitularia. Many of
there, as is evident from the perusal of them, were general
laws extending to the whole French nation, in the general
ffembly in which they were ena&ed. The weakness of

the

the greater part of the monarchs of the second race, and
the disorder into which the nation was thrown by the de-
predations of the Normans, encouraged the barons to
usurp an independent power formerly unknown in France.
The nature and extent of that jurifdictiori which they
assumed, I have formerly confidered. The political union
of the kingdom was at an end, its ancient constitution was
dissolved, and only a feudal relation fubfifled between the
King and his vaftals. The regal jurisdiction extended no
further than the domains of the crown. Under the lafl
Kings of the second race, these were reduced almofl to
nothing. Under the first Kings of the third race, they
comprehended little more than the patrimonial ertate of
Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the crown. Even
wi h this accession, they continued to be very narrow.
Velly, Hist. de France, tom. iii. p. 32. Many of' the
molf considerable provinces of France did not at first ac-
knowledge Hugh Capet as a lawful Monarch. There are
still extant fcveral charters, granted during the first years
of his reign, with this remarkable clause in the form of
dating the charter; " Deo regnante, rcge expeaante,"
regnante domino nofiro Jesu Chriflo, Francis autem contra
jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet Recueil,
ton. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose title was thus openly
disputed, was not in a condition to assert the royal jurif-
diaion, or to limit that of 'the barons.

ALL these circumfilances rendered it easy for the barons

to usurp the rights of royalty within their own territories.
The Capitularia became no less obsolete than the ancient
laws; local customs were every where introduced, and
became the sole rule by which all civil tranfa&ions were
conduaed, and all causes were tried. The wonderful
ignorance, which became general in France, during the
ninth and tenth centuries, contributed to the introducion
of customary law. Few persons, except eccleliaftics,
could read; and as it was not possible for them to have
recourse to written laws, either as their guide in business,
or their rule in adminiflring justice, the cultomary law
universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general affemblyof the nation

feemsnot to have been called, nor to have once exerted its
legislative authority. Local cufloms regulated and decid-
ed every thing. A friking proof of this occurs in tracing
the progress of the French jurisprudence. The last d
the Capitularia colleced by M. Baluze, wia ilfued in the

year

year 921, by Charles the Simple. An hundred and tilil
ye.ars -lapsld from thar period to the publication of th;
firit ordonancc of the Kings of the third race, c(,niai;,d
in the great colleacion of Ml. Laurierc, and the fifl r,.
loliancc which appearc to be an aA of legislation cxtcndir,-
to it-c whole kingdom is that of Philip Auguflus, A. D.

19)O. Ornion. tom. i. p. I, 18. During that long perind

(.1 one llinled and fixty-nine years, all traniaci'ions .csle
u.iiic cd by loc;al cufoms, and no addition was made tol:e
ffiuttitii law of France. The ordonances, previous io

tl;e rci 1n

ol 'liilp Aiiguflus, contain regulations, tl)e

atlic;th; ou which did not extend beyond the Kine',
doina ins.

VARIOUS inflances occur of the caution with wliicl

thc Icing'. of Ira::ce ventured at firfl to exercise lerifia.
it', autl-,-'iy l. I'A. db. e M.ably produces anordonance
o; Pillip Aiugafiu, A. D. . 120, concerning the Jew,,
'lwo, in that age, were in some measure the property of
tlec lord in whole territories they resided. But it is not
lo nuch an acl of royal power, as a treaty of the Kirg
\viih the counti: of Champagne, and the tomte de
D...-lpicrre; and rile r(gulalions in it seem to be eflal,l.h-
ed not by hiis :t!tltoriiy, but by their con'cnt. Obiervat.
fin I'!lill dc France, ii .

P 355. In the fame manner

.n ordo::tirce of Louis VIII. concerning the Jews, A. I).
1223, is a contra: between the King and his nobles, with
,ti',ccL tso the:r manner of trcating that unhappy race ni
mnin. Or'don. toni. i. p. 47. The Eftabliffemens of c.
Iouis, thoighi well adapted to ferne as general laws to
the whole kingdonm, were not piillifhed as fucli, but onl;
as a cmplete cotc of cu(itomart law, to be of authority
witliin the King's domains Th'Ie wisdom, the equity and
the order conspicuous in that code of St. Louis, procur-
ed it a favourable reception throughout the kingdom. T he
veneration clue to the vir:erc, and good intentions of it,
.aithor, contributed tot a little to reconcile the nation to
,hat Iclla!;ive aiu:horiiy, which Ihe King beganto afTimc.
S.I,, af;erl hic time, the idea of the King's pofictTlng
itipre're Ilegifltirc power became common. If, savs

,.tmiantnoir, the King makes any cfablifhment fpecciall
for his ox n d,..main, the barons may nevertheless adhere

,t their antoirt cuifloms; hut if the establishment he gene-
id, it (hall be current throughout the whole kingdom,
rd we ought to h(lieve that such efablifhments are made
.ith malure deliberation, and for the general good.

Cout.

Cout. de Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 265. Though the Kings
of the third race did not call the general assembly of the
nation, during the long period from Hugh Capet to Philip
the Fair, yet they seem to have consulted the bishops and
barons who happened to be present in their court, with re-
spec to any new law which they publilhed. Examples
of this occur. Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5. The pracice
teems to have continued as late as the reign of St. Louis,
when the legislative authority of the crown was well eRta-
blifhed. Ordon. torn. i. p. 58. A. D. 1x46. This at-
tention paid to the barons facilitated the King's acquir-
ing such full poffeflion of the legislative power, as enabled
them afterwards to exercise it without observing that for-
mality.

THE aflemblies, diftinguiihed by the name of the

States General, were firR called, A. D. 1302, and were
held occasionally from that period to the year 1614, since
which time they have not been summoned. These were
very different from the ancient afiemblies of the French
nation under the Kings of the firfi and second race. There
is no point with refpe& to which the French antiquarians
are more generally agreed, than in maintaining that the
States General had no suffrage in the patling of laws, and
pofieffed no proper jurifdition. The whole tenor of the
French History confirms this opinion. The form of pro.
ceeding in the States General was this. The King addref-
fed himself to the whole body afembled in one place, and
hid before them the affairs on account of which he had
summoned them. The deputies of each of the three or-
ders of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate, met
apart, and prepared their cabier or memorial, contaning
their answer to the propositions which had been made to
them, together with the representations which they
thought proper to lay before the King. These afwers
ad representations were confidered by the King in his
council, and generally gave rife to an ordonance. These
ordonances were not addrelled to the three eRtates in com-
mon. Sometimes the King addressed an ordonance to each
of the eflates in particular. Sometimes he mentioned the
afembly of the three etatea Sometimes mention is made
only of the aflembly of that efate to which the ordonance
i addrefed. Sometimes no mention at all is made of the
aflembly of elfates, which suggested the propriety of
enasing the law. Preface an tom. iii des Ordon. p. X.
Thus the States General had only the privilege of advifin

VOL.I. T an.

and remonstrating; the legislative authority resided in
the King alooie.

N O T E XXXIX SECTr.III. p. 141.

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only as the fu.

preme court of ju'fice, every thing relative to its origin
and jurifdition is clear and obvious. It is the ancient court
of the King's palace, rew-modelled, rendered Sedentary,
and inverted with an extensive and ascertained jurifdi&ion.
The power of this court, while employed in this part ot
its funltions, is not the object of present consideration,
The pretensions of the parliament to controul the exercile
of the legislative authority, and its claim of a right.to in-
terpofe with refpeEt to publick affairs and the political ad.
ministration of the kingdom, lead. to inqoiiries attended
with greater difficulty: As the officers and members of
the parliament of Paris were anciently nominated by the
King, were paid by him, and on .everal occasions were
remored by him at pleaftire (Chroniq. Scandaleufe de Louis
XI. chez les Mem. de Comines, -tom. ii. p. 51. Edit. de
M. Lenglet de Frefnoy), they cannot be confidered as re-
presentatives of' the people, nor could they claim any
share in the legislative power as ating in their name,
We mut search for -some other: source of this high privi-
lge.: The'parliament was originally composed of the
mointeminent perfehf in the kingdom; qhe peers of
Pineet, ecclefiatii w'of the high'ef order; and noblemen
of'iHlftious bitth, wete members of it, to 'whom were
added some clesks ,ind counfellon.'leaied in the laws.
Pafitier Recherches, p. 44 &c.!' iEncyclopedie,. ton,
rtii. Art. Parlremnt,; p. 3, 5 A court thus constituted,
was' properly a committee of the States General of the
cingdom, and wat co*npofed of these barons andfidtles,
whom the Kings of France were arcuftomed to consult
with' regard to ever aft of jurisdi&ion or legislative au-
thrity. It Wtas naturd, therefore, during the intervals
between the meetings:of the States General, or during
thof'periods wien that «ffembly was not called, to con-
ftlvt'We parliament, to lay matters of publick concern be.
Tore it, and to obtain its approbation and concurrence,
blforceany ordonante wu publiahed, to which the people
Were 'required to corrform. 2. Under tha: second race of
lOng, every new law was reduced into proper form by

J... ; ..
. ..j the

the Chancellor of the kingdom, was proposed by him to
the people, and when ena&ed, was committed to him to
be kept among the publick records, that he might give
authentick copies of it to all who should demand them.
Hincm. de ord. palat. c. 16. Capitul. Car. Calv. tit. xiv.
§ 1 . tit. xxxiii. The Chancellor presided in the parlia-
ment of Paris at its firl institution. Encyclopedie, tom.
iii. art. Cbancelier, p. 88. It was therefore natural for
the King to continue to employ him in his ancient funtions
of framing, taking into his custody, and publishing the
ordonances which were issued. To an ancient copy of the
Capitularia of Clarlemagne, the following words are
subjoined. Anno tertio Clementiflimi domini nofri Caroli
Augufii, sub ipso anno, hec fa&a Capitula funt, & con-
fignara Stephano comiti, ut hec manifefta faceret Parifiis
mallo publico, & illa legere faceret coram Scabineis,-quod
ita & fecit, & omnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipfi volu-
ifTent obfervare ufque in pofterum, etiam omnes Scabinei,
Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu propria fubter figna-
verunt. Bouquet Recueil. tom. v. p. 663. Mallua figni-
fies not only the publick aflembly of the nation, but the
courts of juflice held by the comes, or missus dominicus.
Scabini were the judges, or the assessors of the judges in
that court. Here then seems to be a very early inltance,
not only of laws being published in a court of justice, but
of their being verified or confirmed by the subscription of
thejudges. If this was the common pratice, it naturally
introduced the verifying of edits in the parliament of
Paris. But this conje&ure I propose with that diffidence,
which I have felt in all my reasonings concerning the laws
and institutions of foreign nations. 3. This supreme court
of juitice in France was dignified with the appellation of
parliament, the name by which the general afTembly of
the nation was diftinguilhed towards the dose of the second
race of Kings; and men, both in reasoning and in condu&,
are wonderfully influenced by the similarity of names. The
preserving the ancient inames of the magistrates, efla-
blilhed while republican government fubfited in Rome,
enabled Auguflus and hSs successors to affirdte new powers,
with less obfervatinn, and greater ease. The beltowing
the fame name in France upon two courts, which were
extreniel different, contributed not * little to confound
Iheir jurifdicion and funcions.

ALL there circumernnce concurred in leading the Kings
of Rrmict to avail thtrnfeldes of the parliament of Paris,

T 2 as

as the infirument of reconciling the people to their exer-
cife of legifiative authority. The French, accultomed to
fee all new laws examined and authorized before they
were published, did not sufficiently distinguish between
the effec of performing this in the national assembly, or
in a court appointed by the King. But as that court was
composed of refpeAable members, and well ikilled in the
laws of their country, when any new edi& received its
fan&ion, that was sufficient to dispose the people to im-
plicit submission.

WHEN the pracice of verifying and regifering the

royal edits in the parliament of Paris became common,
the parliament contended, that this was necessary in or-
der to give them legal authority. It was eflablifhed as a
fundamental maxim in French jurisprudence, that no law
could be published in any other manner; that without this
formality, no edi& or ordonance could have any effe&;
that the people were not bound to obey it, and ought not
to confider it as an edi& or ordonance until it was verified
in the supreme court, after free deliberation. Roche-flavin
des Parlemens de France, 4to. Gen. 1621. p. 921. The
parliament, at different times, hath, with great fortitude
and integrity, opposed the will of their sovereigns, and
notwithstanding their repeated and peremptory requisitions
and commands, hath refused to verify and publilih such
ediEts, as it conceived to be oppreflive to the people, or
subversive of the conltitution of the kingdom. Roche-
flavin reckons that between the year x 562, and the year
1589, the parliament refused to verify more than an hun-
dred edits of the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many inflnces of
the spirit and constancy, with which the parliaments of
France opposed pernicious law, and aferted their own
privileges, are enumerated by Limruts, Notitis Regni
Francia, lib. i. c. 9. p. 4.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain and de-

fend this privilege, bore no proportion to its importance,
or to the courage with which its members adferted ii.
When any monarch was determined that an edia should
be carried into execution, and found the parliament in-
flexibly resolved not to verify or publish it, he could easily
supply this defea by the plenitude of his regal power. He
repaired to the paruament in person, he took poffeflion of
his feat of juotice, and commanded the edid to be read,
verified, registered, and publihed in is presence. Then,
according to another maxim of Frch law, the King

himfcl

himself being present, neither the parliament, nor any
magistrate whatever, can exercise any authority, or per-
form any funcion. Adveniente Principe, cefat magiftra-
tus. Roche-flavin, ibid. p. 928, 929. Encyclopedie,
torn. ix. Art. Lit de _ufiice, p. 581. Roche-flavin men-
tions several instances of Kings who acually exerted this
prerogative, so fatal to the residue of the rights and liber-
ties, tranfnitted to the French by their anceflors. Pas-
quier produces some infRances of the fame kind. Rech.
p. 6I. Limnsus enumerates many others, which the
length to which this note has swelled, prevents me from
inserting at length, though they tend greatly to illuRrate this
important article in the French hiflory, p. 245. Thus by
an exertion of prerogative, which, though violent, seems to
be constitutional, and is juflified by inumerable precedents,
all the efforts of the parliament to limit and controul the
King's legislative authority, are rendered ineffeaual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the constitution or

jurifdition of any parliament in France, but that of Paris.
All of them are formed upon the model of that molt anci-
ent and refpe&able tribunal, and all my observations con-
cerning it will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. SECT. II. . 144.

THE humiliating potfure, in which a great Emperor

implored absolution, is an event so singular, that the
words in which Gregory himself describes it, merit a
place here, and convey a firiking pi&ure of the arrogance
of that Pontiff. Per triduum, ante portam caftri, depo-
fito omni regio cultu, miferabiliter, utpote difcalceatus,
& laneis indutus, perfiftens, non prius cum multo fletu
apoflolice miferationis auxilium, & consolationem implo-
rari deflitit, quam omnes qui ibi aderant, & ad quos
rumor ille pervenit, ad tantam pietatem, & compaflionis
mifericordiam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus & lacri-
mis intercedentes, omnes quidem infolitam noftrr mentis
duritiem mirarentur; nonulli vero in nobis non apoftolicm
fedis gravitater, fed quasi tyrannic= feritates crudelitatem
effe clamarent. Epifi. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Conteffa
Matilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756. vo . p.
174.

T NOTE

NOTE XLI. SECT.III. p. I51.

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace the various

-fleps in the progress of the conflitution of the Empire,
and to explain the peculiarities in its policy very fully, it is
not necessary to add much by way of illuflration. What
appears to be of any importance I ihall range under dil-
tin& heads.

I. WITH refpeA to the power, jurifdi&ion and revenue

of the Emperors. A very jufl idea of these may be
formed by attending to the view which Pfeffel gives of the
rights of the Emperors at two different periods. The first
at the close of the Saxon race, A. D. 1024. These, ac-
cording to his enumeration were the right of conferrirg
all the great ecclefiaflical benefices in Germany; of re-
ceiving the revenues of them during a vacancy, of Mort-
main, or of succeeding to the effeas of ecclefiaflicks who
died intestate. The right of confirming or of annulling
the elelions of the Popes. The right of assembling
councils, and of appointing them to decide concerning the
affairs of the church. The right of conferring the title
of King upon their vassals. The right of granting vacant
fiefs. The right of receiving the revenues of the Empire,
whether arising from the Imperial domains, fiom impofis
and tools, from gold or silver mines, from the taxes paid
by the Jews, or from forfeitures. The right of govern-
ing Italy as its proper sovereigns. The right or ereeting
free cities, and of eflablifhing fairs in them. The right
of assembling the diets of the Empire, and of fixing the
time of their duration. The right of coining money, and
of conferring that privilege on the estates of the Empire.
The right of adminifiring both high and low justice with-
in the territories of the different flates. Abrege p. 160.
The other period is at the extincion of the Emperors of
the families of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D. 1437.
According to the fame author the Imperial prerogatives
at that time were the right of conferring all dignities and
titles, except the privilege of being a slate of the Em-
pire. The right of Preens primarie, or of appointing
once during their reign a dignitary in each chapter or re-
ligious house. The right of granting dispensations with
refpe& to the age of majority. The right of ereaing
cities, and of conferring the privilege of coining money.
The right of calling the meetings of the diet, and of pre-

fiding

fiding in them. Abrege, &c. p. 507. It were easy to
show that M. Pfeffel is well founded in all these asser-tions,
and to confirm them by the tellimony of the most re-
fpeaable authors. In the one period the Emperors appear
as mighty sovereigns with extcnfive prerogatives; in the
other as the heads of a confederacy with very limited
poswers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreared fiill more

than their authority. ''he early Emperors, and particti-
larly those of the Saxon line, besides their vast patrim-n
nial or hereditary territories, possessed an extensive do-
main both in Italy and Germany which belonged to them
as Emperors. Italy belonged to the Fmrperors as their
proper kingdom, and the revenues which they drew front
it were very considerable. The first alienations of the
Imperial revenue were made in this country. The Italian
cities having acquired wealth, and aspiring at indepen-
dence, purchased their liberty from different Emperor%,
as 1 have observed Note XV. The fums which they paid,
and the Emperors with whom they concluded these bar-
gains, are mention-.d by Cafp. Klockius de ^Erario. No-
rimh. 1671. p. 85, &c. Charles IV. and his son Wen-
ceflaus dissipated all that remained of the Italian branch ot
the domain. The German domain lay chiefly upon the
banks of the Rhine, and was under the government of the
Ccunts Palatine. It is not easy to mark out the bounda-
ries, or to eflimate the value of this ancient domain,
which has been so long incorporated with the territories of
different Princes. Some hints with refpeEt to it may be
found in the glofTary of Speidelius, which he has intituled
Speculum Juridico Philologico-politico-Hifloricum Ob-
lervarionum, &c. Norimb. 1673. vol. i. 679, 1045. a
more full account of it is given by Klockius de ]Erario,
p. 84. Betides this, the Emperors possessed considerable
difrias of land lying intermixed with the estates of the
Dukes and barons. They were accuflomed to visit there
frequently, and drew from them what was sufficient to
support their court during the time of their residence.
Annalifle, ap. Struv. tom. i. 611. A great part of these
were seized by the nobles during the long interregnum, or
during the wars occasioned by the conteits between the
Emperors and the court of Rome. At the fame time
that such incroachments were made on the fixed or terri-
torial property of the Emperors, they were robbed at-
mot entirely of ;heir casual revenues. The Princes and

T 4 barons

barons appropriating to themselves taxes and duties 0t
every kind, which had usually been paid to them. Pfeffel
Abrege, p. 374. The profuse and inconsiderate ambition
of Charles IV. squandered whatever remained of the Im.
perial revenues after so many defalcations. He, in the
year 1376, in order to prevail with the eleaors to choose
his son Wenceslaus King of the Romans, promised each
of them a hundred thousand crowns. But being unable
to pay so large a fum, and eager to secure the election to
his son, he alienated to the three ecclefiafiical EleEors,
and to the Count Palatine, such countries as still belonged
to the Imperial domain on the banks of the Rhine, and
likewise made over to them all the taxes and tolls then
levied by the Emperors in that diftri&. Trithemius, and
the author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh, enumerate
the territories and taxes which were thus alienated, and
represent this as the last and fatal blow to the Imperial
authority. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 437. From that peri.
od, the shreds of the ancient revenues pofleffed by the
Emperors have been so inconsiderable, that in the opini.
on of Speidelius, all that they yield would be so far from
defraying the expence of supporting their houfhold, that
they would not pay the charge of maintaining the pols
efiablifhed in the Empire. Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol.
i. p. 68o. These funds, inconsiderable as they were,
continued to decrease. Granvelle, the minister of Charles
V. afierted in the year 1 546, in presence of several of the
German Princes, that his mailer drew no money at all
from the Empire. Sleid. Hifory of the Reformation.
Lond. 1689. p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present.
TraitE de droit Publique de l'Empire par M. le Coq. de
Villeray, p. 55. From the reign of Charles IV. whom
Maximilian called the pest of the Empire, the Emperors
have depended entirely on their hereditary dominions, as
the only source of their power, and even of their subsistence.

2. THE ancient mode of elecing the Emperors, and the

various changes which it underwent, require Tome illu-
fration. The Imperial crown, as well as those of mod
monarchies in Europe, were originally attained by eleti-
on. An opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries and
publick lawyers of Germany, that the right of choofing
the Emperos was veited in the archbishops of Mentz,
Cologne and Treves, the King of Bohcmia, the Duke of
Saxony, the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and the Count
Palatine of the Rhine, by an edict of Otho IlI confirm-

ed

ed by Gregory V. about the year 996. But the whole
tenor of history contradicts this opinion. It appears that
from the earliest period in the history of Germany, the
person who was to reign over all, was elected by the sus-
frage of all. Thus Conrad I. was eleaed by all the peo-
ple of the Franks, fays some annalists; by all the princes
and chief men, fay others; by all the nation, fay others.
See their words, Struv. Corp. 211. Conringius de Ger-
man. Imper. Repub. Acroamata Sex. Ebroduni 1654. p.
103. In the year 1oz4, posterior to the supposed regu-
lations of Otho III. Conrad II. was ele&ed by all the
chief men, and his elecion was approved and confirmed
by the people. Struv. Corp. 284. At the eletion of Lo-
tharius II. A. D. 1 125, sixty thousand persons of all ranks
were present. He was named by the chief men, and
their nomination was approved by the people. Struy.
ibid. p. 357. The first author who mentions the seven
Elecors is Martinus Polonus, who flourished in the reign
of Frederick II. which ended A. D. 1250. We find that
in all the ancient eletions to which I have referred, the
Princes of greatest power and authority were allowed by
their countrymen to name the person whom they wished
to appoint Emperor, and the people approved or ditap-
proved of their nomination. This privilege of voting
sirs is called by the German lawyers the right of Pratax-
ation. Pfeffel Abrege, p. 316. This was the first origin
of the exclusive right which the Elecors acquired. The
Fle&ors possessed the most extensive territories of any
Princes in the Empire; all the great offices of the fate
were in their hands by hereditary right; as soon as they
obtained or engrossed so much influence in the election, as
to be allowed the right of pretaxation, it became unne-
ceffary for the inferior ecclefiafticks and barons to attend,
when they had no other funtion but that of confirming
the deed of there more powerful Princes, by their aftent.
During times of turbulence, they could not resort to the
place of ele&ion, without a numerous retinue of armed
vaftals, the expence of which they were obliged to defiray
out of their own revenues. The rights of the seven
Elecors were supported by all the dcfcendants and allies
of their powerful families, who shared in the fplcndor
and influence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing
privilege. Pfeffel Abregc, p. 376. The seven Elecors
were confidered as the representatives of all the orders,
which composed the highef class of German nobility.

'There

There were three archbi(hops, chancellors of the three
great diltrits into which the Empire was anciently divid.
ed; one King; one Duke; one Marquis; and one Count
All there circumfiances contributed to render the inilo.
du&ion' of this considerable innovation into the conlituri.
on of the Germanick body, extremely easy. Every thing
of importance, relating to this branch of the political
gtate of the Empire, is well illufirated by Onuphrius Pan-
vinius an Augustinian Monk of Verona, who lived in the
reign of Charles V. His treatise, if we make some al-
lowance for that partiality which he expreifes in favour of
the powers which the Popes claimed in the Empire, has
the merit of being one of the first works in which a con-
troverted point in history is examined with critical precifi.
on, and with a proper attention to that evidence which is
derived from records, or the teflimony of contemporary
hiflorians. It is inserted by Goldaflus in his Politica Im.
perialia, p. 2.

As the Ele&ors have cngroffed the sole right of choof.

ing the Emperors, they have assumed likewise that of de-
posing them. This high power the EleEors have not
only presumed to claim, but have ventured, in more than
one inflance, to exercise. In the year 1298, a part of
the Elecors deposed Adolphus of Nassau and substituted
Albert of Aufiria in his place. The reasons on which
they found their sentence, show that this deed flowed
from factious, not from publick-fpiritcd motives. Struv.
Corp. vol. i. 54o. In the first year of the fifteenth cen-
tury, the EleAors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed the
Imperial crown on the head of Rupert Elecor Palatine.
The a& of deposition is flill extant. Goldafli Conllit.
vol. i. 379. It is pronounced in the name and by the au-
thority of the FleEors, and confirmed by several prelates
and barons of the Empire, who were present. Thtfe
exertions of the electoral power demonstrate that the Im-
perial authority was funk very low.

THE other privileges of the ele&ors, and the rights

of the eleloral college are explained by the writers on the
publick law in Germany.

3. WITH refpe& to the diets or general assemblies of

the Empire, it would be neccfary, if my obje& were to
write a particular history of Germany, to enter into a
minute detail, concerning the forms of agembling it, the
persons who have right to be present, their division into
several Colleges or Benches, the objets of their delibera-

tion,

tion, the mode in which they carry on their debates or
give their suffrages, and the authority of their decrees or
recesses. But in a general hiflory it is sufficient to observe,
that, originally, the diets of the Empire were perfectly
the fame with the assemblies of March and of May, held
by the Kings of France. They met, at least, once a
year. Every free-man had a right to be present. 'They
were assemblies, in which a monarch deliberated with his
fubjeAs, concerning their common interell. Arumaeus de
comitiis Rom. German. Imperii, 4to. Jenz, 1660, cap.
7. No. 2o, &c. But when the Princes, dignified ecclefi-
allics, and barons, acquired territorial and independent ju-
rifdiaion, the diet became an assembly of the separate
hates, which formed the confederacy of which the Em-
peror.'as head. While the conflitution of the Empire
remained in its primitive form, attendance on the diets'
wvas a duty, like the other services due from feudal sub-
jeAs to their sovereign, which the members were bound
to perform in person; and if any member who had a
right to be present in the diet negleced to attend in person,
he not only loft his vote, but was liable to an heavy pe-
nalty. Arumaus de Comit: c. 5. No. 40. Whereaz,
from the time that the members of the diet became inde-
pendent states, the right of suffrage was annexed to the
territory or dignity, not to the person. The members, if
they could not, or would not attend in person, might fend
their deputies, as Princes fend arbatfadors, and they
were entitled to exercise all the rights belonging to their
constituents. Ibid. No. 42, 46, 49. By degrees, and np-
on the fame principle of confidering the diet as an assem-
bly of independent flates, in which each confederate had
the right of suffrage, if any member poffiefed more than
one of those flates or charaters which entitle to a feat in
the diet, he was allowed a proportional number of sus-
frages. Pfeffcl AbrcgE, 622. From the fame caule the
irrperial cities, as soon as they became free, and acquired
filreme and independent jurifdi.nion within their own ter-
n'lories, were received as members of the diet. The
powers of the diet extend to every thing relative to the
conmmon concern of the Germanick body, or that can in.
terest or asset it as a confederacy. The diet takes no
cognizance of the interior administration in the different
States, unless that happens to dilturb or threaten the ge-
neral safety.

4. WITH1

4. WITH refpe& to the Imperial chamber, the juri;

dition of which has been the great source of order and
tranquillity in Germany, it is necelfary to observe, that
this court was inflituted in order to put an end to the ca.
lamities occasioned by private wars in Germany. Ihave
already traced the rife and progress of this pratice, and
pointed out its pernicious effeas as fully as their extensive
influence during the middle ages merited. In Germany,
private wars seem to have been more frequent and pro-
du&ive of worse consequences than in the other countries
of Europe. There are obvious reasons for this. The
nobility of Germany were extremely numerous, and the
causes of their dissention multiplied in proportion. The
territorial jurifdi&ion which the German nobles acquircd,
was more compleat than that professed by their order in
other nations. They became, in reality, independent
powers, and they claimed all the privileges of that cha-
rater. The long interregnum accuflomed them to an
uncontrouled license, and led them to forget that fubordi-
nation which is necessary in order to maintain publick
tranquillity. At the time when the other monarchs of
Europe began to acquire such an increase of power and
revenues, as added new force to their government, the
authority and revenues of the Emperors continued gradu-
ally to decline. The diets of the Empire, which alone
had authority to judge between such mighty barons, and
power to enforce its decisions, met very seldom. Con-
ring. Acroamata, p. 234. The diets when they did as
femble were often comptoed of several thousand members.
Chronic. Conflant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546, and were
mere tumultuary assemblies, ill qualified to decide con-
cerning any quefiion of right. The feflion of the diets
continued only two or three days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244,
so that they had no time to bear or discuss any cause that
was in the smallef degree intricate. Thus Germany was
left, in some measure, without any court of judicature,
capable of reprefling the evils of private war.

ALL the expedients which were employed in other

countries of Europe in order to restrain this pracice, and
which I have described Note XXI. were tried in Germany
with little effec. The confederacies of the nobles and oi
the cities, and the division of Germany into various circlek,
which I mentioned in that Note, were found likewise in-
sufficient. As a laid remedy, the Germans had recourk
to arbiters whom they called Aufpr¢g. The barons and

Rates

flates in different parts of Germany joined in conventions,
by which they bound themselves to refer all controversies,
that might arise between them, to the determination of
dufjrege, and to submit to their sentences as final. These
arbiters are named sometimes in the treaty of convention,
an instance of which occurs in Ludewig Reliqus Manufcr.
omnis cvi, vol. ii. 212. sometimes they were chosen by
mutual content; sometimes they were appointed by neu-
tral persons; and sometimes the choice was left to be de-
cided by lot. Datt. de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap.
27. N° 60, &c. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc. AuJfrag.
p q. Upon the introducion of this pracice, the pub-
lic tribunals of jufRice became, in a great measure, useless,
and were almost entirely deserted.

IN order to re-eflablifh the authority of government,

Maximilian infituted the Imperial chamber, at the period
which I have mentioned. This tribunal confifed origi-
nally of a president, who was always a nobleman of the
first order, and of sixteen judges. The president was
appointed by the Emperor, and the judges, partly by
him, and partly by the States, according to forms which
it is unnecessary to describe. A fum was imposed, with
their own content, on the States of the Empire, for pay-
ing the alaries of the judges, and officers in this court.
The Imperial chamber was efiablifhed firfl at Francfort
on the Maine. During the reign of Charles V. it was
removed to Spires, and continued in that city above a
century and a half. It is now fixed at Wetzlar. This
court takes cognizance of all questions concerning civil
right between the States of the Empire, and pases judg-
ment in the las resort, and without appeal. To st be-
longs, likewise, the privilege of judging in criminal cau-
fes, which may be confidered as conneced with the pre-
servation of the publick peace. Pfeffel Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right or jurifdic-

tion, together with such as refpe& the territories, which
hold of the Empire in Italy, belong properly to the jurif-
dicion of the Aulick council. This tribunal was formed
upon the model of the ancient court of the palace inti.
tuted by the Emperors of Germany. It depended not
upon the States of the Empire, but upon the Emperor;
he having the right of appointing at pleasure all the judg-
es of whom it is composed. Maximilian, in order to pro-
cure Ibme compensation for the diminution of his authori-
ty, by the power veied in the Imperial chmber, pre-

vailed

vailed on the diet, A.D. 1512. togive its consent to the
establishment of the Aulick council. Since that time, it
has been a great' objec of polky in the court of Vienna
to extend the jurifdiRion, and'fuppor tlhe authoriyr of the
Auliek conncil, and to circumscribe 'and weaken those of
the Imperitl chamber. The tedious forms and dilatory
proceedings of the Imperial chamber have furnilhed the
Emperors with pretexts for doing so. Lites Spire, ac-
cording to the witticism of a Gemian lawyer, spirant, fed
riunquam exfpirant. Such delays are unavoidable in a
court composed of members named by States, jealousof
each other. Whereas the judges of the Aulick council,
depending on one mnfler, and being responsible to him
alone, are more vigorous and decwive. Puffendorf. de
Statu Impei. German. cap. v.' 20. Pfeffel Abrege, p.
581.

NOTE XLI. SCT.'II. p. 53.

THE description which I have given of the Turkilh go-
*rrmnent: I conformable to the accounts of the mod intel-
fierit travellers wh6 have visited that Empire. The count
de MarfigN, in his treatise eocerhing' the nilitary date of
the Tnrkilhl Empire, ch. vi.'and'the Author of Lbfervati-
onr onthe religion, laws, govermaent a:nd mannerrt f the
turis, publilhed at London' 1768, d. . i. -8i. differ
froh other writers who have de'scribed. the political co:-
flitution of that powerful monarchy. As they had o.)-

rtunity, -dttirng thir' long retidtce in Turkey, to o'r-

serve the' order i*nd'jufIice cbhfpicuom in several depn:t-
mints of aditiniftlation, they 'eem' unwilling to admit
rhat it fhouild be denominated * defpotilhn.' - But whon t:e
frirm of government in any' cuntry is reptrfctd' tro he
defpotick, this 'does not fuppie that the power of the
monarch is :contimillyv xextedl in ass 'of violence,::i-
jiftice and 'ohtty. Under' governnienr f irfyp feecie:s
pnlefs when frmed frantic tyrair't14ppen todbtldr'fhcep-
itre the otdinte' 'adminiftra4ion' it be comforniaeb to
the principles of jtitice, ind if ,;nt :a&ive in p'rttmting
the welfare oFithe pete, car~ot'eett'inly hawX thtir
din'rufion for its odjeft. A'Ihte, in Which the fove-
feign pobffe4es .'hie ablbdite i~imarit f s vift finititary
ftiOrc, : et wthee

wi'!the 'dif!iofall 'f' in ettenfive reveite;

In' whichtHle te:pe tive n6'p. .itge, ndg no rrt ei-
iher immnil; Wfete i'tote' 'I cgIUi4n - in wbhielthre

·*~~~~~~~~
' ~~~~~~~~~is

is no body of hereditary .nobility, jealous of their own
rights and diftinaions, to stand as an intermediate order
between the Prince and the people, cannot be difiinguifh-
ed by any name but that of a despotism. The refiraints,
however, which I have mentioned, arising from the Capi-
culy, and from religion, are powerful. But they are not
such as change the nature or denomination of the govern-
ment. When a defpotick Prince employs an armed force
to support his authority, he commits the supreme power
to their hands. The Prietorian bands in Rome, dethron-
ed, murdered, and exalted Princes, in the fame wanton
manner with the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople.
But not.withgtnding this, the Roman Emperors have been
confidered by all political writers as poffefTig defpotick
power.

NOTE XLIII. S ECT. Ill. p. 154.

THE inflitution, the discipline, and privileges of the

Janizaries are described by all the authors who give any
account of the Turkish government. The manner in
which enthusiasm was employed in order to inspire them
with courage is thus related by Prince Cantemir. " When
Amurath 1. had formed them into a body, he sent them to
Haji Bektath a Turkish Saint, famous for his miracles
and prophecies, desiring him to give them a banner, to
pray to God for their success, and to give them a name.
The faint, when they appeared in his presence, put the
sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads, and fays,
Let them.be called rtengicberi. Let their countenance be
ever bright, their hands vicorious, their sword keen, let
their spear always hang over the heads of their enemies,
and wherever they go, may they return with a (hining
face. Hiflory of the Ottoman Empire, p. 38. The
number of Janizaries, at the first institution of the body,
was not considerable. Under Solyman, in the year 1521,
they amounted to twelve thQufand. Since that time their
number' ba greatly incrnafed. Marfigli, Etat, &c. ch. 6.
p. 68. Though Solyman pofTeffed such abilities and au-
thority as to rcftrain this formidable body within the bounds
of obedience, yet its tendency to limit the power of the
Sultans was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
tervers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompanied M.
d'Aramon amba4ffdor from Henry 11. of France, to Soly-
man, publifhe an account of bi! travels, in which he de-

fcribcs

scribes and celebrates the discipline of the Janizaries, but
at the fame time predids that they would, one day, be.
come formidable to their maters, and a& the fame part
at Constantinople, as the Pretorian bands had done at
Rome. Colle&ion of Voyages from the Earl of Oxford's
Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. III. p. 156.

SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the Turkish

historians have given the firname of Canuni, or inflituter
of rules, firfl brought the finances and military establish-
ment of the Turkilh Empire into a regular form. He
divided the military force into the Capiculy or soldiery of
the Porte, which was properly the standing army, and
Serrataculy or soldiers appointed to guard the frontiers.
The chief flrength of the latter confided of those who
held Timariots and Ziams. These were portions of land
granted to certain persons for life, in much the fame man-
ner as the military fiefs among the nations of Europe, in
return for which military service was performed. Soly-
man, in his Canun,-Nami or book of regulations, fixed with
great accuracy the extent of these lands in each province
of his Empire, appointed the precise number of soldien
each person who held a Timariot or a Ziam should bring
into the field, and eflablifhed the pay which they should
receive while engaged in service. Count Marfigli and Sir
Paul Rycaut have given extra&s from this book of re-
gulations, and it appears that the ordinary establishment
of the Turkilh army exceeded an hundred and fifty thou-
sand men. When there are added to the soldiery of the
Porte, they formed a military power which vafily exceed-
ed what any Chriflian State could command. Marfigli
Etat Militaire, &c. p. 136. Rycaut's state of the Otto-
man Empire, bo'k iii. ch. 2. As Solyman, during his
acive reign, was engaged so conltantly in war, that his
troops were always in the field, the Serrtaouly became
almost equal to the Janizaries themfelve in discipline and
valour.

IT is not furprizing, then, that the authors of the

sixteenth century should represent the Turlu as far superior
to the Christians, both in the knowledge and in the prac-
tice of the art of war. Guicciardini informa us, that the
Italians learned the art of fortifying towns from the Turks.
Hiflor. lib. xv. p. 266. Bulbequiu, who was aminbador

from

from Ferdinand to Solyman, and who had opportunity to
observe the slate both of the Chiiflian and Turkish armies,
published a discourse concerning the belt manner of carry-
ing on war againit the Turks, in which he points out at
great length the immense advantages which the infidels
poffTefed with refped to difcipiine, and military improve-
ments of every kind. Bufbequii opera edit. Elzvir. p.
,93, &c. The testimony of other authors might be
added, if the matter were, in any degree, doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude there Proofs and Illufirations, I

ought to explain the ren.on of two omiflions in them; one
of which it is necessary to mention on my own account,
tlie otierrto obviate an objetion to this part of the
wsrk.

IN all nry inquiries and difqnifitions concerning the pro-

grefs of government, manner%, literature and commerce
during the middle ages, as well as in my delineations of
the political conftitition of the different States of Europe
at the opening of the sixteenth century, I have not once
mentioned MN. de Voltaire, who, in his E.fay fur I'hiJfoire
rcnrale, has reviewed the fame period, and has treated
of all there subje6s. This does not proceed from inatten-
tion to the works of that extraordinary man, whose genius,
no less enterprizing than universal, has attempted almost
every different species of literary composition. In many
of these he excels. In all, if he had left religion untouch-
ed, he is inltru&ive and agreeable. But as he seldom
imitates the example of modern historians in citing the
authors from whom they derived their information, I
could not, with propriety, appeal to his authority in con-
firmation of any doubtful or unknown fa&. I have often,
however, followed him as my guide in there researches;
and he has not only pointed out the saCs with refpe& to
which it was of importance to inquire, but the conclusions
which it was proper to draw from them. If he had, at
the fame time, mentioned the books which relate these
particulars, a great part of my labour would have been
unneceflary, and many of his readers, who now confider
linm only as an entertaining and lively writer, would find
'hat he is a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omiflion; every intelligent reader mufl

hIave observed, that I have not entered, either in the
hiitorical part of this volume, or in the Proofs and llluflra-
lions, into the fame detail with refpet to the ancient laws
and cufloms of the British kingdoms, as concerning those

VOL. I. U of

of the other European nations. As the capital faas, wir,
regard to the progress of government and manners in their
own country, are known to molt of my readers, such a
detail appeared to me to be less essential. Such sacs and
observations, however, as were necessary towards corn.
pleating my design in this part of the work, I have men.
tioned under the different articles which are the fubjecd
of my disquisitions. The Rate of government, in all the
nations of Europe, having been nearly the fame during
several ages, nothing can tend more to illufirate the pro-
grefs of the English constitution, than a careful inquiry
into the laws and cufloms of the kingdoms on the conti.
ncnt. This source of information has been too much
negleced by the English antiquarians and lawyers. Fillkd
with admiration of that happy constitution now eflabliili
ed in Great Britain, they have been more attentive to its
forms and principles, than to the condition and ideas oi
remote times, which, in almost every particular, differ
from the present. While engaged in perusing the laws,
charters, and early historians of the continental kingdoms,
I have often been led to think that an attempt to illufirate
the progress of the English jurisprudence and policy, by a
comparison with those of other kingdoms in a similar
situation, would be of great utility, and might throw
much light on some points which are now obscure, and
decide others, which have been long controverted.

'1 Hr

# BOOK I.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.
C "HARLES V. was born at Ghent on the twenty- Boon I.

fourth day of February, in the year one thou- ''"'
sand five hundred. His father, Philip the Hand- Birchof
rome, Archduke of Aufiria, was the son of the

Emperor Maximilian, and of Mary, the only child of
Charles the Bold, the las prince of the house of Burgun-
diy. His mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen of Castile and
Aragon.

A LONG train of fortunate events had opened the way His domi-

for this young prince to the inheritance of more extensive nionns and
dominions, than any European monarch, since Charlesi byhichh'
the Great, had polffeled. Each of his ancestors had .ycqirc
acquired kingdoms or provinces, towards which their prof- thm
pea of fucceiion was extremely remote. The rich pol-
feflions of Mary of Burgundy were defined for another
family, she having been contracted by her father to the
only son of Lewis XI. of France; but that capricious

U 2 monarch,

30oK I. monarch, intdulging his hatred to her family, chole rather

-"' ~ to flrip her of part of her territories by force, than to

secure the whole by marriage; and by this misconduct
fatal to his poflerity, threw all the Netherlands, and
Francfi Comt6 into the hands of a rival. Isabella, the
daughter of John II. of Caflile, far from having anm
prospect of that noble inheritance which she transmitted
to her grand:on, paTcd the early part of her life in obfctu-
rity and indigence; but the Caflilians, exasperated againll
her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed and vicious prince,
publickly charged him with impotence, and his queen
with adultery; and, upon his demise, rejecting Joannal,
w.hom the King had uniformly, and even on his death-bed,
owned to be his lawful daughter, and whom an assembly
of the flates had acknowledged to be the heir of his king-
dom, they obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placi.
Isabella on the throne of Caflile. Ferdinand owed the
crown of Aragon to the unexpected death of his elder
brother, and acquired the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily
by violating the faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties
of blcad. To all there kingdoms, Chriflopher Columbus,
by an effF'rt of genius and of intrepidity, the boldest and
nmei fucccfsful that is recorded in the annals of mankind,
addiJlc a new world, the wealth of which was one confi-
derable source of the power and grandeur of the Spanifl
monarcis.

Philip nlm DON JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Ifabe!li,
Jollnna, his and their eldest daughter, the queen of Portugal, being
Jather andi cut off in the flower of ycuth, all their hopes centered in
nmotiher, vi-
fit Sptn. Joanna and her polterity. But as her husband, the Arch-

duke, was a flrangcr to the Spaniards, it was thought cx-
pcdicnt to invite him into Spain, that by residing among
them, he might acciflom himself to their laws and man-
ttcrs; and it was expeEted that the Cortes, or afTr.mli)l
of flates, wholc auhiority was then so great in Spain,
that no title to the crown was reckoned valid unlcfs it re-
ceived their fanQion, would acknowledge his right ol
fucccefion, together with that of the Infanta, his wife.
Philip and Joanna, pafling through France in their way to
iSo». Spain, were entertained in that kingdom with the utmofi

magnificence. The Archduke did homage to Lewis XII.
for the earldom of Slanders, and took his feat as a peer of
the realm in the parliament of Paris. They were receiv-
ed in Rpain with every maik of honour that the parental
affetion of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the refpe of thrir

fubjeds,

fuhje&s, could devise; and their title to the crown was Boox I.
jbon after acknowledged by the Cortes of both kingdoms. v

BUT amidfl these outward appearances of atishfacion Ferdinand

and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed upon Ih:- mind of Jea10"l o
each of these princes. The nlately and reserved cere-ro,,e'
monial of the Spanish court, was so buirienFome to Philip,
a prince young, gay, affable, fond of focicty and of piea-
lure, that he soon began to express a desire of returning
to his native country, the manners of which were mere
luited to his temper. Ferdinand, obfetvitig the dcclininr
health of his queen, with whose lile his right to tie gu-
vernment of Cafiile must cease, easily foresaw, that .
prince of Philip's disposition, and who already discovered an
extreme impatience to reign, would never content to his
retaining any degree of authbrity in that kingdom; and
lie profpec of this diminution of his power, awakened
the jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

ISABELLA beheld, with the fentimcnts natural to a IfaTiela'.l-

mother, the indifference and neglec with which the licilu-t
Archduke treated her daughter, who was destitute of all t'h 'm crdt
those beauties of person, and all those accomplishments of her daugh-
mind, which fix the affctcions of an husband. Her un- t,.
'.crftanding, always weak, was often disordered. She
ioated on Philip with such an excess of childish and im-
pertinent fondness, as excited difgtflt rather than affedion.
Her jealousy, for which her husband's behaviour gave her
too much cause, was proportioned to her love, and often
broke out in the moni extravagant acions. Ifabclla,
though sensible of her defeEts, could not help pitying her
condition, which was soon rendered altogether deplorable,
by the archduke's abrupt resolution of etting ont in the
middle of winter for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain.
llabella intreated Ihim not to abandon Jhis wife to grief and
melancbolv, which might prove fatal to her, as the was
near the time of her delivery. Joanna conjured him to
put off his journey for three days only, that she might
have the pleasure of celebratilig the feflival of Chriflmas
in his company. Ferdinand, after reprcfenting the im-
prudence of his leaving Spain, before lie had time to bc-
Lcolo acquainted with the genius, or to gain the affecions
ot the people who were one day to be his fubjecs, bc-
fiught him, at leads, not to pals through France, with
which kingdom he was then at open war. Philip, with-
out regarding either the didates of humanity, or the
maxims of prudence, perfiflcd in lis piurpo.!e, and on the

U 3 twenti-

BooK I. twenty-fecond of December set out for the Low-Countries,
'--^'*-' by the way of France [a3.
Disorder of FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna funk into
JOannaBuenh
Jmind'. a deep ard fullen melancholy [b3, and while (he was in that
Birth of situation bore Ferdinand her second son, for whom the
Ferdinand, power of his brother Charles afterwards procured the
afterwards
Emperor. kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom he at

last transmitted the Imperial sceptre. Joanna was the only
person in Spain who discovered no joy at the birth of this
prince. Insensible to that, as well as to every other plea-
sure, she was wholly occupied with the thoughts of re-
turning to her husband; nor did she, in any degree, reco-
1504. ver tranquillity of mind, till she arrived at Brussels next

year e¢.

PHILIP, in paifing through France, had an interview

with Lewis the XII. and signed a treaty with him, by
which he hoped that all the differences between France
and Spain would be finally terminated. But Ferdinand,
whose affairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous in
Italy, where the superior genius of Gonfalvo de Cordova,
the great captain, triumphed on every occasion over the
arms of France, did not pay the least regard to what his
fon-in-law had concluded, and carried on hostilities with
greater ardour than ever.

Death of FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken any part
Ifbell. in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet, till the death

either of Ferdinand or of Isabella Should open the way to
one of their thrones. The latter of these events was not
far diftlant. The untimely death of her children had
made a deep impression on the mind of Isabella, and as She
could derive but little consolation for the losses she had
sustained either from her daughter Joanna, whole infirmi-
ties daily increased, or from her fon-in-law, who no
longer preserved even the appearance of a decent refpre
towards that unhappy princess, her (pirits and health be-
gan gradually to decline, and after languishing some
months, ihe died at Medina del Campo on the twenty-
sith of November, one thousand five hundred and four
She was no less eminent for virtue, than for wisdom ; and
whether we confider her behaviour as a queen, as a wife,

Petri Martyri. Anglerii Epiftolc. 2ao, st3. [b] Id. Epift. a15
c Mauisr lib, a7. c. i, 14. Flechier Vie de Ximea. 1 191.

[~]~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~O

or as a mother, (he is jufRly entitled to the high encomi- BooK 1.
unis bestowed on her by the Spanish historians [d]. --

A FEW weeks before her death, (he made her last will, Her will,
and being sensible of Joanna's incapacity to assume the appointing

Ferdinand

reins of government into her own hands, and having no regent of
inclination to commit them to Philip, with whose conduB Castile.
she was extremely diflatisfied, (he appointed Ferdinand
regent or adminifirator of the affairs of Catlile till her
grandson Charles attained the age of twenty; (he be-
queathed to him likewise one half of the revenues that
fhoild arise from the Indies, together with the grand
niafterfhips of the three military orders; dignities, that
rendered those who possessed them almost independent,
and which Isabella had, for that reason, annexed to the
crown ]e. But before The signed a deed so favourable to
Ferdinand, fhe-obliged him to swear that he would not,
by a second marriage, or by any other means, endeavour
to deprive Joanna or their poiterity of their right of fuc-
cefiion to any of his kingdoms ['.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdinand re- 'Pe"dinn'

acknowled'-

signed the title of king of Calfile, and commanded Joanna ed , re-
and Philip to be publickly proclaimed the sovereigns of gent by the
that kingdom. But, at the fame time, he assumed the Cortes.
characer of Regent, in consequence of Isabella's testa- '
ment, and not long after he prevailed on the Cortes of
Caflile to acknowledge his right to that office. This,
however, he did not procure without difficulty, nor with-
out discovering such symptoms of alienation and disgust
among the Castilians as filled him with great uneasiness.
The union of Castile and Aragon, for almost thirty years, The Caflili-
had not so entirely extirpated the ancient and hereditary sutdiTfftii-
cnmity which fuhfifled between the natives of these king-fied'
dos,' that the Caflilian pride could submit, without
murmuring, to the government of a king of Aragon. Ser-
dinand's own charater, with which the Castilians were
well acquainted, was far from rendering his authority de-
firable. Suspicious, discerning, revere and parsimonious,
he was accustomed to observe the mos minute acions of
his subje&s with a jealous attention, and to reward their
highef services with little liberality; and they were now
deprived of Ifahclla, whose gentle qualities, and partiality
to her CaRilian subje&s, often tempered his austerity, or

[1] P. Martyr9.S.. 179. t[e P. Martyr. Ep. 177. Mar. His. lib. z8.

c i i. Perreru HiR. Gcner. d' Lpagae, tom viii. a 3.
[I] M r. kliftlib. z. c. 14.

U 4 rendered

Boox I. rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his government
_-v'""ewere especially odious to the Grandees; for that artful

prince, sensible of the dangerous privileges conferred upon
them by the Fe dal institutions, had endeavoured, by ex.
tending the royaiTurifdi&ion, by proteting their injured
vassals, by increasing the immunities of cities, and Iy
other measures equally prudent, to curb their exorbitart
power [e]. From all there causes, a formidable party among
the Castilians united against Ferdinand, and though thole
who composed it, had not hitherto taken any publick flep
in opposition to him, he plainly saw that upon the least
encouragement from their new king, they would proceed
to the mos violent extremities.

dPhiip vuo NOR was there less agitation in the Netherlands upon
obtain the receiving the accounts of Isabella's death, and of Ferdi-
government nand's having assumed the government of Cafile. Philip
f Clle. was not of a temper tamely to susser himself to be sup-

planted by the unnatural ambition of his father-in-law. If
Joanna's infirmities, and the nonage of Charles rendered
them incapable of government, he, as a husband, was the
proper guardian of his wife, and as a father, the natural
tutor of his son. Nor was it sufficient to oppose to these
just rights, and to the inclination of the people of Caflile,
the authority of a testament, the genuineness of which
was perhaps doubtful, and its contents certainly iniqui.
tous. A keener edge was added to Philip's resentment,
and new vigour infused into his councils by the arrival of
Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's ambassador at
the Imperial court, but upon the first notice of Isabella's
death repaired to Brussels, flattering himself that in the
court of a young and liberal prince, he might attain to
power and honours, which he could never hope for in the
service of an old and frugal matter. He had early paid
court to Philip during his residence in Spain, with such
assiduity as entirely gained his confidence; and having been
trained to business under Ferdinand, could oppose his
schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not inferior to
those for which that monarch was diflinguifhed [h].

He equidre BY his advice, ambaIfadors were dispatched to requite
Ferdinmnd
tn reig the Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to resign the govern-
regency. meat of Calfile to those persons whom Philip should cn-

trufi with it till his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the
Castilian nobles as had discovered any diflatisfa&cion with
[g] Maria. lib. II. c. 1a. [h] Zrinta Anales de Aragon tomn. vi. p. it

Ferdinan&ds

yerdinand's administration, were encouraged by everyBooK l.
method to oppose it. At the fame time a treaty was con- v
,ilded with Lewis XII, by which Philip flattered himself
that he had secured the friendship and affiflance of that
nonarch.

MVIEANWH ILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts of ad-

dress and policy, in order to retain the power of which he
had got pofleffion. By means of Conchillos, an Arago,
nian gentleman, he entered into a private negotiation with
Joanna, and prevailed on that weak princess to confirm,
by her authority, his right to the regency. But this in-
trigue did not escape the penetrating eye of Don John
Manuel; Joanna's letter of consent was intercepted;
Conchillos was thrown into a dungeon; and (he herfelt
confined to an apartment in the palace, and all her Spa-
nifh domeflicks secluded from her presence [i].

THE mortification which the discovery of this scheme Fcri'"lan"

occasioned to Ferdinand, was much increased by his ob bythandedC-
serving the progress that Philip's emissaries made in Ca- liha nobles.
tile. Some of thp nobles retired to their caitles; others
to the towns in which they had influence; thev formed
themselves into confederacies, and began to aflemhble their
vassals. Ferdinand's court was almost totally deserted;
not a person of diftintion but Ximenes, archbishop of
Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the marquis of Denia,
remaining there; while the houses of Philip's ambaffa-
dors were daily crowded with those of the highest rank.

EXASPERATED at this universal defecion, and piqued, Ferdinad

perhaps, at feeing all his schemes defeated by a younger refotves to
politician, Ferdinand resolved, in defiance of the law ofearrinor-
nature, and of decency, to deprive his daughter and her elude hi<
ponerity of the crown of Castile, rather than renounce daughter
the regency of that kingdom. His plan for accomplishing throne.
this was no less bold, than the intention itself was wicked.
lie demanded in marriage Joanna, the supposed daughter
of Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy, IHa-
bella's right to the crown of Castile was founded ; and by
reviving the claim of this princess, in opposition to which
he himself had formerly led armies, and fought battles,
he hoped once more to get pofTeflion of the throne ot
that kihgdom. But Emanuel, King of Portugal, in
whose dominions Joanna resided, being married to one of
Ferdinand's daughters by Isabella, refused his content to

[i] P. Mart. Ep. .87. Zurita Analce vi. r. 14.

that

Boot I. that unnatural match; and the unhappy princess herrelf,
.-'v-J-- having lolt, by being long immured in a convent, all re-

lilh for the objects of ambition, discovered no less aver-

\ sion to it [k].

M^ries a THIE resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambition,
nioct of lbe were not exhanfled. Upon meeting with a repulse in
King. Portugal, he turned towards France, and fought in mar-

riage Gcrmaine de Foix, a daughter of the viscount of
Narbonre, and of Mary, the fliter of Lewis XII. The
war which that monarch had carried on against Ferdinand
in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he listened with
joy to a proposal, which furnished him with an honourable
pretence of concluding peace: And though no prince was
ever more remarkable than Ferdinand for making all his
pafiions bend to the maxims of interest, or become subser-
vient to the purpores of ambition, yet so vehement was
his resentment againfl his fon-in-law, that in order to be
revenged of him, by detaching Lewis from his interest,
and in order to gain a chance of excluding him from his
hereditary throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexed
to it, lie was ready once more to divide Spain into fepa-
rate kingdoms, though the union of these was the great
glory of the reign, and had been the chief objet of his
ambition; he consented to restore the Neapolitan nobles of
the French facion to their poffeflions and honours; and
submitted to the ridicule of marrying, in an advanced
age, a princess of eighteen [I].

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived Philip

of his only ally, and threatened him with the loTs of so
many kingdoms, gave a dreadful alarm to him, and con-
vinced Don John Manuel that there was now a neceflity
of taking other measures with regard to the affairs of
Spain [m]. He accordingly inflruted the Flemish ambaf
fadors in the court of Spain, to teflify the firong desire
vhich their mailer had of terminating all differences be-
tween him and Ferdinand in an amicable manner, and his
willingnes to content to any conditions that would re-ef
tablifh the friendship which ought to subsist between a fa-

A trrtv be- ther and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he had made
t'1tnFne'di- and broken more treaties than any prince of any age, was
Philip. apt to confide so far in the sincerity of other men, as to

[k] Sandov. Hit. of Civil Wars in CIdile. Lond. 1655. p. 5. Zuaita
Ajil.. de Aragpn, tom. vi p. 113.

!] P. Mart. !hp. ago, gI9. Mariana lib. 18. c. z6, s7,
nm] P. Mart. Ep 3. be

be always extremely fond of a negotiation. He liflened Boox l
with eagerness to these declarations, and soon concluded a .-
treaty at Salamanca ; in which it was stipulated, that the Nov. 14.
government of Caffile should be carried on in the joint
names of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that
the revenues of the crown, and the right of conferring
offices, fliould be thared between Ferdinand and Philip by
an equal division I1.
NOTHIN G, however, was farther from Philip's thoughts ISo6.

Philip ad

than to observe this treaty. His sole intention in propoiing l Joanrfet
it was to amuse Ferdinand, and to prevent him from tak- iail its
ing any measures for obftruting his voyage into Spain. It Span.
had that effea. Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not
for some time fufpe& his design; and though when he
perceived it, he prevailed on the king of France not only
to remonltrate against the archduke's journey, but to
threaten hostilities if he undertook it ; though he solicited
the duke of Gueldres to attack his fon-in-law's dominions
in the Low-Countries, Philip and his consort nevertheless
set fail with a numerous fleet, and a good body of land
forces. They were obliged by a violent tempest to take
shelter in England, where HenryVII. in compliance with
Ferdinand's Solicitations, detained them upwards of three
months [o]; at last they were permitted to depart, and after
a more prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at Co- Aprii z.
rinna in Galicia, nor durf Ferdinand attempt, as he had
once intended, to oppose their landing by force of arms.

THE Cafliian nobles, who had been obliged hitherto to The iabiti-

conceal or dissemble their sentiments, now declared openly tyef Clacfo
in favour of Philip. From every corner of the kingdom, Philir.
persons of the highefr rank, with numerous retinues of
their vassals, repaired to their new king. Ti:e treaty of
Salamanca was universally condemned, and all agreed to
exclude from the government of Castile a prince, who by
consenting to disjoin Aragon and Naples from that crowo,
discovered so little concern for its true interests. Ferdi-
nand, mean while, abandoned by almost all the Caftilianm,
disconcerted by their revolt, and uncertain whether he
would peaceably relinquish his power, or take arims in
order to maintain it, earnefly solicited an interview with
his fQn-in-law, who by advice of Manuel (ludioufly avoid-
ed it. Convinced at lai, by feeing the number and zeal

(nI Zurit Anale det Aragon, vi. t . P. Mart. Ep. 193, 194.
I) Fcrrer. Hist. viii. l85.

of

BOOK I. of Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was in vain to
'-~-*- think of refifling such a torrent, he consented, by a treaty,
l Ju."'d to resign the regency of Callile into the hands of Philip,
resign the to retire into his hereditary dominions of Aragon, and to
regency of reft satisfied with the masterships of the military orders,
(CaRile, and and that share of the revenue of the Indies, which Isabella
retires to
Aragin. had bequeathed to him. Though an interview between

the princes was no longer neccffary, it was agreed to on
both fids from motives of decency. Philip repaircd io
the place appointed with a splendid retinue of the Cafli-
lian nobles, and a considerable body of armed men. Ser-
dinand appeared without any pomp, attended by a few
followers, mounted on mules, and unarmed. On that
occasion don John Manuel had the pleasure of displaying
before the monarch whom he had deserted, the exten.
five influence he had acquired over his new mailer:
while Ferdinand suffered in presence of his former fubjeqfs
the two most cruel mortifications which an artful and am-
bitious prince can feel; being at once over-reached in con-
dut, and Giripped of power r[1.
July. NOTr long after, he retired into Aragon; and hoping

that some favourable sccident would soon open the way
for his return into Castile, he took care to protefl, though
with great secrecy, that the treaty concluded with his son-
in-law, being extorted by force, ought to be deemed void
of all obligations [].

Philip and PHILIP took poffefion of his new authority with a
kniowltda e youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from whom he de-
aI king and rived it, remained during all these contefls, under the lo-
ueen bythe minion of a deep melancholy; she was seldom allowed to
Corter.

appear in publick; her father, though he had often de-
fired it, was refused access to her; and Philip's chief ob-
jea was to prevail on the Cortes to declare her incapable
of govtrnment, that an undivided power might be lodged
in his hands, till his son should attain to full age. But
such was the partial attachment of the Caflilians to their
native princess, that though Manuel had the address to
gain Iome members of the Cortes afTembled at Vallado-
lid, and others were willing to gratify their new sovereign
in his sirs requefl, the great body of the representatives
refuled their content to a declaration which they thought

[r] Zuiitt Anile de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. ,8. c. 19. 10. P. Mart. er.

304. 305, &c.
['I] Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hist. viii. 19o.

so

so injurious to the blood of their monarchs [r]. They were Bo OK I.
unanimous, however, in acknowledging Joanna and Phi- *--
lip, Queen and King of Caflile, and their son Charles
prince of Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event during Death of

Philip's admninifrration. A fever, occasioned by a debauch, Philip.
put an end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of his age, Sept. 15.
not having enjoyed the regal dignity which he had been to
eager to obtain, full three months [s].

THE whole royal authority in Castile ought of course The difor-

to have devolved upon Joanna. But the shock occasioned drof lJoan
bv a difaler so unexpeEted as the death of her husband increaflr.
compleated the disorder of her underfranding, and her in-
capacity for government. During all the time of Philip's
fickners, no intreaty could prevail on her, though in the
sixth month of her pregnancy, to leave him for a moment.
When he expired, however, ihe did not shcd one tear,
or utter a single groan. Her grief was silent and fettled.
She continued to watch the dead body with the fame ten-
dernefs and attention as if it had been alive [t3, and though
at lait The allowed it to be Vuried, ihe soon removed it
from the tomb to her own apartment. There it was laid
upon a bed of flat, in a fplcndid dress; and having heard
from some monk a legendary tale of a king who revived
after he had been dead fourteen years, she kept her eyes
alhnol conflantly fixed on the body, waiting for the happy
moment of its return to life. Nor was this capricious as-
tiution forher dead lhufband lets tintiured with jealousy, than
that which (he had horne to him while alive. She did not
permit any of her female attendants to approach the bed
on which his corpef was laid ; she would not susser any
woman who did not belong to her family to enter the
apartment ; and rather than grant that privi!ege to a
midwife, tho' a very aged one had been chofcn on pur-
pose, lie bore the princess Catherine without any other
affiflance than that of her own domeflics [u].

A VWOMAN in such a (late of mind was little capable of S i, inica-

governing a great kingdom; and Joanna, who made it Pible f' go-
her sole employment to bewail the lols, and to pray for the
foul of her husband, would have thought her attention to
public affairs an impious neglec of those duties which flie
[F) Zuiitc Anales de Arag. vi. p. 7g. [h] Malian. lib 18. c. 13.

P. Mart. Ipp. 316. [u] Mu. Hist. lib. 19. c. 3 & 5. P. MAit. ep.
319, 3x4, 3.8, 331.

owed

BOOK I. owed to him. But though she declined afTuming the ad.

r----' ministration herself, yet, by a firange caprice of jealousy,

lhe refused to commit it to any other person; and no in.
treaty of her fubjets could persuade her to name a regent,
or even to sign such papers as were necessary for the exe.
cution of juflice, and the security of the kingdom.

THF death of Philip threw the Castilians into the great.

elf perplexity. It was necessary to appoint a regent, both
on account of Joanna's frenzy, and the infancy of her
Ion ; and as there was not among the nobles, any person
lo eminently diflinguifled as to be called by the publick
voice to that high office, all naturally turned their eyes

Miximi;ian either to Ferdinand, or to the Emperor Maximilian. The
thtEirr . former claimed that dignity as adminifirator for his daugh-
nnJ corn- ter, and by virtue of the teflament of Isabella; the latter
Ptitor for thought h:imfelfthe legal guardian of his grandson, whom,
theltegenc. on account of his mother's infirmity, he already confider-

ed as king of Caflile. Those who had lately compelled
Feictinand to resign the government of the kingdom,
trembled at the thoughts of his being reflorcd so soon to
his former dignity. They dreaded the return of a mo-
raich, not apt to forgive, and who, to those defects with
uhicih they were already acquainted, added that resent-
ment which the remembrance of their behaviour, and re-
flection upon his own disgrace, mufl naturally have ex-
cited. Though none of there objections held against
Maximilian, he was a firanger to the laws and manners
of Caflile, and destitute of troops and money to support
his pretensions, nor could his claim be admitted without a
public declaration of Joanna's incapacity for government,
an indignity, to which, notwithflanding the notoriety ot
her difremper, the delicacy of the Caflilians would never
conIent.

D)ON JOHN MANUFr., however, and a few of the

nobles, who confidered thcifelves as molt obnoxius to
Ferdlnard'c difplca'ure, declared for Maximilian, and of-
ftrcd to fuipport his claim with all their interest. hlasi-
milian, always entcrpri.ing and decisive in council, though
teeble and dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the
offer. But a series of ineffecfual negotiations was the
only consequence of this tranfation. The Fmperor, as

iutal, afl'rted his rights in a high flrain, promiled a gceat
deal, and performed nothing [1.
!rl Mariana. lih. 20. c. 7. Z7. ita Anlet de Arag. vi. 93.

A Fr w

A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdinand had BooK I.

set out for Naples, that, by his own presence, he might '--
put an end, with the greater decency, to the vic,- Ferdinand
royalty of the great captain, whose important services, vir°it to hi
and cautious condu&, did not screen him from the sus- kingdom qi
picions of his jealous maller. Though an account of his Naples.
fon-in-law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the terri-
tories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to discover the secret
intrigues which he supposcd the great captain to have been
carrying on, and to cflablifh his own authority on a firm
foundation in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him
from the supreme command there, that rather than dif-
continue his voyage, he chose to leave Cafile in a (late of
anarchy, and even to rifque, by this delay, his obtaining
poeffeilon of the government of that kingdom [y].

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent condu&t

of his adherents, could have prevented the bad effets of
his ablence. At the head of these was Ximenes, archbi- Acquiret
shop of Toledo, who, though he had been railed to that the regency

of Calsite,

dignity by Isabella, contrary to the inclination of Fcrdi-i-chfilef
nand, and though he could have no expetation of enjoy- through the

'influence of

ing much power under his jealous administration, was ne- nrdince of
verthelefs so disinterested, as to prefer the welfare of his Ximents.
country before his own grandeur, and to declare, that
Caflile could never be so happily governed as by a prince,
whom long experience rendered thoroughly acquainted
with its true interest. His zeal to bring over his country-
men to this opinion, induced him to lay aside somewhat
of his usual aufierity and haughtiness. He condescended, 'so7
on this occasion, to court the difaffe&ed nobles, and em-
ployed address, as well as arguments, to persuade them.
Ferdinand seconded his endeavours with great art; and by
conceflions to some of the grandees, by promises to others,
and by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained many
of his molt violent opponents [z]. And though many ca- Aug. 21.
bals were formed, and some commotions excited, yet Ferdinand
when Ferdinand, after having fettled the affairs of Naples, ru'' to
arrived in Castile, he entered upon the adminifiration,
without opposition. The prudence with which he exer- Hi, prudent
cifed his authority in that kingdom, equalled the good for-a'minifQta-
tune by which he had recovered it. By a moderate, but l"on
steady adminifiration, free from partiality and from re-

(y3 Zurit Antlei de Ang. vi. p. 85.
] b. vi. 87, 94, 109.

fentment,

BOOK I. fentment, he entirely reconciled the Cafrilians to his per.
'-v-~-' son, and secured to them, during the remainder of his life

as much comeflic tranquillity, as was consistent with the
genius of the feudal government, which still fubfflec
;:mong them in full vigour [a].

NOR was the preservation of tranquillity in his heredi.

tary kingdoms, the only obligation which the archduke
Charles owed to the wife regency of his grandfathcr; he
had the fatisfation, during that period, of feeing very

1509. important acquisitions added to the dominions over which

Conjlttil of he was to reign. On the coafl of Barbary, Oran, and
"'"''" other conquells of no fma!l value, were annexed to the

cro.wn of C-itile by cardinal Ximcnes, who, with a fpi-
rit verv uncommon in a monk, led in person a numerou,
army againll the Moors of that country; and, with a
generosity and magnificcnce fill more fingllar, defrayel
the whole expcnce of the expedition out of his own reve-
nu( s [t]. ' Vhile in Europe, Ferdinand, under pretencc,
both frivolous and iunjult, and by artifices the mofl sham.-

A:Tqirjfien ful and treacherous, expelled John d'Albert, the lawhii
,.: t',^.i. socereign, from the throne of Navarre ; and seizing on

tli:t kingdom, extended the limits of the Spanish monar-
c!hv from the Pyrenees on the one hand, to the frontiers ot
'Prtugal on the other [M].

Ir w'as not, however, the desire of aggrandizing t!.c

Archduke, uwhich influenced Ferdinand in this or in a!v
other of his acions. He was more apt to confider th:;
voing prince as a rival, who might one day wertc out (if
his hands the government of Cafrile, than as a trandfon,
t'or wiio'c behoof he was entrusted with the adminif'raii-

r.iliia.:l on. This jealousy soon begot aversion and even hatrc.',
;:a:ld, ,. the fynmltoms of which he was aa no pains to conceal.

'. ';'""'" HIHence proceeded his immoderate joy when his young

ilic.t-nl rn'a d( livered of a son, whose life xwould have de-
prived Ch:i:lc> ol the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily,
annd ''adnnia ; and upon the untimely death of that prince,
l. (i'( Coveitcd, flo the fame reason, an excessive solicitude
t; h:ive (. iler children. l'his impatience of his haftenedl,
in all i.mhahilit), the accelion of Charles to the crown of
'paiI. Fern land, in order to procure a blefling, ol
whiili, from his advanced age, and the intemperance oi

] Maiiana, lib. 29. c. Ic.
it.J lb. lib. 19. c. 18.
I[] Ih. lb. b. , c I* , 11, 19, 24.

Xl':5

};s youth, he could have little profpe&, had recourse toBoolK I.
his phylicians, and by their prescription took one of those '--v -
potions, which are supposed to add vigour to the conltitu-
lion, though they more frequently prove fatal to it.
This was its effect on a frame 'o feeble and exhaufled as
tllat of Ferdinand ; and though he survived a violent dif-
order v.hich it at first occasioned, it.biought on such an
h3abitual languor and dejc('tion of mind, as rendered him
a'erie from any leirious attention to public affairs, and
tuii of frivolous amusements, on which he had not hillier-
to bellowed much time [)]. Though he now despaired of
having any son of his own, his jealousy of the Archduke
did not abate, nor could he help yiewing him with that
aversion, which princes often bear their successors. In 15.
order to gratify this t! natural passion, he made a will, Endeavours
appointing prince Ferdcl.and, who having been horn and to exclude
educated in Spain, was much beloved by the Spaniards, th fsp,in.
to be regent of all his kingdoms, till the arrival of the kingdom::,
archduke his brother; and by the fame deed he fettled by a will in
upon him the grand-mafterfliip of the three military or- rdialid.
dors. The former of there grants might hame put it in
his power to have disputed the throne with his brother;
the latter would, in any event, have rendered him almost
independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous love of

power, which was so remarkable through his whole life.
Unwilling to resign it, even at the approach of death, he
removed continually from place :o place, in order to fly
from his distemper, or to forget it; and though his
llrength declined every day, none of his attendants durit
mention his condition; nor would he admit his father con-
eItfor, who thought such silence criminal and unchristian,
into his pretence. At left the danger became so immi-
nent, that it could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand re.
ceived the intimation with a. decent' fortitude; and touch-
ed, perhaps, with compuncion.at the injuflice he had
done his grandson, or influenced by the honest remon-
frances of Carvajal, Zapata and Vargas, his molt anci-
ent and faithful countellors, who represented to him that
by!inyvfting prince Ferdinand with th-e regency, he would
infallibly entail a civil war on the two brothers, and by
beflowing on him the grand maflerlhip of the military
orders, would strip the crown of .ita obleft ornament and

[dl) uri, Anae de Arag. vi. 347. P. bt p. S31, Arpfol AaJt
Vo.A i. , chief
Vo.t.I. X chief

BooK I. chief trength, he consented to alter his will in both the(e

L--'-) particulars. "By a new deed he left Charles the sole heir

ts etrfhadt of all his dominions, and allotted to prince Ferdinand, in.
Wil!, flead of'that throne of which he thought himself almost

secure, an inconsiderable cftablifhment of fifty thousa!d
and dies. ducats a year [e. He died a few hours after signing this

will, on the twenty-third day of January, one thouland
five hundred and sixteen.

Education CI-ARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance defcenl.
o Charles ed by his death, was near the full age of sixteen. He had

hitherto resided in the Low-Countries, his paternal domi.
nions. Margaret of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of
York, the siser of Edward 1V. of England, and widow
of Charles the Bold, two princesses of great virtue and
abilities, had the care of forming his early youth. Upon
the death of his father, Philip, the Flemings committed
the government of the Low-Countries to his grandfather,
the Emperor Maximilian, with the name rather than the
authority of regent [f]. Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the edu-
cation of the young prince his grandson E}. That noble-

man

[e] Mar. Hist. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Anales de Arag, vi. 401. P. Mart.

Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Anales de Arag. lib. i. p. s.

[f] Pontius Heuterus Rerunm Aulfriacarum, lib. xv Lov. 1649. lib. 7
c . i. p.55.

[g] The French hiltorhan, upon the autkority of M. de Bellay, Man.

p. 1 . have unanimoully fterted that Philip, by his last will, having lp-
pointed the King of France to have the direaiom of hib son's education,
Louis XII. with · difimereftednefs, fuitble to the confidence reposed in
him, named Chievret for that office. Even the preident Henault bh
adopted this opinion. Abreg Cbron. A. D. lo7. Varilla%, in his ufuil
manner, pretelds to have seen Philip's testament. Prad. de I' education
des Princes, p. 16. Butthe psilh, Cerman and Plemil hiftoriit co-
cur in contradicting this alflnie of the French suthorn. h appear froi
leutern, a contempory Plemilh hifterian of great authority, that Lois
XII. by confeatin to the mauruse of Germaine de PdFx with Ferdinad,
had loft much of t ciedie which Philip oce placed in im; ltbi
this dlfluft wa icreafed by ti Preflc Iing% gi ial in marriage to
count of Anao leme hi a

dt daughter whom he had formerly betrorhed

to Charles. Neuter. Rer. Autr. lib. v. 51 that tt the Prench . s(hort ti*
before Philip's deth, had '~i d the pece, which fabfitad betwre-
thern ad the PlaBiagc d Philip had complained of dbi injury,. ad wa
ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid. All thele circumfances reader it in.
probable that Philip, who made bis will a few days before he died, He*
ter. p. is%, l wiM eo i

c*it b ecducaaor hbr foriu Lma Xl k

coefimatli of there plaufiM aonjlauar, pitir te~ tinony can be
dued, Ik h rap n qiF Haemn, that lhilip, whenhea set o for Spsiii
had entrule~ CMlLht bl Ath liC re o f bh (eiJede~^t, nd wil
the overnment of his dmninion in the Low-Cotries. Neuter. lib. vii
p. 153.T at am

u ~tm made, sos efn Ph lip', de^ah, tob
the Enpeer Muim liu appoitcd rcgct, durig, $he Ciwahf lb

irqo3

man possessed, in an eminent degree, the talents which Boo I.
fitted him for such an important office, and discharged the
duties of it with great fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian
of Utrecht aded as preceptor. This preferment, which
opened his way to the highest dignities an Ecclesiastic can
attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was extremely
mean; nor to his interest, for he was a firanger to the
arts of a court ; but to the opinion which his countrymen
entertained of his learning. He was indeed no inconfider-
able proficient in those frivolous sciences which, during fe-
veral centuries, aflumed the name of Philosophy, and
published a commentary, which was highly escemed,
upon The Book of Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus
Lombardus, and confidered at that time, as the flandard
fyflem of metaphysical theology. But whatever admirati-
on these procured him in an illiterate age, it was soon
found that a man accuflomed to the retirement of a col-
lege, unacquainted with the world, and without any tinc-
ture of tafle or elegance, was by no means qualified for
rendering science agreeable to a young prince: Charles,
accordingly, discovered an early aversion to learning, and
an exceflive fondness for those violent and martial exercif-
es, to excel in which was, at that time, the chief pride,
and almost the only ifudy of perlons of rank. Chievres
encouraged this tafle, either from desire of gaining his
pupil by indulgence, or from too flight an opinion of the
advantage of literary accomplishments [h. He infiruded
him, however, with great care in the arts of government
he made him fludy the history not only of his own king-
doms, but of those with which they were conneced; he
accuflomed him, from the time of his assuming the go-
vernment of Slanders in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and fifteen, to attend to business; he persuaded him
to peruse all papers relating to public affairs; to be present

gindoen, but tiat being oppoled, ChievyreC fee to have continued to dif-
cirge bu the affice whrc Philip bed amiued to him, Hen. ibid.

3, 1 55. That in the bepining of the year 1 o8, t e Fleia Ipvitf-
Mximilian to accept of the regency, to which be consented, apd

*pó

POinted his daughter Margaret, together with a coaucil of Flemings, to
texrcji the n Apec tlthorit, when be bimfeif betd t any tie be
mbruat. Be likfwile nored Cbievres u governor,

v a4 A4irn of JUutn

s preceptor to his son, Het. Ibid. 15S, 157. Wht HHeterus relate, with
refpec to this matter ii confirmed by Moriflu in Vita Adriani s pud
AnlebCr Carp. Burmunni e APriaoo, wp. aio by Iuiw , OCpiic.
urabint. Ibid. p. 15; and by Hulrus Anntl. Brb. vol. ii. sLo, &c.

[h] Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 9. Otruvii C~w Hi. . M. 9y7. P.
icutcr. ker. Afitr. lib. 7. c. .p. e57.

X a at

BOOK I. at the deliberations of his privy counsellors, and to propo's
.- tto them himself those matters concerning which he re-

quired their opinion [E]. From such an education, Charles
contraEted habits of gravity and recolletion which scarce

The first suited his time of life. The firfi openings of his geniu.
oprnings of did not indicate that superiority which its maturer age
his charc- displayed [k]. fIe did not discover in his youth that impc-

tuofity of spirit which commonly ushers in an aaive and
enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early obsequiousness
to Chievres, and his other favourites, promise that capa-
cious and decisive judgment, which afterwards directed the
affairs of one half of Europe. But his fubjeds, dazzled
with the external accomplishments of a graceful figure anti
manly address, viewing his characer with that partiality
which is always shown to princes during their youth, en-
tertained sanguine hopes of his adding luifre to thote
crowns which descended to him by the death of FeFdinand.

State of THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from the view
Spain re- which I have given of their political conflitution, were, at
quires vi- that time, in a situation, which required an adminiltrati-
gorous ad-
minitration.on, no less vigorous than prudent. The feudal inflituti-

ons, which had been introduced into all its different pro-
vinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Vandals, fubfifl-
ed in great force. The nobles, who were powerful and
warlike, had long poflefed all the exorbitant privileges,
which these inflitutions vefied in their order. The cities
in Spain were more numerous and more considerable, than
the genius of feudal government, naturally an enemy to
commerce, and to regular police, seemed to admit. The
personal rights, and political influence, which the inhabi-
tants of these cities had acquired, were extensive. The
royal prerogative circumscribed by the privileges of the
nobility, and by the pretensions of the people, was con-
Lined within very narrow limits. Under such a form of
government, the principles of discord were many; the
bond of union was extremely feeble; and Spain felt not
only all the inconveniencies occasioned by the defecs in
the feudal system, but was exposed to disorders arising
from the pecuFiarities in its own confitution.

DURING the long adminifiration of Ferdinand, no in
ternal commotion, it is true, had arisen in Spain. Ii1

[i] beItoiM de EBlby, (Wo. Par. i73

p. ai. P. Heutr. Ib. viii. c.-
'[i'~ r.SMm et,, As^s.superi

fuperiol
* r

superior abilities enabled him to restrain the turbulence of BooK I.
the nobles, and to moderate the jealousy of she commons; --.r
and by the wisdom of his domestic government, by the
i:gacity with which he conduacd his foreign operations,
and by the high opinion that his fubjets entertained of
both, he prcferved among them a degree of trancqitility
greater than was natural to a conflitution, in which the
feeds of discord and disorder were so copiously mingled.
But, by the death of Ferdinand, these restraints were at
once withdrawn; and fadion and discontent, from being
long repressed, were ready to break out with fiercer ani-
mo.fity.

IN order to prevent there evils, Ferdinand had in his Ferlinand

las will taken a mofl prudent precaution, by appointing hadappoint-
cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, to be sole fe- xed'rdinae
gent of Catile, till the arrival of his grandson in Spain. Regent.
The singular charaAer of this man, and the extraordinary
qualities which marked him out for that office,. at such a
junaure, merit a particular description. He was descend- S.is rife and
ed of an honourable, not of a wealthy family; and the Ch""aral.
circumstances of his parents, as well as his own inclinati-
ons, having determined him to enter into the church, he
early obtained benefices of great value, and which placed
him in the way of the highest preferment. All thei',
however, he renounced at once; and after undergoing a
very fevcre noviciate, assumed the habit of St. Francis in
a monaflery of Obfervantine friars, one of the mofl rigid
orders in the Romish Church. There he soon became
eminent for his uncommon autlerity of manners, and for
those excesses of superstitious devotion, which are the
proper charaaeriflics of the monafic life. But notwith-
htanding these extravagancies, to which weak and enthufi-
aflic minds alone ate usually prone, his uailcrftanding, na-
turally penetrating and decisive, retained its full vigour,
and acquired him such great authority among his own or-
der, as raised him to be their provincial. Ilis reputation
for san&ity, soon procured him the office of father cpn-
fefor to the queen Isabella, which he accepted with the
utmost relucance. He preserved in a court the anme au-
fterity of manners; which had diftinguilhcd him in the
cloifier. He continued to make all his journies on foot;
he fubfiflted only upon alms; his a&s of mortification were
as severe as ever; and his penances as rigorous. Isabella,
pleased with her choice, conferred on him, not long alser,
the Archbilhoprick of 'Toledo, which, next to the Papa-

X 3 cy,

BooK I. cy, is the richest dignity in the church of Rome. This
V'-V-' honour he declined with a firmness, which nothing but the

authoritative injuntion of the Pope was able to overcome.
Nor did tHis height of promotion change his manners.
Though obliged to display in public that magnificence
which became his fiation, he himfelfretained his monastic
severity. Under his pontifical robes he constantly wore
the coarse frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he used
to patch with his own hands. He at no time used linen;
but was commonly clad in hair-doth. He slept always in
his habit, molt frequently on the ground, or on boards,
rarely in a bed. He did not taste any of the delicacies
which appeared at his table, but satisfied himself with that
simple diet which the rule of his order prescribed [k]. Not-
withitanding these peculiarities, so opposite to the manners
of the world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of its
affairs; and no sooner was he called by his flation, and by
the high opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella entertain-
ed of him, to take a principal share in the administration,
than he displayed talents for business, which rendered the
fame of his wisdom equal to that of his san&ity. Bold
and original in all his plans, his political condu& flowed
from his real characer, and partook both of its virtues
and its defeas. His extensive genius suggested to him
schemes, vast and magnificent. Conscious of the inte-
grity of his intentions, he pursued these with unremitting
and undaunted firmness. Accustomed from his early
youth to mortify his own passions, he Ihewed little indul-
gence towards those of other men. Taught by his fyfiem
of religion to check even his most innocent desires, he
was the enemy of every thing to which he could affix the
name of elegance and pleasure; and, though free from
any suspicion of cruelty, he discovered in all his commerce
with the world a severe inflexibility of mind, and austerity
of characer, peculiar to the monastic profeflion, and
which can scarce be conceived in a country where that is
unknown.

Cardinal SU cH wasthe man to whom Ferdinand committed the
Adrian ap- regency of Caltile, and though he was then near four-
pointd re- score, and perfectly acquainted with the labour and

c'hai. difficulty of th office, his natural intrepidity of mind,

and zeal for the public good, prompted him to accept of
it without hefiatiton: And though Adrian of Urecht, who

[k] Hiftir de l'«mli~na da Card. Xio. par Mich. Baudid,
4e. 1ts3. p. I3. ha

had

had been sent into Spain a few months before the death Boot I.
of Ferdinand, produced full powers from the archduke '-
to assume the name and authority of regent upon the de-
mise of his grandfather; such was the aversion of the
Spaniards to the government of a :ranger, and so unequal
the abilities of the two competitors, that Adrian's claim
would at once have been rejeaed, if Ximenes himself, Ximenes
from complaisance to his new malter, had not consented obtains the
to acknowledge him as regent, and to carry on the govern- fule direai-
ment in conjunaion with him. By this, however, Adri- on of as-
an acquired a dignity merely nonimal; and Ximenes,
though he treated him with great decency, and even rc-
fpet, retained the whole power in his own hands [1].

THE Cardinal's firRt care was to observe the motions His precau-
of the Infant Don Ferdinand, who having been flattered tionS agsin

,the infant

with so near a profpe& of the supreme power, bore the D>,n Ferdi.
dilappointment of his hopes with greater impatience than and.
could have been expecdofa prince so young. Ximenes,
under pretence of providing more effeaualiv for his lase-
ty, removed him from Guadalupe, the place in which he
had been educated, to Madrid, -where he fixed the refi-
dence of the court. There he was under the cardinal's
own eye, and his conduc, with that of his domertics,
were watched with the utmost attention [n].

THE firit intelligence he received from the Low-

Countries, gave greater disquiet to the Cardinal, and
convinced him how difficult a talk it would be to conduc
the affairs of a young prince, under the influence of coun-
fellors unacquainted with the laws and manners of Spain. Charles ,-
No sooner did the account of Ferdinand's death reach fumes the
Brussels, than Charles, by the advice of his Flemish titlc otkine.
miniflers, resolved to assume the title of king. By the
laws of Spain, the sole right to the crowns both of Castile
and of Aragon, belonged to Joanna; and though her in-
firmities disqualified her from governing, this incapacity
had not been declared by any public a& of the Cortes of
either kingdom; so that the Spaniards confidered this re-
solution, not only as a direa violation of their privileges,
but as an unnatural usurpation in a son on the prerogatives
of a mother, towards whom, in her present unhappy
ituation, he manifcfted a Iels delicate regard than her futk

1] Cometiuade reb. gest. Ximenii, p. iSo. fol. Compl. i569.
Tm] Miouln Coonti, ruians , lib. i. c a. a. audie rHift. de Ximener,

X 4 jeA

BOOK I. je&s had always expressed [']. The Flemish court, how.

ever, prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor tc
addreis letters to Charles as king of Caflile; the former
of whomn, it was pretended, had a right, as head of the
church; and the latter, as head of the empire, to confer
this title; and inftrutions were sent to Ximenes, to prt-
vail on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes,
though he had earnestly remonstrated against the measure,
as equally unpopular and unnecessary, resolved to exert all
his authority and credit in carrying it into execution, andl
immediately assembled such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before them;
and when, instead of complying with his demands, they
began to murmur against such an unprecedented encroach-
ment on their privileges, and to talk high of the rights oi

Recognized Joanna, and their oath of allegiance to her, Ximenes
through the hastily interposed, and with that firm and decisive tone
influence of which was natural to him, told them, that they were net

ine now called to deliberate, but to obey; that their sovereign

did not apply to them for advice, but expe&ed fubmiflion;
April 13. and " this day, added he, Charles shall be proclaimed

King of Castile in Madrid, and the ret of the cities will
follow its eiample." On the spot he gave orders for that
purpose [o; and notwithstanding the novelty of the prac-
tice, and the secret discontents of many persons of diflinc-
tion, Charles's title was universally recognized. In Ara-
gon, where the privileges of the fubje& were more ex-
tensive, and the abilities and authority of the archbilhop
of Saragofla, whom Ferdinand had appointed regent,
were far inferior to those of Ximenes, the fame obfequi-
oufnefs to the will of Charles did not appear, nor was he
acknowledged there under any other charaaer but that oó
Prince, till his arrival in Spain [P].

Hit klchemt XIMENES, though poffefled only of delegated power
for extend- which, from his advanced age, he could not expea loIn
roative' to enjoy, assumed, together with the characer of regent

all the ideas natural to a monarch, and adopted scheme
for extending the regal authority, which he pursued will
as much intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself had bcel
to reap the advantages resulting from their success. Th'
exorbitant privileges of the Castilian nobles, circumfcrib
ed the prerogative of the prince within very narrow limitl

*a] P. Mart. Ep. 568.
l GoiMw p. ia, cp . Bawdier Hit. de Ximta p. slp .
r P. M:t.U p. 57L.

Thec

These the cardinal confidered as so may unjust extortions BooK 1.
from the crown, and determined to reducc them. Danger-
ons as the attempt was, there were circumstances in his
situation which promised him greater success than any
l ine of Castile could have expeted. His tlria and pru-
dent oconomy of his archiepilcopal revenues, furnilhed
him with more ready money, than the crown could at any
time command; the fanaity of his manners, his charity
and munificence rendered him the idol of the people; and
the nobles themselves, not fulpeaing any danger from him,
did not observe his motions with the fame jealous atten-
tion, as they would have watched those of one of their
monarchs.

IMMEDIATELY upon his accession to the regency, By dep-e-
several of the nobles, fancying that the reins of govern- f' 'tt

hilaty.

ment would of consequence be somewhat relaxed, began
to assemble their vassals, and to prosecute, by force es
arms, animofities ard pretensions which the authority of
Ferdinand had obliged them to differnble, or to rclinquifh.
But Ximenes, who had taken into pay a good body of
troops, opposed and defeated all their designs with unex-
pected vigour and facility; and though he did not treat
the authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he forced
them to aEts of fubmiflion, extremely mortihfing to the
haughty spirit of Caflilian grandees.

BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were confined to in- nv fyrm;ni

dividuals, and every at of rigour was juflifeid by the a ',lry of
appearance of necessity, founded on the forms of juflice, t,'C". de
and tempered with a mixture of lenity, there was scarce the cruo.
room for jealousy or complaint. It was not so with his
next measure, which, by striking at a privilepe elfcntial
to the nobles, gave a general alarm to the whole order.
By the feudal confitution, the military pov.er was lod.ced
in the hands of the nobles, and men of an inferior condi-
tion were called into the field only as their vatTals, and to
follow their banners. A king with scanty revenues, and a
limited prerogative, depended on there potent barons in
all his operations. It was with their forces he attacked his
enemies, and with them he defended his own kingdom;
and while at the head of troops attached only to their own
lords, and accuflomed to obey no other commands, his
authority was precarious, and his efforts feeble. From
this Rate Ximenes resolved to deliver the crown; and as
mercenary handing armies were unknown under the feudal
government, and would have been odious to a martial and

generous

Boo I. generous people, he issued a proclamation, commanding

' every city in Castile to enroll a certain number of its bur.

geffes, in order that they might be trained to the use of
arms cn.Sundays and holidays; he engaged to provide of.
sicer. to command them at the publick expence; and as
an encouragement to the private men, promised them an
exemption from all taxes and impositions. The frequent
incursions of the Moors from Africa, and the ncceffity of
having some force ready to oppose them, furnished a plau-
fible pretence for this innovation. The obje& really in
view was to secure the king a body of troops independent
of his barons, and which might serve to counterbalance
their power [q]. The nobles were not ignorant of his
intention, and saw how effecuallv the scheme he had
adopted would accomplish his end; but as a measure which
had the pious appearance of refifling the progress of the
Infidels was extremely popular, and as any opposition to it
arising from their order alone, would have been imputed
wholly to interested motives, they endeavoured to excite
the cities themselves to refuse obedience, and to remon-
ftrate against the proclamation, as inconsistent with their
charters and privileges. In consequence of their inftigati-
ons, Burgos, Valladolid, and several other cities, rose in
open mutiny. Some of the grandees declared themselves
their prote&ors. Violent remonstrances were presented
to the King. His Flemish counsellors were alarmed.
Ximenes alone continued firm and undaunted ; and partly
by terror, partly by intreaty; by force in some instances,
and by forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the re-
fra&ory cities to comply .r. During his adminifiration,
he continued to execute his plan with vigour, but soon as-
ter his death it was entirely dropt.

y recalling His success in this scheme for reducing the exorbitant
the grantsof power of the nobility, encouraged him to attempt a dimi-

t'rcht to nution of their poflfions, which were no left exorbitant.
the nobility. During the conteRs and disorders inseparable from the

feudal government, the nobles, ever attentive totheir own
interet, and taking advantageof the weaknei and difrefs
of their monarchs, had seized tome parts of the royal
demesnes, obtained grants ofother, andgradually wrested
almof the whole out of the hands of the prince, and an-
nexed them to their own eesta, The rights, by which

M]ai CedmiaduU.tMsma , . Hg. gi7l .

H.5.p. .

[r h s.
Ge p. g6o , r. Oat p. io, óc.

modt

pnol of the grandees held these lands, were extremely BooK I.
defeive; it was from some successful usurpation, which '-v
the crown had been too feeble to dispute, that many deriv-
ed their only title to poffeflion. An enquiry carried back
to the origin of these encroachments, which were almost
co-eval with the feudal fytem, was impraCticable; and
as it would have stripped every nobleman in Spain of great
part of his lands, it must have excited a general revolt.
Such a ftep was too bold, even for the enterprising genius
of Ximenes. He confined himself to the reign of Ser-
dinand; and beginning with the pensions granted during
that time, refused to make any farther payment, becaule
all right to them expired with his life. He then called to
account those who had acquired crown lands under the ad-
minifiration of that monarch, and at once resumed what-
ever he had alienated. The effects of these revocations
extended to many persons of great rank; for though Ser-
dinand was a prince of little gencrofity; yet lie and Ilabella
having been raised to the throne of Castile by a powerbil
action of the nobles, they were obliged to reward the
zeal of their adherents with great liberality, and the royal
demesnes were their only fund for that purpose. The
addition made to the revenue of the crown by these revo-
cations, together with his own frugal trconomv, enabled
Ximenes not only to discharge all the debts which Ferdi-
nand had left, and to remit considerable fums to Slanders,
but to pay the officers of his new militia, and to eftablilh
magazines more numerous, and better furniflied with
artillery, arms, and warlike flores, than Spain had ever
possessed in any former age [r]. The prudent and dilin-
terested application of thele fums was a full apology to the
people for the rigour with which they were exacted.

TH nobles, alarmed at there repeated attacks, thought The nobice

it neceufary to take precautions for the safety of their order. ,ppolie his
Many cabals were formed, loud complaints were uttered,me'"'ica
and desperate resolutions taken; but before they proceeded
to extremities, they appointed some of their number to
etamine the powers in consequence of whch the Cardinal
exercised acs of such high authority. The admiral of
Castile, the duke de Infantado, and the condo de Bene-
venteo, randees of the firit rank, were entrufled with this
commission. Ximenes received them with cold civility,
and in manwer to their demand produced the testament of
Ferdinand, by which he was appointed regent, together

[r] Fkchitr Vide Ximea. ii, 6o(,

with

Boos . . ith the ratification of that deed by Charles. To bot}

L-v~-' thele they objected; and he endeavoured to eftablifr

Bit w:thout their \aliditv. As the conversation grew warm, he let
'iu> ce. them inlenfiily towards a balcony, from which they had

a view of a large body of troops under arms, and of a
lormiidable train of artillery. " Behold," fays he, point-
ing to theie and raising his voice, " the powers which I
have received from his catholick majetly. With thcfe I
govern Cafile; and with thele I will govern it, till the
king your mailer and mine takes poffctlicn of his kil,-
dom [£]." A declaration o b old and haughty filectd
them, and aftoliflied their associates. To take arms
agairfl a man aware of his danger, and prepared for his
deenice, was what despair alone would di.tate. All
thoughts of a general confederacy againfl the Cardinal's
adminifsration were laid aside; and except from some
flight commotions, excited by the private resentment of
particular ncblemen, the tranquillity of Caflile suffered
no ii.terruption.

ThwAed I. T eas not only from the opposition of the Spanilh no-
I rmnifih mi- bility that obflaclcs aroic to the execution of the Cardinal's
niittl¢. Ichemcs; he had a constant itruggle to maintain with the

Flemish miniilers, who presuming upon their favour wvith
the young king, aimed a: direaing the affairs of Spain,
as well as those of their own country. Jealous of his
great abilities, and independent spirit, they confidered
him rather as a rival who might circumcfribe their pow-
er, than as a mini:er who by his prudence and vigour
was adding to the grandeur and authority of their mailer.
Every complaint against his adminiltration was listened to
with pleasure by the courtiers in the Low-Countrits
Unnecessary oblirutions where thrown by their means in
the way of all his measures, and though they could not
either with decency or safety deprive him of the office
of regent, they endeavoured to lessen his authority by
dividing it. They Soon discovered that Adrian of Utrecht,
already joined with him in office, had neither genius or
spirit sufficient to give the leaf check to his proceedings;

An additi- Charles, by their advice, added to the comnil-
il rnumtr sion of regency La Chau, a Flemilh gentleman, and
lppuinteid. afterwards Amerflorf, a nobleman of Holland; the for-

mer diftingaifhed for his address; the latter for his firm-
necs. Ximenes, though no firanger to the malevolent in-
tention of the Flemilh courtiers, received them with all

[] PFIm. ii. 551. FPertr»l, }Hi. viii. 413.

the

Be external marks of diftincion due to the office wit': BOOK I.
which they were inveRted; but when they came to enter --
upon business, he abated nothing of that air of furetiori-
*Y with which he had trelted Adrian, and itill retained
tiletole direcion of assails. Tlhe Spaniards, more averic,
perhaps, than any other people to the governm'rnt et
itrangers, approved of all his efforts to pitferve liis au-
thority; and even the nobles, influenced tnv tlis national Xinme re- '
pafiion, and forgetting their jealousies and discontents, 'tile

.i.

chole rather to lee the lupreme power in the hands of one ati',,, ,
of their countrymen, wi,mr they feared, than in tihie of
foreigners, whomthey hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great fcemrnes ofH Th fuc-r-

domestic policy, and embarrafTed by the artificcs and in- rul wi ...
trigues of the Flemish ministers, had the burden of two
foreign wars to support. The one was in Navarre, in-
vaded by its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albcrt. 'I he
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, and the dil-
cord and difaffeaion which reigned among the Spanilh
nobles, seemed to present him with a favourable opportu-
nity of recovering his dominions. The Cardinal's vigi-
lance, however, defeated a measure so well concerted.
Forefceing the danger to which that kingdom might be
exposed, one of his first adts of administration was to
order thither a considerable body of troops. While ti:
king was employed with one part of his army in the siege
of St. Jean Pied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great
experience and courage, attacked the other by lurpri'e,
and cut it to pieces. The king instantly retreated with
precipitation, and an end was put to the war ['. But as
Navarre was filled at that time with towns and cailes,
sightly fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being un-
able to resist an enemy, served only to furnish him with
places of retreat; Ximenes, always bold and decisive in
his measures, ordered every one of these to be difman-
tied, except Pampeluna, the fortifications of which he
propoled to render very frong. To this uncommon pre-
caution Spain owes the poeffelion of Navarre. The
French, fnce that period, have often entered, and have
"sften over-run the open country; but while they were
expoed to al the inconveniencies attending an invading
rmnys the Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the
eighbouriag provinces to oppose them; and the French,

,t] P. r. Me . s7o.
.a being

BooK 1. being destitute of firong towns to which they could re.
--v"-.-' tire, have been obliged to abandon their conquest with at

much rapidity as they gained it.

His cpera- THE-war which he carried on in Africa, againfl the
tions in A-
filic *eil famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, who, from a pri-
fortunate. vate corsair, railed himself by his singular valour and

address, to be king of Algiers and Tunis, was far fiom
being equally successful. The ill conducE of the Spanish
general, and the rash valour of his troops, prefent-d
Barbarossa with an easy viaory. Many pcrifhed in the
battle, more in the retreat, and the remainder returned
into Spain covered with infamy. The magnanimity
however, with which the Cardinal bore this difgracc,
the only one he experienced during his administration,
added new lulre to his characer [u. Great composure
of temper under a disappointment, was not expeced from
a man so remarkable for the eagernes and impatience
with which he urged on the execution of all his ichemes.

Corrnptinn THIS disaster was ocon forgotten; while the condu&
ftih min-i of the Flernifh court proved the cause of constant unea-
Itere parti- finess, not only to the Cardinal, but to the whole Spanish
culrlyY of nation. All the great qualities of Chievres, the prime

Cvr minister and favourite of the young king, were sullied

with an ignoble and fordid avarice. The accefflion of his
master to the crown of Spain, opened a new and copious
oIurce for the gratification of this -pailion. During the
time of Charles's residence in Slanders, the whole tribe
of pretenders to offices or to favour resorted thither. They
soon discovered that, without the patronage of Chievres,
it was vain to hope for preferment; nor did they want
sagacity to find out the proper method of securing
him. Vast fums of money were drawn out of Spain.
Every thing was venal, and disposed of to the
highest bidder. After the example of Chievres, the in-
ferior Flemith ministers engaged in this traffick, which
became a general and avowed, a it was infamous tw.
The Spaniards were filled with rage when they eheld
offices of great importance to the welfare of their coun-
try, set to sale by firangers, unconcered'for its honor or
its happiness. Ximenes, difinterefed in his whole ad
minifratien, and a franger, from his native ridemr of
mind, to the palion of avarice, ivetghed wth the at-
most boldnef agiinft the venlity of the Fl ping. He
represented to the king in trong term, the murmurs and
indignation which their behavfour excited among a free

[ GOom tia, tl. !i.p.A7. [w] ~ul C a. L i. c. snd

*no

and high-fpirited people, and besought him to let out BooK I.
without loss of time for Spain, that, by his presence, he '-
nmight diflipate the clouds which were gathering all over
the kingdom £x].

CHARLES was fully sensible that he had delayed too Charlesper-

long to take possession of his dominions in Spain. Power- Xire to
ful obtacles, however, fRood in his way, and detained vifitspain.
him in the Low-Countries. The war which the league of
Cambray had kindled in Italy, frill fubfiRfed; though,
during its course, the armies of all the parties engaged in
it, had taken different direcions. France was now in
alliance with Venice, which it had at firfi combined to
defiroy. Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years
carried on hostilities againfi France, their original ally,
to the valour of whose troops the confederacy owed all
its success. Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand
transmitted this war to his grandson; and there was reason
to expec that Maximilian, always fond of new enter-
prizes, would persuade the young monarch to enter into
it with ardour. But the Flemings, who had long pof-
sessed an extensive commerce, which during the league of
Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the ruins of
the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and
Chievres, sagacious to discern the true interest of hir
country, and not warped on this occasion by his love of
wealth, warmly declared for maintaining peace with the
French nation. Francis 1. deflitute of allies, and folici-
tos to secure his late conqueits in Italy by a treaty,
lifened with joy to the sirs overtures of accommodation.
Chievres himself conduced the negotiation in name of
Charls. Gouffier appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis.
Each of them had presided over the education of the
prince whom he represented. They had both adapted
the fame pacific syRem; and were equally persuaded that
the union 0f the two monarchs was the happiest event for
thaemflvq, well m for their kingdoms. In such haods
the neoition did not Ianluih. A few days after open- A peace
" tiheir Cfrences at NoYon, they concluded a treaty cnclud.c
of coenderay an mutl defence between the two mo- AW.thFre
nar .:ihifrb.chieff ick in ch were, that Francis ,,6

ould give.i s 'rue to CSrles his dt daughter,
the pig Lou, am infna of a year old, nd as her

.a, ftold meale or to hin all his dclim and sre.

1t3 P. Ir. I s.,

tenfons

BOOK t. tensions upon the kingdom of Naples; that in confide-
- o-v-- ration of Charles's being already in poffeflion of Naplks,

he should till the accompliihment of the marriage, pay an
hundred thousand crowns a year to the French king; and
the half of that lum annually, as long as the princels had
no children; that when Chai les shall arrive in Spain, the
heirs of the King of Navarre may reprelent to him their
right to that kingdom; and if he do not give them fatia -
faction, Francis flall be at liberty to assist them with all
his forces [x]. Ihis alliance not only united Charles ard
Francis, but obliged Maximiiian, who was unable alone
to ccpe with the French and Venetians, to enter into a
treats with thole powers, which put a final period to
that bloody and tedious war which the league of Cam-
bray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a few years of
universal tranquillit, and was indebted for that bleflirg
to two princes, whole rivalfhip and ambition kept it in
perpetual discord and agitation during the remainder of
their reigns.

The Siem. By the treaty of Novon, Charles securcd a safe passage
0 aCrbe into Spain. It was not, however, the interest of his Fle-
visit to mifh mnifters, that he should visit that kingdom loon.
srain. While le resided in Slanders, the revenues of the Spa-

nifh crown were fpcnt there, and they engrossed, without
any competitors, all the effe&s of their monarch's genc-
rolitv; their country became the feat of government, and
all favours were dispensed by them. Of all these advan-
tages, they ran the rilque of feeing themselves deprived,
from the moment that their sovereign entered Spain. The
Spaniards would naturally aflume the direaion of their
own affairs; the Low-Countries would beconfideFed only
as a province of that mighty monarchy; and they who
now distributed the favours of the prince to others, must
then be content to receive them from the hands of :fran-
Afrid or gers. But what Chievres chiefly wihed tavoid was, an

interview between the King and Ximenes. On tha-other
hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and the nmgianmity
of that prelate, gave him a wonderful ascendant eir the
minds of men; and it was extremely probabblthefe great
qualities, -added to the reverence due to his ae and office,
would command the refpea of a young prine , iho, ca
pable of nobe and generos sentiments hinfiefJ would,
In proportion to his admiration of the Cardlaol! virtues)

[]t Ltomad Rec~ do Trites, ttom. ii.

leslnc

lessen his deference towards persons of another charaer.. Book I.
Or, on the other hand, if Charles should allow his Fle- '- -
mifh favourites to retain all the influence over his coun-
cils which they at present possessed, it was easy to foresee
that the Cardinal would remonstrate loudly against such an
indignity to the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights
of his country with the fame intrepidity and success, that
he had asserted the prerogatives of the crown. For these
rcafons, all his Flemiih counsellors comnbined to retard his
departure; and Charles, unfufpicious, from want of ex-
perience, and fond of his native country, suffered him-
telf to be unnecessarily detained in the Netherlands a whole
year after signing the treaty of Noyon.

THE repeated intreaties of Ximenes, the advice bs his g,17.
grandfather Maximilian, and the impatient murmurs of Chrlesa-
his Spanish subje&s, prevailed on him at last to embark. pairn or
He was attended not only by Chievres, his prime-minifter,
but by a numerous and splendid train of the Flemish no-
bles, fond of beholding the grandeur, or of sharing in the
bounty of their prince. After a dangerous voyage, he Sept. 3.
landed at Villa Viciofa, in the province of Afiurias, and
was received with such loud acclamations of joy, as a new
monarch, whose arrival was so ardently desired, had rea-
son to expec. The Spanith nobility resorted to their so-
vereign from all parts of the kingdom, and displayed a
magnificence which the Flemings were unable to emu-
late y].

XIMENES, who confidered the pretence of the king as His Flemii&

the greatefr blefing to his dominions, was advancing to' miniften
wards the coast, as faf as the infirm state of his health mentdo
would permit, in order to receive him. During his an iPtervc
regency, and notwithstanding his extreme old age, he with iuc-
abated, in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his mor- n
tifications; and to these he added such laborious afliduitv
in business, as would have worn out the most youthful and
vigorous constitution. Every day he employed several
hours in devotion; he celebrated mats in person; he even
allotted some space for Audy. Notwithstanding there oc-
cupations he regularly attended the council; he received
and read all papers presented to him; he di&ated lettr
and inftrufions; and took under his infpe&ion all bus-
nels, civil, eccfiaftical, or military. Every momeat
of hi time was filled up with some serious employment.

[y] P. Man. RE. 199. 0ot.
VOL. . Y The

Boo I. The only amusement in which he indulged himself br

L- way of relaxation after business, was to canvass, with a

few friars and divines, some intricate article in fcholafiic
theology. Watled by such a course of life, the infirmi.
ties of age daily grew upon him. On his journey,
violent disorder seized him at Bos Equillos, attended with
uncommon symptoms; which his followers confidered as
the effec of poison [z], but could not agree whether the
crime ought to be imputed to the hatred of the Spanil
nobles, or to the malice of the Flemish courtiers. This

Charles's accident obliging him to flop short, he wrote to Chark,
tXingredtit and with his usual boldness advised him to dismiss all the

firangers in his train, whose numbers and credit gave of-
fence already to the Spaniards, and would ere long alie.
nate the affe&ions of the whole people. At the fame
time, he earnefily desired to have an interview with the
king, that he might inform him of the fate of the na-
tion, and the temper of his subje&s. To prevent this,
not only the Flemings, but the Spaniih grandees, em.
ployed all their address, and industriously kept Charles it
a diflance from Aranda, the place to which the Cardina
had removed. Through their fuggefiions, every mea-
sure that he recommended was rejected; the utmofi car
was taken to make him feel, and to poiht out to the whole
nation, that his power was on the decline; even in thing
purely trivial, such a choice was always made, as wa
deemed mod disagreeable to him. Ximenes did not bea
this treatment with his usual fortitude of spirit. Con-
fcious of his own integrity and merit, he expeted a mor
grateul return from a prince, to whom he delivered a
kingdom more fowurihing than it had been in any for-
mer age, and an authority more extensive and better eta-
blibed, than the mdt illufirious of his ancestors had ever
poses'ed. He could not, therefore, on many occasions,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and complaints.
He lamented the fate of his country, and foretold the
calamities it would susser from the insolence, the rapaci
oufnefi, and ignorance of fitrangers. While his mind
was agitated by these pailions, he received a letter from
the king, in which, after a few cold and formal expreó-
sions of regard, he was allowed to retire to his diocele;
that after a life of such continued labour, he might end
Hls dtb. hi, days in tranquillity. This mef~ge proved tatal t

[*si] Mdla CiC
lib. i. c. 3.

Ximcnc

Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is probable, would notBoo LI
survive disgrace; perhaps his generous heart could not'-v.-
bear the profpe& of the misfortunes ready to fall on his
country. Which soever of these opinions we embrace, Nov. 8.
certain it is that he expired a few hours after reading the
letter [z]. The variety, the grandeur, and the success of
his schemes, during a regency of only twenty months,
leave it doubtful, whether his sagacity in council, his pru-
dence in conduc, or his boldness in execution, deserve
the greatest praise. His reputation is still high in Spain,
not only for wisdom, but for san&ity; and he is the
only prime minifier mentioned in history, whom his con-
temporaries reverenced as a faint [], and to whom the
people under his government ascribed the power of work-
ing miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made his es;

public entry, with great pomp;into Valladolid, whither Corte held
he had summoned the Cortes oPaftile. Though he as- idVall'do
fumed on all occasions the name o'ing, that title had
never been acknowledged in the Cort~' The Spaniards
confidering Joanna us pofeffed of thinle right to the
crown, and no example of a son's hting enjoyed the
title of king during the life of his parents occurring in
their history, the Cortes discovered all that scrupulous re.
fpef for ancient forms, and that aversion tQ innovation,
which are conspicuous in popular afremblies. The pre-
fence, however, of their prince, the address, the artifi-
ces, and the threats of his mini'ers, prevailed on them
at las to declare him king, in conjun&ion with his mo- Decltr
ther, whole name they appointed to 'be placed before that Cha.l
of her son in all publick ads; and declared that, if at kig
any future period the mhould recover the exercifi of rea-
son, the whole royal authority lhould return into her
hands. At the fame time, they voted a free gift of fix
hundred thousand ducats to be paid in three years, a frm
more considerable than had ever been granted to any for-
mer monarch Mh].

NOTWITHTAN1DlNGO this obfequioufnes of the Dibtdm
Cortes to the will of the king, the most violent symptoms of we Cadi

lin., and

of diffatisfaaion with his government began to break out ith, dof
in the kingdom. Chievres had acquired over the mind of it.

[a MarflUr Vie de Xim~m, p. 44. Comeu lib, ii. p, sio, &a.
dir tHilt, de Xime.. op . .

Flechir, Vb de Xim_. ii. t4d.

i] Mimiu Cotia. rib. . c.1. P. MoLt. lm. 6l.. o o. . p. lS.

Y a the

Boo K I. the young monarch the atcendant not only of a tutor, bInt
a__-v'. of a parent. Charles seemed to have no Sentiments but

those which his minister inspired, and scarce uttered a
word but what he put into his mouth. He was confiantly
surrounded by Flemings; no person got access to him,
without their permiflion; nor was any admitted to audi-
ence but in their presence. As he spoke the Spanish lan-
guage very imperfectly, his answers were always extreme-
ly Ihort, and often delivered with hesitation. From all
these circumstances, many of the Spaniards were led to
believe that he was a prince of a flow and narrow genius;
some pretended to discover a firong resemblance between
him and his mother, and began to whisper that his capa-
city for government would never be far superior to hers;
and though they who had the belt opportunity of judging
concerning his characer, maintained, that notwithftand-
ing such unpromising ipppearances, he possessed a large
fund of knowledge an4 gicity [c]; yet all agreed in con-
demning his partialiy.tWwards his countrymen, and his at-
tachment to his f'trites as unreasonable and immode-
rate. Unfortun 'y for Charles, these favourites were
unworthy of his confidence. To amass wealth seems to
have been their only aim; and as they had reason to fear,
that either their master's good sense, or the indignation of
the Spaniards, might soon abridge their power, they ha-
Rened to improve the present opportunity, and their ava-
rice was the more rapacious, because they expeced their
authority to be of no long duration. All honours, offi-
ces and benefices, were ither engrossed by the Flemings,
or publickly fold by them. Chievres,. his wife, and Sau-
vage, whom Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had im-
prudently raised to be chancellor of Cafile, vied with
each other in all the refinements of extortion and venalit).
Not only the Spaniih historians, who, from resentment,
may be fulpeced of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr An-
gleria, an Italian, who resided at that time in the court of
Spain, and who was under no temptation to deceive tile
persons to whom his letters are addressed, give a defcripti-
on which is almost incredible, of the insatiable and
{hamelefs covetoufnefi of the Flemings. According to
Angleria's calculation, which he asser to be extremely
moderate, they remitted into the Low-Countries, in the
space of ton months, no Ies a furn than a million and one

[c] Sudoal, p. 1. P. Ma Ep. un65.cd.

hundred

hundred thousand ducats. The nomination of William Book I.
ie Croy, Chievres's nephew, a young man not of cano- v
nical age, to the Archbithoprick of Toledo, exasperated
the Spaniards more than all these exations. They con-
fidercd the elevation of a itranger to the head of their
church, and to the richest benefice in the kingdom, not
only as an injury, but as an insult to the whole nation;
and both clergy and laity, the former from interest, the
latter from indignation, joined in exclaiming against
it [d].

CH ARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with his admi- Charlec

niftration, set out for Saragofla, the capital of Aragon, hlds the
that he might be preent in the Cortes of that kingdom. Aragon.
On his way thither, he took leave of his brother Ferdi-
nand, whom he sent into Germany on the pretence of
visiting their grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age.
To this prudent precaution, Charles owed the prefervati-
on of his Spanish dominions. During the violent com-
motions which arose there soon after this period, the Spa-
niards would infallibly have offered the crown to a prince,
who was the dariing of the whole nation; nor did Ferdi-
nand want ambition, or counsellors, that would have
prompted him to accept of the offer [].

THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged Charles The Arto-

as king, nor would they allow the Cortes to be assembled nefe mole
in his name, but in that of the Juftiza, to whom, during than the
an interregnum, this privilege belonged [f. The oppoi- Cattilian,.
tion Charles had to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon,
was more violent and obstinate than that which he had
overcome in Castile; after long delays, however, and
with much difficulty, he persuaded the members to con-
ser on him the title of king, in conjuncion with his mo-
ther. At the fame time he bound himself by that solemn
oath, which the Aragonefe exaced of their kings, never
to violate any of their rights or liberties. When a dona-
tive was demanded, the members were f{ill more intrac-
able; many months elapsed before they would agree to
grant Charles two hundred thousand ducats, and that
fum they appropriated so fri&ly for paying debts of the
crown, which had long been forgotten, that a very small
part of it came into the King's hands. What had hap-

[4] SBndBv.l, 19-5i. .. Ep. 608, 611, 613, 614, 6t, 613,
6 l3 Miniar, Contin. lib. . c. 3. p. l.

sm P MEl yr, Rp. 6 9. Ferrerts, viii. 460.

.P. Mnyr. Ep. 6pened

Y a pened

Boor I. pened in CaRile taught them caution, and determined
-v. them rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow citizens

how obsolete soever, than to furnish strangers the means
of enriching themselves with the spoils of their coun.
try [g].

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, ambassadors

arrived at Saragossa from Francis I. and the young king
of Navarre, demanding the refitution of that kingdom
in terms of the treaty of Noyon. But neither Charles,
nor the Castilian nobles whom he consulted on this occafi-
on, discovered any inclination to part with this acquifiti.
on. A conference held soon after at Montpelier, in order
to bring this matter toan amicable issue, was altogether
fruitless; and while the French urged the injustice of the
usurpation, the Spaniards were attentive only to its import-
ance [h].
r119. FRoMAragon, Charles proceeded toCataloiia, where

he wafted as much time, encountered more difficulties,
and gained less money. The Flemings were now be-
come so odious in every province of Spain by their exac-
tions, that the desire of mortifying them, and of dilap-
pointing their avarice, augmented the jealousy with which
a free people usually condu& their deliberations.

Combinati- THE Castilians, who had felt mofi sensibly the weight
on of the and rigour of the epprellive schemes, carried on by the
cgrnft the Flemings, resolved no longer to submit with a tamene!s
Flemilh mi. fatal to themselves, and which rendered them the objets
filfers. of scorn among the reft of the Spaniards. Segovia, To-

ledo, Seville, and several other cities of the firfl rank,
entered into a confederacy for the defence of their rights
and privileges; and notwithfianding the silence of the
nobility, who, on this occasion, discovered neither the
publick spirit, nor the resolution which became their or-
der, they laid before the king a full view of the slate of
the kingdom, and of the mal-adminifiration of his fa-
vourites. The preferment of strangers; the exportation
of the current coin; the increase of taxes, were the griev-
ances of which they chiefly complained; and of theft
they demanded redress with that boldness, which is natu-
ral to a free people. These remonfirances, presentcd at
firt at Sarago, and renewed afterwards at Barcelona,
Charles treated with great neglec. The confederacy,
however, of these cities at this junaure, was the begin-

Ptl r- M ertr. rE. 615634.
hI lb. 605, 633, 64o.

ning

ping of that famous union among the commons of Castile, Boo K I.
which not long after threw the kingdom into such violent I
convelfions, fsook the throne, and almost overturned the
constitution [qi.

So N after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he received

the account of an event which interefied him much more
than the murmurs of the Castilians, or the scruples of the
Cortes of Catalonia. This was the death of the Empe- Death of
ror Maximilian; an occurrence of small importance in the Emperor
itielf, for he was a prince conspicuous neither for his vir- Mxml n .
tues, his power, nor his abilities; but rendered by its
consequences more memorable than any that had happen-
ed during several ages. It broke that profound and uni-
versal peace which then reigned in the Christian world;
it excited a rivalfhip between two princes, which threw
all Europe into agitation, and kindled wars more general,
and of longer duration, than had hitherto been known in
modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition of the

French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had inspired the
European princes with new ideas concerning the import-
ance of the Imperial dignity. The claims of the Em-
pire upon some of the Italian Rates were numerous; its
jurildi&ion over others was extensive; and though the
former had been almoRf abandoned, and the latter seldom
cxercifed, under princes of no abilities, and of little in-
fluence, it was obvious, that in the hands of an Emperor
pofteffed of power and genius, they would be employed
as engines for stretching his dominion over the greater
part of that country. Even Maximilian, feeble and un-
fleady as his condua always was, had availed himself of
the infinite pretensions of the Empire, and had reaped
advantage from every war and every negotiation in Italy
during his reign. These considerations, added to the
dignity of the fation, confessedly the first among Chri-
llian princes, and to the rights inherent in the office,
which, if exerted with vigour, were far from being in-
considerable, rendered the Imperial crown more than ever
an objec of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had discover- Maximilia,

ed great solicitude to preserve this dignity in the Aufrian had endc,-
family, and to procure the king of Spain to be chosen his vruredto

As lecure the

fucccflor. But he himself having never been crowned by imperial
the Pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age, was crown to hi

tgr .dfon.
[i] P. Uatyr, Ep 630. So Prera, vili. 464.

Y 4 confidered

Book I. confidered only as Emperor elef; and though hiRorian

C-V'-' did not attend to that diftin&ion, neither the Italian no

German chancery bellowed any other title upon him that
that of King of the Romans; and no example occurring
in hiRofry of any person's being chosen a fuccefTor to
king of the Romans, the Germans, always tenacious 0o
their forms, and unwilling to confer upon Charles an of.
fice for which their confitution knew no name, obstinate.
ly refused to gratify Maximilian in that point [k].

Chsrles and BY his death, this difficulty was at once removed, and
Frrpncii . Charles openly aspired to that dignity which his grandta.
Competitors
for the em- ther had attempted, without success, to secure for him,
pire. At the fame time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered

the lifts against him; and the attention of all Europe was
fixed upon this competition, no less illustrious from the
high rank of the candidates, than from the importance of
the prize for which they contended. Each of themujrged
his pretensions with sanguine expecations, and with no

Pretension iunpromifing profpe' of success. Charles confidered the
saln hoiof Imperial crown as belonging to him of right, from iis
Charles. h of r

,
.

long continuance in the Aufirian line; he knew that none
of the German princes poflefled power or influence
enough to appear as his antagonist; he flattered himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives of Ger-
many to exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which
during so many ages had been' deemed peculiar to their
own nation; and leaf of all, that they would confer this
honour upon Francis L the lovereign of a people whose
genius, and laws, and manners differed so widely from
those of the Germans, that if was scarcely possible to
eftablifli any cordial union between them: he trusted not
a little to the effe& of Maximilian's negotiations, which
though they did not attain their end, had prepared the
minds of the Germans for his elevation to the Imperial
throne; but what he relied on a his chief recommendati-
on, was the fortunate situation of his hereditary domini-
ons in Germany, which served as a natural barrier to the
Empire againfi the encroachments of the Turkif power.
The conquests, the abilities, and the ambition of Sultan
Selim 11. had spread over Europe, at that time, a general
and well founded alarm. By his vicories over the Ma-
maluke*, and the extirpation of that allant body of men,

(Ck Oucirdi, tib. ,. p. ip. i Hi. OGu. dAllease, pr-P.
lrm, toemI. vi.p.

i . p. io97. l . i. Hcer,, Rer. Aaftr, lib v. c. 7.
t179 lb. »iii. c. s. p . rs.

he had not only added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but iBooec L
had secured to it such a degree of internal tranquillity, --
that he was ready to turn against Chriltendom the whole
force of his arms, which nothing had hitherto been able
to refif : The most effetual expedient for flopping the
progress of this torrent, seemed to be the eletion of an
Emperor, poffefted of extenfivc territories in that coun-
try, where its first impreflion would be felt, and who,
besides, could combat this formidable enemy with all the
forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the wealth
fumrifhed by the mines of the new world, or the com-
merce of the Low-Countrice. These were the arguments
by which Charles publickly supported his claim; and to
men of integrity and reflection, they appeared to be not
only plausible, but convincing. He did not, however,
trust the success of his cause to there alone. Great furms
of money were remitted from Spain; all the refinements
and artifice of negotiation were employed; and a confi-
derable body of troops kept on foot by the dates of the
Circle of Suabia, was secretly taken into his pay. The
venal were gained by presents; the objections of the more
scrupulous were answered or eluded; and some feeble
princes were threatened and over-awed ['].

ON the other hand, Francis supported his claim with Of Fracir.

equal eagerness, and no less confidence of its being well
founded. His emissaries contended that it was now high
time to convince the Princes of the house of Aufiria that
the Imperial crown was eleive, and not hereditary; and
that other persons might aspire to an honour which their
arrogance had come to regard as the property of their fa-
mily; that it required a sovereign of mature judgment,
and of approved abilities, to hold the reins of govern-
ment in a country where such unknown opinions concern-
ing religion had been published, as had thrown the minds
of men into an uncommon agitation, which threatened
the most violent effets; that a young prince, without er-
perience, and who had hitherto given no specimens of his
genius for command, was no equal match for Selim, a
monarch, grown old in the art of war, and in the course
of vitory; whereas a king, who, in his early youth had
triumphed over the valour and discipline of the Swiss, till
then reckoned invincible, would be an antagonist not un-

I] tate. lib. ,1 ,. Sltlidsau Hist. of the Refr mu .

14, bruvii Corp.
Oer. rirm.i. 97 i, No(. so.

worthy

BOOK I. worthy of the Conqueror of the Eatl; that the fire and
'-V --' impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the discipline

and flability of the German infantry, would form an ar-
my so irrefiflible, that inflead of waiting the approach of
the Ottoman forces, it might carry hoflilities into the
heart of their dominions; that the eleAion of Charles
would be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution, by
which the person who holds the crown of Naples, is ex-
cluded from aspiring to the Imperial dignity; that his ele-
vation to that honour would soon kindle a war in Italy, on
account of his pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, the es-
sects of which could not fail of reaching the Empire, and
might prove fatal to it [m]. But while his ambassadors
enlarged upon there and other topicks of the fame kind,
in all the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the
prejudices entertained against him as a foreigner, unac-
quainted with the German language or manners, endea-
voured to overcome there, and to gain the favour of the
princes by immense gifts, and by infinite promises. As
the expeditious method of transmitting money, and the
decent mode of conveying a bribe by bills of exchange
was then little known, the French ambassadors travelled
with a train of horses loaded with treasure, an equipage
not very honourable for that prince by whom they were
emploved, and infamous for those to whom they were
sent [n]j

View, and THE other European princes could not remain indiffe-
interel of rent fpeEators of a contest, the decision of which so near-
other Lt"es. y affe8ed them. Their common interest ought naturally

to have formed a general combination, in order to difap-
point both competitors, and to prevent either of them
from obtaining such a pre-eminence in power and dignity,
as might prove dangerous to the liberties of Europe. But
the ideas with refpeA to a proper distribution and balance
of power were so lately introduced into the (vilem of Eu-
ropean policy, that they were not hitherto obje&s of fuffi-
cienr attention. The pallions of tome princes, the want
of foresight in others, and the fear of giving offence to
the candidates, hindered such a salutary union of the pow-
ers of Europe, and rendered them either totally negligent
of the publick fafery, or kept them from exerting them-
selves with vigour in its behalf.

[m] Cuic, lib. 3. (0o. Slid. p. s6. Oeor. lebini de clc. Car. V. H1
inris apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4
[n] Memoires de Muaech. de Flcuragea, p. Tti.

THE

THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the elevation B oo I.
of either of the contending monarchs, and though they v*
wilhed to have seen some prince whose dominions were OtthSwifs.
less extensive, and whose power was more moderate,
feated on the Imperial throne, were prompted, however,
by their hatred of the French nation, to give an open
preference to the pretensions of Charles, while they used
their utmoRt influence to frustrate those of Francis [r].

THe Venetians easily discerned, that it was the inte- O°the-

reft of their republick to have both the rivals set aside ;sDe'n
but their jealousy of the house of Austria, whore ambiti-
on and neighbourhood had been fatal to their grandeur,
would not permit them to a& up to their own ideas, and
led them haRily to give the fanaion of their approbation
to the claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interel, and more in the power of Of tHenr

Henry VIII. of England, to prevent either Francis or VIII
Charles from acquiring a dignity which would raise them
so far above other monarchs. But though Henry often
boafled, that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the steady attention, the accurate discern-
ment, nor the dispassionate temper which that delicate
funcion required. On this occasion it mortified his vani-
ty so much, to fee himself excluded from that noble com-
petition which reflected such honour upon the two antago-
nifts, that he took the resolution of fending an amhalTa-
dor into Germany, and of declaring himself a candidate
for the Imperial throne. The ambassador, though loaded
with caresses by the German princes and the Pope's nun-
cio, informed his malter, that he could hope for no fuc-
cess in $ claim which he had been so late in preferring;
and Henry, imputing his disappointment to that circum-
fiance alone, and toothed with this oflentatious dilplay of
his own importance, seems to have taken no farther part
in the matter, either by contributing to thwart both his
rivals, or to promote one of them [t].

LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his political ahili- o Leo X.

ties, than for his love of the arts, was the only prince of Ihe
age who observed the motions of the two contending mo-
narchs with a prudent attention, or who difcovcred a pro-
per solicitude for the public safety. The Imperial and Pa-
pal jurifdiaion interfered in so many inflances, the com-

[o] Sabin"u, 6
r Memoire de Fleursngei, 314. H. Herbrt, Hi. f Henry Vil.

plaints

BooK T. plaints of usurpation were so numerous on both fides, and

' the territories of the church owed their safety so entirely to
the weakness of their neighbours, and so little to their own
force, tiat nothing was so formidable to the court of Rome
as an Emperor of extensive power, or of enterprizing genius.
Leo trembled at the profpe& of beholding the Imperial
crown placed on the head of the king of Spain and of Na.
pies, and the malter of the new world; nor was he less
afraid of feeing a king of France, who was duke of Milan
and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold
that the ele&ion of either of them would be fatal to the
independence of the holy fee, to the peace of Italy, and
perhaps to the liberties of Europe. To oppose them,
however, required address and caution in proportion to the
greatness of their power, and their opportunities of taking
revenge. Leo was defecive in neither. He secretly ex-
horted the German princes to place one of their own num-
ber on the Imperial throne, which many of them were
capable of filling with honour; he put them in mind of
the conflitution by which the Kings of Naples were for
ever excluded from that dignity [q]; he warmly exhorted
the French king to persist in his claim, not from any de-
fire that he should gain his end, but as he foresaw that the
Germans would he more disposed to favour the king of
Spain, he hoped that Francis himself, when he discover-
ed his own chance of success to be desperate, would be
flimulated by resentment and the spirit of rivallhip, to
concur with all his interest in raising some third person to
the head of the Empire; or, on the other hand, if Francis
should make unexpeced progress, he did not doubt but
that Charles would be induced by similar motives to a&
the fame part; and thus by prudence and attention, the
mutual jealousy of the two rivals might be so dextrouly
managed, as to disappoint both. But this scheme, the
only one which a prince in Leo's situation could adopt,
though concerted with great wisdom, was executed with
little discretion. The French ambassadors in Germany
fed their master with vain hopes; -the pope's nuncio, being
gained by them, altogether forgot the inftrn&ions he had
received, and Francis persevered so long and so obstinately
in urging his own pretensions, as rendered all Leo's metr
fures abortive ['].

[qJ Coldafti Conftitulioas e Impeales. Pnre 673

of Y.

1 .

. 43.
[r] G icciar. Ib. i'J. I a i.

8cCH

SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and the views BooK I.

of the different princes, when the diet was opened accord- --v~J
ing to form at Frankfort. The right of choofing an Em- 'The diet
peror had long been vefled in seven great princes, diltin- Jne t

;;

guilhed by the name of Elecors, the origin of whose of-
tice, and the nature and extent of their powers, have al-
ready been explained. Thete were, at that time Albert
of Brandenburgh, archbilhop of Mentz; Herman count de
Wied, archbishop of Cologne; Richard de Grieffenklau,
archbishop of Treves; Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis,
count Palatin of the Rhine; Frederick, duke of Saxony;
and Joachim I. marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithftand-
ing the artful arguments produced by the ambassadors of
the two kings, in favour of their refpe&ive matters, and
in spite of all their solicitations, intrigues, and presents,
the Eletors did not forget that maxim on which the liber- views or
ty of the German constitution was thought to be founded. the Elea-
Among the members of the Germanick body, which is a or,.
great republick composed of states almost independent, the
firt principle of patriotism is to depress and limit the pow-
er of the Emperor; and of this idea, so natural under such
a form of government, a German politician seldom loses
fight. No prince of coniderable power, or extensive do-
minions, had for some ages been raised to the Imperial
throne; and to this prudent precaution many of the great
families in Germany owed the splendor and independence
which they had acquired during that period. To ele& ei-
ther of the contending monarchs, would have been a gross
violation of that salutary maxim; would have given to the
Empire a mailer, instead of a head: and would have re-
duced themselves from the rank of equals, to the condition
of subje&s.

FULL of there ideas, they all turned their eyes towards offer the

Frederick, duke of Saxony, a prince of Iuch eminent vir- imperial
toe, and abilities, as to be diflinguifhed by the name of .w. tO
the Sage, and with one voice offered him the Imperial saxoiy,
crown. He was not dazzled with that objea, which mo-
narchs so far superior to him in power courted with such
cagernefs; and after deliberating upon the matter a flort
time, he rejeced it with a magnanimity and diftinterefted- who rrjea
ness, no left singular than admirable. Nothing, he ob- i't
served, could be more impolitic, than an obstinate adhe-
rence to a maxim which, though found and just in many
cafes, wa not applicable to all. In times of tranquillity,
said he, we with for an Emperor who has not power to

invade

BOOR I. invade our liberties; times of danger demand one who it
-=v_- able to secure our safety. The ' urkifi armies, led bva

gallant and victorious monarch, are now assembling. They
are ready to pour in upon Germany with a violence un-
known in former ages. New conjuncures call for ntw
expedients. The Imperial sceptre must be committed to
some hand more powerful than mine, or that of any other
German prince. We possess neither dominions, nor re-
venues, nor authority which enable us to encounter such
a formidable enemy. Recourse mufi be had in this exi-
grency to one of the rival monarchs. Each of them can
bring into the field forces sufficient for our defence. But
as the king of Spain is of German extration, as he is a
member and prince of the empire'by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather; as his dominions
firetch along that frontier which lies moRt exposed to the
enemy; his claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that
of a firanger to our language, to our blood, and to our
country; and therefore I give my vote to confer on him
the Imperial crown.

and rcufrcs THIS opinion, dicated by such uncommon generosity,

1ny pr'e"Lt and supported by arguments so plausible, made a deep
charrl&'. impreflion on the Electors. The king of Spain's ambal-
mbatff.CcrT. faders, sensible of the. important service which Frederic

had done their malter, sent him a considerable fum of
money, as the sirs token of that prince's gratitude. But
he who had greatness of mind to refuse a crown, disdain-
ed to receive a bribe; and upon their intreatng that, at
leaR, he would permit them to difiribute part of that fum
among his courtiers, he replied, that he could not pre-
vent them from accepting what lhould 'be offered, but
whoever took a single florin should be dismissed next
morning from his service [r.

[r] P. Daniel, an biltorian of considerable name, feemr to call in quef'

tion the trutb of this account of Frcderick's behaviour, because it is not
mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in hib Hilory of the eletion and corona-
tion of Charlie V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no great firefi ought to be rlid
on an omiflon n a superficial autor, whole treatise, though dignified
with the name of hilory, contains only focb an account of the cceremonial
ot Charles,' eleltion as is usually published in Germany on like occafinoa.

'ard. Rer. Genn. Script. v. a. p. s. The tellimooy of Branlmu, lib.
s . epit. 4. and that of Sleildn, p. 18. re exprefi. echendorf in his
Commentirims H1iouicus & Apologeticut de Lutheraniifmo, p. 1at, hba
examined this fad with hii usual indufiry, and hai eltabllfhed its truth by
the monl undoubted evidence. To thMe teftimonie whilcbhe has colleatd,
I Inry add the decisive one of cardinal Cjetau, the pope'a leoate at Frank-
fort, in his letter July 5th, 1 9. Epifires au princes, &c. recuellics pa
Rufctili, traduidsa pr Belforrcit. Par. 1571. p.e.

No

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dignity, BoOK I.

which k rederick had declined for realons applicable to-
them all. It remained to make a choice between the Further de-
two great competitors. But besides the prejudice in Charles's of the elec-
favour arising from his birth, and the situation of his tors.
German dominions, he owed not a little to the abilities
of the cardinal de Gurk, and the zeal of Erard de la
Mark, bibhop of Liege, two of his ambassadors who had
conduaed their negotiations with more prudence and ad-
dress, than those entrusted by the French king. The
former, who had long been the minister and favourite of
Maximilian, was well acquainted with the art of mana-
gil:g the Germans; and the latter having been disappointed
of a cardinal's hat by Francis, employed all the mali-
cious ingenuity with which the desire of revenge inspires
an ambitious mind, in thwarting the measures of that
monarch. The Spanish party among the Ele&ors daily
gained ground; and the Pope's nuncio, being convinced
that it was vain to make any farther opposition, endea-
voured to acquire some merit with the future Emperor, by
offering voluntarily, in the name of his mailer, a dif-
peafation to hold the Imperial crown in conjuncion with
that of Naples I[.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months and ten

days after the death of Maximilian, this important con-
test, which had held all Europe in suspense, was decided.
Six of the Elecors had already declared for the king of Theychoofe
Spain, and the archbishop of Treves, the only firm ad- Charlesem-
herent to the French interest, having at last joined his peror'
brethren, Charles was by the unanimous voice of the
Ele&oral college raised to the Imperial throne ['.

Bu T though the Ele&rs consented, from various mo- They are

tives, to promote Charles to that high flation, they dif- ppre'hen"
covered at the fame time great jealousy of his extraordi- power, and
nary power, and endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, take prc-
to provide against his encroaching on the privileges of the c"ution"
Germanick body. It had long been the custom to de- ain it.
mand of every new Emperor a confirmation of these
privileges, and to require a promise that he would never
violate them in any infance. While princes who were
formidable neither from extent of territory, nor of ge-

[' Preheri. Rer. Cetman. 8criptore, vol.iii; it. ear Ftruvil Ag nt.

1717. CGinone Hil. ol Naple, a. 498.
[t] Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hil. hii temporis. Edit. Bulkley, lib . .c. 9.

nius,

Boor I. nius, possessed the Imperial throne, a general and verbal
a_--yy' engagement to this purpose was deemed sufficient fecu-

rity. But under an Emperor so powerful as Charles,
other precautions seemed necessary. A Capitulation or
claim of rights was formed, in which the privileges aid
immunities of the elecors, of the princes of the empire,
of the cities, and of every other member of the Ger-
manick body are enumerated. This capitulation was im-
mediately signed by Charles's ambassadors in the name of
their master, and he himself at his coronation confirmed
it in the moit solemn manner. . Since that period, the
Elecors have continued to prescribe the fame condi-
tions to all his successors; and in Germany the Capitula-
tion or mutual contraa between the Emperor and his
subje&s, is confidered as a ifrong barrier againil the pro-
grefs of the imperial power, and as the great charter of
their liberties to which they often appeal [u].

The elTei- THE important intelligence of his elecion was con-
on notified veyed in nine days from Frankfort to Barcelona, where
Cbhre. Charles was still detained by the obstinacy of the Cata-

lonian Cortes, which had not hitherto brought to an issue
any of the affairs that came before it. He received the
account with' the joy natural to a young aspiring mind, on
an acceflion of power and dignity which raised him so far
above the other princes of Europe. Then it was that
those vafl profpe&s which alured him during his whole
adminiflration began to open, and from this tera we may
date the formation, and are able to trace the gradual pro-
grefs of a grand fyfiem of enterprizing ambition which
renders the history of his reign so worthy of attention.

Itef, etup- A TRIVIAL circumstance sirs difcoverd the eses of
on bim. this reat elevation upon the mind of Charles. In all the

publick writs which he issued as king of Spain, he affulicd
the title of Majef/l, and required it from his fubjeds as
a mark of their refpea. Before that time, all the mo-
narchs of Europe were satisfied with the appellation of
Higbneif, or Grace; but the vanity of other courts soon
led them to imitate the example of the Spanilh. The
epithet of Majefiy is no longer a mark of pre-eminence.
The mofi inconsiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it,

tu] Pfeffel Abrege de I' His. de Droit Publique d'Allemage 590.
Limoci Capitlug. mpcr. Epi!tres dci Princes ru Ilufcelli, p. 60.

and

and the arrogance of the greater potentates has invented Bo OK I.
no higher denomination [u].

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of The Spni-

their King to the Imperial throne with the fame fatisfac- tisfed with
tion which he himielf felt. To be deprived of the pre- this event.
fence of their sovereign, and to be fubje&ed to the go-
vernment of a viceroy and his council, a species of ad-
ministration often oppreflive, and always disagreeable,
were the immediate and necessary conlequences of this
new dignity. To fee the blood of their countrymen shed
in quarrels wherein the nation had no concern, to behold
its treasures wafted in supporting the splendour of a foreign
title, and to be plunged in the chaos of Italian and Ger-
man politics, were effe&s of this event almoR as unavoid-
able. From all these considerations, they concluded,'
that nothing could have happened more pernicious to the
Spanilh nation; and the fortitude and publick spirit of
their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of Cafile, prohibited
Alfonzo the Wife from leaving the kingdom, in order to
receive the Imperial crown, were often mentioned with
the highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely wor-
thy of imitation at this juncure [wl.

BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments or

murmurs of his Spanish fubjeas, accepted of the Impe-
rial dignity which the count Palatine, at the head of a November.
solemn embafly, offered him in the name of the Eletors;
and declared his intention of setting out soon for Germany,
in order to take poffeflion of it. This was the more ne-
ceffary, because, according to the forms of the German
constitution, he could not, before the ceremony of a
publick coronation, exercise any aa of jurifdi&ion or
authority ['].

TH EI certain knowledge of this resolution augmented 'eir dir-

the difgut of the Spaniards; and a fullen and refracory cesls.
spirit prevailed among persons of all ranks. The Pope
having granted the king the tenths of all ecclefiafiical be-
nefices in Catile, to alit him in carrying on war with
greater vigour againfi the Turks, a convocation of the
clergy unanimoufy refused to levy that fum, upon pre-
tence that it ought never to be exated but at those times

[] Minimeir Comni . ar. p . Or3. Frert viii. 475. Memouue Hilt. do
Ho~aaie, mim. . P. p., &wc.
[wj! mudvu1l i. p. 3. Mitisne, Contia. p. 14.

V]eLam. I. BmZ wheniss.
VOL. I. Z when

BooK I. when Christendom was aaually invaded by the Infideli

-v-'3 and though Leo, in order to lupport his authority, lai.

the kingdom under an interdict, lo little regard was pail
to a censure which was universally deemed unjust, thi
Charles himself applied to have it taken off; and th1t
the Spanish clergy, besides their merit in opposing t,
usurpations of the pope, and disregarding the influence c
the crown, gained the exemption which they had claimediL;

THE commotions which arose in the kingdom of A,:

lencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon, were more iLr
midable, and produced more dangerous and lasting re

An infur- sets. A seditious monk having by his sermons exciter
,lencia. the citizens of Valencia, the capital city, to take arm,

and to punish certain criminals in a tumultuary manner
the people, pleased with this exercise of power, and witi
such a discovery of their own importance, not only refulte
to lay down their arms, but formed themlelves into troop
and companies that they might be regularly trained tr
martial exercises. To obtain some security againfl the
oppreflion of the grandees was the-motive of this affr
ciation, and proved a powerful bond of union; for asthi
ariftocratical privileges and independence were mon
complete in Valencia than in any other of the Spanifi
kingdoms, the nobles, being scarce accountable for thee
conduac to any superior, treated the people not only a
vassals but as slaves. They were alarmed, however, at thi
success of this unexpeted infurre&ion, as it might encot
rage the people to attempt shaking off the yoke; but a
they could not repress them without taking arms, it be
came necessary to have recoorfe to the Emperor, and t(

',56. desire his permiflon to attack them. At the fame timi
Its progrcs. the people made choice of deputies to represent thti

grievances, and to implore the protecion of their fove
reign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at court whce
Charles was exasperated to an high degree against thi
nobles. As he was eager to visit Germany, where hi
presence became every day more necessary, and as his Fle
mifh courtiers were till more impatient to return into thci
native country, and to carry thither the spoils which the'
had amassed in Castile, it was impoflible for him to lioll
the Cortes of Valencia in person. He had for that read'l
empowered the cardinal Adrian to represent him in tJli
afrembly, and in his name to receive their oath of alle

[y] P. Mrtyr, Ep. 461. Pcrrera viii, 473.

giance

glance, to confirm their privileges with the usual folem- Boo I.
nities, and to demand of them a free gift. But the Va- v
lencian nobles, who confidered this measure as an indig-
nity to their country, which was no less entitled, than his
other kingdoms, to the honour of their sovereign's pre-
ience, declared that by the fundamental laws of the con-
ftitution they could neither acknowledge a person who
was absent as king, nor grant him any subsidy, and to this
declaration they adhered with an haughty and inflexible
obtinacy. Charles piqued, by their behaviour, decided
in favour of the people, and rashly authorized them to
continue in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph,
and were received by their fellow-citizens as the deliver-
ers of their country; and the insolence of the multitude
increasing with their success, they expelled all the nobles
cut of the city, committed the government to magistrates
of their own elecion, and entered into an association dif-
tinguifhed by the name of Germanada or Brotberbood,
which proved the source not only of the wildest disorders,
but of the molf fatal calamities in that kingdom [M].

MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was agitated The Corte,

. it ~,lttttcu

olence. of Gaitile

with no less violence. No sooner was the Emperor's in- fmmoe,, f
tention to leave Spain made known, than several cities of to meet in
the first rank resolved to remonltrate against it, and to Galicia.
crave redress once more of those grievances which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully avoided
admitting their deputies to audience; and as he saw from
this circumstance how difficult it would be at this juncure
to retfrain the mutinous spirit of greater cities, he fum-
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Compolella in
Galicia. His only reason for calling that assembly, was
the hope of obtaining another donative; for as his trea-
fury had been exhausted in the fame proportion that the
riches of his ministers increaled, he could not, without
some additional aid, appear in Germany with Splendour
suited to the Imperial dignity. To appoint a meeting of
the Cortes in so remote a province, and todemand a new
subsidy before the time for paying the former was ex-
pired, were innovations of a mort dangerous tendency;
and among people jealous of their liberties, and accuf-
tOmed to supply the wants of their sovereigns with a very
iugal hand, excited an universal alarm. 1 he magistrates
of Toledo remonstrated againR both these measures in a

[E] P. Mttyr. Ep. 651. Prencras, vii. 476( 4r5.

Z 2 very

Boo I. very hightone; the inhabitants of Valladolid, who e.-
,v.-'- peaed that the Cortes should have been held in that city,

were so enraged that they took arms in a tumultuary
manner; and if Charles with his foreign counsellors had
not fortunately made their escape during a violent tempef,
they would have maflacred all the Flemings, and have
prevented him from continuing his journey towards Con-
pofiella.

The pro- EV ¥RY city through which they passed, petitioned
ceedings of against holding a Cortes in Galicia, a point with regard
blyat rem- to which Charles was inflexible. But though the utmrft

influence had been exerted by the ministers, in order to
procure a choice of representatives favourable to their de-
signs, such was the temper of the nation, that at the
April I- opening of the assembly, there appeared among many of

the members unusual symptoms of ill humour, which
threatened a fierce opposition to all the measures of the
court. No representatives were sent by Toledo, for the
lot, according to which, by ancient custom, the elecaion
was determined in that city, having fallen upon two per-
sons, devoted to the Flemiih miniRters, their fellow-
citizens refused to grant them a commiflien in the usual
form, and in their Rlead made choice of two deputies,
whom they empowered to repair to Compoftclla, and to
protest againfi the lawfulness of the Cortes assembled

The diff- there. The representatives of Salamanca refused to take
fesionofthethe ufial oath of fidelity, unless Charles consented t,
Cailibans
iarcrafts. change the place of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid,

Cordova, and several other places, declared the demand
of another donative to be unprecedented, unconflitutional,
and unnecessary. All the arts, however, which influence
popular assemblies, bribes, promises, threats, and even
force, were employed in order to gain members. The
obles, toothed by the refpeaful aflidnity with which
Chievres and the other Flemings paid court to them, or in-
ftigated by a mean jealousy ofthat spirit of independence
which they saw rising among the commons, openly favour-
ed the pretensions 9f the court, or at the utmofi did not
oppefe them; and at ltaf, in contempt both of the senti-
ments of the nation, and of the ancient forms of the
constitution, a majority voted to grant the donative for
which the Emperor had applied L]. Together with this
grant, the Cortes laid before Charles a rcprefeatation of

[' P. MitYrs RN pa3. Aov, Ep.
S P aT .

thoke

those grievances whereof his people craved redress; but Boox I.
he, having obtained from them all he could expe&, paid '-
no attention to this ill-timed petition, which it was no
lorgyr dangerous to disregard [b3.

As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he difdof- Charles ap-

rd his intention with regard to the regency of CaRile dur- pints
ing his absence, which he htil hitherto kept Secret, and his absence,
nominated cardinal Adrian to that office. The vice-
royalty of Aragon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza;
that of Valencia on Don Diego de Mendoza Conde de
Melitor. The choice of the two latter was univerfallv
acceptable; but the advancement of Adrian, though the
cnlv Fleming who had preferred any reputatiorf aong the
Spaniards, animated he Caftiians with new hatred again t
foreigners; and even the nobles, who had so tamely iuf-
sered other inroads upon the conslitution, felt the indignity
offered to their own order by his promotion, and remon-
firated against it as illegal. But Charles's desire of visit-
ing Germany, and the impatience of his ministers to
leave Spain, were now so much inctafed, thai withqit
regarding the murmurs of the Castilians, or even taking
time to provide any remedy againf an infurreEion in
Toledo, which at that time threatened, and afterwards
produced most formidable effets, he failed from Corunna fordthe Low
on the twenty-fecond of May; and by setting out so Countries.
abruptly in quelf of a new crown, he endangered a more
important one of which he was already in polieffion [].

({bl Seval, 846 M i'.
e] P. Mtuyr, Ep. 6jo. Sadovk.

Z 3 ' I- E

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R EI GN

OF THE
BMPEROR CHARLES V.

B OO K II.

BooK 1. 't
i ANY concurring circumfances, not only called

M-^--- J. V1 Charles's thoughts towards the affairs of German),

Cbhrles's but rendered his prelncte in that country neceflary. The
prefnce ij Ele&ors grew impatient of so long an interregnum; his
neceirry. hereditary dominions were disturbed by intestine commo-

tions; and the new opinions concerning religion, made
such rapid progress as required the moil serious confidera-
tion. But above all, the motions of the French king drew
his attention, and convinced him that it was necessary tn
take measures for his own defence, both with speed and
with vigour.

gire ain WHYN Charles and Francis entered the lifts as candi-
p o fa dates for the Imperial dignity, they conduced their rival

wt",'lp (hip with many profeffionsof regard for each other, and
cbrlek and with repeated declarations that they would not susser any
Smaci, 1 tin&ure of enmity to mingle itself with this honourable

emulation. " We both court the fame miltrefs," said

Francs,

Francis, with his ulual vivacity, " each ought to urge his BOOK II.
tuit with all the addrels of which he is master; the moll
fortunate will prevail, and the other muff reft contented
[']." But though two young and high-fpirited Princes,
aid each of them animated with the hope of fucccfs,.
inirht be capable of forming such a generous resolution,
it was soon tbund that they promised upon a mederatiml
loo refined and disinterested for human nature. The pre-
ference given to Charles in the fight of all Europe, mor-
tcfed Francis to the highest degree, and inspired him with
all the palions natural to disappointed ambition. To this
was owing the personal jealousy and rivaifhip which sub-
filled between the two monarchs during their whole reign;
and the rancour of these, added to a real opposition of
interest, and to many unavoidable causes of discord, ir-
volved them in almost perpetual hostilities. Charles had
paid no regard to tile principal article in the treaty of
Noyon, by refusing oftener than once to do justice to
John d'Albert, the excluded monarch of Navarre, whom
Francis was bound in honour, and prompted by interest,
to restore to his throne. The French king had preten-
sions to the crown of Naples, of which Ferdinand had
deprived his predecessor by a molf unjultifiable breach of
faith. The Emperor might reclaim the dutchy of Milan
a& a fief of the empire, which Francis had seized, and
till kept in possession, without havingreceived investiture.
Charles considered the dutchv of Burgundy as the patri-
monial domain of his ancestors wrested from them by the
unjuil policy of Lewis XI. and observed with the greatest
jealousy the Aria connections which Francis had formed
with the duke of Gueldrcs, the hereditary enemy of his
lamily.

WHEN the sources of discord were so many and vari- Their deli.

ous, pece could be of no long continuance even between beraion"
princes the moRl exempt from ambition or emulation. But h, com-,
as the shock between two such mighty antagonifls could mencement
not fail of being both desperate and dangerous, they both orhontiiii".
discovered no small solicitude about its consequences, and
took time not only to collet, and to weigh their own
Rrength, and to compare it with that of their adversary,
but to secure the friendship or afliftance of the other Euro-
PRan powers.

[d] Guic. lib. 3. p. IS9.

Z 4 THa

BOOK II. THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two rivals,
K-- and saw that he who prevailed, would become absolute
They nego- maler in Italy. If it had been in his power to engage
eiate with
the Pope. them in hostilities, without rendering Lombardy the

theatre of war, nothing would have been more agreeable
to him than to fee them waite each other's strength in
endless quarrels, but this was impoflible. Leo foresaw
that on the first rupture between the two monarchs, the
armies of France and Spain would take the field in the
Milanese, and while the scene of their operations was so
near, and the subjet for which they contended so interest-
ing to him, he could not long remain neuter. He was
obliged therefore to adapt his plan of condu& to his poli-
tical situation. He courted and soothed both the Emperor
and king of France with equal industry and address; and
tho' warmly solicited by each of them, he aflumed all
the appearances of entire impartiality, and attempted to
conceal his real sentiments under that profound diflimu-
lation which teems to have been affeced by molt of the
Italian politicians in that age.

With the THE vicws and intercit of the Venetians were not
Venetians. different from thole of the Pope; nor were they less folici-

tous to prevent Italy from becoming the feat of war, and
their own republick from being involved in the quarrel.
But through all Leo's artifices, and notwithltanding his
high pretensions to a perfec neutrality, it was visible that
he leaned towards the Emperor, from whom he had both
more to fear and more to hope than from Francis; and it
was equally manifest, that if it became necessary to take
a fide, the Venetians would, from motives of the fame
nature, declare for the king of France. No considerable
aflflance, however, was to be expeced from the Italian
ltates, who were jealous to an extreme degree of the
Transalpine powers, and careful to preserve the balance
betwet n them, unless when they were'educed to violate
this favoul ite maxim of their policy, by the certain prof-
peat of great advantage to themselves.

With BUe the chief attention both of Charles and of Fran-
Henry VIII. cis, wa.q employed in order to gain the king of England,

from whom each of them expe&ed afitdance more effec-
tual, and afforded with less political caution. Henry VIII.
had afct nded the throne of that kingdom in one thousand

The peat five hundred and nine, with such circumstances of advan-
powel of tage, as promised a reign of diftinluihed felicity and
creh. splendour. The union in hi. person of the two contend-

ins

irg titles of York and Lancaftr, and the alacrity and BooK II.
eIl!vlation with which both fations obeyed him, not only -
enabled him to exert in his domestic government a degree
of vigour and authority which none of his. predeceirors
could have safely assumed; but permitted him to take a
Ihare in the affairs of the continent, from which the atten-
tion of the Englifl had long been diverted by their unhap-
py divisions. The immense treafurcs which his father had
amassed, rendered him the most wealthy prince in Europe.
The peace which had subsisted under the cautious admini-
tration of that monarch, was of sufficient length to re-
cruit the nation after the desolation of the civil wars, but
had not enervated its spirit; and the English, ashamcd of
having so long rendered their owsn country a scene of dif-
cord and bloodshed, were eager to display their valour in
some foreign war, and to revive the memory of the
victories gained by their anceflors. Henry's ovxn temper, .
perfe&ly suited the state of his kingdom, and the difpofi- ,ei'
tion of his fubiets. Ambitious, a&ive, erterpri;.ing, and
accomplithed in all the martial exercises which in that
age formed a chief part in the education of persons of
noble birth, and inspired them with an early love of war,
he longed to engage in real aAion, and to signalize the
beginning of his reign by some remarkable exploit. An
opportunity of this kind soon presented itfclf; and the
vitory at Guinegate, and the successful sieges of Teroier-
ne and Tournay, tho' of little utility to England, rcfieted
great lustre on its monarch, and confirmed the idea which
foreign princes entertained of his power and importance. So
many concurring causes, addedtothchappy fittation of his
own dominions, which secured them from foreign invasion;
andtothefortunatecircumftance of his being in poffeflion of
Calais, whichferved notonly as akey to France, but opened
an eafypaffage into the Netherlands, rendered the King of
England the natural guardian of the liberties of F.uropc,
and the arbiter between the Emperor and French monarch.
Henry himself was sensible of this singular advantage,
and convinced, that in order to preserve the balance even,
it was his office to prevent either of the rivals from acquir-
ing such superiority of power as might be fatal to the other,
and formidable to the reft of Christendom. But he was
destitute of the penetration, and fill more of the temper,
which such a funaion required. Influenced by caprice,
by vanity, by resentment, by affecion, he was incapable
of forming any regular and extensive syRem of policy, or
of adhriag to it with feadinef. His measures seldom

?"''*»> rrefulted

BOOK II. resulted from attention to the general welfare, or from a
--v_--' deliberate regaid lo his own interest, but were dictated by

pailions which. rendered him blind to both, and prevented
I isgair inr tla alccndant in the affairs of Europe, or from
rca;irng1uch advwi:.agcs to himlelt, as a prince of great-
er art, ti1ough viih inferior talents, might have easily
sccure.d.

And o'lo;, A.LL the impolitic iteps in Henry's adminifiration must
m;innflrtr.-nolt, l-..wever, be imput-d to deteds in his own cha-
ina; ,V1- radl.er; rnanwy of them were owing to the violent passions

-and i niatiable ambition of lis prime minister and favourite
cardinal WVoilly. This man, from one of the lowelt
ranks in lile, had risen to an height of power and dignity,
to which ro Erglii'h fiibjec ever arrived; and governtd
tl.e hauahty, pieC;ulptucus and untradable spirit of Henry
\.ith abicliute alitl;riti. Great talents, and of very
diftErert khi-,( fiUtted lilm for the two opposite flations of
minifctr, ani cf fa ourite. His profound judgment, his
unweraried indu-,ry, his tiiorcugh acquaintance with the
itate cf the kingdom, and his extensive knowledge of the
views ard interefls of foreign courts, qualified him for
that unconuclcd dire&ion of affairs with which he was
intrufled. The elegance of his manners, the gaiety of
his ccm erfation, his insinuating address, his love of mae-
rincncc, and his proficiency in those parts of literature of
which IHenry was fond, gained him the affecion and con-
f.derce of the young monarch. Wolfey was far from
employing this vast and almost royal power, to promote
either the true intercit of the nation, or the real grandeur
of his rmaler. Rapacious at the fame time, and profuse,
he was infaliable in desiring wealth. Of boundless ambi-
tion, he aspired after new honours with an eagernels
unabated by his former fuccels; and being rendered pre-
sumptuous by his uncommon elevation, and the aicendant
he had gained ocr a prince, who scarce brpoked advice
from any other person, he dilcovered in his whole demea-
nour the most overbearing haughtiness and pride. To
thele pailions he himself lacrificed every consideration;
and whoever endeavoured to obtain his favour, or that of
his master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

The court As all the fates of Europe fought Henry's friendship
pridtoWol- at that time; all courted his minister with incredible at-
Icyby rn- tention and obfcquioufnefs, and firove by presents, by

promifcs, or by flattery to work upon his avarice, his

ambition,

,mbition, or his pride [I. Francis had in the l'vc:r one PFoK II.
iotluiard Sfo~ hundred and eieghteon emlloyed L;'nniv', --','
2dmiral of France, one of his meft accoit-!iihcd ardl
rrtful courtiers, to gain the haughty pr,.late. lie himn.ll
bcf.owed on him every mark ot rclfct ar.d ccI::fidrncc.
ic ccnfulted him with regard to his nmoil irml i-ianl a;ffarls,
ard received his retl'onfcs with imr:licit ceftrcrce. By
ihefc arts, together wiih the grant of a la'ge lnclfiol,
Francis iecured the Cardina!, who ptriiadtcl h'i ma:}cr
1o surrender Tournay to France, to coinc.tic a treatyv cC
marriage between his daughter the privccIl. Marv, .crd 1
consent to a personal inter\ icw with the Frenchii ';?

h '.

From that time, the rmoil familiar intercourfc !uli:ilt-d
between the two couris; Francis, sensible of ti'.c great
salue of Wolsey's fricndhip, laboured to fccurtt ti.e co--
tinuance of it by every pcffible expreflion cf rcegc,
bestowing on him in all his letters the honourable apr'lla-
ticn cf Father, Tutor, and Gcverror.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union with the A^' !by

utmost jealousy and concern. His near relation to theC:d"'
king of England gave him tome litle to his fricndl,'ip, and
soon after his accefficn to the throne of Castile, he at-
tempted to ingratiate himself with \Vollev, by fettling on
him a pension of three thousand livrcs. His chief lolici-
tude at present was to prevent the intended interview, the
effeAs of which upon two young princes, who'e hearts
uere no less Ifufcptihle of friendlhip than their mar.rels
were of inipirir.g it, he extremely dreadtd. But aftr
pmany delays occasioned by difficulties about the cerec-
nial, and by the anxious precautions of both cuturts for
the safety of their re!pe.ivt.j fovcreigrs, the timre a;td place
of meeting were at lafi fixed. MRflTcngers had ibeen firt
to different courts inviting all (comrrs, whlo were ecntlc-
men, to enter the lifts at tilt and toiurniiimcnt, r..;i't the
two monarchs and their knights; and both Fr-nt-is and
Henry loved the splendour of thefc fpcaacks ico wcll,
and were too much delighted with the graccful figule
they made on such occatons, to torego the pleafint' or
glory which they expeced from such a singular and hrii-
liant afembly. Nor was the Cardinal lelf fond of dil-
playing his magnificence in the presence of two court,
and ofdifcovering to the two nations the extent of his in-
fluence over both their monarchs. Charles' finding it

el Fiddes', Life or Wotcy, 66. Rymter' Foedera, xiii. 718.
·1 Hcrben'I Hist. of Henry VIl. 3o. Rymer, xiii. 624.

impoflible

BooK F. impofiible to prevent the interview, endeavoured to dif.
ly--c-- appoint its efieds, and to pre-occupy the favour of tlhe

El.glifh monarch and his minister by an ac of complai-
'ul, Vli-d fance flii more flattering and more uncommon. Having

failed from Corunna, as has already been related, he
flered his course diredtly towards England, and relying
wholly on Hcnry'sgcnerofity for his own safety, landed at
Moy 6tb. Io,.r. This unexpeted visit furprized the nation. \Vol-

f.c, however, was well acquainted with the Emperor's
intention. A negotiation, unknown to the hiflorians of
that age, had been carried on between him and the court
of Spain; this visit had been concerted, and Charles grant-
ed the Cardinal, whom he calls his ml sincere friend, ar
additional pension of seven thousand ducats [gr. Henry,
who was then at Canterbury, in his way to France, im-
mediately dispatchcd Wolfey to Dover, and being highly
pleased with an event so soothing to his vanity, hastened to
receive, with suitable refpet, a guest who had placed in

In;,tnte, him such unbounded confidence. Charles, to whom time
himitlfinto wasprecicus, flaid only four days in England: Butduring
fivour both that short space, he had the address not only to give
w:ith the
King anL Henry favourable jmpreflions of his chara&er and intenti-
'ol'ii. ons, but to detach Wolfey entirely from the interef of

the French king. All the grandeur, wealth and power,
which the Cardinal possessed, did not satisfy his ambitious
mind while there was fill one ftep higher to which an
ecclefialtic could ascend. The papal dignity had for
fame time been the objec of his wifhcs, and Francis, as
the mbo effecual method of securing his friendship, had
promised to favour his pretensions, on the sirs vacancy,
with all his interelt. But as the Emperor's influence in
the college of cardinals was greatly superior to the French
king's, Wolfey grasped eagerly at an offer which that art-
ful prince had made him of exerting it vigorously in his
behalf; and allured by this profpe&, which under the
pontificate of Lco, itillin the prime of his life, was a
very distant one, he entered with warmth into all the
Emperor's fchcmes. No treaty, however, was conclued
at that time, between the two monarchs; but Henry, in
return for the honour which Charles had done him, pro-
mifed to visit him in some place of the Low-Countries,
immediately after taking leave of the French king.

(1g Blmer, xiii. 714.

Hig

His interview with that prince was in an open plain Boo 11K .

1)etween-Guifiles and Ardreb, where the two kings and -
their attendants displaycd their magrni'ccilce with luch ltue 7,t,
emulation and profule expence, as procured it the name bteen
of the Field of the Cloth cf Gold. Feats of chivalry, par- H:nry and
ties of gallantry, and such exercifcs and paftimcs as were F'a * -
in that age reckoned manly or elegant, rather than serious
business, occupied both courts during eighteen davs that
they continued together [hl. Whatever impreflion the
engaging manners of Francis, and the liberal and unfufpi-
cious confidence with which he treated Henry, made on
the mind of that monarch, was soon effaced by Wolf 's
artifices, or by the interview which he had with the July I,.
Emperor at Gravelines; which was conduced by Charcs
with less pomp than that near Guifnes, but with gre..ter
attention to his political interest.

THIS assiduity with which the two greatest monarchs Henry' ide.-

in Europe paid court to Henry, appeared to him a plain asofhithw
acknowledgment that he held the balance in his hands, and n"Port3c0.
convinced him of the justness of the motto he had chocn,
" Thatwhoever he favoured would certainly prcvail."
In this opinion he wasconfirmed by an offer which Charles
made of submitting any difference that might arile be-
tween him and Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing
could have the appearance of greater candour and mode-
ration, than the choice of a judge who was reckoned th-
common friend of both. But as the Emperor had nov
attached Wotfey entirely to his interefl, no proposal co iid
be more insidious, nor, as appeared by the sequel, more
fatal to the French king t(.,

[h] TheFrench and Englilh historians deftribe the pomp of this inter-

*iev, and the varioMr fpecifcles with great minutenein. One circu nlance
mentioned by the marechba' le FlPcrages, who was present, and wiichl
appears singular in the present age, is commonly omitted. ' After th'
teornaments;" fays he, " the French and Englith wrestlers male their
ppearance, and wrefelcd in the presence of the Kings, and the ladies; ard
at there were many flout wrelleils there, it affordled rtxcelle<tp;alimce; bi;
a the King of France had neglected to hring any wrt Illerr out of Bretangle
the Englilh gained the prize.-.After this, the Kings of France and
England retired to n tent, where they drank together, ind the King o
England feiaing the King of France by the collar, lail, " Mvy brothor, I
muf wreflar eitbyou," and endeavrored once or twice to trip up hil
keel; but the King of Prince, who is a deurous wreltler, twilled him
round, and threw him on the gronnd with prodigioub violentr. The King
*f England wanted to renew the combat, but wa p.rt vcnted," Memoirew
de FleuraiBng, 1'. Paris, 17j3. . 319.
[i] Hcrbert, 37.

CHAR L.S,

BOOK II. CHARI.ES, notwithifanding his partial fondness for tl;,

v--N- t Netherlands, the place of his nativity, made no long fRay

of "r''7,"'l there; and after receiving the homage and congratultions
FrcLr. of hisicountrymen, hastened to Aix-la-Chapelk-, the place

apl[oiinted by the golden bull for the coronation of the
October 3. Emperor. I'here, in pretence of an assembly nore nu-

merous and fplkndid than had appeared on any former oc.
cation, the crown of Charlemagne was placed upon his
heAn/, with all the pompous solemnity which the Germanr
assea in their publick ceremonies, and which they deem es.
lcntial to the dignity of their empire [k].

So!)'T-n the ALMOST at the fame time, Solsman the Magnificent,
jtl''the' one of the moi accomplilhed, enterprizing, and vicorious
('trorr.a of the Turkifli princes, a conflant and formidable rival to
thtroin. the Emperor, alcendcd the Ottoman throne. It was the

peculiar glory of that period to produce monarchs the moit
illulrious, that have at any one time appeared in Europe.
Leo, Charles, Francis, Henry, and Solyman, were each of
them polefeed of talents wh.ich would have rendered any
age in which they happened to flourish, conspicuous. But
such a conlkellation of great princes, flicd uncommon lufir
on the sixteenth century. In every contest, great power
and great ab)iiiies were set in opposition; and the efforts
of valour and conduct on one fide, counterbalanced by an
equal exertion of the fame qualities on the other, not onlv
occasioned such a variety of events as renders the hiflory ct
that period intereting, but served to check the exorbitaint
progress of any of those princes, and to prevent their at-
taining fuich pre-eminence in power as would have been fatal
to the liberty and happiness of mankind.

Dirt cailed '1'tiE firll ad of the Emperor's administration was to
Wom,,n arppoint a diet of the empire to be held at Worms on the

sixth of January, one thousand five hundred and twenty-
one ; and in his circular letters to the different princes, he
informed them that he had called this afTembly in order to
concert with them the moll proper mcafurcs for checking
the progress of those new and dangerous opinions, which
threatened to diflirb the pence of Germany, and to over-
turn the religion of their ancefitors.

Rife of the CH.RI.Es had in view the opinions propagated by Lu-
ieformation. ther and his difeiples since the year one thousand five hun-

dred and seventeen; and as these led to that happy re-

[k] Hartmnn. Mturuc Rtltlio Corona. Car. . aS. Colaft. Potl. Iorit
pct!ia. Prnd. 614. :. fr'l. r. a.

formation

fortnation in religion which rescued one part of Europe POOK II.
from the papal yoke, mitigated its rigour in the other, and

2 J

produced a revolution in the lentiments of mankind, the
greatefi as well as the most beneficial that has happened
since the publication of Christianity, the events which at
firfl gave birth to these opinions, and the cauties lich ren-
dered their progress so rapid and successful, deterve to be
confidered with minute attention.

To overturn a fyfiem of religious belief founded on an-

cient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by power, and
defended with art and industry; to eflablifn in its room
dotrines of the molf contrary genius and tendency; and
to accomplish all this, not by external violence or the force
of arms, are operations which hiflorians the leafd prone to
credulity and fuperfitilion, mufi ascribe to that Divine Pro-
vidence which can, with infinite ease, bring about events
that to human sagacity appear impossible. The interpofi-
tion of Heaven in favour of the Chriflian religion at its
first publication, was manifefied by miracles and pro-
phecies wrought and uttered in confirmation of it: And
though none of the reformers possessed, or pretended to
possess, these supernatural gifts, yet that wonderful prepa-
ration of circumstances which disposed the minds of men
for receiving their dotrines, that singular combination of
caufcs which secured their success, and enabled men defti-
tute of power and of policy to triumph over tho'e wxho
employed both against them, may be confidered as no flight
proof that the fame hand which planted the Chrillian re-
ligion, proteced the reformed faith, and reared it, fiom
beginnings extremely feeble, to an amazing degree of
strength and maturity.

IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and from a Fromincon-

source very inconsiderable, that all the mighty effeas of lfijtLbt bt-
the reformation flowed. Leo X. when raised to the papal
throne, found the revenues of the church exhauflied by the
valt proje&s of his two ambitious predecefiors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II; and his own temper, naiural'y
liberal and enterprizing, rendered him incapable of that
severe and patient economy which the situation of his
finances required. On the contrary, his schemes for ag-
grandizing the family of Medici, his love of splendour,
his taRe for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding
men of genius, involved him daily in new expences; in
order to provide a fund for which, every device, that the
fertile invention of priests had fallen upon to drain the cre-

dulous

BooK II. dulous multitude, was tried. Among others, he had re
<-v-- c
o course to a sale of Indulgences. According to the dotrint
A faleofin- of the Komifh church, all the good works of the Saint:;
datr~esnce~ ublifrl,d by over and above those which were necessary towards theii
Leo X. own justification, together with the infinite merits of Jesus

Christ, are deposited in one inexhauflible treasury. The
keys of this were committed to St. Peter and to his fuccef.
fors the Popes, who may open it at pleasure, and by tranf-
ferring a portion of this superabundant merit to any parti-
cular person, for a fum of money, may convey to him
either the pardon of his own fins, or a release for any one
in whom he is interested, from the pains of purgatory.
Such indulgences were first invented in the eleventh cen-
tury by Urban II. as a recompense for those who went in
person upon the wild enterprize of conquering the Holy
Land. They were afterwards granted to those who hired
a soldier for that purpose; and in process of time were
beflowed on filch as gave money for accomplishing any
pious work enjoined by the Pope [1]. Julius 11. had be-
flowed indulgences on all who contributed towards building
the church of St. Peter at Rome ; and as Leo was carrying
on that magnificent and expensive fabric, his grant was
founded on the fame pretence [m].

So condua- THE promulgating of these indulgences in Germany,
ed as to give together with a share of the profits arising from the sale of
General of- them, was afligned to Albert, ele&or of Mentz and arch-

e. bilhop of Magdeburg, who, as his chief agent for retail-

ing them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar,
of licentious morals, but of an afive spirit, and remark-
able for his noisy and popular eloquence. He, affifled by
the monks of his order, executed the commiflion with
great zeal and success, but with little discretion or decency;
and though by magnifying exceflively the benefit of their
indulgences [n], and by difporing of them at a very low

price,

[1l History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
m] Palavic. HiR. Cone. Trident. p. 4.
n] As the form of these Indullgencc, and the benefits which they were

supposed to convey, are unknown in Protellant countries, and little underflood,
at prcfent, in feecral plces where the Roman catholic religion is eftabliied, I
have, for the information of my readers, translated the form of absolution
used by Tetzel. " May our Lord Jefiu Christ have mercy upon thee, and
absolve thee by the merits of his most holy pflion. And I, by his authority,
thbt of his blessed poftles Peter and Paul, and of the moat holy Pope,
granted and committed to me ia these partm, do *ablve thee, firt from all
ecclefialical confures i whatever manner they have been iocurd, aod
thea from All thy fin, tranfgreiona, sad excrefei, how cnomloma loever
they may he, evet frn ich aL are refiered for the eogismce of the holy

fee,

price, they carried on for rome time an extensive and lu- BooK II,
crative traffick among the credulous multitude, the extra- t
vagance of their aflertions, and the irregularities in their
condu,, camp at last to give general offence. The princes
and nobles were irritated at feeing their vasals drained of so
much wealth, in order to replentfh the trealurv of a pro-
firfe pontiff. Men of piety regretted the delusion of the
eople, who being taught to rely tor the pardon of their
.1ns on the indulgences which they purchalfed, did not think
it incumbent on them either to ahound in faith, or to prac-
tilc holiness. Even the most unthlnkinig were shockcd at
the scandalous behaviour of ''etzel and his associates, who
often fquindered in drunkenness, gaming, and low de-
btuchery, those fums which were piously bellowed in hopes
of obtaining eternal happiness; and all began to wish that
fonme check were given to this commerce, no less detrimental
tofociety than deftrutive to rel:gion.

SUCH was the favourable jundure, and so disposed were Firftappear.

the minds of his countrymen to liften to his difcounles, when ¥~e of Lu-
Martin Luther firtt began to call in question the efficacy of char'acr.

fee, and as far as the keys of the hcly church extend, I remit to you all
punihfmcent which you defrrve in t'uigaiciy on their accour t, and I ieflo.e
yu to the holy sacraments of the chu ch, to the unity ot the laithful, and
to that innocence and purity which you poffcfTed at bal.tifim so that v.hen
y.u die the gate: ot punishment. Ihall be hut, and ti.e gAt c.f the para-
(d:!c of delight shall be opened, and it you fliall not die at picient, this
trace (hall remain in full .orce when you are at the poirt ot death. In
the name ot the Fathe,, and of the Son, and o0 the Holy Ghost." Seckend.
Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his associatees dtIfcil ed the benefits of In-

dulgence, and the necessity of purchasing them are so extravagant, that
they appear to be rlmoR incredible. If any man (!iid they; purchalfs Ict-
ttis of indulgence, his foul may reft secure with :elipet t, it. falrstton.
The Gfuls confined in pu, gatoy, for whose redemption ijidulencts a. cl.ur-
chased, as soon as the money tinkles in the theft, inflantly ,c. pe i'm that
place of tormetit, and ucroiln into heaven: T hat the efficacy ot induJ-
genceb was so great, that the m'it heinous tins, even if cnc fliould vinlate
(which was impoflible) the Mother ;f Godl, woull be leminitd and .vpi-
aced bly thiem, anl thr person be treed both fr, m punifliment a id guilt: That
thl: was the unlpeakahle gift of God, in order to reconcile mer. to hlrrielf:
Tlat the croft errced by the preachers us indu.genccs, was as ceffcaeious
x lihe ciofi of rhrift illelt: I.o ! the heavenr ac open; if y",u . nter not
now, when will you enter ? For twtlve-pence y ,u may red, m Ile foul
0o your father (out o purgatory; and are you so urngrateful, iha yvou will
not relcue your parent tiom tormert ? If you had but one COnt, y a ought
to Itrip yourself inllantly. and fell it, in older to iurchafr such benefilt, &c.
Thle», and many such extrnvagant exprerfions, are Cleeredl out od Luther's
wvorks by Chemnitiur in his Exam-a Coaciiii Tridentini apud ierm. Vir. der
Hsrdt. Hil., Liter. Rrfoum. pars iv. p. 6. 'ihe fsme author h.,. publilhed
several of Tetsel's Discourse, which prove that theec expressions were ani-
tl litplr si l or c.xaSr n td. Ibid. p. 14.

VOL. I. A a Indulgences,

Boon II. Indulgences, and to declaim against the vicious lives and
'--J ' faire dotrines of those who promulgated them. He wa

a native of Eineben in Saxony, and though born of poor
parents, had received a learned education, during the pro.
grefs of which he gave many indications of uncommon vi.
gour and acuteness of genius. As his mind was naturally
susceptible of serious impressions, and tincured with fomt.
what of that religious melancholy which delights in the
solitude and devotion of a monastic life, lie retired into a
convent of Augustinian friars, and without suffering the in.
treaties of his parents to divert him from what he thought
his duty to God, he assumed the habit of that order,
There he acquired great reputation, not only for piety, but
for his love of knowledge, and unwearied application ti
fludy. He had been taught the fcholafiic philosophy and
theology which were then in vogue by very able maflers,
and wanted not penetration to comprehend all the nicetin
and diflinaions with which they abound; but his under.
sanding, naturally found, and superior to every thing fri.
volous, soon became difgulted with these subtile and unirr
ftru&ive sciences, and fought for some more solid founda-
tion of knowledge and of piety in the holy scripture.
Having found a copy of the Bible, which lay negle&ed
in the library of his monaltery, he abandoned all other
pursuits, and devoted himself to the fludy of it, with such
eagerness and afliduity, as aflonifhed the monks, who were
little accuflomed to derive their theological notions from
that source. The great progress which he made in this un-
common course of fludy, augmented so much the fame both
of his fanAiry and of his learning, that Frederick, Elertor
of Saxony, having founded an university at Wittemberg
on the Elbe, the place of his refidencc, Luther was choses
first to teach philosophy, and afterwards theology there,
and discharged both offices in such a manner, that he was
deemed the chief ornament of that society.

Heopppofcs WHILE Luther was at the height of his reputation and
the rfle of authority, Tetzel began to publish Indulgences in the
indulgences. neighbourhood of Wittemberg, and to ascribe to them the

fame imaginary virtues, which had, in other places, inm
pored on the credulity of the people. As Saxony was not
more enlightened than the other provinces of Germany,
Tetzel met with prodigious fuccefi there. It was with the
utmofi concern, that Luther beheld the artifices of thob
who fold, and the simplicity of those who bought, Indul-
gences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas and the other

fchoolmc1,

fhoolmen, on which the doarine of Indulgences wasBooK II.
founded, had already loft much of their authority with '-Y
him: and the Scriptures, which he began to confider as
the great flandard of theological truth, afforded no coun-
tenance to a praaice, equally subversive of faith and of
morals. His warm and impetuous temper di.i not susser
him long to conceal such i:mportant d;fcoveries, or to con-
tinue a silent fpecator of the delusion of his countrymen.
From the pulpit in the great church of Witernherg he
in:'eiLhed bitterly againa the irrcula.ritie-s and vices of
those who published Indulgences; he vi.iiured io examine
the dotrines which they taught, and pointed out to the
people the danger of relying for salvation upon any 'nher
means than those appointed by God in hi, word. The
boldness and novelty ot thete opinions drew great at;ention,
and being recommended by the authority of Luther's
personal chara&er, and delivereld with a popul;r and per-
suasive eloquence, they made a d.e-p imprefion on his
hearers. EncouraEed by the favour.ib!e reception of his
doctrines among the people, lie wrote to Albert, eleqor
of Mentz, and achbifhop of Magdeburg, to whose jurif-
diaion that part of Saxony was lubjeEt, and remonltrated
warmly againfl the f.li'e opinions and wicked lives of the
preacheis of Indulgences; but he found that prelate too
deeply interested in their success to correct their abufcs.
Ilis next attempt was to gain the ftlfrage of men of learn-
ing. For this purpore, Ih pub;filed ninety-five theses, Herubliflhc
containing his sentiments with regird to Indulgences.his 'he'i:
There he proposed, not as points fully eflahl:fhed, or ot them
undoubted certainty, but as fubjeas of inqu;ry and dif-
putation; he appoin'ed a d.iy, on which the learned were
invited to impugn them either in person, or by writing;
and subjoined to the whole, Iclemn proteflations of his
high refpe& for the apoflolic fee, and ot his implicit sub-
miflion to its authority. No opponent appeared at the
time prefixed; the theses spread over Germany with aflo-
nif(hng rapidity ; they were read with the greatcft eager-
ness; and all admired the boldness of the man who had
ventured to call in question the plenitude of papal power,
and to attack the Dominicans, armed with all the terrors
of inquisitorial authority [".

[a] I.utheri Opera Jene, 161i . vol. i. prefat. 3. p. 1. 66. Hist. of
Couc. of Ttent by F. Paul, p. 4. Seckend. Corn. Apol. p. 16.

' A a a Tx

BooK It. THE Friars of St. Augufline, Luther's own order,
i-)-- -~ though addiced with no less obsequiousness than the other
Supported monanlic fraternities to the papal fee, gave no check to the
by his own
order. publication of these uncommon opinions. Luther had by

his piety and learning acquired extraordinary authority
among his brethren; he professed the highelf regard fr
the authority of the Pope; his profeflions were at that
time sincere; and as a secret enmity, excited by intert.
and emulation, fubfitls among all the monastic orders i!,
the Romish church, the Augustinians were highly pleasfe
with his inveOives against the Dominicans, and hoped to
fee them exposed to the hatred and corn of the peotle.
Nor was his sovereign the Elecor of Saxony, the witfi
prince at-that time in Germany, dissatisfied with this eb.
fIruclion which Luther threw in the way of the publica.
tion of Indulgences. He secretly encouraged the attempt,
and flattered himself that this di!putc among the Eccle-
fiafticks themselves, might give some check to the ex.
actions of the court of Rome, which the secular princes
had long, though without success, been endeavouring to
oppose.

Many en. MANY zealous champions immediately arose to defend
deavour to opinions on which the wealth and power of the church
confuehim. were founded, againfl Luther's attacks. In opposition to

his theses, Tetzel published a counter-thefes at Francfort
on the Oder; Eccius, a celebrated Divine of Augsburg,
endeavoured to refute his notions; and Prierias, a Domi-
nican friar, mafier of the sacred palace and Inquisitor ge.
neral, wrote againf him with all the virulence of a fcho.
laftic disputant. But the mannerin which they condueed
the controversy, did little service to their cause. Luther
attempted to overturn Indulgences by arguments founded
in reason, or derived from scripture; they produced no-
thing in support of them but the sentiments of fchoolmen,
the conclusions of the canon law, and the decrees o:
Popes [b). The decision of judges so partial and i.r
terefied, did not satisfy the people, who began to call
in queflion the authority even of there venerable guidec
when they found them standing in direa opposition t(

[b] F. Paul, p. 6. Seckead. p. 40. Palvk. p. 8.
.

the dihtates of reason, and the determinations of the di- BOOK If.
vine law [C. *

M1\EASNWHI.E, there novelties in Luther's doarines Tilhecnrtc

Rome at si A

which intcrecied all Germany, excited little attention and dif,;ra
no alarm in the court of Rome. Leo, fond of elegant Lather.
and refined pleasures, intent upon great schemes of po-
licy, a firanger to theological controversies, and apt to
clfpiic them, regarded with the utmost indifference the ope-

[.] Seckend. p. 30.
* Guiccia,dini has afterted two thingr vwith regard to the first rort.t!-

pa:ion of iindulgences; i. That Leo bcftov.ed a gift of the profi;s o.rifiri
t,,m the sale ot indulgences in Saxony, ani the adjacent provinces of Ger-
i:;j;, upon hisfltcr.Magdalen, the wile ofFiancciccttoCibo. Guic. hlb. xiii.
'. 168. a. That Arcemboldo, a Genoefi ecelefiaiic, who had been brci a
mnerchant, and flill retained all the arts of that profefTion, was appointc
by her to collei the money which thould be railed F. Paul has fcllowtd
him in both thele particulars, and adds, that the Augullinians in Saxsy
lad leen immemolially employed in preaching indulge.ncees, but t'at A -
cmbolon and his deputies, hoping to gain moie by comnmitting this tluit
to the Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tettel, and that Luthe:
was prompted at frfi to oppore Tetzel and his afFacialer, by a defre ,'r
tiking revenge for this injury offered to his order. F. Pau!, p. 5. Alim .
all the hiflorians since their time, p,)pifh as well as piotefiant, have, with-
out examination, admitted these affcitions to be true upon the;r authorit,.
But notwithstanding the concurring testimony of two aubtors si emrean;
both for exaCnefs and veracity, we may obfervc,

x. That Felix Contolri, who searched the pontifical archives of purpof.,

could not find this pretended grant in any of thole regiflrrs where it mutL
necefrarily have been recorded. Palav. p 5--:_ . That the profits ami.;-
from Indulgences in Saxony, and the adjicent countries, had been granted
not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbishop of Mentz, who had the right of
nominating those who publifhedt them. Seek. p. 11. Luth. Oper. ;. praif
p. t. Palav. p. 6.-3. That Arcemboldo never had concern in the p ;bl;
cation of Indulgences in Saxony, his diftlrit was Flandcrs and the Upple
and Lower Rhine. Seek. p. 14. Palav. p. 6.-4 T'hat Luther and hi:
a !herents never mention this grant of Leo's to his sifter, though a ci:curr-
fiance of which they could scarce have been ignorant, and which thrv
would have been careful not to suppress.-5. The publication of Inui--
gences in Germany was not usually committed to the Atuguflinian.. Tht
piomulgation of them at three different periods under Julius II. was granlrd
to the Frantifcans; the Dominicans had been -mployed in the fame ofR,-c
a f(hrt time betore the plefent period. Palav. p. 46. 6. The promulgari;:,
of thole Indulgences, which firlf excited Luthe's indignation, was entrulfel
to the archbishop of Mentz, in conjuncion with the guardian of the Frao:
cifcans, but the latter having declined accepting of that rust, the foic
tight became vested in the archbiflop. Palav. 6 Seck. i6, 177.- Lu-
ther was not infligated by his iuperiorn among the Augullinians to attt.l;
the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate Indulgences becaufr they were
promulgated by them; Iisa oppoition to their opinions and vices proceeded
from more laudable motives. Seek. p. 15. 3. Lutheri Opera i. p. 64.6. 1
A diploma of Indulgenco is publilhed by Hcern. Vonder Hardt, from wlli.i
it appears that the name of the guardian of the Francifcane is retained, to,
tether with that of the arehbihop, although the former did not ma. The
limita of the country to which their cormrnitioni extended, via. the die.
seftc of Ment, Maleburgh, Hllberftadt and the territories of the mar'
quib of Brandenburgh, are octIdoned in that diloms. 4ii.l LiLearia Re-
"mltpn. pUM i. p. I 4.

A a 3 rationos

BooK II. rations of an obscure Friar, who, in the heart of Gtr.

--- tmany, carried on a Icliolaftic di putation in a barbarous file

Little did he apprehend, or Luther liinifelf dream, tl:at
tihe effeds of this quarrel would he so fatal to the pa.
pal fee. Lco imputed tlce whole to monastic enmity and
emulation, and seemed inclined nri to intei pose in the
conrefl, but to allow the Auguftiiians and Dominicans to
wrangle ahout the matter v:ithl their ul;ial anirr.ofity.

The pro- THE lolicitatio's, however, of Lu:Itr's advcrfaries, C:-
gref. o Lu- afperaled to an hirh degree by the boldness and feverly
ther's pi- wi;h which he animadvtered on their writings, togetiicr
cions.

with the furpjizing prngre' whnich his opinions made in
different parts of Germany, rouzed at last the attention of
the court of Rome, and (lbl 'ed Leo to take measures f;:r
the recurity of the church Iaainfft an attack that appeartl

Heis rum- now too serious to be dpri'ed. For this end, he'ulm.
mnred to moned Luther to appear a: Rome, within fixtv days, be.
appea a3t fore the audi'or of the cnamber, and the fame Prieri:l,

RO who had wri'ten againfl him, whom he empowered to ex-

amine his docrines, and to decide concerning them. He
wrote, at the fame tim , to the Flertor or Caxonv, be.
feeching him not to prottd a man wvhofe Leretical and pro-
fane tenets were lo shocking to pious ears; and enjoined
the Provincial of the Augustinians to check by his authority
the rashness of an arrogant monk, which brought disgrace
upon the order of St. Augustine, and gave offence and
difinrbance to the whole church.

The Pope FR OM the firain of these letters, as well as from the tro
empow:e r mination of a judge so prejudiced and partial as Prierias,
i* "lPte 'a Luther cafily saw what ftenence he might expecr at Rome.
try him in
Germany. He dircovered, for that rcafon, the utmofi solicitude to

have his cau'e tried in Germany, and before a less fufpefed
tribunal. The university of 'Witemberg, anxious for ihe
safety of a man who did so much honour to their focicty,
wrote to the Pope, and, after employing several pretfxts
to excuse Luther Irom appcaring at Rome, intreattd Leo
to commit the examination ot his dofrines to some per-
sons of learning and authority in Germany. The Elecor
requefled the fame tlhing of the Pope's legate at the diet
of Aublburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that time,
was so far from having any intention to disclaim the papal
authority, that he did not even entertain the rmallei fulpi-
cion concerning its divine original, had written to Leo a
FnoRf submissive letter, promising an unreserved compliance
with his will, the Pope gratified them so far as to em-

power

power his legate in Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Domi- BooK 11.
rican, eminent for scholastic learning, and paflionately '---
devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine the
cause.

LUTHER, though he had good reason todecline a judge Luther ap-

chosen among his avowed adversaries, did not hesitate pears beiove
about appearing before Cajetan ; and having obtained the the legate.
Emperor's fafe-conduct, immediately repaired to Augf-
burg. The Cardinal received him with decent refpet,
and endeavoured at first to gain upon him by gentle treat-
r)ent: But thinking it beneath the dignity of his station to
enter into any formal dispute, he required him, by virtue
ss the apostolic powers with which lie was cloathed, to
retraf the errors he had uttered with regard to Indul-
gences, and the nature of faith; and to abflain, for the
future, from the publication of new and dangerous opi-
nions. Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own
tenets, and confirmed in the belief of them by the appro-
bation they had met with among persons conspicuous both
for their learning and piety, was furprized at this abrupt
mention of a recantation, before any endeavours were
used to convince him that he was mistaken. He had flat-
tered himself, that in a conference concerning the points
in dispute, with a prelate of such difiinguiihed abilities, he
would be able to remove many of those imputations with
which the ignorance or malice of his antagonifis had
laded him; but the high tone of authority which the
Cardinal assumed, extinguished at once all hopes of this
kind, and cut off every profpeft of advantage from the
interview. His native intrepidity of mind, however, did His intrepid
not desert him. He declared, with the utmost firmness, behkviour.
that he could not, with a (afe conscience, renounce opi-
aions which he believed to be true; nor should any confi-
deration ever induce him to do what would be so base in
itself, and so offensive to God. At the fame time he con-
tinued to expreC no less reverence than formerly for the
authority of the apostolic fee [d]; he signified his willing-
ness to submit the whole controversy to certain universities
which he named, and prbmifed neither to write nor to
preach for the future concerning Indulgences, provided his
adversaries were likewise enjoined to be silent with refpea
to them [el. All these offers Cajetan disregarded or re-
jeaed, and Rill insisted peremptorily on a simple recantation,

[d] Luth. Oper, vot. L . L64. [e] Ibid. p. 169,

A * 4 threatcin

BooK II. threatening him with ecclesiastical censures, and forbiddin
'-v"' him to appear again in his presence, unless he resolved in

ftantly to comply with what he required. This hatlghli
and violent manner of proceeding, as well as other circium
stances, gave Luther's friends such f(rong seatons to fufl
pe&, that even the Imperial fafe-conduE would not x
able to protec him from the legate's power and reCent.
ment, that they prevailed on him to withdraw secretly
from Augiburg, and to return to his own country. Put
before h;s departure, according to a form of which there
His appeal. had been some examples, he prepared a solemn appeal,

from the Pope ill-informed at that time concerning his
cause, to the Pope when he should receive more full infor-
mation with refpet to it ['].
He is sup- CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, and

ie "leY the publication of his appeal, wrote to the Ele&or of Sax.
of Saxony. ony, complaining of both; and requiring him, as he re.

garded the peace of the church, or the authority of its
h-ad, either to fend that seditious monk a prisoner to
Rome, or to banish him out of his territories. It was not
from theological considerations that Frederick had hitherto
countenanced Luther; he seems to have been mucha
ifranger to controversies of that kind, and to have been
little interefled in them. His proteEion flowed almof
entirely, as hath been already observed, from political
motive%, and was afforded with great secrecy and caution.
He had neither heard any of Luther's discourses, nor read
any of his books; and though all Germany resounded with
his fame, he had nrver once admitted him into his pre-
fence [g]. But upon this demand which the Cardinal
made, it became receffary to throw off somewhat of his
former reserve. He had been at great expence, and had
beflowed much attention on founding a new university, an
objec of confiderabic importance to every German prince;
and foreseeing how fatal a blow the removal of Luther
would be to its reputation [hi, he, under various pretexts,
and with many profeflions of efeem for the Cardinal, and
of reverence for the Pope, declined complying with either
of his requests, and openly discovered great concern for
Luther's safety li].

r ] Alid. Hist. erRefewm. p. . eend. p. 45. Luth. Oper. L t{j.

! eckdren . p. #,. 6leid. Hilt. p. a1.

I'l Seckend. P . .,
[i] Slid. HiFn . oP. Lth Oper. i. i7,

*· +~I

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan insisted on a BoOK II.

simple recantation, gave great offence to Luther's follow- -
ers in that age, and hath since been censured as impru- Motives of
dtent, by several popish writers. But it was lmpoffibleconduc.
for the legate to at another part. The judges before
whom Luther had been required to appear at Rome,
were so eager to display their zeal againfi his errors, that,
v.iihout waiting the expiration of the sixty days allowed
him in the citation, they had already condemned him as
an heretick [k. 3 Leo had in several of his brieves and let-
ters, fligmatized him as a child of iniquity, and a man
givcn up to, a reprobate sense. Nothing leis, therefore,
than a recantation could lave the honour of the church,
whose maxim it is never to abandon the smallest point it
has established, and which is even precluded, by its pre-
tensions to infallibility, fiom having it in its power to do
so.

LUTHER'S situation, mean while, was such as would Lnth;'- r-

have filled any other perron with the mos disquieting ap-r1i,,us fit'a-
prehensions. He could not expe& that a prince so prudent
and cautious as Frederick would, on his account, set at
defiance the thunders of the church, and brave the papal
power which had crushed tome of the mos powerful of
the German Emperors. He knew what veneration was
paid, at that time, to ecclefiaflical decisions; what terror
ecclefiafical censures carried along with them, and how
easily there might intimidate and shake a prince, who was
rather his protecor from policy, than his disciple from
convicion. If he Should be obliged to quit Saxony, he
had no profpet of any other asylum, and mulat sand ex-
pored to whatever punifihment the rage or bigotry of his
enemies could infli&. Though sensible of his danger, he
discovered no symptoms of timidity, or remiffnes, but
continued to vindicate his own condu& and opinions, and
to inveigh against those of his adversaries with more vehe-
mence than ever 1 ].

BuT as every flep taken by the court of Rome, parti- He appeas

cularly the irregular sentence by which he had been so pre- O '

. "1el'

cipitately declared an heretick, convinced Luther that .
Leo would soon proceed to the modl violent measures
against him, he had recourse to the only expedient in his
power, in order to prevent the effic of the Papal censures.

kl Luh.Oper.i. ,i,.

Seckend. r. I9f

OF~~H

BooR II. He appealed to a general council, which he affirmed to be

v-v ' the representative of the catholic church, and superior in

power to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might err,
as St.-Peter, the most perfeA of his predeceflors, had
erred [mi.

A new bull IT soon appeared, that Lnther had not formed rash
in favour of conjeaures concerning the intentions of the Romifl
OuS. en- church. A bull, of a date prior to his appeal, was issued

by the Pope, in which he magnifies the virtue and effica-
cy of Indulgences in terms as extravagant as any of his
predecessors had ventured to use in the darkest ages; and
without applying such pallia:ives, or mentioning such con.
cessions as the junaure seemed to call for, he required all
Christians to assent to what he delivered as the dcE&rine of
the Catholic church, and fubjeEted those who should hold
or teach any contrary opinion to the heaviefl ecclesiastical
censures.

flrimili- AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which they con-
*n's death fidered as an unjtflifiable effort of the Pope in order to
of adva.-

c to Lu- preserve that rich branch of his revenue which arose from
thrr. Indulgences, produced little effeEt. But among the reft

of his countrymen, such a clear decision of the sovereign
Pontiff againfl him, and enforced by such dreadful penal-
ties, muff have been attended with consequences very fa-
tal to his cause; if there had not been prevented in a great
measure by the death of the Emperor Maximilian, whom
both his principles and his interest prompted to support
the authority of the holy fee. In consequence of this
event, the vicariat of that part of Germany which is go-
verned by the Saxon laws, was committed to the Ele&or
of Saxony, and under the flelter of his friendly adminifira-
tion, Luther not only enjoyed tranquillity, but his opini-
ons were suffered, during the inter.regnum which preced-
ed Charles's elecion, to take root in different places, and
to grow up to rome degree of fthength and firmness. Leo
too, to whom the election of an Emperor was a point
more interesting than a theological controversy, which he
did not understand, and of which he could not foresee the
consequences, being extremely solicitous not to irritate a
Prince of such confiderahle influence in the elecoral col-
lege as Frederick, discovered a great unwillingness to pro-
nounce the sentence of excommunication against Luther,

[m] 8lcid. Hist. sa. Lut. Operi. 1. 79.

which

,hich his adversaries continually demanded with the most BooK II.
clamorotl in-rp.ur, uity. v_'-','

'To the'e pe lsuic: views of the Pope, as well as to his Ski~plion

matt!ral a1, rfitn trom s!vi-crc meaftucei , r'as wving the finl. oft lrvred-
rCnfion of any turt her proccctilngs ag:infl lTIl her for eigh- Lump.
tecn months. Iei pe uai nloi:.iti<ons, howvecr, in order
to bring the matter to 1oultc amicatle Iine, x. -re carried
on during thai Ipace. '!'he m.anner in wf'ich there were
conduEted having Given I.rl:ihr many opr.o('ri'tti s of ob-
f(rv;il the crolrtlp: ion ot lhe court or Rome ; i's (,bhlinacy
in adhering to ft.i>b!ifhedl cri'rs; and i;-s indilfference about
truith, howevt-r clearly prorpoltI, cr l I'(1m' Iy proved, he iHe brrnt
bhein tn utter some (doiit)s wvi h r ('Ai d i, ile l divine orii t,. ( i

, i

n I of the Papa! autho i5y. A p'> hl' dr u'atin was he:d 'ufln ute
upon this importani quctionl at Leipfic, hbtwcen Luthef ,iy.
and Eccius, one of his n m, Ick2rned and !ormidabile anta-
gonifls; btI it was as friiltlef aind incd ciive as Inch kcho-
iaflic comhats itfuail!v prove. Both partuis boafled of hav-
ing obtained the vittc rv; both were confirmed in their
own opinions; and no prnorels was made towards deciding
the point in <ontroverlv t ].

NOR did this ,spirit of mutiny against the doqrrines and Reformati-

ururpations of the Rormih cli-ch, b! eak out in Saxonv on in sw"i
alone; an attack no lels fierce, and occafinned by the fame l
canses, was made upon them about ihis time in Switzer-
land. T'he Fiancilcais being entrulied vith the promill-
gation of Indulgences in that country, ex(iculed their com-
mifli n with the fame indiscretion and rapaci.,u(nef.,
which had rendered the Dominicans so odious in Germa-
ny. They proceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted
success till they arrived at Zurich. Thcee 7Ziinglins, a
man not inferior to Luliher himt If in enl and intrepidity,
ventured to oppole ti em; and being animated with a re-
publican boldncfs, and free from those restraints which
fuhjetion to the will of a Prince imposed on the German
relormer, he alvanced with more daring and rapid fleps
to everturn the whnle fabric of the eltablifled religion ( 1.
The appearance of futh a vigorous auxiliary, and the
progress which he made, was, at firfl, matter of great
joy to Luther, though on the other hand, the decrees of
the universities of Cologne and Louvain, which pronoun-

[n] Luth. Oper, i. 199.
[o] Slcid. Hilt. %. ScLkend. c.

ced

BooK I1. ced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded great cause d
- -v--' triumph to his adversaries.
Luther's BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther, acquired fresh ,.
boldnels, gour from every instance of opposition; and pufhingoa
nl pro- his inquiries and attacks from one doctrine to another, he
rel. ' began to shake the firmefl foundations on which the

wealth or power of the church were eflablifhed. Leo
came at lafi to be convinced, that all hopes of reclainlino
him by forbearance were vain; several prelates of great
wisdom exclaimed no less than Luther's personal adverfa.
ries against the Pope's unprecedented lenity in permitrinJ
an incorrigible heretick, who during three years had been
endeavouring to fulbvert every thing lacred and venerabi,
fill to remain within the bosom of the church; the digni.
ty of the papal fee rendered the most vigorous proceeding
neceflary; the new Emperor, it was hoped, would i;r.
port its authority; nor did it seem probable that the Elc.
or of Saxony would so far forget his usual caution, asto
set himfelfin opposition to their united power. The col.
lege of cardinals was often assembled, in order to prepare
the sentence with due deliberation, and the mofi able ca.
nons were consulted how it might be expressed with most

lBul of ex- unexceptionable formality. At lait, on the fifte-nth of
cormmunica- June, ore thousand five hundred and twenty, the bull, lb
ton pubtih- fatal to the church of Rome, was issued. Forty-one pro.
ed aga.ia
mim. positions, extraced out of Luther's works, are therein

condemned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to piou
ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writings, upon
pain of excommunication; such as had any of them in the'i
cufody, are commanded to commit them to the flames;
and he himself, if he did not, within sixty days, publickly
recant his errors, and burn his books, is pronounced an
obstinate heretick; is excommunicated, and delivered un-
to Satan for the deflruaion of his flesh; and all secular
Princes' are required, under pain of incurring the fame
censure,. to seize his person, that he might be punilhed as
his crimes deserved [p].

The effca THE publication of this bull in Germany excited vnri-
i this in ouS paflions in different places. Luther's adversaries ex-
Germ"iy, ulted, as if his party and opinions had been crulhed at

onc4 by such a decisive blow. His followers, whose re-
verence for the papal authority daily diminished, read
Leo's anathemas with more indignation than terror. In

fr] Palvic . 1a. Lwh. Opcr. i. 413,

sonn

onIc cities, the people violently obftruaed the promulga. Boot 11.
ion of the bull; in others, those who attempted to pub- '--r
if it were infilted, and the bull itself torn in pieces, and
trodden under foot Iq).

THIS sentence, which he had for some time expeted, ind pou

did not disconcert or intimidate Luther. After renewing Luther.
his appeal to a general council, he puiblifhed remarks upon Nov. 17'
the bull of excommunication; and being now persuaded
that Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuflice in
his proceedings against him, he boldly declared the Pope
to be that man of fin, or Antichrist, whose appearance is
foretold in the New Testament; he declaimed againfi his
tyrarny and usurpations with greater violence thah ever;
lie exhorted all Chriltian Princes to shake off such an igno-
minious yoke; and boafled of his own happiness in being
marked out as the objec of cclefiaflical indignation, be-
cause he had ventured to allfrt the liberty of mankind.
Nor did he confine his expreflions of contempt for the pa-
pal power to words alone; Leo having, in execution of
the bull, appointed Luther's books to be burnt at Rome,
he, by way of retaliation, assembled all the professors and
ludents in the university of Wittemberg, and with great
pomp, and before a valf multitude of spectators, cast the
volumes of the canon law, together with the bull of ex-
communication into the flames; arid his example was imi-
tated in several cities of Germany. The manner in which
he justified this afcion was still more provoking than the
a&ion itself. He colleted from the canon law some of
the mos extravagant propositions with regard to the ple-
nitude and omnipotence of the Pope's power, and fubor-
dination of all secular jurifdi&ion to his authority, and pub-
liihed these with a commentary, pointing out the impiety
of such tenets, and their evident tendency to subvert all
civil government [r].

SUCHi was the progress which Luther had made, and State of'tie

such the (late of his party, when Charles arrived in Ger- Reforrnc.
many. No secular Prince had hitherto embraced Luther's 'harie,,r-
opinions; no change in the eftabli(hed forms of worlhip rivd im
had been introduced; and no encroachments made upon G"crmy.
the pofefions or jurifdiaion of the clergy; neither party
had yet proceeded to ation; and the controversy, though
conduetcd with great heat and palion on both fides, was

fql eck. p. 1 6.
(rL. Olcr. iL 3'(.

ifill

BooK IT. flill carried on wi'h its prope:r weapons, with theses, dif
- v---' putations, and replies. A deep imp efCion, however, u',

made upon the minds of tle pcei;e ; liheir reverence for
Inciet inltulill o;is and docth ins wa- fikcn ; and the mi.
t-jrial. were already I;iUitcrct wh cich produced the cojubiu:
tion that loon Ipic.l r1.'l uver Germanv. Students cr-ovd.
*te from every provinte of Iihe i.nmpire to ,Viiernieji;
2nd unrder Lu l.cr lIm cl , \lc]i, inhun, Carlouldirs, ar:d
orter mAlfltrs, lithn leekoidl einiiii.nt, imbibed opiniin,,

lhich, on their recitrn, :h.v pio!tagate.i nrrnuig t ilr

countrymen, who iilltitnd to tiein c i tl t hat tond iatten:i.
on, which truth when accompnlnd with novel y natural.
Iy command [- .

RReteno;r DURING the course of tilire tranfatiosns, the colir: (
upon be Rome, though utireir the d.rection or ole o, its a!:!ct
conduac of r
the outIof Pontiffs, neither ;ornied t s l. hem -. with tht prolourd
R.mt, sagacity, nor c x'ciitt e them with that fietdy perfetc.

rance, which! h..l lor, i rencdrcd i r!;e most pcrer t moael
of political Wi'oiil to the rela cf Lurope. Vle' I Lulher
began to declairn agniinl Inldulgences, two different me-
thods of treating him lay betoie the Pope; by adopting
one of which the ai.enipr, it is probable, might have
been crushed, an.l Ibv ;;e other it tr.ight have been render-
ed innocent. If Ii.u.:ers iirit depar:ure from the doc-
trines of the church had inian ly drawn upon him the
'eight of its censures, the dread of there might have re-
frained the Elecor of Saxony trom proreQing him, might
have deteircd the pcple tfom liltening to his difcour'ts,
or have over awed Luthcr himfclf; and his name, like
that of many good men bclorc his line, would now have
lben known to the uorld only for his honest but ill-titned
tffort to corredt the corruptions of the Romilh church.
Or on the other hand, if the Pope had early teflified fiome
dlilpleafre with the vices and excefles of those who had
been employed to publilh Indulgences; if he had forbid-
den the mentioning of controverted points in discourses,
addressed to the people; if ihe had enjoined the disputants
on both fides to be silent; if he had been careful not to
ritquet the credit of the church by defining articles which
had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther woukl, pro-
bably, have flopped thort at his firil dilcoverics: He
would not have been forced in felf-defence to venture up-
on new ground, and the whole controversy might poflibly

[(I eckd , .9. avc

lve died away insensibly; or being confined entirely to Boor II.
the schools, might have been carried on with as little de- '*-v-'1
triment to the peace and unity of the Romish church, as
that which the Franciscans maintain with the Dominicans,
concerning the immaculate conception, or that between
the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the operations of
grace. Bit Leo, by flutuating between these opposite
fyflems, and by embracing them alternately, defeated the
effeAs of both. By an improper exertion of authority,
Luther was exasperated, not restrained. By a miflaken
exercise of lenity, time was given for his opinions to spread,
but no progress made towards reconciling him to the
church; and even the sentence of excommunication,
which at another junture might have been decisive, was
delayed so long, that it became at last scarce an objech of
terror.

SUCH a series of errors in the rneaftre of a court, fel- and upnthe

dom chargeable with miflaking its o\v n true interef, is not CLuOtiu of
more aflonifhing than the wisdom which appeared in Lu-
ther's condut. Though a perfec firanger to the'max-
ims of human prudence, and incapable, from the impetu.
ofity of his temper, of observing them, he was led natu-
rally by the method in which he made his discoveries, to
carry on his operations in a manner which contributed
more to their success, than if every (tep he took had been
prescribed by the most artful policy. At the time when
he set himself to oppose Tetiel, he was far from intend-
ing that reformation, which he afterwsarls effeced; and
would have trembled with horror at the thoughts of what
at las he gloried in accomplishing. The knowledge of
truth was not poured into his mind, all at once, by any
special revelation; he acquired it by industry and neditati-
on, and his progress, of consequence, was gradual. The
dotrines of Popery are so closely conneced, that the ex-
posing of one error conduced him naturally to the deteti-
on of others; and all the parts of that artificial fabrick
were so linked together, that the pulling down of one
!Ixfened the foundation of the reft, and rendered it more
easy to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant te-
nets concerning Indulgences, he was obliged to inquire in-
to the true cause of our justification and acceptance with
God. The knowledge of that, discovered to him by de-
grees the inutility of pilgrimages and penances; the vani-
ty of relying on the interceli on of faints; the impiety of
Worihipping them; the abuses of auricular confeclion;

and

BooK II. and the imaginary existence of purgatory. The detec.
---~ - tion of so many errors, led him of course to confider tl,e

charater of the clergy who taught them; and their ec-
orbitant wealth, the tevere injuncion of celibacy, aid
the intolerable rigour of monaflic vows appeared to hijl
the great sources of their corruption. From thence, ,
was but one ftep to call in question the divine original of
the papal power, which authorized and supported fucli a
system of errors. As the unavoidable relult of the iwhvc,
he disclaimed the infallibility of the Pope, the decii!.s
of fchoolmen, or any other human authority, and ap-
pealed to the word of God as the only standard of tL-c-
logical truth. To this gradual progrels Luther owed Ii;
fuccecs. His hearers were not shocked at first by ary
proposition too repugnant to their ancient prejudices, c0
too remote from established opinions. They were con-
duced infenfiblv from one doctrine to another. T'Iir
faith and convition were able to keep pace with 11,
dilcoveries. To the fame cause was owing the inattentio;;,
and even indifference, with which Leo viewed Luther's
firfa proceedings. A diret or violent attack upon the au-
thority of the church, would have drawn upon him at
once the whole weight of its vengeance; but as this was
*far from his thoughts, as he continued long to profic'
great refpet for the Pope, and made repeated offers of
fubmiflion to his decisions, there seemed to be no rcaton
for apprehending that he would prove the author of any
desperate revolt; and he was suffered to proceed ftep by
ftep, in undermining the conflitution of the church, till
the remedy applied at lat came too late to produce any
effe&.

An inquiry BUT whatever advantages Luther's caufc derived ci-
int' thib ther from the mistakes of his adversaries, or from his o, n
conlril,utced good conduc, the sudden progress and firm cfiablifihmint
tn the pio- of his do&rines, mull not be alcribed to these alone. The
gref, of he fame corruptions in the church of Rome which he con-
R.eformaati-

d. emned, had been attacked long before his appearance,
.and the fame opinions which he now propagated, had
been publifled in different places, and were supported by
the fame arguments. Waldus in the twelfth century,
Wickliff in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth, had
inveighed against the errors of Popery with great bold-
ness, and confuted them with more ingenuity and learn-
ing than could have been cxpeacd in those illiterate ages

in

in which they flouriihed. But all these premature at-BooK I.
tempts towards a reformation proved abortive. Such feeble
lights, incapable of dispelling the darknefi which then
covered the church, were soon extinguished; and though
the docrines of these pious men produced ofme effeas,
and left some traces in the countries where they were
taught, they were neither extensive nor coifiderable.
Many powerful causes contributed to facilitate Luther's
progrels, which either did not exist, or did not operate
with full force in their days; and at the critical and ma-
ture juncure when he appeared, circumstances of every
kind concurred in rendering each flep he took successful.

THE long and scandalous schism which divided, the The Ilng

church, during the latter part of the fourteenth, and the schism in
beginning of the fifteenth centuries, had a great effect in thenthuc-
diminishing the veneration with which the world had tury.
been accustomed to view the papal dignity. Two or
three contending Pontiffs roaming about Europe at a time ;
fawning on the Princes whom they wanted to gain;
squeezing the countries which acknowledged their autho-
rity; excommunicating their rivals, and cursing those who
adhered to them, discredited their pretensions to infalli-
bility, and exposed both their persons and their office to
contempt. The laity, to whom all parties appealed,
came to learn that lome right of private judgment be-
longed to them, and acquired the exercise of it so far as
to choose, among these infallible guides, whom they
wou!d please to follow. The proceedings of the councils
of Conflance and Basil, spread still wider this difrefpea
for the Romilh fee, and by their bold exertion of authority
in deposing and elecing Popes, taught the world that
there was in the church a jurildi&ion superior even to
the papal power, which they had long believed to be fu-
preme.

THE wound given on that occasion to the papal au- The ponti.
thority was scarce healed up, when the pontificates offi"ctesof

Alexander

Alexander VI. and Julius II. both able princes, but de- V. and of
teflable ecclesiastics, raised new scandal in Chriflendom. Julihr I.
The profligate morals of the former in private life; the
fraud, the Injustice and cruelty of his publick adminiRra-
tion, place him on a level.with those tyrants, whose deeds
are the greatet reproach to human nature. The latter,
though a stranger to these odior pailions which prompted
his predecessor to commit so many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a reftilcf and ungovernable
VOL. I. B b ambition,

/

BooK II. ambition, which scorned all considerations of gratitude
'--v-.- of decency, or of justice, when they obfiru&ed the exe-

cution of his schemes. It was scarce pofible to be firm!,
perfiuaded that the infallible knowledge of a religion,
whose chief precepts are purity and humility, was d(
posited in the breaffs of the impious Alexander, or the
overbearing Julius. The opinion of those who exalted
the authority of a council above that of the Pope fpreadi
wonderfully under their pontificates: And as the Em-
peror and French Kings, who were alternately engaged il
hoitilities with these ative pontiffs, permitted and even
encouraged their fubjeas to expoie their vices with all tic
violence of invecive, and all the petulance of ridicuk,
men's ears being accustomed to these, were not shockcd
with the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther and li;
followers concerning the papal dignity.

The immo- NOR were such excesses confined to the head of tle
rh liverof church alone. Many of the dignified clergy, both fe-

cular and regular, being the younger sons of noble fa-
milies, who had assumed the ecclefiafiical charater for
no other reason but that they found in the church fia-
tions of great dignity and affluence, were accustomed to-
tally to neglet the duties of their office, and indulged
themselves without reserve in all the vices to which great
wealth and idleness naturally give birth. Though the in-
ferior clergy were prevented by their poverty from imi-
tating the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them as con-
temptible as the other were odious t. The severe and
unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were equally
fubje&, occasioned such irregularities, that in several parts
of Europe the concubinage of priefis was not only per-
mitted, but enjoined. The employing of a remedy f(
contrary to the genius of the Chriflian religion, is the
firongeft proof that the crimes it was intended to prevent
were both numerous and flagrant. Long before the si.
teenth century, many authors of great name and autho-

rt] The eorrnpt afte of the church prior to the Reformation, is acknon-

ledged by an authr, who was both abundantly able to judge concerning
dtis matter, and who was not over forwrd to conferi it. " For some yean;
(frys he) before the Lutheran and CalviojiRic herefies were published, there
was not (e contemporary uthors tetify) any severity in ecclefiftical ju-
dicatoriee any diScipline with regard to morals, any knowledge of fcred
liteanture, ny reverence for divine things, there wua not most any reli-

aon remainiing." Bellarmaina Conio. xxviii. Oper. tom. vi. col. 996.
edit. Colon 7.. spud Oe defi Hit. Evang. Renovati. vol. i. p. 1s.

rity

rity give such descriptions of the dissolute morals of the BooK IL
clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present age .

u - -y

The voluptuous lives of ecclesiastics occasioned great
scandal, not only because their manners were inconsistent
with their sacred characer; but the laity being accuf-
tomed to fee several of them raised from the lowest Rfa-
tions to the greatest affluence, did not shew the fame in-
dulgence to their excesses, as to those of persons pcffeffed
of hereditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing their con-
dition with more envy, they censured their crimes with
greater feveritv. Nothing, therefore, could be more ac-
ceptable to Luther's hearers, than the viclence with which
he exclaimed against the immoralitiesof churchmen, ard
every person in his audience could, from his own obier-
vation, confirm the truth of his invecives.

THE scandal of these crimes was greatly increased, by The facility
the facility with which those who committed them ob- with which-

these immoe

tained pardon. In all the European kingdoms, the im- raliitieswer
potence of the civil magistrate, under forms of govern- pardoned.
ment extremely irregular and turbulent, made it necessary
to relax the rigour of juflice, and upon payment of a
certain fine or composition pre!cribed by law, to remit
farther punishment, even of the molt atrocious crimes.
The court of Rome, always attentive to the means of
augmenting its revenues, imitated this pracice, and by a
prepoflerous accommodation of it to religious concerns,
granted its pardons to such tranfgreffls as gave a fum

[u] Centum Gravamins. Nat. German. in Fafciculo Rer. Expentend.

& Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i. 361. See innumerable
pfla9ges to the fame purpose in the appendix, or second volume, publifted
by Edw. Brown. See also Hern. V,nder Hardt Hill. Lit. Reform. pars
iii. and the vast collecaons of Walchint in his soar volumes of Monumenta
medii evi. Gotting. 17S7

The authors I have ,uoted enumerate the vices of the clergy. When

they ventured upon crimes, they would not be fcrupuloul with refpee to
the decorum of behaviour Accordingly their neglect of the decent con-
dlut suitable to their profession, icems to have given great offence. In
order to illustrate this I (hall IranlcriLe one raffT.ge, becaule it is taken not
from any author whore prfleflfe purpose it waE to describe the improper
c..ndut of the clergy; and who from prejudice or artifice may be fuppojcd
to aggravate the charge againlt them. The Emperor Charles IV. in a
letter to the archbifiop ot Mentz, A. D. 135, exhoring him to reform
the difi)rdera of the cle gy, thus expresses himlilf: " De Chrilli patrimo-
m10, ludo, haftiladia & torneementa exercent habitum niili.irem cum
[rttextis suis rei & argenteis geltint, & clceos militarer; comam &S ba;-
almn nutriunt, & nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem ecd.lcflG itim Ipe'ttat,
fclendunt. Militnribu fe duntaxat & fecularibus aaibus, vita & moribus,
in fule falutis difpendium, & generle populi fcandalum, jmmifcent. Codea
Diplolaicus Anccdotorum, per Val. Fed. Gudenum. 4to. voL iii, p.
43.2

B b 2 of

Boat II. of money in order to purchase them. As the idea of l
'- '" - composition for crimes was then familiar, this strange

traffick was so far from shocking mankind, that it soon
became general; and to prevent any imposition in carry-
ing it on, the officers of the Roman chancery publihfed a
book, containing the precise fum to be exaced for the
pardon of every particular fin. A deacon guilty of
murder was absolved for twenty crowns. A bishop.
abbot might assassinate for three hundred livres. Any
ecclesiastic might commit uncleanness, though with the
most aggravating circumstances, for the third part of that
fum. Even such shocking crimes, as occur seldom in
human life, and perhaps exist only in the impure imagi-
nation of a cafuifi, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perfect mode of dispensing
justice came to be introduced into civil courts, the prac-
tice of paying a composition for crimes went gradually
into disuse; and mankind having acquired more accurate
notions concerning religion and morality, the condition
on which the court of Rome bellowed its pardons appeared
impious, and were confidered as one great source of ec'
clefiafical corruption M4.

The exorbi. THIS degeneracy of mannersamong the clergy might,
or the perhaps, have been tolerated with greater indulgence, if
church. their exorbitant riches and power had not enabled them at

the fame time, to oppress all other orders of men. It is
the genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pompous
or grand, to set no bounds to its liberality towards perfors
whom it esteems sacred, and to think its expreflions o
regard defective untefs it hath raised them to the heighth
of wealth and authority. Hence lowed the extenfivc
revenues and jurifdiaion possesed by the church in every
country of Europe, and which were become intolerable
to the laity from whose undifcerning bounty they were at
firlt derived.
Purticularly THE burden, however, of ecclefiafticat opprefionha

erm,. fallen with such peculiar weight on the Germans, as rten

dered them, though naturally exempt from levity, and
tenacious of their ancient customs, more indinable than
any people in Europe to liften to those who called on
them to assert their liberty.- During the long contal

Ix] Fafcicll. Rer. Expet. & For . i. Jt. . CSchelornii Ail

Literrr. Frmeof. A7s. vol. ii. 369. Dloo. de Bayle, Attic. Blck, I
Tuppir Tau Cucclmr. ReIlla, EdM. Frrncf. 1651. pl he.L

betwe

between the Popes and Emperors concerning the right of BooK IL.
inveltiture, and the wars which these occasioned, most -v -
of the considerable German ecclesiastics joined the papal
tation; and while engaged in rebellion against the head
of the Empire, they leized the Imperial revenues, and
usurped the Imperial jurifdi&ion within their own dioceses.
Upon the re-eflablifhment of tranquillity, they still re-
tained these ufurpatiorw, as if by the length of an unjust
poifeflion they had acquired a legal right to them. The
Emperors, too feeble to wrest them out of their hands,
w-ere obliged to grant them fiefs of these vast territories,
and they enjoyed all the immunities and honours which
belonged to feudal barons. By means of these, many
bishops and abbots in Germany were not only ecdefiaf.
tics, but princes, and their characer and manners, par-
took more of the license, too frequent among the latter,
than of the san&ity which became the former y].

THE unsettled Rate of government in Germany, and where the

the frequent wars to which that country was exposed, con- eedrgy r
tributed in another manner towards aggrandizing Ecclefi- par of the
aftics. The only property during these times of anarchy property.
which enjoyed security from the oppression of the great,
or the ravages of war, was that which belonged to the
church. This was owing, not only to the great reve-
rence for the sacred characer prevalent in those ages,
but to a superstitious dread of the sentence of excommu-
nication, which the clergy were ready to denounce against
all who invaded their pofleffions. Many observing this,
made a surrender of their lands to the ecclesiastics, and
consenting to hold them in fee of the church, obtained as
its vassals a degree of safety, which without this device
they were unable to procure. By Such an increase of the
number of their vassals, the power of ecclesiastics received
a real and peranent augmentation; and as lands, held in
fee by the limited tenures common in those ages, often
returned to the perfbns bn whom the fief depended, con-
fiderable addition were made in this way to the property
of the clergy [q].

(y F. Paul, History of Dccledift. Beeficer . so7.
1] F. Paul, Hist. of EcclLe. Bend. p. 66. Boulsavilliers, Etat do
Artne, trc i. . 69. Load. 1737.

Bb 3 Tiil

Boot II. THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for the safety

_--*v- of their own perlbrs, was still greater than that which

The vatt they displayed in securing their poffefions; and their es-
immunitie, forts to attain it were flill more successful. As they were
of ecclesias- consecrated to the priestly office with much outward so-
tiCb. lemnity; were distinguished from the reft of mankind by

a peculiar dress and manner of life; and arrogated to
their order many privileges which do not belong to other
Christians, they naturally became the obje&s of exceflive
veneration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they were
regarded as beings of a superior species to the profane
laity, whom it would be impious to try by the fame laws,
or to fubje& to the fame punishments. This exemption
from civil jurifdiaion, granted at first to ecclefiaflics, as
a mark of refpe&, they soon claimed as a point of right.
This valuable immunity of the priefihood is alferted, net
only in the decrees of Popes and councils, but was con-
firmed in the mofl ample form by many of the greatefi
Emperors []. As long as the clerical character remained,
the person of an ecclesiastic was sacred; and unless he
were degraded from his office, the unhallowed hand of the
civil judge durst not touch him. But as the power ot
degradation was lodged in the Ipiritual courts, the difficulty
and expence of obtaining such a sentence, too often fe-
cured offenders of absolute impunity. Many assumed the
clerical characer for no other reason, than that it might
screen them from the punishment which their acions de-
served lb]. The German nobles complained loudly, that
these anointed malefacors, as they call them [c, seldom
suffered capitally, even for the moil atrocious crimes;
and their independence on the civil magifrate is often
mentioned in their remonfirances, as a privilege equally
pernicious to society, and to the morals of the clergy.

Their en- WHILE the clergy asserted the privileges of their own
Creoch-

on rder with such zeal, they made continual encroachments

the jurifdic- upon those of the laity. All causes relative to matrimony,
tion of the to teflaments, to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as
nty. those which concerned ecclefiaflical revenues, were thought

to be so conneced with religion, that they could be tried
only in the spiritual courts. Not satisfied with this am-
pie jurifdi&ion, which extended to one half of the sub-
jecs which give rife to litigation among men, the clergy,

CI Goldafi Confitut. Im;erial.Prancof. 167j 1. li. 9ii. 07.
b Rymer'a Fadcrr, v'ol. xiii. a53s [(] Cntumn Grsm. J. 31.

with

with wonderful industry, and by a thousand inventions, BooK II.
endeavoured to draw all other causes into their own
courts [d]; and as they had engrossed the whole learning
known in the dark ages, the spiritual judges were com-
monly to far iuperior in knowledge and abilities to those
employed in the secular courts, that the people at firfi fa-
voured any stretch that was made to bring their affairs
under the cognizance of ajudicature, on the dccifions of
v.hich they could rely with superior confidence, Thus
the interest of the church, and the inclination of the
pecple, concurring to elude the jurifdi&ion of the lay-
magiflrate, soon reduced it almofi to nothing [e]. By
means of this, vast power accrued to ecclesiastics, and no
inconsiderable addition was made to their revenue by the
tums paid in those ages to such as adminiflered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts enforced The dr'ed-

their sentences, added to them great weight and terror. fpuI ff't
The censure of excommunication was inflituted origi- cenlure.
nally for preserving the purity of the church, that ob-
ftinate offenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives
were a reproach to Christianity, might be cut off from
the society of the faithful: This, ecclesiastics did not fcru-
pie to convert into an engine for promoting their own
power, and infliced it on the moit frivolous occasions.
\k hoever despised any of their decisions, even concern-
ing civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful cen-
sure, which not only excluded them from all the privileges
of a Christian, but deprived them of their rights as men
and citizens [Q; and the dread of this rendered even the
moit fierce and turbulent spirits obsequious to the autho-
rity of the church.

NOR did the clergy negle& the proper methods ofTheltviir,
preserving the wealth and power which they had acquired of eceltli-

aItics to te.

with such induiftry and address. The pofieffions of the cue their
church, being consecrated to God, were declared to be ulurpationn.
unalienable; so that the funds of a society which was
daily gaining, and could never lose, grew to be im-
mense. In Germany, it was computed that the eccle-
iaftics had got into their hands more than one half of
the national property sl]. In other nations, the propor-

td] Cianoa Hist. of NAplic, book xix. § 3. e ] Centttan Cr.
vmn. S 5( 64. f] Centum Onrvam. 5 34. ,] Catum Grannm.

B b 4 ton

BooK II. tion varied; but the share belonging to the church was
_-v-' every where prodigious. These vaif possessions were not

subjea to the burdens imposed on the lands of the laity.
The German clergy were exempted by law from all
taxes [s]; and if, on any extraordinary emergence, Ec-
clefiaftics were pleased to grant any aid towards supplying
the publick exigencies, this was confidered as a free gitt
flowing from their own generosity, which the civil nla-
gifirate had no title to demand, far less to exac. In
consequence of this firange -solecism in government, the
laity in Germany had the mortification to find themlelves
loaded with exceflive impositions, because thole who
possessed the greatest property were freed from any obli-
gation to support, or to defend the state.

Th Ger- GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth and
mnftec l"ft-numerous privileges of the clerical order were to the
ly foreign- other members of the Germanick body, they would have
ers. reckoned it some mitigation of the evil, if there had

been poffefled only by ecclesiastics residing among them-
selves, who would have been less apt to make an im-
proper use of their riches, or to exercise their rights with
unbecoming rigour. But the bishops of Rome having
early put in a claim, the boldest that ever human am-
bition suggested, of being supreme and infallible heads of
the ChriRian church; they, by their profound policy and
unwearied perseverance, by their addrels in availing them-
selves of every circumfiance which occurred, by taking
advantage of the superstition of some Princes, of the nc-
ceflities of others, and of the credulity of the people,
at length eftablilhed their pretensions in opposition both
to the interest and common sense of mankind. Germany
was the country which these eccefiaftical sovereigns go-
verned with most absolute authority. They excommu-
nicated and deposed some of its most illustrious Emperors,
and excited their subje&s, their ministers, and even their
children to take arms againfi them. AmidRf these con-
tefis, the Popes continually extended their own immuni-
ties, and spoiled the secular Princes of their most valuable
prerogatives, and the German church felt all the rigour of
that oppression which flows from fubje&ion to foreign do-
minion, and foreign exaaions.

Nominated THz right of conferring benefices, which the Popes
by the Pope. usurped during that period of confusion, was an acquisition

[h] Centum Oravam. ibid. Geldalti Conft. Imper. ii. t7, olt. Pfctl
Hist. du Droit Publ, 350, 374.

Of

of great importance, and exalted the ecclefiaflical power Bo OK 1I.
upon the ruins of the temporal. The emperors and other '- '
princes of Germany had long been in poffeflion of this
right, and it served to increase both their authority and
their revenue. But by wrefling it out of their hands, the
Popes were enabled to fill the Empire with their own
creatures; they accustomed a great body of every
prince's subje&s to depend not upon him but upon the
Roman fee; they bestowed the richest benefices in every
country upon Itrangers, and drained their welth to lup-
ply the luxury of a foreign court. Even the patience of
the most fuperititious ages mutinied under iuch opprcflion;
and so loud and frequent were the complaints and mur-
murs of the Germans, that the Popes, afraid of irritat-
ing them too far, contented, contrary to their usual prac-
tice, to abate somewhat of their pictenfions, and to reft
latisfied with the right of nomination to thoie bentfices
which happened to fall vacant during fix months in the
year, leaving the disposal of the remainder to the princts
and other legal patrons [i].

BuT the court of Rome easily found expedients for TheexPe'li.

eluding an agreement which put such relirairts on its (tni',,ng'hi
power. The pradcice of reserving certain benefices in pomCro lthe
every country to the Pope's immediate nomination, w-hich p'(pc inef-
had been long known, and olten complained of, was ex- ou
tended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the beneficcs
possessed by Cardinals, or any of the numerous officers in
the Roman court; those held by persons who happened
to die at Rome, or within forty miles of that city on tli ir
journey to or from it; those which became vacant hv
franflation, with many others, were inrluded in ti:at
number; and Julius II. and Leo feretchirg the matter to
the utmost, often collated to benefices where the right of
reservation had not been declared, on prctcnce of having
mentally reserved this privilege to thcmfelve,. 'The right
of refcrvation, however, even with this extension, had
certain limits, as it could be exercised only where the be-
nefice was acually vacant; and therefore, in order to
render the exertion of papal power unbounded, .expefla-
live gracet, or mandates nominating a person to fucced to
a benefice upon the first vacancy that Ihould happen, were
brought into use. By means of these, Germany was
filled with persons depending on the court of Rome, from
[i] F. Paul, Hii of Rccl. Beof. 1o4. Gold. Confl. Imper. i. 4o1.

which

BRoK II. which it received there reversionary grants; princes were

defrauded, in a great degree, of their prerogatives, and
the rights of lay-patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered
almoll entirely vain [k].

Venalityof THE manner in which these extraordinary powers were
the court of exercised, rendered them still more odious and intolera-

e, ble. The avarice and extortion of the court of Rome

were become excessive almofl to a proverb. The tale of
benefices was so notorious that no pains were taken to
conceal, or to difguiie it. Companies of merchants open-
ly purchased the benefices of different dillries in Ger-
many from the Pope's ministers, and retailed them at an
advanced price [13. Pious men beheld with deep regret
there fimoniacal tranfa&ions, so unworthy the ministers
of a chriflian church; while politicians complained of the
loss furfained by the exportation of so much wealth in
that irreligious traffick.

It drained T'HE fums, indeed, which the court of Rome drce
other cun- by its flatcd and legal impositions from all the countries
ti of:!;(i] that acknowlcdged its authority, were so considerable,

that it is not flrange that they murmured at the fmallefl
addition made to them by unnecessary or illicit means.
:ery cr cclefiaflical person, upon his admiffon to his bene-
fice, paid annats or one vear's rent of his living to trc
Pcpc, and as that tax was exated with great rigour, i:;
anlount was prodigious. To this mull be added the fre-
quent demands made by the Popes of free-gifts from the
clergy, together with the extraordinary levies of tenths
upon cclcfiaflical benefices, on pretence of expeditions
against the Turks, seldom intended, or carried into exe-
cution; and from the whole, the vafi proportion of the
revenues of the church which flowed continually to Rome,
may be cfimated.

The uniteld VCH were the dissolute manners, the exorbitant
ti o ul al wealth, and power, and privileges of the clergy before

the reformation; such the oppreflive rigour of that domi-
nion which the Popes had eflablilhed over the christian
world; and such the sentiments concerning them that pre-
vailed in Germany, at the beginning of the sixteenth
century. Nor has this sketch been copied fiom the con-
trovcrfial writers of that age, who, in the heat of difpu-
tation, may be fufpeaed of having exaggerated the errors,
or of having misrepresentcd the condu& of that church

[k] Centum Gravam. 31 . Fafcic. Rer, Exper. &3. 334. Gold. Coonl.

Imper. i. 3i, 40 40405. F. Paul, Hia. of Eccl. elks. 167, I9s&
(I Fakcic. Rcr. ExIpl. i. 359.

..,I. drh

which they laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more BoomK II.
authentick evidence, upon the memorials and remonftran- ---
ces of the Imperial diets, coolly enumerating the grievan-
ces under which the Empire groaned, in order to obtain
the redress of them. Diffatistaction must have arisen to
a great height among the people, when thef!' grave
airemblies expressed themrfelves with such acrimony; and
if they demanded the abolition of these enormities with
so much vehemence, the pcopce, we may be assured,
uttercd their sentiments and desires in bolder and mole
virulent language.

To men thus prepared for shaking off the ycloe, Luther Men p-

addressed himlell with certainty of luccef.. As they had pa edtrm-
long felt its weight, and borne it with impatience, they hbl.e tL-

·.,& . .I

,

. 5 ' t

. ' thzr'b h q~iai-

liltened with joy to the fitr proposal for procuring dcliver- on,
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager reception
that his do&trines met with, and the rapidity with which
they ipread over all the provinces of Germany. Even
tle impetuosity and fierceness of Luther's spirit, his cons- ar.d o role-
dance in aferting hisown opinions, and the arrosance and ra(e hlis de-
contempt wherewith he treated all vjwho differed from him,
which, in ages of greater moderation and refinement,
have been reckoned defects in the characer of that relor-
mer, did not appear exceliive to his contemporaries, whole
minds were strongly agitated by those intcrefling contrc-
verfies which he carried on, and who had them:clvcs en-
dured the rigour of papal tyranny, and fecn the corrupti-
ons in the church againll which he cxcllimcd.

NOR were they greatly offended at that gross fcurlilitv

with which his polemical writing:. are filled, or at the h(w
buffoonery he sometimes introduces into his girvcef dif-
courles. No dispute was managed in those tludc timnts
without a large portion of the former, and the ltlter xi as
common, even on the mors solemn eccafions, and in trc;:.-
ingthc mofl sacrcd subjes. So far were either of thlrn
from doing hurt to his cause, that invective and ridicu!l
had some eff'ct, as well as more lau4ablc argumentl:, in
cxpofing the errors of popery, and in detcrmining mankind
to abandon them.

BEsIDEs all there causes of Luther's rapid progress, T, deT.t

arising from the nature of' his entcrpri.e, and the juncture ,In,,, , ,, , -
at which he undertook it, he reaped advantage from some ing nn the
foreign and adventitious circumflanccs, thc beneficial in- rP'rPf, o t
fluence of which none of his forerunncrs in the fame mc,,,t,
course had enjoyed. Among theef may be reckoned the

invention

BooK II. invention of the art of p.inting, about half a century
---s-- before his time. By this tortunate discovery, the facillty

of acquiring and of propagating knowledge, was wonde.
fully increaied, and Luther's books, which must othel-
wile have made their way slowly and with uncertainty into
diltant countries, fpleadfat once all over Europe. Nur
were they read only by the rich and the learned, who
a'one had'accefs to books before that invention; they pot
into the lands cf the people, who, upon this appeal to
the-m as jiudgs, ventured to examine and to rejeE many
dcitrinee, which they had formerly been required to bt.
lieve, withcut being taught to understand them.

And or the TH . revi va! cf learnirg at the fame period was a cir-
,vlvalcf cumftance extremely friendly to the reformation. The

nktn"$ fludy of the ancient Greek and Roman authors, and the

discovery of that liberal and found knowledge which they
ccntain, rou'ed the human mind from the profound
lethargy in which it had been funk during several centu-
ries. Man!il;d ccem, at that period, to have recovered
the powers of inquiring and of thinking, faculties of which
they had long loft the use ; and fond of the acquisition,
thev cxercifed them with great boldness upon all fubjtts.
Thley were not now afraid of entering an uncommon path,
or f' embracing a new opinion. Novelty appears, at
this time, rather to have been a recommendation to a
dotrine; and inflead of being startled when the daring
hand of Luther drew aside, or tore the veil which covered
efiablilhed errors, the genius of the age applauded and
aided the attempt. Luther, though a stranger to elegance
in taste or composition, zealously promoted the cultivation
of ancient literature; and sensible of its being necessary
in ltudying the scriptures, he himself had acquired confi-
derable knowledge both in the Hebrew and Greek tongues.
Melan&hon, ai;d some other of his disciples, were emi-
nent proficients in the polite arts; and as the fame barba-
rous monks who opposed the introdution of learning into
Germany, set themselves with equal fierceness againfi
Luther's opinions, and declared the good reception of the
one to be the cffet of the progress which the other had
made, the cause of learning and of the Reformation came
to be confidered as closely conneced, and, in every
country, had the fame friends andthe fame enemies. This
enabled the reformers to carry on the contlet at firR with
great superiority. Erudition, industry, accuracy of fen-
timent, purity of compofitioa, and even wit and raillery,

wcic

rere wholly on their fide, and triumphed with ease ovcr BO tl-
iiliterate monks, whole rude arguments, expressed in a <
perplexed and barbarous file, were found iniufficient for
ilic defence of a system, the errors of which, all the art
and ingenuity of its later and more learned advocates have
not been able to palliate.

THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival of

learning excited in Europe, was lo favourable to the Re-
formation, that Luther was aided in his progrels, and
mankind were prepared to embrace his doctrines, by per-
sons who did not wish success to his undertaking. '1 he
greater part of the ingenious men who applied to the
itudy ot ancient literature, towards th. ':,,Ij of the sis-
tcenth century, and the beginning ot the fixtecnth, though
they had no intention, and prhlaps ;o wifn to overlnrn the
established sysem of religion, had di'covcred the abiu!.it¥
of many tenets and pracices authorized by the church,
and perceived the futility of tlcfe arguments, by which
illiterate monks endeavoured to defend them. '1 heir con-
temptof these advocates for the rccteied errors, led them
frequently tb expose the ignorance which they supportcd,
and to ridicule their opinions with the utmroft treedorit
and severity. By this men were prepared tor the mor_
serious attacks made upon them bv Luther, and thei:
reverence both for the dotrines and persons against whom
he inveighed, was considerably abated. This was par-
ticularly the cafe in Germany. When the firit atterp:s
were made to revive a tafie for ancient learnin. in tizt
country, the Ecclefiatics there, who were flili more
ignorant than their brethren on the other fide of the Alps,
let themselves to oppose its progrels with more ativezeal
and the patrons of thc new studies, in return, attacked
them with great violence. In the writings of Reachlin,
Ilutten, andthe other revivers of learning in Germany,
the corruptions of the church of Rome are censured with
an acrimony of flyle, little inferior to that of Luther
himself O.

FRoM the fame cause proceeded the frequent Rritures

of Erafnus upon the errors of the church, as well as upon
the ignorance and vices of the clergy. His reputation
and authority were so high in Europe at the beginning of
the sixteenth century, and his works were read with such

[f] Cerdefius Hit. Evng. remow vol. i. p. 141, 57. Sckeatd. lib. i.
P. 0o3. Vonder Hardt His. Litonr. Retorm. pr» .i.

universal

BOOK II. universal admiration, that the effed of these deserves to u
--v~--' rmentioned as one of the circumfiances, which contributed

towards Iuther's success. Erafmnus having been defined
for the church, and trained up in the knowledge of .ccic-.
fialtcal literature, applied himself more to theological in-
quiries than any of the rcvivers of learning in that ac.
llts acute judgment and vast erudition, enabled him :,
dflcover many errors, both in the do&rine and worlhip of
the Romish church. Some of these he confuted with
great solidity of rcafoning, and force of eloquence. Others
he treated as ob)cies ol ridicule, and turned againfl them
that irrefiflible torient of popular and satirical wit, of
which he had the command. There was scarce any opi-
nion or pradtice of the Romish church which Luther en-
deavoured to reform, but what had been previously ani-
madverted upon by Erasmus, and had affcrded him sub-
jce either of censure or of raillery. When Luther sir!s
began his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to
applaud his condut; he courted the friendship of several
of his difcipies and patrons; and condemned.the behavi-
our and spirit of his adversaries [e]. He concurred openly
with himin inveighing against the fchool-divines, as the
teachers of a system equally unedifying and obscure. He
joined him in endeavouring to turn the attention of men to
the fludy of the holy scriptures, as the only standard of re-
ligious truth [].

VARIOUS circumflances, however prevented Erasmus

fiom holding the fame course with Luther. The natural
timidity of his temper; his want of that force of mind
which alone can prompt a man to assume the charaaer of
a reformer [] ; his excefllive deference for persons in high
flation; his dread of losing the pensions and other emolu-
ments which their liberality had conferred upon him; bis
extreme love of peace, and hopes of refurming abuses
gradually, and by gentle methods; all concurred in deter-
mining him to repress and to moderate the zeal, with

[Mt Seckend. lib. i rP. 40, 96.
h) Vonder Hardt Hilor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Cerdcr. Hist. Evang.
Renov. i. 147.

] Elralimus himfeif is candid enough to acknowledge this: "Luther,

lSy« he, hal given us many a wholefrone dotrine, and many a good
4ounfel. I with he had not defeated the etcet of herm by intoerable
fSults. But if he had written every thing in the moR unxcceptionable
manner, I had no inclination to die for the r oke of truth. Every man
hath not the courage requisite to make a martyr and I un afraid, that it
I wee put to the trial, I should imitate st Peter." Epift. Errmi in Jor.
tiu'z Life of Erain. vul, i. p. 173.wh

which

which he had once been animated againit the errors of the BOOR I!
church [k]; and to assume the character of a mediator be--
twecn Luther and his opponents. But though Er2fmus
soon began to cenfurc Luther as too daring and impetu-
ou;, and was at last prevailed upon to write againfl him,
he muff, nevertheless, be confidered as his forerunner and
,uxiliary in this war upon the church. lie firlt fc.ttered
the feeds, which Luthcr cherished and brought to maturi-
ty. His raillery and oblique censures, prepared the way
lor Luther's inveEtives and more direcl attack;. In this
light Erasmus appeared to the 7.ealols defenders of the
Romish church in his own times [I]. In this light he mufl
be confidered by every person conversant in the history of
that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumflances which

combined in favouring the progrels of Luther's opinions,
or in weakening the refiflancc of his adversaries, I have
avoided entering into any dilcuffion of the theological doc-
trines of popery, and have sot attempted to (hew how re-
pugnant they are to the spirit of Chrihianity, and how
deltitute of any foundation in reason, in the word of God,
or in the pracice of the primitive church, leaving these
topics entirely to ecclesiastical hiflorians, to whose pro-
vince they peculiarly belong. But when we add the effea
of these religious considerations to the influence of political
causes, it is obvious that the united operation of both on
the human mind, must have been sudden and irrefilliblc.
And though, to Luther's contemporaries, who were too
near perhaps to the scene, or too deeply interested in it,
to trace causes with accuracy, or to examine them with
coolness, the rapidity with which his opinions spread ap-
peared to be so unaccountable, that some of them imput-
ed it to a certain uncommon and malignant position of the
flars, which scattered the spirit of giddiness and innovati-
on over the world [m], it is evident, that their success was
the natural effe& of many powerful causes prepared by
peculiar providence, and happily conspiring to that end.
This attempt to investigate the causes, and to throw light
on an event so singular and important, will not, pcrhaps,
be deemed an unnecessary digreffion.-I return from it to
the course of the history.

k] Jnrtin', Lire of Frafmu,, ol. i. p. 158.
] Vonder Hardt Hist. Literar. Reform. pars i. p c.
M] Jovii Hiftoria, Lut. 1(53. fol. p. 134.

TllB

BOOK Ii, THE Diet at Worms conduated its deliberations wit,

-v--> that flow formality peculiar to such affembl es. Much
Procredings time was spent in eflablifhing some regulations with regard
of the Diet
at Worm. to the internal police of the Empire. The jurifdiEion of

the'Imperial chamber was confirmed, and the forms of
its proceeding rendered more fixed and regular. A coun-
cil of regency was appointed :o aflifl Ferdinand in !he go.
vernment of the Empire during his brother's absence;
which, from the extent of the Emperor's dorinions, and
the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that might be
fiequently expeled [t]. The fRate of religion was then

The f.mpe- taken into consideration. There were not wanting some
t""' virew plausible reasons which might have induced Charles to
wAh regaid
to Luther. have declared himself the protector of Luther's cause, or

at leaf to have connived at iis progress. If he had po;.
sessed no other dominions hut those which belonged to him
in Germany, and no other crown betides the Imperial, he
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a man, who
asserted To boldly the privileges and immunities for whiil
the Empire had tfruggled so kig with the Popes. Btt
the vail and dangerous schemes which Francis I. was
forming againfl him, made it neceflary for him to regulate
his condua by views more extensive than those which
would have suited a German prince; and it being of the
iitmoll importance to secure the Pope's friendship, this
determined him to treat Luther with great severity, as
the mofl effeaual method of soothing Leo into a concur'
rence with his measures. His eagerness to accomplifi
this, rendered him not unwilling to gratify the Papal le-
gates in Germany, who inffled that, without any delay
or formal deliberation, the diet ought to condemn a man
whom the Pope had already excommunicated as an incor-
rigible heretick. Such an abrupt manner of proceeding,
however, being deemed unprecedented and unjust by the

He is frum- members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's ap-
moned to pearing in person, and declaring whether he adhered or
*rpear. not to those opinions, which had drawn upon him the cen-

fures of the church [°1. Not only the Emperor, but .ll
the princes through whose territories he had to pars,
Marcb6. granted him a fafe-conduEt; and Charles wrote to him

at the fame time, requiring his immediate attendance oi

[n] Pont. Heuter. Rer. Auir, lib, viii, c. II. p. i9. P. ffcl Ab etc

Chronol. p. 598.
[o] P. :a-tc. Ep. 7?.

,he

he diet, and renewing his prormifes of proteaion from BooK II.
ny injury or violence [p]. Luther did not hesitate one
oment about yielding obedience, and set out for Worms,
ttended by the herald who had brought the Emperor's
tter and fafe-condu&. While on his journey, many of
is friends, whom the fate of Huss, under similar circum-
nces, and notwithstanding the fame security of an Im-
erial fafe-condut, filled with solicitude, advised and in-
eated him not to rush 'wantonly into the midst of danger.
ut Luther, superior to such terrors, silenced them with Hisundzunt.
his reply, " I am lawfully called," said he, " to appear ed spirit.
n that city, and thither will I go in the name of the Lord,
hough as many devils as there are tiles on the houses,
were there combined againfi me [q]."
THE reception he met with at Worms, was such as he His recepti.
ight have reckoned a full reward of all his labours, if°nst
anity and the love of applause had been the principles by
hich he was influenced. Greater crowds assembled to
hold him, than had appeared at the Emperor's publick
ntry; his apartments were daily filled with princes and
erfonages of the highest rank [r], and he was treated with
llthe refpe& paid to those who possess the power of di-
eting the underfianding and sentiments of other men;
n homage, more sincere, as well as more flattering, than
ny which pre-eminence in birth or condition can com-
and. At his appearance before the diet, he behaved The man-
with great decency, and with equal firmness. He readi- ner of his
y acknowledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony in 'ppsr",c¢.
is controversial writings, but refused to retra& his opini,-
ns unless he were convinced of their falfhood; or to con-
ent to their being tried by any other rule than the word of
od. When neither threats nor entreaties could prevail
n him to depart from this resolution, some of the eccle-
aflics proposed to imitate the example of the council of
?onftance, and by puniihing the author of this pefiilent
erefy, who was now in their power, to deliver the
hurch at once from such an evil. But the members of
he diet refuting to expose the German integrity to fresh
proach by a second violation of publick faith; and
hare being no less unwilling to bring a slain upon the
ginning of his adminifiration by such an ignominious

[i Lth. Oper.ii 41 .
q) Luth. Oper. ii. 41*.
[r Secke. I 6. Lu. Oper. ii. 4,4.
VOL. C c ta&in,

BooK II. aaion, Luther was permitted to depart in falcty [']. A
pi' j few days after he left the city, a severe edid was pulli'.
rdjia 6 ed in the Emperor's name, and by authority of the diet
againfthim. depriving him, as an obfrinate and excommunicated crini.

nal, of all the privileges he enjoyed as a fubjeEt of the Em.
pire, forbidding any prince to harbour or protet him, and
requiring all to concur in seizing his person as soon as tie
term specified in his fafe-conduE was expired [].

He is fcized, BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable effce,
nnd conceal-the execution of it being prevented partly by the muitipi.
bt Wart- city of occupations which the commotions in Spain, ap[

the wars in Italy and the Low-Countries, created to ti,:
Emperor; and partly by a prudent precaution employvd
by the eletor of Saxony, Luther's faithful patron. A:
Luther, on his return from Worms, was pafling neal
Althenftein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in mall,
rnfhed suddenly out of a wood, where the Eledor hai
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and surrounding hi;
company, carried him, after difmifling all his attendant,
to Wartburg, a firong cattle not far distant. There the
Elecor ordered him to be supplied with every thing nec
ceffary or agreeable, but the place of his retreat wa;
carefully concealed, until upon a change in the politica!
situation of Europe, the fury of the present storm agein::
him began to abate. In this solitude, where he remaines
nine months, and which he frequently called his Patm .
after the name of that island to which the apofile John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and induftr) il
defence of his dotrines, or in confutation of his adverfi
Ties, publishing several treatises, which revived the fpiri:
of h;s followers, atfonifhed to a great degree, and difheart-
ened at the sudden disappearance of their leader.

Progrer of DURING his confinement, his opinions continued to
bib opiniouS.gain ground, acquiring the ascendant in almoRf every city

of Saxony. At this time, the Augutlinians of Wittem.
beIrg, with the approbation of the university, and the con-
niv.ince of the EleEtcr, ventured upon the first fep to.
wards an alteration in the eflablifhed forms of publick
worship, by abolilhing the celebration of private maflcs,
and by giving the cup as well as the bread to the laity in
adminiltring the sacrament of the Lord's supper.

[f F. P.lul, His. of Counc. p. 13. Scckend. 160.

Cold. C(ona. Imperial, ii. 408.

WHATEV ,

W nT. :v r:. consolation the courage and fuccefsof hisBooK II.

disciples, or tile progrels of his (ocdlrines in h;s own coun-
ly afforded Luther in his retreat, he tl-cre received infor- Decrieeof
nlltion of two events which coniidera.hly damped his joy, fity of Pari,
as they feemcil to lay infiuerable obttacles i;n the way of condemning
propragating his principles in tle two mic, powerful king-'
tllms of liurope. One s as, a f,.lemn .Scrcer, condemn-
inc his opinions, pnl'lifhcd by the inivcrfi t of Paris, the
mofl ancient, and at that time the mofl refipcable of the
lairned locietics in Europe. The other was, the answer Henry VIII.
written to his book concerning the Bab)loniflT captivity by wilte
I-enry VIII. of IFngl.nd. That young monarch, having againtthern.
been educated under the eye of a suspicious father, who,
in order to prevent his attending to hufinefs, kept him
occupied in the fludy of literature, still retained a greater
love of learning, and fRronger habits of application to it,
than are common among Princes of so acaive a difpolition,
and such violent paflions; and being ambitious of acquir-
ing glory of every kind, as well as zealously attached to
the Romish church, and highly cxaf)ciated againfi Lu-
ther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite
author, with great contempt, he did not think it enough
to exert his royal authority in opposing the opinions of
tlle reformer, but resolved likewise to combat them with
fcholafic weapons. W\ith this view he published his trea-
tilc on the Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten at
present, as books of controvcrfy always are, when the oc-
cafion that produced them is past, is not destitute of po-
lemical ingenuity and acutenels, and was represented by
the flattery of his coui tiers to be a work of such wonderful
fciencc and learning, as exalted him no less above other
authors in merit, than he was diftinguilhed among them
by his rank. The Pope, to whom it was prelented with
the greatest formalitv in full confillory, lpoke of it in
fuich terms, as if it had been diectated by immediatc irfpi-
ration; and as a tefiniony of the giatitude of the church
for hisextraordinary 7,cal, conferred on him the title of
D frnd.r of tbe Faitb, an appellation wlich -lenrv soon
folfiited in the opinion of thotl from whonl he dcrived it,
and which is till the title of liis iuccefTrr, though the
avowed enemies of those opinions, h) (onenteinen tor
which lie merited that honourable dillintin!l. Lither, L;elii' re-
who was not over-awed either by the authority o( the ply to but
University, or the dignity ot the monarch, soon publilhed
his apimadverfions ons both, in a stile no less vehement

C c 2 and

BOoK II. and severe than he would have used in confuting li;

C'-v3- meanest antagonifi. This indecent boldness, inlfead of

/hocking his contemporaries, was confidered by them as
a new proof of his undaunted spirit; a controversy ma-
naged by disputants so illuitrious, drew more general at-
tention; and filch was the contagion of the spirit of inno.
vation, diffifed through Europe in that age, and so pow-
erful the evidence which accompanied the doetrines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite both of
the civil and ecclefiaflical powers combined againit them,
they daily gained converts both in France and in England.

Stale of as- HOWEVER desirous the Emperor might be to put a
fairs be- flop to Luther's progress, he was often obliged, during

lesnd , the diet at Worms, to turn his thoughts to matters fill

Charles and t de a

.,
Francis. more intereting, and which demanded more immedia!e

attention. A war was ready to break out between him
and Francis in Navarre, in the Low-Countries, and in
Italy; and it required either great address to avert the
danger, or timely and wife precautions to refill it. Eve-
ry circumitance, at that junture, inclined Charles to pre-
ser the former measure. Spain was torn with intefline
commotions. In Italy, he had not hitherto securcd the
afliftanceof any one ally. In the Low-Countries, his
subje&s trembled at the thoughts of a rupture with France,
the fatal effects of which on their commerce they had of-
ten experienced. From these considerations, as well as
from the solicitude of Chievres during his whole admini-
firation to maintain peace between the two monarchs,
proceeded the Emperor's backwardness to commence ho-
ilities. But Francis and his minilters did not breathe the
fame pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord could
not long fubfit, where interefl, emulation, and ambition
conspired to dissolve it; and he possessed several advan-
tages which flattered him with the hopes of surprising his
rival, and of over-powering him before he could put him-
self in a posture of defence. The French King's domini-
ons, from their compac situation, from their fubje&ion
to the royal authority, from the genius of the people,
fond of war, and attached to their sovereign by every tie
of duty and affe&ion, were more capable of a great or
sudden effort, than the larger but disunited territories of
the Emperor, in one part of which the people were in
arms againfi his minilners, and in all his prerogative was
more limited than that of his rival

THE

THE only princes, in whose power it was to have kept BooK II.

down, or to have extinguished this flame on its firfi ap- --
pearance, either negleced to exert themselves, or were
ative in kindling and spreading it. Henry VIII. though Henry Vrr.
he affeced to assume the name of mediator, and both vour the
parties made frequent appeals to him, had laid aside the
impartiality which suited that characer. Wolfey, by his
artifices, had efiranged him so entirely from the French
King, that he secretly fomented the discord which he
ought to have composed, and waited only for some decent
pretext to join his arms to the Emperor's [13.

LEo's endeavours to excite discord between the Empe- L.ehefitates

ror and Francis were more avowed, and had greater influ- between the
ence. Not only his duty, as the common father of Chri- rl
flendom, but his interest as an Italian potentate, called up-
on the Pope to ad as the guardian of the public tranquil-
lity, and to avoid any measure that might overturn the
sysem, which after much bloodshed, and many negotia-
tions, was now eflablifhed in Italy. Accordingly Leo,
who instantly discerned the propriety of this conduEt, had
formed a scheme upon Charles's promotion to the Impe-
rial dignity, of rendering himself the umpire between the
rivals, by soothing them alternately, while he entered into
no close confederacy with either; and a Pontiff less ambi-
tious and enterprizing, might have saved Europe from
many calamities by adhering to this plan. But this high-
spirited prelate, who was lill in the prime of life, longed
paflionately to diflinguifh his pontificate by some splendid
acion. He was impatient to wash away the infamy of
having loft Parma and Placentia, the acquisition of whith
refleced fe much lufire on the administration of his pre-
decellor Julius. He beheld, with the indignation natu-
ral to Italians in that age, the dominion which the Tranf-
alpine, or as they in imitation of the Roman arrogance
denominated them, the barbarous nations, had attained
in Italy. He flattered himself, that after affilting the one
monarch to firip the other of his poflfelions in that coun.
try, he might find means of driving out the viqtor in his
turn, and acquire the glory of refloring Italy to the liber-
ty and happiness it enjoyed before the invasion of Charles
VIII. when every slate was governed by its native princes,
or its own laws, and unacquainted with a foreign yoke.
Extravagant and chimerical as this projeE may seem, it

[s] Herbert. Fiddec'. Life ofWolfry, 158.
·.. C C3 Was

Boos II. was the favourite object of almofi every Italian cminent

_-v'--'1 for genius or enterprize during great part of the fix-

teenth century; they vainly hoped, that by fuperiour fkiill
in the artifices and refinements of negotiation, they would
be able to baffile the efforts of nations, ruder indeed than
themselves, but much more powerful and warlike. So
alluring was the profpea of this to Leo, that notwith-
flanding the gentleness of his difpcfition, and his fondness
for the pleasures of a refined and luxurious cafe, he ha-
flened to d;flurb the peace of Europe, and to plunge him-
fcef in a dangerous war, with an impetuosity scarce inic-
rior to that of the turbulent and martial Julius [1,].

IT was in Leo's power, however, to choose which of

the monarchs he would take for his confederate againfl the
other. Both of them courted his friendship; he wavered
for forne time between them, awd at firll concluded an
alliance with Francis. The objeE of this treaty was the
conquest of Naples, which the confederates agreed to di-
vide between them. The Pope, it is probable, flattered
himlelf that the brisk and aaive spirit of Francis, feconj-
ed by the fame qualities in his fuhjc&s, would get thl
start of the flow and wary councils of the Emperor, aind
that they might over-run with ease this detached port;o;l
of his dominions, ill provided for defence, and always the
prey of every invader. But whether the French King,
by discovering too openly his suspicions of Leo's finceiit\,
tlifappointed these hopes; whether the treaty was only an
artifice of the Pope's, to cover the more serious negotiali-
ons he was carrying on with Charles; whether he was en-
ticed by the profpe& of reaping greater advantages from
an union with that prince; or whether he was soothed by
the zeal which Charles had manifefled for the honour or
the church in condemning Luther; certain it is, that he

Concludes a soon delerted his new ally, and made overtures of friend-
treay , 'iLh hip, though with great secrecy, to the Emperor [c]. Don

John Manuel, the fame man who had been the favourite
of Philip, and whose address had disconcertcd all Ferdi-
nand's schemes, having been delivered, upon the death
of that monarch, from the prison to which he was confin-
ed, waas now the Imperial ambassador at Rome, and fully
capable of improving this favourable disposition in the
Pope to his master's advantage [d]. To him the conduct

b l Cuic. 1. . p. i73.
[j Cuic. lib. 14. p. 17 . Mem. de Bclloy, Par. IS. 3. P. 14.
1[ i Jovii Vitl Lconis, lib. iv, p. 89.

of

c this negotiation was entirely committed, and being care- 1BOOK II.
fully concealed fiom Chievres, whose aversion from a war
\\ ith France would have prompted him to retard or defeat
it, an alliance between the Pope and Emperor was quickly May 8.
concluded [c]. The chief articles in this treaty, which
proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in Italy, were,

tl;a the lope and Emperor should join their forces to ex-

pel the French out of the Milanese, the poffeflion of which
liould he granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico
the Moor, and who had resided at Trent since the time
!,is brother Maximilian had been difpoffeffed of his domi-
nions by the French King; that Parma and Placentia
should be restored to the church; that the Emperor fllould
allift the Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the anijual
iitrhie paid by the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See
floutil be increased; that the Emperor should take the fa,
milv of t\edici under his protection; that he flould grant
to the Cardinal of that name a pension of ten thousand du-
cats upon the archbifhoprick of Toledo; and fettle lands
in the kingdom of Naples to the fame value upon Alexan-
der the natural ton of Lorenzo di Medici.

ITHr tranfating an affair of fiuch moment without his Dcsth of
f:itticipation, appeared to Chievres so decisive a proof of Clhi re.,

the Fmne-

I:. laving lot the altendant which he had hitherto main- rr,,, c,,,
tained over the mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this lin- i,,
account, added to the melancholy with which he was""'it
ouerwhelmed on taking a view of the many and unavoida-
ble calamities attending a war againtl France, is said to
hIve flortened his days [']. But though this, perhaps,
may be only the conjecture of hiflorians, fond of attri-
buting every thing that befalls illuflrious personages to ex-
traordinary causes, and of ascribing even their diseases ani
death to the effet of political pafions, which oftener di-
flurb the enjoyment than they abridge the period of life,
it is ccrtain that his death at this critical junsture cxtin-
guifhed all hopes of avoiding a rupture with France [g],
This event, too, delivered Charles from a minifler, to
whose authority he had been accustomed from his infancy
to submit with such implicit deference, as checked and de-
prelTed his genius, and retained him in a fate of pupil-
lage, unbecoming both his years and his rank; but this

It] Cuic. 1, 4. 18i. Mem. de Belly, p. 24. Do Mon Corp· Diplom.

ton. iv. suppl. p. y6.

sI Blcacrii Comment. de reb. Callic. 483.
lJ P. Heutcr. Rcr. Auttriac. lib. viii. c. p. r. 197.

C c 4 reflraint

BooK II. reflraint being removed, the native powers of his mint

were allowed to unfold themselves, and he dilplayed luci
great talents, both in council and in execution, as exceed.
ed the hopes of his contemporaries [h], and command the
admiration of posterity.

Commmace- WHiILE the Pope and Emperor were preparing, in
mentof hoT- consequence of their secret alliance, to attack Milan, ho.
tillties in
Ntlvarre. Rilities commenced in another quarter. The children oi

John D'Albert King of Navarre having often demanded
the reflitution of their hereditary dominions, in terms of
the treaty of Noyon, and Charles having as often eluded
their requefi upon very frivolous pretexts, Francis thought
himself authorized by that treaty to aflifl the exiled fami-
ly. The juncure appeared extremely favourable for such
an enterprize. Charles was at a distance from that part
of his dominions; the troops usually ltationed there had
been called away to quell the commotions in Spain; the
Spanish malecontents warmly solicited him to invade Na-
varre [i], in which a considerable faclion was ready to de-
clare for the descendants of their ancient monarchs. But
in order to avoid, as much as poflible, .giving offence to
the Emperor, or King of England, Francis direted forces
to be levied, and the war to be carried on, not in his own
name, but in that of Henry D'Albert. The condut cf
these troops was committed to Andrew de Foix, de l'El-
parre, a young nobleman, whom his near alliance to the
unfortunate King whose battles he was to fight, and what
was fill more powerful, the interest of his filler, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mifirefs, recom-
mended to that important trufl, for which he had neither

Progress of talents nor experience. But as there was no army in the
he French. field to oppose him, he became master, in a few days, of

the whole kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with
any obftru&ion but from the citadel of Pampeluna. The
additional works to this fortress begun by Ximenes, were
fill unfinished; nor would its flight resistance have deferr-
ed notice, if Ignatio Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had
not been dangerously wounded in its defence. During the
progress of a lingering cure, Loyola happened to have no
other anufcment than what he found in reading the lives
of the faints: The cffet of this on his mind, naturally

]P.PMIrt. Ep. 735.
i] lb. 71.

enthufiaflic,

enthulraftic, but ambitious and daring, was to inspire him BooK II.
wuith such a desire of emulating the glory of the!e fabu- 'v
lous worthies of the Romish church, as led him into the
wiidefl and molt extravagant adventures; which termi-
nated at last in instituting the society of Jefilits, the moil
political and bes regulated of all the monaflic orders, nd
from which mankind have derived more advan:ages, and
received greater hurt, than from any other of thele reli-
gious fraternities.

IF, upon the reduEtion of Pampeluna, L'Ffparre l.id T:iry entcr

been fatisf.ed with taking proper precau ions fur fecCing a ile.
his conquefi, the kingdom of Navarre might still have re-
mained annexed to the crown of France, in reality, as
well as in title. But, pushed on by youh!iul ardour, H:ilt
nmouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be d.4l..ld
with success, he ventured to pass the confines of Nanarre,
and to lay siege io Logrogno, a small city in Caflile.
This rquzed the Caflilians, who had hitherto beheld the
rapid progress of his arms with great unconcern; and tle
dissensions in that kingdom being almost composed, both
parties exerted thcmfelves with emulation in defence of
their country; the one that it might efface the memory
of past mifcondui by their present zeal; the other that it
might add to the merit of having subdued the Emperor's
rebellious subjects, that of repulsing his lortign enemies.
The sudden advance of their troops, togc;her with the
gallant defence made by the inhabitants of Logrogno, ob-
liged the French gereral to abandon his rafli ente:pri'e.
The Spanihf army, whith increa!ed ever)' day, har.fing Ttcey 2re
him during his retreat, he, il;rtead of taking f ltcr inder

, ,;,. t,''
the canon of Pampeluna, or wai;!'g the arlival to fomc ard.t ,^n

out o' Na-

troops who were marching to join himn, attacked the Spa- varic.
niards, though far superior to hi!r in number, with great
impetuosity, but with so little condute, that his forces
were totally routed, he liimlell, together wilh hlis princi-
pal officers, was taken prifoncr, aid Spain recovered pof.
feflion of Navarre in flill fliorter tinme than the Frrrcli
had spent in the conquefi of it I].

WHILE Francis cndcavoured to jifiif\v Ii, invnfion of i4,fiiiitrs

Navarre, by carrying it on in the name ut Henryv 1)'Al- t,1U i"I the
bert, he had recourle to an artifice muich of the famet ,. . lr
kind, in attacking another part of the Emperor's tcrnito-

[] MeSm. de Bcllay, p. 1. . Man. rp. 716.

ries.

BoOK II. ries. Robert de la Marck, lord of the fir.all but indc-
--.-- pendent territcry of Bouillon, situated on the frontiers of

Luxemburg and Champagne, having abandoned Charles's
service on account of an encroachment which the Aulic
council made on his jurifdiAtion, and having thrown him-
ielf upon France for pro:ecaion, was easily persuaded, in
the heat cf his refenmecnt, to fend a herald to Worms,
and to declare war in form against the Emperor. Such
extravagant infolcncc in a pettv prince furprized Charles,
and appeared to him a certain proof cf his having re-
ceived promises of powerful support from the French
King. The juifnc's of this conclusion soon became evi-
dent. Robert with troops levied in France, by the King's
connivance, though c'cmingly in contradition to his or,
(icrs, entered Luxemiurg, and after ravaging the open
country, laid siege to Vircton. Of this Cha!les com-
plain(d loudly, as a dirct violation of the peace fubfil'-
ing between the two crowns, and summoned Henry VIII.
in terms of the treaty concluded at London in the year
one thousand fise hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms
a,,ainl} France as the firfl aggressor; and though Fran-
cis pretended that he was not anfwcrable for Robert's
conduct, whose army fought under his own flandard,, and
in his own quarrel, and who, contrary to an expreis pro-
hibition, had seduccd bomne fubjeds of France into his ler-
vice; Henry paid lb little regard to this evasion, that the
French King, rather than ilritate a prince whom he still
hoped to gain, commanded de la Marck to disband his
troops L'].

l'H I: rmperor, meanwhile, was assembling an army

to chaif:ite Rolbrt's inlolence. Twventy thousand men
ti'c!er the cclunt o(f Nalftia invaded his little territories,
:trd in a fcw da\ s became mailers of every place in them
1-bia Sedan. Alctr making him feel so sensibly the weight
ft' hi:, nialer's indi.nation, NaTff:l advanced towards the
fIontircs of Francc; and Charles knowing that he might
plcfunic so tar on IIenry's partiality in his favour, as not
to be o\ci-:;i ed by the fame fears which had reltained
Francis, oirdcrd his general to besiege Moiuln. The
cowardicc of the garrison having obliged the governor to

sicerof,,- lifurcnder almoil without refiltance, Nlaflau invefled M'-
itrse lthe /.icrcs, a place at that time of no confiderabie frengtil,
lmperif i. but so advantagcoufly situated, that by getting polfcllion of

[I] Mcm. de Bcllay, r. ai, &c. Mcm. dc FlcurauCes, r. 335, &c.

it,

;i, the Imperial army might have penetrated into theBooK II.
lheart of Champagne, in which there w\asfcarce any other v'
tov'n capable of obltructing its progrcls. Happily for
France, its monarch, sensible of the importance of this
fortrels, and of the danger to w hich it was exposed, com-
mitted the defence of it to the chevalier Bayard, diflin-
guifh-ed among his contempo;aries by the appellation of
'bhi t iigbt titbout fear, and withoutt r ',' roa.Lh . This
man, whole prowels in combat, whole lunctilious honour,
and formal gallantry, bear a nearer efl'inl-.l:c;, than ainy
thling recorded in hiftorv, to the ch:ra' !ir alcri. ( to tho e
heroes of chivalry, poflicifd all the ta;! r:!ts xhich tcrnm a
great general. 'hefc he had many clc ca.io c.f tX.l'rilig
in the defence of Mezicres; paitly by )Iis valour, partly
by his conduc, he protral'cde the fic.;rc lo a rreat iEcni.h,
and in the end ohliged the Tlmperial.lifl to raile it, with R.ii,d
infamy and loss [". Frar.c;:, ;t th:c !;cd of a numerous
army soon retook Moulon, and entering the Low-Coun-
tries, made several conquefth cf imall imfortance. In
the neighbourhood of Valencicnncs, through an excels of
caution, an error with which he car.nnot be often charged,
he loft an opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial
army []; and what was still of more consequence, he
dilguiled the confltable Bourbon, by giving the command
of the van to the duke D'Alenion, though this polf of
honour belonged to Bourbon, as a prclogative of his of-
fice.

DURING there operations in the field, a crWrnreFs was Al^,uu.

held at Calais under the mediation of Henry \11. i n or- C'" ..'r , t
der to bring all differences to an amict'llc' iffiie; and ii ji,: 1,..n!,'',-
the intentions of the mediator had cl.o;-:tioldcd in any oi .. l-
degrec to hIs profeirlons, it could lkarce have lailed o( pro- i1"',
ducing some good effet. eInry comn:h'.ed tle sole
management of the negotiation, with urlilnled pr(lv cs,
to \Volfev; and this choice alone was iulit eil:t to I,;!;:
rendered it abortive. That prelate, leint on attainiti
the papal crown, the great objed of his anbiti(n, a;idi
ready to sacrifice every tling in oidc to ea.in the ]'m-
peror's interest, was so little able to conce:di his partialitv,
that if Francis had not been well acqiin.inttd with I:is
haughty and vindicive temper, he would ha\e declined

[m] Oeuvres de Brantome, tom, vi. 1 14. F,'] Mrm. dc Bcllby, p.
a5, &c. [o] P. Mitt. Ep. 747. M im. de Clll..', p. 35.

his

BooK II. his mediation. Much time was spent in inquiring who
--v---' had begun hoflilities, which Wolley affeced to represent

as the principal point; and by throwing the blame of that
on Francis, he hoped to justify, by the treaty of London,
any alliance into which his matter should enter with
Charles. The conditions on which hostilities might be
terminated, came next to be confidered; but with re-
gard to these, the Emperor's proposals were such as dif-
coiered either that he was utterly averse from peace, or
that he knew v\'lfcv would approve of whatever should
be offered in i,;s name. He demanded the reftitutionof
the dutchy of Buegundy, a province, the possession of
which would have given him access into the heart of the
kirgdtcm; and required a dilcharge of the homage due
to the crcwn of France for the counties of Slanders and
Artois, uhich nor.e of his ancefters had ever refuled, and
which he had bound hiinfelf by the treaty of Ncyon to

without any renew. Thele terms, to which an high-fpirited prince
efiet. wculd scarce have listened, after the diliaters of the moll

unfortunate war, Francis rejected with great disdain; and
Charles shewing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and moderate propositions of the French monarch,
that he should reflore Navarre to its lawful prince, and
witldraw his troops from the siege of Tournay, the con-
grcfs broke up without any other effet, than that which
attends unsuccessful negotiations, the exasperating of the
parties, whom it was intended to reconcile [PI.

Leafwe D1 RlING the continuance of the congress, Wolfey, on
Franc b. preterce that the Emperor hlimfelf would be more willing
Prance be- c*c
twen lte to make rcafonable concessions than his miniflers, made an
Emr.ror excursion to Brugcs, to meet that monarch. He was re-
Iad Htn'y ceivid by Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much

refpe&t and magnificence as if he had been King of En-
gland. But inflead of advancing the treaty of peace by
this interview, Wolley, in his mafler's name, concluded
a league wilh the Emperor againlt Francis; in which it
was flipulated, that Charles should invade France on the
fidt of Spain, and lHenry in Picardy, each with an army
of forty tlhou!hnd men; and that, in order to firengthen
their union, Cluhalcs should espouse the Princcfs Mary,
Hcnrv's only ihild, and the apparent heir of his domi-
nions [q]. HIcnry produced no better reasons for this mea-
lure, equally unjust and impolitic, than the article in the

[p) P. Mart. Ep. 39. Herbert. [q] Rymer, Ftader. xiii. Herbert.

treaty

treaty of London, by which he pretended that he wasBooK II.
bound to take arms against the French King as the first 'v
aggressor; and the injury which he alledeed Francis had
done him, in permitting the duke of Albany, the head
of a facion in Scotland which oppolid his interet, to
return into that kingdom. He was influenccd, however,
by other considerations. The advantages which accrued
to his fubjeas from maintaining ail exaA neutrality, or
the honour that resulted to hin!'elf from acting as the
arbiter between contending princes, appeared to his youth-
ful imagination so inconhiderable, when compared with
the glory which Charles and Francis reaped from leading
armies or conquering provinces, that he determined to re-
main no longer in a fiate of inactivity. Having once
taken this resolution, his inducements to prefer an alliance
with Charles were obvious. He had no claim upon any
part of that Prince's dominions, molt of which were lo
situated, that he could not attack them without great dif-
ficulty and disadvantage; whereas several maritime pro-
vinces of France had been long in the hands of the En-
glifh monarchs, whole pretensions, even to the crown of
that kingdom, were not altogether forgotten; and the pof-
feflion of Calais not only gave him easy access into some
of these provinces, but afforded him, in cafe of any dif-
after, a secure retreat. While Charles attacked France
upon one frontier, Henry flattered himself that he would
find little resistance on the other, and that the glory of
re-annexing to the crown of England the ancient inherit-
ance of its monarchs on the continent, was reserved for
his reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged these vain hopes,
whichled his malter into such measures as were molt sub-
servient to his own secret schemes, and the English,
whose hereditary animosity againit the French was apt to
rekindle on every occasion, did not. disapprove ol the
martial spirit of their sovereign.

MEANWHILE the league betwecn the Pope and Em-Honilitie'

peror produced great effedts in Italy, and rendered Lom-in tLaly.
bardy the chief theatre of war. There was, at that
time, such contrariety between the characer of the French
and Italians, that the latter submitted to the government
of the former with greater impatience, than they exprel-
fed under the dominion of other foreigners. The phlegm
of the Germans and gravity of the Spaniards, suited their
jealous temper and ceremonious manners better than the
Trench gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and too little at-

tentive

Boo 11I. tentive to decorum. Levis XII. however, by the eqti:t
-v-'y and gentleness of his administration, and by granting thr

Milanese more extensive privileges than they had enjoyed
unler their native princes, had overcome, in a gre i
mcalure, their prejudices, and reconciled them to the
F'renchl government. Francis, on recovering that dutch),
i:rl not imitate the excample of his predecessor; and thouhii
too generous hilteltl to oppress his people, his confidenre
in his favourites, and his negligence in examining in:to
the condtlua of Ithofe whom he entruffed with power, em-
holdened them to venture upon many ads of op;refion.

'lt Mll- ''The government of Milan was committed by him to
nicl di:, ult- Odet de Foix, Mlarechal de Lautrcc, another brother of
cdnth toC Madtame de Chateeaubriand, an oflccy- of great expe-
c.iiict. rience and rcputation, but haughty, imperious, rapacious,

and incapable either of liflening to advice, or bearirg
contradiction. His insolence and exactions totally alien-
ated the affcStions of the Milanese from France, drove
many of the considerable citizens into baniflrrent, ard
forced others to retire for their own safety. Among the
lafl was Jerome Merone, vice-chancellor of Milan, a
man whole genius for intrigue and enterprize diftinguited
him in an age and country, where violent factions, as
well as frequent revolutions, affording great scope for
iuch talents, produced or called them forth in great abun-
dance. He repaired to Francis Sforza, whose brother
Maximilian he had betrayed; and fufpcting the Pope's
intention of attacking the Milanese, although his treaty
with the Emperor was not yet made publick, proposed to
him in the name of Sforza, a scheme for surprising fe-
veral places in that dutchy by means of the exiles, who,
from hatred to the French, and from attachment to their
former maflers, were ready for any desperate attempt.
L co not only encouraged the attempt, but advanced a
considerable lim towards the execution of it; and when
through unforckcen accidents it failed of success in every
part, he allowed the exiles who had affcmbled in a body,
to retire to Reggio, which belonged at that time to the
June 24. church. The Marechal dc Foix, who commanded at

Milan in ablcnce of his brother Lautrcc, who was then
in France, tempted with the hopes of catching at once as
'in a share, all the avowed enemies of his maller's go-
vernment in that country, ventured to march into the ec-
clefiaftical territories, and to invest Reggio. But the vi-
gilance and good condu& of Guicciardini the historian,

governor

governor of that place, obliged the French general toBooK II.
abandon the entcrprize with dl;grace [a]. Leo, on receiv-'- v
ing this intelligence, awith which he was highly pleased, The Popc
as it furnifled him a decent pretext for a ri!pture with again(t
France, immediately assembled the cnnfiftory of Cardi- FIaIis.
nals, and complaining hitteriy,/ (f i:,c i;ofiile inltitlions- of
the French King, and magnifying. the lnmperJr's zeal
for the church, ot which he hadl ,rven a recent proof hy
hris proceedings ag:ilnfl Luther, declared that he was col.-
flrained in Ifet-detence, and as the on!v expedient For the:
Iecurity of the ecclesial ical slate, to juin his arms to tiole
of that prince. For this puilpoicL, he now pretended to
conclude a treaty with lon John TManuel, althlough it
had been signed some months before this time ; and he
publickly excommunicated De Foix, as an impious in-
vader of St. Peter's patrimony.

LEO had already begun preparations for war bV taking War in the

into pay a considerable body of Swiss; but the Imperial MilaLnte.
troops advanced so slowly from Naples and Germany,
that it was the middle of autumn before the army took
the field under the command of Prolper Colonna, the
most eminent of the Italian generals, whose long expe-
rience and extreme caution were opposed with great pro-
priety to the impetuosity of the French. In the mean
time, De Foix dispatched courier after courier to inform
the King of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whose forces were either employed in the Low-Countries,
or assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who did not
expe& so sudden an attack in that quarter, sent ambaffa-
dors to his allies the Swiss, to procure from them the im-
mediate levy of an additional body of troops; and coin-
fnanded Lautrec to repair forthwith to his government.
'Tht general, who was well acquainted with the great
neglet of ceconomy in the administration of the King's
finances, and who knew how much the troops in the
Milanese had already suffered from the want of their pay,
refused to set out, unless the fum of three hundred thou-
sand crowns was immediately put into his hands. But
the King, Louise of Savoy, his mother, and Scmblaniay,
the fuperintendint of finances, having promised, even
with an oath, that on his arrival at Milan he should find
remittances for the fum which he demanded; upon the
faith of this, he departed. Unhappily for France, Louise,
[i] Guic. lib. xiv. 183. Meme dc Bclly, p. 38, &c.

a woman

BOOK II. a woman deceitful, vindi&ive, rapacious, and capable of

S' acrificing any thing to the gratification of her paflions,
but who had acquired an abiolute ascendant over her obn
hb her maternal tendernels, her care of his education, and
her great abilities, was reiolved not to perform this pro-
rnifc. Lautrec having ircurred her diiplcafure by his
hr;;:ghtinels in neglecring to pay court to her, and by the
freedom with which he talked concerning obme of her
zdve.ntures in gallantry, fie, in order to deprive him of
the honour which he might have gained by a successful
defence of the Milanese, iteied the three hundred thou-
sand crowns destined for that lervice, and detained them
for her own use.

Prrorref of LAU T EC, notwithlanding this cruel disappointment,
tit.;, lpri- found means to assemble a considerable army, though far

interior in number to that of the confederates. He adopted
the plan of defence mofl suitable to his situation, avoid-
ing a pitched battle with the greatest care, while he ha-
ralred the enemy continually with his light troops, beat
up their quarters, intercepted their convoys, and covered
or relieved every place which they attempted to attack.
By this prudent conduEt, he not only retarded their pro-
grefs, but would have loon wearied out the Pope, who
had hitheito dcfra)ed almost the whole expence of the
war, as the EImpror whole revenues in Spain were dif-
fipated lduring the commotions in that country, and who
was obliged to support a numerous army in the Nether-
lands, could not make any considerable remittances into
Itayv. But an untoretfen accident disconcerted all his
meafurcs, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the French
affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swiss served in their
army under the banners of the republick, with which
France was in alliance. By a law, no less political than
humane, cliablifhed among the cantons, their troops
were not hired out by publick authority to both the con-
tending parties in any war. This law, the love of gain
had sometimes eluded, and private persons had been al-
lowed to enliit in what service they pleased, though not
under the publick banners, but under those of their of-
ficers. The Cardinal of Sion, who till preserved his
interest among his countrymen, and his enmity to France,
having prevailed on them to permit a levy of this kind,
twelve thouland Swiss joined the army of the confederates.
The cantons, when they saw so many of their country-
men marching under hostile flandards, and ready to de-

firoy

firoy each other, became sensible of the infamy to which Boo I11
they would be exposed, as well as the loss they might sus- -v
ser, and dispatched couriers, commanding them to leave
both armies, and to return into their own country. The
Cardinal of Sion, however, had the address, by corrupt-
ing the messengers appointed to carry this order, to pre-
vent its being delivered to the Swiss in the service of the
confederates; but being intimated in due form to those
in the French army, they, fatigued with the length of
the campaign, and murmuring for want of pay, in-
ftantly yielded obedience, in spite of Lautrec's remon-
ftrances and intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed the

strength of his army, Lautrec durst no longer face the
confederatcs; and turning towards Milan, encamped on
the banks of the Adda, and placed his chief hopes of
safety in preventing the enemy from pafling the river; an
expedient for defending a country so precarious, that
there are few examples of its being employed with fuc-
cess against any general of experience or abilities. Ac-
cordingly Colonna, notwithstanding Lautrec's vigilance
and aaivity, passed the Adda with little loss, and obliged
him to shut himself up within the walls of Milan, which
the confederates were preparing to besiege, when an un-
known person, who never afterwards appeared either to
boast of this service, or to claim a reward for it, came
from the city, and acquainted Morone, that if the army
would advance tiat night, the. Ghibelline or Imperial
facion would put them in pofletfion of one of the gates.
Colonna, though no friend to rash enterprizes, allowed
the marquis de Pescara to advance with the Spanish in-
fantry, and he himself followed with the reft of his troops.
About the beginning of night, Pescara arriving at the Becore
Roman gate in the suburbs, furprized the soldiers whom mafiersoi
he foundthere; those pofled in the fortifications adjoin, Mila"n
ing to it, immediately fled; the marquis, seizing the
works which they abandoned, and pushing forward in-
ceffantly, though with no less caution than vigour, became
master of the city with little bloodshed, and almost with-
out resistance; the viaors being as much afoniihed as
the vanquished at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Venetian territo-
ries with the remains of his Ihattered army; the cities of
the Milanese following the fate of the capital, furren,
dered to the confederates; Parma and Placentia were

VOL. I. D d united

SOOK II. united to the ecclesiastical fiate, and of their conquefs in
_-v-' Lombardy, only the town of Cremona, the castle Ic

Milan, and a few irconfiderable forts remained in the
hands of the French [b3.

Death of 'LEO received the accounts of this ralid succession of
Lco Xi prosperous events with such transports of joy, as brought

on (if we may believe the French hiflorians) a flight
fever, which being negleted, occasioncd his death on the
iecond of December. wh;!.e he was sKill of a vigorous age,
and at the height of his glory. By this unexpeced actc
dent; the spirit of the confederacy was broken, and its
operations ftupcndcd. 'he Cardinals of Sion and Medici
left the army' that thev might be present in the conclave;
the Swiss were recalled by their superiors; feme othecr
mercenaries disbanded for want of pay; and only the Spa-
niards, and a few Germans in the Emperor's service, rn-
mained to defend the Milanese. But Lautrec, deftitu:e
both of men and of money, was unable to improve this
favourable opportunity in the manner he would have wifi-
ed. The vigilance of Mororic, and the good condut ci
Colonna, disappointed his feeble attempts on the Mila-
nefe; and Guicciardini, by his address and valour, repul!-
ed a bolder and more dangerous attack which he made on
Parma [c.

Adrian MEANWHILE great discord prevailed in the conclave,
ele&td which followed upon Leo's death, and all the arts natural

. to men grown old in intrigue, when contending for a prize

so valuable, were pradifed. Wolsey's name, notwith-
flanding all the Emperor's magnificent promises to favour
his pretensions, of which that prelate did not fail to remind
him, was scarce mentioned in the conclave. Julio Car-
dinal di Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent
than any other member of the sacred college for his abilities,
his wealth, and his experience in tranfa&ing great affairs,
had already secured fifteen voices, a number sufficient,
according to the forms of the conclave, to exclude any
other candidate, though not to carry his own election.
All the old cardinals combined againi him, without being
united in favour of any other perbfn. While these factions
were endcavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary otit
each other, Medici and his adherents voted one morning

[b]Guic. I. iv. 19o, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 41, &c. Galetcii CAperl

de reb. gefi. pro. nRiut. Frai. Sfbrtiz Comment. *p. Sc&rdimn, vol. ii.
a so, &c.
[c] Guic, i. iv114.

at

at the scrutiny, which according to form was made every BooK II.
dav, for Cardinal Adrian of Utrecht, who at that time -v
governed Spain in the Emperor's nime. This they did
merely to protract time; but the adverse party inPiantly
cloing with them, to their own amarr.orcnt and that of
all Europe, a firanger to Italy, unknown to the persons
who gave their suffrages in his favc.ur, and n-acquainted
with the manners of the people, or the i.tcreft of .he fiate,
the government of which tihe conferred upon him, was January 9.
unanimously railed to the papal throne, at a juncture so
delicate ard critical, as A ould have demanded all the laga-
citV and experience of one ot the molt aDlc prelates in the
sacred college. The Cardinals themfclves, unable to give
a realon for this firance choice, on account of which, as
they marched in r.oceffion from the conclave, they were
loaded with intuits and curses by the Roman people, afcrib-
ed it to an immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may
be imputed with greater certainty to the influence of Don
John Maruel, the Imperial ambassador, who by his address
and intrigues facilitated the election of a person devoted to
his maftcr's service, from gratitude, from interest, and
from inclination [d].

BESIDES the iifluence which Charles acquired bv Warrenew-
Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on his adminri- ed in the

Milanelc.

ftration. To beflow on his preceptor such a noble recom-
penfe, and toplaceon the papal throne a creature whom
he had raised, were acs of uncommon magnificence and
power. Francis observed, with the sensibility of a rival,
the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and resolved to
exert himself with fresh vigour, in order to wrest from him
his late conquets in Italy. The Swiss, in order to make
some reparation to the French King, for having so unfea-
fonably withdrawn their troops from his army, which had
cccafioned the loss of the Milanese, permitted him to levy
ten thousand men in the republick. Together with this
reinforcement, Lautrec received from the King a small
fum in money, which enabled him once more to take the
field, and after feiling by furprize, or force, several pla-
ces in the Milanese, to advance within a few miles of the
capital. The confederate army was in no condition to ob-
tlru& his progref ; and though the inhabitants of Milan,
inflamed by the artifices of Morone, and by the popular

Id] Ger. Moringi Vita Hadrianl ap. Cafp. Buirnma. in Analet. de
Hldr. p. ;t. Conclave Hadr. ibid. p. 144, Sc.

D d a dedamations

BOOK 11. declamations of a monk whom he employed, with the
--'V-J most enthusiastic zeal againfi the French government,

consented to raise extraordinary contributions, Colonna
must soon have abandoned the advantageous camp he had
chosen at Bicocca, and have dismissed his troops for want
of pSay, if tile Swiss in the French service had not once
more extricated him out of his difficulties.

THE insolence and caprice of that people were often

no less fatal to their friends, than their valour and discipline
were formidable to their enemies. Having now served
two months without pay, of which they complained loudly,
a fum destined for their use was sent fiom France under a
convoy of horse; but Morone, whole vigilant eye nothing
cicaped, posted a body of troops in their way, so that
those who escorted the money durst not advance. On re-
ceiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all patience,
and officers as well as soldiers crowding around Lautrec,
threatened with one voice instantly to retire, if he did not
either advance the pay which was due, or promise to lead
them next morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remon-
firate against thele demands, representing to them the
impossibility of the former, and the rashness of the latter,
which must be attended with certain deffrudion, as the'
enemy occupied a camp naturally of'great strength, and
which by art they had rendered almost inaccessible. The
Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that their valour was
capable of surmounting every obstacle, renewed their de-
mand with greater fierceness, offering themselves to form
the van-guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec, unable
to overcome their obstinacy, complied with their request,
hoping, perhaps, that some of those unforeseen accidents
which so often determine the fate of battles, might crown
this rash enterprize with undeserved success; and con-
vinced that the effe&s of a defeat could not be more fatal
than those which would certainly follow upon the retreat of

Ms, a body which composed one halt of his army. Next morn-
.5:12. ing the Swiss were early in the field, and marched with

the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply intrenched
on every fide, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to
receive them. Asthey advanced, they fufiained a furious
cannonade with great firmness, and without waiting for
their own artillery, rulhed impetuously upon the intrench-

The French ments. But after incredible efforts of valour, seconded
drdcfted in with great spirit by the French, having loft their bravefl
hiobt^,l. of officers and belt troops, and finding that they could make

no

no impreflion on the enemy's works, they founded a re- Bo o 11.
treat; leaving the field of battle, however, like men re- --v
pulsed, but not vanquished, in close array, and without
receiving any molestation from the enemy.

NEX r day, such as survived set out for their own coun- pniven nut

try; and Lautrec, deipairing of being able to make any oftheS.ila-
farther refirance, retired into France, after throwing e.
garrisons into Cremona, and a few other places ; all which,
except the citadel of Cremona, Colonna loon obliged to
ful-ender.

GENOA, however, and its territories, remaining sub- Loft Gn .

jea to France, still gave Francis confiderahlc footing in
Italy, and made it ealv for him to execute any 1fhene for
the recovery of the luxilaneie. But Colonna, rendered
enterprizing by continual fuccef, and excited by the
solicitations of the fadion of the Adorni, the heredi:a:y
enemies of the Fregoil, wli, -,ide r the proteticrn )f
France possessed the chief authority in Genoa, determined
to attempt the reduócion of that state; and accomp!ifhcd
itwith amazing facility. He became mailer of Genoa
by an accident as unexpe&ed as that which had given him
.pofeflion of Milan; and almost without opposition or
bloodlhed, the power of the Adorni and the authority of
the Emperor were established in Genoa [].

SU CH a cruel fucceltion of misfortunes asseted Francis Henry \VIII

with deep concern, which was not a little augmented by dclal-t . .1
the unexpe&ed arrival of an English herald, who, in the Fran,
name of his sovereign, declared war in form againif May 29.
France. This flep was taken in consequence of the treaty
\oliey had concluded with the Emperor at Bruges, and
which had hitherto been kept secret. Francis, though he
had reason to be furprized with this denunciation, after
having been at such pains to sooth Henry and to gain his
minister, received the herald with great compolure and
dignity [i]; and without abandoning any of the schemes
he was forming against the Emperor, began vigorous pre-
parations for refitfing this new enemy. His treasury,
however, being exhausted by the effr.rts which he had
already made, as well as by the fums he expended on his
pleasures, he had recourse to extraordinary expedients for
supplying it. Several new offices were created, and ex-
posed to sale; the royal demeines were alienated; unusual

rJ1ovii VitFrdin. Daymll. p. 344. Ouic. I. ,iv. 233.
[tj Joural d L~oife dr:S voie, p. 199.

d 3 taxce

BooK II. taxes were imposed; and the tomb of St. Martin was
'--V--' stripped of a rail of massive silver, with which Lewis XI.

in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled it. By means
of these expedients he was enabled to levy a confideralle
army, and to put the frontier towns in a good poflure of
defence.

Charles vi- THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous to
fit Lngland. draw as much advantage as possible from the accession of

such a powerful ally; and the prosperous situation of l,is
affairs, at this time, permitting him to set out for Spain,
where his presence was extremely neccffary, he visited the
court of England in his way tothat country. He prrpofed
by this interview not only to strengthen the bonds of friend-
iip which united him and Henry, and to excite him to
pufhthe war against France with vigour, but hoped to
remove any disgust or refcntment \Wolley might have con-
ceived on account of the cruel disappointment which he
had met with in the late conclave. His success exceeded
his most faneuine expectations; and bv his artful address,
during a residence of fix weeks in England, he gained
not only the King and the minifler, but the nation itfelt.
Henrv, whose vanity was sensibly flattered by such a visit,.
as well as by the fludied refped with which the Emperor
treated him on every occasion, entered warmly into all
his schemes. The Cardinal, foreseeing from Adrian's
age and infirmities, a sudden vacancy in the papal fee,
dissembled or forgot his resentment; and as Charles aug-
mented the pcnfions which he had already fettled on him,
and renewed his promise of favouring his pretensions to
the papacy, with all his ir,:rcfl, he endeavoured to merit
the former, and to iecure !.. accomrlifhment of the latter,
by fresh ferviccs. The nation, lharing in the glory ot
its monarch, and pleased with the confidence which the
Emperor placed in the English by creating the earl oi
Surrey, his high-admiral, diicovered no less inclination to
commence hostilities than Henry hirrfelf.

The English IN order to give Charles, before he left England, a
invade proof of this general ardour, Surrey failed with such forces
France, as were ready, and ravaged the coasts of Normandy. He

then made a descent on Bretagne, where he plundered
and burnt Morlaix, and some other places of less confe-
quence. After these flight excursions, attended with
greater dishonour than damage to France, he repaired to
Calais and took the command of the principal army, con-
filing of sixteen thousand men; withwhich having joined

the

the Flemiih troops under the count de Buren, he advan-BooK ii.
ccd into Picardy. The army which Francis had assembled, -
was far inferior in number to these united bodies. But
during the long wars between the two nations, the French
had discovered the pioper method of defending their coun-
try againfi the English. They had been taught by their
misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with the utmost care,
and to endeavour, by throwing garrisons into every place ca-
pable of refilar.ce, by watching all the enemy's motions, by
intercepting their convovs, attacking their advanccdpofts,
and harafilng them continually with their numerous caval-
rv, to ruin them with the length of the war, or to beat
them by piece-meal. This plan the duke of Vendome,
the French general in Picardy, pursued with no less pru-
dence than success; and not only prevented Surrey from but ,with lit-
taking any town of importance, but obliged him to retire tl success.
with his army greatly reduced by fatigue, by want of pro-
viflons, and by the loss it had sustained in several unfuc-
celsful skirmishes.

TH u s ended the second campaign in a war the most

general that hitherto had been kindled in Europe; and
though Francis, by his mother's ill-timedrefentment, by
*the disgusting insolence of his general, and the caprice of
the mercenary troops he employed, had loft his conquefrs
in Italy, yet all the powers combined against him had not
been able to make any impreflion on his hereditary domi-
nions; and wherever they either intended or attempted
an attack, he was well prepared to receive them.

WHILE the Chriflian princes wAre thus wafting each Solyman's

other's strength, Solyman the Magnificent entered Hun- cnqu 'f of
gary with a numerous army, and invelting Belgrade, Rodei.
which was deemed the chief barrier of that kingdom
against the Turkish arms, soon forced it to furrendcr.
F;ncouraged by this fuccels, he turned his victorious aruts
againfl the island of Rhodes, the feat, at that time, ot
the knights of St. John of Jerusalem. This frnall slate
he attacked with such a numerous army, as the lords of
Aria have been accultomed in every age to bring into the
field. Two hundred thousand men, and a tleet of four
hundred fail appeared against a town defended by a garri-
son confidting of five thousand foldieri, and fix hundred
knights, under the command of Villicris de L'isle Adam,
the grand master, whose wisdom and valour rendered him
wprthy of that ltation at such a dan!cirois junaure. No
fooncr did he begin to fufpe& the dellinatiun of Solyman's

D d 4 va

BooK II. vail armaments, than he dispatched messengers to all the

_-v* Chriflian courts, imploring their aid againt the common

enemy. But though every prince in that age, acknow.
ledged Rhodes to be the great bulwark of Christendom in
the east, and trufled to the gallantry of its knights as the
bell security against the progress of the Ottoman arms;
and though Adrian, with a zeal which became the head
and father of the church, exhorted the contending powers
to forget their private quarrels, and by uniting their arms,
to prevent the Infidels from destroying a society which did
honour to the Christian name; yet so violent and impla-
cable was the animosity of both parties, that, regardlels
of the danger to which they exposed all Europe, and un-
moved by the intreaties of the grand master, or the ?:!-
monitions of the Pope, they suffered Solyman, without
difturbancc, to carry on his operations against Rhodes.
The grand master, after incredible efforts of courage, of
patience, and of military condua during a siege of fix
months; after sustaining many assaults, and disputing
15z. every poll with amazing obstinacy, was obliged at last to

yield to numbers, and having obtained an honourable
capitulation from the Sultan, who admired and refpe&ed
his virtue, he surrendered the town, which was reduced
to a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every resource [g].
Charles and Francis, ashamed of having occasioned such
a loss to Christendom by their ambitious contests, endea.
voured to throw the blame of it on each other, while all
Europe, with greater justice, imputed it equally to both.
The Emperor, by way of reparation, granted the knights
of St. John the small island of Malta, in which they
fixed their residence, retaining, though with less power
and splendour, their ancient spirit, and implacable enmity
to the Infidels.

[g] Foanurau de Bello Rhodo Ip. Scrd. Script. Rer. Cernns. Vol.

ii. p. 8I. P. Barrc. Hist. d'Allc. vnm. viii.
v 7.

THE

# BOOK III.

OF THE
R E I CG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

B O O K III.
C HARLES, havirg had the fatisfaAion of feeing Boot IIT

hostilities begun between France and England, took _

leave of Henry, and arrived in Spain on the seventeenth Civil war in
of June. He found that country just beginning to reco- Catile.
ver order and fitength, after the miseries of a civil war to
which it had been exposed during his absence; an account
of the rife and progress of which, as it was but little con-
ncoeed with the other events that happened in Europe,
hath been reserved to this place.

No fooncr was it known that the Cortes aflembled in

Galicia had voted the Emperor a free-gift, without ob-
tainingthe redrcfs of any grievance, than it excited uni-
versal indignation. The citizens of Toledo, who confi- Infirrfina,
dered themselves, on account of the great privileges which of Tolcdu.
they enjoyed, as guardians of the liberties of the Caflilian
commons, finding that no regard was paid to the remon-
firances of their deputies againtl that unconflitutional
grant, took arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing

the

BOOK IIl. the gates of the city, which were fortified, attacked the
~'- -' nal-cazar, or caflle, which they soon obliged the governor

to surrender. Emboldened by this ficcel', they deprived
of all authority every person whom thry fufpeaed of any
attachment to the court, established a popular form of go-
vernment, compofedt of deputies from the several parishes
in i!,c city, and levied troops in their own defence. The
chief leader of the people in these infurreafions was Don
John de Pad;lla, the eldest son of the commendador of
Caltih, a young nobleman of a generous temper, of un-
daunted courage, and possessed of the talents as well as of
the ambition which in times of civil discord raise men to
power and eminence [a].
Of Seovia. TirE resentment of the citizens of Segovia produced

cffets frill mere fatal. Tordefillas, one of their repre-
fentatives in the late CQrtes, had vpted for the donative;
and being a bold and haughty man, ventured, upon his re-
turn, to call together his fellow citizens in the great
church, that he might give them, according to custom, an
account of his condut in that tafembly. But the multi-
tude, unable to bear his insolence, in attempting to justify
what they thought inexcusable, burfi open the gates of
the church with the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy
Tordefillas, dragged him through the fireets, with a thou.
sand curses and insults, towards the place of publick exe-
cution. In va;n did the dean and canons come forth in
procession with the holy facramcnt, in order to appease
their rage. In vain did the monks of those monafleries ty
which they passed, conjure them on their knees to spare
his life, or at leaf to allow him time to confess, and to re-
ceive absolution of his fins. Without lifening to the dic-
tates either of humanity or of religion, they cried out,
*' That the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor to
his country," hurried him along with greater violence, and
finding that he had expired under their hands, they hung
him up with his head downwards on the common gib-
bet [b]. The fame spirit seized the inhabitants of Burgos,
Zamora, and several other cities; and though their repre-
fentatives, taking warning from the fate of Tordefillas,
had been so wife as to save themselves by a timely flight,
they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to the ground,
and their effe&s consumed with fire; and such was the

[a] S ndov. , 77. [b]

P.
pb t. Ep, (71.

horror

horror the people had conceived againfl them as hetrayers BoOK Ill.
ot the publick liberty, that not one in those licentious mill- v--
tiruaes would touch any thing, however valuable, which had
-,:'onged to them [3].

ADIZ1AN, at that time regent of Spain, had scarce fixed Mesires or

the feat of his government at Valladolid, when he was oArder nto
ai:rmntd with an account of these inlurrcaions. He im- punif.ihcm.
mrediately assembled the council to deliberate concernilngJun"e
the proper method of suppressing lthem. The counsellors i50'
differed in opinion; some infilling it w;:s necefary to check
this audacious spirit in its infancy by a leveie execution (f
mftice; others advising to treat with lenity a peop!e who
h}ad some reason to be incensed, and not to di ive them he-
yond all the bounds of duty by an i '-'imnd riour. The
icntimcnts of the former being warmly fupporled by the
archbishop of Granada, president ot the counil, a person
of great authority, but cholcrLilk and impetuous, wece ap-
proved of by Adrian, whose zeal to fi:pport his nlai. r's
authority hurried him into a measure, to which, fioin I is
natural caution and timiditv, he'would otherwise lhvt ; c .n
avcrfe. He commanded Roncuillo, one ot the kin,'s
.judges, to repair inflantly to Segovia, which lI:d let the
first example of mutiny, and to proceed agaii;il the delin-
quents according to law; and clft the people fl(ould lie so
outrageous as to resist his authority, a confidcrable body of
troops was appointed to attend him. The Scgovian.,l:s troFr
foreleeing what they n.ight e'c:pec from a judpe fko w(rl!1''rIUl'd at
known for his autlere antd lnfi

n i g (, t( nl-tr, i(x 'gr arnm '

vg

with one consent, and, having muflcrc- tx 'se thou!and
men, fiut their gates af'iiill him. Rot.qill'o, tnrag;ed
at this infull, d nuuonccd them rebels ard olltla s ; and his
troops seizing all the avenucs to the lown, hoped that it
would L,oon Ie c,!liiF l to furrcndler for w.int of pro-
visions. The inh.l i. ni-, howeevr, c'tl ndcd therm't Ives
with vigour, and having rcctivcd a (nfli!.ab;-l ,e reniol(c-
ment frnm Toledo, u;ndr l he command ot Padilla, attacked
Ronquillo, and Iorced liF iin 1, cti, i ith the lois of Iis
baggage and military chefl [I].

UPoN this Adrian ordered Antorip de Foqceca, whom and at t4c-

the Emperor had appointed commander in chief of the dila
forces in Spain, to assemble an army, and to beficge the
city in form. But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo,

a] ndov, ye3. P. Mart. Ep. 674.
[dt SIDdOv. i . 1'. MastS. . E6- Mllau, Contin.. p. .

where

Be O Ill. where Cardinal Ximenes had eflablifhed a vast magazine of
'--v-' military flores, would not susser him to draw from it a train

of battering cannon, or to defiroy their countrymen with
those arms which had been prepared againfi the enemies of
Augut 21. the kingdom. Fonseca, who could not execute his orders

without artillery, determined to seize the magazine by
force, and the citizens Hlanding on their defence, he as-
faulted the town with great briskness: but his troops were
so warmly received, that despairing of carrying the place,
lhe set fire to some of the houses, in hopes that the citi-
7.ens would abandon the walls in order to save their fami-
lies and effec's. Intlead of that, the expedient to which
he had recourse served only to encreafe their fury, and he
was repulsed with great infamy, while the flames spread-
ing from fIreet to firect, reduced to ashes almost the whole
town, one of the molt considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufa&ures of Segovia, and
fcveral other cities. As the warehouses were then filled
i ith goods for the approaching fair, the loss was immense,
and wns felt univcrfally; and this, added to the impression
which such a cruel ation made on people long unaccuf-
tomed to the horrors of civil war, enraged the Castilian3
almost to madness. Fonseca became the objec of general
indignation, and was branded with the name of incendiary
and enemy to his country; and even the citizens of Val-
ladolid, whom the presence of the Cardinal had hitherto
refrained, declared that they could no longer remain in-
ative fpetators of the fitfferings of their countrymen,
and taking arms with no less fury than the other cities,
they burned Fonseca's house to the ground,elected new magi-
firates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to command them,
and guarded their walls with as much diligence, as if an
enemy had been ready to attack them.

Adrian dif- THE Cardinal, who though virtuous and difinterefled,
bands hib and capable of governing the kingdom with honour in
uors5. times of tranquillity, possessed neither the courage nor fa-

gacity necessary at such a dangerous junAure, and finding
himself unable to check there outrages committed under his
own eye, attempted to appease the people, by protefiing
that Fonseca had exceeded his orders, and had by his rash
condut offended him, as much as he had injured them.
This condefcenfon, the effe& of irresolution and timidity,
rendered the malecontents bolder and more insolent; and
the Cardinal having soon after recalled Fonseca, and dif-
miffcd his troops, which he could no longer afford to pay,

as

as the treasury had been drained by the rapacioufnefsof the BOOK Ill.
Flemif( ministers, and received no supply from the great -
cities which were all in arms, the people were left at full
liberty to a&t without controul, and scarce any shadow of
power remained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the effeas The viewi

merely of popular and tumultuary rage; they aimed at an" ilofeen
obtaining redress of their political grievances, and an efta-cornm.onsof
blifhment of publick liberty on a secure basis, objeasc'afli!.
worthy of all the zeal they discovered in contending for
them. The feudal government in Spain was, at that time,
in a slate more favourable to liberty than in any other of the
great European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly to tl e
number of great cities in that country, a circumstance of
which I have already taken notice, and which contributes
more than any other to mitigate the rigour of the feudal
institutions, and to introduce a more liberal and equal form
of government. The inhabitants of every city formed a
great corporation with valuable immunities and privileges;
they were delivered from a state of fubjeclion and vassal-
age; they were admitted to a considerable share in the le-
gifature; they acquired the arts of indufiry, without
which cities cannot fubfilt; they accumulated wealth, by
engaging in commerce; and being free and independent
themselves, were the guardians of the publick freedom and
independence. The genius of the internal government
efRablilhed in cities, which, even in countries where despotic
power prevails most, is democratical and republican, ren-
dered the idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their
representatives in the Cortes were accustomed to check
with equal spirit the encroachments of the King, and the
oppreflion of the nobles. They endeavoured to, extend
the privileges of their own order; they laboured to shake
off the remaining encumbrances with which the feudal ty-
ranny had burdened them; and conscious of being one of
the molt considerable orders in the state, were ambitious of
becoming the mofi powerful.

THE present junture appeared favourable for pufhingTheir con-

any new claim. Their sovereign was absent from his do. fderacy, 1

.

minions; by the ill condua of his miniflers he had lobt, H oly
the esteem and affeEtion of his fubjeAs; the people ex-.Jnto.
afperated by many injuries had taken arms, though with-
out concert, almolf by general consent; they were ani-
mated with fury capable of carrying them to the molt

violent

BOK III violent extremes; the royal treasury was exhaufed ; the

L-~v-' kingdom destitute of troops; and the government corn.

mitrc-d to a fliailger, of great virtue indled, but of ab!i-
ties uinqual to Iuchl a trust. Ihe first care of Padiila, and
the othcr popuilar leaders, who observed and determined
to improve thlele circumnlaiincs, was to eflati.ih some fornm
of union (r :{ici,,ti.l among the ma!conients, that th(e
nri;lh t '- viih .Ic.ter I gu!.ritr, and purs'ue one common
eT,; and s

; i!he diL(.rin.t cities hadl been prompted to

t:kc ,i; m. L; the llnc ni)ti aes, and were accuftoried to
c-o!'-li( rl thlCm! l\\ a. 1 :iir:;.t bcdy trom the rell of ti,e

' ',th. ey ('I i t l

I !i diii Clr. A general convcn-

ti(n ; v'. ;;;rniid to i e hild at A\ ila. Deputies appeared
th( re illn n:,nc otf lminl all the ciries entitled to have re-
p!efcrl.:i i\mc itr the C'rtes. '1lhcy all bound thcmfelve byv
lolemn oathl, to live and (ice iln tlie eirvice of the king, ai!
in dcftnie ctr Ie p;ivlieCes of their order ; and aflumini
the name of the holy ':ir:.I or ;rTociation, proceeded to
deliberate coitcrnng thle state of the nation, and the pro.

They dir- per method of rcelTreing its pricv.anccs. The first that
Ira;m Airi- naturally presented itfcit, was the nomination of a foreiirer
ny.U:ho- 0to be regent; this they declared with one voice to be i

violation of the fund:amental laws of the kingdom, and
rcfolved to fend a deputation of their members to Adiian,
requiring him, in their name, to lay aside all the tn-
signs of his office, and to abflain for the ft:ure from
the exercise of a jurifdiaion which they had pronounced
illeeal [].

etr pe,. i- WVHILE they were preparing to execute this bold rcfo.
o..n.. Queen lution, Padilla accomplished an enterprize of the grcacfit
,-.^'ai. advantage to the cause. After relieving Segovia, he

marched suddenly to Tordefillas, the place where the un-
happy queen Joanna had resided since the death of her
husband, and, being favoured by the inhabitants, was ad-
mitted into the town, and became malter of her person,
tor the security of which Adrian had negleled to take pro-
per precautions [1I. Padilla waited imrmediately upon the
qnecn, and accofling her with that profound refpeEt, which
she exaRed from the few persons whom she deigned to ad-
mit into her prelence, acquainted her at large with the

[k] P. Mart. Ep. 691. [I] Vita dell' Imper. Carl. V. dall Als.
UULU. Ven. 1509. p. 67. Miniaa, Contia. p. 17.

mirerablc

nirerable condition of her Cafilian fulhjecs under the go- BooK III.
vernment of her son, who, being destitute of experience -v^ '
himelif, permitted his foreign minilcers to treat them with
filch rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in defence
of the liberties of their country. The Queen, as if she
had been awakened out of a lethatgy, expressed great
altoni(hment at what he said, and told him, -that as ihe
had never heard, till that moment, of the death of het fa-
ther, or known the sufferings of her people, no blame
could be imputed to her, but that now fihe would take care
to provide a fifficicnt remedy; and in the mean time,
added ihe, let it be your concern to do what is necessary
for the public welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a
conclusion agreeable to his wilhcs, miltook this lucid in-
terval of reason for a perfect return of that faculty; and
acquainting the Junto with what had happened, adviled
them to remove to Tordefillas, and to hold their meetings
in that place. This was instantly done; but though Jo-
anna received very graciously an address of the Junto, be-
feeching her to take upon her the government of the king-
dom, and in token of her compliance admitted all the de-
puties to kifs her hand; though she was present at a tour-
nament held on that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied
with both there ceremonies, which were conduaed with
great magnificence, in order to please her, the Goon re-
lapsed into her former melancholy and sullenness, and could
never be brought, by any arguments or intreaties, to
sign any one paper ne,.effary towards the dilpatch of
business [m].

THE Junto, concealingias much as possible this laRd cir- Carry on

cumftance, carried on all their deliberations in her name; gov"rnm'ent
and as the Castilians, wvho idolized the memory of Isabel- lr nam
la, retained a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no
sooner was it known that she had consented to assume the
reins of government, than the people expressed the most
universal and immoderate joy ; and believing her recovery
to be compleat, afclibed it to a miraculous interposition of
heaven, in order to rescue their country from the opprel-
sion of foreigners. The Junto, conscious of the reputa- nd deprive
tion and power they had acquired, by seeming to at under AlriAn t"
the royal authority, were no longer iatisfied with requiring l
Adrian to resign the office of regent; they detached Psa
dilla to Valladolid with a considerable body of troops, or-

[m] Sandov. 164. P. Mart. p. 685, 686.

dering

Boor IllIdering him to seize such members of the council as were

-r~-v -' still in that city, to conduct them to Tordefillas, and to

bring away the feals of the kingdom, the public archives,
and treasury books. Padilla, who was received by the ci-
tizens' as the deliverer of his country, executed his corn
miflion with great exatnefs; permitting Adrian, how-
ever, still to reside in Valladolid, though only as a private
person, and without any shadow of power [n].

The Empe- THE Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of thcfe
roralainied. tranrations were transmitted while he was fill in Slanders,

was sensible of his own imprudence and that of his mini-
fters in having defpiled too long the murmurs and remon-
ftrances of the Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern,
a kingdom the most valuable of any he poffefTed, and in
which lay the strength and sinews of his power, just ready
to disown his authority, and on the point of being plunged
in all the miseries of civil war. But though his presence
might have averted this calamity, he could not,, at that
time, visit Spain without endangering the imperial crown,
and allowing the French King full leisure to execute his

Hrs me«- ambitious schemes. The only points now to be deliberated
cures with upon, were whether he should attempt to gain the male- .
rcfpea to contents by indulgence and conceflions, or prepare direcly
the male-
content. to suppress them by force; and he relolved to make trial of

the former, while at the fame time, if that should fail of
success, he prepared for the latter. For this purpose, he
issued circular letters to all the cities of Castile, exhorting
them in most gentle terms, and with assurances of full par-
don, to lay down their arms; he promised such cities as
had continued faithful not to exaa from them the subsidy
granted in the late Cortes, and offered the fame favour to
those who returned to their duty; he engaged that no of-
fice Ihould be conferred for the future upon any but native
Castilians. On the other hand, he wrote to the nobles,
exciting them to appear with vigour in defence of their
own rights, and those of the crown, against the exorbitant
claims of the commons; he appointed the high admiral,
Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high conflable of Castile,
Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of great abilities and
influence, regents of the kingdom in conjuncion with
Adrian; and he gave them full power and inltru&ions,
if the obitinacy of the malccontents ibould render it

[n] Sandov 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

necessary,

necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by force of Boo': IIL
arms Lo]. J-

'THE conceflions lie was willing to make, which, at the The large

time of his leaving Spain, would have ful!y fat:ified the remon-f
reople, came now too late to produce any efftd. The the Junto
lunto, relying on the unanimity with which the nation sub- concerning
nitted to their authority, elated wi; h the success which hi- their geriev
therto had accompanied all their undertakings, and feeing
no military force collected to defeat or obftru& their dc-
signs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of political
abuces. They had been employed for some time in pre-
paring a remonfrance, containing a large enunmcrauion not
only of the grievances, of which they craved redress, but of
such new regulations as they thought necefllary for the fe-
cirity of their liberties. T'his remonflrance, which is di-
vived into many articles relating to all the differenr mem-
bers of which the confli:r tion was composed, as well as
to the various departments in the administration of govel n-
ment, furnishes us with more authentic evidence concern-
ing the intentions of the Junto, than can be drawn from
the testimony of the latter Spanish hifoorians, who lived in
times when it became fashionable, and even neceflary, to
represent the condut of the malecontents in the worf:
lPght, and as flowing from the worst motives. After a
long preamble concerning the various calamities under
which the nation groaned, and the errors ard corruption in
government to which theef were to be imputed, they take
notice of the exemplary patience wherewith the people
had endured them, till fclf-prcfervation, and the duty
which they owed to their country, had obliged them to as-
femble, in order to provide in a legal manner for their own
safety, and that of the constitution: For this purpose,
they demanded that the King would be plea'ed to return
to his Spanish dominions, and reside there, as all their
former monarchs had done; that he would not marry iut
with consent of the Cortes; that if he should be obliged
at any time to leave the kingdom, it ihall not be lawful to
appoint any foreigner to be regent ; that the present no-
mination of Cardinal Adrian to that office shall inflantly be
declared void; that he would not, at his return, bring
along with him any Flemings or other firangers; that no
foreign troops (hall, on any pretence whatever, be intro-
duced into the kingdom; that none but natives shall be

[o] P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii c.6. p. las.
VQL. I. Ee capabfq

BOOK III. capable of holding any office or benefice either in church
'I-^- or slate; that no foreigners (hall be naturalized; that free

quarters shall not be granted to soldiers, nor to those of the
kingts houfhold, for any longer time than fix days, and
that only when the court is in a progress; that all tic
taxes ihall be reduced to the fame state they were in
at the death of Queen Isabella; that all alienations es
the royal demesnes or revenues since that Queen's death
shall be resumed; that all new offices created since
that period be abolished; that the subsidy granted by
the late Cortes in Galicia shall not be exaEed; that
in all future Cortes each city shall fend one reprefenta-
tive of the clergy, one of the gentry, and ore of the com-
mons, each to be eleced by his own order; that the
crown shall not influence or direc any city with regard to
the choice of its representatives; that no member of ti.c
Cortes ihall receive an office or pension from the king,
either for himself or for any of his family, under pain c:
death, and confiscation of his goods; that each city or
community shall pay a competent salary to its reprefenta-
tives for his maintenance during his attendance on the
Cortes; that the Cortes {hall assemble once in three yea'r
at leat, whether summoned by the King or not, and {hall
then inquire into the observation of the articles now agreed
upon, and deliberate concerning public affairs; that the
rewards which have been given or promised to any of the
members of the Cortes in Galicia, shall be revoked; that
no gold, silver, or jewels, shall, upon pain of death, bc
sent out of the kingdom; that judges shall have fixed fa-
laries afligned them, and /hall not receive any (hare of the
fines and forfeitures of persons condemned by them; that
no grant of the goods of persons accused lhall be valid, if
given before sentence was pronounced against them; that
all privileges which the nobles have at any time obtained,
to the prejudice of the commons, shall be revoked; that
the government of cities or towns (hall not be put into the
hands of the nobles; that the lands of the nobles /hall be
fubje& to all public taxes, in the fame manner as those of
the commons; that an enquiry be made into the conducd
of those who have been intrusted with the management
of the royal patrimony since the accefflon of Ferdinand;
and if the King do not within thirty days appoint person!
properly qualified for that service, it shall be lawfiul so
the Cortes to nominate them; that Indulgences shall no'
be preached or disperscd in the kingdom until the caufc o

publishii'i

publishing them be examined and approved of by the Boot Ill.
Cortes; that all the money arising from the sale of Indul- '-v-
gences, shall be faithfully employed in carrying on war
against the Infidels; that such prelates as do not rcfide in
their dioceses fix months in the year, shall forfeit their re-
venues during the time they are absent; that the ecclefi-
aftical judges and their officers shall not exas greater fees
than those which are paid in the secular courts; that the
present archbishop of Toledo, being a foreigner, be com-
pelled to resign that dignity, which shall be conferred upon
a Cafilian; that the king (hall ratify and hold as good
service done to him and to the kingdom all the proceedings
of the Junto, and pardon any irregularities which the cities
may have committed from an excess of zeal in a good
cause; that he shall promise and swear, in the molt solemn
manner, to observe all there articles, and on no occasion
attempt either to elude or to repeal them; and that he
shall never solicit the Pope, or any other prelate, to grant
him a dispensation or absolution from this oath and
promise [P].

SuCH were the chief articles presented by the Junto to The fpiiit

their sovereign. As the feudal inflitutions in the several king- Ofhibterty
dorns of Europe were originally the fame, the genius of breched.
those governments which arose fiom them bore a firong
resemblance to each other, and the regulations which the
Castilians attempted to eftabliih on this occasion, differ little
from those which other nations laboured to procure in
their firuggles with their monarchs for liberty, The
grievances complained of, and the remedies proposed by
the Englifl commons, in their contests with the princes of
the house of Stuart, particularly resemble those upon
which the Junto now infifled. But the Spaniards had al-
ready acquired ideas of their own liberty and independence,
had formed bold and generous sentiments concerning go-
vernment, and discovered an extent of political knowledge
to which the English did not attain till more than a century
afterwards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit of re-

formation among the Caflilians, hitherto unrestrained by
authority, and emboldened by success, became too impe-
tuous, and prompted the Junto to propose innovations,
which, by alarming the other members of the conflitution,
proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, who inflead of

[p] Sandov, ho6. P. Mart. Ep. 6lS.

E c 2 obflrufing,

Boos III obflruaing, had favoured or connived at their proceeding.,
'-3V-.' while they confined their demands of redress to such

grievances as had been occasioned by the King's want of
experience, and by the imprudence and rapaciousness of

Irritates the his foreign miniiers, were filed with indignation when
nobles, they began to touch the privileges of their order, and

plainly saw that the mcafures of the commons tended no
less to break the power of the ariflocracy, than to limit
the prerogativets of the trown. The resentment which
they had conceived on account of Adrian's promotion to
the regency, abated considerably upon the Emperor's raising
the conflable and admiral to a joint power with him in
that office; and as their pride and dignity were ess hurt
by fuffcring the prince to possess an extensive prerogative,
than by admitting the high pretensions of the people,
they determined to give their sovereign the afliflance which
he had demanded of them, and began to assemble their
vassals for that purpose.

The depu- THE Junto, meanwhile, expeaed with impatience the
ies of the Emperor's answer to their remonfirance, which they had
not',refent appointed some of their number to present. The mem-
their remon- bers intrufled with this commission set out immediately for
ttrance. Germany; but having received, at different places, certain

intelligence from court, that they could not venture to ap-
pear there without endangering their lives, they flopped
ihort in their journey, and acquainted the Junto of the in-
formation which had been given them [Il. This excited
such violent paflions, as transported the whole party be-
yond all bounds of prudence, or of moderation. That a
Cafilian King should deny his fubjeds access into his pre-
fence, or refute to lifien to their humble petitions, was re-
presented as an a& of tyranny so unprecedented and into-
lerable, that nothing now remained but with arms in their
hands to drive away that ravenous band of foreigners which
encompafled the throne, who, after having devoured the
wealth of the kingdom, found it neceflary to prevent the
cries of an injured people from reaching the ears of their

Violent pr- sovereign. Many insisted warmly on approving a motion

siti,. of . Charle·
I" uO'tof which had formerly been made, for depriving Charles,

during the life of his mother, of the regal titles and au-
thority, which had been too rashly conferred upon him,
from a false supposition of her total inability for govern-
ment. Some proposed to provide a proper person to afift

t[] Sadov. 143.

her

her in the adminifiration of public affairs, by marryingBooK III.
the Queen to the Prince of Calabria, the heir of thev'
Aragonefe Kings of Naples, who had been detained in
prison since the time that Ferdinand had difpoffeffed his
anceflors of their crown. All agreed that, as the hopes
of obtaining redrets and security merely by presenting
their requests to their sovereign, had kept them too long
in a slate of ination, and prevented them from taking
advantage of the unanimity with which the nation declar-
ed in their favour, it was now necelTary to colleA their
whole force, and to exert themiclves with vigour, in op-
posing this tatal combination of the king and nobles agair.f
their liberties [m].

ITH Y soon took the field with twerty thousand men. Taketbe

Violent disputes arose concerning the command of thisfield.
army. Padilla, the darling of the people and soldiers,
was the only person whom they thought worthy of this
honour. But Don Pedro de Gircn, the eldest ion of the
Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman of the fifll order,
having lately joined the commons out of private resent-
ment againit the lmperor, the refpcE due to his birth,
together with a secret desire of di4.ippointing Padilla, of
'vho!e popularity many of the Junto had become jealous,
procured him the office of general; though he soon gave
them a fatal proof that he poffelffd neither the experience,
the abilities, nor the fleadinefs which that important lta-
tion required.

THE Regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as the The reienta

place of rendezvous for their troops, which, though far and nobie¢
inferior to those of the commons in number, excelledrm'
them greatly in discipline and in valour. They had
drawn a considerable body of regular and veteran infan-
try out of Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the
chief strength of their army, confinted mostly of gentle-
men accustomed to the military life, and animated with
the martial spirit peculiar to their order in that age. The
infantry of the junto was formed enilrel' of citizens and
mechanics, little acquainted with the ule of arms. The
small body of cavalry they had been able to raise, was
compored of persons of ignoble birth, and perfec firan-
gers to the service into which they entered. The charac-
ter of the generals differed no lets than that of their troops.
The royalifls were commanded by the Condo de Haro,

[m] P. Mart, Ep. 488.

E e 3 the

BOOK III. the constable's eldest son, an officer of great experience,
~'-- -' and of distinguished abilities.
Imprudence GIRON marched with his army direcly to Riofeco,
and ill fuc-
cess of the and leizing the villages and passes around it, hoped that
general of the rgyaliits would be obliged either to surrender for want
the Junto. of provisions, or to fight with disadvantage before all

their troops were assembled. But he had not the abilities,
nor his troops the patience and dilcipline necessary for the
execution of such a scheme. The Condc de Haro found
little difficulty in condu&ing a considerable reinforce-
ment through all his ports into the town; and Giron de-
fpairing of being able to reduce it, advanced fuddenlv'to
Villa-panda, a place belonging to the Constable, in
which the enemy had their chief magazine of provision,.
By this ill-judged motion, he left Tordefillas open to the
Decemb. 5. royalifls, whom the Conde de Haro led thither in the

night, with the utmost lecrecy and dispatch; and attack-
ing the town, in which Giron had left no other garrison
than a regiment of pliefts railed by the biffop of Zamo-
ra, he, by break of day, forced Ais way into it after a
desperate resistance, became master of the Queen's person,
took prisoners many members of the Junto, and recovered
the great feal, with the cther ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junto loft all the reputation and

authority which they derived from seeming to aa by the
Queen's commands; such of the nobles as had hithertq
been wavering or undetermined in their choice, now
joined the regents with all their forces; and an universal
conflernation seized the partizans of the commons. This
was much increased by the suspicions they began to enter-
tain of Giron, whom they loudly accused of having be-
trayed Tordefillas to the enemy; and though that charge
seems to have been destitute of foundation, the fuccels of
the royalists being owing to Giron's ill-condua rather
than to his treachery, he so entirely loft credit with his
party, that he resigned his commiflion, and retired to one
of his castles [n].

The Junto SU C H members of the Junto as had escaped the ene-
adhere to my's hands at Tordefilas, fled to Valladolid; and PS it
bheir syRem. would have required long time to supply the places ot

those who were prisoners, by a new elecion, they made
choice among themselves of a small number of persons to
whom they committed the supreme direaion of affairs.

[n] Mifctllhaeow Trost by Dr. Micd. GCdder, vol. ip. 17 8.

Their

Their army, which grew stronger every day by the ar-BooK II.
rival of troops from different parts of the kingdom, '--v~
marched likewise to Valladolid; and Padilla being ap-
pointed commander in chief, the spirits of the soldiery
revived, and the whole party forgetting the late misfor-
tune, continued to express the fame ardent zeal for the
liberties of their country, and the fame implacable ani-
nofity againlf their oppressors.

WHAT they flood most in need of, was monev to pay Thei, rrwpc

their troops. A great part of the current coin had been di'nt, f'r
carried out of the kingdom by the Flemings; the ftatedn ra'fig '
taxes levied in times of peace were inconsiderable; com-
merce of every kind being interrupted by the war, the
urm wvhich they yielded decreased daily; and the Junto
were afraid of disgusting the people by burdening them
with new impositions, to which, in that age, they were
little accustomed. But from this difficulty thev were tx-
ticated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's wife, a wo-
man of noble birth, of great abilities, of boundlcls ambi-
tion, and animated with the molt ardent zeal in support
of the cause of the Junto. She, with a boldnces superior
to those superstitious fears which often influence her sex,
ptopofed to seize all the rich and magnificent ornaments
in the cathedral of Toledo; but left that a&ion, by i:.
appearance of impiety, might offend the people, she and
her retinue marched to the church in solemn procellion,
in mourning habits, with tears in their eyes, and beating
their breasts, and falling on their knees, implored the
pardon of the faints whose shrines she was about to violate.
By this artifice, which screened her from the imputation
of sacrilege, and persuaded the people that necellity and
zeal for a good cause had constrained her, though with
relu&ance, to venture upon this adion, she procured a
considerable supply of money for the Junto [o]. The re-
gents, no less at a loss how to maintain their troops, the
revenues of the crown having either been difllipated by the
Flemings, or being seized by the commons, were obliged
to take the Queen's jewels, and the plate belonging to
the nobility, and apply them to that purpose; and when
these failed, they obtained a small fum by way of loan
from the King of Portugal [PI.

THE nobility discovered great unwillingness to proceed Lore tint
to extremities with the Junta. They were animated with tionSwi,'

the nobility.

[l Stndov. 308. Didt. do Blyle, Art. Padilla.
IP P. Mart. Ep. 7 8.

lEe 4 no

BOOK lII.no less hatred than the commons against the Fleming,;
-v-'-they approved much of several articles in the remon.

firance; they thought the juncture favourable, not only
for redressing past grievances, but for rendering the cor-
ftitution more perles and secure by new regulatior,;
they were afraid that while the two orders of which the
leIiflature was compoled, wafted each other's strength by
mutual hoflilities, the crown would rife to power on th-
ruin or weakr.es of both, and encroach no lets on the in-
dependence of the nobles, than on the privileges of the
commons. To this disposition were owing the frequent
overtures of peace which the regents made to the Juntc,
and the continual negotiations they carried on during the
progress of their military operations. Nor were ite
terms w hich they offered unreasonable; for on condition
that the Junto would pass from a few articles moi fubvc-.
five of the royal authority, or inconfiflent with the rights
of the nobility, they engaged to procure the Emperc;'
consent to their other demands, which, if he, through
the irfiuence of evil counSellors, should refute, several ct
the nobles prcmifed to join with them in order to extcnr
it [q]. Such divisions, however, prevailed among the
members of the Junto, as prevented their deliberatite
calmly, or judging with prudence. Several of the cities
which had entered into the confederacy, were filled va;h
that mean jealcufy arnd diiruft cf each other, which ri-
valfip in commerce or in grandeur is apt to inspire; th1e
constable, by his influence and promises, had prevail(d
on the inhabitants of Burgos to abandon the Junto, ard
other noblemen had shaken the fidelity of some of the l'-
fir cities; no person had ari!en among the commor.s oi
such superior abilities or elevation of mind, as to acqtlire
the direaion of their affairs; Padilla, their general,
was a man of popular qualities, but dillrufled for that
reason by those of highest rank who adhered to the Junn;
the conduct of G iron led the people to view with fufpici-
on every perfin of noble birth who joined their party; il
that the firongelt marks of irresolution, mutual diftrtIf,
and mediocrity of genius, appeared in all their procc-ed
ings at this time. After many consultations held conccrn-
ing the terms proposid by the regents, they suffered thrm-
filves to be so carried away by resentment against the no-
bility, that rejecing all thoughts of accommodation,
[q] P.Mart. Ep. 695, 713. Grddcs'e Traots, i. i6i.

ihco

they threatened to strip them of the crown-lards, whlicl Boor 1I!.
they or their ancestors had u!urpcd, a..d to re-annex them - '-
to the royal domain: And on this pt'cpojterous ichcmn-,
which would at once have annihilated all the liberties for
which they had been struggling, by rcndering the Ki:,'
cf Castile absolute and independent on teiir pecple, tht.v
v.ere so intent that they exclaimed - tiii les vthcinltn.-
acainft the exactions of the toreign nr.i.-ircrs, ili.n
a.rainft the immense power aild wealth of the nobils, and
seered to hope that they mivht m ake pc.cce with Cla:let,
hv offering to enrich him wvith thfir u-oils.

'rTE success which l'adilla had n:,-i with in several re.atc' .

small encounters, and in reduct.i ioTne incoIfi-i,'la.)c !h,, '."al'
tovwr,, khelped to precipitate then into tils meafur,, 11'.- im ,'i n-
in:g them v;ilh such corfidcnce in tlic valour of thci; -. ..;.
troops, that they hoped for an cafy viac.ry ever tihe ro,-
alifis. Padilla, th:nt his army mi;;ht not rcrrn-in ia ctiavr,
while finished with gccd fcrture, l:id ficgr to Tort.Ileba-
ton, a place of greater firength aid iniportancc thai any
he had hitherto attacked, and which was de!citri-d by a
sufficient garrison; and '.hcuzh :he bcfieged miade a cdec-
peratc resistance, and the admiral attempted tc relieve
them, he took the town by storm and gase it up to lhe March l,
plundered bx his soldiers. If he had marched ;nlita;ly Isz'.
with hic victoricus army to Tordefilias the head quartzrs
of the royalul.s, he could scarce have tailed of making an
effctuall impreflion on their tioops, furpriz.cd at the rlifi-
ncis of his operaticr.s, and far from bcinlg of 'ucc.t
tlrength to give him battle. Eill the hicklcneis ar.d ira-Impnrudence
prudence of the junto prevented his taking this flep. In- o0 t.e r
cpahle alike of carrying on war, or of making peace,
they liflcned again to overtures of accmunmodation, ae'd
even agreed to a short fufpcnficn of arms. Ttis p:.t. i: -
lion terminated in nothing; but wiile it wvs carryin. on,
many of Padilla's loldicrs, unacquiainted witl the rrftrairil
of diecipline, went off with the booty they lihud cl ;,t
''orrelohaton; and others, vwe:ri'd out by the ur:n':l'l
length of the campaign, de'crtcd t]. T'hc ConmalIc icn
had leisure to affemile his forces at Burgos, and to pir-
pare every tlhing for marching, and as loon as ihe truce
expired, he cffeced a jucttion with the Coni:d de Iaro,
in spite of all Padilla's eflorts to prevent it. Th:.v ad.
vanced immcdiat(ly towards Torrelobaton, and Padilla

[i] Sandov. 33g.

finding

BOOK III. finding the number of his troops so diminished that he
'- ---- durlt not risk a battle, attempted to retreat to Toro,

which if he could have accomplished, the invasion of Na-
varre at that junEture by the French, and the neceflity
which the regents mull have been under of detaching
men to that kingdom, might have saved him from dan-

Thle noblcs ger. But Haro, 1cnfiblc how fatal the consequences
attlac the would be of luffc;ing him to escape, marched with such
army oi 'ie rapiditv at the head of his cavalry, that he came up
AUpil t3 with him near Vilia!ar, and without waiting for his in-

fanrtrv, advanced to the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued
and disheartened by their precipitate retreat, which they
could not ditlinguifh from a flight, happened at that time
to be palling over a ploughed field, on which iuch a vio-
lent rain had fallen, that the soldiers funk almost to the
knees at ever,' kep, and remained exposed to the fire of
obme field-iicces which the royalists had brought along
with them. All there circumstances so disconcerted and
intimidated raw soldiers, that without facing the enemy,

.n1i -ifeat or making any resistance, they fled in the utmost confufi-
it. cn. Padilla exerted himself with extraordinary courage

and aEtivity in order to rally them, though in vain; fear
rendering them deaf both to his threats and intreaties:
Upon which, finding matters irretrievable, and resolving
not to survive the disgrace of that day, and the ruin of
his party, he ruffed into the thickef of the enemy; but
being wounded and dismounted, he was taken prisoner.
His principal officers shared the fame fate; the common
soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the nobles being too
generous to kill men who threw down their arms [].

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser Padilla

to linger long in expe&ation of what should befall him.
Next dav he was condemned to lose his head, though
without any regular trial, the notoriety of the crime be-
ing supposed sufficient to supercede the formality of a le-

padilla, gal process. He was led instantly to execution, together
their gpne- with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis Maldonada, the
dlh ru t former commander of the Segovians, and the latter of

the troops of Salamanca. Padilla viewed the approach
of death with calm but undaunted fortitude; and when
Bravo, his fellow-fuffeler, expressed some indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked him,

It] Sandov. 341, S&c. P. MIrt. Ep. 71o. Miniins, Contin. p s6.
.Epitome de Ia vids y Hechos del Emper. Cilof V. per D. Juan Anton. de
yera y Zunigs, 4te. Madr. 1617. r. i1.

by

by observing, " That yesterday was the time to have dif- BooKs IL
played the ipirit of gentlemen, this day to die with the --v
meekness of Chriflians." Being permitted to write to his
wife and to the community of Toledo, the place of his
nativity, he addressed the former with a manly and virtu-
ous tenderners, and the latter with the exultation natural to
one who confidered himself as a martyr for the liberties ,of
his country u]. After this, he submitted quietly to his

[C] The firain of these letters is so elonuent and high spirited that I have
:i^i;iated them for the entertainment of my readc:,.

The Letter of Drn YJab Padlla to i;l Wife.

" Ir your grief did not affict me more than my own death, I hliuli

.rein mrnyi i perfectly happy. For the end of life being certain to ail :-en,
·he Almighty confers a mark of diftinguifning favour upon that ;,e on, 'r
v. hom he appoints a death fIch as mine, which though lamented b) .ry,
. nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would requi,e m re time th.an I
r iw have to write any thing that could afford you conlolation. Tlht my
inemnies will not grant me, tior dn I wish to delay the recep:ion or that
crown which I ihpe to enjoy. You mar bewail your own lol', but not
my death, which, being so bonourabie, ought not to be lamented bv in).
My foul, for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to you. You will re-
ceive it, as the thing in this world which you valued mofl. I dn not wile
to my father Pcro Lopez, because I dare not, for though I have Sfh .n mIr-
lelf to be his ion in daring to lose my llr-, 1: ave not been the heir ot his
good fortune. I will not attempt to fay any thing rmre, that I may not
tire the executioner who waits for me, and that I may not excite a ftfpici-
on, that in order to prolong my life, I lcngthen oui my letter. My ser-
vant Soffa, an eye witness, and to whom 1 have communicated my moll
Icc:et thoughts, wi!l inform you of what I cannot now wite; and tl.us I
relt, expecting the inltrumcnt of your giicf, and of mn dliverance."

Jis Letter to the City of Toledo.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole worl.', free

from the time of the mighty Goths ; to thee, who by Ihedding the hlood of
fiuangers, as well as thy own blood, har recovered liberty for thyftl; anld
thy neighbouring cities. Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives inlor-
mation, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient vittoriea are to be rc-
frelhed. If fate hath not permitted my alionr to be placed among your
fuccefhful and celebrated exploits, the fault hath been in my ill fortune not
in my good will. Thii I requell of thee as of a mother, to accept, fin.-e
God hath given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than that which i
am now to relinquish. I rai more solicitous about thy good opinion than
about my own life. The (liftings of fortune which never f(tnd fiill, are
many. But this I fee with infinite consolation, that I, (lie 1 as of thy
children, susser death for thee; and that thou halt nurl'F. at thy breallt
such as may take vengeance for my wrorga. Many tongue, will . tlate the
manner of my death, of which I am fill ignorant, though I know it to be
near. My end will teRify what was my delire. My foul I recommend
to thee aa to the patronefa of Chrifiianity. Of my body I fay nothing.
for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for at this very moment, I
feel the knife at my throat with greater dread of thy difplcafure, than &p-
p&chenfion of my ovn lain." Sandov. Hilt. vol. i. r, 478.

fate.

BooK 111. fate. Most of the Spanfih historians, accustomed to ideas

o-"vo""~ of government, and of regal power, very different from
those upon whicih ti acctad, have been so eager to teflify
their disapprobation of the cause in which he was engaged,
that the; Ia'e negleic'd, or have been afraid to do juflice
to his virtues; and by blackening his memory, have en-
dcavoured to deprive him of that pity, which is seldom
denied to ili:ififiots flffirers.

Ruin of the TH: ictorv at Villabar proved as cecifive as it was
l'arti. coinpleat. 'alladolid, the n-oft zealous of all the affoci-

ated ,i!, . ..: i ts gates immediately to the conque-
r.: , :;: . 'b ;.e.tcd with great clemency by the Re-
gents, M dciina del Campo, Segovia, and many other ci-
tiet iiloo:eii its exanple. This sudden dissolution of a
confederacy, formed not upon flight difguifs or upon
trifling molives, into which the whole body of the peo-
ple had entered, and which had been allowed time to ac-
quire some degree of order and confiflence, by eflablifhing
a regular plan of government, is the strongest proof of
the inability of its leaders, or of some secret discord reign-
ing among the members. Though part of the army by
which they had been subdued, was obliged, a few days
after the battle, to march towards Navarre, in order to
check the progress of the French in that kingdom, no-
thing could prevail on the dejeced commons of Castile to
take arms again, and to embrace such a favourable oppor-
tunity of acquiring those rights and privileges for which

padillts they had appeared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone,
wic defends animated hy Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow,
TotldciitIl who, inftcad of bewailing her hulband with a womanish

sorrow, prepared to revenge his death, and to profecutc
that cause in defence of which he had suffered, mufl be
excepted. Kefpea for her sex, or admiration of her
courage and abilities, as well as sympathy with her mif-
fortunes, and veneration for the memory of her husband,
secured her the fame ascendant over the people which he
had pofltffed. The prudence and vigour with which (he
aced, jiltified the confidence they placed in her. She
wrote to the French general in Navarre, encouraging him
to invade Caflile by the offer of powerful afliftance. She
endeavoured by her letters and eminfaries to revive the fpi-
rit and hopes of other cities. She raised soldiers, and ex-
*ted a great fum from the clergy belonging to the cathe-

dral

dral to defray the expence of keeping them on foot Lx]. BOOK III
She employed every artifice that could interest or inflame '--V
the populace. For this purpose she ordered crucifixes to
be used by her troops instead of colours, as if they had
been at war with infidels, and enemies of religion; she
marched through the firects of Toledo with her son, a
young child, clad in deep mourning, feated on a mule,
having a flandard carried before him representing the man-
ner of his father's execution []. By all thefc means the
kept the minds of the people in such perpetual agitatitun
as prevented their pafions from subsiding, and rendered
them insensible of the dangers to which they were expos-
ed by standing alone in oppofilinn to the royal authority.
While the army was employed in Navarre, the Regents
were unable to attempt the reducion of Toledo by force;
and all their endeavours either to diminish Donna'Maria's
credit with the people, or to gain her by large promises
and the solicitations of her brother the Marquis de Mon-
deair, proved ineffecual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army returned into
Cafile, and inverted Toledo. Even this made no impref-
sion on the intrepid and obfinate courage of Donna Ma-
ria. She defended the town with vigour, her troops beat
the royalirs in several sallies, and no progress was made
towards reducing the place, till the clergy, whom ihe had
highly offended by invading their property, having receiv-
ed information of the death of William de Croy archbi-
1hop of Toledo, whose poffeflion of that fee was their
chief grievance, and that he Emperor had named a Ca-
filian to fucceed-him, began to turn against her. They
persuaded the people that the had acquired such influence
over them by the force of cnc;iartments, that she was
allifted by a familiar demon which attended her in the
form of a Negro-maid, a:;d that by its fugefltions she re-
gulated every part us her condua [4. The credulous
multitude, whom their impatience of a long blockade,
and despair of obtaining succours either from the cities
formerly in confederacy with them, or from the French,
rendered desirous of peace, took arms against her, and
driving her out of the city surrendered it to the royalilss. oaobe, s.
She retired to the citadel, which (he defended with amaz-

xl P. Mart. Ep. 717.

S]rdov 375.
a] P. Mart. Ep. 717.

iQg

BooK III. ing fortitude four months longer; and when reduced to
-_- the las extremities, she made her escape in disguise, and
Feb. 1t, fled to Portugal, where The had many relations [»].
Fat:dl s-(3 UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tranquillity
or thiu civil weas re-eftablifled in Callile; and this bold attempt of the
a'-. commons, like all unsuccessful infurreaions, contributed

to confirm and extend the power of the crown, which it
was intended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes still
continued to make a part of the Castilian constitution,
and were summoned to meet whenever the King flood in
need of money; but inflead of adhering to their ancient
and cautious form of examining and redrefling public
grievances, before they proceeded to grant any fuppiy,
the more courtly custom of voting a donative in the first
place was introduced, and the Sovereign having obtained
all he wanted, never allowed them to enter into any fcru-
tiny, or to attempt any reformation injurious to his autho-
rity. The privileges which the cities had enjoyed were
gradually circumscribed or abolifled; their commerce be-
gan from this period to decline; and becoming less weal-
thy and less populous, they lofl that power and influence
which they had acquired in the Cortes.

The rro- WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities of civil
greli ol the war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn by intestine corn-
inrtfqios motions fill more violent. The afrociation which had
la Valencia.

Vcnabeen formed in the city of Valencia in the year one thou-

sand five hundred and twenty, and which was distinguish-
ed by the name of the Germanada, continued to fubfif
after the Emperor's departure from Spain; and the mem-
bers of it, upon pretexts of defending the csafts against
the descents of the Corsairs of Barbary, and under fan&i-
on of that permiflion, which Charles had raMlly granted
them, refused to lay down their arms. But as the griev-
ances, which the Valencians aimed at redrefling, pro-
ceeded from the arrogance and cxafions of the nobility,
rather than from any unwarrantable exercise of the royal
prerogative, their resentment turned chiefly against the
former. As soon as they were allowed the use of arms,
and became conscious of their own Rrength, they grew
impatient to take vengeance of their oppressors. They
drove the nobles out of moRs of the cities, plundered their
houses, wafted their lands, and assaulted their caltles.
They then proceeded to eleE thirteen persons, one from

[a] Sandov. 375. P. Mart. p. 754. Ferrer, viii. 563.

each

each company of tradesmen established in Valencia, and Boo III.
committed the adminifiration of government to them, -v--
under pretext that they would reform the laws, cflablith
one uniform mode of dispensing juffice without partiality,
or regard to the diftin&ion of ranks, and thus restore men
to some degree of their original equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in felf-defence.

HIofilities began, and were carried on with all the ran-
cour, with which resentment at oppression inspired the one
party, and the idea of insulted dignity animated the other.
As no perlbn of honourable binrt, or of liberal education
joined the Germanada, the councils as well as troops of
the confederacy were conduaed by low mechanics, who
acquired the confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by
the fierceness of their zeal, and the extravagance of their
proceedings. Among such men, the laws introduced in
civilized nations, in order to reflrain or moderate the
violence of war, were unknown or despised; and they
committed the wildeit aAs of cruelty and outrage.

THE Emperor occupied with suppressing the infurrec-

tion in Castile, which more immediately threatened the
subversion of his power and prerogative, was unable to
give much attention to the tumults in Valencia, and left
the nobility of that kingdom to fight their own battles. His
viceroy, the Conde de Melito, had the supreme command
of the forces which the nobles raised among their vassals.
The Germanada carried on the war during the years 1520
and 21, with a moreperfevering courage, than could have
been expected from a body to tumultuary, under the
condu& of such leaders. They defeated the nobility in
several a&ions, which, though not considerable, were ex-
tremely {harp. They repulsed them in their attempts to
reduce different towns. But the nobles, by their superior
Ikill in war, and at the head of troops more accuflomed to
service, gained the advantage in most of the rencounters.
At length, they were joined by a body of Castilian caval-
ry, which the regents dispatched towards Valencia, soon
after their vitory over Padilla at Villalar, and by their
alliflance they acquired iuch fupcriority, that they entirely
broke and ruined the Germanada. The leaders of the
party were put to death, almost without any formality of
legaltrial, and suffered such cruel punishments, as the
fcnfe of recent injuries prompted the nobles to inflict.

The
I

BOO K III. The government of Valencia was re-established in its an-
'--v * Ccicnt iroIll [1,].
A|' I..'ics "' lN Aragon, violent fiymptcm.s of lhe fame spirit of dif-
t"r :,'i..f,- afkióbon and mutiny, uwh;h i-ig;tad in the other kine-
s.'. ' i'dems ct Spain, began ol app-- r; L:tt by the prudent con-

lut ot the iceov, Don jonn d c I.anu',a, they were 10
lar compolhd, aS to p. event their brteak.ng out into any

rFn 'idab!c :rtpn iiijullrett!o.". bLut in the ilan..J ol' i',ajorca, which
i,.lt,-..ti'.n ab annextd to tl.e ciown o.d A\r::tcn, the famue caufeb that
. i^, ly. hai exccitcd the cen':::o;r;s ii; \ialircia, productd effc&is
i-*l- 11o lels violent. 'iihe ptopie, inpa:ient l' thc hardihips

xhich they ecllurted u::der tl:e ri:id jurii'li..ion of the
liubilly, took arias in a tuni. ituary manner; depoled
tl.Lir v.ccroy; dro\ e him ou: c the il.a;:d; aid Inaffaertd
i.vry gentleman ui.o w\as so uni;(irt!itiate a, to fall into their
lh.ness. The ol-,liac v. ith v.t.:clh tle pccpll of Mvlajorca
perfihed in tl.ci; tlC;'.lun, . as iou;!l to the r:;e with
\\iiitl tihey lbegan ii. It rcquiitld io inonfiiLrlblc efiolt
to ctducc them to lceiielree; and tranquiliti was re-ella-
blilhed in cx cri part ,ls bpain befere thiy could be brought
to fuhmnitto their io ci:i.rn Li].

Caures \'HiILE the ipirit c: c :l,;!doni was so general among
w,.hpre- the Spaniards, ar.d *o Imany cauies corcuired in prccipi-
unin ot t:ie taring them into luch vile'ct mea'ures, in order to cbtain
m lecou- the red: es of tc';cr grie arnces, it may appear firange, that
te.ts. the malecoltents in the different kingdoms ficuld have

carried on their operations without ary mutual concert,
cr even any intercour'. with each other. By uniting their
ccuncils and arms, they might have a&cd both with
greater force, and w:ith more eflTct. 'Ilhe appearance of
a national contedtracy would have rendered it no le: re-
ipecable among the people, than lotrmidable to the
clown; and the Emperor, unable to refit such a combi-
nation, mull have complied with any terms which the
members of it thought fit to prercribe. Many things,
however, prevented the Spaniards from forming tlemfelves
into one body, and puruiing common meaiures. T'he
people of the different kingdoms in Spain, though they

[b] Argenfola Anile* de Aragon, cap. 7,, 90,99, il. lyis 'Antlel

*e Arngnn, crp. 5. 1i, &c. P. Mart. Ep. Ilb. 33 & 34. ptffim. Fcrrer.
Hilt. d'.fpagne. viii. 541, 564, &c.

[d] Argceilola Analec de Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. Hilt. viii. g54.

SJral Annales de Araon, cap. 7. ii, 14, 76, 1. Ferreral Hilt. d'Ef-
P»gne, visi. S79. &c. 60a.

were

were become the fubjeas of the fame Sovereign, retained, BooK III.
in full force, their national antipathy to each other. The i--
remembrance of their ancient rivalfiip and hostilities was
still recent, and the sense ot reciprocal injuries so intire,
as to be incompatible with their acting with confidence and
concert. Each nation chole rather to depend on its own
efforts, and to maintain the firuggle alone, than to implore
the aid of neighbours, whom they diftruficd and hated.
At the fame time, the forms of government in the several
kingdoms of Spain were io different, and the siievances
of which they complained, as well as the altcrations and
amendments which they attempted to introduce, so various,
that it was not ealv to bring them to unite in any common
plan. To this disunion Charles was indebted for the pre-
lervation of his Spanifli crowns; and while each of the
kingdoms followed separate mcalures, all of them were
obliged at last to conform to the will of their sovereign.

THE arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled his subje&s The Empe.

who had been in arms against him with deep apprehenfi- dentand
ons; from which he soon delivered them by an alt ofgenerousbe.
clemency, no lelt prudent than generous. After a rebelli- haviour to-

wards the

on lo general, scarce twenty persons, among so many Rnalecon-
criminals obnoxious to the law, had been punished capi- tets.
tally in Castile. Though firongly solicited by his coun-
cil, Charles refused to shed any more blood by the hands
of the executioner; and publilhed a general pardon, ex- o0. z8.
tending to all crimes committed since the commencement
of the infurre&ions, from which only fourscore were ex-
cepted. Even these he seems to have named, rather
with an intention to intimidate others, than from any
inclination to seize them; for when an officious courtier
offered to inform him where one of the most considerable
among them was concealed, he avoided it by a good-na-
tured pleasantry; " Go," savs he, " I have now no
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some cause to
keep at a distance from me, and you would be better
employed in telling him that I am here, than in acquaint-
ing me with the place of his retreat [H." By this appear-
ance of magnanimity, as well as by his care to avoid
every thing which had disgusted the Castilians during his
former reaidence among them; by his address in assuming
their manners, in speaking their language, and in cc m-
plying with all their humours and cufioms, he acquired

[e] Ssndov. 377, &c. Vida del. Emper.Carlos por Don Juan Anton.
de Vern y Zunga, p. 30.

VTuL I. F f all

BooK III. an ascendant over them which scarce any of their native
'v~*-1 monarchs had ever attained, and brought them to furport

him in all his enterprizes with a zeal and valour to which
he owed much of his success and grandeur [f].

Adrian fes 'A U T the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian
RUtIor and set out for lhalv to take poffeflion of his new dignity. But
his ill recep-though the Roman peoplelonged extremely for his arrival,
Lion there. they could not, on his first appearance, conceal their

furprize and diiappointment. After being accuflomed to
the princely magnificence of Julius, and the elegant fplen-
dour of Leo, they beheld with contempt an old man of
an humble deportment, of austere manners, an enemy to
pomp, deffitute of taste in the arts, and unadorned with
any of the external accomplishments which the vulgar ex;
pe&t in those raised to eminent stations [g]. Nor did his
political views and maxims seem less strange and aftoniih-
ing to the pontifical ministers. He acknowledged and
bewailed the corruptions which abounded in the church,
as well as in the court of Rome, and prepared to reform
both; he discovered no intention of aggrandizing his
family; he even scrupled at retaining such territories as
some of his predecessors had acquired :by violence and
fraud, rather than by any legal title, and for that reason
he inveited Francesco Maria de Rovere anew in the dut-
chy of UIrbiro, of which Leo had stripped him, and
surrendered to the duke of Ferrara several places wrested
from him by the church [h. To men little habituated to
fee princes regulate their conduc by the maxims of mora-
lity and the principles of justice, these a&Cions of the new
Pope appeared inconteftible proofs of his weakness and
inexperience; and Adrian, who was a perfet Rrtanger
to the complex and intricate system of Italian politics, and
who could place no confidence in persons whose fubtilt'
and refinements in business suited so ill with his natural
simplicity and candour, being often embarrassed and irre-
solute in his deliberations, the opinion of his incapacity
daily increased, until both his person and government be-
came obje&s of ridicule among his subjes [i].

f] Ulloa Vita de Crlo V. p. 8.
g] Cuic. 1. 15. 138. Jovii Vita Adriani, z17. Bcllcfor. Epitr. dl(

Princ. 84.

[h] Cuic. lib. 15. 140.
[i] Jov. Vita Adr. 18. P. Mart Et. 774. Rfcclli Lettere de Princ.
vol. i, 87, 96, log.

ADRIAN,

ADRIAN, though devoted to the Emperor, endeavour- Boo III.
ed to assume the impartiality which became the common ,-
father of Christendom, and laboured to reconcile the e ur'eae-
contending princes, that they might unite in a league a- florepeace
gainft Solyman, whole conquest of Rhodes rendered him in Europe.
more formidable than ever to Europe [k]. But this was
an undertaking far beyond his abilities. To examine such
a variety of pretensions, to adjust such a number of in-
tersering interests, to extinguish the paflions mhich am-
bition, emulation, and mutual injuries had kindled, to
bring so many hottile powers to pursue the fame scheme
with unanimity and vigour, required not only uprightness
of intentions, but a great luperiority both of underfland-
ing and address.

THE Italian states were no less desirous of peace than

the Pope. The Imperial army under Colonna was fill
kept on foot, but as the Emperor's revenues in Spain, in
Naples, and in the Low-Countries, were either exhausted,
or applied to some other purpose, it depended entirely for
pay and subsistence on the Italians. A great part of it
was quartered in the ecclesiastical state, and monthly con-
tributions were levied upon the Florentines, the Milanele,
'the Genoese, and Lucchefc, by the viceroy of Naples;
and though all exclaimed againt such oppreflion, and
were impatient to be delivered from it, the dread of worse
consequences from the rage of the army, or the resent-
ment of the Emperor, obliged them to submit til.

So much regard, however, was paid to the Pope's 52i3.
exhortations, and to a bull which he illued requiring all A new

league a.

Christian princes to consent to a truce for three years, againfi the
that the Imperial, the French, and Englilh embaffadors French
at Rome were impowered to treat of that matter; but King.
while they wafted their time in fruitless negotiations,
their maiters continued their preparations for war. The
Venetians, who had hitherto adhered with great firmness
to their alliance with Francis, being now convinced that
his affairs in Italy were in a desperate situation, entered June 28.
into a league againfi him with the Emperor; to which
Adrian, at the instigation of his countryman and friend
Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who persuaded
him that the only oblfacles to peace arose from the am-
bition of the French King, soon after acceded. The

l] iBllefto. Epilr. p. 86.
[I] Cuic . 1. I. 38.

Fs other

BooK III. other Italian flates followed their example; and Franci
'------' was left without a tingle ally, to refif the efforts of 1i

1523. many enemies whose armies threatened, and whole tel-

ritories encompassed his dominions on every fide [m].

Francin'svi- 'THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it was
gorousmea- thought, would have obliged Francis to keep wholly on
lureS in op- '
pofiiontoit. the defensive, or at leart have prevented his cntertaining

any thoughts of marching into Italy. But it was the cha-
raEer of that prince, too apt to become remils, and even
negligent on ordinary occasions, to rouze at the approach
of danger, and not only to encounter it with spirit and in-
trepidity, qualities which never forsook him, but to pro-
vide against it with diligence and indufiry. Before his
enemies were ready to execute any of their schemes,
Francis had assembled a numerous army. His authority
over his own fubje6ts was far greater than that which
Charles or Henry possessed over theirs. They depended
on their parliaments for money, which was usually granted
them in small fums, very slowly, and with much reluc-
tance. The taxes he could impose were more confide-
rable, and levied with greater dispatch; so that on this,
as well as on other occasions, his army was in the field
while they were devising ways and means for raisin.
theirs. Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped to dil-
concert all the Emperor's schemes by marching in perlon
intothe Milanese; and this bold measure, the more for-
midable, because unexpeced, could scarce have failed of

Suspended producing that effet. The vanguard of his army had
upon the already reached Lyons, and he himself was hafiening
difcove

o

the con0s after it with the second division of his troops, when the
ble Bour- discovery es a domeflic conspiracy which threatened the
bon'son- ruin of the kingdom, obliged him to flop ihort, and to
piracy. alter his measures.
His cbhrac- THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles duke of
Cr5. Bourbon, lord high conitable, whose noble birth, vait for-

tune, and high office, raised him to be the motl powerful
subjea in France, as his great talents, equally suited to
the field or the council, and his signal Services to the crown
rendered him the moRl illufirious and deserving. The
near resemblance between the King and him in many ol
their qualities, both being fond of war, and ambitious to
excel in adive and manly exercises, as well as their equa-

[m] GOic. 1. 1', 141, 148.

lity

lity in age, and their proximity of blood, ought naturally BooK III.
to have fccured him a considerable fl(are in that Mo- -,-.
iarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the King's mo- Te3uJ
ther, had contracted a violent aversion to the house of of his diltf-
Bourbon, for no better reason than because Anne of Bre- &aeon.
tagne, the Qyeen of Lewis the Twelfth, with whom she
ived in perpetual enmity, discovered a peculiar attach-
ment to that branch of the royal family; and she had
1tught her ion, who was too fu!ceptible of any impref-
s.on flie gave him, to view all the confail)le's aftions
with a mean arnd unbecoming jealousy. His distinguished
merit at the battle of Marignano had not been sufficiently
rewarded; he had been recalled from the government of
Milan upon very frivolous pretences, and had met with
a cold reception, which his prudent conduc in that
difficult ifation did not deserve ; the payment of his pen-
rions had been suspendcd without any good cause; and
during the campaign of one thnufand five hundred and
twenty-one, the King, as has already been related, had
affronted him in the prelence of the wvhole army, by
giving tF command of the van to the duke of Alercon.
The conflable, at firlt, bore there indignities with great-
er moderation than could have been expeced from an
high-fpirited Prince, conscious of what was due to his
rank, and to his services. Such a multiplicity of injuries,
however, exhaifted his patience; and inspiring him with
thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and begaq
to hold a fecrct correlpondence with some of the Im-
peror's miniflers.,

APOUT that time the Dutchess of Bourbon happened

to die without'leaving.any children; and Louite, of a
disposition no less amorous than vindictive, and still fils-
ceptible of the tender passions at the age of forty-fix,
began to view the Conalahle, a Prince as amiable as he
was accomplifid, .with other eyes; and nptwithftanding
the great disparity of their years, ihe formed the scheme
of marrying him. Bourbon, who might have expeded
every thing to which an ambitious mind can aspire, from
the doting fondefs of a woman who governed her son
and the kingdom, being incapable either of imit.ting the
queei in her sudden xranfition from hatred to love, or of
dilfembling'fo meanly as to pretend affecion for one who
had prosecuted him so long with unprovoked malice, not
only rejeaed the match, but embittered his refusal by
tome severe raillery on Louise's person and charader. She

F f 3 finding

BoOK III. finding herself not only contenpned, but insulted, her dif-
^'-v--' appointed love turned Into hatred, and since she could not

523. marry, she resolved to ruin Bourbon.

FOR this purpole she consulted with the chancellor du

Prat, a man, who by a base prostitution of great talents
and of superior skill in his profession, had risen to that
high office. By his advice a law-tuit was commenced
against the Conflable, for the whole estate belonging to
the house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed in the
King's name, as having fallen to the crown; part in that
of Louise, as the nearefi heir in blood of the deceased
Dutchess. Both these claims were equally deltitute of
any foundation in jufsice; but Louise, by her folicita-
tions and authority, and Du Prat by employing all the ar-
tifices and chicanery of law, prevailed on the judges to

His recret order the estate to be sequestered. This unjust decision
negotiations drove the Conflable to despair, and to measures which
wi'h the
Emperor. despair alone could have dicated. He renewed his in-

trigues in the Imperial court, and flattering himself that
the injuries he had suffered would jultify his having re-
course to any means in order to obtain reveng, he of-
sered to transfer his allegiance from his natural sovereign.
to the Emperor, and to assist him in the conquefi of
France. Charles, as well as the King of England, to
whom the secret was communicated In], expe&ing pro-
digious advantages from his revolt, were ready to receive
him with open arms, and spared neither promises nor al-
lurements that might help to confirm him in his refolu-
tion. The Emperor offered him in marriage his filler
Eleanor, the widow of the King of Portugal, with a vast
portion. He was included as a prinnpal in the treaty
between Charles and Henry. The counties of Provence
and Dauphinc were to be fettled on him, with the title of
King. The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, fuppprted by the Flemings, to in-
vade Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied at
their common charge, were to penetrate into Burgundy,
and to ac in concert with Bourbon, who undertook to
raise fix thousand men among his friends and vafTals in
the heart of the kingdom. The execution of this deep-
laid and dangerous plot was suspended, until the king
lhould cross the Alps with the only army capable of de-
tending his dominions; and as he was far advanced in

In] Rymcr's Fader. xiii. 794.

his

his marclrhor that purpose, France flood on the brink of BOOK III.
deftru&ion . o].

HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negotiation which had Di 15 3'ed

now been carrying on for several months, though con-
du&ed with the most profound secrecy, and communicated
only to a few chosen confidents, could not altogether es-
cape the obfcrvation of the reft of the Conftablc's nume-
rous retainers, rendered more inquisitive by finding that
they were distrusted. Two of these gave the king some
intimation of a mysterious correspondence between their
master and the Comte de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman o
great confidence with the Emperor. Francis, who could
not bring himielf to fufpe& that the first prince of tlh
blood would be so base as to betray the kingdom to its
enemies, immediately repaired to hloulins, where the
Constable was in bed, feigning indisposition that he might
not be obliged to accompany the King into Italy, and
acquainted him of the intelligence which he had received.
Bourbon, with great solemnity and the most inmpcfing al-
fe&ation of ingenuity and candour, asserted his own in-
nocence; and as his health, he said, was now more ccn-
firmed, he promised to join the army within a few iavs.
Francis, open and candid himself, and too apt to be de-
ceived by the appearance of those virtues in others, gave
such credit to what he said, that he refused to arrest him,
although advised to take that precaution by his wisest
counfcllors, and as if the danger had been over, he con-
tinued his march towards Lyons. The Constable iet Septembc:
out soon after, seemingly with an intention to follow
him; but turning suddenly to the left, he crofTed the rlies to t,.
Rhone, and after infinite fatigues and perils elcaped all ly.
the parties which the King, sensible too late of his cre-
dulity, sent out to intercept him, and reached Italy in
safety [p].

FRANCIS tpok every pofible precaution to prcvcn.

the bad effeas of the irreparable error he had committed.
He put garrisons in all the places of strength in the
Constable's territories. He fcized all the gentlemen whom
he could fufpet of being his afociates, and as he had not
hitherto discovered the whole extent of the conspirator's

[o] Thuoai Hilf lib. i. c. io, Hei-tr. Rer. Aultr. lib. viii. c. 18. p.
[p] Mem. de Buelly, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recberchec d; la Francc, p.

F f 4 fchenic.,

BOOK II. fchemcs, nor knew how far the infection had spread

v- --' among his fubjccs, he \ as afraid that his absence migh:
'523. encourage them to make tbme desperate attempt, and ici

that rcafon relinquished his intention of leading his armn
in peribn into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his dcfign on the Mi-

,aic ,he lanefc; but appointed admiral Bonnivet to take the ht-
rlalntfi. prcme command in his stead, and to march into tiat

cotuntry with an army thirty thlouland firong. Bonnivct
did not owe this preferment to his abilities as a general;
for of all talents requisite to form a great comman-
der, he possessed only personal courage, the lowest and the
moll common. But he was the mofl accomplished gcn-
tleman in the French court, of agreeable manners, an
insinuating address, and a sprightly conversation; and
Francis, who lived in great familiarity with his cour-
tiers, was so charmed with these qualities, that he ho-
ncured him, on all occasions, with the mos partial and
diflinguifhing marks of his favour. He was, besides,
the implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as the King
scarce knew whom to trurf at that juncture, he thought
the chief command could be lodged no where so safely as
in his hands.

'Ther ill COLONNA, who was intrusted with the defence of
co°ndUa' the Milanese, his own conqueet, was in no condition to

refill such a formidable army. He had scarce money luf-
ficient to pay his troops, reduced to a small number by
sickness or desertion, and had, for that reason, been ob-
liged to negled every precaution neceflary for the security
of the country. The only plan he formed was to defend
the paffageof the river Tefino againfi the French; and
as if he had forgotten how easily he himself had difcon-
certed a similar Icheme formed by Lautrec, he promised
with great confidence on its being effetual. But in spite
of all his caution, it succeeded no better with him than
with Lautrec. Bonnivet pasTed the river without loss, at
a ford which had been neglected, and the Imperialists re-
tired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town as soon as
the French should appear before it. By an unaccount-
able negligence which Guiccardini imputes to infatua-
tion [q), Bonnivet did not advance for three or four days,
and loft the opportunity with which his good fortune pre-
lented him. The citizens recovered from their conlter-

f'1] Cuic..lib. ;1. 254.

nation,

nation: Colonna still active, at the age of fourscore, and BOOK III.
Moroire, whose enmity to France was indefatigeable, were -v
employed night and day in repairing the fortiihcations, in 'sl'
amassing provilions, in collecting troops from every
quarter; and by the time the lrench approached, had
put the city in a condition to fland a fiBc=e. Bonnivet
atlter tome truitlefs attempts on the town, which ]hartilcd
his own troops more than the enemy, w as obligcd, by the
inclekmcncy of the feaion, to retire into wviIlcr-qliarltes.

DU KING these tranfadions, Pope Adrian died; an I),:!i1 oF

event so much to the 2atisfaction of the Roman people, A.il'" Xl.
v'hofe hatred or contempt of him augmcnted evcr\ day,
that the night after his dereale, thel adoirned the door t(,
his chief physician's house witlih garl itids, adding thi:, in-
scription, TO THE DELIVERERlO ()i' HIS CQUN-

RY [r]. The Cardinal di Medici inltantly rcnei-cd

his pretensions to the Papal dignity, and entered the con-
clave with high expectations on his own part, and a re-
neral opinion of the people that thely would be fucccftliil.
But though supported by the Imperial tfacion, poffciTcd
of great perbonal interest, and capable of all the arti-
sices, refinements, and corruptions, which reign in ihole
assemblies,. the obilinacy and intrigues of his rivals pro-
traaed the conclave to the unu'ual length of fifty days.
The address and perseverance ot the Cardinal, sur-E 'cion of
mounted at lait every obstacle. He was raiied to the c'lm'.'!1
head of the church, and assumed the government of it Nov. S8.
by the name of Clement VII. The choice was univer-
ially approved of. High expecations were conceived of
a Pope, whose great talents, and long experLiSce in bu-
finess, seemed to qualify him no. l.s for. d'enrding the
spiritual interefis of the church, exp(,fdt to imminent
danger by the progress of Lutl.er's opinions, than for cor-
duding its political operations with the prudence rcquifite
at lilhh a difficult juunure; and who, befidcs thele ad-
vantages, rendered:.the ecclefiati'cal ftace nore rcfp ahl::,
by having in his hands the govelnmient ol l'lolence, alid
the wealth of the family of Medici [ 1

CARDINAL WOLSF.Y, not dilheartened by the dlifap- w,)th ydir-
pointmnnt of his ambitious viexs at tlie former eletion, ri;",i"',

ant filled

had entertained more sanguine hope, of fucc f' on this oc- wvih ,iiLit-
cafion. Henry wrote to the Emperor, reminding him of' en.
his engagements to second the pretensions of his minifler.
Wolfev beftirred himself with activity luitable to the im-

[i] Jovii v'it. Adr. 127, [.] Gui li. lil . 1,263.

portaliCC

BooK IlT. portance of the prize for which he contended, and in-

_->v--- tructed his agents at Rome to spare neither promises nor
5^-3· bribes in order to gain his end. But Charles had either

amuted him with vain hopes which he never intended to
gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose a candidate
who had such a profpeaof succeeding as Medici; or per-
Ilaps the cardinals durst rot venture to provoke the people
of Rome, while their indignation against Adrian's memory
was frill fresh, by placing another Ultramontane in the
papal throne. Wolley, after all his expectations and en-
deavours, had the mortification to fee a Pope ele&ed, of
such an age, and of so vigorous a conflitution, that he
could not comfort himself much with the chance of fur-
viving him. Wolfey, by this feccnd proof, was fully
convinced of the Emperor's insincerity, and it excited in
him all the resentment which an haughty mind feels on
being at once disappointed, and deceived; and though
Clement endeavoured to tooth his vindicive nature by
granting him a commillipn to be legate in England dur-
ing life, with such ample powers as veiled in him almofi
the whole papal jurifdi&ion in that kingdom, the injury
he had received entirely dissolved the tie which had united
him to Charles, and from that moment he meditated re-
venge. It was necefiary, however, to conceal his in-
tention from his malter, and to suspend the execution of
it, until by a dextrous improvement of the incidents which
might occur, he should be able gradually to alienate the
King's affecions from the Emperor. For this reason, he
was far from expressing any uneasiness on account of
the repulse be had met with, that he abounded on every
occasion, private as well as public, in declarations of his
high fatisfaion with Clement's promotion t].

Heary's HoJ[NRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled with great
^ Fce. sincerity whatever he was bound to perform by the league

againi France, though more slowly than he could have
wished. His thoughtleft profusion, and total neglec of
oeconomy reduced him often to great ftrits for money.
The operations of war were now carried on in Europe
in a manner very different from that which had long pre-
vailed. Infead of armies suddenly arembled, which
under diftin& chieftains followed their prince into the
field for a short space, and served at their own coil;

[I] Fiddee's Life of Wolfey, an4, g i. !Hbert

troops

troops were now levied at a great charge, and received BOOK II1.
regularly considerable pay. Inilead of impatience on >--v-~
both fides to bring every quarrel to the issue of a battle, 1s53.
which commonly decided the fate of open and defence-
less countries, and allowed the barons together with their
vassals to return to their ordinary occupations; towns
were fortified with great art, and defended with much
obltinacy; war, from a simple, became a very intricate
science; and campaigns grew of course to be more te-
dious, and leis decisive. The expencewhich these alter-
ations in the military system necessarily created, ap-
peared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccustomed to the
burden of heavy taxes. Hence proceeded the frugal,
and even parsimonious spirit of the English parliaments
in that age, which Henry, with all his authority, was
seldom able to overcome. The commons, having refuled
at this time to grant him the supplies he demanded, he had
recourse to the ample and almost unlimited prerogative,
which the Kings of England, then, possessed, and by a
violent and unusual exertion of it, raised the money he
wanted. This, however, wafted so much time, that Sept. o.
it was late in the season before his army, under the
duke of Suffolk, could take the field. Being joined by
a considerable body of Flemings, Suffolk marched into
Picardy, and Francis from his extravagant eagerness to
recover the Milanese, having left that frontier almost un-
guarded, he penetrated as far as the banks of the river
Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that capital
with consternation. But the arrival of some troops de-
tached by the King, who was till at Lyons; the acive
gallantry of the French officers, who allowed the allies
no respite night or day; the rigour of a moRs unnatu- Noemnblt
ral season, together with scarcity of provisions, compel-
led Suffolk to retire; and La Tremouille, who com-
manded in those parts, had the glory of having, with an
handful of men, checked the progress of a formidable
army, and of having driven them with ignominy out of
the French territories u].

THI Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and Guienne And thife

were not more fortunate, though in both there provinces of the Ce -
Francis was equally ill prepared to rcfift them. The spuitd.
condut and valour of his generals supplied his want of

[u] Htrbert. bm. de Belly, 73, &c.

foresight;

gooK III. foresight; the Germans who made an irruption into one

_--v--' of thele provinces, and the Spaniards who attacked the
1523 other, were relrul.cd wllh great dilgrace.

Fnd rs the THus ended tle year 1523, during which Francis's

'"r=n;"n. g'ood fortulC e
and ficccls had been such as gave all Europe

an high idea oi his power and refourccs. He had dil-
<o c-c d a;nd (ifcorcertcd a dangerous confliracv, the au-
thor of \\hich he had driven into exile, almolt without
an attendant; e h:ad renclered aboitive all the lchernes
of the poweri'l confederacy formed againit him; he had
1,r-otc6ted his domiiions when attacked on three different
tides; ant t(,iughl his army in the Milanere had not made
such prcgreis as might have been expected from its fupc-
riorilv to the enemy in number, he had recovered and still
kept pofefion of one half of that dutchy.

Ic14. '11i1: ei:uing year opened with events more disastrous
.i nlt.,S to France. Fol:tarabia .as loft by the cowardice or trea-
Ype. ciery of its governor. In Italy, the allies refolvedon an
Fi'.L7. taril and -igorous effort in order to dilpoflefs Bonnivet

of that pari of t;he Miilancfe which lies beyond the Te-
fino; Clement, who, under the pontificates both of Leo
and Adria:, had di'covered an implacable enmity to
France, began now to view the power which the Emperor
was daily acquiring in Italy, with so much jealousy, that
he refuied to accede, as his predecessors had done, to the
league agailt l Francis, and forgetting private paflions and
animci;ties, laboured with the zeal which became his
cliarader, to bring about a reconciliation among.the

rnperial r- contending parnics. But all his endeavours were inef-
rt',' Ily to ecual; a numerous army, to which each of the allies
lake the
fAld.lly. furnithed their contingent of troops, was assembled at

Milan by the beginning of March. Lannoy, viceroy
of Naples, took the command of it upon Colonna's death,
though the chief direction of military operations wa-
committed to Bourbon, and the marquis de Pescara; the
latter, the ableit and most enterprizing of the Imperial
generals; the former inspircd by his reientment with new
aaivitv and invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with
the characters of the French commanders, the genius ot
their troops, and the firength as well as weakness of
their armies, as to be of intiite Icrvici to the party which
he joined. But all thefc advantages were nearly lolt
throutgh the Emperor's inability to raise money fitiicient
ort executing the various atnd eltcnfive plans which he

had

had formed. When his troops were commanded to Boo l IL.
march, they mutinied against their leaders, demanding e-m
the pay which was due to them for tome months; and dil- i';4.

1 e r

;* . . . .' . Retardtd by

regarding both the menaces and intreaties ct their of- a rrutiin of
ficers, threatened to pillage the city of Milan if they did t;.e t.op,.
not inltantly receive iatistadion. Out of this difficulty
the generals of the allies were extri:ated by MtVoror.e,
who, prevailing on his countrymen, over whom his in-
fluence was prodigious, to ads ance the umr that was rc-
quifite, the army took the field [].

BOiNIVET was deltitute of troops to oppose this The French

army, and still more of the talents that could rec;er him btl:cd ta-
an equal match for its leaders. After various movements Miliace.
and encounters, described with great accuracy by the
contemporary historians, a detail of which, at this dil-
tance of time, would be equally uninterelling arid unin-
f{ruaive, he was forced to abandon the strong camp in
which he had intrenched himself at Biagraffa. Soon as-
ter, partly by his own mifcondut, partly by the acivsitv
of the enemy, who harassed and ruined his army by
continual tkirmifhes, while they carefully declined a bat-
tle which he often offered them; and partly by the ca-
price of 6000 Swiss, who refused to join his army though
within a day's march of it; he was reduced to the ne-
ceflity of attempting a retreat into France through the
valley of Aoft. Just as he arrived on the banks of
the Seffia, and began to pass that river, Bourbon ard
Pescara appeared with the vanguard of the allies, and
attacked his rear with great fury. At the beginning of
the charge, Bonnivet, while exerting himself with much
valour, was wounded so dangerously as obliged him to
quit the field; and the condua of the rear was commit-
ted to the chevalier Bayard, who, though so much a
firanger to the arts of a court that he never rose to the
chief command, was always called, in times of real dan-
ger, to the posts of difficulty and importance. He put
himself at the head of the men at arms, and animating
them by his presence and example to sustain the whole
shock of the enemy's troops, he gained time for the
reft of his countrymen to make good their retreat. But Deathothe
in this service he received a wound which he immediately chevalier

Bay ard, nnd

perceived to be mortal, and being unable to continue any ,ui o! 'tile
longer on horseback, he ordered one of his attendants to Flnch ar-

my.
[x] Guic. 1. xv. 167. Capella, 19,.

place

Boot It. place him under a tree, with his face towards the enemy
'-v ~'' *then fixing his eyes on the guard of his sword, which hi

rs54 held up initead of a cross, he addressed his prayers t(

Gcd, and in this posture, which became his chara&ei
both as a soldier and as a Christian, he calmly waitec
the approach of death. Bourbon, who led the foremoll
of the enemies troops, found him in this situation, and
expressed regret and pity at the fight. A' Pity not me,"
cried the high-fpirited chevalier, " I die as a man of
" honour ought, in the discharge of my duty: They
" indeed are objeas of pity, who fight againit their
"King, their country, and their oath." The marquis
de Pescara, passing soon after, manifested his admiration
of Bayard's virtues, and his sorrow for his fall, with the
generosity of a gallant enemy; and finding that he could
rot be removed with safety from that spot, ordered a
tent to be pitched there, and appointed proper persons
to attend him. He died, notwithstanding their care, as
his ancestors for several generations had done, in the field
of battle. Pescara ordered his body to be embalmed,
and sent to his relations; and such was the refpec paid
to military merit in that age, that the duke of Savoy
commanded it to be received with royal honours in all
the cities of his dominions; in Dauphine, Bayard's na-
tive country, the people of all ranks came out in a so-
lcmn proceflion to meet it [y].

BO N N IVET led back the Shattered remains of his army

into France; and in one short campaign, Francis was
firipped of all he had possessed in Italy, and left without
one ally in that country.

Pregreft of WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of Charles
mh tine in and Francis spread over so many countries of Europe,
Germany. Germany enjoyed a profound tranquillity, extremely fa-

vourable to the reformation, which continued to make
progress daily. During Luther's confinement in his re-
treat at Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples, ani-
mated with the fame zeal, but possessed of less prudence
and moderation than his malter, began to propagate
wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly among the lower
people. Encouraged by his exhortations, they rose in
several villages of Saxony, broke into the churches with

[y] Bellefor. Epitr. p. 3. Men. de Bellty, 75. Oewu. de Breat.
tom. vi. Ao8, &c. la quiet Rccherches, p. 5S6.

tumultuary

tumultuary violence, and threw down and deitroyed the BooK I1I.
images with which they were adorned. 'Thele irregular ---'
and outrageous proceedings were so repugnant to all the '54
Eleaor's cautious maxims that if they had not received
a timely check, they could scarce have tailed of alien-
ating from the reformers that prince, jealous to a great
degree of his own authority, and afraid of giving offence
to the Emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opinions.
Luther, sensible of the danger, immediately quitted his arch 6,
retreat, without waiting for Frederick's permission, and '5"*
returned to Wittemberg., Happily lor the reformation,
the veneration for his person and authority were still so
great, that his appearance alone suppressed that spirit of
extravagance which began to leize his party. Carlofta-
dius and his fanatical followers firuck dumb by his rebukes,
declared that they heard the voice of an angel, not of a
man [q.

BEFORI Luther left his retreat, he had begun to tran- Luther

slate the Bible into the German tongue, an undertaking lr' ntil
of no less difficulty than importance, of which he was
extremely fond, and for which he was well qualified:
He had a competent knowledge in the original languages;
a thorough acquaintance with the style and sentiments of
the inspired writers; and tho' his compositions in Latin
were rude and barbarous, he was reckoned a sreat
marter of the purity of his mother tongue, and could
express himself with all the elegance of which it is ca-
pable. By his own afliduous application, together with
the afiftance of Melan&hon and several other of his
disciples, he finished part of the New Teflament this
year; and the publication of it proved more fatal to the
church of Rome, than that ot all his own works. It
was read with wonderful avidity and attention by peribns
of every rank. They were aionithed at discovering how
contrary the precepts of the Author of our religion are,
to the inventions of those who pretended to be his vicege-
rents; and having now in their hand the rule of faith,
they thought themselves qualified by applying it to judge
of the eltablifhed opinions, and to pronounce when they
were conformable to the standard, and when they depart-
ed from it. The great advantage arising from Luther's
translation of the Bible, encouraged the advocates for
reformation, in the other countries of Europe, to imitate

[i] Ilcid. Hist. 5i. Seckcnd. 195,

his

BOOK III. his example, and to publith versions of the Scriptlure, in
v^--_ their respective languagcs.
Sv\lal ti- ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, llambur¥,
tl 'a1t,:,h'i and levelral other cities in Germany of the first rank openly
the l'opih embraced the reformed religion, and by the alliority
chulch. of their magifEratcs abolishcd the mals, and the olhr In-

perflitious ritcs of Popery [M. The Elector of Bral-
tdctnlurfh, the Dukes ot Brunswick and Lunenburgli,
and Prince of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of Lu-
thli's opinions, aind countenanced the preaching of them
among their lfubjcCts.

Meafturre I'HE (curt of Rome beheld this growing defecion
t nrl Vti, with great concern; and Adrian's firlt care after his ai-

id,, 0

to' rival in Iia\., had been to deliberate with the Cardinal.,

cIcL thc concerning the proper means of putting a flop to it. This
prg,,i, "l Pope was profoundly Ikilled in 'cholaltic theology, and
muior a-. havint been early taken notice of on that account, he flill

rctained fich an excessive admiration of the Icience to,
which he owed his reputation and luccefs in life, that
he confidered Luther's invecives againfr the fchoolmen,
particularly Thomas Aquinas, as little less than bla!-
phem\. All the tenets of that docor appeared to him so
clear and irrefragable, that he supposed every person who
called in queflion c;r contraditecd them, to be either blind-
ed by ignorance, or to be ating in opposition to the con-
viction of his own mind: Of course, no Pope was ever
more bigotted or inflexible with regard to points of doc-
trine than Adrian; he not only maintained them as Leo
had done, hecaufe they were ancient, or because it wa~
dangerous for the church to allow of innovations, but he
adhered to them with the zeal of a theologian, and with
the tenacioufnets of a disputant. At the fame time his
own manners being extremely simple, and uninfeEted
with any of the vices which reigned in the court of Rome,
he was as lenfible of its corruptions as the reformers them-
'ovemler. selves, and viewed them with no less indignation. The

brief he addressed to the Diet of the Empire alfembled
at Nuremberg, and the inftrutions he gave Cheregato
the nuncio whom he sent thither, were framed agreeably
to these views. On the one hand, he condemned Lu-
ther's opinions with more alperity and rancour of exprcf-
lion than Leo had ever used; he severely censured the

[a] Seckcnd. 141. Chytrai Contin, Krmntzii, 103.

Princes

Princes of Germany for suffering him to spread his per- BooK III.
njcious tenets, by their negleEting to execute the edi& of ---'v
the Diet at Worms, and required them, if Luther did '514
not instantly retrat his errors, to destroy him with fire, as
a gangrened and incurable member, in like manner as
Daihan and Abiram had been cut off by Moses, Ananias
and Sapphira by the apoffles, and John Huls and Jerome
of Prague by their anceflors [t]. On the other hand, he,
with great candour, and in the most explicit terms, ac-
knowledged the corruptions of the Roman court to be the
fou.ce from which had flowed all the evils that the church
now felt or dreaded ; he promised to exert all his autho-
rity towards reforming these abuses, with as much dif-
patch as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
could admit; and he requefled of them to give him
their advice with regard to the mofi effetual means of
fupprefling that new heresy which had sprung up among
them [c].

THE members of the diet, after praising the Pope's Diet of Na-

pious and laudable intentions, excused themselves for * trembt rge
executing the edict of Worms, by alledging that the pSi.- :ral coun-
digious increase of Luther's followers, as well as the ave: - 1, as the
sion to the court of Rome, among their other subje&s, pr''r re-
on account of its innumerable exacions, rendered such an
attempt not only dangerous, but impossible. They as-
firmed, that the grievances of Germany, which did not
arise from imaginary injuries, but from impositions no less
real than intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them, which they intended to lay before him,
called now for some new and efficacious remedy; and in
their opinion, the only remedy adequate to the disease, or
which afforded them any hopes of feeing the church re-
flored to soundness and vigour, was a general council.
Such a council, therefore, they advised him, after ob-
taining the Emperor's content, to assemble without delay,
in one of the great cities of Germany, that all who had a
right to be present might deliberate with freedom, and
propose their opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous
situation of religion at this juncure required [d].

b] Farcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiead. p. 341.

Ibid. p. 345. [d] Ibid. p. 34ó.
VOL. I. G g THE

BOOK III. THE nuncio, more artful than his marter, and bettei

- ---'acquainted with the political views and interests of the R(.
Alfies4 of man court, was flartled at the proposition of a council,
the nuncio and easily foresaw how dangerous such an assembly might
to elade it. prove at a time when many openly denied the papal au.

thority, and the reverence and submission yielded to it vi.
sibly declined among all. For that reason he employed hi;
utmofi address, in order to prevail on the members of tit
Diet to proceed themselves with greater severity againif
the Lutheran heresy, and to relinquish their proposal con-
cerning a general council to be held in Germany. The),
perceiving the nuncio to be more solicitous about the in-
terefis of the Roman court, than the tranquillity of the
Empire, or purity of the church, remained inflexible, and
continued to prepare the catalogue of their grievances to
be presented to the Pope [e]. The nuncio, that he migl:
not be the bearer of a remonfirance so disagreeable to hi;
court, left Nuremberg abruptly, without taking leave of
the Diet.

The Diet THE secular princes accordingly, for the ecclefiafiics, al-
present a lif though they gave no oppofition,did not think itdecent tojoin
friea hndred with them, drew up the lift (o famous in the German an
grievances ts
to the Pope. nals) of a hundred grievances, which the Empire imputed to

the iniquitous dominion of the papal fee. This lift contained
grievances much of the fame nature with that prepared un-
der the reign of Maximilian. It would be tedious to enume-
rate each of them; they complained of the fums exaced for
dispensations, absolutions, and indulgences; of the expencc
arising from the law-suits carried to Rome; of the innu-
merable abuses occasioned by reservations, commendams,
and annates; of the exemption from civil jurifdi&ion which
the clergy had obtained; of the arts by which they
brought all secular causes under the cognizance of the ec-
clefiaftical judges; of the indecent and profligate live;
which not a few of the clergy led; and of various other
particulars, many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumflances which contributed to the favour-
able reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's
docrines. In the end they concluded, that if the holy
fee did not speedily deliver them from those intolerable
burdens, they had determined to endure them 10
longer, and would employ the power and authority

[e] Fafcic. ..

Rr & FPged .

& id p 349.
[C] Ibid. pI. 376.

with

with which God had intrufed them, in order to procureBooK IIf.
relief [g].

INSTEAD of such severities againfR Luther and his fol- Th5r4.e

lowers as the nuncio had recommended, the recess or ediA of the Diet.
of the Diet contained only a general injunction to all ranks March 6,
of men to wait with patience for the determinations of
the council which was to be assembled, and in the mean
time not to publish any new opinions, contrary to the
established doEtrines of the church; together with an
admonition to all preachers to abstain from matters of
controversy in their discourses to the people, and to
confine themselves to the plain and inftruaive truths of
religion [h].

THE reformers derived great advantage from, the tranf- The Diet of
a&ions of this Diet, as they afforded them the fullef and gret benefit

to the re-

most authentic evidence that gross corruptions prevailed in formation.
the court of Rome, and that the empire was loaded by
the clergy with insupportable burdens. With regard to
the former, they had now the teflimony of the Pope him-
self that their inveaives and accusations were not malicious
or ill-founded. As to the latter, the representatives of the
Germanick body, in an assembly where the patrons of the
new opinions were far from being the mofi numerous or
powerful, had pointed out, as the chief grievances of the
Empire, those very pracices of the Romish church againR
which Luther and his disciples were accustomed to de-
claim. Accordingly in all their controversial writings after
this period, they often appealed to Adrian's declaration,
and to the hundred grievances, in confirmation of whatever
they advanced concerning the dissolute manners, or infa-
tiable ambition and rapaciousness of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's condu& was confidered as a proof of Adrian's
the mot childish simplicity and imprudence. Men trained ",aeddut"n

fured at

up amidfl the artifices and corruptions of the papal court, Rome.
and accuflomed to judge of acions, not by what was just,
but by what was useful, were aflonifhed at a Pontiff, who,
departing from the wife maxims elf his predeeeffors, ac-
knowledged disorders which he ought to have concealed,
and, forgetting his own dignity, asked advice of those to
whom he was entitled to prescribe. By fiuch an excess of
impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that inflead of re-
claiming, he would render the enemies of the church

[g] Ffrcic. Rr.

R xpet. & Fugiend. p. 354.
h] Ibid. p. 348.

G g . more

BooK III. more presumptuous, and instead of extinguishing heresy,

L-vM' would weaken the foundations of the papal power, or stop
'514. the chief sources from which wealth flowed into t.e

church U]. For this reason, they induitrioufly opposed all
his schemes of reformation, and by throwing objeEions
and difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or to de-
feat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed on the one
hand at the obstinacy of the Lutherans, disgusted on the
other with the manners and maxims of the Italians, and
finding himself unable to correc either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and often looked
back with pleasure on that period of his life when he was
only dean of Louvain, a more humble but happier nation,
in which little was expeled from him, and there was no-
thing to frustrate his good intentions [k].

Clement's CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian as much
measures in the arts of government, as he was inferior to him in pu-
againt' Lu-
ther, andhisrity of life, or uprightness of intention. He was ani-
dread ot a mated not only with the aversion which an Popes natn-
gounel rally bear to a council, but having gained his own elecion

by means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an aflembly
that might subjet it to a scrutiny, which it could not itand.
He determined, therefore, to elude, by every poflible
means, the demands of the Germans, both with refpet
to the calling of a council, and reforming abuses in the
papal court, which the rashness and incapacity of his pre-
deceffor had brought upon him. For this purpose he
made choice of cardinal Campeggio, an artful man, often
intrusted by the Popes with negotiations of importance, as
his nuncio to the Diet of the Empire assembled again at
Nuremberg.

Feb. t1»4. CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of what had
'tih"ofi; pafled in the last meeting, exhorted the Diet, in a long
nuncio in a discourse, to execute the edi& of Worms with vigour, as
second diet the only effeaual means of suppressing Luther's doctrines.
rNurem- The Diet, in return, desired to know the Pope's inten-

tions concerning the council, and the redress of the hun-
dred grievances. The former the nuncio endeavoured to
elude, by general and unmeaning declarations of the Pope's
resolution to pursue such measures as would be for the
greatest good of the church. With regard to the latter,
as the catalogue of grievances did not reach Rome till after

i] F. Paul, p. 8s. Pallavic. Hill.. 58.
k j ovii Vit. Adr. p. a18.

Adrian's

Adrian's death, and of consequence had not been regularly BOOK 1I.
laid before the present Pope, Campeggio took advantage --..-
of this circumstance to decline making any definitive an- 1524.
fwer to them in Clement's name; though, at the lame
time, he observed, that their catalogue of grievances
contained many particulars extremely indecent and undu-
tiful, and that the publishing it by their own authority,
was highly disrespectful to the Roman fee. In the end,
he renewed his demand of their proceeding with ricour
against Luther and his adherents; but though an ambafTa- attendtle
dor from the Emperor, who was at that time very foli-effa.
citous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded the Nuncio, with
many profeflions of his master's zeal for the honour and April $8.
dignity of the papal fee, the recess of the diet was con-
ceived in terms of almost the fame import with the fprmer,
without enjoining any additional severity against Luther
and his party [ll.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order to

amuse and sooth the people, published certain articles for
the amendment of some disorders and abuses which pre-
vailed among the inferior clergy; but this partial reforma-
tion, which fell so far short of the expecations of the
Lutherans, and of the demands of the Diet, gave no fa-
tisfation, and produced little effet. The Nuncio, with
a tender hand, lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed
a deeper blow, and, by striking at the root, wished to ex-
terminate the evil [m].
[1] Seckend. p. a86. Sleid. Hit. p. 66. [rm] Seckepd. p. zg.,

G g3 THE

# BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R EI G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV.

BOOK TV. 'rHE expulsion of the French, both out of the Mi-
--" ' 1 lanefe and the republic of Genoa, was confidered
VieS5o'4 theby the Italians as the conclusion of the war between
Italiann tes Charles and Francis; and as they began immediately to
with refpet be apprehensive of the Emperor, when they saw no power
todFaric. remaining in Italy capable either to control or oppose
d F r ahim, they longed ardently for the re-eflablilhment of

peace. Having procured the restoration of Sforza to his
paternal dominions, which had been their chief motive
for entering into a confederacy with Charles, they plainly
discovered their intention to contribute no longer towards
increasing the Emperor's superiority over his rival, which
was already the objea of their jealousy. The Pope efpe-
cially, whore natural timidity increased his suspicions of
Charles's designs, endeavoured, by his ambassadors and re-

monflrances,

monstrances, to inspire him with moderation, and incline BOOK IV.
him to peace.

13UT the Emperor, intoxicated with success, and urged Ch1,514

on by his own ambition, no less than by Bourbon's desire sol,,e to in.
of revenge, contemncd Clement's admonitions, and de vadeFrance.
Jared his resolution of ordering his army to pass the
Alps, and to invade Provence, a part of his rival's do-
minions, where he least dreaded an attack, and was leafs
prepared to refill it. His molt experienced minitiers dif-
fladed him from undertaking such an enterplvze with a
fcble army, and an exhaufled treasury: But he relied so
much on having obtained the concurrence of the King of
Enigand, and ui ilic hopcs ,.l-'ch Bourbon, u ,ith ,rh con-
fidcnce and credulity natural to exiles, entertained of being
joined by a numerous body of his partisans as soon as the
Imperial troops should enter France, that he persisted ob-
Ilinatelv in the measure. Henry undertook to furnish an
hundred thousand ducats towards defraying the expence of
the expedition during the first month, and had it in his
choice either to continue the payment of that fum month-
ly, or to invade Picardy, before the end of July, with a
.powerful army. The Emperor engaged to attack G uienne
a: the fame time with a considerable body of men; and if
these enterprises proved successful, they agreed that Bour-
lon, besides the territories he had loft, should be put in
pnofeflion of Provence, with the title of King, and ihould
do homage to H-lenrv, as the lawful King of France, for
his new dominions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant projet, the invasion of Provence was the
only one which was executed. For although Bourbon,
with a scrupulous delicacy, altogether unexpeted after
the part he had aaed, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby ab-
solved him from any obligation to promote the enterprise,
Charles's eagerness to carry his own plan into execution
did not in any degree abate. The army he employed for
that purpose amounted only to eightetn thousand men;
the supreme command of which was given to the Marquis
de Pescara, with inftruaions to pay the greatest deference
to Bourbon's advice in all his operations. Pescara passed Thbe 1':nC-
the Alps without opposition, and entering Provence, laid ,li", i,
ficge to Marseilles. Bourbon had advited him rather toAuguit o9.
march towards Lyons, in the neghbourhood of which
city his territories were situated, and where of course his
influence was most extensive. But the Emperor was so

G g 4 desirous

BooK IV. desirous to get possession of a port, which would, at all
,- times, secure him easy access into France, that by his au-

'5S14 thority he over-ruled the Conitable's opinion, and dirc.-

ed Pescara to make the reduaion of Marseilles his chicf
object [].

Prudent FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to prever,
measures of
Frlncis. this attempt, took the moll proper precautions to defeat it.

He laid wafle the adjacent country, in order to render it
more difficult for the enemy to subsist their army; he
razed the siburbs of the city, strengthened its fortiications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the command
of brave and experienced officers. To there, nine thou-
sand of the citizens, whom their dread of the Spanifli
yoke inspircd with contempt of danger, joined themselves;
by their united courage and industry, all the efforts of
Pescara's military (kill, and of Bourbon's ativity and re-
venge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean-while,
had leisure to assemble a powerful army under the walls cf
Avignon, and no sooner began to advance towards Mhar-

mperialinfs feilles, than the Imperial troops, exhautied by the fa-
forced to tigues of a siege which had lasted forty days, weakened b,
retret. diseases, and almost. deflitute of provisions, retired with
OsrL '19. precipitation towards Italy ["].

IF during thefc operations of the army in Provence,

either Charles or Henry had attacked France in the man-
ner which they had proje&ed, that kingdom must have
been expofedto the motl imminent danger. But on thls,
as well as on many other occasions, the Emperor fourl
that the extent of his revenues was not adequate to the
grcatr.fs of his power, or the ardourof his ambition, and
the want of money obliged him, though with much re-
luaance, to circumscribe his plan, and to leave part of
it unexecuted. Henry, disgusted at Bourbon's refufingto
recognize his right to the crown of France; alarmed it
the motions of the Scots, whom the solicitations of the
Frch King had persuaded to march towards the borders
of England; and no longer incited by his minister, who
was become extremely cool with regard to the Emperor's
interests; took no meafurcs to support an entcrprize, of

a[] Guic. I. 15. 173, &e. Mem. de Belly, p. 8o.
] CGuic. 1. 15. 277. Ullol VitL dell Carlo V. p. 93.

which

w-hich, as of all new undertakings, he had been at firll cx- BOOK IV.
ceifively fend [c.

IF the King of France had been satisfied with having Frai ela-

delivered his lubjeas from this formidable invasion, and ted with his
having shewn all Europe the facility with which the inter- fuLcecs.
ral strength of his dominions enabled him to resist the
imprefiions of a foreign enemy, even when seconded Iv
the abilities and powerful efforts of a rebellious fibjed,
the campaign, notwithilanding the loss of the Milanese,
w.ould have been far from ending ingloriouflv. But
Francis, animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; puShed on by ambition, enterprir.i
railthr than co.il.derate; and too apt to be elated wih
,uccefs; was fond of every undertaking that seemed bold
ard adventurous. Such an undertaking, the situation of Reoles to
his affairs at that junaure, naturally presented to his view. Milanlcfc.
lie had under his command one of the most powerful and
best appointed armies France had ever brought into the
field, which he could not think of disbanding without
having employed it in any service. The Imperial troops
had been obliged to retire alinoft ruined by hard dutv,
and difheartcned m ith ill fucccfs; the Milanese had been
left altogether without defence; it was not irpoffible to
reach that country before Pescara, with his thattered forces,
could arrive there; or if fear should add speed to their
retreat, they were in no condition to make head against
his fresh and numerous troops; and Milan culd now, as
in former inflanccs, submit u ithout rcfiftanceto a bold in-
vader. Those considerations, which were not deflitute
of plausibility, appeared to his sanguine temper to be of
the utmost weight. In vain did his wifefi miniftcrs and
generals represent to him the danger of taking the field at
a season so far advanced, with an army composed chiefly
of Swiss and Germans, to whose caprices he would be
subjec in all his operations, and on whose fidelity his
safety mull absolutely depend. In vain did LqIte of
Savoy advance by hasty journies towards Provence, that
she might exert all her authority in dissuading her son
from such a rash enterprize. Francis disregarded the re-
monstrances of his fubjeas; and that he might save him-
self the pain of an interview with his mother, whose
counsels he had determined to reje&, he began his march
[U] Fidds's Life of Wolefy. Append. N° o, 7 , t z.

before

BooK 1V. before her arrival; appointing her, however, by way of

- atonement for that neglet, to be regent of the kingdom

154. during his absence. Bonnivet, by his persuasions, contri-

A' 'lin'ler buted hot a little to confirm Francis in this resolution.
tcgcit dur- 'That favourite who strongly rcfembled his master in all
ing hi, ab- the defecdive parts of his chara&er, was led by his na-
i"Lt"iL tural impetuosity, warmly to approve of such an enter-

prize; and being prompted besides by his impatience to
revisit a Milanele lad-, of whom he had been deeply
enamoured during his late expedition, he is said, by his
flattering descriptions of her beauty and accomplishments
to have inlpired Francis, who was extremely f:!!ceptible
of fiuch passions, with an equal desire of feeing her [].

Opra:icr.s THE French paifed the Alps at Mount Cenis; and as
in the Mi- their success depended on dispatch, they advanced with

the greatest diligence. Pescara, who had been obliged
to take a longer and more difficult rout by Monaco and
Final, was loon informed of their intention; and being
sensible that nothing but the presence of his troops could
lave the Milanefc, marched with such rapidity, that he
reached Alva on the fame day that the French army
arrived at Vercelli. Francis, inftru&ed by Bonnivet's
error in the former campaign, advanced direcfly towards
Milan, where the unexpeced approach of an enemy io
poweilul, occasioned such conflernation and disorder, that
although Pescara entered the city with some of his best
troops, he found that the defence of it could not be un-
dertaken with any probability of luccefs; and having thrown
a garrison into the citadel, retired through one gate, while
the French were admitted at another [].

mhbaraffirg THESE brisk motions of the French Monarch difcon-
nle or tle ccrted all the schemes of defence which the Imperialiits
Inperialills. had formed. Never, indeed, did generals attempt to

oppose a formidable invasion under such circumflances of
disadvantage. Tho' Charles pofeffed dominions more
cxtenfive than any other Prince in Europe, and had, at
this time, no other army but that which was employed in
Lombardy, which did not amount to sixteen thousand
men, his prerogative in all his different dates was folimit-
ed, and his fubjeats, without whose consent he could raise
no taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden them-
selves with new and extraordinary impositions, that even

[di Oeuv. de Brant. tom. vi. j13.
e] Mem. dc Bellay, p. 81. Guic, I. I1. 178,

this

this small body of troops was in want of pay, of ammuni- BOOK IV.
tion, of provisions, and of cloathing. In such a situation, ----)
it required all the wisdom of Lannov, the intrepidity of 5S1^
Pescara, and the implacable resentment of Bourbon, to
prcierve them from finking under despair, and to in'pire
them with resolution to attempt, or fagacitv to dilcover
what was essential to their safety. To the efforts of their
genius, and the ativity of their zeal, the Emperor was
more indebted for the preicrvation of his Italian dominions
than to his own power. Lannoy, by mortgaging the re-
venues of Naples, procured some money, which was im-
mediately applied towards providing the army with what-
ever was mou; n.cei.ry [1. Pei'rar beloved and al-
most adored by the Spanish troops, exhorted them to shew
the world, by their engaging to serve the Emperor, in that
dangerous exigency, without making any immediate'de-
mand of pay, that they were animated with sentiments of
honour very different from those of mercenary soldiers, to
which proposition, that gallant body of men with an
unexampled generosity gave their content [1. Bourbon
having raised a considerable fum, by pawning his jewels,
set out for Germany, where his influence was great, that
by his presence he might haRlen the levying of troops for
the Imperial service [h].

FRANCIS, by a'fatal error, allowed the Emperor's ranci '.-

generals time to derive advantage from all these operati- Gege: Pa-ia.
ons. Instead of pursuing the enemy, who retired to Lodi
on the Adda, an untenable post, which Pescara had re-
solved to abandon on his approach, he, in compliance
with the opinion of Bonnivet, though contrary to that
of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Tefino; Oaobr S.
a town, indeed, of great importance, the poffeflion of
which would have opened to him all the fertile country
lying on the banks of that river. But the fortifications of
the place were firong; it was dangerous to undertake a
difficult siege, at so late a season; and the Imperial gene-
rals, sensible of its consequence, had thrown into the town
a garrison of fix thousand veterans, under the command
of Antonio de Lcyva, an officer of high rank; of great
experience; of a patient but enterprizing courage; fertile

f] Cuic. I. i5. 80o.
[] Jovii Vit. Davali. lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. 6 . Ulln, Vita

delli Crlo V. p. 94, &c. Vida dell Emper. Carloh V. per Vitl y
ZunieK. p. 36.
[h] Mem. de Bellay, p. 83.

in

BOOK IV. in resources; ambitious of diflinguifhing himself; and

--v--4 ' capable, for that reason, as well as from his having been
';54. long accustomed both to obey and to command, of susser-

ing or performing any thing in order to procure success.

His vigor- FRANCIS prolecuted the siege with obstinacy equal to
ous efforts. the rashness with which he had undertaken it. During

three months, every thing known to the engineers of that
age, or that could be effected by the valour of his troops,
was attempted in order to reduce the place while Lannoy
and Pescara, unable to obflrua his operations, were obli-
ged to remain in such an ignominious itate of ina&ion,
that a Pasquinade was publilhed at Rome. offering a re-
ward to any person who could find the Imperial army,
loft in the month of Ocober in the mountains between
France and Lombardy, and which had not been heard of
since that time [i].

The town LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties under
gallarnlyde-which his countrymen laboured, and the impoflibility of

their facing, in the field, such a powerful army as formed
the siege of Pavia, placed his only hopes of safety in his
own vigilance and valour. The efforts of both were ex-
traordinary, and in proportion to the/importance of the
place, with the defence of which he was intrufled. He
interrupted the approaches of the French by frequent and
furious sallies. Behind the breaches which their artillery
made, he ere&ed new works, that appeared to be scarce
inferior in tirength to the original fortifications. He re-
pulsed the besiegers in all their aftaults; and by his own
example, brought not only the garrison, but the inhabit-
ants to bear the mofi intolerable fatigues, and to encounter
the greatest dangers without murmuring. The rigour of
the season conspired with his endeavours in retarding the
progress of the French. Francis attempting to become
mailer of the town, by diverting the course of the Tefino,
which is its defence on one fide, a sudden inundation of
the river destroyed, in one day, thelabour of many weeks,
and swept away all the mounds which his army had raised
with infinite toil, as well as at great expence k].

NOTW ITHSTANDING the flow progress of the be-

fiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired by his gallant
detcnce, it was not doubted but that the town would at

Thepe oe las be obliged to surrender. The Pope, who already con-
concludes a
treaty of r t i. óo.
treralt . Il Sandov. i. óo8.

neutrality. uic. 1. \it% . Ulloa Vit i11 CartkV. p. 95.

fidcred

fidered the French arms as superior in Italy, became im- Bo K IV.
patient to disengage himself from his connections with -v-
the Emperor, of whose designs he was extremelyjealous; '524.
and to enter into terms of friendship with Francis. As
Clement's timid and cautious temper rendered him inca-
pable of following the bold plan which Leo had formed
of delivering Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he
returned to the more obvious and pracicable scheme of
employing the power of the one to balance and to restrain
that of the other. For this reason, he did not dissemble
his fatisfa&ion at feeing the French King recover Milan,
as he hoped that the dread of such a neighbour would be
some check upon the Eiperor'. ambition, which no Dower
in Italy was now able to control. He laboured hard to
bring about a peace that would secure Francis in poffelion
of his new conquests; and as Charles, who was always
inflexible in the prosecution of his schemes, rejeted the
proposition with disdain, and with bitter exclamations
against the Pope, by whose persuasions while Cardinal di
Medici, he had been induced to invade the Milanese,
Clement immediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with
the King of France, in which the republic of Florence
was included Il.

FRANCIS having by this tranfa&ion, deprived ther,,,,,,,

Emperor of his two most powerful allies, and at the fame vades Na-
time having secured a passage for his own troops through ples.
their territories, formed a scheme of attacking the king-
dom of Naples, hoping either to over-run that country,
which was left altogether without defence, or that at lead
such an unexpeced invasion would oblige the viceroy to
recall part of the Imperial army out of the Milanese. For
this purpose he ordered fix thousand men to march under
the command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But Pes-
cara foreseeing that the effet of this diverion would de-
pend entirely upon the operations of the armies in the Mi-
lanefe, persuaded Lannoy to disregard Albany's motions
[m], and to bend his whole force against the King him-
self; so that Francis not only weakened his army very un-
seasonably by this great detachment; but incurred the re-
proach of engaging too rashly in chimercial and extrava-
gant projets.

[I] Guic I. a1. l8t,tS s.
[m] Ibid, i. i. S. s-

MEAN-

BOOK IV. MEANWHILE the garrison of Pavia was reduced
--' -' extremity; their ammunitions and provisions began t,
rffst 4 fail; the Germans, of whom it was chiefly compoed
rctar;i ald having received no pay for seven months [I,, threatenec
1Buurbon. to deliver the town into the enemies hands, and coulc

fcarcc be retained from mutiny by all Leyva's addrels and
authority. The Imperial generals, who were no stranger:
to his situation, saw the neceflity of marching withou:
logs of time to his relief. This they had now in their
power : Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
acii ity of Bourbon taught to move with unusual rapidity,
had entered Lombardy under his command, and rendered
lilr imperial army nearly equal to that of the French,
}'reatly diminished by the ablence of the body under Al-
banv, as well as by the fatigues of the siege, and the ri-
gtur of the season. But the more their troops increaicd
in number, the more lenfibly did they feel the diftrti-
arising fiom want of money. Far from having funds for pa!-
i;:g a powvcrful army, they had scarce what was lufficient for
detratinrg the charges of conduting their artillery, and
of carr ing their ammunition and provisions. The abi-
lities of the generals, however, supplied every defecd
By their own example, as well as by magnificent promileJ
in the name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the troop,
of all the different nations which composed their army, to
take the field without pay; they engaged to lead them di-
rctaly towards the enemy; and flattered them with the
certain profpc& of vitorv, which would at once enriLh
them \' ilh such royal spoils as would be an ample reward
for li :! '.rfervices. The soldiers, sensible that by quit-
ting the army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due to
them, and eager to get poflellionofthe promised treasures,
demanded a battle with all the impatience of adventurers
who fought only for plunder [m].

Sl25. THE Imperial generals, without suffering the ardour

Tli cynrch of their troops to cool, advanced immediately towards the
,lr Ir.,ch, French camp. )On the si ft intelligence of their approach,
Fcbluary 3. Francis called a council of war, to deliberate what courie

he ought to take. All his officers of greatcft experience
were unanimous in advising him to retire, and to decline
a battle with an enemy who courted it from dcfpair. The

rna] ;old. Polit. Imperial. 87q.
[m] Elyci Prutcani Hit. C4lilpitr ap. GCrvii Thef. Antiquit. Ital.
ili . 1170, i 7r 9.

leaders

leaders of the Imperialists, they observed, would either BOOK IV-
be obliged in a few weeks to diiband an army, which v
they were unable to pay, and which they kept together 'S'2
only by the hope of pillage, or the soldiers, enraged at the
non-perftom:ance of the promises to which tlcyv had
trultcd, would rife in obine furious mutiny, whic h would
allow them to think of nothing but their ox\n lal'v:
''hat, mean1while, he mihit eninlmp in iomc flrong p'Ci;,
-nrd waiting in safety the arrival of ftrfli trluo,s tron
France and Swit/.vruand, might, before the end of litrin-r,
lake polfetlion of all the Milanci, without danger, (.r
blocdflitd. But in (,,position to thein, Bonnimet, whole
t!..'lli;j it '.l:' to giV;: Lounlcl, fatal to France during th-
whole campaign, reprefelited the ignominiy it wuuid re-
flea on their oovereign if he should abandon a siege which
he had prolfcutcd ob :rPg, or turn his back before In ene-
my to whom he was still luperior in number; and infifl-
ed on the nccefiity of fighting the Impeiialills rather than
relinquish an undertaking, on the success of which the
King's future fame depended. Unfortunately, Francib's
notions of honour were delicate to an excess that bordcicd
on what was romantic. Having often said that he would
take Pavia, or perish in the attempt, he thought himself
bound not to depart from that resolution; and rather than
expose himself to the slightest imputation,' he chose to
forego all the advantages which were the certain conle-
quences 6f a retreat, and determined to wait for the Im-
perialilts before the walls of Pavia [I3.

THE Imperial generals found the French so strongly n:tItl of

entrenched, that notwithstanding the powerful motives Pavi'
which urged them on, they hesitated long before they
ventured to attack them; but at last the necessitics of the
besieged, and the murmurs of their own loldiers, obliged
them to put every thing to hazard. Never did armies re. 24.
engage with greater ardour, or with an higher opinion of
the importance of the battle they were going to fight;
never were troops more firongly animated with emulation,
national antipathy, mutual rcfentmcnt, and all the paflions
which inspire obstinate bravery. On the one hand, a
gallant young Monarch, seconded by a generous nobility,
and followed by subje&s to whose natural impetuosity, in-
dignation at the opposition they had encountered, added
new force, contended for vitory and honour. On the

[n] Guic. I. iS.:i1.

other

BOOK IV. other fide, troops more completely disciplined, and con-
(,
-- i duled by generals of greater abilities, fought from necel-

Ss15. fity, with courage heightened by delpair. The Impcri-

alifs, however, were unable to refill the si.ft efforts ct.
the French valour, and their firmest battalions began to
give way. But the fortune of the day was quickly chan-
ged. T he Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of
the reputation of their country for fidelit) and martial
gleor, abandoned their poll in a cowardly manner. Lev-
va, with his garriion, sallied out and attacked the rere of
the French during the heat of the aEtion wilh such fury as
threw it into cnfulfion; and EPIcara falling on their
caval:-! with rh lI Ilmri! here, amo:ng !he.m he !ad
prudently intermingled a confide able number of Spanifil
toot, armed with the heavy mufLets then in use, broke
this formidable body by an unuliual method of attack

TheFrtrnch againtf which they were wholly unprovided. The rout
rmy r-ut- became unlverfal; and resistance ceaicd in almost every
eux part, but where the King was in person, w-ho fiught now,

not for tame or victorv, lut for safety. Though wounded
in several places, ard thrown from hir ho:lc which was
killed under him, Francis defended himself on foot with
an heroic courage. Miany of his bravest officers gather-
ing round him, and er.jcavouring to save his life at the
expence of their own, teli at his feet. Among these was
Bonnivet, the author of this great calamity, who alone
died unlamented. The King exhaulted with fatigue, and
Icarce capable of farther resistance, was left almost alone,
expoled to the fury of some :parilTh foldicrs, fitangers to
his rank, and enraged at his obfliilacy. At that moment
came up Pomperant, a French gentleman, who had en-
tertd together with Bourbon into the Emperor's service,
and placing himself by the fide of the Monarch againdf
whom he had rebelled, ailifled in protecting him from
the violence of the soldiers; at the fame time bciecching
him to surrender to Bourbon, who was not far dillant.
imminent as the danser was x hich now surrounded Fran-
c s, he rejeaed with indignation the thoughts of an ation
which would have afiorled luch matter of triumph to his

PI,,tci, traiterous subjea; and calling for Lannov, who happen-
tlaen ed likewise to be near at hand, gave up his sword to him;
pilloutr. which he, kneeling to kiis the King's hand, received with

profound refpet; and taking his own sword from his
Gide, prelented it to him, faying, That it did not become

sb

so great a Monarch to remain disarmed in the presence oFBoox IV.
one of the Emperor's fubjed:s [-'].

TEN thouland men fell on this day, one of the most 'l S

fatal France had ever seen. Among there were many no-
blemeH of the highest diffintion, who chose rather to pe-
rifll than to turn their backs with dishonour. Not a few
were taken prisoners, of whom the most illultrious was
Ilinrv D'Albert, the unfortunate King of Navarre. A
imrall body of the rear-guatd made its escape under the
command of the duke Alencon; the feeble garrison of
Milan on the firfl news of the defeat, retired without be-
ing purlued, by another road; and in two weeks after the
battle, not a Frenchman remainaed in ltaly.

LANSOY, though he treated Francis with all the out-

ward marks of honour due to his rank and chara&er,
guarded him with the utmost attention. He was folici-
tous, not only to prevent any poflibility of his escaping,
but afraid that his own troops might seize his person, and
detain it as the best security for the payment of their ar-
rears. In order to provide against both there dangers, he
conduEted Francis, the day after the battle, to the strong
catfle of Pizzichitone near Cremona, committing him to
the cuflody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the
Spanilh infantry, an officer of great bravery, and of firi&
honour, but remarkable for that revere and scrupulous vi-
gilance which such a trust required.

MEANWHILE Francis, who formed a judgment of the

Emperor's dispositions by his own, was extremely desirous
that Charles thould be informed of his situation, fondly
hoping that from his generosity or sympathy, he would
ohtain speedy relief. The Imperial generals were no less
impatient to give their sovereign an early account of the
decisive vitory which they had gained, and to receive his'
inftru&ions with regard to their future condu&. As the
molt certain and expeditious method of conveying intelli-
gence to Spain, at that season of the year, was by land,
Francis gave the Commendador Pennalofa, who was
charged with Lanioy's dispatches, a palfport to travel
through France.

CHARtI.S received the account of this signal and unex- Eife of
peaed success that had crowned his arms, with a modera- this viaory

lrr

[u] Coit. 1. 1. 9as. 'Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 3J. Mem. de Baky, p. March ao.

9o. Sndov. Hii. i. 6313, &c. P. Mart Ep. lo5, #io. Rufcclli Lelore
L' Prinsip. ii. p. 70. ..Ulh Vita dell Culo V. p. g9.
.VOL. I. H h tion,

BOOK IV. sion, which if it had been real, would have done him

- more honour than the greatest vi&ory. Without uttering
S*25. one word expreflive of exultation, or of intemperate joy,

he retired immediately into his chapel, and having spent
an hour in offering up his thanksgivings to heaven, return-
ed to the prefence-chamber, which by that time was filled
with grandees and foreign ambassadors, aflembled in order
to congratulate him: He accepted of their compliments
with a modest deportment; he lamented the misfortune of
the captive King, as a friking example of the fad reverse
of fortune, to which the mofl powerful monarchs are
fubje&; he sorbad any public rejoicings, as indecent in a
war carried on among Chrifians, reserving them until he
ihould obtain a viaory equally illutrious over the infidels;
and seemed to take pleasure in the advantage he had gain-
ed, only as it would prove the occasion of rcfloring peace
to Chriflendom [p].

The CHARLES, however, had already begun to form
Icheties he schemes in his own mind, which little suited such external
began to
fen to appearances. Ambition, not generosity, was the ruling

passion in his mind; and the vicory at Pavia opened such
new and unbounded profpeEs of gratifying it, as allured
him with irresistible force: But it being no easy matter to
execute the vast designs which he meditated, he thought
it necessary, while proper measures were taking for that
purpose, to assea the greatest moderation, hoping under
that veil to conceal his real intentions from the other Prin-
ces of Europe.

Thegeneral MEANWHILE France was filled with conternation.
conftenai- The King himself had early transmitted an account of the
oinrce. rout at Pavia, in a letter to his mother delivered by Penna-

lofa, which contained only these words, " Madam all is
, loft except our honour." Those who survived, when
they arrivedfrom Italy, brought such a melancholy detail
of particulars, as made all ranks of men sensibly feel the
greatness and extent of the calamity. France, without
its sovereign, without money in her treasury, without
an army, without officers to command it, and encompaf-
fed on all fides by a victorious and afive enemy, seered

The pro- to be on the very brink of deftru&ion. But on that oc-
deoi con- cafion the great abilities of Louise the regent saved the
,ct&.. tlhe
ReeCnlt.l kingdom, which the violence of her pailions had more

than once exposcd to the greatest danger. Instead of giv-

[1l 8indov, HilQ. . ó. U65 llo Vi dollCuarb V. p. i io.

·og

ing herself up to such lamentations as were natural to aBooK IV.
woman so remarkable for her maternal tenderness, Ihe dif-'---.
covered all the foresight, and exerted all the acivity of a 15ss.
consummate politician. She assembled the nobles at Li-
ons, and animated them by her example, no less than by
her words, with such zeal in defence of their country as
its preTent situation required. She collected the remains
of the army which had served in Italy, ransomed the pri-
foners, paid their arrears, and put them in a condition to
take the field. She levied new troops, provided for the
security of the frontiers, and raised furns sufficient for de-
fraying these extraordinary expences. Her chief care,
however, was to appease the resentment, or to gain the
iriendihip of the King of England; and from that quar-
ter, the firfl ray of comfort broke in upon the French
affairs..

THOUGH Henry, in entering into alliances withffe^tSof

the vietory

Charles or Francis, seldom followed any regular or con- t epaV, on
certed plan of policy, but was influenced chiefly by the Henry VIti;
caprice of temporary pallions, such occurrences often hap-
pened as recalled his attention towards that equal balance
of power, which it was necessary to keep between the two
contending potentates, the preservation of which he al-
ways boasted to be his peculiar office. He had expedted
that his union with the Emperor might afford him an op-
portunity of recovering some part of those territories in
France which had belonged to his anceflors, and for the
fake of such an acquisition he did not scruple to give his
affislance towards raising Charles to a confiderabk pre-
eminence above Francis. He had never dreamed, how-
ever, of any event so decisive and so fatal as the vicory at
Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken, but to
have annihilated the power of one of the rivals; so that
the profpea of the sudden and entire revolution which
this would occasion in the political system, filled him with
the most disquieting apprehensions. He saw all Europe
in danger of being over-run by an ambitious prince, to
whose power there now remained no counterpoise; and
though he himself might at firfi be admitted, in quality
of an ally, to some share in the spoils of the captive Mo-
narch, it was easy to discern that with regard to the man-
ner of making the partition, as well as his security for
keeping poTfeflion of what should be allotted him, he must
absolutely depend upon the will of a confederate, to whose
forces his own bore no proportion. He was feniible that

H h z if

BOOK IV. if Charles were permitted to add any considerable part of

L'~-v'' France t¢ the vast dominions of which he was already
sl2sr master, his neighbourhood would be much more formida-

ble to England than that of the ancient French King's;
while, at the fame time, the proper balance on the con-
tinent, to which England owed both its safety and import-
ance, would be entirely loft. Concern for the situation of
the unhappy Monarch co-operated with these political
considerations; his gallant behaviour in the battle of IPavia
had excited an high degree of admiration, which never
fails of augmenting sympathy; and Henry, naturally sus-
ceptible of generous sentiments, was fond of appearing as
the deliverer of a vanquished enemy from a state of capti-
vity. The paflions of the Englifl minister seconded the
inclinations of the Monarch. Wolfey, who had not for-
got the disappointment of his hopes in two successive con-
claves, which he imputed chiefly to the Emperor, thought
this a proper opportunity of taking revenge; and Louise
courting the friendship of England with such flattering sub-
miflions as were no less agreeable to the King than to the
Cardinal, Henry gave her secret assurances that he would
not lend his aid towards opprefling France, in its present
helpless state, and obliged her to promise that she would
not content to dismember the kingdom even in order to
procure her son's liberty [q].

BuT as Henry's connecions with the Emperor made it

necessary to at in such a manner, as to save appearances,
he ordered public rejoicings to be made in his dominions
for the success of the Imperial arms; and as if he had
been eager to seize the present opportunity of ruining the
French monarchy, he sent ambassadors to Madrid, to
congratulate with Charles upon his viaory; to put him in
mind, that he, ai his ally, engaged in one common canfe,
was entitled to partake in the fruits of it; and to require
that in compliance with the terms of their confederacy, he
would invade Guienne with a powerful army, in order to
give him.poffeflion of that province. At the fame time,
he offered to fend the princess Mary into Spain or the
Low-Countries, that she might be educated trider the
Emperor's direcion, until the conclusion of the marriage
agreed on between them , and in return for that mark of
his confidence he infifled that Francis thould be delivered
to him, in consequence of that article in the treaty of Bru-

[q] Mem. de Beill', p. 94. Guic. 1. 16. 318. Herbcrt.

ges,

ges, whereby each of the contracing parties was boundBooK IV.
to surrender all usurpers to him whose rights they had in- ' '
vaded. It was impofihble that Henry could expect that 1525'
the Emperor would lifien to there extravagant demands,
which it was neither his interest, nor in his power to grant.
They appear evidently to have been made with no other
intention than to furnish him with a decent pretext for
entering into such engagements with France as the juncure
required r].

IT was among the Italian frates, that the viaory atOn hcJ Ia-

Pavia occasioned the greatefl alarm and terror. That liin" po r.
balance of power on which they relied for their security,
and w hch it had been the conflant obje& of all their ne-
gotiatic ns and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a
moment., They were exposed by their ituiation to feel
the first effcas of the uncontrolled autlhority Chiarles siad
acqulired. Ihey observed many symptoms of a houndlefs
ambition in that young prince, and were sensible that as
Empcror, or King of Naples, he could cither form dan-
gcrous pretcrifions upon each of their territories, or invade
them with great advantage. They deliberated, therefore,
with much solicitude concerning the means of raiting Iuch
a force as might obftrutc his progref: [T]. But their con-
uliations, conduaed with little union, ar(d executed u'iih
lets vigour, had no effect. Clement, infkad of piufiilg.
the meaftres which he had concerted with the V\c::cians
for securing the liberty of Italy, was so intimidated Iy
,annoy's threats, or overcome by his promirfs, tllat he Arrl -
entered into a fcparate treaty, binding himself to advance
a confider;ble fTm in reulrn for certain emoluments whici
he was to receive. The money was inflantly paid;
Charles afterwards rerurcd to ratiry the treaty; and the
Pope remained exposcd at once to infamy and to ridicule;
to the former, because he had deserted the public cau!e
for his private inteieft ; to the latter, becaule he had bect
a laor Iy that unworthy atio;n 1'].

IHow tlic(ihonoirahlc iocvet the artifice mirhit he which Muinr .n

was cmployed in wtlder to defraud the Pope of this fum, " Im"' ... :
it came very feaConal)ly into the viceroy's hand(l, and piut tam).
it iii his power to cKxtricatc hIimfelf o>ut of an imminent

[*] HI hcr-et, r 64.

t] (ui. . 6. 300. Ructl; l.eltelT ile Plilc. ii. 74, 76, &Sc. l'Tn

wl I-list. U')1

i.c

. t .
' ez. V 1 131, 1J6.

t h1 3 dan;,er.

Boox IV. danger. Soon after the defeat of the French army, the
^-^- GGerman troops which had defended Pavia with such me-

515'. ritorious courage and perseverance, growing insolent upon

the fame they had acquired, and impatient of relying any
longer on fruitless promises with which they had been so
often amused, rendered themselves mailers of the town,
with a resolution to keep possession of it as a security for
the payment of their arrears, and the reft of the army
discovered a much stronger inclination to affif, than to
punish the mutineers. By dividing among them the mo-
ney exaced from the Pope, Lannoy quieted the tumul-
tuous Germans; but though this satisfied their present de-
mands, he had to little prufpedt of being able to pay
them or his other forces regularly for the future, and was
under such continual apprehensions of their seizing the
person of the captive King, that not long after, he was
obliged to dismiss all the Germans and Italians in the Im-
perial service [uL Thus, from a circumfiance that now
appears very singular, but arising naturally from the con-
fiitution of most European governments in the sixteenth
century, while Charles was fufpeted by all his neighbours
of aiming at universal monarchy, and while he was really
forming vast projecs of this kind, his revenues were so
limited, that he could not keep on foot his victorious ar-
my, though it did not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

The Empe- DURING these tranfations, Charles, whose pretensions
for', deibe to moderation and disinterestedness were soon forgotten,
cerning the deliberated with the utmost solicitude, how he might de-
manner of rive the greatef advantages from the misfortune of his
ismvpting adversary. Some of his counsellors advised him to treat

s Francis with the magnanimity that became a victorious

Prince, and inflead of taking advantage of his filuation
to impose rigorous conditions, to dilmifs him on such
equal terms, as would bind him for ever to his interest by
the ties of gratitude and affection, more forcible as well
as more permanent than any which could be formed by
extorted oaths and involuntary stipulations. Such an ex-
ertion of generosity is not, perhaps, to be expeaed in the
condut of political affairs, and it was far too refined for
that Prince to whom it was proposed. The more obvi-
ous, but less (plendid scheme of endeavouring to make
the utmost of Francis's calamity, had a greater number in
the council to recommend it, and suited better with the

[u] Guic. 1. 1i. p. 301.

Emperor's

Emperor's genius. But though Charles adopted this plan, Boor IV.
he did not execute it in a proper manner. Inflead of'v"-'
making one great effort to penetrate into France with all i5's
the forces of Spain and the Low-Countries; inflead of
crushing the Italian flates before they recovered from the
conflernation which the success of his arms had occasioned;
he had recourSe to the artifices of intrigue and negotiation.
This proceeded partly from necessity, partly from the na-
tural disposition of his mind. The situation of his sinan-
ces at that time rendered it extremely difficult to carry on
any extraordinary armament; and he himself having ne-
\er appeared at the head of his armies, the command of
which he had hitherto committed to his generals, wss
averse from bold and martial counsels, and trusted more to
the arts with which he was acquainted. He laid, besides,
too much stress upon the victory of Pavia, as if by that
event the firength of France had been annihilated, its re-
sources exhaufled, and the kingdom itself, no lets than
the person of its Monarch, had been fubjeaed to his
power.

FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the highest The ,ig-

price upon Francis's freedom, and having appointed the i^ ",'r,,%~
count de Rocux to visit the captive King in his name, he to r'aci-.'
inftru&ed him to propose the following articles, as the
conditions on which he would grant him his liberty ; that
he shouid restore Burgundy to the Emperor, from whole
ancestors it had been unjustly wrested, that he should fur-
render Provence and Dauphine, that they might be ereA-
ed into an independent kingdom.for the Conflahle Bour-
bon; that he should make full ratisfaQion to the King of
England for all his claims; and finally, renounce the prec
tensions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other terri-
tory in Italy. When Francis, who had hitherto flatterrd
himself that he should be treated by the Emperor with
the generosity becoming one great Prince towards ano-
ther, heard these rigorous conditions, he was so transport-
ed with indignation, that drawing his dagger haftiiy, he
cried out, " 'Twere better that a King should die thus."
Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence, laid hold on his
hand; but though he soon recovered greater composure,
he flill declared in the moR solemn manner, that he would
rather remain a prisoner during life, than purchase liberty
by such ignominious conccflions [1x.

[x] Mer. de Bllely, 94. Ferrerb'r HiR. ix. 43.

iH h 4 T'1it

BooK IV. THIS mortifying discovery of the Emperor's intentions,
< ~-'- greatly augmented Francis's chagrin and impatience undtr

'S25cr- his confinement, and mull have driven him to absolute

ried prilonerdefpair, if he had not laid hold of the only thing which
to Spain. fill could administer to him any comfort. He persuaded

himself, that the conditions which Roeux had proposed,
did not 'ow originally from Charles himself, but were dic-
tated hy the rigorous policy of his Spanish council, and
that therefore he might hope in one per!onal interview
with him, to do more towards haflening his own deliver-
ance, than could be effeEted by long negotiations paflir.g
through the subordinate hands of his minifiers. Relyirg
on this supposition, which proceeded fiom ton favon;alhle
an opinion of the Emperor's character, he ossetrd to visit
him in Spain, and was willing to be carried tliiticr as a
fpe-acle to that haughty nation. Iannoy cmplcyed all
his addrcfs to confirm him in these fcntiments; and con-
certed with him in secret the manner of executing Ihis rc-
solution. Francis was so eager on a f( home u hich fecmcd
to open some prospect of liberty, that he fIlnifhed the
gallies necessary for the voyage, Charles being at that
time unable to set any fleet to sea. The viceroy, without
communicating his intentions either to Bourbon or Pcfca-
ra, conduced his prisoner toward Genoa, under pretence
of transporting him hy sea to Naples; though soon after
they set fail, he ordered the pilots to fleer dircclly f:r
Spain; but the wind happening to carry them ne.ar the
French coafi, the unfortunate monarc-i hjd a full profpc.t
of his own dominions, towards which he calt many a for-
rowful and desiring look. They landed, howev r, in a
AuguP 24. few days at Barctlona, and soon after, Francis was lodngc,

by the Emperor's command, in the Alc.7ar of Madid,
undrr the care of the vigilant Aiancon, who gnardtd hini
with as much circumfpetion as .v r ['1.

Henry VIIi. A Frt. days after Frantis's arrival at Madiid, anil
crrcludar when he began to be sensible of his having relied without
,,a, ,'ih foundation on the Emperor's generosity, I!enry VIII. con-
Frrdr ,0 cluded a treaty wih the Regent of France, which afford-
pr-curr hi. ed him feme hope of liberty from anoth(r quarter. Icr.-

l. iv's extravagant demands had been received at Madrid

wilh that neglcrt which Ihr) dJr!'rvred, and which he pio-
bKbly expeced. Charle,, intoxicated vith profperi't,
no long,-r courted him in that rtfptiuful and fubmiflic

[y] Merm. te LCtly, 9 P. M-rt. ; r il' . .;;r !. 6, 3123.

inannci

mtanner which pleased his haughty temper. Wolfey, no Book IV.
*lcfs haughty than his master, was highly irritated at the '--
Tmperor's di!continuing his wonted carefles and profeffi- 'S5S-
(,l;s of firiendfhip to him. These flight offences, added to
the weighty considerations formerly mentioned, induced
Henry to enter into a defensive alliance with Loiiile, in
uhich all the differences between him and her son ,,ile
adjusted; at the fame time he engaged that he would em-
ploy his beet offices in order to procure the deliverance of
his new ally from a flare of captivity [z.

MWsHIL.E the open defection of fitch a powerful confede- Morone',
rate affcted Charles with deep concern, a secret confpira- intrigue' ,

in ordtr to

cy was carrying on in Italy, which threatened him with n... rn
confcquerces fill more fatal. The reificf! and intriCuing hEr r-mpe-
genius of Morone, chancellor of Mlilan, gnve rife to this. ror's "ewer
Hils revenge had heen amply g raificd by the expullion ot
the French out of Italy, and lis vanity no less toothed by
the re-est blifr,.ment of Sforza, to whose interest lie had
!atached himselF, in the dutchy of Milan. The delays
however, and evasions of the Imperial cotrt in granting
Sforza the invetfiture of his new-acquired territories had
long alarmed Moror.:; these were repeated so often, and
with foch apparent artifice, as became a full proof to his
fiifpicious mind that the Emperor intended to frip his ma-
fler of that rich country which he had conquered in his
name. Though Charle, in order to quiet the lope ard
the Venetians, no less jealous of hi dcfigns than Mlorrrc,
gave Sforza, at last, the invefliture which had been 1.
long desired; the charter was clogged with so many refer-
vations, and fiihjeacfd him to such grievous burdens, as
rendered the diuke of Milan a dependant on the Emrperor,
ra'her than a vaf:.l of the Fnrr.;re, and afforded him
scarce any other liecurily for his poffeflion, than the gond
plea'ure of an ambitious sup' nor. Such an acceflion f
power as would have accrued from the addition of the
Milane'e to the kingdom of Nalle., was confideltd hv
Morone as fatal to the liberties ,fs Italv, no less than to his
own power and importance. Futll of this idea, he began
to revolve in his mind the pofihilitv of rescuing Italy
from the yoke of foreigners, the da:ling 'cheme, as has
been already observed, of the It4lin politicians in that
age, and which it 'was the great o!ijca of their ambition
ro accomplish. if to the glory of having been the chief

[(] He:bert. Fiddet's I.ie of W'clPy, 33.

instrument

BooK IV. inatrument of driving the French out of Milan, he could
-'-v ' add that of delivering Naples from the dominion of the

525- Spaniards, he thought that nothing would be wanting to

compleat his fame. His fertile genius soon suggested to
him a projeEt for that purpoe ; a difficult, indeed, and
daring one, but, for that very reason, more agreeable to
his bold and enterprizing temper.

His negotia- BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged at Lan-
tions with noy's carrying the French King into Spain without their

knowledge. The former, being afraid that the two Mo-
narchs might, in his absence, conclude tome treaty in
which his interests would be entirely sacrificed, hastencd
to Madrid, in order to guard againfi that danger. Tile
latter, on whom the command of the army now devolved,
was obliged to remain in Italy; but in every company,
he gave vent to his indignation against the viceroy in ex-
preflions full of rancour and contempt; he accused him in
a letter to the Emperor of cowardice in the time of dan-
ger, and of insolence after a vicory, towards the obtain-
ing of which he had contributed nothing either by his va-
lour or his condut; nor did he abflain from bitter com-
plaints againfi the Emperor himself, who had not disco-
vered, as he imagined, a sufficient sense of his merit, nor
beflowed any adequate reward on his services. It was on
this disgust of Pescara, that Morone founded his whole
fyfiem. He knew the bouridlefs ambition of his nature,
the vast extent of his abilities in peace as well as war, and
the intrepedity of his rrind capable alike of undertaking
and of executing the most desperate designs. The can-
tonment of the Spanifl troops on the frontier of the Mi-
lanefe, gave occasion to many interviews between him
and Morone, in which the latter took care frequently to
turn the conversation to the tranfaqtions subsequent to the
battle of Pavia, a fubje& upon which the marquis enter-
ed willingly and with pailion; and Morone observing his
resentment to be uniform and v'olent, artfully pointed out
and aggravated every circumfsance that could increase its
fury. He painted in the firongefi colours the Emperor's
want of discernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring
Lannoy to him, and in allowing that presumptuous Fle.
ming to dispose of the captive King, without consulting
the man to whose bravery and wisdom Charles was indebt-
ed for the glory of having him in his power. Having
warmed him by such discourses, he then began tojinfinuate
that now was the time to be avenged for those insults, and

to

to acquire immortal renown as the deliverer of his country Boo IV.
from the oppression of strangers; that the fates of Italy, ''
weary of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of '5S.
barbarians, were at lafi ready to combine in order to vin-
dicate their own independence; that their eyes were fixed
on him as the only leader whose genius and good fortune
could ensure the happy success of that noble enterprize;
that the attempt was no less practicable than glorious, it
being in his power :. to disperse the Spanith infantry, the
only body of the Emperor's troops in Italy, through the
villages of the Milanese, that, in one night, they might
be destroyed by the people, who, having suffered much
from their exa&icns and insolence, would gladly under-
take this service; that he might then, without opposition,
take possession of the throne of Naples, the elevation def-
tired for him, and a reward not unworthy the restorer of
liber:y to Italy; that the Pope, of whom that kingdom
held, and whose predecessors had disposed of it on many
former occasions, would willingly grant him the right of
investiture; that the Venetians, the Florentines, the d'ike
of Milan, to whom he had communicated the 1chemc,
together with the French, would be the guarantees of his
right; that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the
government of one of their countrymen, whom they
loved and admired, to that odious dominion of firangers,
to which they had been so long fubjeaed; and that the
Emperor, astonished at a blow so unexpeced, would find
that he had neither troops nor money to resist such a power-
ful confederacy [b].

PESCAkRA, amazed at the boldness and extent of the

scheme, listened attentively to Moror.:, but with the
countenance of a man loft in profound and anxious
thought. On the one hand, the infamy of betraying his
sovereign under whom he bore such high command, de-
terred him from the attempt; 6n the other, the profpe&
of obtaining a crown anured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a 1hort space in suspense, the Icaft com-
mendable motives, as is usual after such deliberations,
prevailed, and ambition triumphed over honour. In or-
der, however, to throw a colour of decency on his con-
du&, he infifled that some learned casuists (hould give

[b] Cuie. xvi. I. z3g. Jnvii Viti Davali, p 4t1. Oeuv. de Brantomw,

Iv- 171. Rutcelli Lettere dePiac. ii. 91. Thaui Hillt. lib. i. c. i.
P. Heater. Ror. Afllr. lib. ix. c. 3. 10h7.

their

Boo IV. their opinion, " Whether it was lawful for a fubjct to

ta-vk- take arms against his immediate lovereign, in ebediencc
'^5 to the Lord Paramount of whomthe kingdom itfelt w,s

held." Such a resolution of the cale, as he expeEted,
was soon obtained from the divines and civilians both of
Rome and Milan; the negotiation went forward; and
nea!ures seemed to be taking with great spirit for the speedy
exccution of the design.

LMEANWHIL.E Pescara, either hoc':ed at the treachery

of the action which he was going to commit, or d(i-
pairing of its success, began to entertain thoughts cf
abandoning the engagements he ha.d come under. The
indisposition of Sforza, who happened at that time to be
taken ill of a diflemper wlich was thought mortal, con-
firmed this resolution, and detcrmined him to make known
the whole cornpiracy to the Emperor, deeming it mere
prudent to expet the dutchy of Milan from him as
the reward ot this discovery, than to aim at a kingdom
to be purchased by a fcries of crimes. This rclolution,
however, proved the source of artior.s scarce less crimi-
rnal and ignominious. The Emperor, who had already
received full infoimation concerning the conspiracy from
ether hands, seemed to be hig!lly l:!eafed v.itih Pescara's
fidelity, and commanded him to ccr,iruc his intrigues for
feme time with the Pcpe and Sftor:a, both that he might
difcovcr their intentions more fully, ard be able to cun-
vit them of the crime with greater certainty. Pefcala,
confcicus of guilt, as well as sensible how lufpicicus hlii
long filcnce must have appeared at Madrid, durit nut
decline that difhorcuralite office; and to his eternal dil-
grace, was obliged to at the meaned of all parts, tlat
of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confidering the
abilities of' the perfors with whom he had to deaT, the
part was scarce less difficullt, than base ; but he aded it
with lich addrcfs, as to deceive even the pcnetrating eye
of Moron', who relving with full confidcnce on his fii,-
cerity, visited him at Novara in order to put the !i l :aiiJ

Burt|rye to their inachin.a ions. Pcfcara received him in an apart-
11 tasken llment where Antenio de Leyva uas placed behind tlie
PtIi a. by tapefry, that he mright overhtear and bear wi:ncfs to tll ir

conviir..tion ; as M(roi i was returning he-mewv.aid, ti.tt
offcer Ifutllcly alrpeard, and to his ifcrnflirn(nt arr.fi-d
him pri'oner in thIe Il'npo)er's name. Itc was condttc'd
to tl:r castle of Pavia; and Pcfcara, who bad lb Iitcly
ben l.is accum! licc, had now the a(Turance to intcrrr-

gate

gate him ash;is judge. At the fame time, the Emperor Boo.l IV.
declared Sfbrza to have forfeited all right to the dutchy -
of Milan, by his engaging in a contpiracv against the 155
sovereign of whom he held; Pescara, by his command,
seized on every place in the Milanese, except the cafiles
of Cremona and Milan, which the unfortunate duke at-
tempting to defend, were closely blockaded by the Im-
perial troops c).

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, infiead ofThe 'igr-
tripping the Emperor of what he already possessed inento'
Italv, contributed to extend his dominions in that country, Francis in
it shewed him the neceflitv of coming to some agreement sl in.
with the French King, unless he would draw on himself
a confederacy of all Europe, which the progress of his
arms, and his boundless and undisguised ambition, filled
with general alarm. He had not hitherto treated Francis
with the generosity which that monarch expeced, and
scarce with the decency due to his flation. Inflead of
displaying the lentiments becoming a great Prince, he
seems to have aaed with the mercenary art of a corsair,
who, by the rigorous usage of his prisoners, endeavours
to draw from them an high price for their ransom. The
captive King was confined in an old castle, under a keeper
whose formal austerity of manners rendered his vigilance
still more disgustful. He was allowed no exercise but
that of riding on a mule, surrounded with armed guards
on horseback. Charles, on pretence of its being necef-
fary to attend the Cortes assembled in Toledo, had gone
to reside in that city, and suffered several weeks to efapfe
without visiting Francis, though he solicited an inter-
view with the most preflflg and fubmiiive importunity.
So many indignities made a deep impression on an high-
spirited Prince; he began to lose all relish for his usual
amusements; his natural gaiety of temper forsook him;
and after languilhing for bome time, he was seized with Ella:ters
a dangerous fever, during the violence of which he com- hi
plained constantly of the unexpeced and unprincely ri-
gour with which he had been treated, often exclaiming,
that now the Emperor would have the fatisfadion of his
dying in his hands, without having once deigned to lee
has face. The phylfcians, at last, despaired of his life,
and informed the Emperor that they saw no hopes of his
recovery, unlefi he were gratified with regard to. that

[c] Guic. 1. 16. 3a9. Jovii Hid. 319. Clpcl:e lib v. . f. ooi .

point

Boo cIV. point on which he seemed to be so strongly bent. Charles,
_'--v~* solicitous to preserve a life, with which all his profpets

'sS-. of farther advantage from the vi&ory at Pavia must have

terminated, immediately consulted his ministers concern-
ing.the course to be taken. In vain did the chancellor
Gattinara, the most able among them, represent to him
the indecency of his visiting Francis, if he did not in-
tend to set him at liberty immediately upon equal terms;
in vain did he point out the infamy to which he would
be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition ihould
prevail on him to give the captive monarch this mark
of attention and sympathy, for which humanity and ge-
nerofity had pleaded so long without effe&. The Em-
percr, less delicate, or less solicitous about reputation than

Sept. is. his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his prisoner. The
The Empe- interview was short; Francis being too weak to bear a
hin' long conversation. Charles accosted him in terms full

of affection and refpec, and gave him such promises of
speedy deliverance and princely treatment, as would have
refleced the greatest honour upon him, if they had
flowed from another source. Francis grasped at them
with the eagerness natural in his situation; and cheared
with this gleam of hope began to revive from that mo-
ment, and loon recovered his wonted health [d].

HE had loon the mortification to find, that his confi-

dence in the Emperor was net better founded than formerly.
Charles returned instantly to Toledo; :il negotiations
were carried on by his miniftcrs; and Francis w'as kept
in as ftrit custody as ever. A new indignitv, and that
very galling, was added to all these he had already luf-

The con- sered. Bourbon arrived in Spain about this time; Chartles,
table Bour- who had so long refused to visit the King, received his
en Mr^id. rebellious subjet with the most fudied refpe&. He mec
Nuv. 15. him without the gates of Toledo, embraced him with the

greatert affetion, and placing him on his left hand, con-
duaed him to his apartment; These marks of honour to
him, were so many insults to the unfortunate Monarch;
which he felt in a very sensible manner. It fforded him
some consolation, however, to observe that the sentiments
of the Spaniards differed widely from those of their so-
vereign. That generous people detcfted Bourbon's crime;
and notwithstanding his great talents and important ser-
vices, they ihunned all intercourse with him to such a

[d] Guic. 1. ,
16. &33. do. Hist. i. 6fs.

degree,

degree, that Charles having desired the marquis de Vil- Boo IV.
lena to permit Bourbon to reside in his palace while the -v
court remained in Toledo, he politely replied, " That 'SzS
he could not refute gratifying the Emperor in that re-
quest ;" but added with a Caltilian dignity of mind,
" That he mull not be furprized if the moment the
Constable departed, he should burn to the ground a house,
which having been polluted by the pretence of a traitor,
became an unfit habitation for a man of honour [l."

THE Emperor himself, nevertheless, seemed to have Appointed

it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services in a signal general of
manner. But as Bourbon infilled, in the firRt place, on ,ary in
the accomplishment of his promise of giving him in Itly.
marriage his filter Eleanora, Queen dowager of Portugal,
the honour of which alliance had been one of his chief
inducements to rebel againfi his lawful sovereign; as
Francis, in order to prevent such a dangerous union, had
offered before he left Italy, to marry that Princess; and
as Eleanora discovered an inclination rather to match with
a powerful Monarch, than with his exiled subjet; all
there interfering circumfiances created great embarralfment
to Charles, and left him scarce any hope of extricating
himself with decency. But the death of Pescara, who at December.
the age of thirty-fix, left behind him the reputation of
being one of the greatest generals and ableit politicians of
that century, happened opportunely at this jun&ure for
his relief. By that event, the command of the army in
Italy becamevacant, and Charles, always fertile in his
resources, persuaded Bourbon, who was in no condition
to dispute his will, to accept the office of general in
chief there, together with a grant of the dutchy of Milan
forfeited by Sforza, and in return for these to relinquish
all hopes of marrying the queen of Portugal Tl.

THE chief obstacle that flood in the way of Francis's Negotiti-

liberty, was the Emperor's infiling so peremptorily on on, f p'r
the reflitution of Burgundy, as a preliminary to that Francii.'
event. Francis declared that he would never consent to liberty.
dismember his kingdom; and that if even he should so
far forget the duties of a Monarch as to come to such a
resolution, the fundamental laws of the kingdom would
prevent its taking effe&. On his part he was willing to
make an absolute cefion to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy and the Low-Countries; he promised to

I[] Guic. 1. Ixi. 335. [f] Sndov. Hill. i, 676. Ocua. de rnut. iv.
149.

reflora

BooL IV. reflore Bourbon all his lands which had been confiscated;
t---- Ihe renewed his propolil of marrying the Emperor's fifltr,

I515. the Queen dowager of Portugal; and engaging to pay a

grear turn by ranrlom tor his own person. But all mutual
flteem -and confidence between the two Monarchs were
ncw entirely lolt; there appeared on the one hand, a ra-
pacious ambition labouring to avail itself of every fa-
vc.ulrale circuniftance; on the other, lufpicion and re-
ientlnicunt, 1anding perpetually on their guard; so that
the pro!ped of bril;ging their negotiations to an issue,
leemed to be far ditfant. The dutchess of Alercon, the
French King's fifler, whom Charles permitted to visit
her brother in his confinement, employed all her address,
in order to procure his liberty on more reasonable terms:

Franci in Henry of England interposed his good offices to the
lefpair t-U
cvrs to re- fame purpose; but both with so little tucccfs, that Francis
itgn his in 'depair took- suddenly the resolution of resigning his
£'"''.. crown, with all its rights and prerogatives, to his ion the

Dauphin, determining rather to end his davy in a prison,
than topurchafe his freedom by conc,,-Tions unworthy of
a King. The deed for this purpose he signed with legal
formality at Madrid, empowering his sifter to carry it in.
to France that it might be registered in all the parlia-
ments of the kingdonm; and at the fame time intimating
his intention to the Emperor, he desired him to rame the
place of his confinement, and to alsign him a proper num-
ber of attendants during the remainder of his days [g].

CharTes TH IS reolution of the French King had great effet;
ila;mcd. Charles began to be sensible, that by pushing rigour to

excess, he might defeat his cown mcasures, and in ead of
the vail advantages he hoped to draw flom ransoming a
powerful Monarch, he might at lafi ind in his hands a
Prince without dominions or revenues. About the fame
tinme, one of the King of Navarre's dometics happened
1,v an extraordinary exertion of fidelity, courage and ad-
dtefs, to procure his master an opportunity of escaping
ficm the prison in which his malterhad been confined ever
fincc the battle of Pavia. This convinced the Emperor,
that the nimt vigilant attention of his officers might be
eluded by the ingenuity or boldnets of Francis, or his at-
tcndants, and one unlucky hour might deprive him of all

fg] This paper is published in Memoirec Hiftoriques, &c. pr. rM.
1' Ablb Rayu)al, itom. ii. p. 51.

the

the advantages which he had been so folicitousto obtain. BooK IV-
By thele considerations, he was induced to abate some- -
uhat of his former demands. On the other hand, 's5s.
Francis's impatience under confinement daily increased;
and having received certain intelligence of a powerful
league forming againit his rival in Italy, he grew more
compliant with regard to conceflions, trusting, that if he
could once obtain his liberty, he would loon be in a con-
dition to resume whatever he had yielded.

As these were the views and fentimentsof the two Mo- 1526.

narchs, the treaty which procured Francis his liberty was^Maidof
signed at Madrid on the fourteenth of January, one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-fix. The article with re-
gard to Burgundy, which had hitherto created the greatest
difficulty, was compromised, Francis engaging to restore
that dutchy with all its dependencies in full sovereignty to
the Emperor; and Charles consenting that this restitution
lfhould not be made till the King was let at liberty ; in or-
der to secure the performance of this, as well as the other
conditions in the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame
intfant be himlelf was released, he would deliver as hof-
tages to the Emperor, his eldcet son the Dauphin, his
second son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by Charles.
The other articles Iwelled to a great number, and though
not of such importance, were extremely rigorous. Among
these the molf remarkable were, that Francis should re-
nounce all his pretensions in Italy; that he bould disclaim
any title which he had to the sovereignty of Slanders and
Artois; that within fix weeks after his release, he should
restore to Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods, move-
able and immoveable, and make them full reparation for
the damages they had fufiained by the confiscation of
them; that he fliould use his interest with HenryD'Albert
to relinquish his pretensions to the crown of Navarre, and
should not for the future assist him in any attempt to recover
it; that there should be eflablifhed between the Emperor
and Francis a league of perpetual friendship and confe-
deracy, with a promile of mutual aflifiance in every cafe
of necessity. That in corroboration of this union, Francis
should marry the Emperor's fifler, the QUeen dowager of
Portugal; that Francis should cause all the articles of this
treaty to be ratified by the States, and regiflered in the
Parliaments of his kingdom; that upon the Emperor's

V L.. 1. i receiving

Bor IV. receiving this ratification, the hostages should be set at

l-v-J liberty; but in their place, the duke of Angouleme, the
1516. King's third son, should be delivered to Charles, that in

order to manitelt, as well as to itrcngthen the amity be-
tween'the two monarchs, he might be educated at the im-
perial court, and that if Francis did not, within the time
limited, fulfil the stipulations in the treaty, he should pro-
mise, upon his honour and oath, to return into Spain, aid
to surrender himfclf again a priboner to the Emperor [h].

Sentiments BY this treaty, Charles flattered himself that he had
of that age not only effecualiy humbled his rival, but that he had
o it re.pe taken such precautions as would for ever prevent his re-

attaining any formidable degree of power. The opinion,
which the wisest politicians formed concerning it, was verv
different; they could not persuade themselves that Francis,
after obtaining his liberty, would execute these ar-
ticles against which he had tfruggled so long, and to which
even amidst the horrors of captivity he had consented
with such reluaance. Ambition and resentment, they
knew, would conspire in prompting him to violate the
hard conditions to which he had been conRtrained to
lubmit; nor would arguments and casuistry be wanting to
represent that which was so manifefily advantageous, to
be necessary and just. If one part of Francis's conduct
had been known, at that time, this opinion might have

Francis fe- been founded, not in conjeaure, but in certainty. A
cretly pro- few hours before he signed the treaty, he assembled such of
tfthtlidity his counsellors as were then in Madrid, and having ex-
of it. aaed from them a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a

long enumeration in their presence of all the dishonourable
arts, as well as unprincely rigour, which the Emperor had
employed in order to ensnare or intimidate him. For
that realon, he took a formal protelf in the hands of no-
taries, that his consent to the treaty should be confidered
as an involuntary deed, and be deemed null and void [ii.
By this disingenuous artifice, for which even the treat-
ment he had received was no apology, Francis endea-
voured to satisfy his honour and conscience in fignine the
treaty, and providing at the fame time a pretext on which
to break it.

[h] Rccucil des Trait. tom. ii. Ill. Ulloi Vita deli Carlo. V. p. ol,
&c.

[i] Recueil dei Tirit. tom, ii. p. £o7.

MEANWv-HILrE

MEANWHILE, great were the outward demonftrationsBo oK IV.

of love and confidence between the two Monarchs; they --v--
appeared often together in public; they frequently had 15s6.
long conferences in private; they travelled in the fame
litter, and joined in the fame amusements. But amidfl
there signs of peace and friendship, the Emperor still har-
boured iufpicion in his mind. 'lhough the ceremonies of
the marriage between Francis and the Queen of Portugal
were performed loon after the conclusion of the treaty,
Charles would not permit him to consummate it until the
return of the ratification from France. Even then Francis
was not allowed to be at full liberty; his guards were still
continued; and while he was caressed as a brother-in-
lawv, he was (fill watched like a prisoner; and it was ob-
vious to attentive observers, that an union, in the very
beginning of which there might be discerned fuch.fymp-
toms of jealousy and diftrufi, could not be cordial, or of
long continuance [k].

AB o u r a month after the signing of the treaty, the Ratified in

Regent's ratification of it was brought from France; and F^nce.
that wife Princess, preferring, on this occasion, the public
good to domestic affeaion, informed her son, that inflead
of the twelve noblemen named in the treaty, ihe had sent
the duke of Orleans along with his brother the Dauphin
to the frontier, as the kingdom could susser nothing by the
absence of a child, but must be left almost incapable of
defence, if deprived of its ablest Itatefmen, and most
experienced generals, whom Charles had artfully included
in his nomination. At last Francis took leave of the Em- FPrci, set
peror, whose suspicion of the King's sincerity increasing, t libety.
as the time of putting it to the proof approached, he en-
dcavoured to bind him still faster by exacting new pro-
miles, which after those le had already made, the French
Monarch was not flow to grant. He let cut for Madrid,
a place which the remembrance of many afflicing cir-
cumltances rendered peculiarly odious to him, with the
joy natural on such an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-
for journey towards his own dominions. He was escorted
by a body of horse under the command of Alarcon, who,
as the King drew near the frontiers of France, guarded
]lim with more scrupulous exa&nefsthan ever. When he
arrived at the river Andaye, which separates the two

[k] Guic. . 16. 353.

I i a Ikingdomu,

BoOK IV.kingdoms, Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank with a
- 8v ' guard of horse equal in number to' Alarcon's. An empty

51.6- bark was moored in the middle of the ftrcam; the atten-

dants drew up inorder on the opposite banks; at.the fame
inflant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put off from the
Spanifi, and Lautrec with the fame number from the
French fide of the river; the former had the King in his
boat; the latter, the Dauphin and duke of Orleans; they
met in the empty vessel; the exchange was made in a
moment; Francis, after a short embrace to his children,
leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reached the French shore.
He mounted that instant a Turkish horse, waved his hand
over his head, and with a joyful voice crying aloud several
times, " I am yet a King," galloped full specd to St.
John de Lu7., and from thence to Bayonne. T'his event,
no less impatiently desired by the French nation than by
their Monarch, happened on the eighteenth of March, a
year and twenty-two days after the fatal battle of Pavia ['].

The Empe- SOON after the Emperor had taken leave of Francis,
rnr' mnar. and permitted him to begin his journey towards his own
riage with
Ifalella of dominions, he set out for Seville, inorderto folcmnizehis
Portugal. marriage with Isabella, the daughter of Emaruel, the

late King of Portugal, and the sifter of John 111. who
had succeeded him in the throne of that kingdom. Isabella
was a princess of uncommon beauty and accomplish-
ments; and as the Cortes both in Castile and Aragon had
warmly solicited their sovereign to marry, the choice of a
wife so nearly allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms,
was extremely acceptable to his subje&s. The Portuguese,
fond of this new conneaion with the first Monarch in
Christendom, granted him an extraordinary dowry with
Isabella, amounting to nine hundred thousand crowns, a
fum, which, in the situation of his affairs at that junc-
ture, was of no small consequence to the Emperor. The
marriage was celebrated with that splendor and gaiety,
which became a great and youthful Prince. Charles lived
with Isabella in perfet harmony, and treated her on all
occasions with much diftin&ion and regard [m].

Affairs of DURING these tranfa&ions, Charles could scarce give
Germany. any attention to the affairs of Germany, tho' it was torn

[1] Sandov. Hit. i. 73. Guic. 1. 16. 35 .
[m] Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. o6. Belcarius Cam. Rr. Gallic. p.
565. Spalatinua ap. Siruv. Corp. Hilt. Germ. ii. lo81.

in

in pieces by commotions, which threatened the mofi dan- BooK IV
gerous consequences. The feudal institutions still fubfifled -r -
almost unimpaired in the Empire. The property of '15s6
lands was vefied in the Princes, and free-barons. Their Grievances
vassals held of them by the firiCtefi and most limitedof the
tenures; while the great body of the people was kept in pcafants.
a state but little removed from absolute servitude. In
some places of Germany, people of the lowest class were
so entirely in the power of their matters, as to be subjet
to personal and domestic slavery, the mod rigorous form
of that wretched state. In other provinces, particularly
in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peasants were bound to re-
main on the lands to which they belonged, and making
part of the estate, were transferred like any other pro-
perty from one hand to another. Even in Suabia, and
the countries on the banks of the Rhine, where their
condition was mofi tolerable, the peasants not only paid
the full rent of their farms to the landlord; but if they
chose either to change the place of their abode, or to
follow a new profession, they were obliged to purchase
this privilege at a certain price. Besides this, all grants
of lands to peasants expired at their death, without de-
scending to their poflerity. Upon that event, the landlord
had a right to the bedt of their cattle, and of their fur-
niture; and their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal
of the grant, were obliged to pay large fums by way of
fine. These exations, though grievous, were borne
with patience, because they were customary and ancient :
But when the progress of elegance and luxury, as well as
the changes introduced into the art of war came to increase
the expence of government, and made it necessary for
Princes to levy occasional or dated taxes on their fubjecs,
such impositions being new, appeared intolerable; and in
Germany, these duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine,
and other neceflaries of life, affeced the common people
in the mos sensible manner. The addition of .such a load
to their former burdens, drove them to despair. It was
to the valour inspired by resentment again t impositions
of this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of their
liberty in the fourteenth century. The fame cause had ex-
cited the peasants in several other provinces in Germany
to rebel against their superiors towards the end of the sis-
teenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries; and tho'
ohefT infurretiops were not attended with like success, they

i i 3 could

BooK IV. could not however be quelled without much difficulty and

c-v-' bloodshed [m].
t'16. BY there checks, the spirit of the peasants was over-

Their infur-
Teeion in awed rather than subdued; and their grievances multiply-
Suabia. ing continually, they ran to arms, this year, with the

molf frantic rage. Their firr appearance was near Ulm
in Suabia. The peasants in the adjacent country flocked
totheir standard with the ardour and impatience natural
to men, who having groaned long under oppreflion, be-
held at last some profpc of deliverance; and the con-
tagion spreading from province to province, reached al-
most every part of Germany. Wherever they came,
they plundered the monasteries; wafted the lands of
their superiors; razed their castles; and massacred with-
out mercy all persons of noble birth who were so unhappy
as to fall into their hands [n. Having intimidated their
oppressors, as they imagined, by the violence of these
proceedings, they began to confider what would be the
most proper and effectual method of fecuringthemfelves
for the future from their tyrannical exaaions. With this
view, they drew up and published a memorial, contain-
ing all their demands, and declared that while arms
were in their hands, they would either persuade or oblige
the nobles to give them full fatisfaaion with regard to
these. The chief articles were, that they might have li-
berty to choose their own pastors; that they might be freed
from the payment of all tythes but those of corn; tlat
they might no longer be confidered as the slaves or bond-
men of their superiors; that the liberty of hunting and
filhing might be common; that the great forests might
not be regarded as private property, but be open for the
use of all; that they might be delivered from the unusual.
burden of taxes under which they laboured; that the ad-
minifiration of juflice might be rendered lcfs rigorous and
more impartial; that the encroachments of the nobles
upon meadows and commons might be restrained [o].
Quelled.' MANY of these demands were extremely reafonablc;

and being urged by such formidable numbers, might have
met with some redress. But those vast unwieldy bodies,
aflcmbled in different places, had neither union, conduct,

[m] Seckend. lib. ii- r. ., 6.
{nJPetr. Crinicu. de Bello Ruftictno. *p. Freher. Scripl. Rer. Cerm.
Argett. 1717. vol ii. iii. 143. [o] Sicd. Hist. p. 9.

nor

nor vigour. They were led ty persons of the lowes rank BOOK IV.
without skill in war, or knowledge of what was neceflary `v
for accomplishing their designs; and all their exploits were '15s6
diltinguifhed by a brutal and unmeaning fury. To op-
pose this, the princes and nobles of Suabia and the Lower
Rhine raised their valTals, and attacking tome of the mu-
tineers with open force, and others by furprizt, cut to
pieces, or difperled all who infested those provinces; so
that the peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their associates in
the field, were obliged to return to their habitations. with
lets hope than ever of relief from their grievances [,3.

THESE commotions happened at ffrPt in protinccs ofi' hir inur-

zcdti',O in

Germany where Luther's opinions had made little progress; 'l'i/'a.
and being excited wholly by political causes, had no con-
necion with the disputed points in religion. But the fren-
zy reaching at lall thore countries in which the Reforma-
tion was eftlabifled, derived new strength from circum-
i:ances peculiar to them, and rose to a still greater pitch
of extravagance. The Reformation, wherever it was
received, increased that bold and innovating 'pirit to which
it owed its birth. Men who had the courage to overturn
a system supported by every thing which can commanld
refrpec or reverence, were not to be overawed by any au-
thority, however great or venerable. After having been
accuflomned to confider themselves as judges of the moil
important doctrines in religion, to examine these freely,
and to reject, without scruple, what appeared to them
erroneous, it was natural for them to turn the fame daring
and inquisitive eye towards government, and to think ot
r.rtifying whatever disorders or imperfcions were disco-
vered there. And as religious abuses had been reformed
in fevcral places without the permiflion of the magiltrate,
it was an easy transition to attempt the rcdrefs of political
grievances in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break out inMorc f,rnl-

'rhuiingia, a province fubje& to the Elctor of Saxony,dablr.
the inhabitants of which were molfly converts to Luther-
anifm, than it assumed a new and more dangecous form.
Thomas Muncer, one of Luther's disciples, having efta-
tflilhed himself in that country, had acquired a wonderful
ascendant over the minds of the people. He propagated

[b] Seckend. lib. ii. p. o. Petr. Gnodslium de Ruficanorum Tumult*
n Gtrmani a , . Scard. cript. vol. ii. p. 13 , &c.

I i4 .pnong

BooK IV. among them the wildest and moif enthusiastic notions, but
_»--v-~ such as tended manifefily to inspire them with boldness,
1526. and lead them to sedition. " Luther, he told them, had

Their fana-
ticl spirit. done more hurt than good to religion. He had indeed

refcwued the church from the yoke of Popery, but his doc-
trines encouraged, and his life set an example of the ut-
most licentiousness of manners. In order to avoid vice,
fays he, men mufl practice perpetual mortification.
They muf put on a grave countenance, speak little, wear
a plain garb, and be serious in their whole deportment.
Such as prepare their hearts in this manner, may expet
that thefupreme Being will diret their fleps, and by some
visible sign discover his will to them; if that illumination
be at any time withheld, we may expostulate with the
Almighty, who deals with us so harshly, and remind him
of his promises. This expofiulation and anger will be
highly acceptableto God, and will at last prevail on him
to guide us with the fame unerring hand that guided the
patriarchs of old. Let us beware, however, of offend-
ing him by our arrogance, but as all men are equal in his
eye, let them return to that condition of equality in wh'ch
he formed them, and having all things in common, let
them live together like brethren, without any marks of
subordination or pre-eminence [q]."

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they flattered

so many paflions in the human heart, as to make a deep
impression. To aim at nothing more than abridging the
power of the nobles was now confidered as a trifling and
partial reformation, not worth the contending for; it was
proposed to level every diflinaion among mankind, and
by abolishing property, to reduce them to their natural
slate of equality, in which all should receive their fubfflt-
ence from one common flock. Muncer assured them,
that the design was approved of by heaven, and that the
Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its success.
The peasants set about the execution of it, not only with
the rage which animated those of their order in other
parts of Germany, hut with the ardour that enthusiasm
inspires. They deposed the magistrates in all the cities of
which they were mailers; seized the lands of the nobles;
and obliged such of them as they got.into their hands, to
put on the dress commonly worn by peasants, and inficad

f'11 Scckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Sleii. Hil. p. 83.

of

of their former titles, to be satisfied with the appellation Boot IV.
given to people in the lowefl class of life. Vast numbers '-
engaged in this wild undertaking; but Muncer, their 15t6
leader and their prophet, was deflitute of the abilities ne-
ceffary for conducing it. He had all the extravagance,
but not the courage, which enthufiatis usually poisess. It
was with difficulty he could he persuaded to take the field;
and though he soon drew together eight thousand men, he
fiffered himself to be surrounded by a body of cavalry un-
der the command of the Ele&or of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hesse, and duke of Brunfwic. These Princes
unwilling to shcd the blood of their deluded fubje&ts, sent
a young nobleman to their camp, with the offer of a ge-
neral pardon, if the? would immediately lay down their
arms, and deliver up the authors 6f the fedi'ion. Mun-
cer, alarmed at this, began to harangue them with his
usual vehemence, exhorting them not to trust there de-
ceitful promises of their opprefTors, nor to desert the cause
of God, and of Chrittian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger made a deeper impref- Pearants d&-

sion on the peasants than his eloquence, and coi fu sion and fealed.
terror were visible in every face, when a rainbow, which
was the emblem the mutineers had painted on their co-
lours, happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable pretence of mind, I.ld hold of that incident,
and suddenly raised his eyes and hands towards leaven,
" Behold," cries he, with an clevated voice, " the sign
" which God has given. There is the pledge of your
" safety, and a token that the wicked (hall be destroyed."
The fanatical multitude set up inflantly a great fhour, as if
vitory had been certain; and passing in a moment from
one extreme to another, murdered the unfortunate noble-
man who had come with the offer of pardon, and de-
manded to be led towards the enemy. The Princes en-
raged at this shocking violation of the laws of war, pre- N:,,, ,
vented them by beginning the attack; but the behaviour
of the peasants in the comlbat was not such as might have
been'expe&ed either from their ferocity or confidence of
success; an undisciplined rabble was no equal match for
well-trained troops; above five thousand were slain in the
field, almost without making refifance; the reft fled, and
among the foremost Muncer, their general. He was ta-
ken the next day, and being condemned to such punifli-
ments as his crimes had deserved, he suffered them with a
poor and dastardly spirit. His death put an end to the in-

furreEtions

BooK IV. furrections of the peasants which had filled Germany with
.-v--w futch terror [r]; but the enthusiastic notions which he had

1sZ6- scattered were not extirpated, and produced, not long as-

ter, effects more memorable, as well as more extrava-
gant,

Luther's D URI NG thefecommotions, Le her ated with exem-
mode'l" et plary prudence and moderation; like a common parent,
aondUd" solicitous about the welfare of both parties, without spa-

ring the faults or errors of either. On the one hand, he
addressed a monitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting
them to treat their dependants with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he feverelv cernfred the fc-
ditious spirit of the peasants, advifir.g them not to mur-
mur at hardlhips in!eparable from their condition, nor to
seek for redress by any.but legal means [1.

LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catherine a Bcria,

a nun of a noble family, who having thrown off the veil,
had fled from the doifter, happened this year, and was
far from meeting with the fame approbation. Even his
most devoted followers thought this indecent at a time
when his country was involved in so many calamities;
while his enemies never mentioned it with any softer ap-
pellation than that of inceflucus or profane. Luther him-
self was sensible of the imprelion it had made to his di`-
advantage; but being satisfied with his own conduct, he
bore the censure of his friends, and the reproaches of his
adversaries, with .!is usual fortitude [E].
My) 5. THIS year the Reformation loft its firfi protecer, Fre-

derick, Etlecor of Saxony; but the blow was the lets fen-
fihlv felt, as he was succeeded by his brother John, a more
avowed and zealous, though less able patron of Luther
and his docrines.

prfflt ANOTHER event happened about the fame time,
wrested which, as it occasioncd a considerable change in the flare
1rtmnc th of Gcrmany, muf be traced back to its source. While
erde,. the frenzy of the Cru ades pnffcfled all Europe daring the

twelfth and thirteenth centuries, several orders of rcligi-
pus knighthood were fouhded in defence of the Chriiflan
faith againfi Heathens and Infidels. Among these the
Teutonic order in Germany was one of the moil illuftri-
ous, the knights of which diftinguilhed themfclves great-

[,] SBid. ift. p. 84. Seckend. lib. ii. p. ia. Onohlliu Tumnil.
Rufican. 15.

[ Skiid. His p. 87.

8t e SecLend. lib. ii. p. i '

ly

ly in all the wild enterprizes carried on in the Holy Land. Poo IV
Being driven at last from their settlements in the Eafl, -
they were obliged to return to their native country. x'56-
'Their zeal, and valour, were too impetuous to remain
long inacive. They invaded, on very flight pretences,
the province of PruiTia, the inhabitants of which were
still idolaters; and having completed the conquest of it
about the middle of the thirteenth century, held it many
years as a fief depending on the crown of Poland.
Fierce contests arose during this period, between the
grand masters of the order, and the Kings of Poland;
the former ifruggling for independence, while the latter
aiferted their right of sovereignty with great firmness.
Albert, a Prince of the house of Brandenburgh, who
waseleced grand mafler in the year one thouland five
hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel,
maintained a long war with Sigismund, King of Poland;
but having become an early convert to Luther's dotrines,
this gradually lessened his z.cal for the interests of his fra-
ternity, so that he took the opportunity of the confusions
in the Empire, and the absence of the Emperor, to con-
clude a treaty with Sigimnund, greatly to his private
emolument. By it, that part of Pruflia which belonged
to the Teutonic order, was erctcd into a secular and
hereditary dutchy, and the invefliture of it granted to Al-
bert, who, in return, bound himtelf to do homage for it
to the Kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately as-
ter this, he made public profession of the reformed reli-
gion, and married a Princess of Denmark. The Teuto-
nic knights exclaimed so loudly against the treachery of
their grand master, that he was put under the ban of the
Empire; but he still kept poifeflion of the province he
had usurped, and transmitted it to his poflcrity. In pro-
cess of time this rich inheritance fell to the eleEtoral
branch of the family, all dependance on the crown of
Poland was shaken off, and the Margraves of Branden-
burgh, having assumed the title of Kings of Prussia, have
not only risen to an equality with the firfi Princes in Ger-
many, but take their rank among the great Monarchs of
Europe [u].

UPON the return of the French King to his domini-ii,n me,

ons, the eyes of all the powers in Europe were fixed upon Iur r. .f uile
him, that by observing his firfi motions, they might form Frenc' King

upon hi, re-
turn t
[u] Sleid. Hin. p. 9. Pflefcl Abrcgc de 'liJt. de droit Publ. p. 6o5,Frcnce.

a judgment

BOOK IV.a judgment concerning his subsequent condu&. They
'-v-.-jwere not held long in suspense. Francis, as soon as he

'5s6. arrived at Bayonne, wrote to the King of England,

thanking him for his zealous and affecionate interpofiti-
on in his favour, to which he acknowledged that he owed
the recovery of his liberty. Next day the Emperor's am-
baffadors demanded audience, and in their master's name,
required him to issue such orders as were necessary for
carrying the treaty of Madrid into full and immediate
execution; he coldly answered, that though for his own
part he determined religiously to perform all he had pro-
mifed, the treaty contained bo many articles relative not
to himself alone, but asseting the interests of the French
monarchy, that he could not take any farther flep with-
out consulting the states of his kingdom, and that some
time would be necessary in order to reconcile their minds
to the hard conditions which he had consented to ratify [xl.
This reply was confidered as no obscure discovery of his
being resolved to elude the treaty; and the compliment
paid to Henry, appeared a very proper flep towards fe-
curing the aflifiance of that Monarch in the war with the
Emperor, to which such a retolution would certainly give
rife. Thcfe circumfiances, added to the explicit decla-
rations which Francis made in secret to the ambassadors
from several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied them
that their conje&ures with regard to his condut had been
just, and that instead of intending to execute an unreason-
tble treaty, he was eager to seize the first opportunity of
revenging those injuries which had compelled him to feign
an approbation of it. Even the doubts, and fears, and
scruples which used, on other occasions, to hold Clement
in a fiate of uncertainty, were diflipated by Francis's
seeming impatience to break through all his engagements
with the Emperor. The situation, indeed, of affairs in
Italy at that time, did not allow the Pope to hesitate long.
Sltora was fill besieged by the Imperialists in the caRle of
Milan. That feeble Prince, deprived now of Moroni's
advice, and unprovided with every thing necessary for de-
fence, found means to inform Clement and the Veneti-
ans, that he mud soon surrender, if they did not come
to his relief. 'he Imperial troops, as they had received
no pay since the battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in the
Milanese, levying such exorbitant contributions in that

[x] Mnm. de Bellsy, p. 9,.

dutchy,

dutchy, as amounted, if we may rely on Guicciardini's BooK IV.
calculation, to no less a fum than five thousand ducats a -
day [y; nor was it to be doubted, but that the soldiers, as 5z6.
soon as the castle should submit, would choose to leave a
ruined country which scarce afforded them subsistence,
that they might take poffefion of more comfortable quar-
ters in the fertile and untouched territories of the Pope
and Venetians. The assistance of the French King was
the only thing which could either save Sforza, or enable
them to protea their own dominions from the intults of
the Imperial troops.

FOR these realons, the Pope, the Venetians, and duke A league

of Milan, were equally impatient to come to an agiee- formed
ment with Francis, who, on his part, was no less desirous Egmt hero.
of acquiring so considerable an accession both of strength
and reputation as such a confederacy would bring along
with it. The chief objecs of this alliance, which was
concluded at Cognac on the twenty-fecond of May,
though kept secret for some time, were to oblige the Em-
peror to set at liberty the French King's sons, upon pay-
ment of a reasonable ransom, and to re-establish Sforza in
the quiet poffeflion of the Milanese. If Charles should
refule either of these, the contracing parties bound
themselves to bring into the field an army of thirty-five
thousand men, with which, after driving the Spaniards
out of the Milanese, they would attack the !kingdom of
Naples. The King of England was declared Protecor
of this league, which they dignified with the name of
Holy, because the Pope was at the head of it; and in or-
der to allure Henry more effectually, a principality in the
kingdom of Naples, of thirty thousand ducats yearly re-
venue, was to be fettled on him; and lands to the value
of ten thousand ducats on Wolfey his favourite [].

No sooner was this league concluded, than Clement, Tie oper

by the plenitude of his papal power, absolved Francis absolve,
from the oath he had taken to observe the treaty of Ma- Frno is
drid[a]. This right, how pernicious soever to morals, oath t
and inftruaive of that integrity which is the basis of all obftrve

the treaty

tranfations amongfl men, was the natural confequence'fMlad^.
of the powers which the Popes arrogated as infallible vice-
gerents of Christ upon earth; and they having, in virtue

y l uic. 1. 17. 360.
] P. Heater. Rer. Aufr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 117. Recucil des Trait. i.

114.
[«a Goldaft. Poit. Imperial. p. ioga. Pallav. Hit. p. 7~.

of

BOOK IV. of these, often dispensed with obligations which were held
4-- - 1ftacred, the interelt of Some men, and the credulity ot

a526. others, led them to imagine that the decisions of a love-

reign pontiff authorized or justified actions which would,
otlhrwife, have been criminal and unbecoming.

The Fmpe- riEANWHILE, t.e discovery of Francis's intention to
roi alamed. elude the treaty of Madrid, hlled the Emperor with a

variety of disquieting thoughts. He had treated an unfor-
tunate Prince with the mofl ungenerous rigour; he had
displayed an insatiable ambition in all his negotiations with
hi, pi:ioncr: He knew what censures the former had
drawn upon him, and what apprehensions the latter had
excited in every court of Europe; nor had he reaped
fiom the measures he pursued, any of those advantages
which politicians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
noflt criminal conduct, and a compensation for the le-
vcreft reproaches. Francis was now out of his hands,
and not one of all the mighty consequences which he ex-
peced from the treaty that let him at liberty, was liktly
to take place. His rashness in relsing so far on his own
judgment as to trufl to the sincerity of the French King,
in loppofition to the sentiments of his wifefl minitfers,
was i:ow apparent; and he easily conjecured, that the
lame confederacy, the dread of which had induced him
to let Francis at liberty, would now be formed against
him with that gallant and incensed Monarch at its head.
Self-condemnation and shame, on account of what was
past, with anxious apprehensions concerning what might
happen, were the neceffarv result of these reflecions on
his own condua and situation. Charles, however, was
naturally firm and inflexible in all his measures. To
have receded suddenly from any article in the treaty of
Madrid, would hate been a plain confession of impru-
der.ce, and a palpable symptom of fear; he determined
therefore, that it was mcft suitable to his. dignity, to in-
sift, whatever might he the consequences, on.the firif
execution of the treaty, and particularly not to accept of
any thing which might be offered as an equivalent for the
rcflituticn of Burgundv [b].

Requirs IN conlcquence of this refclution, he appointed Lan-
F.Panito noy and Alarcon, to repair, as his ambassadors, to the
F!erform
,bhat hth,d court of France, and formally to summon the King ei-
ttipulated. thcr to execute the treaty with the sincerity that became

[b] Cuic. I. xvii, 366.

him,

him, or to return, according to his oath, a prisoner to BooK IV.
Mjadrid. Inflead of giving them an immediate answer,'--
Francis admitted the deputies of the flates of Burgundy a5x6.
to an audience in their pretence. They humbly repre-
sented to him, that he had exceeded the powers vefled
in a King of France when he consented to aleniate their
country Irom the crown, the domains of which he was
bound by his coronation oath to preserve entire and un-
impaired. Francis, in return, thanked them for their at-
tachment to his crown, and intreated them, though very
faintly, to remember the obligations which he lay under
to fulfil his engagements with the Emperor. The depu-
ties assuming an higher tone, declared they would not
obey commands which they confidered as illegal; and if
he should abandon them to the enemies of France, they
had resolved to defend themfclves to the best of their
power, with a firm purpose rather to perish than to sub-
mit to a foreign dominion. Upon which Francis turning His anfer.
towards the Imperial ambassadors, represented to them
the impossibility of performing what he had undertaken,
and offered in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two
million of crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon, who eafi-
ly perceived that the scene to which they had been wit-
neffes, was concerted between the King and his fubjets
in order to impose on them, signified to him their mafler's
fixed resolution not to depart in the smallest point fiom
the terms of the treaty, and withdrew [cl. Before they
left the kingdom, they had the mortification to hear the June ii.
Holy league againit the Emperor published with great so-
lemnity.

CH ARLES no sooner received an account of this confe- The Empe-

deracy than he exclaimed in the mor public manner, and rors prepa-
in the harfheit terms, againfli Francis, as a Prince void of wr.
faith, or of honour. He complained no less of Clement,
whom he solicited in vain to abandon his new al;ies; he
accused him of ingratitude; he taxed him with an ambi-
tion unbecoming his characer; he threatened him not
only with all the vengeance which the power of an Em-
peror can inflict, but by appealing to a general council,
called up before him all the terrors arising from the au-
thority of those assemblies so formidable to the Papal fee.
It was necessary, however, to oppose something else than
reproaches and threats to the powerful combination form-
[c] Bclcar. Comment de Rfb. Gal. 573. Mera de Bellay, 97.

ed

BOOK IV. ed againfi him; and the Emperor, prompted by so many

v-- --- passions, did not fail to exert himself with unusual vigour,
3s16- in order to fend supplies not only of men, but of money,

which was fill more needed, into Italy.

Feeble ope- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confederates
aEionr. of bore: no proportion to that animosity against the Emperor
, es. with which they seemed to enter into the holy league.

Francis it was thought, would have infused spirit and vi-
gour into the whole body. He had his loft honour to re-
pair, many injuries to revenge, and the station among the
Princes of Europe, from which he had fallen, to recover.
From all there, added to the natural impetuosity of his
temper, a war more fierce and bloody than any he had
hitherto made upon his rival, was expeaed. But Fran-
cis ha:d gone through such a scene of distress, and the im-
prefflon it had made was still so frelh in his memory, that
he was become diffident of himself, distrustful of fortune,
and desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release of
his sons, and to avoid the rcftitution of Burgundy by pay-
ing rome reasonable equivalent, were his chief objeEts,
and for the fake of there, he wonld willingly have facri-
siced Sforza and the liberties of Italy to the Emperor.
H1e flattered himself that the dread alone of such a confe-
deracy would induce Charles to liften to what was equit-
able; and was afraid of employing any considerable force
for the relief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their own interest,
than punAual in fulfilling their engagements, should aban-
don him as soon as the Imperialists were driven out of
that country, and deprive his negotiations with the Em-
peror of that weight which they derived from his being at
the head of a powerful league. Meanwhile the cafile of
Milan was preffd more closely than ever, and Sforza was
now reduced to the lat extremity. The Pope and Ve-
ntians, trufling to Francis's concurrence, commanded
their troops to take the field, in order to relieve him ;
and an army more than sufficient for that service was soon
formed. The Milanese, pafllonately attached to their
unfortunate duke, and no less exasperated against the Im-
perialifts, who had opprefled them so cruelly, were ready
to aid the confederates in all their enterprizes. But the
duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally sow and ipdcci-
five, and restrained, besides, by his ancient enmity to the
fim:ly of Medici, from taking any flep that might ag-

lgradize

grandize or add reputation to the Pope [cl, loft some op- Bo or IV.
portunities, and refuscd to improve others, of attacking '-
the Imperialifis, and raising the siege. These delays gave z'56.
Bourbon time to bring up a reinforcement of fresh troops,
and a supply of money. He immediately took the corn- Juy 14.
mand of the army, and pushed on the siege with such vi-
gour, as quickly obliged Sforza to surrender, who retiring
to Lodi, which the confederates had furprized, left Bour-
bon in full pofleflion of the reft of the dutchy, the invefli-
ture of which the Emperor had promised to grant him [e].

THE Italians began now to perceive the game which Difquictude

Francis had played, and to be sensible that, notwithfiand- of the Itali-
ing all their address, and refinements in negotiation, which an powes.
they boasted of as talents peculiarly their own, they had
for once been over-reached in those very arts by a tra-
montane Prince. He.had hitherto thrown almost the
whole burden of the war upon them, taking advantage of
their efforts in order to enforce the proposals which he
often renewed at the court of Madrid for obtaining the
liberty of his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftulated
and complained I], but as they were not able to rouze
Francis from his inativity, their own zeal and vigour
gradually abated, and Clement having already gone far-
ther than his timidity usually permitted him, began to
accuse himself of rashness, and to relapse into his natural
tfate of doubt and uncertainty.

ALL the Emperor's motions depending on himself Feeble ope

alone, were more brifl and better concerted. The nar- ations of
rownefs of his revenues, indeed, did not allow him to rtescne
make any sudden or great effort in the field, but he
abundantly supplied that defet by his intrigues and nego-
tiations. The family of Colonna, the mos powerful of
all the Roman barons, had adhered uniformly to the
Ghibeline or Imperial fa&ion, during there fierce conten-
tions between the Popes and Emperors, which, for several
ages, filled Italy and Germany with discord and blood-
lhed. Though the caules which at fils gave birth to
there deRru&ive faaions existed no longer, and the rage
with which they had been animated was in a great mea-
sure spent, the Colonnas till retained the: irachmter: to
the Imperial interest, and by placing themlte/es under the

E'lI Guick 1. 17. 381.
!e Ibid. 376, Lc,
I Rukfeif Lettere de Psincipi, ii. 157, &c. 159, 160-166.
otL. 1. K k protecion

BOOK IV. protecion of the Emperors, secured the quiet pofTeflnon
'_--^* of their own territories and privileges. The Cardinal

5z6. Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent and ambitious

temper, at that time the head of the family, had long
been Clement's rival, to whose influence in the last con-
clave he imputed the difappointrent of all his fchemcs
for attaining the Papal dignity, of which, from his known
conneacion with the Emperor, he thought himself secure.
This was too great an injury to an aspiring mind ever to
be forgiven; and though he had dissembled his resent-
ment so far as to vote for Clement at his election, and to
accept of great offices in his court, he waited with the
utmost impatience for an opportunity of being revenged.
Don Hugo di Moncada, the Imperial ambassador at
Rome, who was no firanger to these sentiments, easily
persuaded him that now was the time, while all the Po-
pal troops were employed in Lombardy, to attem,.
lomething which would, at once, avenge his own wrongs,
and be of essential service to the Emperor his patron.
''he Pope, however, whose timidity rendered him quick-
fighted, was so attentive to their operations, and began
to be alarmed so early, that he might have drawn toge-
ther troops sufficient to have disconcerted all Colonna's
neafures. But Moncada amused him so artfully with ne-
gotiations, promises, and fabe intelligence, that he lulled
asleep all his suspicions, and prevented his taking any of
the precautions necessary for his safety; and to the eter-
nal disgrace of a prince poTfefled of great power, as well
Sept. 29. as renowned for political wisdom, Colonna at the head of

three thousand men, seized one of the gates of his capi-
tal, while he imagined himself to be in perfec security,
and was altogether unprepared for refilling fuoh a feeble

The Colon- enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted Colonna's
n-become troops, from whom they apprehended no injury, to ad-

me.I vance without opposition; the Pope's guards were difperl-

ed in a moment; and Clement himself, terrified at the
danger, ashamed of his own credulity, and defcrted by
almost every person, fled with precipitation into the caflle
of St. Angelo, which was immediately invested. The
palace of the Vatican, the church of St. Peter, and the
houses of the Pope's ministers and servants, were plun-
dered in the mofi licentious manner; the reft of the city

Accommo- was left unmolested. Clement, deflitute of every thing
dation b- necessary either for subsistence or defence, was soon oblig-
Fope and ed to demand a capitulation; and Moncada, being admit-
Emiltar. ted

ted into the castle, prescribed to him, with all the haughti- BoK IV-
nels of a conqueror, conditions which it was not in his'-v--
power to rcjet. The chief of there was, that Clement '56-
should not only grant a full pardon to the Colonnas, but
receive them into favour, and immediately withdraw all
the troops in his pay from the army of the confederates in
Lombardy [g].

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than of de-

posing Clement, and of placing Pompeo, their kinsman,
in the vacant chair of St. Peter, exclaimed loudly againit
a treaty which left them at the mercy of a Pontiff juflly
incensed against them. But Mloncada, attentive only to
his master's interest, paid little regard to their complaints,
and by this fortunate measure, broke entirely the power of
the confederates.

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered such a The lmpe-

considerable diminution, the Imperialifls received two great ril army r-
reinforcements; one trom Spain, under the command of
Lannoy and Alarcon, which amounted to fix thousand
men; the other was raised in the Empire by George
Frondfperg, a German nobleman, who having served in
Italy with great reputation, had acquired such influence
and popularity, that multitudes of his countrymen, fond
on every occasion of engaging in military enterprizes, and
impatient at that juncure to escape from the oppression of
their superiors both in religious and civil matters, crowded
to his flandard; so that without any other gratuity than
the payment of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand
inlifed in his service. To there the archduke Ferdinand
added two thousand horse, levied in the Austrian domini-
ons. But although the Emperor had raised troops, he could
not remit the fums neccfsary for their support. His ordi-
nary revenues were exhaufled ; the credit of princes, during
the infancy of commerce, was not extensive; and the
Cortes of Caltile, though every art had been tried to gain
them, and some innovations had been made in the confti-
tution, in order to secure their concurrence, peremptorily
refused to grant Charles any extraordinary supply [h]; so
that the more his army increased in number, the more
were his generals embarrassed and difreffed. Bourbon, in
particular, was involved in such difficullies, that he flood
in need of all his address and courage in order to extricate

[g] Jovii Vits Pomp. Colon. Cuic. 1. x'ii 407. Rulcclli Lrttcre de
PIlDt.ipi, i. p 104. h] Sndov. i. (14.

K k 2 himself.

BooK IV. himself. Vail fums were due to the Spaniflh troops already
~'-- - in the Milanese, when Frondfperg arrived with sixteen
The 5:;pe thousand hungry Germans, deflitute of every thing. Both
lor'mfinalces made their demands with equal fiercenels; the former
defiicin. claiming their arrears, and the latter, the pay which had

been.promifed them on their entering Lombardy: Bourbon
was altogether incapable of giving fatisfacion to either.
In this situation, he was confirained to commit ads of vio-
lence extremely ihocking to his own nature, which was
gentle and humane. HIe seized the principal citizens of
Milan, and by threats, and even torture, forced from them
a considerable fum ; he rifled the churches of all their plate
and ornaments; the inadequate supply which there afford-
ed, he diflrihuted among the soldiers, with so many sooth-
ing expreflions of his sympathy and affeiion, that, though
it fell far (hort of the fums due to them, it appeared their
present murmurs [h].

Bourbonfets AMONG other expedients for railing money, Bourbon
Morone at granted his life and liberty to Morone, who having been
librty. kept in prison since his intrigue with Pescara, had been con-

demned to die by the Spanilh judges empowered to try him.
For this remiion he paid twenty thousand ducats; and
such were his singular talents, and the wonderful ascendant
he acquired over the minds of those to whom he had ac-
cess, that in a few days, from being Bourbon's prisoner,
he became his prime confident, with whom he consulted
in all affairs of importance. To his insinuations mull be
imputed the suspicions which Bourbon began to entertain,
that the Emperor had never intended to grant him the in-
veltiture of Milan, but had appointed Leyva, and the
other Spanish generals, rather to be spies on his condut,
than to co-operate heartily towards the execution of his
Ichemes. To him likewise, as he fill retained at the age
of fouricore all the enterprizing spirit of youtli, may be at-
tribi;ted the bold and unexpected measure on which Bour-
bon soon after ventured [i].

Hi dt,;lile- SUCH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Imperial
ration with troops in the Milancfe, that it became indifpcnf.ibly necef-
reola to his fary to take some immediate tfep for their relief. The ar-

rears of the soldiers increaled daily; the Fmperor made
no remittances to his generals; and the utmofl rigour of

[h] Ripamont. Hiif. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.
i] C;uIL. I. xvii. 419.

plilitary

military extortion could draw nothing more from a coun- BOOK IV.
try entirely drained and ruined. In this situation there '-~'-
was no choice left, but either to disband the army, or to L5z6.
march for fubfiflence into the enemies country. The ter-
ritories of the Venetians lay neared at hand; but they,
with their usual foresight and prudence, had taken fuich
precautions as fccured them from any insult. Nothing,
therefore, remained but to invade the dominions of the
Church, or of the Florentines; and Clement had of late
aAed such a part, as merited the severest vengeance from
the Emperor. No sooner did the troops return to Rome
after the infurretion of the Colonnas, than, without pay-
ing any regard to the treaty with Moncada, he degraded
the Cardinal Colonna, excommunicated the reft of the fa-
mily, ikit.ed their places of flrength, and wafled their
lands with all the cruelty which the smart of a recent in-
jury naturally excites. After this, he turned his arms
againfl Naples, and, as his operations were Icconded by
the French fleet, he made some progress towards the con-
quefl of that kingdom; the Viceroy being no less destitute
than the other Imperial generals, of the money requisite
for a vigorous defence [k].

THLSF. proceedings of the Pope juflificd, in appear- i;27.
ance, the measures which Bourbon's situation rendered ne- .a '.c''. to

Invade [he

cefary ; and he set about executing them under such dif- poe'- i:
advantages, as furniflh the (lrongeft proof, both of the t,:ic.
despair to which he was reduced, and of the greatners of
his abilities, which were able to furnmount so many ob-
flacles. Having committed the government of Milan to Jan. 3.
Leyva, whom he was not unwilling to leave behind, he
began his march in the depth of winter, at the head of
twenty-five thousand men, compored of nations differing
from each other in language and manners; without mo-
ney, without maga.ines, without artillery, without car-
riages; in flort, without any of those things which are
necessary to the fmallefl party, and which seem ctfential to
the exitence and motions of a great army. Ilis rout lay
through a country cut by rivers and mountains, in which
the roads were almost impraticable ; as an addition to his
difficulties, the enemy's army, superior to his own in num-
ber, was at hand to watch all his motions, and to improve
every advantage. But his troops, impatient of their pre-

[k] Jovii Viti Pomp. Colon. Cuic. 1. xviii. 414.

K k 3 fkL t

Boot IV. cent hardflips, and allured by the hopes of obtaining an

Cvy- » immen!e nooty, did not confider how ill provided they
A 17' were for a march, and followed him with great chearfulnces.

His first Icheme was to have made himself master of Pla-
centia, and to have gratified his soldiers with the plunder
of that city; but the vigilance of the confederate generals
rendered the design abortive; nor had le better fucccfs in
his project for tie reduEtion of Bologna, which was sea-
fonably supplied with as many troops as ftcured it from the
infi'ts of an army which had neither aritllcry nor ammu-
nition. HIaving failed in both these attempts to becomc
mafi r of some great city, he was unoer a necefity of ad-
vancing. But he had now been two months in the field;
his troops had suffered every calamity which a long march,
together with the uncommon rigour of the season, could
bring upon men deflitute of all necessary accommodations,
in an enemy's country; the magnificent promises to which
they trufled, had proved altogether vain; they saw no

Mutinyof profpe& of relief; their patience, tried to the utmost,
his troops. failed at lafd, and they broke out into open mutiny. Some

officers, who rashly attempted to restrain them, fell vic-
tims to their firy; Bourbon himself, not daring to appear
during the first transports of their rage, was obliged to fl,
secretly from his quarters [11. But this sudden ebullition of
wrath began at last to subside, when Bourbon, who pof-
sessed, in a wonderful degree, the art of governing the
minds of soldiers, renewed his promires with more confi-
dence th-n formerly, and assured them that they would
be soon accomplished. He endeavoured to render their
hardships more tolerable by partaking of them liimfelf;
lie fared no better than the meanefl centinel; he marched
along with them on foot; he joined them in singing their
camp-ballads, in which, with high praises of his valour,
they mingled many firokes of military raillery on his po-
verty; and wherever they came, he allowed them, as a
foretafle of what he had promised, to plunder the adjaceat
villages at dicretion. Encouiaged by all these fooilingr
arts, they entirely forgot their sufferings and complaints,
and followed him with the fame implicit confidence a,
formerly tm].

I ] Cuic. . xviii. 434. Jnvii Vit. Colon. 163.
[m] Oeuvres de Brant. iol. iv. p. 146, &c.

BOUtBON,

BouRroN, meanwhile, carefully concealed his inten- nOOK IV.

tions. Rome and Florence, not knowing on which t1clle Ioow
would f;ll, were held in the moll di'luieting slate otts,27-
fufpence. Clement, equally solicitous for the safety of irit iluton
both, flucuated in more than his ulnal uncertainty; and anld .'l[ru-
while the rapid approach of danger called for prompt ancd "'-"
decisive measures, he spent the time in deliberations which
came to no istTlc, or in taking resolutions, which next day
his refllcfs mind, more sagacious in dilceirn;ng than in ob-
viating difficulties, overturned, without being ailec to -x
on what should be substituted in their place. At one tilme
he determined to unite hiimlelf more clof(ly than ever x i\ h
his aliie, and to push the war with vieour; at aintilier,
lie inclin.d to bring all differences to a final accomnmodtia-
tion, by a treaty with Itannoy, wio, knowing his pafTioii
tor negotiation, solicitcd lhim incessantly with propolsli tor
that purpo'e. Ilis timidity at length prevailWd, and led March r5.
hirm to conclude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the t,'iat.v Gih
iollowing were the chief articles: That a fiufenfion of Ithe Vin.y
arms should take place between the Pontifical and Impe- o Nipt't-,
rial troops for eight months: That Clement ftiould ad-
vance sixty thousand crowns towards satis -ing the demands
of the Imperial army: 'lhat the Colonnas hou!d be ab-
solved fiom ccnfurc, and their former dignities and posses-
sions le restored to them: That the viceroy should come
to Rome, and prevent Bourbnn from approaclilng nearer
to that city, or to Florence 1.3. On this sudden trctty,
which deprived him of all hopes of affiflance from his al-
lies, without affording him any lolid foundation of fecu-
riry, Clement relied so firmly, that like a man extricated
at once out of all difficulties, he was at perfet cafe, and,
in the fulners of his confidence, dilbanded all his troops,
cxcept as many as were fuffikcint to guard his own per-
son. This amazing confidence of Clement's, who, on
every other occasion, was fearful and suspicious to excels,
appeared so unaccountable to Guicciardini, who being at
that time the pontifical commiilary-gcneral and resident in
the confedcr.tee army, hau great opportunity, as well a' great
abilities, for observing how chinerical all hlis hopes were,
that he imputes the Pope's condua, at this junaure, whol!y
to infatuation, which those who arc doomred to ruin can-
not avoid [].

In] G ic. I. xviii. 436. [F] Ibid. 446

K k 4 LANO,

BOOK IV. LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have executed
t-_v- the treaty with great sincerity; and having detached Cle-
wbic7ourr ment from the confederacy, withed to turn Bourbon's arms
bon difre- against the Venetians, who, of all the powers at war with
girds. !tie Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour. VWith this

view, he dispatched a courier to Pourbon, informing him
of the suspension of arms, which, in the name of their
common mailer, he had concluded with the Pope. Bour-
bon had other schemes; and he had prosecuted them now
too far to think of retreating. To have mentioned a re-
treat to his soldiers, would have been dangerous; his com-
mand was independent on Lannoy; he was fond of mor-
tifying a man whom he had many reasons to hate; for
these reasons, without paying the Icaft regard to the mef-
sage, he continued to ravage the ecclefialtical territories,
and to advance towards Florence. Upon this, all Cle-
mcnt's terror and anxiety returning with new force, he had
recourse to Lannoy, and intrcated and conjured him to
put a flop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly set
out for his camp, but duift not approach it; Bourbon's fol-
diers laving got notice of the truce, raged and threatened,
demanding the accomplifhme nt of the promises to which
thty had trufled; their general himself could scarce restrain
them ; every pcrfon in Rome perceived that nothing re-
mained but to prepare for refifling a florm which it was
row' impossible to dipel. Clement alone, relying on some
ambiguous and deceitful profeflions which Bourbon made
of his inclination towards peace, funk back into his former
fccurity [r].

Advances BOURBON, on his part, was far from being free from
R--.', solicitude. All his attempts on any places of importance

had hitherto miscarried; and Florence, towards which he
had been approaching for tome time, was, by the arrival
of the duke d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his
power at defiance. As it now became necessary to change
his rout, ard to take infantly some new resolution, he
fixed, without hcfitation, on one no less daring in itself,
than it was impious according to the opinion of that age.
This was to assault and plunder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted hin to it. He was fond of thwarting
Lannoy, who had undertaken for the safety of that city;
he imagined that the Emperor would be highly pleased to
lee Clement, the chief author of the league againfi him,

[p] Guic, 1. xviii. 437, Sc. Mem. de Beliy, p. 0oo.

humbled;

humbled; he flattered himself, that by gratifying the ra- BooK IV-
pacity of his soldiers with such immense booty, he would -v-
attach them for ever to his interest; or (which is still '517
more probable than any of these) he hoped, that by
means of the power and splendor he would acquire from
the conquefl of the firfl city in Chrillendom, he might lay -
the foundation of an independent power; and that, after#
shaking off all connection with the Emperor, he might
take poffeflion of Naples, or of tome of the Italian states,
in his own name [q].

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed his refo- ' he Pope's

lution with a rapidity equal to the boldness with which he reTparations
had formed it. His soldiers, now that they had their
prey in full view, complained neither of fatigue, nor fa-
mine, nor want of pay. No sooner did they begin to
move fiom Tuscany towards Rome, than the Pope, fen-
fible at last how fallacious the hopes had been on which he
reposed, flarted from his security. But no time now re-
mained, even for a bold and decisive Pontiff, to have taken
proper rTeafures, or to have formed any effeAual plan of
defence. Under Clement's feeble conduct, all was con-
flernation, disorder, and irresolution. He colleced, how-
ever, such of his disbanded soldiers as Hill remained in the
city; he armed the artificers of Rome, and the footmen
and train-bearers of the Cardinals; he repaired the breaches
in the walls; he begun to ereA new works; he excommu-
nicated Bourbon and all his troops, branding the Germans
vwith the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards with that
of Moors [']. Trufling to there ineffecual military pre-
parations, or to his spiritual arms, which were fill more
elefpifed by rapacious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside
his natural timidity, and, contrary to the advice of all his
counsellors, determined to wait the approach of an
enemy whom, by a timely retreat, he might cafily have
avoided.

BOURBON, who saw the neccffity of dispatch, now that AfTll; ..'

his intentions were known, advanced with such fpccd, that ","
he gained several marches on the duke d'Uirino's army,
and encamped in the plains of Rome on the evening if
the fifth of May. From thence he shewed his soldiers 1li1
palaces and churches of that city. into which, as the ca-
pital of the Chrifsian commonwcalth, the wealth of ll:
Europe had flowed during many centuries, without having

'] RrAnt. iv. 271. vi. 189. Belk1ii Comment. 594.
r] Scikcnd. lib. ii. p. 68.

been

BooE IV. been once violated by any hoflile hand; and commanding
---v---' them to refresh themselves that night, as a preparation for

5 the assault next day, promired them, in reward of their

toils and valour, the poffeflion of all the treasures accu-
rmilated there.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had determined

io distinguish that day either by his death or the success of
hi; enterprise, appeared at the head of his troops, clad in
complete armour, above which he wore a velt of white
tiffuc, that he might be more conspicuous both to his
friends and to his enemies; and as all depended on one
bold impression, he led them inflantly to fcalc the walls.
Three diftinEt bodies, one of Germans, another of Spa-
niards, and the lafl of Italians, the three different nations
of whom the army was cornpofed, were appointed to this
service; a separate attack was assigned to each, and the
whole army advanced to support them as occasion should
require. A thick miff concealed their approach, until they
reached almofl the brink of the ditch which surrounded
the suburbs; having planted their ladders in a moment,
each brigade rushed on to the assault with an impeluofity
heightened by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own ; the Swiss in the
Pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who had been as-
feml4ed, fought with a courage becoming men to whom
the defence of the noblest city in the world was intrufed.
Bouibonn's troops, notwithflanding all their valour, gained
no ground, and even began to give way, when their leader,
perceiving tlhat on this critical moment the fate of the day
depended, threw himself from his horse, prtffle to the
front, fiatched a fcaling-laddcr from a soldier, planted it
against the wall, and began to mount it, encouraging his
Fnurbon men, with his voice and hand, to follow him; but at that

n ery inltant, a mulsket bullet fiom the ramparts pierced

his groin with a wound, which he immediately felt to be
mortal; Ihut lie retained so much pretence of mind as to
desire those hlo were near him to cover his body with a
cloak, that his dcalh might not dishearten his troops; and
soon after he expired with a co*rage worthy of a ettler
cauC', and which would have entitled him to thl higherll
praise, if he had thus fallen in defence of his country, not
al thead of its enemies [ ].

1[] Mem. de BEllty, Ioi. Cuic. 1. xviii. p, 445, &c. Otuv. dc Brant.
iv. 157, &c.

IT

IT was impossible to conceal this fatal event from the BotK IV.

army; the foldicrs soon miffed their general, whom they ---
were accustomcd to fee in every time of danger; lut in- "'7

The'city

flead of being disheartened by their loss, it animated them taken.
with new valour; the name of Bourbon resounded along
the line, accompanied with the cry of blood and revengr'.
'Ihe veterans who defended the walls were soon over-
powered by numbers; the untrained body of city recruits
fled at the fight of danger, and the enemy with irrcfiftible
violence rushed into the town.

DURING the combat, Clement was emploved at the

altar of St. Peter's in offering up to heaven univailing
prayers for viAory. No sooner was he informed that his
troops began to give way, than he fled with precipitation,
and, with an infatuation fill more anma.ing than any thing
already mentioned, inflead of making his efcapc by the
opposite gate, where there was no enemy to oppose it, he
shut himself up, together with thirteen cardinals, the lo-
reign ambafTadors, and many persons of diflin.ion, in the
cattle of St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, he
m.ighf have known to be an infecrrc retreat. In his way
from the Vatican to that fortress, he saw his troops flying
before an enemy who pursued without giving quarrter; he
heard the cries and lamentations of the Roman citizer:,
and beheld the beginning of those calamities which his
own credulity and ill-conduct had brought upon his
fubjets ['].

IT is impoirble to describe, or even to imagine, the rilunderd.

misery and horror of that scene which followed. What-
ever a city taken by form can dread from military rage
unrefirained by discipline; whatever excesses the ferocity
of the Germans, hle w;varice of the Spaniards, or the li-
ccntioufnefs qs the Italians could commit, these the
wretched inhabitants were obliged to (flTer. Churches,
palaces, and the houses of private persons, were plundered
without difiinaion. No age, or character, or sex, was
exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles, priefis, matrons,
virgins, were all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of
men deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did there out-
rages cease, as is usual in towns which are carried byhv as-
fault, when the sirs fury of the form was over; the Im-
perialifts kept poffeflion of Rome several months; and
during all that time the insolence and brutality of the fol-

[t] Jov. Vit. Colon. 16s.

dicrs

BooK IV. diers scarce abated. Their booty, in ready money alone,
,V--, amounted to a million of ducats; what they railed by

'127 ranforns and exations far exceeded that fum. Rome,

though taken several different times by the northern na-
tions; who over-ran the Empire in the fifth and sixth cen-
turies, was never treated with so much cruelty by the bar-
barous and heathen Huns,Vandals, or Goths, as now by the
bigotted fubjeas of a catholic monarch [u].

The Pope AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of the Impe-
,ficgrd in rial army devolved on Philibert de Chalons prince of
thl c:itlotf Oranire, who with difficulty prevailed on as many of his

soldiers to defill from the pillage as were neceflary to in-
veil the caille of St. Angelo. Clement was immediately
fcnfible of his error in having retired into that ill provided
and untenable fort. But as the Imperialiils, scorning dilci-
pline, and intent only on plunder, pushed the siege with
little vigour, he did not despair of holding out until the
duke d'Urbino should come to his relief. That general
advanced at the head of an army composed of Venetians,
Florentincs, and Swiss, in the pay of France, of sufficient
firength to have delivered Clement from the present dan-
ger. But d'Urlino, preferring the indulgence of his ha-
tredl againfl the family of Medici to the glory of deliver-
ing the capital of Chrillendom, and the head of the church,
pronounced the cntcrprize to be too hazardous; and hav-
in,, from an exCquifite refinement in revenge, marched
foeward Io far, that his army being seen from the ramparts
of St. Anclo, flattered the Pope with the profpe, of ocr-

orcnJlcrs tain relief, he immediately retired [x]. Clement, de-
him!'if a privcd of every reloi'ce, and reduced to such extremity of
"'"c"nr. famine as to feed on affLs flnei [], was obliged to capitu-

1 .t: on fiahi conditinns as the conquerors were pleased to
prlc'ribe. I-e a!g;e:l t n pav Ifour hundred thourand ducats
to the army ; to fIlirender to the Emperor all the places of
ltrength blonging to the church; and befiels giving hofR-
n>es, to rcmain a prilbner himself until the chief articles
vwere performel. 1I-e was committed to the care of Alar-
con, who, by his revere vigilance in guarding Francis, had
given full proof of. his being qualified for that officc; and
tliu%, by ;a singular accident, the fame man had the cultody

[II] Ji. V1t. C'.

ol. i6;u. Guic. I. xvii. 440, &c. Cnmment. de carta

hbe Roma n;'. Scarlium, i. 130. Ullon Vita dell Carlo V. p. I o, &c.
tlanontl- lilil. of N:ap Ih ' . ,i . .3. ' o7.

[J] Guic 1. xi.i. 4;3. [y)] ov. Vit. Colon, 167.

of

of the two mofi illutfrious personages who had been made BoO$K IV.
prisoners in Europe during several ages. -v

THE account of this extraordinary and unexpeced The517n-

event was no less furprizing than agreeable to the Em- ror's bcha-
peror. But in order to conceal his joy fiom his fubjet&s, V,.iO at this
who were filltd with horror at the success and crimes ofjua"tuc'
their countrymen, and to Icen the indignation of the reft
of Europe, he declared that Rome had been assaulted
without any order from him ; he wrote to all the princes
with whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his having had
any knowledge of Bourbon's intention [7] ; he put himself
and court into mourning; commanded the rejoicings which
had been ordered for the bilt h of his son Philip to be flop-
ped; and, employing an artifice no less hypocritical than
grols, he appointed prayers and procellions throughout all
Spain for the recovery of the Pope's liberty, which, by
an order to his generals, he could have immediately
granted him [a.

THE good fortune of the house of Austria was no less Solymn i;-

conspicuous in another part of Europe. Solyman having vades Hun-
invaded Hnngary with an army three hundred thousand gary'
frong, Lewis II. King of that country, and of Bohemia,
a weak and unexperienced prince, advanced rashly to meet
him with a body of men which did not amount to thirty
thousand. With an imprudence still more unpardonable,
he gave the command of there troops to Paul Tomorri, a
Franciscan monk, archbihop of Golocza. This aukward Defeat ns
general, in the dress of his order, girt with its cord, the Hunga-
marched at the head of the troops; and hurried on by his ,,cth of
own presumption, as well as by the impetuosity of nobles their King.
who defpied danger, but were impatient of long service,
fought the fatal battle of M\ohac7., in which the King,
the flower of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of
twenty thousand men, fell ;he victims of his folly and
ill-conduC. Solyman, after his vitorv, seized and kept
poffcflion of several towns of greater strength in the
southern provinces of Hungary, and over-running the reft
of the country, carried near two hundred thousand persons
into captivity. As Lewis was the lafl male of the royal
family of Jagcllon, the Archduke Ferdinand claimed both
his crowns. This claim was founded on a double title;
the one derived from the ancient pretensions of the houle

[z] Rufcelli L.ettre di l'riincii, ii. 234.
ltJ S cid. Io. i. a. lvlu. a. . Hiltt. V ncta. lib. iii. »2c.

of

BooK IV. of Austria to both kingdoms; the other from the right of

-v~-' his wife, the only filler of the deceased monarch. The
'527' feudal ini-itutions, however, fubfifled both in Hungary and

Bohemia in such vigour, and the nobles possessed such ex-
tensive power, that the crowns were till eleaive; and
Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been powerfully sup-

Ferdinand ported, would have met with little regard. But his own
trieacd personal merit; the refpea due to the brother of the
u'g. ggreatefi monarch in Christendom ; the necessity of choofing

a prince able to afford his fubjets some additional pro-
recion against the Turkish arms, which, as they had felt
their weight so lately, they greatly dreaded ; together with
the intrigues of his fifRer, who had been married to the
late King, overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians
had conceived against the Archduke as a foreigner; and
though a considerable party voted for the Waywode ot
T'ranfilvania, at length secured Ferdinand the throne of that
kingdom. The ltatcs of Bohemia imitated the example
of their neighbour kingdom; but in order to afccrtain and
secure their own privileges, they obliged Ferdinand, be-
fore his coronation, to subscribe a deed, which they termed
a Rcverfc, declaring that he held that crown not by any
previous right, but by their gratuitous and voluntary elec-
tion. By fitch a vall acceflion of territories, the hereditary
pofieflion of which they secured in process of time to their
family, the princes of the houle of Aultria attained that
pre-eminence in power which hath rendered them so formi-
dable to the relt of German) [6].

Progrr . of THE dissensions between the Pope and Emperor proved
tbe Refor- extremely favourable to the progress of lutheranilnm.
matiuni. Charles, exasperated by Clement's condua, and fullv em-

ployed in opposing the league which he had formed .Tgainft
him, had little inclination and less leisure to take any

line 25, mreaflres for suppressing the new opinions in Germany. In
;sei. a diet of the Empire, held at Spires, the slate of religion

came to be confidered; and all that the Emperor reqired
of the princes was,that they would wait paticntly, and with-
out encouraging innovations, for the meeting of a general
council which he had demanded of the Pope. They, in re-
turn, acknowledged :Lheionvocation ofa council tobe thepro-
per and regular llep towards reforming abuses in the church;

[h] Strph. Piodcrick Pr(icancel.t ii Hungar. Clades in Campo Mohlcz

tp. Scardium, ii. 8. P. B. Barnt Hill. d'Allcmaigne, tum. viii. prrt i. p.
1.y8.

but

but contended, that a national council held in Germany Boox IV
would be more effectual for that purpose than what he had v---
proposed. To his advice, concerning the discouragement '527'
of innovations, they paid so little regard. that even during
the meeting of the diet at Spires, the divines who at-
tended the EleEtor of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse-
Caflel thither, preached publickly, and adminiflered the
sacraments according ro the rites of the reformed church [cl.
The Emperor's own example emboldened the Germans to
treat the Papal authority with little reverence. During
the heat of his relentment againfi Clement, he had pub-
lifhed a long reply to an angry brief which the Pope had
intended as an apology for his own condut. In this ma-
nifeflo, the Emperor, after having enumerated many in-
flances of that Pontiff's ingratitude, deceit, and ambition,
all which he painted in the strongest and most aggravated
colours, he appealed from him to a general council. At
the fame time he wrote to the college of Cardinals, com-
plaining of Clement's partiality and injuflice, and requiring
them, if he refused or delayed to call a council, to manifefl
their concern for the peace of the Chriflian church, so
fhameftlly neglected by its chief pastor, by summoning
that assembly in their own name [d]. This manifeflo,
scarce inferior in virulence to the inveaives of Luther him-
self, was dispersed over Germany with great industry, and
being eagerly read by persons of every rank, did much
more than counterbalance the effe& of all Charles's decla-
rations against the new opinions.

[c] Sleid. p. 1o3.
[d] Goldlft. Polit. Imper. p. 984.

END OF VOL. I.

. I
