THE
I

S

T O

R

Y

O F
COTLAND.

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A RY and of

King J A M E S

TILL
His AccESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTTISH HISTORY previous to that Period;

And an A PPENDIX containing OR IG I NAL PAPE R S.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON,

D.D.
Minister of LAD Y YES T E R 'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.
THE THIRD EDITION.

L O N D O N:
Printed for A. M I L L A R, in the Strand.

MDCCLX.

H
S

VI.
I _ _ __ ______ _ _

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

B 00 K VI.

HE unexpected blow, by which the Regent fell, ftruckBooKVI.
the King's party with the utmost consternation. Eliza- -' --
beth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster, which ,Di15e7

Dihlorders oc-

could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degreecafioned by
that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now,tdhgent
her restoration were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who expressed such
indecent joy at the commiion of it. And as the aflaffin made his
escape on a horse, which belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and
fled directly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
was concluded that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the resent-
ment of the Queen's party, rather than to the revenge of a private
man. On the day after the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker
of Ferniherft, both zealous abettors of the Queen's cause, entered

VOL. II. B England

BOOK VI.England in an hostile manner, and plundered and burnt the coun-
t.-,,-_ try, the inhabitants of which expected no such outrage. If the

J57°'

Regent had been alive, they would .scarce have ventured on such
an irregular incursion, nor could it well have'happened so soon after
his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

Steps talen
towards eleEt-
ing another
Regent,
Feb. z.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's death gave occasion. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impossible to restrain these, with-
out a fettled form of government, a Convention of the nobles
was held, in order to deliberate concerning the election of a Re-
gent. The Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting,
and protested againit its proceedings. The King's own party was
irresolute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had
set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then aifembled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been laid to
his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two par-
ties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the joint administration of
government with her son. Elizabeth, adhering to her antient
system with regard to Scottish affairs, laboured, notwithflanding the
follicitations of Mary's friends ', to multiply, and to perpetuate the
facions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom she
despatched into Scotland on the first news of the Regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for such ferviccs, found all parties to
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcilable rancour,
that it cost him little trouble to inflame their animosity. The Convcn-
tion broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new meect-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited, was appointed
on the first of May --.

* Sec Append. No. I. I Crawf Mem. 131, Caldcrw. 2. 1 57.

MEAN-
2

.A

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who frill continued to ac-BooK VI.
knowledge the King's authority, were at the utmost pains to restore '

1570.

some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They procured, A coaliion of
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the leaders of theparties at-
two factions. But while the one demanded the restoration of thevain.
Queen, as the only thing which could re-establish the public tran-
quility; while the other esteemed the King's authority to be so fa-
cred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question or im-
paired; and neither of them would.recede in the least point from
their opinions, they separated without any profpeEt of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by the hope
of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with promises of
powerful succour to the Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in
that kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating in a peace,
it was expected that Charles would soon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the Earl of Suffex was assem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could not
fail of adding spirit and firength to the King's party .

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the factions provedQieen's p:r-

ty in pofreflion

ineffectual, it contributed somewhat to moderate, or suspend theirofEdinb,,igh.
rage; but they soon began to aa with their usual animosity. Mor-
ton the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide, follicited
Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for the safety of a party, so
devoted to her interest, and which stood so much in need of her
afiftlance. The Chiefs of the Queen's faction, assembling at Lin-Apil to.
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was
both Governor of the castle, and Provost of the town, prevailed

* Crawf. Mem. 134.

3
B 2

on0

4

Boox VI.on the citizens, though with some difficulty, to admit them within
-'----' the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and
1570. Maitland, acceded almoR openly to their party; and the Duke, and

Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
resumed the places, which they had formerly held in their coun-
cils. Encouraged by the acquisition of persons so illustrious by
their birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they published a pro-
clamation, declaring their intention to support the Queen's autho-
thority, and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the meeting
of the approaching Convention, in which, by their numbers and
influence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices on
their fide *.

Eneavour to AT the fame time, they had formed a design of kindling war
involve the between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in
nnar with Eng holities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they
land. hoped, not only to diflblve a confederacy of great advantage to the

King's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to the Queen,
Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this view,
they had immediately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had since instigated-
them to continue and extend their depredations. As Elizabeth fore-
saw, on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to susser such
an insult on her government to pass with impunity; (he issued a.
proclamation, declaring that she imputed the outrages which had
been committed, not to the Scottish nation, but to a few desperate
and ill-defigning persons; that, with the former, she was resolved

' Crawf. Mem. 137. Caldcrwv. 2. 176.

to

5

to maintain an inviolable friendship, whereas the duty, which fheBooK VI.
owed to her own fubjeds, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness-'
of the latter*. Sufnex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland, 5
the one on the east, the other on the weft borders, and laid waste
the adjacent countries with fire and sword +. Fame magnified the
number and progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents, not
thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof
were ill affected to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There, by aApril 2S.
public proclamation they aflerted the Queen's authority, and sorbad
giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and
Huntly, whom. the had conitituted her Lieutenants in the king-
dom.

THE nobles who adhered to the King, though considerably King's party

weakened by the defetion of so many of their friends, afembled beer Edin-
at Edinburgh on the day appointed' They issued a counter-procla-May F.
mation, declaring those who appeared for the Queen, enemies of
their country; and charging them with the murder both of the late
King, and.of the Regent. They could not, however, presume so
much on their own strength as to venture either to elect a Regent,
or to take the field against the Queen's party; but the afiiftance,
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both. By
her order, Sir William Drury marched into Scotland, with a thou-
sand foot, and. three hundred horse; the King's adherents joined
him with a considerable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already begun holtilities by
attacking the castle, they forced them to retire, plundered the neigh-
bouring. country, which belonged to the Hamiltons, and, after

* Cald. 2. 18x. :1: Cabala, 174.

ifizing

BOOK VI.feizing obme of their castles, and razing others, returnedto Edin-
-- . burgh.

Motives of UNDER Drury's protection, the Earl of Lennox returned into
Elizabeth's
condua with Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the kin-
regard to dom to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illustrious
them.

birth, and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as of
Scotland, rendered him worthy of that honour. And as his re-
fentment against Mary was implacable, as his estate lay in England,
and his family resided there, Elizabeth confidered him as a man,
who, both from inclination, and from interest, would ad in con-
cert with her, and ardently wished that he might succeed Murray
in the office of Regent. But, on many accounts, she did not
think it prudent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour his
pretensions too openly. The civil wars in France, which had been
excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce-
ness that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the point of
coming to an issue; and after shedding the best blood, and wafting
the richest provinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negotiations, which were carry-
ing on for that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be a paflionate
admirer of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser a Queen
of France, and the mofl ancient ally of his crown, to languish in
her present cruel situation, without attempting to procure her re-
lief. He had, hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with remon-
ftrating, by his ambassadors, against the indignity, with which ile
had been treated. But if he were once at full liberty to pursue his
inclinations, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from the
impetuosity of his temper, and the power of his arms. It therefore
became necessary for her to ad with some reserve, and not to ap-

pear,
6

7

pear, avowedly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-BooK VI.
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and prejudice of the --
Scots required no less management. Had the openly supported I570
Lennox's claim; had She recommended him to the Convention, as
the candidate, whom she approved; this might have rouzed the in-
dependent spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her
intention, she might have defeated its success. For these reasons,
the hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
messages, which the received from the King's party. A more ex-
plicit declaration of her sentiments was at last obtained, and an
event of an extraordinary nature seems to have been the occasion
of it. Pope Pius V. having issued a bull, whereby he excommu-
nicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved her
fubjets from their oath of allegiance, Felton, an English man, had
the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's palace.
In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or
bigotry, denounced this fatal sentence against the most powerful
monarchs; but as the authority of the court of Rome was now less
regarded, its proceedings were more cautious; and, it was only when
they were rouzed by some powerful Prince, that the thunders of the
church were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this step,
which the Pope had taken, to a combination of the Roman Catholic
Princes against her, and fufpedted that some plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottihf Queen. In that event, the knew that the safety of
her own kingdom depended on preserving her influence in Scotland;
and in order to flrengthen this, the renewed her promises of pro-
tcting the King's adherents, encouraged them to proceed to the
elecion of a Regent, and even ventured to point out the Earl of
Lennox, as the pcrlbn who had the best title. That honour was

accord-

BooK VI. accordingly conferred 'upon him, in a Convention of the whole

1570. party, held on the 12th of July*.
LeRenno ele- THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-

liament, which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at
Linlithgow. Having effected that, he marched against the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garrison,
which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after, he made himself master of some other castles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by the
appearance of a considerable army, with which the Earl of Suffex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of fe-
cretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other leaders
of the Qgeen's party, traitors and enemies of their country +.

Mary's adhe- IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Queen's adherents
rents nego-
tiate it had recourse to the King of Spain 11, with whom Mary had held a
-Span. close correspondence ever since her confinement in England. They

prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coasts, and harbours; and
obtained from him a small supply of money and arms, which were
sent to the Earl of Huntly t. But this aid, so disproportionate to
their exigencies, would have availed them little. They were in-

Elizabeth debted for their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on
proposes a
ticty of ac- under colour of restoring the captive Q!een to her throne. The first
Conibe tin feMayps in this negotiation were taken in the month of May; but hither-
alnd her sUb. to little progress had been made in it. The Peace concluded between

the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and her apprehen-

* Spotfw. 240. Cald. 2. i86. Scc Append. N° II.
.C:,kl,. 198. II Sc Append. N". III. -- Anders. 3. 123.

:l Crawf.Mcm. 159.
Crawf Mem. 153.

sions

sions that Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of his
filter in law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affected to treat
her prisoner with more indulgence, fie listened more graciously to
the follicitations of foreign ambassadors in her favour, and seemed
fully determined to replace her on the throne of her ancestors.- As
a proof of her sincerity, she laboured to procure a ceflation of arms
between the two contending factions in Scotland. Lennox, elated
with the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his admini-
firation, and flattering himself with an easy triumph over enemies,
whose estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, refused, for
some time, to come into this measure. It was not safe for him,
however, to dispute the will of his protedrefs. A cessation of ho-
ftilities during two months, to commence on the third of September,
was agreed upon ; and being renewed from time to time, it con-
tinued till the firit of April next year *.

SOON after, Elizabeth despatched Cecil and Sir Walter Mildmay

to the Queen of Scots. The dignity of these ambassadors, the
former her prime Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that the
negociation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty was
now approaching. The propositions, which they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in Mary's
situation, had reason to expeCt. The ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the Engliih Crown,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the adhering
to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning her sub-
jeds, who had taken arms against her; and her promising to hold

* Spotfw. 243.
VOL. II.

Book VI.

I570.

9
C

110

Book VI. no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that might
'-"-- disturb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By

570 ' way of security for the accomplishment of there, they demanded

that some persons of rank should be given as hofiages, that the
Prince her son should reside in England, and that a few caflles on
the border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some of these
propolitions Mary conrented; some fihe endeavoured to mitigate;
and others she attempted to evade. In the mean time, she tranf-
,mitted copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of France and
Spain, and to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without rome
timely and vigorous interposition in her behalf, The would be obliged
to accept of there hard conditions, and to purchase liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by his efforts against
the Turks, his treasury was entirely exhausted. Charles had already
begun to meditate that conspiracy againfr the Hugonots, which
marks his reign with such infamy; and it required much leisure,
and perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan to maturity.
Philip was employed in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great
renown to the Chriffian arms, by the victory over the infidels at
Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatned an infurretion; and his
fubjedts in the Netherlands, provoked by much oppression, and
many indignities, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of
them, for there different reasons, advised Mary, without depending
on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best terms ihe could
procure *.

F1 izabethl's MARY, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,
Irtiticesinlthlcand discovered a facility of disposition, which promired frill

condu Ancr. Vol.
iII. 0, o

~' Anders. Vol. Ill. io9, 120,

I

further

further conceflions. But no concession ihe could have made, would Book VI.
have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated profefioqns
of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and notwithstanding the so-
lemnity with which she carried on the treaty, had no other object
in it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time*. After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her.for refuge, in so
ungenerous a manner, she could not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had
found means to excite commotions in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate effects of her just resentment
might be expeced, if ihe were set at liberty, and recovered her
former power ? What engagements could bind her, not to revenge
the wrongs the had suffered, nor to take advantage of the favour-
able contuntures, that might present themselves ? Was it possible
for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times to come,
as might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was there not good
cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever obliterate the
memory of past injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned ; though
the continued to ad as if her views had been entirely different. She
appointed seven of her privy counsellors to be commissioners for
fettling the articles of the treaty; and as Mary had already named
the Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for her
ambassadors, fle required the Regent to impower proper persons to
appear in behalf of the King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcarn abbot of
Dun.fermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons chosen by I57I.
the Regent. They prepared for their journey, as slowly as Eli-
zabeth her self could have 'wifled. At length they arrived at
London, and met the commifioners of the two Quens. Mary'slcb, 19.

* Digges Compl. Amb. 78.

C 2 albaf-

II

Book VI. ambafladors discovered the ftrongefl inclination to comply with
k-'--; every thing, that would remove the obstacles, which flood in the

57r'- way of their mistress's liberty. But when Morton and his aflbciates

were called upon to vindicate their conduc, and to explain the
sentiments of their party, they began, in juitification of their
treatment of the Queen, to advance such maxims concerning the
limited powers of Princes, and the natural right of fubjeds to refilt
and to controul them, as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth,
whose notions of regal prerogative were very exalted. With regard
to the authority which the King now possessed, they declared that
they neither had, nor could possibly receive inftrudions, to content to
any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even to impair it, in the least
degree *. Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than such
a reply from the commissioners of the King of Scots, to the Queen of
England. His party depended absolutely on her protection, her hand
had feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed the conti-
nuance of his reign. With the utmost ease, The could have brought
them to talk in a very different manner; and whatever conditions She
might have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had no other
choice but to submit. This declaration, however, she affected to con-

It proves fider as an insuperable difficulty. And finding that there was no rea-
fruilefs. son to dread any danger from the French King, who had not disco-

vered that eagerness in support of Mary, which was expected; the
reply made by Morton furnished her with a pretence for putting a flop
March 24. to the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambassadors with more

ample powers. And after being amused for ten months with the
hopes of liberty, the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under firider
custody than ever, and without any profpedt of escaping from it;
while those fubjeds, who tfill adhered to her, were exposed, without

* Cald. 2. 234. Diggcs 51. Ilayncs 523, 524.

ally

13

ally or protecor, to the rage of enemies, whom their success in this Book VI.
negociation rendered frill more insolent .
.

I57'.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been Dunbarton
obcerved with little exaanefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of cafe ftrpriz-

ed by the Re-

Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a fervicegent.
of great importance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of Dun-
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept pofTeflion, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rites in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely firong, and in the opinion of that age impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and
efreemed the most proper place in the kingdom for landing any so-
reign troops, that might come to Mary's aid. The strength of the
place rendered Lord Fleming the governor, more secure than he
ought to have been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who had
served in the garrison, and had been disgusted by some ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demonffrate that
it was practicable, and offered himself to go the foremost man on
the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for so
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else was necessary,
were prepared with the utnmot secrecy and dispatch. All the
avenues to the cafile were seized, that no intelligence of the design
might reach the governor. Towards evening, Crawford marched
from Glasgow, with a small but determined band. By midnight,
they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered with a
thick fog. It was where the rock was highcll, that the aflailants

* And. 3. 91, &c.

iidade

J4

made: their attempt, because, in that place there were few sentinels,
and th.uy hoped to find them least alert, The firfi ladder was scarce
fixed, when the weight and eagerncfs of those who mounted it,
brought it to the ground. None of the afflilants were hurt by
the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and fastened the ladder
to the roots of a tree, which grew in a clft. This place they all
reached with the utrnoft difficulty, but were fiill at a great diflance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made fast a second
time; but in the middle of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen
difficulty. One of their companions was seized with some sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All were at a
fland. It was impossible to pass him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's pre-
fence of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fait to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit was
over : and turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted, with
ease, over his belly. Day now began to break, and there frill re-
mained an high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many greater
difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A sentry observed the firfi
man, who appeared on the parapet, and had just time to give the
alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more follicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making refiiance. The
assailants ruffled forwards, with repeated (houts, and with the ut-
most fury; took poifeffion of the magazine; seized the cannon; and
turned them againfi their enemies. Lord Fleining got into a finall
boat, and fled all alone, into Argylllire. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good conduct, remained mafler of the caflle; and as
lie did not lose a tingle man in the enterprize,'he enjoyed his fuc-
ccfs with uninixcd pleasure. Lady Fleming, Vcrac the French

Envoy,

Book VI.

I 57 -.-
I571.

15

Envoy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrews, were the pri- Book VI.
foners of greatest diftincion .

157'1.
VERAC'S characer protected him from the usage, which he me- Archlbinopof

St. Andreks

rited by his activity in stirring up enemies against the King. The put to death
Regent treated the lady with great politeness,. and humanity. But by him-
a very different fate awaited the archbishop; he was carried under
a firong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted by
ad of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemned
to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the fen-
tence was executed. An attempt was made to convict him of being
accessary to the murther both of the King and Regent, but there
accusations were supported by no proof. Our historians observe that
he was the first bifmop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church and
slate, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, inflicted
only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his
abilities, and his profession, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose
counsels the reputation and, power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, dictated that in-
decent sentence, for which some colour was fought, by imputing
to him such odious crimes --.

Ti-I. loss of Dunbartrb, and the severe treatmelnt of the Arch- riri.;l.,dv de-

binflop, perplexd and enraged the Qeen's par'ty; and hostilities fels tli:,C'
were renewed with all the flercenefl, Which disappointment and il- 1,, gh in the
dignat on can inspire. Kirkaldy, Who, during the truces hSd taeke nalnc.
care to increase the number of his garrison, and to provide every thing
ncceflary for his defence, ilrued a proclamatioil declaring Lennox's

-j Spotlfw 252.

autho-
11 BUC11. '95.

Book VI. authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
'---- ' voured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized the

arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the fleeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affecticns of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
held out the metropolis against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that fation, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a small furn of
money, and some ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable body
of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily skirmishes
happened, and with various success. The Queen's party was not
strong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was his fu-
periority so great as to undertake the iiege of the castle, or of the
town *.

Both parties SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands 'of his enemies,
hold parlia- the Regent had summoned a Parliament to 'meet in tha't place. In
mnients.

May 14. order to prevent any obj'etion against the lawffulnefs of the' meeting,

the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as poflible; and
assembled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which, though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the'city.' K'irkaldy,
exerted himself to the utmost to interrupt their.meeting; but they
were so strongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They
passed an aCt attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then ad-
journed to the 28th of August t.

Cald. 2. 223, &c. t Crawf, Mcm, 177.

THE

The other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun-BooGK VT.

tenanced by the flame shew of legal authority, held a. meeting of >"
parliament soon after. There was produced in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby (ie
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an ad was pafr, pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itfclf,
and in all its confetquences; and enjoining all good fubjeas to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
flpport those who aded in lier name. The present eftabliflment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another flatute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of August .

MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the kinllg-'Mif,'ble

O-condition of

dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and thekingdorn,
ranged themselves under the standards of the contending facions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, Kin,'s-men
and t/iecn's-men were names of ditindtion. Political hatred dissolved
all natural ties, and extinguiflied the reciprocal good will and confi-
dence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal
mingled itself with these civil diflinitions, and contributed not a
little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE facions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, St.m of ,-

only two. But in both these, there were persons, with views, and
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguifhed. With some, considerations of religion were predomi-

Crawf. Mcm, T77.
VO.t I1.

17
D

nant,

Book VI. authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
-_.-- ' voured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized the

arms, blonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the fleeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affedions of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
held out the metropolis against, the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that fation, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a small fum of
money, and rome ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable body
of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily skirmishes
happened, and with various success. The Queen's party was not
firong enough to take the field againflt the Regent, nor was his fu-
periority so great as to undertake the siege of the castle, or of the
town *.

Both parties
hold parlia-
/ mets.

May 14.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell' into the hands of his enemies,

the Regent had summoned a Parliamienti to meet in that place. In
order to prevent any objection agaiift tlh law'fulness of the' meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exadtly as possible; and
assembled in a house at the head of the Caiiongate, which, though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the'city.' Kir'aldy,
exerted himself to the utmost. to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so firongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They
passed an ad attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then ad-
journed to the 28th of August -i.

* Cald. 2. 223, &C.

t Crtwf. Mler, 177.

THE

The other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun-Boox VI.
tenanced by the iame shew of legal authority, held a meeting of " '

57 1.

parliament soon after. There was produced in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby ile
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
f6n. Conformable to this declaration, an ad was pail, pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fubjets to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
flipport those who aded in her name. The present eflablifhment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another flatute ; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of August .

MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the king-iferaibleo

condition of

dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and thekingdom.
ranged themselves under the standards of the contending fadcions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's-men
and ,Q ecn's-nmen were names of diftindion. Political hatred dissolved
all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good will and confi-
dence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal
mingled itself with these civil difrinCions, and contributed not a
little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE factions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, Stalc of sac-

only two. But in both these, there were persons, with views, andt°"
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguifhed. With some, considerations of religion were predomi-

* Crawf, Mem. 177.
Vol. II.

17
D

nlanlt,

BooK VI.nant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hoped, by

--- her means, to re-eftabli(h Popery, or they defended the King's au-
I 57' thority, as the best support of the Proteflant faith. Among these

tl:e opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others were in-
fluenced by political motives only, or allured by views of interelt;
the Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair of gaining,
by gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the King's
authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of
a coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might be restored
to some flare in the government, and the kingdom shake off its
dependance on England. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious,
and the most powerful man of the King's party, held a particular
course; and moving only as he was prompted by the court of Eng-
land, thwarted every measure, that tended towards a reconcilement
of the factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed protecion.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two bishops
appeared in that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were, they pafied an
act for attainting upwards of 200 of the adverse facion. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid. The Regent had
prevailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and Lord Boyd,
to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls were among
the most powerful noblemen in the Kingdom, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been one of
Mary's commissioners at York and Weftlminfter, and, since that time,
had been admitted into all her molt secret councils. But, during that
turbulent period, the conduct of individuals, as well as the prin-

ciples

ciples of factions, varied so often, that the sense of honour, the BooK VI.
chief preservative of confiflency in character, was entirely loft;-"

1571.

and without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one
party, and adopted all the violent passions of the other. The defec-
tion, however, of so many persons of diflinEtion, not only weak-
ened the Queen's party, but added reputation to her adversaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that at Stir-The King's

ling began with framing aas againlt the opposite facion. But in the pYin Srtlring.
midst of all the security, which confidence in their own numbers, or
distance from danger could inspire, they were awakened, early one
morning, by the shouts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment, the houses of every person of diftindion were fur-sept 3
rounded, and before they knew what to think of so strange an
event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyl!, Morton, Glencairn, Caf-
fils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to carry rhem to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprize; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed follicitude of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conducting it, that day would have ter-
minated the contest between the two factions, and have reflored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred men, under
the command of Huntley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of
Buccleugh, set out for Edinburgh, and the better to conceal their
dcfign, marched towards the south. But they soon lwheeled to the
right, and horses having been providec for the infantry, rode ftrcight
to Stirling. By four in tle morning, they arrived there; not ole
lentry was posted on the walls, not a single inan was awake abot:t
the place. IThey met with no reliftance from any perlon they

D 2 h.l

I9

BOOK VI.had seized, except Morton. He defending his house with obflinate

' valour, they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
571.

till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this, some time
was consumed; and the private men, unaccustomed to regular dif--
cipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses, and fiops
of the citizens. 1 he noiie and uproar in the town reached the
cafele. The Earl of Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers ; fired brilkly
upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers kept toge-
ther in a body. The townsmen took arms to assist their governor;
a sudden panic flruck the assailants; some fled, some surrendered
themselves to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers, who
followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horfcs
within the place, not a man would have escaped. If the Regent
had not unfortunately been killed, the loss on the King's fide
would have been as inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. Think
on the archbijfop of St. Andrews, was the word among the Queen'S
The Regent soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officer,

to whom he surrendered, endeavouring to protect him, loft his
own life in his defence. He was slain, according to the general
opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had
the glory of concerting this plan with great secrecy, and prudence;
but Morton's fortunate obflinacy, and the want of discipline
among his own troops, deprived him of success, the only thing
wanting to render this equal to the nmot applauded military enter-
prizes of the kind*.-

\I :r chfocn As so many of the nobles were assembled, they proceeded, with-
>sr '. out delay, to the eledtion of a Regent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar,

:" Mclv. 226. Cravwf. McIn, 204,

were
20

-were candidates for the office. Mar was choren by a majority of BooK VI.
voices. Amidf all the fierce diifentions, which had prevailed so i7''
long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself by his moderation,
his humanity, and his disinterestedness. And as his power was far
inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not tb great as Morton's, lie was,
for there reasons, less formidable to the other nobles. His merit,
too, in having so lately rescued the Leaders of the party from immi-
nent deftrudion, contributed not a little to his preferment.

,rWHILE there things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfa(OionsPoceedings

in England a.

in England were no lets interefling to Mary, and frill more fatal tOgjinftMary.
her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in April,
pafled an ad, by which, it was declared to be high treason, to
claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen to as-
firm that the title of any other person was better than hers; or to
maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to limit
the order of succession. This remarkable flatute was intended not
only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the reillefs
and intriguing spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her adherents *.

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and theMarri.gne nc-

Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced.gtwc Ei;, a-
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave oubeth aiol t
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of takl:ng place.iou.
Neither of them, however, wished its success; and they cnlcoul agcd
it for no other end, but because it served to cover or to lprlote
their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of Medi-
cis was bent towards the accomplifsment of hei deteflable proicd-
for the delrrucdion of the liugonot chiefs; and by carrying on a
negotiation for the marriage of her son with a Princess, who was
jultly eitleeed the protctrefs of that party, by yielding some things

* Canmd. 436.

Book VI. in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference with regard

--- to others, fle hoped to amuse all the Protestants in Europe, and to
1571. lull asleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth

flattered herself with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negotiation, the French could not with de-
cency give any open assistance to the Scottish Queen ; if they con-
ceived any hopes of success in the treaty of marriage, they would, of
course, interedf themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary herself
must be dejeted at losing an ally, whom she had hitherto reckoned
her most powerful protector; and by interrupting her correspondence
with France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which
dillurbed the kingdom, would be fiopt. Both Queens succeeded in
their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and
tlirdcd the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmost indif-
fererce about the interest of the Scottifi Queen; and Mary, confi-
dering that court as already united with her rival, turned herfeif,

Norfoltk's for protection, towards the King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and
conitiracv in
favo^ur oi thoughtful mind, delighted in the Ilyfiery of intrigue, had held a
Mary. secret correspondence with Mary, for some time, by means of the

Biflop of RoIf, and had supplied both herself, and her adherents
in Scotland, with small fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the character of a banker,
and who adtcd privately as an agent for the Pope, was the person
whom the Bishop intrutled with this negociation. Mary thought
it necefiary, likewise, to communicate the tccret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty, upon his
iolcmn promilfe to have no further intercourse with the Queen of
Scots; which, however, le rcgarded lb little, that the took no fl-ep
in any matter of monient, without his advice. Slic complained in

* Diggcs. 144, r4,. Camd. 434.

a long
22

a long letter, which she wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, BOOi VI.
with which the French court had abandoned her interefit; fe de- _-c-,
dared her intention of imploring the affifance of the Spanish Mo- 5
narch, which was now her only resource; and recommended Ri-
dolphi to his confidence, as a person, capable both of explaining,
and of advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded Hickford,
his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this letter; but whe-
ther he had been already gained by the court, or resolved at that
time to betray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the order,
and hid the letter, together with other treasonable papers, under
the Duke's own bed.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of those

arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are the usual
incentives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum
in readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of Alva had
undertaken to land ten thousand men not far from London. The
Catholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes on him, and called on him to revenge the unmerited
injuries, which he himself had suffered; and to rescue an unfortu-
nate Queen, who offered him her person, and her crown, as the re-
ward of his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and though
he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed him to use
his name, in negociating with the Pope, and Alva *. The Biflhop
of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and impatience to
procure relief for his miflrefs, was apt to run into rash and dclpe-
rate designs, advised the Duke to assemble secretly a few of his fol-
lo.wers, and at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the Duke

Andcr 3. 63. 6.

rejeced

23

Book VI. rejeSed as a fclieme, equally wild and hazardous. Mean while,
-'"'- - the Enh!ith court had received some imperfec information of the

rile:,.-c:-. byp!ot, b. intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents ; and an accident hap-

.pened, which brought to light all the circumstances of it. The
Duke had employed Ilickford to tranfmiit to Lord Herreis, tome
money, which was to be ditIributed among Mary's adherents in
Scotland. A person not in the secret was intiufled with conveying
it to the borders; and he, fufpeding it from the weight to be gold,
w'lhreas he had been told that it was silver, carried it directly to the
priv, council. The Duke, his domefrics, and all who were privy,
srt -. 1or could be fufpedced of being privy to the design, were taken into

cuflody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover lets
firrmicis; or servants betray an indulgent master, with greater base-
ness. Every one confersed the whole of what he knew. Hickford
gave directions how to find the papers, which he had hid. The
Duke hirnfelf, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates, and
believing all dangerous papers to have been destroyed, confidently
asserted his own innocence ; but when their depositions, and the
papers themselves were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's mercy. His
offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;
and 1'lizabeth thought it necessary to deter her subjes, by his
punli(lhent, from holding correspondence with the Queen of Scots,
or her emiflaries, Being tried by his Peers, he was found guilty
of high treason, and, after several delays, fufflred death for the
crime *.

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many effects, ex-
tremely detrimental to Mary's interest. The Bishop of Ross, who ap-'

* Andcrf. 3, 149. State Trials, i. 85.

peared

3
2 :,

peared by the confession of all concerned, to be the prime mover inBooK VI.
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers -
searched, himself committed to the tower, treated with the utmost 5
rigour, threatened with capital punishment, and after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he should leave the king-
dom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time, the
privilege of having an ambassador at the English court. The Spa-
nifh ambafTador, whom, the power and dignity of the prince he
represented, exempted from such insults, as Ross had suffered, was
commanded to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a strider guard than formerly, the number of her domeflics
abridged, and no person permitted to fee her, but in pretence of
her keepers t.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the iform which wasElizabeth de-

~. , . -* -rt .

'7'i .i~
** clares openly

gathering, on the continent, against her kingdom, began to wifhagaint the
that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's Qpen's
late attempt againIt her government, (he determined to ad, with-
out disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party. This re-
solution she intimated to the leaders of both fadtions. Mary, fheoL. 23.
told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous conspiracies both
against her crown and life, that fie would henceforth confider her
as unworthy of protection, and would never content to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She exhorted them,
therefore, to unite in acknowledging the King's authority. She
promised to procure by her mediation equitable terms for tliofe,
.who had hitherto opposed it. But if they frill continued rcfiadcory,

* Digges. 163, f Strype. Ann. 2. 50.

25
VOL II.

E

file

BOOK VI.

1571.

flie threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to sub-
mit +. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate es-
sec; though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery,
and good conduct, routed the King's adherents in the North, in
many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's fen-
timents contributed not a little to animate one party, and to depress
the spirit and hopes of the other*.

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith,

Hostilities and Kirkaldy still held out the town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce
carried on be-
tween them. a day passed without a skirmish. And while both avoided any de-

cifive action, they harraffed each other by attacking small parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
though little memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought them up,
.at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and without
trial. Great numbers suffered in this shocking manner; the un-
happy viEcims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till both fides had smarted severely, that they discontinued
this barbarous practice, so reproachful to the character of the na-
tion -. Mean while, those in the town and cattle, though they had
received a supply of money from the Duke of Alva I, began to
susser for want of provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the

: See Append. NO. IV.
'|- Crawf, Mem. 218, 220.

* Cald. 2. 289, 294. Strype, 2. 76.

ii Cald. 2. 345.

mills
26

mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted small gar-BooK VI.
rifons in all the houses of llrength around it, scarcity daily increased. .7.-
At last all the miseries of famine were felt, and they must have been
soon reduced to such extremities, as would have forced them to ca-
pitulate, if the English and French ambassadors had not procured a
suspension of hostilities, between the two parties*.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage between Elizabeth andLeague be-

tween Eng-

the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and she wereland and
desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between' the two crowns. France.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the befl device for blinding
the Proteflants, against whom the conspiracy was now almost ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might expose
him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a single ally,
now saw her kingdom so threatned with intestine commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that the was extremely solicitous
to secure the afliftance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul_
ties, arising from the situation of the Scottish Q(een, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded rome terms of advan-
tage for Mary, and her adherefits. Elizabeth refused to liften to
any proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint
efforts of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so much as
mentioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottish affairs, a hortAlpril 1 .
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this pur-
pose, " That the parties contrating (hall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any stranger to enter, and to foment the sac-
tions there; but it fiall be lawful for the Qeen of England to
chafiife, by force of arms, those Scots who shall continue to har-
bour the English rebels now in Scotland -." In consequence of

* Id. 346. *- Diggcs. 170, 191. Canmd. 441.

E 2 this

27

Book VI.

I572.

this treaty, France and England asseted to at in concert with re-
gard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
there, in name of their refpeAive sovereigns. By their mediation,
a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and during that time,
conferences were to be held between the leaders of the opposite
factions, in order to accommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval
of tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South; but in the
North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon had still
maintained his reputation and superiority there. Several parties,
under different officers, were sent against him. Some of them he
attacked in the field'; against others he employed tiratagem; and
as his courage and conduct were equal, none of his enterprizes
failed of success. He made war, too, with the humanity, which
became so gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been obliged, by the
truce, to suspend his operations, he would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to submit entirely to the Queen's
authority *.

Poceedings NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's in-
ain Eglary terest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among

the English. Nothing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the prospect of the Spanish yoke,
than her negociations with the Duke of Alva. The parliament;
which met in May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn conference between
the Lords and Commons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive her of all

* Crawf. Memo

right

6
28

right of fucceflion to the crown. This great cause, as it was then BooK VI.
called, occupied them during the whole feflion, and was carried
on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though the applauded their 572
zeal, and approved greatly of the course they were taking, was fa,
tisfied with (hewing Mary what (he might expec from the resent-
ment of the nation; but as {he did not yet think it time to pro-
ceed to the most violent extremity against her, she prorogued the
parliament *.

THESE severe proceedings of the Englil parliament were notTheFrench

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect of her alliesglea her
the French. The Duke ofMontmorency, indeed; who came over
to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a flew of interefling him-
self in favour of the Scottifl Q:_een, but instead of folliciting for her
liberty, or her restoration to her throne, all that he demanded was a
flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprisonment. And even this
small request, he urged with so little warmth or importunity, that
no regard was paid to it -..

THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfaiionThe maiacre,

and the expected from it a great increase of security. She now turned°fP^?i"
her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animofities of the
two factions were Rill so high, and ib many interfering interests to
be adjusted, that a general pacification seemed to be at a great dif-
tance. But while fle laboured to bring them to some agreement,.
an event happened which filled a great part of Europe with astonish-
ment, and with horror.. This was the mafiacre of Paris; an
attempt, to which there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either from the dissimulation which led to it, or for the cruelty and

* D'Ewes Journ. 2o6, &c. tf Jcbb. 2. 512.

bai ba.'ity,,

29

30
BOOK VI. barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By the most solemn

'-~ promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the Proteflants
1572. were drawn to court; and though doomed to deftrudion, they

were received with caresses, loaded with honours, and treated, for
seven months, with every possible mark of familiarity, and of con-
August 24. fidence. In the midst of their security, the warrant for their de-

firudion was issued by their sovereign, on whose word they had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their fellow
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood.
Ten thousand Proteflants, without diltination of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous or-
ders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time, applauded in Spain;
and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God, for its
success. But among the Protestants it excited incredible horror; a
striking picture of which is drawn by the French ambassador at the
court of England, in his account of his first audience after the
maflacre. " A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence,
as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each fide,
all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them, not one
bestowed on me a civil look, or made the leafi return to my
salutes *".

Detrimental BUT horror was not the only passion, with which this event in-
,re ary's in- spired the Proteflants; it filled them with fear. They confidered

it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed, not, without
much probability, that all the Popish Princes had conspired the de-

* Carte, 3. 522.

flrudtion

5

ftrudion of their fee. This opinion did no small dilfervice to Mary's BOOK VI.
affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protestants; and, '-"
though they wished her restoration, were not willing, on that 5
account, to sacrifice the faith which they profeifed. They dreaded
her attachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to violate
the most solemn engagements, and prompted them to perpetrate
the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the Pro-
teflants seemed to them, the only thing that could uphold the Re-
formation against the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present eftablilhment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a firid union with Elizabeth; and by the con-
currence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as a com-
mon cause *.

THE Regent took hold of this favourable conjunCture for nego-The Regent

endeavours to

ciating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose, with,,nit both
the utmost zeal, and the adverse faction placed entire confidence inParties
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of being fuc-
cefsful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained, except the formality of signing
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the disappointment he
met with in his pretensions to the Regency ; his abilities, his wealth,
and the patronage of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and he took plea-
sure in thwarting every measure pursued by him. He was afraid
that if Maitland and his associates recovered any share in the admi_
nif.ration, his own influence would be considerably diminified; and
the Regent, by their means, would regain that ascendant, which be-
longed to his flation. With him concurred all thoec, who were
in pofeffion of the lands, which belonged to any of the Queen's

* Digges, 244, 267.

party.

Booi; VI.party. And his ambition, and their avarice, frustrated the Re-
'-"-' gent's pious intentions, and retarded a blessing so necessary to the

15. kingdom, as the establishment of peace *.
His Death. SUCH a discovery of the felfi(hnefs and ambition, which reigned

among his party, made a deep impreflion on the regent, who loved
his country, and wiffied for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled melan-
choly, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the 29th of
Odober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and have
left it, without loss of reputation. Notwithfsanding their mutual
animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be uncorrupted -.

Morton
chosen Re- No competitor now appeared against Morton. The Queen of
gNoem. 24 England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithltanding the

fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleaed
Regent; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held that
dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of January, this gave

him an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the opposite
party, which had been set on foot by his predeceflor. They pro-
duced no efftles, however, till the beginning of the next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hitherto untouched,
deserve our notice.

'* nlelv. 233. Crawf. Mem. 237. t Id. 241.

THE
32

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in

Lochleven, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year I569, was
given up to Lord Hunfdane Governor of Berwick; and being car-
ried to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebellion. The
King's party were so sensible of their dependence on Elizabeth's pro-
tection, that it was scarce poflible for them to refuse putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms against her. But as a fum of
money was paid, on that account; and shared between Morton and
Douglas of Lochleven, the former of whom, during his exile in Eng-
land, had been much indebted to Northumberland's friendship, the
abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to certain
deflrucion, was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary action ;.

Book VI.

1572.
THIS year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the Affirs of :ie

Ch urch.

government of the Church. Soon after the Reformation, the Popish
Bisho'ps had been confirmed by law in poiffeflon of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual jurisdiction, which belonged to their order,
was exercised by fuperintendants, though with more moderate au-
thority. On the death of the archbishop of St. Andrews, Morton
obtained from the Crown a grant of the temporalities of that fee.
But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to
which the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas, iector
of the university of St. Andrews, to be chosen archbishop ; and
allotting him a frnall pension out of the revenues of the fee, retained the
remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages
they might reap from fich a practice, supportcd him in the exe-
cution of his plan. It gave great offence, however, to the Cler7y,
who, inflead of perpetuating an orlcr, whose name and power was
odious to them, wished that the revenues which had belonged to it,

* Crawf. Mein 55, 222. Camd. 445.
VOL. II. 1? m;glit

33

might be employed in supplying such parishes, as were still un-
provided with fettled pastors. But on the one hand, it would have
been rafl in the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen, on
whom the very existence of the Protestant Church in Scotland de-
pended; and Morton, on the other, conducted his scheme with
fulch dexterity, and managed them with so much art, that it was,
at last, agreed, in a Convention composed of the leading men
among the Clergy, togetherwith a committee of privy council,
( that the name and office of archbishop, and bishop, should be con-
tinued during the King's minority, and these dignities be conferred
upon the best qualified among the Protestant Ministers; but that with
regard to their spiritual jurifdidions, they should be subject to the
general assembly of the Church." The rules to be observed in
their election; and the persons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in
times of Popery, were likewise particularly specified *. And the
whole being laid before the General Affernbly, after some exceptions
to the names of ArchbiJfop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protestation
that it should be confidered only as a temporary conflitution, till
one more perfeCt could be introduced, it obtained the approbation
of that court -. Even Knox, who was prevented from attending
the Assembly by the ill state of his health, though he declaimed
loudly against the Simoniacal padion, to which Douglas owed his
preferment, and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out
with age and infirmities, to an office, which required unimpaired
vigour both of body and mind, teems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the !fflernbly, ap-
proved of tome of their regulations with refpcd to the election
of Bishops, as worthy of being carefully observed i. In confe-

* Cald. 2. 305.

i1 Id. 354.

1 Sec Append. N°. V.

quence

34
Book VI.

572.

35

quence of the Assembly's content to the plan agreed upon in the Book VI.
Convention, Douglas was iniRalled in his office; and at the fame .-~X
time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a bishop of Dunkeld were 57.
chosen from among the Protestant Clergy. They were all admitted
to the place in parliament, which belonged to the ecclesiastical
order. But in imitation of the example set by Morton, such pac-
tions were made with them by different noblemen, as gave them
possession only of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to
their fees *.

SooN after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, the prime in- Nov. 27.

ftrument of spreading and establishing the Reformed religion in Death and
Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepi- Knox.
dity, disinterestedness, were virtues which he possessed, in an eminent
degree. He was acquainted, too, with the learning, cultivated in that
age; and excelled in that species of eloquence, which is calculated
to rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however, were often too fe-
vere, and the impetuosity of his temper exceflive. Rigid and un-
complying himself, he flewed no indulgence to the infirmities of
others. Regardless of the diftindions of rank and character, he ut-
tered his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to
irritate, than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into indecent and
undutiful expressions, with refped to the Queen's person and con-
dud. Those very qualities, however, which now render his cha-
raaer less amiable, fitted him to be the instrument of Providence
for advancing the Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled
him to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from which
a person of a more gentle spirit would have been apt to shrink
back. By an unwearied application to study, and to buG-

* Spots. 261.

nets,
F 2

ness, as well as by the frequency and fervour of his public dif-
courses, he had worn out a constitution, naturally strong. During
a lingering illness, he discovered the utmoit fortitude; and met the
approaches of death, with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha-
rader. lie was constantly employed in ads of devotion, and com-
forted hinmfelf with those prolfptcs of immortality, which not only
preserve gcod men from desponding, but fill them with exultation
in their last moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present at
Liis funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the more
honourable for Knox, as they came from one, whom he had often
censured with peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never feared
the face of man *."

TIIOUGH MortDn did not desire peace from such generous mo-

tives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good earnefi,
to eftabli(h it. The public confusions and calamities, to which he
owed his power and importance when he was only the second per-
son in the nation, were extremely detrimental to him, now that he
was raised to be the firfi. While so many of the nobles continued
in armns again2l him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no lets desirous of extinguishing
the flame, which fie had kindled, and kept so long alive in Scot-
land --. She had discovered the alliance with France, from which
she had expecqed inch advantages, to be no foundation of fccurity.
And though the appearances of friendship fiill subsisted between
her and that court, and Charles daily renewed his protestations of
inviolable adherence to the treaty, she was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little fle ought to rely on the promises or oaths of
that perfidious Monarch. Her ambaflador warned her that the

* Spotfw. 266. Cald, 2. 2.73.

't Diggcs, 299.
Book VI.

z 72.

1.573.

Tbr Reg 'nt
tr(c3.S ~\ js2l
tlh- Q-1Cen's
1 ;tY v.

Frcnch

French held a secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scot- Book VI.
land, and encouraged them in their obstinacy *. The Duke of --" ~
Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom, with less disguise. 3
She was persuaded that they would embrace the first serene interval,
which the commotions in France and in the Netherlands would
allow them, and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She resolved,
'therefore, to prevent their getting any footing in the island, and to
cut off all their hopes of finding any assistance there, by uniting
the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Regent to carry His overtures

on his negociations with them to great advantage. They were now Mjaitlad and
divided into two factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- Kikaldy.
rault, and Huntly.. Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the
other. Their high rank, their extensive property, and the numbers of
their followers, rendered the former considerable. The latter were
indebted for their importance, to their personal abilities, and to the
strength of the castle of Edinburgh, which was in their pofeffion.
The Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the fame treaty;
but as he dreaded that the Queen's party, if it remained entire,
would be able to thwart and embarrass his administration, he re-
solved to divide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. He made
the first overture to Kirkaldy and his associates, and endeavoured to
renew the negociation with them, which, during the life of his
predecessor, had been broken off by his own artifices. But Kir-
kaldy knew Morton's views, and system of government, to be very
different fiom those of the former Regent. Maitland confidered
him, as a personal and implacable enemy. They received repeated
afi rances of protection from France. And though the itrcg
of Rochelle employed the French arms at that time, the fname

* Id. 296, 3 2.

hopes,
8

37

hopes, which had so often deceived the party, fill amused them,
and they expected that the obstinacy of the Hugonots, would soon
be subdued, and that Charles would then be at liberty to ad with
vigour in Scotland. Mean while, a supply of money was sent, and
if the castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effectual aid was
promised *. Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes, that
were bold and dangerous; and Kirkaldy possessed the intre-
pidity, necessary for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's power.
Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by
fending forces to his assistance. And if the French should be able
to land any considerable body of men, it might be possible to deliver
the Queen from captivity, or at least to ballance the influence of
France and England in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from
the dishonourable dependence on the latter, under which it had
fallen. This splendid, but chimerical project, they preferred to the
friendfhlip of Morton. They encouraged the negociation, however,
because it served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame pur-
pose, that the whole of the Queen's party should be comprehended
in it, and that Kirkaldy (hould retain the command of the castle,
fix months after the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to reject the former; his penetration discovered the danger
of complying with the latter ; and all hopes of accommodation
vanished ~.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the city

of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom he
had expelled, was devoted as zealously, as ever, to the King's cause.

* Digges, 314.

t Mclv. 235, &c.
Book V'I,

573.
I r- '

j7,~'

But
38

But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty with Chatelherault Book VI.
and JIuntly, the cessation of arms still continued with them.

1573.
THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, and listened Accepted by

Chatelherault

eagerly to his overtures. The Duke was naturally unsteady, and and Huntlxv.
the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and aversion to
aation. The miseries of civil discord had afflicted Scotland, almost
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had gained much
honour; both had suffered great losses; and had exhausted their
own estates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons
were in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace, which
might terminate this fruitless, but deftrucdive quarrel.

A GREAT ftep was taken towards this desirable event, by the Articls of

treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hat:d, and the trCat.
Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of
Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador *. The chief articles in it were
these; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty flhould declare
their approbation of the Reformed religion, now cftabliflcd in the
kingdom; that they should submit to the King's government, and
own Morton's authoiity as Regent ; that they flould acknowledge
every thing done in opposition to the King, since his coronation, to
l)c illegal; that on both fides, the prisoners who had bccn taken
flould be set at liberty, and the lands rcftorcd to their proper
ownVlrs ; that the act of attainder pafled against the Queen 's
adherents fmould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all tilc
crimes, of which they had been guilty since the i sth of June

* Sec Append. N". VL.

1 (,7 ;
I

TH E HISTORY

Book VI. 1567; and that the treaty should be ratified, by the common con-
-- -. sent of both parties, in parliament *.

1573.

Sigeg of the KIRIKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither
burcgh "" discovered follicitude nor made provision for his safety, did not lose

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation -t. And
though all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he still re-
solved to defend the caflle, il the Queen's name; and to wait the
arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in Scotland to a pe-
ririd, before the French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 1500 foot, and a coufiderable train of artillery. The
April 25. Regent joined him, with all his forces; and trenches were opened,

and approaches regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great fum of money, remitted
to him from France, and which fell into the Regent's hands,
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man

* Crawf. Mem, 25 .

t Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who joined with Kirkaldy

in the defence of the calilc, and who was himself firongly attached to their party,
affLrts that Kirlakly oflered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offlrs were ricjeicd by the Regent. \lelv. 240. But as Elizabeth was,
at that time, extremely dlcr-cus of reforing peace in Scotland, and hcr ambafridor
Klilnlciew, as well as the Elarl of Rothes, used their utmnio enlleavours to pcrfiiade
Kirl;ally to accede to the trcaty of Pci th, it eecms more credible to impute the con-
tinuance cf hollilitics to Kirklaldy's obllinacy, his dill ruf of Morton, or his hope
of foreign ,id, than to any other cmife.

That this wv:,s really the crlf, is evident firom the positive teflimony of SpotfA-w.

2' , 270 (':1lll. 418. J(!ull llilt. 3,

l . Digges, 334. Crawfbrd's account
:irecs, in tl ma, thh tni it ;is, 1tMe. 260j.

of

of that age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by despair. BooK VI.
Three and thirty days he refifled all the efforts of the Scots and '
Englif, who pushed on their attacks, with courage, and with
emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
battered down, and one of the wells in the castle dried up, and the
other choaked with rubbish. Even then, his spirit was unfubdued,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrench-
ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison
was not animated with the fame heroic or desperate resolution,
and riLing in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He furrenderedMay 29.
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mistress, that
he should be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about i60 soldiers were made pri-
foners *.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the itates, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue, which has
always been the charateriftic of the Scottiff Nation.

THUS by the treaty'with Chatelherault and Huntly, and theReviewofthe

surrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought toboha parries.
a period. When we review the Rate of the nation, and compare
the strength of the two fadtions, Mary's partizans among the
nobles appear, manifestly, to have been superior both in numbers,
and in power. But these advantages were more than counterbal-
lanced by others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political abi-

* Cald, 2. 408. Melv. 240. Crawf. Mem. 265.

41
VOL. II.

G

lities,

BOOK VI. iities, military flill, and all the talents, which times of adion form,

--' or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor could their
1573' enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-

ray, tempered with wisdom; the pr6found sagacity of Morton;
the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland; or the
successful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed
in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the one fide,
measures were concerted with prudence, and executed with vi-
gour; on the other, their resolutions were rash, and their condu&t
feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted
by indignation against the queen, warmly supported the King's
cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government was finally elta-
blifhed. Mary loft even that shadow of sovereignty, which, amidst
all her sufferings, she had hitherto retained among part of her own
fubjecds. And as fie was no longer permitted to have an ambai-
fador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity which she
had, for some time, enjoyed there, ihe must henceforth be con-
fidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

Kirkaldy put Kirkaldy and his associates remained in Drury's custody, and
to death.

were treated by him with great humanity, till the queen of England,
whose prisoners they were, should determine their fate. Morton
insisted that they should susser the punishment due to their rebel-
lion and obstinacy; and declared that so long as they were al-
lowed to live, he did not reckon his own person or authority fe-
cure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his
promifcs in her name, gave them up to the Regent's disposal.

pie
42

Ie first confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after, with BOOK VI.
Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be '-'57
hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not expectAuguft 3,
to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a public
execution, by a voluntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman faflion *."

While the Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison.
At the fame time her health began to be much impaired by con-
finement, and want of exercise. At the intreaty of the French am-
baffador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her impri-
fonment. Cecil, who lately had been created Baron of Burleigh, and
Lord High Treasurer of England, happened to be there at the fame
time. And though no minister ever entered more warmly into the
views of a sovereign, or gave stronger proofs of his fidelity and at-
tachment, than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's distrust
of every person, who approached the Queen of Scots, that her
suspicions extended even to him; and while Mary justly reckoned
him her most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty in per-
fuading his own miflrefs, that he was not partial to that unhappy
QUeen t.

The duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppreflive adminifIra-
tion rouzed a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhausted
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens, who

* Melv. 242. + Strype, 2. 248, 288.

43

fuccccd-
G 2

BOOK VI.'fucceeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enterprizing
-."-' genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-

73 quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scottish Queen,

and his zeal for her interest.

1574. THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, many

The Regent'sof the evils, which accompany civil war, were flill felt. The re-
adminiltra-
tion becomes ftraints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re-

odlus garded even by civilized nations, were totally despised by a fierce

people, unaccustomed to the regular adminiitration ofjuftice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protection of the one, or the other faction, crimes of
every kind were committed, with impunity. The Regent set him-
self to redress these, and, by his industry and vigour, order and fecu-
rity were re-eflablifhed in the kingdom. But he loll the reputation,
due to this important service, by the avarice, which he discovered,
in performing it; and his own exactions became more pernicious to
the nation,. than all tie irregularities, which he restrained tf. Spies
and informers were every where employed; the remembrance
of old offences was 'revived; imaginary crimes were invented;
petty trespasses were aggravated; and delinquents were forced to
compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debased*; licences were fold

-' See Append. N-. VII.

* The corruption of the coin, during Morton's adminiitration, was very great. Al-

though the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gra-
dually incrca'cd by former princes the standard or fineness suffered little alteration,
and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame, with what is now used. But Morton
mixed a fourth part of alloy, with every poundl of fiver, and funk, by consequence,
the value of coin, in proportion. In the year IS8 i, all the money coined by him was
called in, and appointed to be rccoined. The ilandard was reflored to the fame purity
as formeily. Ruddim. Prxf. to Anders. Diploin. p. 74.

for
3

for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, unusual taxes BooK VI.
were imposed on commodities; and all the refinements in oppression, 574
from which, nations so imperfectly polished as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in pratice. None of these were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injustice towards the
Church. The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received
their fiubfiflance, had always been slowly and irregularly paid to col-
lectors, appointed by the General Affcmbly; and during the civil
wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts of the kingdom.
Under colour of redressing this grievance, and upon a promise of
assigning every Minister a stipend within his own pariffh, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which they had right
By law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any advantage from this
alteration, found that payments became more irregular and dilatory
than ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with the care
of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the
Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a new

misfortune to the Scottish Queen. Henry III. who succeeded him,
had not the fame attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Queen Mother, greatly
alienated him from her interest.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must likewise be I575°

jJanuary -i,

confidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently
declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refpet among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than any

* Crawf. Merm 272, Spotfw. 273. Cald. 2. 420, 427.

,other

BOOK VI.other person in the kingdom, to counterballance the Regent's

575' power.
'575.

SooN after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scottifl and English marches, a scuffle happened, in which
the English were worsted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James
Forester, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too fen-
fible of the advantage, which resulted from the good understanding
that subsisted between the two kingdoms, to allow this flight acci-
dent to interrupt it.

Attempts of THE dometfic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some danger
aainft the of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons, raised
episcopal or- to the dignity of bishops, possessed very small revenues, and a very

moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and
all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions steal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such small beginnings, the hierarchy
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of there suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
diflinguifiecd by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he putrued, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, lie often de-
feated laudable designs, by the impctuofity and imprudence with
which he carried them on. A qucftion was moved by him in the
assembly, " whether the office of bishop, as now exercised in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?" In the ecclefiafti-

cal
46.

cal judicatories, continual complaints were made of the biflops, BOOK VI.
for neglec of duty, many of which, their known remifnefs too well 5
justified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidating
his benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. And the Regent,
inifead of checking, connived at these disputes about Ecclesiastical
government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attend-
ing to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the Church -.

THE weight of the Regent's opprefiive adminifiration had, hi- 1576.

therto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower, and middle rank; but'bHeintates
he began now to take such steps, as convinced the nobles, that theirnobles.
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effecs of his
power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of diflention
among the Scottish nobles, occasioned a difference between the Earls
of Argyll and Athole. A vafial of the former had made some de-
predations on the lands of the latter. Athole took arms to punish
the offender; Argyll, to protect him ; and this ignoble quarrel they
were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by interposing
his authority, obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, which, though common, were
contrary to the letter of the law. Of there the Regent took advan-
tage, and resolved to found on them a charge of treason. This design
was revealed to the two Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The
common danger, to which they were exposed, compelled them to
forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close confederacy, for their
mutual defence. Their jundion rendered them formidable; they
despised the summons which the Regent gave them to appear before
a court of juflice; and he was obliged to desist from any further

't Cald. Affcmblies, i'74, &c. Johnft. Hist, 15.

pro-

47

3ooK VI.profecution. But the injury he intended made a deep imprefion on
- 576- their minds, and drew on him severe vengeance *.

1576.
1 577 NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which lie made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracv againit his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
his accomplices were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any thing
criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumltances dif-
covered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to him such an odious design -.

They tuni THE Scottili Nobles, who were almoff equal to their Monarchs
their e'vs t.Su.
wardt' the in power, and treated by them with much diftinacion, observed
King. there arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-

tion. The people, who under a form of government extremely
simple, had been little accustomed to the burden of taxes, con-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expeded the
redress of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle, and
more equal administration.

James's edu JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queen,
cation and
difpofiion. soon after his birth, had committed him to the care'of the Earl of

Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in the caflle
of Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's brother, had the
chief direction of his education. Under him, the famous Buchanan
ated as preceptor, together with three other matiers, the mofl emi-
nent, the nation afforded, for skill in those sciences, which were
deemed necessary for a prince. The young King shewed an un-

* Crawf. Mcm, 285.

jt Crawf. Mein. 2,7.

common
48

common passion for learning, and made great progress in it. And Book VI.
the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him, all those vir- %
tues, which the fondness or credulity of subjeCts usually ascribe to
princes, during their minority. But as James was flill far from that
age, at which the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments
of the people, nor reflect, how naturally these prejudices in his
favour-might encourage the King to anticipate that period. He not
only neglected to secure the friendihip of those, who were about
the King's person, and who possessed his ear, but had even exafpe-
rated tome of them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con-
curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into the King early He is fufpici-

ous of the Re-

suspicions of Morton's power, and designs. A King, they told him, gent's power.
had often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to keep the prince
in perpetual infancy, at a distance from his fubjeds, and unacquainted
with business. A small' degree of vigour, however, was fuflicient
to break the yoke. Subjeds naturally reverence their Sovereign,
and become impatient of the temporary and delegated jurifdidion
of a Regent. Morton had governed with a rigour, unknown to the
ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groaned under his op-
pressions; and would welcome the firif profped of a milder admi-
nifiration. At present, the King's name was scarce mentioned in
Scotland, his friends were without influence, and his favourites
without honour. But one effort would discover Morton's power to
be as feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would put him-
felfin possession of his just authority, and rescue the nation from
intolerable tyranny. If he did not regard his own rights as a King,
let him liften, at leafr, to the cries of his people *.

*Mclv. z49.
VOL. II.

H

THE SE

Book VI. THESE suggestions made a deep impression on the young King,
l-'"VL who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command.

I577.

A plotformed His approbation of the design, however, was of small consequence,
againf the without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and
Regent..

Athole, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable resentment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-caftle communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the command of that fort, and the custody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into the King's pretence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his fubjeds, under the Re-
gent's arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the in-
justice, with which themselves had been treated; and besought
the King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the
nation, to call a council of the whole nobles. James consented,
and letters were issued, in his name, for that purpose; but the two
Earls took care that they should be sent only to those, who were
known to bear no good will. to Morton *.

THE number of these was, however, so considerable, that on
Mar57h the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles aflembled at

Stirling; and so highly were they incensed againif Morton, that al-
though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's interview
with the King, he had made a feint as if he would resign the Re-
gency, they advised the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the administration of govern-
ment into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and
Herreis, were appointed to signify this resolution to Morton, who

1;jotfw. 278.

was,
It

was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. No. Book VI.
thing could equal the joy, with which this unexpected resolution o'

1578.

filled the nation, but the furprize occasioned by the seeming ala- Herefignshis
crity, with which the regent descended from so high a fiation. officc ald re-

t-res.

He neither wanted sagacity to forefee'the danger of resigning, nor
inclination to keep poffefTion of an office, for the expiration cf
which, the law had fixed so diflant a term. But all the sources,
whence the-fadion of which he was head, derived their firength,
had either failed, or now supplied his adversaries with the means
of humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the Cler-
gy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied oppref-
sions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself by treat), to fend a
considerable body of troops to the afliflance of the inhabitants ot
the Netherlands, who were itruggling for liberty, had little leisure
to attend to the affairs of Scotland ; and as The had nothing to dread
from France, in whose councils the princes of Lorraiu had not,
at that time, much influence, ihe was not displeased, perhaps, at
the birth of new factions in the kingdom. Even those nobles,
who had long been joined with Morton in faction, or whom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven,
Pitcarn the secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all de-
ferted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling.
So many concurring circumfrances convinced Morton of his own
weakness, and determined him to give way to a torrent, which was
too impetuous to bo refitled. He attended the chancellor and March x.
Herreis to Edinburgh ; was present when the King's acceptance
of the government was proclaimed; and, in the presence of the
people, furrendcred to the king, all the authority to which lie
had any claim in virtue of his office. This ceremony was ac-
companied with fich cxceffive joy and acclamations of the mul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguifl, which an ambi-
tious spirit muff feel, when compelled to renounce supreme

II 2 power;

Book VI.

1578.

THE HISTORY

power; and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft the assec-
tions of his countrymen. He obtained, however, from the King
an a&t, containing the approbation of every thing done by him in
the exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the most ample form,
that his fear or caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treasons. The nobles, who adhered to the King, bound them-
selves, under a great penalty, to procure the ratification of this act,
in the first parliament *.

Continues to A COUNCIL of twelve nobles was appointed to assist the King,
watch themo- in the administration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own
tions of the
adverfeparty, party, and unable to struggle with the faction, which governed ab-

folutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy
the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all
the uneasy reflections, which accompany disappointed ambition;
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even in
this retreat, which the people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and
abilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors were
so imprudent as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to sirip him of all remains of power. They re-
quired him to surrender the castle of Edinburgh, which was still in
his poTeffion. He refused at firfl to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulsed a part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that important
fortress, without resistance. This encouraged his adversaries
to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply
their demands upon him, in such a manner, as convinced him

4 Spotifw. 278. Crawf. Mem. 289. Cald, 2. 522.

that

that nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate Book V[I
hatred. D

1578.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began already to decline.

The Chancellor, the ableit and most moderate man in the party,
having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter between
his followers, and those of the earl of Crawford; Athole, who
was appointed his successor in that high office, the Earls of Eglin-
ton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,
were either avowed papists, or fufpeded of leaning to the opinions
of that fed. In an age, when the return of Popery was, so much
and fojuftly, dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Morton
had always treated the papists with rigour, this unseasonable indul-
gence made all zealous Proteflants remember that circumflance in
his administration, with great praise *.

MORTON, to whom none of there particulars were unknown, Resumes his

Or former autho-

thought this the proper jundure for setting to work the inifru-yer"athy.
ments, which he had been preparing. Having gained the confi-
dence of the earl. of Mar, and of the countess his mother, he in-
finuated to them that Alexander Erskine had formed a plot to de-
prive his nephew of the government of Stirling-caftle, and the cuf-
tody of the King's person; and easily induced an ambitious woman,
and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent this supposed
injury. The earl repairing, suddenly, to Stirling, and being ad-
mitted, as usual, into the cafile with his attendants, seized the
gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who dreaded April 26.
no danger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison submitted
to him as their governor, and, with little danger, and no effusion

* Spotfw. 283.

of

Book VI. of blood, he became mailer both of the King's person, and the

.578. fortress .
1578.

AN event so unexpected occasioned great consternation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety, to change
their measures, and i-ftead of pursuing him with fich implacable
resentment, to en-ter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, still so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the advantage,
May z2. which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

set out in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray of
Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into the caftie;
and managing matters there with his usual dexterity, he soon had
more entirely the command of the fort, than the earl himself. Ie
was likewise admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired the
fame ascendant in it A.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin-

burgh now approached, this gave him tome anxiety. He was
afraid of carrying the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the adverse faction. He was no less
unwilling to leave James behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he issued a proclamation, in the King's name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-cafUlc. This
Athole and his party represented as a flep altogether unconstitutional.

* Cald. 2. 535. t Cald. 2. 536.

The

4

The King, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended Coun- Book VI.
fellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may re- 5

1578.

pair without fear, and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after disorders of such
long continuance. But in an afrembly, called contrary to all form,
held within the walls of a garrison, and over-awed by armed men,
what safety could members expect ? what liberty could prevail in
debate ? or what benefit result to the public ? The parliament met, July 25.
however, on the day appointed, and notwithstanding the protefta-
tion of the Earl of Montrose and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was confirmed; the ac granted to Morton, for his security,
ratified; some regulations, with regard to the numbers and autho-
rity of the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pension for life
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been so instrumental in
bringing about the late revolution *.

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followers, took arms, Argyll and

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, and Athoc! take
the kingdom from oppression. James himself, impatient of the ser- him.
vitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long been
taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprize; though, at the
fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in public, but
to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by proclamation,
that he was perfectly free from any conffraint, either upon his per-
son, or his will. Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and
Athole were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus, Mor-
ton's nephew, met them with an army 5ooo strong; neither party, t

1 .
however, was eager to engage. Morton diftruflcd the fidelity of

* Cald. 2. 547. Parl. V. Jac. VI.

his

Leook VI. his own troops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle vicTory,

;57g. however compleat, would not 1be decisive; and as they were in no

condition to undertake the siege of Stirling-caftle, where the King
was kept, their strength would soon be exhausted, while Morton's
own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen of England, might
furnifl him with endless resources. By the mediation of Bowes,
whom Elizabeth had sent into Scotland to negotiate an accoinmo-

Elizabeth nc- daion between the two fadions, a treaty .was concluded, in confe-
accommnoda- quence of which, Argyll and Athole were admitted into the King's
tion between
them. presence; some of their party were added to the privy council;

and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring all renmaining
differences to an amicable issue .

So soon as James aiTumed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth of
that event; to offer to renew the alliance between -the two king-
doms; and to demand poffefiion of the estate, which had lately
fallen to him, by the death of his grandmother, the Countess of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in England. And as the chief objection
against the pretensions of the Scottish line to the crown of England,
was that maxim of English law, which excludes aliens from any
right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting
this demand, would have established a precedent in James's favour,
that might have been esteemed decisive, with regard to a point,
which it had been her constant care to keep undecided. Without
suffering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing any new light
to be thrown on that, which /he confidered as the great mytIery
of her reign, ihe commanded the rents of the estate to be fequef-

* Crawf. Mem. 307.

tered

tered by Lord Burleigh, mafler of the Wards; and by this method BooI; VI.
of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early warning how necessary _.-- -'-
it would be to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success in
claims of greater importance, but equally liable to be contro-
verted -.

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending 1579

nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement hav-Ap;l 2.
ing invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great entertainment,
Athole the chancellor was, soon after, taken ill, and died within
a few days. The symptoms and violence of the disease gave rife
to strong suspicions of his being poisoned. And though the phyfi-
cians, who opened his body'differed in opinion as to the cause of the
distemper, the Chancellor's relations publickly accused Morton of
that odious crime. And the advantage which visibly accrued to
him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and averse si om all
his measures was sufficient proof of his guilt to the people, who
are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent persons to extra-
ordinary causes *.

THE office of Chancellor was beflowed upon Argyll, whom this Iolton's il.

preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Morton's adminiftra- ligal 'l'occcd-
tion. He' had now recovered all the authority he poefl'ed during the lfamily of
his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power and Iiilti.
cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained to be
the objets of his jealousy, or to obftrud his designs, but that of
Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never rcco-
vercd the flock, which lie received from the ill fucccfs of his pas-

-1 Camd, 461, * Spotfw. 306.

sion

57

I
V0 L. 1 1

BOOK VI.sion for the Q.een, and had now altogether loft his reason. Lord
t-~^~- John, the second brother, was in possession of the family estate. Lord

1579' Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of them young. men,

ambitious, and erterprizing. Morton dreaded their influence in
the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to flare their spoils among them;.
and as all princes naturally view their successors with jealousy and
hatred, it was easy to infuse these pafions into the.mind of the young
King. A pretence was at hand to justify the most violent proceed-
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth, did not ex-
tend to those, who were acce.flary to the murder of the regents
Murray or Lennox. Lord John and his brother were fufpeded.
of being the authors of both these crimes, and had been included
in a general adt of attainder on that account. Without summoning
them to trial, or examining a single witness to prove the charge,
this attainder was now thought sufficient to subje.t them to all the
penalties,which they would have incurred by being formally convicted.
The Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglington, tpgether with the Lords,
Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commifion to seize their
persons and estates. On a few hours warning, a considerable bgdy
of troops was ready, and marched towards Hamilton, in hostile
array. Happily, the two brothers made their escape, though with
great difficulty. But their lands were confiscated; the castles of
Hamilton and Draffan besieged; those who defended them punish-
ed. The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his situation,. of
committing any crime, was involved, by a shameful abuse of law,
in the common ruin of his family; and as if he, too, could have
been guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These proceed-
ings, so contrary to the fundamental principles of justice, were all
ratified in the subsequent parliament -.

1' Crawf. Mcm. 311. Spotfv. 306.

ABOUT

8

ABOUT this time Mary -ent, by Nau: her secretary, a letter toBooi VI.

her son, together with some jewels of value, and a vest embroidered ~ '~
with her own hands. But as she gave him only the title of Prince-
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without being admitted
into his presence -.

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason to fear Negociatlons

for a marriage

any attempt of the Popish Princes, in Mary's favour, she still con- bet,, en E1i'
tinued to guard her with the fame anxious care. The acquifitionzbeth 1and

0

, . ~ the Duke tf

of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of the Netherlands, Alencon.
on the other, fully employed the councils and arms of Spain.
France, torn in pieces by inteffine commotions, and under a weak
and capricious prince, despised and difrufted by his own fubjeas,
was in no condition to disturb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long
amused that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage with the
Duke of Alencon, the King's brother. But whether, at the age
of forty five, she really intended to marry a Prince of twenty ? whe-
ther the pleasure of being flattered and courted, made her liften to the
addresses of so young a lover, whom the allowed to visit her at two
different times, and treated with the most diftinguifing refpedt?
Or whether considerations of interest, predominated in this, as
well as in every other tranfadion of her reign, are problems in
history, which we are not concerned to resolve ? During the pro-
grefs of this negociation, which was drawn out to an extraordinary
length, Mary could expect no afiflance from the French court,
and seems to have held little correspondence with it. And there
was no period in her reign, wherein Elizabeth enjoyed more perfcd:
security.

-- Crawf. Mem. 31q.

M'IR TON

59)
I 2

BooIK VI. MorTON seems, at this time, to have been equally secure;. but
.--,V,-- his fccurity was not so well founded. He had weathered out
Twoota7-o one florm, had cruflied his adversaries, and was again in pof-
rites gain an feflioni of the role directioi of affairs. But as the King was now.
acce nda.nt
over Tames. cf an age, when the character and dispositions of the mind begin

to unfold themselves, and to become visible, the finalleft attention.
to these might have convinced him, that there was reason to expect
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied
him through his whole life. This passion which naturally arises
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be expected that
the choice of the objects, on whom he placed his affedions, should
be made with great skill. The most considerable of them, was
Efiie Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second brother of
the Earl of Lennox. He was distinguished by the title of Lord
D'Aubigne, an estate in Fralice, which descended to him from his
ancestors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their va-
September S. lour, and services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland,

about this time, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Len-
nox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was received, at first,
by the King, with the refped due to so near a relation. The
gracefulness of his person, the elegance of his dress, and his
courtly behaviour, made a great impression on James, who, even
in his more mature years, was little able to resist there frivolous
charms; and his affection flowed with its usual rapidity, and pro-
furion. Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he,
was created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl, and Duke of
Lennox, Governor of Dumbarton caflc, Captain of the guard,
firil Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord IIigh Chamberlain. At
the fame time, and without any of the envy, or interference,

which
60

which is usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart,BooK VI.
the second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But 5'7

1579.

notwithstanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were per-
sons of very opposite characters. The former was naturally gentle;
humane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of the country,
and misled, or misinformed by those, whom he trusted; not un.
worthy to be the companion of the young King, in his amuse-
ments, but utterly disqualified for acting as a Minister, in directing
his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, which ren-
der a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious counsellor
to his Prince; nor did he possess any one virtue, to counterbalance
these vices, unless dexterity in conducting his own designs, and
an enterprizing courage, superior to the sense of danger, may pass
by that name. Unrefirained by religion, regardless of decency,
and undismayed by opposition, he aimed at objects, seemingly un-
attainable; butunder a Prince, void of experience, and blind to
all the. defects of those,. who had gained his favour, his audacity
was fuccefbful; and honours, wealth,. and power,, were the reward
of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole addrefs,They labour

to undermine

to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obftruced their fullorton,,
poffeflion of power. And as James had been bred up with an aver-'tho'i't
sion for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the
authority of a Tutor, than to a& with the obsequiousness of a Mi-
nifter, they found it no difficult matter to accomplill their design.
Morton, who could no longer keep the King shut up within the
walls of Stirling-caftle, having called a parliament to meet at Edin-oaobcr 17.
burgh, brought him thither. James made his entry into the capital,
with great folelmnity; the citizens received him with the louleft.

accla-

BOOK VI.acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, according
--'"_ to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty-feven years,
1579' during which, Scotland had been fubjeded to the delegated power

of Regents, or to the feeble government of a woman, and had sus-
sered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a King. Fond even of that shadow of authority, which a Prince
of fifteen could poflefs, thie Scots flattered themselves, that union,
order, and tranquillity would now be restored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary pomp, but nothing
remarkable passed in it.

These demonlfrations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue their
insinuations against Morton; and as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his subjects had access, the
cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which
occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

1580. MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavoured to

devours o put a flop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by representing
prevent them.him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a fqcret

agent in favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the house of
Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of
complaisance to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some
learned divines, whom the King appointed to inttrud him in the
principles of the Proteflant Religion, publickly renounced the errors
of Popery, in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a mem-
ber of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Confession of Faith.

This,
62

This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence fomeBooK V.
zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac- 80
cufation *.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mbrton was pre-

paripg to seize the. ing's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaining his power, by any other means, had
driven him to-make any overture. of; that kind to the English court,
or. whether it was a calumny, invented -by his adversaries to render
him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty. As he declared.
at his death, that such a design had never entered into his thoughts,
the latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence, how-
ever, for reviving- the office of Lord Chamberlain, which had
been, for some time, disused. That honour was conferred on Len-
nox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital, enemy, was his deputy;
they had under them a band of Gentlemen, who were appointed
constantly to attend the King, and to guard his person t.

Mo..ToN: was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to in- h

Elizabeth An.

finjate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And asteipofes in hi.
his las resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protection had often beals.
flood him in stead, in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowes her Envoy accused Lennox of practices
againfl the peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in her name,
that he should instantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered, by the Councellors, as an
affront to the King, and an encroachment on the independency of
the kingdom. They affected to called in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refused him farther audience. I-e retired.

* Crawf.Mcm. 319. Spotfw. 308. t Crawf. Mcm. 320.

in

BOOK VI.,acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, according

L"'-- to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty-feven years,

-'
7 during which, Scotland had been fubjeded to the delegated power

of Regents, or to the feeble government of a woman, and had sus-
sered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a King. Fond even of that shadow of authority, which a Prince
of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered themselves, that union,
order, and tranquillity would now be restored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary pomp, but nothing
remarkable passed in it.

These demonstrations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue their
insinuations againit Morton; and as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjets had access, the
cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which
occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

1580. MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and endeavoured to

Morton en-
dcaours to put a flop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by representi-ng
prevent them.him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a fqcret

agent in favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the house of
Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of
complaisance to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some
learned divines, whom the King appointed to inftrud him in the
principles of the Protestant Religion, publickly renounced the errors
of Popery, in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a mem-
ber of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Confefiion of Faith.

This,

This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence fomeBoOK V.
zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac- -
cufation *.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mbrton was pre-

paripg to seize the.King's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether despair of maintaining his power, by any other means, had.
driven him to-make any overture, of that kind to the Englilh court,
or whether it was a calumny, invented by his adversaries to render
him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty. As he declared.
at his death, that such a design had never entered into his thoughts,
the latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence, how-
ever, for reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain, which had
been, for some time, disused. That honour was conferred on Len-
nox. Alexander Erikine, Morton's capital enemy, was his deputy;
they had under them a band of Gentlemen, who were appointed
constantly to attend the King, and to guard his person t.

Mo.TON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to in-

EIizabcth in-

finiate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And asteipoces in ii
his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protetion had often behalf.
flood him in stead, in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowes her Envoy accused Lennox of pracices
against the peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in her name,
that he should inflantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered, by the Councellors, as an
affront to the King, and an encroachment on the independency of
the kingdom. They affeced to called in queflion the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refused him farther audience. I-e retired.

* Crawf. Mcm. 3T9. Spotfw. 308. t Criwf. Mnm.320.

in

63

BooK VI. indirgufl, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander Home was

8---._ sent to expostulate with Elizabeth on the subjed. After the tre'at-';
I580' ment which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below

her dignity to admit Home into her pretence. Burleigh, to whom
he was commanded to impart hlis commission, reproached him with
his Master's ingratitude towards a benefadrefs, who had placed the
crown on his head, and required him to advise the King to beware
of sacrificing the friendflhip of so necessary an ally, to the giddy
humours of a young man, without experience, and firongly sus-
peded of principles, and attachments, incompatible with the hap.
piness of the Scottish nation.

Morton ac- .THS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, Mar-
cured of'the
imdr of the ton's fall. The ad of indemnity, which he had obtained when he
late Kig. resigned the Regency, was worded with fuch:-fcrupulou§ exatnefs,

as almost screened him from any legal prosecution. The murder
of the late King was the only crime, which could not, with de-
cency, be inserted in a pardon, granted by his son. Here Morton
tfill lay open to the penalties of the law. Ard Captain Stewart,
who shunned no action, however desperate, 'if it"led to power, or
to favour, entered the council-chamber, while'the'.King and rnoWes
were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of bWing
accessary, or according to the language of the Scottish iaw, art and
pait, in the conspiracy againll the life of his majefly's father, and
offered, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dcnce. Morton, who was prefcnt, heard this accusation with firm-
ness; and replied with a dilfainful finile, proceeding either from
contempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fciouftiefs of his own innocence, " that his known zeal, in punifil-
ing those who were fufpcdeld of that detetfable crime, might well

exempt
64

exempt himself from any suspicion of being accessary to it, never- Book VI.
thelefs, he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that place, 580.
or in any other court; and doubted not but his own innocence,
and the malice of his enemies, would then appear in the clearest
light." Stewart, who was still on his knees, began to enquire how
he would reconcile his bellowing so many honours on Archibald
Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be one of the murtherers,
with his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton was ready to
answer. But the King commanded both of them to be removed.
The Earl was confined, first of all, to his own house, and then i58 r.
committed to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erskine January 2.
was Governor; and as if it had not been a sufficient indignity to
subjed him to the power of one of his enemies, he was, soon after,
carried to Dumbarton, of which Lennox had the command. A January 18.
warrant was, likewise, infued for apprehending Archibald Douglas;
but he, having received timely intelligence of the approaching
danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceedings not

to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity between
the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that a con-
fpiracy was now formed for the deftrudtion of the whole name, was
ready to take arms in order to rescue his kinsman. But Morton
absolutely sorbad any such attempt, and declared that he would
rather susser ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputation on his
own character by seeming to decline a trial -.

* Crawf. Mem. 323. 1 Johnft. 64. Spotfw. 311.
VOL. II.

K

ELIZA-

Book VI. ELIZABETH did not fail to interpose, with warmth, In behalf of

a mnan, who had contributed so mnuch to preserve her influence over

El.zabeth's Scotland. The late trar.faaions in that kingdom had given her
realures il great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired inde-
order to lave

i,. pendant of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambassadors had

met with, differed greatly from the refped, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow the
feeds ofdifcord between the two nations, and to seduce James into
a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with some Popish
Princess. Full of there apprehensions, she ordered a considerable
body of troops to be assembled on the borders of Scotland, and de-
fpatched Randolph as her ambassador into that kingdom. He ad-
dreifed himself not only to James, and to his council, but to a Con-
vention of estates met at that time. He began with enumerating
the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the
Scottish nation: That without demanding a single foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the liberties of the kingdom in the
smallest article, she had, at the expence of the blood of her sub-
je&ts, and the treasures of her Crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, established among them true Religion, and
put them in possession of their ancient rights: That from the begin-
ning {he had proteced those, who espoused the King's cause, and
by her assistance alone, the Crown was preserved on his head, and
all the attempts of the adverse fadion baffled: That an union,
unknown to their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long period of years, and though so many
Popish Princes had combined to disturb this happy slate of things,
her care, and their constancy, had hitherto defeated all these efforts:
That ffhe had observed, of late, an unusual coldness, difiruft, and

I eitrange-

efirangement in the Scottish Council, which (he could impute to Book VI.
none but to Lennox, a subjed of France, a retainer to the house C58
of Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery, and frill fufpeded of
favouring that superstition. Not satisfied with having mounted so
fafl to such an uncommon height of power, which he exercised
with all the rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of a firanger;
nor thinking it enough to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the
authority, due to his abilities, and experience, he had conspired
the ruin of that nobleman, who had often exposed his life in the
King's cause, who had contributed more than any other subjed to
place him on the throne, to resist the encroachments of Popery, and
to preserve the union between the two kingdoms. If any zeal for
.religion remained among the nobles of Scotland, if they wished for
the continuance of amity with England, if they valued the pri-
vileges of their own order, he called upon them, in the name of
his Millrefs, to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox
from the presence of the young King, to rescue Morton out of the
hands of his avowed enemy, and secure to him, the benefit of a fair
and impartial trial. And if force were neceifary towards accom-
plifhing a design so salutary to the King and kingdom, he promised
them the protection of his Miflrefs in the enterprize, and what-
ever affiflance they should demand either of men or money .

BUT there extraordinary remonstrances, accompanied with such

an unusual appeal from the King to his fubjeds, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting James on account

* Cald. 3. 6. Strype, 2. 621.

K 2

of

Book VI.

1581.

THE HISTORY

of the valour, which many of his fubjecs had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the refllefs en-
terprizes of the Popish Princes against the Protestant Religion;
to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their dangerous
cabals; and above all things, to difirufi the insinuations of those,
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the Protestants in Europe beheld with so
much pleasure *.

James deter- JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the deftrudion of
ceines to pro-their enemy to liften to there remonfirances. The officious inter-
ceed against enemy
him. position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

message, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjeds to rebel
againif their Sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on
the majesty and independance of a crowned head. A general and
evasive answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to assert
his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpeaed of favouring Morton
were turned out of office, some of them were required to surrender
themselves prisoners; the fencible men throughout the kingdom were
commanded to take arms; and troops were levied, and posted on
the borders. The English ambassador, finding that neither the
public manifesto which he had delivered to the Convention, nor his
private cabals with the nobles could excite them to arms, fled in
the night-time out of Scotland, where libels against him had been
daily published, and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kingdoms every thing wore an hoffile afpe&. But Elizabeth,
though she wished to have intimidated the Scottith King by

+ Cald. 3. 9.

her

her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with him;Book VI.
and the troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage, 58

I58I.
were soon dispersed '.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deftrution. Captain Stewart his'accufer was first appointed Tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate of his
unhappy ward, to which he advanced tome frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new made Peer was commanded to
conduct Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh; and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expect,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his deadly enemy already
loaded.with honours, in reward of the malice with which he had
contributed to his ruin.

THE records of the court ofjufliciary at this period are loft. The He is tried

account which our historians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and ded cod'
unfatisfatory. The whole proceedings seem to have been violent,
irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order to extort evidence, tor-
tured several of the Earl's domestics with unusual cruelty. During
the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in different
parts of the city. The jury was composed of the Earl's known
enemies; and though he challenged several of them, his objections
were over-ruled. After a short consultation, his peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art andpart in the conspiracy
against the life of the late king. The first part of the verdict did
not furprize him, but he twice repeated the words art and part with

*Crawf. Mem. 328. Strype, 2. App. J38.

some

Book VI. tnme vehemence, and added, " God knows it is not To." The

8V ^ doom, which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pronounced.

The King, however, remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the
sentence, and appointed that he should susser death next day, by
being beheaded *.
lis death. DURING that awful interval, Morton possessed the utmost com-

pofure of mind. He fupped chearfully; slept a part of the night,
in his usual manner; and employed the reft of his time in religious
conferences, and in acts of devotion, with some Ministers of the
city. The clergymen who attended him, dealt freely with his con-
science, and pressed his crimes home upon him. What he con-
fefled with regard to the crime for which he suffered is remark-
able, and supplies, in some measure, the imperfection of our records.
He acknowledged, that on his return from England after the death
of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy against the
King, which the Qeen, as he told him, knew of and approved;
that he follicited him to concur in the execution of it, which, at
that time, he absolutely declined; that, soon after, Bothwell him-
self, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, renewing their follicita-
tions to the fame purpose, he had required a warrant, under the
Queen's hand, authorising the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had refused to be any farther concerned in the matter.
"But, continued he, as I neither consented to this treasonable ac,
" nor assisted in the committing of it, so it was impossible for me to
"reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I make the discovery ?
" The Queen was the author of the enterprize. Darnly was such

a changeling, that no secret could be safely communicated to him.

* Spotfw. 315. Johnft. 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. 3. 45.

' Huntly

"c Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief sway in the kingdom, Book VI.
" were themselves the perpetrators of the crime." These circum-
ifances, it must be confessed, go some length towards extenuating
Morton's guilt; and though his apology for the favour he had
flhewn to Archibald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the con-
fpirators,, be far less fatisfatory, no uneasy reflections seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account *. When ilis keepers told
him that the guards were attending, and all things in readineft,
c( I praise my God, said he, I am ready likewise." Arran com-
manded these guards; and even in those moments, when the most
implacable hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could
not forbear this insult. On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm;
his countenance and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in
devotion, he suffered death with the intrepidity, which became the
name of Douglas. His head was placed on the public jail of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, co-
vered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to the
usual burial-place of criminals. None of his friends durst accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude and respect by any
symptoms of sorrow -.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious in his Odiouscon-

public conduct, soon after drew the attention of his countrymen, d f
by his infamous marriage with the Countess of March. Before he
grew into favour at court, he had been often entertained in her
husband's house, and without regarding the laws of hospitality or
of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
benefactor, a womai young and, beautiful, but, according to the

* Crawf, Mem. App. 3. It Crawf. Mem,. 334, ;oftfw. 313.

defcrip-

Book VI. description of a cotemporary Hiltorian, " intolerable in all the im-

581> perfections, incident to her sex." Impatient of any restraint upon

their mutual desires, they, with equal ardor, wished to avow their
union publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring
of their unlawful paflion. The Countess petitioned to be divorced
from her husband, for a reason, which no modest woman will ever
plead. The judges, over-awed by Arran, passed sentence without
July 6. delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a marriage,

solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of men with
the utmost horror *.

A Parliament was held this year, at the opening of which some

disputes arose between Arran and the Earl now created Duke of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition, began to affect an equality with the Duke, under whose
protetion he had hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form. a party in the council against Lennox, he
found him fixed so firmly in the King's affections, that it was im-
possible to shake him, and rather than lose all interest at court, from
which he was banished, he made the mort humble submissions to
the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This rupture
contributed, however, to render the Duke still more odious to the
nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affected to court the
Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Proteflant Religion,
and laboured to confirm the suspicions, which were entertained of
his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a favourer of
Popery. As he was supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's
most secret designs, his calumnies were listened to with more cre-

* Spotsw. 31 5.

dit,
O&ober 24.

dit, than was due to his character. To the fame cause, we must BookVI.
ascribe several ads of parliament uncommonly favourable to the -
Church, particularly one, which abolished the practice, introduced
by Morton, of appointing but one minihter to several parishes.

No notice hath been taken for orme years of Ecclesiastical af-Eccleflaftial

fairs. While the civil government underwent so many extraordi-affais
nary revolutions, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objetAs, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy. The one
was the forming a fyllem of discipline, or Ecclefiafical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this was at last brought to
omne degree of perfection. The Afiembly solemnly approved of it,
n.l appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to ob-
tain the ratificatiun of it in parliament. But Morton, during his
adminifiration, and those who, after his fall, governed the King,
were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and by
flarting difficulties, and throwing in objedions, prevented it from
receiving a legal fandion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The bishops were so devoted to the
King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the funotion itself
was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a
feat in parliament, and distinguished by titles of honou;, these not
only occasioned many avocations from their spiritual employments,
but soon rendered their character and manners extremely different
from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles viewed their power
with jealousy; the populace confidered their lives as profane; and
both wifled their downfal with equal ardour. The personal emulation
between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learnlng, and eminent for
his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on the death of Dou-
glas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

VoL.- II. L pafiioll

73

Book VI. pafiions on each fide, and heightened them. Attacks were made;

8~nI in every assembly,. on the order of bishops; their privileges were

gradually circumscribed; and at last an ac was passed, declaring
the office of bishop, as it was then exercised within the realm, to
have neither foundation nor warrant in the wo:d of God ; and re-
quiring, under pain of excommunication, all who now possesed
that office, initantly to resign it, and to abflain from preaching or
adminiitring the sacraments, till they flould receive permiion
from the assembly. The court did not acquiesce in this decree.
A vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgo-
mery Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous, and
more apt, by the blemishes in his characer, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to reconcile them to
one which was the objec of their hatred, struck up an infamous
bargain with Lennox, and on his recommendation was chosen
Archbifop. The Presbytery of Stirling of which he was a merm.
ber, the presbytery of Glasgow whither he was to be translated,
the General Assembly, vied with each other in prosecuting him
on that account. In order to screen Montgomery, James made
trial both of gentle and of rigorous measures, and both were
equally ineffc[tual. The General Assembly was just ready to pro-
nounce againit him the sentence of excommunication, when an
Herald entered and commanded them, in the King's name, and
under pain of rebellion, to flop further proceedings. Even this
injunction they despiscd. And though Montgomery, by his tears,
and teeming penitence, procured a flort rcfpite, the sentence was
at last issued by their appointment, and published in all the churches
throughout the kingdom.
74

TMIE fitinnefs of the Clergy in a co:lctive body, was not greater Book VI.

than the boldness of some individuals, particularly of the Minifcrs ---
of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily a'ainft -the corruptions in the
adminifiration, and, with the freedom of speech admitted into the
pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief authors
of the grievances, under which the church and kingdom groaned.
The courtiers, in their turn, complained to the King of the info-
lent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In order to check the bold-
ness of their discourses, James ilffed a proclamation, commanding
Dury, one of the moRt popular Miniflers, not only to leave the
town, but to abstain from preaching in any other place. Dury,
complained, to the judicatories of the Church, of this encroach-
ment upon the immunities of his office. They approved of the
dodtrine which he had delivered; and he determined to disregard
the royal proclamation. But the magirtrates being determined to
compel him to leave the city, according to the King's orders, he
was obliged to abandon his charge, after protefling publickly, at the
cross of Edinburgh, against the violence, which was put upon him.
The people accompanied him to the gates, with tears and lamenta-
tions; and the Clergy denounced the vengeance of heaven against
the authors of this outrage *.

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of its

judicatories callcd in question, and the liberty of the pulpit re-
firained, when a sudden revolution in the civil government procured
them unexpected relief.

THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the King, pofleliid His fa.ollrites
uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and cxercifcd it with the t-,iag il, un

popular mnca.
* Cald, Afremb, I576-- 1582. Spotfw. 277, &c, fures.

L 2 mno t

Book VI. most wantonness. James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
_-,-w- feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended by such company,

I582' and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his dignity.

The services of thufe, who had contributed mots to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards
and honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconfiflent with the conflitution of
Scotland, being instilled by favourites into the mind of the young Mo-
narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impreflion there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent errors in the go-
vernment of both kingdoms *. Courts of juffice were held in almost
every county, the proprietors of land were called before them, and
upon the slightest neglet of any of the numerous forms, which are
peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual and into-
lerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the obsolete jurif-
ditdion of his office over the Burroughs, and they were fubjeoted'to
cxations no less grievous. A design seemed, likewise, to have been
formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with her,
which all good Protestants efleemed the chief security of their re-
ligion in Scotland. A close correspondence was set on foot between
the King and his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniti:ng their titles to the Crown, by fiich a t.eaty of afociation, as
Maitland had projctced; which could not fail of endangering or
(liminifhing his authority, and muff have proved fatal to those, who
had aded againfi helr with greatest vigour -.

'I.h nO-,,as AL L there circumflances irritated the impatient spirit of lhe
cnfir^ a- Scottish nobls, who resolvcd to tolerate no longer the insolence of

the two minions, or to btand by, while their presumption and in-

* Cald. 3. 152. Cald. 3. 157.

experience
76

experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, Book VI.
during the administration of the four Regents, had the entire direc- 582.'
tion of the affairs'of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into meafuires, so repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor
of Glamis, the Matter of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen-
tlemen of diftindion, entered into a combination for that purpose.
And as changes in administration, which among polished nations,
are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were
in that rude age effeced suddenly and by violence, the King's
situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con-
fpirators to have immediate recourse to force.

JAM.ES, after having resided for some time in Athole, where he Seize the

enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returning's Ruthpenp
towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven-
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fur(peted no danger, -he went
thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of firangers whom Auguf 22.
he found there gave him tome uneasiness; and as those who were
in the fccret arrived every moment fiom different parts, the appear-
ance of so many new faces increased his fears. He concealed his
une.ifinefs, however, with the utmost care; and next morning pre-
pared for the field, expecting to find there some opportunity of
making his cfcape. But just as he was ready to depart, the Nobles
entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memorial againfl
the illegal and oppreffivc adtions of his two favourites, whom they
reprelented as mol: dangerous enemies to the religion and liberties of
the nation. James, though he received this remonlirance with the

coin-

77

I ooi VI. compla!ance which wa necessary in his prefcnt situation, wa's e

--,-"-; treie'V' impoa;nit to be gone; but as he approached the door of the

2. a:-.rtmlenet, the Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him. Ihe King

coml?!ained, expotlulated, threatned, and -finding all there without
efrtc, buril into tears, " No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better
children weep than bearded men." There words made a deep im-
preioon on the King's mind, and were never forgotten. The con-
Jfprator-s, without regarding his tears or indigation, dfinified such
of lis foliowers as they fufpeded ; allowed. none but their own party
to have acce's to him ; and though they treated him with great re-
i;ect, guarded his peron wih the utmost care. This enterprize is
uTilally called, by our hiforians, The raid of Ruthven %.
z;in ctop:i1n.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last degree at an event

so unexpeted, and so fatal to their power. The former endea-
voured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from captivity. The
latter, with his usu.al impetuosity, mounted on horseback the mo-
ment he heard what had befallen the King, and with a few fol-
lowers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable body
of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of Mar, lay
in his way ready to oppose him, he separated himself from his com-
panions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the castle.
At the fight of a man so odious to his country, the indignation
of the conspirators rose, and inflant dcath must have been the
punifimnent of his rafinefs, if the friendiflip of Gowrie, or some
other cause not explained by our historians, had not saved a life,
so pernicious to the kingdom. -Ie was confined, however, to

* Cald. 3. 134. Spots 320. Mclv. 357.

the

6

,7,S
!

79

the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into the King's Book VL
presence. 152.

THE King, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeds, with Command

Lennox to

whose conduct he could not help discovering many symptoms of 1:.,'t the
disgust, was obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying his appro- kingdom..
bation of their enterprize, declaring that he himself was at full
liberty, without any restraint or violence offered to his person ; and
forbidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid of Ruth-
ven, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
fame time, he commanded Lennox. to leave Scotland before the Augufr zs..
20th of September *

SooN after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambaffadors-The Confpi

fiom Elizabeth. The pretext of their embassy was to inquire after -.toi, doul
the King's safety; to encourage and countenance the conspirators Elizabeth,
was the real motive of it. By their intercefion, the Earl of Angus,
who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile,
obtained leave to return. And the accession of a nobleman so
powerful and so popular strengthened the faction t.

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many fiiends, and who received private assurances that the King's.
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
first, to pay no regard to a command, cxtorted by violence, and no
less disagreeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to him-
fclf. But the power of his enemies, who were masters of the King's per-
son, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and openly applauded
by the Clergy, deterred him from an enterprize, the fucceis of

* C.ld. 3. 135, 138. . CalJ, 3. 1.52.

which.

00

THE HISTORY
Book VI. which was dubious, and the danger certain both to himself, and to

] 58 shis Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure by various arti-

sices, in expecation either that James might make his escape fiom
the conspirators, or that fortune might present some more favour-
able opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

Til'ir con- ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous not
du capproved only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
hb an Aenm-
biv and a some legal sanction of their enterprize. For this purpose, they
co"'e nti publithed a long declaration, containing the motives, which had in-

duced them to venture on such an irregular ftep, and endeavoured
to heighten the public indignation against the favourites, by repre-
senting, in the strongest colours, their inexperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppreflion of the people. They obliged the
King, who could not with safety refuse any of their demands, to
grant them a remifion in the most ample form; and not satisfied
with that, they applied to the AlTembly of the Church, and easily
Otoer 13. procured an at, declaring, " that they had done good and accept-

able service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native country;"
and requiring all sincere Protestants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add the greater
weight to this ad, every Minister was enjoined to read it, in his
own pulpit, and to inflict the censures of the Church on those
who set themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven-
tion of estates, assembled a few days after, passed an ad to the
fame effet, and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for every
thing they had done *.

Cald. 3. 177, 187, 200. Spotfw. 322.

JAMES

JAMES was conduced by them, firlt to Stirling, and afterwardsBooK VI.

to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe; and though he was received every I
where with the external marks of refpeEt due to his dignity, hiSLennxs de-
motions were carefully observed, and he was under a restraint nopa'rtre fioott
less triEt, than at the first moment when he was seized by the con-
fpirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey. He lingered,
however, for some time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as
if he had frill intended to make one effort towards restoring the
King to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own dif-
position, averse to blood-shed and the disorders of civil war, or
from some other cause, unknown to us, he abandoned the design,
and fetoutfor France, by the way of England. The King iffuedDecember3o.
the order for his departure, with no less reluctance than the Duke
obeyed it. And both mourned a reparation, which neither of them
had power to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fatigue
of the journey, or the anguish of his mind, threw him into a
fever. In his lass moments, he discovered such a firm adherence
to the Protestant faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im-
putation of an attachment to Popery, with which he had been un-
charitably loaded in Scotland *. As he was the earliest, and best
beloved, he was, perhaps, the most deserving, though not the
most able of all James's favourites. The warmth and tenderness
of his Matler's affection for him was not abated by death itself.
By many aCts of kindness and generosity towards his pofierity,
the King not only did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
but set his own characer in one of the most favourable points
of view.

* Spotfw. 324.
VOL. II.

M

BOOK VI. THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,

5C nlmade great noise over all Europe; and at last reached the ears of
I582.

M- y: a.xi,-Mary in the prison to which (he was confined. As her own expe-
ty about her1
ty abt her rience had taught her what injuries a captive prince is exposed to

susser; and as many of those, who were now concerned in the en-
terprize against her son, were the fame persons whom she confil-
dered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural for
the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that the fame calamities
were ready to fall on his head; and such a prospeCt did not fail of
adding to the distress and horror of her own situation. In the an-
guifl of her heart, The wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bit-
terest terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which Ihe herself
had been treated, and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious fubjedss; nor permit him to be involved in
the fame misfortunes, under which (he had so long groaned. The
peculiar vigour and acrimony of stile, for which this. letter is re-
markable, ditcover both the high spirit of the Scottith Queen, un-
subdued by her sufferings, and the violence of her indignation at
Elizabeth's artifices and severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the
end tle had in view, and accordingly it neither procured any miti-
gation of the rigour of her own confinement, nor any interposition
in favour of the King.*.

HENRY IlI.. who, though he feared and hated the Princes of

Ambaor3' Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed with
arrive from warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party so
France and
England.. entirely devoted to the. English interest. He commanded M. de la

Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the court of England, to repair,
to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmost endeavours towards
placing James in a situation, more suitable to his dignity. As Eli-

' Camd. 489.

zabeth

2.1
82

zabeth could not, with decency, refuse him liberty to execute thisBooK VI.
commission, she appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as -.
her Envoy, under colour of concurring with him in the negocia-
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and to obftrud
his success. James, whose title to the Crown had not hitherto
been recognized by any of the princes on the -continent, was ex-
tremely fond of such an honourable embafly from the French Mo-
narch; and, on that account, as well as for the fake of the errand January 7.
on which he came, received Fenelon with great refpec. The no-
bles, in whose power the King was, did not reliih this interposition
of the French'court, which had long loft its ancient influence over
the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed at the danger
to which religion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise should
recover any ascendant over the public councils. And though the
King tried every method for restraining them within the bounds of
decency, they declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the ambassador, against entering into any
alliance with such notorious persecutors of the Church of God, with
a vehemence, which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The ambafador, watched
by Davison, diftrufled by the nobles, and exposed to the insults
of the Clergy, and of the people, returned into England with-
out procuring any change in the King's situation, or receiving any
answer to a proposal which he made, that the government flhould
be carried on in the joint names of James, and the Queen his
mother *.

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with great art, be-Jamesefcalpc.
came every day more uneasy under his confinement; his uneaiinels ,,dt ,';,

.O , 1

}) tI L. 'J
* Cald. 3. 207. Spotfw. 324. Sec Append. N° VIII.

M 2 rendered

83

BOOK VI. rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper opportunity

for making his escape; and to this attention, he at laftowed his liberty,
158' which the King of France was not able, nor the Queen of England

willing to procure for him. As the conspirators had forced Lennox
out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a diflance from court, they
grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled the King to
them, and to his situation, they watched him with little care. Some
occasions of discord had arisen among themselves; and the French
ambassador, by fomenting there, during the time of his residence
in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which alone their safety
confided *. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of the band
of gentlemen, who guarded the King's person, being gained by
James, had the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his maf-
June 27. ter to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March

his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from Falkland to St.
Andrew's. That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged at
first, in an open defenceless house in the town, but pretending a
curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was he entered with rome of
his attendants whom he could trust, than Colonel Stewart com-
manded the gates to be slut, and excluded all the reft of his train.
Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly, Crawford, 'Montrose,
Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been communicated,
entered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with fe-
veral of the leaders of the faction, appeared inarms, they found
themselves so far out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re-
covering possession of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of so
soft and dutile a temper, that those who were near his person, com-
monly made a deep imprefiion on his heart, which was formed to

* Camd. 482.

be
84

be under the sway of favourites. As he remained implacable and Book VI.
unreconciled to the conspirators, during so long a time, and at a 8-
period of life when resentments are rather violent than lassing, they
must either have improved the opportunities of insinuating them-
selves into favour with little dexterity, or the indignation, with
which this first insult to his person and authority filled him, must
have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He resolved, Resolves,

however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wisest coun-treat them
fellors, to act with the utmost moderation. Having called, into'ith modera-
his presence, the leaders of both factions, the neighbouring gentry,
the deputies of the adjacent burroughs, and the Ministers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under restraint for some time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pass a general ac of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeds with un-
distinguishing and equal affetion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he visited the Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven-caflle, and granted
him a full pardon of any guilt he had contrated, by the crime
committed in that very place *.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderaten,, Arran re-
plan. His former favourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per-gai"l hlis: '

ceiidaiiit over

mitted for some time to reside at Kenneil, one of his country feats.hil.
As soon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and he expressed a strong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whose insolent and

overbearing
* Melv. 272.

Book VI. overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefled

his crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and pro-
mifing that he should continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient assec-
tion; the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his ascendant
over him ; and within a few days resumed the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all the rash-
nels peculiar to himself*.

And the King THE 'first effec of his influence was a proclamation with regard
pursues ano- to.thofe concerned in the Raid of Ruthven. They were required

to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; and the King
.promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future conduc
,were such, as did not oblige him to remember past miscarriages. The
tenor of this proclamation was extremely different from the adt of
oblivion, which the conspirators had been encouraged to expect.
Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise, clogged
with such an equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the influence of a Minister, void of faith, regardless of de-
cency, and transported, by the desire of revenge, even beyond the
usual ferocity of his temper, Many of the leaders, who had at
firif appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses; and
foreseeing the dangerous storm which was gathering, began to
look out for a retreat in foreign countries t-

Elizabeth's
solicitations
in behalf of
the confpira-
tors.
August 7.

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected the conspirators, was

extremely disgusted with measures which tended so visibly to their
deflruEtion, and wrote to the King a harfhl and haughty letter, re-
proaching him in a tile, very uncommon among Princes, with

* Melv. 274.

Mt Mclv. 278. Spots. 326. Cald. 3. 330.

breach

breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence Book VI;
in proceeding so rigorously againfl his belt and most faithful fubjeds. `S
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted by
violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were no, longer bind-
ing when these were removed; that it belonged to him, alone to
chute what Ministers he would employ in his service; and that
though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven with the
utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the support of his authorityi
that such an insult on his person fllould not pass altogether uncen-
fured *.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Wallingham hersept. r.

secretary, whom she appointed her ambassador to James, and whoemafy inghto
appeared in the Scottish court, with a splendor and magnificence,Scotland.
well.calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince, Walsingham
was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in which
he infiled on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

AFTER suffering several indignities,. from the arrogance of Arran,.

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any
new treaty with.the King. Walsingham was, next to Burleigh, the
Minifler on whom the chief weight of the English administration
refted; and when a person of his rank, ftept so far out of the or-
dinary road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in his old
age, and under a declining fate of health, some affair of confe-
quence was supposed to be the cause, or some important event was
expeated to be the effecf of this measure. But as nothing con-
fpicuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable
that Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minifler, than to discover, with exactness, the capacity and dif-

Melv. 279. fiti

pofitioa

87

Book VI. position of the Scottifi King, who was now arrived at a time-of life,

'-- - when, with some degree of certainty, conjectures might be formed
J5 j. concerning his character, and future conduct. As James poffefied

talents of that kind, which make a greater figure in conversation,
than in action, he gained a great deal by this interview with the
English secretary, who, notwithfianding the cold reception he met
with, gave such an advantageous representation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward, with more de-
cency and refpet *.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to prote& the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had
all refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone complied; the reft
either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to retire
Decem. 17. into foreign parts. A Convention of estates was held, the mem-

bers of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, de-
clared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthyven to have been guilty
of high treason; appointed the a&t passed last year approving of
their conduct to be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmofft rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing that was

uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and under an
unsettled state of government, muff be acknowledged to have been
guilty of an act of treason against their sovereign; and James, who
confidered their conduct in this light, had good reason to boast of his

* Melv.293. Cald. 3. 258. Jcbb. 2. 536.

clemency,
3

clemency, when he offered to pardon them, upon their confessing BOOK VI.
their crime. But, on the other hand, it must be allowed that,--

I583.

after the King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion, they had
ibme reason to complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Ar-
ran's power.

TIlE interest of the Church was considerably affecled by these 1584.

contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept poffeflion offalu thi'
power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. confpiratcos

rand irritat-.

As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they the Klng,
took some bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal
order out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexteri y in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate all the Bishops in Scotland. When the
King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different asped.
The favour beflowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most zealous defenders of the Protertant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church. The
Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this im-
pending danger in silence. Dury, who had been restored to his
office as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at which the King was so enraged,
that, notwithstanding some fyrmptoms of his fubmiflion, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, being summoned before the privy council to answer for the
doctrine e h had uttered in a sermon at St. Andrew's, and accused
of comparing the present grievances of the nation with those under

VOL. II. N James

89

BOOK VI. James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be redref-
i"- ' fed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave

with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdidion of a Civil court,
in a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclefiaffical; the Pref-
bytery of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the first instance, of
the doctrine delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civil jurifdidion was a
privilege, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lufre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would have become inde-
pendant on the civil magistrate; and an order of men, extremely
useful to Society while they inculcate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness' and tranquillity, might have become no less
pernicious by teaching, without fear or controul, the most dangerous
principles, or by exciting their hearers to theminoft ddfperate and law-
less ations. The King, jealous to excess of his prerdgative, was a'la m-
ed at this daring encroachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of the
party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which that pre-
eminence rendered neccflary, and to discourage, by a 'timely .e-
verity, the revival of such a danger6us claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England; and the pulpits 'refunded
with complaints that the King had extingulihed the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the Chuerch of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline '*

* SpOt. 330. Cald, 3. 304.

T1' HESE
90o

THIESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still possessed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of Ar-
ran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person amdg them who had sub-
mitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a
frep, which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's neglec, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingring so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the.fufpicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the con-
fpiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his refinfance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the castle of Stirling, and ereding their flandard there, published a
manifesto, declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's presence, a minion who had acquired power
by the most unworthy actions, and who exerciscd it with the mofil
intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprifonnment
struck a damp upon their spirits,. They imputed it to treachery on
his part, and fufpcacd that as he had formerly dclcrted, he had

BoOK VI.

1584.

9x
N 2

now

BooK VI. James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be redref-

5~`' fed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave

with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdiaion of a Civil court,
in a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Pref-
bytery of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the first infiance, of
the dodrine delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civil jurifdidion was a
privilege, which the Popish Ecclefialtics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lufre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would have become inde-
pendant on the civil magistrate; and an order of men, extremely
useful to Society while they inculeate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness' and tranquillity, might have become no less
pernicious by teaching, without fear or controul, the molt dangerous
principles, or by exciting their hearers to the'toft ddfperate and law-
less acions. The King, jealoustoexcefsof his prirdgative, was ailarm-
ed at this daring encroachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of head of the
party, he resolved to punifi him with tle rigour, which that pre-
eineiince rendered neccatry, and to discourage, by a 'timndly fe-
verity, the revival of such a dangerdus claim. Me-lvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England; and the pulpits 'resounded
with complaints that the King had extinguished the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the Chuirthl of the ablefl and moil
faithful guardian of its liberties. and difcipliine *.

* SPOI. 330. CRlid 3. 314*

1THESE
90

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still polTeffed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of Ar-
ran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person amdhg them who had sub-
mitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a
ftep, which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's neglect, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for-furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingring so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the. fifpicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the success of the con-
Ipiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his refiflance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the castle of Stirling, and erecting their standard there, published a
manifesto, declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's presence, a minion who had acquired power
by the most unworthy actions, and who exerciscd it with the most
intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
firuck a damp upon their spirits, They imputed it to treachery on
his part, and fufpccted that as he had formerly dcfcrtcd, he had

BOOK VI.

1584.

9I
N 2

noW'

BOOK VI. now betrayed them. At the fame time, a Tum of money, with

S-- which Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly

paid, and their friends and vassals coming in slowly, they appeared
irresolute and disheartened; and as the King, who aded with great
vigour, advanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men, they
fled precipitately towards England, and with difficulty 'made their
escape *. This rafhdnd feeble attempt produced such effects, as
usually follow disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause,
for which it was undertaken, but added firength and reputation to
the King; confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue
their measures with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie
was the firfi victim of their resentment. After a very informal trial,
a jury of peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly
beheaded at Stirling.

May 22.

A parliament
held.

Sc cre laws
i ;linfl the
.hi urch.

To humble the Church was the King's next ftep. But as it be-

came necessary, for this purpose, to, call in the aid of the legislative
authority, a parliament was hastily summoned. And while so many
of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or forbidden to
appear in the King's pretence; while Arran's haughtiness kept some
at a diflance, and intimidated others; the meeting consisted only
of those, who were absolutely at the devotion of the court. In
order to conceal the laws which were framing from the knowledge
of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy.
And when some of the ministers, who either fufpeted, or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized at the palace-gate,
and carried to a distant prison. Others, attempting to enter the parlia-

* Home's Hist. of House of Dougl. 379. Spots. 330.

nient
92

ment house, were refused admittance *. And such laws were Book.VI.
passed, as totally overturned the constitution and discipline of the
Church. The refuting to acknowledge the jurifdition of the privy Alay 2Z.
council; the pretending an exemption from the authority of the
civil courts; the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of
any of the three eflates in parliament, were declared to be high-
treason. The holding Assemblies, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,
without the King's permission or appointment; the uttering, either
privately, or publickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any false and
scandalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or miniliers, were
pronounced capital crimes -j.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross of Edinburgh, ac-

cording to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.
Cuthberts, and one of the lords of Session, solemnly protested
against them, in the name of his brethren, because they had been
passed without the knowledge or content of the Church, Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had
both been esteemed sacred. In the former,, the Clergy had been
accustomed to censure, and admonifi, with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and independant jurifdic-
tion. The blow was now aimed at both these privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render churchmen as inconsiderable,
as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles had stripped
them of the wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive them
of the power which once belonged to their order. No wonder
the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud. All the Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The most eminent Clergymen, throughout the kingdom, imitated

Cald. 3. 365. 1 Parl. 8. Jac. VI.

their

93

94

BooK VI. their example. Desolation and aftonihment appeared in every part
.-,- - of the Scottish Church; the people bewailed the loss of Pastors,

584. whom they esteemed; and full of consternation, at an event so un-

expedted, openly expressed their rage against Arran, and began to
fufpedt the King himself to be an enemy to the Reformed Reli-
gion *.

* Spots. 333.

T E

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOT LAND

B O OK VII.

W
]; HI L E Scotland was torn by those intestine factions, Book VIL

Elizabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in S /

agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Throgimor-
Cheshire gentleman, was suspected of being deeply concerned in the1 t'V ",CSa'Pt
design, and on that suspicion lie was taken into cuflody. Among tlizabeth.
his papers were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in
the kingdom, with an account of their situation, and of the depth
of water in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catho-
lics in England. This circurnftance confirmed the suspicion against
lim, and some dark and desperate conspiracy was suppoScd j(ft
ready to break out. At firfl he boldly avowed his innocence, and
declared that the two papers were forged by the Queen's Miniflcis,
in order to intimidate or infiare him; and he even endured the
rack with the utmost fortitude. But being brought a fccond

t,!:n\

Pook VII. time to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not

only acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with
the Queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade England. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnish
troops, and to conduct the enterprize. The Pope and king of
Spain were to supply the money, necessary for carrying it on; all the
Englifhi exiles were ready to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing; Mendoza the
Spanish ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no
pains in fomenting the spirit ofdifaffedion among the Englih, or
in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his pofflefion. This confession he retraced at his trial;
returned to it again, after sentence was passed upon him; and re-
traAed it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are affifled in forming our opinion

of this matter, by the light which time and history hath thrown upon
the designs and characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
ltances in Throgmorton's confeflion appear to be extremely remote
from truth, or even from probability. The Duke of Guise was, at
that juncure, far fiom being in a situation to undertake foreign
conquests. Without either power or office at court; hated by the
King; and persecuted by the favourites; he had no leisure for any
thoughts ofdifturbing the quiet of neighbouring flates, and his varf
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the foundation
of that famous league, which shook the throne of France. But
about the time that Elizabeth detectd this conspiracy, the close union
between the house of Cuife and Philip II. was remarkable to all

* Holingfhed, 1370.

Europe,

Europe, and as their great enterprize against Henry III. was notBook VIIt
yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to conceal that under their 584.
threatnings to invade England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently
all the parties mentioned by him wished her downfal, thought that
the could not guard her kingdom with too much care. The indif-Defigns of
creot zeal of the English exiles increased her fears. Not fatisfiedrents againt
with incessant outcries against her severity towards the ScottifhElizabeth
Queen, and her cruel persecution of her Catholic fubjets, nor
thinking it enough that one Pope had threatned her with the fen-
tence of excommunication, and another had actually pronounced
it, they now began to disperse books and writings, in which they
endeavoured to persuade their disciples, that it would be a merito-
rious action to take away her life , they openly exhorted the maids
of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by such an
illufirious deed, to render their own names honourable and sacred
in the Church, throughout all future ages *. For all these reasons,
Elizabeth not only inflicted the punishment of a traitor on Throg-
morton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador instantly to leave
England; and that {he might be in no danger of being attacked
within the island, ile determined to use her utmost efforts, in (rder
to recover that influence over the Scottish councils ; which flee had
for some time .entirely loft.

THIERE were three different methods, by which Elizabeth mightsheendea-
hope to accomplish this; either by furnifling such effetual aid."'ous toe

cilibifli hex
to the banished nobles, as would enable them to resume the chiefi'l;'ticice in

S sotland, by

diredion of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Mary,:li ringAr.
as might intimidate her son, who being now accustomed to go-' ran

* Camd, 497..

97
IVOL.. 11.,

0

,vcrn,

BooKVII.vern, would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than resign the

8- - sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Era
15841' of Arran, to secure the direcion of the King his master. The

ladt was not only the easiest, and fpeedieft, but the mofit likely to be
successful. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying
the other two altogether aside. With this view, (he sent Dayifon,
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and addr.ess, into
Scotland. A minifler so venal as Arran, hated by his own
countrymen, and holding his power by the most precarious of all
tenures, the favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and efleemed the acquisition of her protetion
to be the most solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after,
Aguft 13. be consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdane the Governor of

Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous title of Lieute-
nant General for the King, he appeared at the place appointed, with
a splendid train. InHunfdane's pretence, he renewed his promises
of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English interelt, and
assured him that James should enter into no negociation, which
might tend to interrupt the peace between the two kingdoms; and
as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies concern-
ing the King's marriage, which had formerly disquieted her with re-
gard to his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from listening
to any overture of that kind, till he had previously obtained the
Queen of England's content *.

THE baniihed lords and their adherents soon felt the effects of

Severe pro-
ccedings a- Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
gainft the ba- t
nifhedLoxds. them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her Miniflers

were of opinion that she ought to employ her arms in defence of

Cald. 3.491. Melv. 315. SecAppend. NQ. IX.

their
98

their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which relrainedBooyVII,
James and' his favourite, from proceeding to fich extremities againfl
them, as might have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their
behalf. But every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to call a parliament, in which an ad was pafled, at-Aguf
tainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of their followers.
Their estates devolved to the Crown, and according to the practice
of the Scottish Monarchs, who were obliged to reward the faction
which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of these to Arran, and
his associates *.

NoR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. All Minif-Aga;nf the

ters, readers, and professors in colleges were injoined to subscribe lery
within forty days, a paper teffifying their approbation of the laws
concerning the Church, enacted in Iaft parliament. Many, over-
awed, or corrupted by the 'Court, yielded obedience; others flood
out. The flipends of the latter were fequeflered, some of the
more active committed to prison, and numbers compelled to fly the
kingdom. Those Who complied, fell under the suspicion of a6ting
from merconary or ambitious motives. Those Who suffered, ac-
quired high reputation, by giving 'such convincing evidence of their
firmness and sincerity. Thejudicatories of the Church were al-most
entirely suppressed. In some places, afcae as .many Miriftrs re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious worship; they soon
funk in -reputation among -the people, and :being prohibited ,not only
from discoursing of publiok affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of
the administration, to frame every sentiment and expression in fulhl a

* Cald. 3. 527.

99
0 2

manner,

THE HISTORY
BOOK VII. manner, as to glve the court no offence, their sermons were deem.

158i 8 ed languid, insipid, and contemptible. And it became the general

opinion, that together with the most virtuous of the nobles, and
the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of Religion
were now banished out of the kingdom ,

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitless

negociations with the Queen of Scots, which it had become almost
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to
amuse that unhappy princess with some profped of liberty; but
furnished an apology for eluding the follicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to-overawe James, by Mhewing him
that she could, at any time set free a dangerous rival to dispute his
authority. These treaties (he suffered to proceed to what length The
pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when
they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot was
not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the
reasons, however, which rendered it ineffectual were far from being
frivolous.

New confpi-
racy againlt
Elizabeth.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scotland,

the flip on board of which he was a passenger happened to be
chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in his cuf-
tody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary accident
the wind blew them back into the (hip, and they were immediately
taken up by some of the passengers, who carried them to Wade,
the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great industry and pa-

Cald. 3.
5'l

tience,

tience, joined them together, and they were found to contain theBooKVII.
account of a plot, said to have been formed by the King of Spain, 5
and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The people were not yet
recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy,
in which Throgmorton had b en engaged, and as his discoveries ap-
peared now to be confirmed by additional evidence, not only all
their former apprehensions recurred, but the consternation became
general and exceflive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatned for some years, flowed either immediately from
Mary herself, or from those, who made use of her name to jufify
their infurredions and conspiracies, this gradually diminished the
compafnion due to her situation, and the English, instead of pitying,
began to fear and to hate her. Elizabeth, under whose wife and
pacific reign the English enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened sources
of wealth unknown to their anceflors, was extremely beloved by
all her people; and regard to her safety, not less than to their own
interest, animated them against the Scottish Queen. In order toOccafions an

afrociation in

discourage her adherents, it was thought necessary to convince them, opposition to
by Come public deed, of the attachment of the English to theirMarY
own Sovereign, and that any attempt against her life would prove
fatal to her rival. With this view, an Afociation was framed, the Oaober j,
subscribers of which bound themselves by the m:ist solemn oaths,
"t to defend the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and domes-
( tic; and if violence should be offered to her life, in order to

favour the title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only en-
' gaged never to allow or acknowledge the person, or persons, by

whom, or for whom, such a deteflable act ihould be committed,
but vowed, in the pretence of the Eternal God, to prosecute

<' such person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue them,
ls with their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow and ex-

" tirpa-

o01

BooK VII' tirpation*." Persons of all ranks fubfribed this combination,

-- .-. with the greater eagerness and unanimity t.
1584.
Which great- MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed

design to exclude her from all right offucceffon, but as the certain
and immediate forerunner of her deRiruaion. In order to avert
this, she made such feeble efforts as were frill in her power, and sent
Naue her secretary to court, with offers .of more entire refigna-
tion to the will of Elizabeth, in every point, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than her sufferings hitherto had
been able to extort +. But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her
privileges, as an independent Sovereign, or yielding to the necessity
of her situation, endeavoured, by conceflions, to sooth her rival,
she was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was imputed to obfti-
nacy, or to the secret hope of foreign assistance; her concessions
were either believed to be insincere, or to flow from the fear of some
imminent danger. Her present willingness, however, to comply
with any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly urged his
mistress to come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth was
persuaded, that it was the spirit raiied by the association, which
had rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always imagined
that there was something mvfterious and deceitful in all Mary's ac-
tions, and fufpeted her of carrying on a dangerous corrcCpondence
with the English Cathdlics, both within and without the kingdom.
Nor were her suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging
him to halten the execution of what she calls the Great plot or De-
'fgnment, without hesitating on account of any danger in which it

* State Trials, 1. 122. t Camd. 499. 4 Camd, Ibid.
I02

might
3

might involve her life, which she would most willingly part with, BooK VII.
if, by that sacrifice, ihe could procure relief for so great a number 8-'--
of the oppressed children of the Church *. Inead, therefore, fShe is treated
hearkening to the overture which the Scottiffi Queen made, orwith greater

rigour.

granting any mitigation of the hardhfips of which The complained,
Elizabeth resolved- to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsvbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury,
to be her keepers. Shrewvbury had diicharged his trust with great
fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary
with gentleness an;d refped, and had always fweetned harsh com-
mands, by the humanity, with which he put them in execution.
The fame politeness was not to be expected from men of an inferior
rank, whose revere vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommen-
dation to that employment, and the only merit, by which they
could pretend to gain favour or preferment t.

As James was no lets eager, than ever, to deprive the banifhedGray, anew

nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he appointed the Matter of Grayfavouriteof
his ambassador to the court of England, and intrusted him with
the condu& of a negociation for that purpose. An honour for
which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of
Arran. Gray poffefied all the talents of a Courtier; a graceful per-
son, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France, he had been ad-
mitted into the most intimate familiarity with the Duke of Guise,
and in order to gain his favour, had'renounced the Proteflant Re-
ligion, and professed the utmost zeal for the captive Queen, who
carried on a secret correspondence with him, from which she ex-
pected great advantages. On his return into Scotland, he paid

t Strype, 3.246. 1 Camd. 500.

court

103

BooKVII. court to James with extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplish-
'-"-J ' ments did not fail to make their usual impression on the King's heart.

Arran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his grow-
ing favour; and flattering himself, that absence would efface any
sentiments of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom, for an embassy of such importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his fall. Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper in-
ftruments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which
was frill greater. He abandoned himself without reserve to Eli-
zabeth's directions, and not only undertook to retain the King un-
der the influence of England, but aded as a spy upon the Scottish
Queen, and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could
draw from her by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.

His interest C R AY'S credit with the Englifl court was extremely galling to
with theCourt he banified nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing
of England. t

her power to restore them; she found it easier to govern Scotland,
by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with Gray's
follicitations, she commanded the exiles to leave the north of Eng-
Decembcr31.land, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This ren-

dered it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partizans in Scotland, and almost imposSible to return thither with-
out her permission. Gray, by gaining a point which James had so
much at heart, rivetted himself more firmly than ever in his fa-

s Strype, 3. 302. Mclv. 316.

vour;
o104

,our; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of ferv- Book VII.
ing Elizabeth with greater success *.

1584.

ARRAN had now possessed, for rome time, all the power, the 1585.
riches and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could desire, Arran's cor.

raption, and

or the fondness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality, towards iafol, ce.i
his favourites, could bestow. The office of Lord Chancellor, the
highest and most important in the kingdom, was conferred upon
him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, who succeeded
Athole in that dignity --. And the publick beheld, with astonish-
ment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of fortune, ig-
norant of law, and a contemner ofjuftice, appointed to preside in
parliament, in the privy council, in the court of session, and intrust-
ed with the supreme disposal of the property of his fellow-fubjeds.
He was, at the fame time, governor of the castles of Stirling and
Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Provost of the city
of Edinburgh; and as if by all these accumulated dignities his me-
rit were not sufficiently recompenced, he had been created Lieute-
nant General over the whole kingdom. No person was admitted into
the King's presence without his permission; no favour could be
obtained but by his mediation. James, occupied with youthful
amusements, devolved upon him the whole regal authority. Such
unmerited elevation increased his natural arrogance, and rendered
it intolerable. He was no longer content with the condition of a
subjed, but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo Duke of
Albany; and boasted, openly, that his title to the Crown was pre-
ferable to that of the King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his primitive indigence.
His venality as a judge was scandalous, and was exceeded only by
that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made herself a party

* Cald. 3. 643. + Crawf. Offic, of State. App. 447.

Ios
VOL. II.

p

in

Book VII, in almost every queflion which came to: be decided, employed hey
.~.~' influence to corrupt, or to overawe the judges, and almost openly
158 5 didated their decisions *. His rapaciousness as a Minister was in-

satiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many offices; with
the estate, and honours which belonged to the house of Hamilton;
or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his
fbare; he grasped at the possessions of several of the nobles. He
required lord Maxwell to exchange part of his estate, for the for-
feited lands of Kinneil; and because he was- unwilling to quit an
ancient inheritance for a possession so precarious, he stirred up against
him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of Johniton, and involved that
corner of the kingdom in a civil war. He committed to prison the
Earl of Athole, Lord Home, and the Master of Caffils; the first,
because he would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the Earl of
Gowrie, and entail his estate on him; the second, because he was
unwilling to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his estates;
and, the third, for refuting to lend him money. His spies and in-
formers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves into every
company. The nearest neighbours distrusted and feared: each other.
All familiar society was at an end. Even the common intercourses
of humanity were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to con-
fide, or where to utter his complaints. There is not perhaps in
history, an example of a minister so universally deteflable to a na-
tion, or who more justly deserved its detestation t.

ARRAN, notwithitanding, regardless of the sentiments, and de-

spifing the murmurs of the people, gave a.loofe to his natural tem-
per, and proceeded to acs still more violent. David Home of Ar-
gaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from one of

v Cald. 3. 331. Scotflarvet's Staggering State, 7. - Spots. 337, 338.

3 the
xo6

the banished Lords, about private business, were condemned and Book VII.
put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cunning- -.-'-
hame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of
honour and reputation, were accused of having conspired, with
the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A tingle witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence was un-
answerable; their accuser himself not long after acknowledged that
he had been suborned by Arran; and all men believed the charge February 9,
against them to be groundless: they were found guilty, notwith-
standing, and suffered the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time, that these gentlemen were punished for Parry's con-

a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was indangered by a real one. Efizracygainft
Parry, a Dodor of Laws, and a member of the House of Com-
mons, a man vain and fantafRic, but of a resolute spirit, had lately
been reconciled to the Church of Rome; and fraught with the
zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonstrate the sincerity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Eli-
zabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove the mur-
der of an excommunicated Prince to be not only lawful,' but a me-
ritorious acion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the defigrh.
The Pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and granted him, for
his encouragement, a plenary indulgence, and remission of his fins.
Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose, But
though he often got access to the Queen, fear, or some remaining
sense of duty, retrained him from perpetrating the crime. Hap-
pily, his intention was at last discovered byNevil, the only person
in England, to whom he had communicated it; and he himself

, * Spotfw. 338. Cald. 794.

having

107
P 2

BookVII. having voluntarily confessed his guilt, he. suffered the punishment

L---,- which it deserved *.
1585.

March 2. THESE repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened the
A revere fha-
tute, which indignation of the English parliament, and produced a very extra-
proved fatal ordinary flatute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of
to Mary.

Scots. By this law the Association in defence of Elizabeth's life was
ratified, and it was further enacted; "that if any rebellion shall be

excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of

"her Majefly's person, by or for any person pretending a title to
"the Crown, the Queen shall empower twenty four persons, by a
"commiflion under the great feal, to examine into, and pass fen-

tence upon such offences; and after judgment given, a proclama-
" tion shall be issued, declaring the persons whom they find guilty,

excluded from any right to the Crown; and her Majesty's sub-

"jecs may lawfully pursue every one of them to the death, with
" all their aiders and abettors. And if any design against the life

of the Queen take effec, the persons, by orfor whom, such. a
detestable ad is executed, and their iues, being any wife assent-
ing or privy to the fame, shall be disabled for ever from pre-
tending to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man.

(' ner -." This at was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots;
and whether we confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im-
pute it to the influence, which that artful Princess preserved over
her Parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles of justice, or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered
accountable not only for her own ations, but for those of others ;

* State Trials, Vol. I. 103.

+ State Trials, Vol. I. 123.

in

in consequence of which, the might forfeit her right of fucceflon, Book VII.
and even her life itself.

1585.

MARY juffly confidered this aft, as a warning to prepare for The rigour

the worst extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had with which
resolved, by this time, to take away her life; and suffered books to ed, increased.
be published, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but just *. Even
that short period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflic. Almost all her servants were difmilfed; he
was treated no longer with the refped due to a Queen; and though
the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
flitution, she was confined to two ruinous chambers, scarce habi-
table, even in the middle of summer, by reason of cold. Notwith-
flanding the scantiness of her revenue, she had been accustomed
to difiribute regularly Come alms among the poor in the village ad-
joining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to per-
form this. pious and humane office, which had afforded her great
consolation, amidst her own sufferings. The castle, in which She
resided, was converted into a common prison; and a young man,
fufpeded of popery, was confined there, and treated with such rigour,
under her eye, that he died of the ill usage. She often complain-
ed to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and expoftulated as
became a woman and a Queen; but as no political reason now
obliged that Princess to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,
far from granting her any redress, she did not even deign to give
her any answer. The King of France, closely allied to Elizabeth,
on whom he depended for assistance, was afraid of espousing Mary's

' Strype 3. 299.

cause,

og9

Book VI. cause, with any warmth; and all his follicitations in her behalf

v--- were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French
5 85. ambassador, whose companion and zeal for, the unhappy Queen

supplied the defeCts in his inftrudions, remonstrated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which She was exposeld, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tut-
bury; though she was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation *.

NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the neglect of her

A breach be-
tween Mary friends, made such an impreflion on Mary, as the ingratitude of her
and her son. son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpec, and

had even entered into negotiations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this good
correspondence hould continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embassy, persuaded him to write a harsh and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which he exprefly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow and despair.
" Was it for this, said she, in a letter to the French ambassador,

that I have indured so much, in order to preserve for him the in-
" heritance, to which 1 have a just right ? I am far from envying

his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor wifll to

" fct my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure of
" once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved with too ten-

der affection. Whatever he either enjoys or expects, he derived
c it from me. From him, I never received afiftance, supply, or

* Jcbb, v. 2. 576-598.

(' benefit
II0

benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer ag a Book VII.

"King; he holds that dignity by my consent; and if a speedy ----'
( repentance does not appease my just resentment, I will load him 585'
" with a parent's curse, and surrender my'Crown, with all my pre-
"tensions, to one, who will receive them with gratitude, and de-
"fend them with vigour *." The love which James bore to his mo-
ther, whom he had never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to confider as the most abandoned person of her sex, cannot
be supposed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
pains to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his un-
dutiful behaviou.r, added to her bigotted attachment to Popery,
prompted Mary at any time to think- seriously ofdifinheriting her son;
or whether there threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally of difap-
pointed affeEcion, it is now no easy matter to determine. Some pa-
pers which are still extant seem to render the former not improbable -.

CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting, occupied Eliza- Dangerous
beth's thoughts. The calm, whichfihe had long enjoyed, seemed now situation of

Elizabeth.

to be at an end; and such 'forms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled' her with just alarm. All the neighbouring nations had
undergone. revolutions, exztremely to her disadvantage. The great-
qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and which-
raised the expectations of his fubjeEts so high, vanifhed.on his as-
cending the throne; and his acquiring supreme power seems not
only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his under-
standing. He soon loft the esteem and affercion of the nation ; and
a life divided between the aufterities of a superstitious devotion,
and the extravagancies of the most dissolute debauchery, rendered'
him as contemptible, as he was odious on account of his rapacious-

* Jcbb, 2, 571. Sec Append. N9.Xi ' See Append. N° XI.

ness,

1 1

Book VII.nefs, his profusion, and the fondness with which he doted on many
l- "'' unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fen-
1585. timents of the people burst out with violence. Henry had no chil-

dren, and though but thirty two years of age, the succession of the

from the pro- Crown was already confidered as open. The King of Navarre a
grefs of the distant descendant of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to

the Crown, was a zealous Proteflant. The profpet of an event,
so fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France,
alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, and the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romish faith, and the asserter of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In order to unite the
party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diftinguifled by the name
of the Holy League. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation.
The spirit spread with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural
to religious passions, in that age. The deftrution of the Reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be the ob-
ject and with of the whole party. And the Duke of Guise, the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the
kingdom, far superior to that, which the King himself possessed.

from the Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the
power ofPhi-naval power of Spain, and had at last reduced under his dominion
lip 1. that portion of the Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenaan

mountains, and which nature seems to have deffined to form one
great Monarchy. William Prince of Orange, who first encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whole
wisdom and valour formed and proteced the riling commonwealth,
had fallen by the hands of an affafin. The superior genius of the
Prince of Parma, had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in
the Low Countries; all his enterprizes, concerted with consummate
still, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended with un-

inter-
112

interrupted success; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, Book VII.
we.e on the point of falling under the dominion of their ancient .-
mafler.

NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto Her wife and

owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no ad- vigorous con-
vantage from the jealousy, which had subsisted between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke of
Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms. The
H-agonots were unable to contend with the power of the
league; and little could be expeded from any diversion they
might create. Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could long
employ the arms or divide the strength of Spain. In this situation
of the affairs of Europe, it became necessary for Elizabeth to form
a new plan of conduct; and her wifdorm in forming it, was not
greater than the vigour with which fle carried it on. The mea-
fures, most suitable to her natural temper, and which she had hi-
therto pursued, were cautious and safe; those The now adopted
were enterprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by necessity, not
only of defending herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness, which averted danger from her own domi-
liions. She immediately furnliflhed the Hugonots with a con-
fidcrable supply in money. She carried on a private negociation
with IHcnry III. who, though compelled to join the league, hated
tlhe leaders of it, and wished for their deflruction. She openly
undertook the protetion of the Dutch commonwealth, and sent a
powCerful army to its afillance. She endeavoured to form a genrall
coni)edclracy of the Protcflant Princes in opposition to the Popin ,,

Rcl ;,,
le;aue. She determined to proceed with the utnoft rigour against p't l l :1il.,

0 .'d

1

n i

l 1:" to ¶rztjt
the Queen of Scots, whose fufficrings and rights affordedl hcr cnc- :il ..

\V1 II. Q._ Ili

1"3

1i4
Book VII. mies a specious pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved

L--r to redouble her endeavours in order to effea a closer union with
5i. Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate her influence over the coun-

cils of that nation.

SEI found it no difficult matter to induce mor of the Scottish

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary, which his brother
formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Juflice Clerk, who had
rly 2q succeeded Gray as the King's resident at London, were the persons

in whom fife chiefly confided. In order to direCd and quicken their
motions, ihe despatched Sir Edward Wotton along with Bellenden
into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, and entertaining;
he excelled in all the exercises, for which James had a paflion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures he had met with,
and the observations he had made, during a long residence in foreign
countries; but under the veil ofthere superficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high
favour with James, and while he was seemingly attentive only to
pleasure and diversions, he acquired influence over the publick coun-
cils, to a degree which was indecent for a stranger to possess *.

Propores a NOTHrING, however, could be more acceptable to the nation,
ltague wlith than the proposal he made, of a firic alliance between the two king-
bcotland,

doms, in defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid and
alarming progrcfs of the Popish league seemed to call on all Prote-
ilant Princes, to unite for the preservation of their common faith.
,uly 29. James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention of

estates impowercd him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to

* Mclv. 3r7,

ratify

ratify it in parliament ". The alacrity with which James concur- Book VII.
red in this measure, rnuft not be wholly ascribed either to his own
zeal, or to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's
liberality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the young
King, the fettled on him an annual pension of 5000 pounds; the
fame fum which her father had allotted her, before (lie ascended
the throne. This circumstance, which she took care to mention,
rendered a furn, which in that age was far from being inconfider-
able, a very acceptable present to the King, whose revenues, dur-
ing a long minority, had been almost totally dissipated -.

BUT the chief obje& of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Arran, Undermines

While a minion so odious to the nation continued to govern the poera'
King, his affiflance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdane, had ap-
peared extremely zealous for her interefi, she could place no great
confidence in a man, whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,
and who, notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary, still
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary, and with the
Duke of Guise. The banished Lords were attached to England
from affeCdion, as well as principle, and were the only persons,
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, (he could
thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
summoned thither, under colour of vindicating themselves from his
accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most proper
measures for restoring them to their country. Wqctton pursued this
plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for execution; and it was greatly
facilitated by an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forater, and Ker of Ferniherit, the Englifl and Scottifl war-

* Spot f339.. * Cald. 3. 505.

dens

t P

Book Vii. dens of the middle marches, having met, according to the cuftoni
r- --n of the borders, about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffie,

I585' the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This scuffle

was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a design
formed by Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them should be deli-
vered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeer.-

Aflifts the During his absence from court, Wotton and his associates carried
banifed no- on their intrigues without interruption. By their advice, the banish-

ed nobles endeavoured to accommodate their differences with Lord
John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons, whom
Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom. Their com-
mon sufferings, and common interest, induced both parties to bury
in oblivion the ancient discord, which had subsisted between the
houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's permiflion they
returned in a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who had
again recovered favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in a posture
of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted
all his nleafures. Some necessary orders they prevented from being
iffied; others they rendered ineffeltual, by the manner of execu-
tion; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and with reluc-
tance ".

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the design

* Spotfw, 340.
4

was

was happily discovered, and in order to avoid the punishment his BookVII.
treachery merited, he departed without taking leave. 8.

1585.
MEAN while the banished Lords hastened the execution of their They return

into Scotland,

enterp ize; and as their friends and vaflals were now ready to join and are recon-
them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they wereciled to the
welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the most fervent
prayers were addressed to heaven for the success of their arms They
advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the head
of Io,0oo men. The King, though he had assembled an army
superior in number, could not venture to meet them in the field, with
troops, whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at best,
were far from being hearty in the cause; nor was either the town
or castle provided, for a siege. The gates, however, of both, were
shut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night Nov. z.
they furprized the town, or more probably it was betrayed into their
hands; and Arran, who had undertaken to defend it, was obliged
to save himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invest-
ed the castle, in which there were not provisions for twenty-four
hours; and James was necessitated immediately to hearken to terms
of accommodation. They were not so elated with success, as to
urge extravagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to make
every reasonable concefflon. They obtained a pardon, in the mofl
ample form, of all the offences they had committed; the prin-
cipal forts in the kingdom were, by way of security, put into their
hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart, were removed
from the King's pretence; and a parliament was called, to eftablifa
tranquillity in the nation f.

* Mclv. 335. 1- Cald, 3. 795.

Tiioucri

117

Book VII. TIOUGvi a great majority in this parliament confifed of the con-
~'-^^
X federate nobles, and their adherents, they were far from discovering

A par!i ment a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an act, restoring them
Decemberio, to their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the pardon granted

by the King, they seemed willing to forget all past errors in the ad-
niniftration, and spared James the mortification of feeing his Mi-
nifters branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone,
deprived of all his honours, firipped of his borrowed spoils, and
declared an enemy to his country by public proclamation, funk back
into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been; during his un-
merited prosperity, the object of the hatred and indignation of his
countrymen, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all his fIls-
ferings mitigate their resentment in the leafi degree.

Church as- THE clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no redress
fa irs. of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate nobles had, all

along, affecded to be confidered as guardians of the privileges and dif-
cipline of the Church. In all their manifestos they had declared their
resolution to restore there, and by that popular pretence, had gained
many friends. It was now naturalto expeafome fruit ofthefepromiles,
and some returns of gratitude towards many of the most eminent
preachers who had suffered in their cause, and who demanded the
repeal of the laws passed the preceding year. The King, how-
ever, was resolute to maintain these laws in full authority; and as
the nobles were extremely follicitous not to disgust him, by insisting
on any difiagrecable requefl, the claims of the Church in this, as well
as in many former inflances, were acrificcd to the interest of the
laity. The ministers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and

3 their
18

i19

their impatience uhder the difappointiment broke out in fomie ex-Book VII,
pressions, extremely disrespectful even towards the King himself *. 86

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's too, felt the effecs of their

anger, the provincial fynod of Fife summoned him to appear, and
to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the function of a Bishop. And though
he refused to acknowledge the jurifdidion of the court, and ap-
pealed from it to the King, a sentence of excommunication, equal-
ly indecent and irregular, was pronounced against him. Adam-April 13
son, with no less indecency, thundered his archrepifcopal ex-
communications against Melvil, and some other of his oppo-
nents.

SOON after, a General AfTembly was held, in which the King,

with some difficulty, obtained an adt, permitting the name and
office of a Biffop fiill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched. The exercise
of difcit line, and the inspection of the life and doctrine of the
Clergy, Were committed to Prefbyteries, in which Biflops should
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as per-
petual moderators. They themselves were declared to be subjet, in
the fame hmanner as other pastors, to the jurifdidion of the General
Affcmbly. And as the discussion of the Archbifop's appeal might
have kindled unusual heats in the affmbly, tlat affair was terminat-
ed by a comprotnife. Ile renounced any claim of supremacy over
the Chulic, and promised to demean himfclf suitably to the cha-
radcer ol a Bishop, as dcfcribcd by St. Paul. The Aflcmbly, with-
out examining the foundations of the sentence of excommiiunica-

' Spotlw. 343,

tion,

Book VII.tion, declared that it should be-held of no effe&, and relored him

to all the privileges which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
86' Notwithstanding the extraordinary tendeinefs flewn for the honour

of the fynod, and the delicacy and refped, with which its jurifdic-
tion was treated; several members were so zealous as to protest a-
gainft this decision *.

A lcIeguewith THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so warmly
England con- attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two kingdoms,
eluded.

which had been proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French Envoy. James himself firfl offered to re-
July 5. new the negociation. Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable op-

portunity to flip, and instantly despatched Randolph to conclude
a treaty, which the so much desired. The danger to which the Pro-
teftant religion was exposed, by the late combination of the Popifl
powers for its deftrution, and the necefity of a ftric confederacy a-
mong those, who had embraced the Reformation, in order to obflrua
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties should bind
themselves to defend the Evangelic religion ; that the league /hould
be ofTenfivc ahd defensive against all, who filall endeavour to disturb
the exercise of religion in either kingdon; that if one of the two
parties be invaded, the other, notwithltanding any former alliance,
should not diretly or indiretly affiit the invader; that if England
be invaded in any part remote from Scotland, James fiould aflift
the QCccn \with 2000 horse, and 5ooo foot; that if the enemy
landed or approached within lixty miles of Scotland, the King should
take the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as lie
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth, in return,

* Cald. 3. 194. Spotfw. 346.

undcr-
I20

undertook to at in defence of Scotland, if it should be invaded.BooKVII.
At the fame time, the assured the King that no fep should be taken, 1 56.
which might derogate in any degree from his pretensions to the
English Crown *. Elizabeth expressed great satisfaction with a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dange-
rous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that fide,
which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of them had been
able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the blessings of
peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable pe-
riod, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that the
King's conduct was universally acceptable to his own people -.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time, exposed James

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged in
the conspiracy against the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered for that crime,
had accused him of being present at the murder §. He had escaped
punishment by flying into England, and James had often required
Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her protection. He
now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to return into Scot-
land; and after undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal ra-
ther than to detec his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by
the King, but lent back to the court of England, with the honou-
rable character of his ambafiader. James was now of such an age,
that his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse for this
indecent tranfafion. It mull be imputed to the excessive facility
of his temper, which often led him to gratify his courtiers at the
expence of his own dignity and reputation [1.

Spotfw. 351. 1- Camd. 53. § See Append, NO. XII.

U Spotfw. 348. Cald. 3. 917.
VOL. II. R Nor

121

Book VII. NOT long after, the inconsiderate affetion of the English Catho-

- licks towards Mary, and their implacable resentment against Eliza-

I586.

Rife of Bab- beth, gave rife to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the one Queen,
ington's con- left an indelible stain on the reputation of the other, and presented
fpiracy again2
Elizabeth. a fpeaacle to Europe, of which there had hitherto been no example

in the history of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and Hodgson, priests educated

in the seminary at Rheims, had adopted an extravagant and enthu-
fiaftic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dictated
immediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion they inffilled
into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his furious
zeal, and daring courage; and persuaded him that no service could.
be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an excom.
April 26. municated Heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the Crown of mar-

tyrdom, bound himself, by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come over to Paris, and
follicited Mendoza the Spanifl ambassador there, to procure an in-
vafion of England, while the affairs of the league were so profpe-
rous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so many of the Queen's
best troops into the Netherlands. Paget and the English exiles de-
monftrated the fruitleflhefs of such an attempt, unless Elizabeth were
first cut off, or the invaders secured of a powerful concurrence on
their landing. If it could be hoped that either of there events would:
happen, effectual aid was promised; and in the mean time Ballard
May 5. was sent back to renew his intrigues.

IIE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a young

gentleman in Derbyflire, of a plentiful fortune, and many amiable
qualities, who having contracted, during his residence in France, a
familiarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had been recommend-

ed
122

ed by him to the Queen of Scots: He concurred with Paget inBoo VIT.
confidering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any 586.
invasion. Baliard gave him hopes that an end would soon be put to
her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in Lon-
don waiting for an opportunity to strike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to rely on a single
hand for the execution of it, and proposed that five resolute gen-
tlemen should be joined with Savage in an enterprize, the success
of which was the foundation of all their hopes. He offered to
find out persons willing to undertake the service, whose honour,
secrecy, and courage, they might safely trust. He accordingly
opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers, Robert
Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert
Polly, all of them, except Polly, whose buffling forward zeal intro-
duced him into their society, gentlemen of good families united to-
gether in the bonds of private friendship, strengthened by the more
powerful tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were held ; theirjune.
plan of operations was at last fettled; and their different parts as-
signed. Babington himself was appointed to rescue the Queen of
Scots; -Salisbury, with some others, undertook to excite several coun- The scheme
tries to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the mofl dangerous, f the con
and important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with
four associates. And so totally had their bigotted prejudices extin-
guifhed the principles of honour, and the sentiments of humanity,
Iiitable to their rank, that without scruple or compundion, they un-
dertook an action, which is viewed with horror, even when commit-
ted by the meanest and most profligate of mankind. This attempt,
on the contrary, appeared to them no less honourable than it was def-
perate, and in order to perpetuate the memory of it, they had a
picture drawn containing the portraits of the fix afntafins, with that

R 2 of

I23

BooKVII. of Babington in the middle, and a motto intimating that they were
- i8 -' jointly embarked in some hazardous design.
r586.

Discovered
by Walfing-
ham.

. They are
seized and
punifbed.
August 4.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in-

fiance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce possible,
and neither difirufted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted
the success of their undertaking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried on with the most profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every tfep they took was fully known to Walsingham.
Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into the conspiracy
with no other design than to betray his associates. Gilbert Gifford,
too, having been sent over to England to quicken the motions of
the conspirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and gave him sure
intelligence of all their projects. That vigilant minister immediate-
ly imparted the discoveries which he had made to Elizabeth ; and
without communicating the matter to any other of the Counsellors,
they agreed, in order to understand the plot more perfectly, to wait
till it was ripened into some form, and brought near the point of
execution.

AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expose

her own life, and to tempt providence any farther. Ballard, the
prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrested. His associates,
disconcerted and struck with astonishment, endeavoured to save
themselves by flight. But, within a few days, all of them, except
Windsor, were seized in different places of the kingdom, and com-
mitted to the Tower. Though they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit of afaffins; and, influenced
by fear or by hope, discovered all they knew. The indignation of
the people, and their impatience to revenge such an execrable com-

3 bination
124

bination againit the life of their Sovereign, hatfened their trial, BooKVII,
and all of them suffered the death of traitors a*, 8

i S86.

Sept. 20.

THUS far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronounced both prudentMay is ac.
and laudable, nor can she be accused of violating any law of hu-cued of being

an accomplice

manity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were neceffaryin the con-
for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard to piracy.
which, posterity will pass a very different judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts sufficiently for

all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But this was
not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose to place
the conspiracy. They represented Babington and his associates to
be instruments employed by the Q2een of Scots, the real though
secret author of so many attempts against the life of Elizabeth, and
the peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters, which they
ascribed to her, in support of this charge. These, as they gave
out, had come into their hands, by a very singular, and mysterious
method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into England, had
been intrusted with letters to Mary; but in order to make a trial of his
fidelity or address, they were only blank papers made up in that
form. These being safely delivered, he was afterwards employed
without farther scruple. By Walsingham's permission, and the
connivance of Paulet, he bribed a tradesman in the neighbourhood
of Chartley, whither Mary had been conveyed, who deposited the
letters in a hole in the wall of the castle, covered with a loose stone.
Thence they were taken by the Queen, and in the fame manner,
her answers returned. All these were carried to Walsingham,

* Camd. 5 5. State Trials, Vol. I. no.

'opened

25S

BookVIi. opened by him, decyphered, fealed again so dexterously that the

- -ó- fraud could not be perceived, and then transmitted to the persons

to whom they were directed. Two letters to Babington, with several
to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield, and the English fugitives, were pro-
cured by this artifice. It was given out that in these letters Mary ap-
proved of the conspiracy, and even of the assassination; that she
directed them to proceed with the utmost circumspection, and
not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to join them; that
she recommended the Earl of Arundel, his brothers, and the young
Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons to conduct and to add
reputation to their enterprize; that she advised them, if poflible,
to excite at the fame time some commotion in Ireland; and above
all, besought them to concert with care the means of her escape,
fuggefring to them several expedients for that purpose.

The indigna- ALL these circumstances were opened at the trial of the confpi-
tion of the rators. And while the nation was under the influence of those
English a-
gainft heron terrors which the association had raised, and the late danger had
that account.

augmented, they were believed without hesitation or enquiry, and
spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her religion was well
known; and in that age, examples of the violent and sanguinary
spirit which it inspired, were numerous. All the cabals against the
peace of the kingdom for many years had been carried on in her
name ; and it now appears evidently, said the English, that the safety
of the one Queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why
then, added they, should the tranquillity of England be sacrificed
for the fake of a firanger ? Why is a life so dear to the nation
exposed to the repeated assaults of an exasperated rival? The cafe
supposed in the association has now happened, the sacrcd person
of our Sovereign has been threatened, and why should not an

injured
i26

injured people execute that just revenge which they hadBook VII.
vowedP ?

i586.
No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to ElizabethElizabeth re-

solves. to pro-

and her Minifers. They themselves had at first propagated themceed to the
among the people, and they now served both as an apology, and aumt te-a' g
motive, for their proceeding to such extremities against the Scottish her.
Queen, as they had long meditated. The more injuries Elizabeth
heaped on Mary, the more ihe feared and hated that unhappy Queen,
and came at last to be persuaded that there could be no other fe-
curity for her own life, but the death of her rival. Burleigh and
Walsingham had promoted so zealously all her measures with regard
to Scottish affairs; and had aded, with so little reserve, in opposition
to Mary, that they had reason to dread the most violent effeds of
her resentment, if ever ebe should mount the throne of England;
and therefore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal to them-
selves, by confirming their Mistress's fear and hatred of the Scottifli
Queen.

MEAN. while, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and greatHer do:nemics,

papers, &c.

care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the con-arlS s.ied.
fpiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which. the was
loaded as accessary to that crime; and he furprized her with the ac-
count, just as fie had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers. She was firuck with astonishment, and would have re-
turned to her apartment. But the was not permitted; and in her
abfcnce, her private closet was broke open,her cabinet and papers were
fcized, fealed, and sent up to court. Her principal domestics, too,
vcrc arrested, and committed to different keepers. Naue and Curie,

~~~~~~~~I h"her

127

BooKVII. her two secretaries, the one a native of France, the other of Scot-
`- 6 land, were carried prisoners to London. All the money in her

i586.
Sept. lo. cuRtody, amounting to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured.

And after leading her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
house to another, the was conveyed to Fotheringay, a itrong cafile
in Northamptonhire *.

Deliter.tes No farther evidence could now be expeced againfi Mary, and
thecetiho ofnothing remained but to decide what (hould be her fate. With re-
proceeding. gard to this, Elizabeth and those Ministers in whom (he chiefly con-

fided, seem to havetaken their resolution; but there was still great
variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors. Some thought
it sufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her under
such close restraint, as would cut off all possibility of corresponding
with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her constitution, broken
by long confinement, and her spirit dejected with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the Queen and na-
tion would soon be delivered from all their fears. But though it
might be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to di-
minifh the reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name,
or to extinguish the compassion with which they viewed her sus-
ferings; while these continued, infurredions and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effect of any new ri-
gour would be to render them more frequent and dangerous. For
this reason the expedient was rejeced.

Determines A public and legal trial, though the most unexampled, wasjudged
to try her
publickly. the most unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it had at the

* Camd, 5'7.

fame
128

fame time, a semblance of justice, accompanied with an air of dig- Boor VIL
nity. It was in vain to search the ancient records, for any statute I86.
or precedent, to justify such an uncommon ltep, as the trial of a
foreign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but had
fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against her were founded
on the at of last Parliament, and by applying it in this manner, the
intention of those who had framed that severe fiatute became more
apparent *.

EL iZABETH resolved that no circumstance of pomp or solemnity

Thould be wanting, which could render this tranfadion such as be-
came the dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
commiflion under the great feal, forty persons, the molt illustrious
in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Many difficulties were
farted by the lawyers, about the name and title by which Mary
should be arraigned; and while the essentials of juflice were so
grofly violated, the empty forms of it were the objects of their care.
They at length agreed that she should be filed, " Mary, daughter
"and heir of James V, late King of Scots, commonly called Queen
" of Scots, and Dowager of France t."

AFTER the many indignities which she had lately suffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her dellrudion was determined. She
expected, every moment, to end her days by poison, or by Tome of
those secret means, usually employed againtf captive Princes. And
left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived
her of life, should endeavour likewise to blast her reputation, /he

* Camd. 519. Johnft. Hilt. I 3. t Strype, 3. 362.
VOL. II.

129
S

wrote

BOOK VIL.wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in-;the strongef

L'-- terms, from the imputation of encouraging or of being accessory to

the conspiracy for assassinating Elizabeth *. In the solitude of;her
prison, the strange resolution of bringing her to a public trial had
not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unprecedented,
and so repugnant to regal Majesty, once enter into her thoughts.
'The tralat ON the eleventh of October, the commissioners appointed by

Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered a
letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches
and accusations, {he informed her, that regard to her own safety
had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a public enquiry into her
conduct, and therefore required her, as Ihe had lived so long under
the protection of the laws of England, to submit now to the trial,

Mary refuses which they ordained to be taken of her crimes. Mary, though fur-
at firflt to
plead, prized at this menfage, was neither appalled at the danger, nor un-

mindful of her own dignity. She protested, in the most solemn
manner, that (he was innocent of the crime laid to her charge,
and had never countenanced any attempt against the life of the
Queen of England; but, at the fame time, refused to acknowlege
the jurifdidtion of her commissioners. " I came into the king-
' dom," said she, " an independent Sovereign, to implore the
"' Queen's affiltance, not to subjed myself to her authority. Nor

is my spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so intimidated
"by present dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbecoming the

Majesty of a crowned head, or that will disgrace the ancestors

" from whom I am descended, and the son to whom I shall leave
( my throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone can be my Peers.

* Jebb, 2. 283.

A" The
g30

c The Queen of England's fubjeds, however noble their birth BooKVII.
' may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival -V

... snc m . ~: 58,-

' in this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws
" never afforded me any protetion. Let them not now be per-
" verted, in order to take away my life."

THE commissioners employed arguments and intreaties to over-

comeMary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed according
to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on account of
her contumacy in refuting to plead; the persisted, however, for two
days to decline their jurifdiEion. An argument urged by Hatton,
the Vice-Chamberlain, at last prevailed. He told her, that by
avoiding a trial, the injured her own reputation, and deprived her-
self of the only opportunity of setting her innocence in.a clear light;
and that nothing would be more agreeable to them, or more ac-
ceptable to the Q^een their Miflrefs, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that she had been unjustly loaded with foul
arperfions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible thould impose on the unwary Consents

Queen, or that (he, unassisted, at that time, by any friend or coun-owefver to
fellor, should not be able to detet and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally melancholy, and
under circumstances nearly similar, her Grandson, Charles I. re-
fused, with the utmost firmness, to acknowledge the usurped jurif-
didtion of the High Court of Justice; and posterity has approved
his condut, as suitable to the dignity of a King. If Mary was
less constant in her resolution, it must be imputed solely to her anxi-
ous desire of vindicating her own honour.

S 2

AT

BookVII AT her appearance before the Judges, who. were feated in, the
'. ..-,.' great hall of the castle, where they received her with much cere-

1. 84. mony, she took care to protelt, that by condescending to hear and

to give an answer to the accusations, which should be offered
against her, she neither acknowledged the jurifdicion of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and juflice of those ads, by which they
pretended to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to. vin-

dicate the authority of the court.

The accura-
tion against
her.

THEN the Queen's Attorney and Sollicitor opened the charge.

against her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy. Copies.
of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget were
produced; Babington's confession, those of Ballard, Savage, and
the other conspirators, together with the declarations of Naue and
Curie her secretaries, were read, and the whole ranged in the moit
specious order, which the art of the lawyers could devise, and
heightened by every colour, their eloquence could add.

MARY listened to their harangues attentively, and without emo-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who was.
then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory to the
conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and generous exclamation :
" Alas! how much has the noble house of Howard suffered for
' my fake !"

WHEN the Queen's council had finished, Mary flood up, and
Hcr defence.

with great magnanimity, and equal pretence of mind, began her
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own situation, that,
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which she had suffered

treatment
.32

treatment no left cruel than unmerited, (he was at last loaded withBook VII.
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right of -

JI586.

fuccefiion, and to deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her name
with infamy to future ages:. That, without regarding the sacred.
rights of sovereignty, (he was now fubjeded to-laws framed againif
private persons; though an anointed Queen, commanded to ap-
pear before the tribunal of fubjeds; and, like a common crimi-
nal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers, ca-
pable of wresting her words, and of misrepresenting her aCtions:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, she was denied the pri-
vileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her
own defence, without the presence of any friend with whom to
advise, without the.aid of council, and without the ufe-of her.own
papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accusation.

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington: The
name of Ballard was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced; though nothing
less than her hand-writing or subscription was sufficient to convict
her of such an-odious crime: No proof could be brought that the
letters were delivered into her hands, or that any answer was re-
turned by her direction.: The confessions of wretches condemned
and executed for such a detestable action, were of little weight;
fear or hope might extort fromthem many things inconsistent with
truth, nor ought the honour of a Queen to be slained by such vile
teftinony. The declaration, of her secretarics was not more con-
clufive: promises and threats might easily overcome the resolution of
two stranger.s; in order to fereen themselves, they might throw the
blame on her; but they could discover nothing to her prejudice,
without violating, in the first place, their oath of fidelity; and their

perjury,

134
Book VII.perjury, in one ifftance, rendered them unworthy of creci in an-

I--6' other: The letters to the Spanish ambassador were either nothing

more than copies, or contained only what was perfetly innocents
" I have often," continued {he, " made such efforts for the re-
" covery of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature. And
"convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it was vain
"to expect it from the juffice or generosity of the Queen of Eng-
" land, I have frequently follicited foreign Princes, and called on
" all my friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I
" have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the English Catho-
"lies some mitigation of the rigour with which they are now
"treated; and if I could hope, by my death, to deliver them from
"oppression, I am willing to die for their fake. I with, however,
" to imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith, and would
" rather make intercession for my people, than thed the blood of
" the meanest creature, in order to save them. I have often
' checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either the
" severity of their own persecutions, or indignation at the unheard.
c, of injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate them
" into violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dangers
" to which these harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn
"out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the profped of a
c Crown is not so inviting, that I should ruin my foul in order to
"obtain it. I am no itranger to the feelings of humanity, nor
"unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor the detest-
" able crime of assassination, as equally repugnant to both. And,
" if ever I have given content by my words, or even by my
" thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the Queen of Eng-
' land, far from declining the judgment of men, I small not even
( pray for the mercy of God *."

* Camb. 520, &c.

135

T w o different days- did Mary appear before the judges, and inBooKVI.
every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a

I$86.
Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modefly of a woman.

THE commissioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourn-Sentence a.

gainfi her.

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in o. 25.
Westminster. When assembled in that place, Naue and Curie were
brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration upon
oath. And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the commis-
fioners unanimously declared Mary " To be accessory to Babington's

conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to the
" hurt, death, and defrruCtion of Elizabeth, contrary to the ex-

press words of the statute, made for the security of the Queen's
*' life ."

IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injustice in ap-Irregularities

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conduAing it, were great-in the trial,
eft and most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim authority
over an independent Qeen ? Was Mary bound to comply with the
laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could the fubjeds of another
Prince become her judges ? Or if such an insult on royalty were
allowed, ought not the common forms of juffice to have been ob-
served ? If the testimony of Babington and his associates was so
explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a few weeks, and
by confronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with the full con-
viaion of her crimes ? Naue and Curle were both alive, wherefore
did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for what reason were they
produced in the Star-Chamber, where Mary was not'prelent to hear
what they deposed ? Was this suspicious evidence enough to con-

* Camd. 525.

8

demn

Book VII.demn a Queen? Ought the meanest criminal to have been found
18~- 6 guilty, upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs.?

IT was not, however, on (he evidence produced at her trial, that the

sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a pretence tojuf-
tify, .but was not the cause .of the violent steps taken by Elizabeth
and her Miniflers towards her destruction; and was employed to give
some appearance of justice, towhat was the offspring of jealousy and
fear. And the nation, blinded with resentment against Mary, and
solicitous to secure the life of 'its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
fees in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and probabilities, as if
they had been.irrefragable demonfiratiojls.

The parlia- THE parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounced
thentcnfi, m against Mary. In that illustrious assembly more temper and dif-

cernment than are to be found among the people, might have
been expeced. Both Lords and Commons, however, were equally
under the dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and the
fame excesses of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are
apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with impatience
upon an enquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers which threat-
ned the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdom. All the pa-
pers, which had been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before
them. And after many violent invecdives againfi the Queen of
Scots, both houses, unanimously, ratified the proceedings of the
commiflioners by whom she had been tried, and declared the fen-
tence against her to be just and well-founded. Not satisfied with

and demand this, they presented a joint address to the Queen, beseeching her,
the executionas She regarded her own safety, the prefcrvation of the Proteflant

~~~~~~~~of i~~t.~religion,

religion,
136

religion, the welfare and wishes of her people, to publish the fen-BooK VII.
tence; and without farther delay to infliat on a rival, no less irre- ~56
claimable than dangerous, the puni/hment which she had merited
by so many crimes. This request, dictated by fears unworthy of
that great Assembly, was enforced by reasons fiill more unworthy.
They were drawn not from jutlice, but from conveniency. The
most rigorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's
intriguing spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to be
an overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The
severest penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who, while
they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper opportu-
nity for invading the kingdom, and aferting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's safety; and if ihe were spared out of a false cle-
mency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the king-
dom, could not be one moment secure. Necessity required that she
should be sacrificed in order to preserve these; and to prove this fa-
crifice to be no lefsjuft than necessary, several examples in hirfory
were produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but both the
one and the other were misapplied, and distorted from their true
meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth than fl:nl,^ctlis

an address in this strain. It'extricated her out of a fixuation, ex-diimi11ulatiot"
trcmely embarrafling; and without depriving her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punifl her rival with less appearance of
blame. If file chore the former, the whole honour would redound
to her own clemency. If fle determined on the latter, whatever

VOL. II. T was

z37

BooKVII. was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the solicitations of

T86.' her people, rather than to flow from her own inclination. Her

answer, however, was in a stile, which the often used, ambiguous
and evasive under the appearance of openness and candor, full of
such profefflons of regard for her people, as served to heighten their
loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were calcu-
lated to excite their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the end, (he besought them to save her the infamy and the pain
of delivering up a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment;
and to confider whether it might not fill be possible to provide
for the public security, without forcing her to imbrue her hands
in royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily understood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former request, with additional
importunity, which was far from being either unexpected, or of-
fenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit; and
having obtained such a public fandion of her proceedings, there
was no longer any reason for protracting this scene of difimuIa-
tion; there was even some danger that her feigned difficulties might
at last be treated as real ones; she therefore adjourned the parlia-
ment, and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal of her rival's
fate *.

France inter- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceedings against
po0e feebly Mary, with aftoniflment and horror; and even Henry III. notwith-
in behalf of
Mary. flanding his known aversion to the house of Guise, was obliged to

interpose in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the common

* Camd. 526. D'Ewes 37 .

rights
3

rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambassador, and Bellie-BooKVII.
vere who was sent with an extraordinary commission to the fame ~'v.

i586.

purpose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of warmth. Nov. 2.
They employed all the arguments which the cause naturally fug-
gested; they pleaded from justice, generosity, and humanity; they
intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all these Elizabeth
continued deaf and inexorable, and having received some intima-
tion of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scottish Queen,
and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, ihe trufled,
that these loud remonstrances would be followed by no violent re-
fentment *.

SHE paid no greater regard to the follicitations of the Scottish lames endea-

King, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, merited moreu`rs toi" e
attention. Though her commissioners had been extremely carefullife.
to tooth James, by publishing a declaration that their sentence against
Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
any title which he formerly poffefied; he beheld the indignities to
which his Mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the sentiments which became a King. The pride of the Scottish
nation was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of their Mo-
narchs, and called upon him to employ the most vigorous efforts,
in order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

AT firfl, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would venture
upon an action so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to

" Camd. 531.

render

139
T 2

BOOK VII.render the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people,

586' and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times,

she was so remarkably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary
iteps which (he took discovered her intention, he despatched Sir
William Keith to London; who, together with Douglas his am-
baffador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the strongest terms, against
the injury done to an independent Queen, in fubjeting her to be
tried like a private person, and by laws to which the owed no obe-
dience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by susser-
ing a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonourable to the King
of Scots, to be put in execution*.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to there remonstrances of his

ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand, complaining in
the bitterest terms of her conduc, not without threats that both his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her friendship,
and to a& as became a son when called to revenge his mother's
wrongs -f-. At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who promised
to stand by him in so good a cause. He appointed ambassadors to
France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore the aid of these
courts; and took other fleps towards executing his threats with vi-
gour. The high strain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to fiich a de-
gree, that the was ready to dismiss his amhaffadors without any reply.
But his preparations alarmed and cmbarraffed her Ministers, and at

* See Append. No XIII. - Birch. Mem. I. 52.

ii~~~~~ Birh.eire.x

their
I

their intreaty she returned a soft and evasive answer, promising toBooKVIT.
liften to any overture from the King, that tended to his mother's ' - '_
safety; and to suspend the execution of the sentence, till the arrival 586
of new ambafadors from Scotland *.

MEANWHILE, she commanded the sentence against Mary to beDecemb. 6.

published, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- fenga tence
torted from her by the repeated intreaties of both houses of parlia-publifhed.
ment. At the fame time, the despatched Lord Buckhurft and Beale
to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunately the
nation demanded the execution of it, and, though she had not
hitherto yielded to these follicitations, she advised her to prepare for
an event, which might become necessary for securing the Protestant
religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary re-
ceived the message not only without symptoms of fear, but with
expreflions of triumph. " No wonder, said she, the English lhould
"now thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince, they have often
"offered violence to their own Monarchs. But after so many sus-
"ferings, death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am proud
"to think that my life is esteemed of importance to the Catholic

religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing to die i".

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was stripped ofhe is treated

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of slate in herwith the ut-
apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap-
proached her person without ceremony; and even appeared covered
in her pretence. Shocked with there indignities, and offended at
this gross familiarity, to which fie had never been accustomed,
Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame time,

*Spotfw. 251. Cald. 4. 5. - Camd.528. Jcbb, 291.

as

I4I

BooKVII.as her last request, intreated that file would permit her servants to

i5-86 carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her ancelsors,
Decemb. 19. in hallowed ground; thatfome of her domestics might be present

at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence
to the Catholic faith ; that all her servants might be suffered to leave
the kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies, which (he should
beltow on them, as testimonies of her affection; and that, in the
mean time, her almoner, or some other Catholic Priest, might be
allowed to attend her, and to aflift her in preparing for an eternal
world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their near
consanguinity, and the royal dignity writh which they were both in-
veiled, to gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge her so far
as to signify her compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whe-
ther Mary's letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her requefis. She was
offered a Frotetlant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them (he re-
jeded; and without any Clergyman to direCt her devotions, she pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which (he
now believed to be at no great distance *.

JAMES, withoutlofing a moment, sent new ambafladorstoLon-

13 587. don. These were the malter of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In

his follicita- order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Matker
tion :n her
behalf, would become bound that no conspiracy should be undertaken
January 1 againil her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's con-

sent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver some
of the most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hostages. If this

* Camd. 528. Jebb, 2. 295.

were
J42

were not thought sufficient, they proposed that Mary should refignBooKVITL
all her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing inju- " 8
rious to the Proteflant religion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's 5
safety, could be feared. The former proposal, Elizabeth rejeded
as insecure ; the latter, as dangerous. The ambassadors were then
inftru'ted to talk in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the com-
miion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual per-
fidy, deceived his Master who trusted him with a negotiation of so
much importance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was employed
to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to execute the fen-
tence against her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial fen-
tenc.e, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever should happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least to prevent any
violent effects of his resentment *.

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of theElizabeth:s

most violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She shunned o-dimlatindn
ciety, she was often found in a melancholy and musing potfure, and
repeating, with much emphasis, these sentences which she borrowed
from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut fir aut feri; ne
Jeriare feri. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness must
be imputed to diffinulation; it was impossible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an
adtion, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life
and kingdom to danger, without reflecing deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in fufpence and anxie-
ty; and left their fear or their zeal should subside, rumours of
danger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost in-
duftry; Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was accused of having

* Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. See Append. No. XIV.

suborned

I43

144
BooKVII.fuborned an assassin to murder the Queen. The Spanifi fleet was

8<V~" flaid by some to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others as-
$57. firmed that the Duke of Guise had landed with a strong army, in

Suffex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were up
in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with all their
forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every day more
violent; and the people, astonished and enraged, called for the exe-
cution of the sentence against Mary, as the only thing which could
restore tranquillity to the kingdom *.

Warrant for WHILE these fentirents prevailed among her fubjeds, Elizabeth
tign gned. thought the might safely venture to itrike the blow, which she had
February i. so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fecreta-

ries of slate, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her behaviour,
on that occasion, plainly {hewed that it is not to humanity, that we
must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment she
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her
own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, she was
capable of jesting. " Go, fays (he to Davison, and tell Walfing-
ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he will die for
grief when he hears it." IHer chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from Mary's death, without appear-
ing to have given her consent to a deed so infamous. She often
hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as to some other courtiers, that
now was the time to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
safety, and that she expeded their zeal would extricate her out of
her piefent perplexity. But they were wife enough to seem not to
understand her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, flie

* Camd. 533, 534.

coIl-

145

commanded a letter to be written to Paulet,. in lets ambiguous Book VII'
terms; complaining of his remissness in sparing so long the life of '""
her capital enemy, and begging him to remember at last what was 1587
incumbent on him as an affectionate subjet, and to deliver his So-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by shortening the days of
his prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal
in the discharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. He rejected the
proposal with disdain; and lamenting that he should ever have been
deemed capable of acting the part of an afaffin, he declared that
the Queen might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but he would
never stain his own honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of in-
famy on his poflerity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a
crime. On the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extremely
peevish; and calling him a dainty and precise fellow, who would
promise much, but perform nothing, The proposed to employ one
Wingfield, who had both courage and inclination to firike the blow-.
But Davison remonfirating againfl this method, as no less dangerous
than dishonourable, The again declared her intention that the fen-
tence pronounced by the commissioners should be executed accord-
ing to law; and as she had already signed the warrant, the begged
that no farther application might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themfelvcs fufliciently authorized
to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Q een's safety, or infligated, as is more probable, by the apprehen-
flon of the danger to which they would themfelvcs be exposed, if
the life of the Qecen of Scots were spared, they assembled in the
Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their hands, empowerc(l
the Earls of Shrewflury and Kent, together with the -Iidh Shcriif
of the County, to fee the sentence put in execution *.

I' Biogr. Britan. Arlicle DaiJit. * Camd. 531.. Strypc, 3. 361, 364.
VOL. II. U ON

Book VII. ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So.

5g7 theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her pretence

Mary's beha- the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to die next
tiour at her
death. morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion, and

crofting herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost. " That foul, said fle, is not worthy of the joys
of Heaven, which repines Lecaufe the body must endure the firoke
of the executioner; and though I did not expect that the Queen of
England would set the first example of violating the sacred person
of a Sovereign Prince, 1 willingly submit to that which providence
has decreed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a Bible, which
happened to be near her, she solemnly protested that ihe was inno-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried on against Eli-
zabeth's life *. She then mentioned the requests contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfadory answer. She en-
treated, with particular earnestness, that now in her las moments,
her Almoner might be suffered to attend her, and that she might
enjoy the consolation of those pious inflitutions prescribed by her
religion. Even this favour, which is usually granted to the vilest
criminals, was abfolutcly denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the presence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish ; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and burfi out into
the most passionate expreflions of tenderness and sorrow. Mary,
however, not only retained perfect composure of mind, but en-
deavoured to moderate their excessive grief. And falling on her
knees, with all her domestics around her, she thanked Heaven that

* Jebb. 2, 301.

her
146

147

her sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that she mightBooKVII.
be enabled to endure what still remained with decency, and with '--
fortitude. The greater part of the evening she employed in set- I587
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Testament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her cloaths, she distributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote a
short letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments, and recom-
mended her foul to their prayers, and her afflicted servants to their
protection. At supper, she eat temperately, as usual, and conversed
not only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; she drank to every one
of her servants, and alked their forgiveness, if ever she had failed
in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time ihe
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning
She retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in de-
votion. At eight o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers entered
her chamber, and found her still kneeling at the altar. She imme-
diately flarted up, and with a majestic mien, and a countenance un-
dismayed, and even chearful, advanced towards the place of exe-
cution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dressed in a
mourning habit, but with an elegance and splendor, which fie had
long laid aside, except on a few festival days. An A4gnus Dci hung
by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her girdle; and in
her hand ihe carried a crucifix of ivory. At the foot of the flair,
the two Earls, attended by fevcral gentlemen fiom the neighbouring
Counties, received her; and there fir Andrew Melvil, the maler
of hce houlilold, who had been secluded, for some weeks, from
her prcfcnce, was permitted to take his last farewel. At the fight
of a Mifire;s whom he tcidlcrly luved, in such a situation, he
melted into tears; and as he was bewailing her condition, and com-
plaining of his own hard fate in being appointed to carry the account

U 2 of

BooK VI.of such a mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not,
...-.-.. good Melvil, there is at present greater cause for rejoicing. Thou

I57. shalt this day, fee Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares, and

such an end put to her tedious sufferings as she has long expected.
Bear witness that I die conflant in my religion; firm in my fidelity
towards Scotland; and unchanged in my affection to France. Com-
mend me to my son. Tell him I have done nothing injurious to his
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all those.
who have thirfied, without cause, for my blood."

With much difficulty, and after many intreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was erected in the fame hall where fie had been tried, railed a little
above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion, and
block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the fleps with alacrity,
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance,
and signing herself with the cross, she fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which file
listened with a careless air, and like one occupied in other thoughts.
Then the Dean of Peterborough began a devout discourse, suitable
to her present condition, and offered up prayers to heaven in her
behalf; but flhe declared that ihe could not in conscience hearken
to the one, nor join with the other; and falling on her knees re-
peated a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finihfed his devotions,
fle with an audible voice, and in the English tongue, recommended
unto God the afflilted ifate of the Church, and prayed for prof-
perity to her son, and for a long life, and peaceable reign to Eliza-
beth. She declared that (le hoped for mercy only through the deatl
of Chrifl, at the foot of whose image she now willingly hied her
blood; and lifting up, and kissing the Crucifix, fle thus addreffe.
148

8

it,

it, " As thy arms, O Jesus, were extended on the C ofs; so witi BooKVII.
the outstretched arms of thy mercy, receive me, and forgive my

5uS7·
fins."

SH;E then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil, and

upper garments ; and one of the executioners rudely endeavouring
to affilt, she gently checked him, and said, with a smile, that she
had not been accustomed to undress before so many fpeEtators, nor
to be served by such valets. With calm but undaunted fortitude,
flIe laid her neck on the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other at the second firoke, cut off her head, which
falling out of its attire, discovered her hair already grown quite gray,
with cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up flill fireaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perish all Queen Eliza-
beth's enemies," the Earl of Kent alone answered Amen. The
refl of the fp.etators continued silent, and drowned in tears; being
incapable at that moment, of any other sentiments, but those of
pity, or admiration *

SUCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of Scots, after a lifesentimncnts of

of forty four years and two months, almost nineteen years of which hif°oi'.is
flie passed in captivity. The political parties which were formedler.
in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsisted, under various
denominations, ever since that time. The rancour, with which
they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even augmented. Among Hiflorians, who were under the donii-
nion of all these paflions, and who have either ascribed to her
every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to her all the

Camd. 534. Spolf. 355. Jcbb. 2. 300. Sirypc, 3. 383.

vices,

1 9

BooKVIL.vices, of which the human heart is susceptible, we search in vain
----' for Mary's real character. She neither merited the exaggerated

587'. praises of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing censure of the other.

er c - To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of exter-
ter. nal form, she added those accomplishments, which render their

impression irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and
capable of speaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachments; because her
heart was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction;
because {he had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated as a
Queen. No firanger, on some occasions, to dissimulation ; which,
in that perfidious court where she received her education, was reckon-
ed among the necessary arts of government. Not insensible of
flattery, nor unconscious of that pleasure, with which almost every
woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we admire;
flie was an agreeable woman, rather than an illufirious Queen.
The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently tempered with found
judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not, at all
times, under the refiraint of discretion, betrayed her both into er-
rors, and into crimes. To fay that she was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and almost uninterrupted succession of
calamities which besel her; we muff likcwife add that she was often
imprudent. IHer pafliosi for Darnly was raih, youthful, and cx-
cefsive. And though the sudden transition to the opposite extreme
was the natural effe&t of her ill-requited love, and of his i: grati-
tude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither thefc, nor Bothwell's
artful adldref, and important services, can justify her attachment to
that nobleman. Even the manners of that age, licentious as they
were, arc no apology for this unhappy passion nor can they induce

Us
150

us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followedBooKIVII.
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over 8'
this part of her character which it cannot approve, and may, per-
haps, prompt tome to impute her aaions to her situation, more than
to her dispositions ; and to lament the unhappiness of the former,
rather than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's sufferings
exceed, both in degree and in duration, those tragical distresses,
which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commiseration; and
while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her frailties,
we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve of our
tears, as if they were Shed for a person who had attained much
nearer to pure virtue.

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circumstance not to be

omitted in writing the hitfory of a female reign, all cotempbrary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of shape, of which the human form is capa-
ble. Her hair was black, though, according to the fashion of that
age, the frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different colours.
Her eyes were a dark gray; her complexion was exquisitely fine ;
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to (hape and
colour. Her flature was of an height that rose to the majeflic.
She danced, /he walked, and rode with equal grace. Her taste
for music was just, and (le both sung and played upon the lute,
with uncommon skill. Towards the end of her life, (he began
to grow fat; and her long confinement and the coldness of the
houses in which (he had been imprisoned, brought on a rheuma-
tifin, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays
Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or
will read her hiffory without sorrow.

NONE

15I
6

BooK VII. NONE of her women were fuffcred to come near her dead body,
L~ ' "'-" which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,

where it lay, for some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn.
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing fained with her blood, were reduced
to ashes. Not long after, Elizabeth appointed her body to be
buried in the Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain ; the pageantry of
a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those injuries,
which laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his accefflon to
the English throne, ordered her body to be removed to Wefl-min-
fler-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs of Eng-
land.

E iz.beth as- ELIZABETH affeded to receive the accounts of Mary's death,
tIec ita- wvith the most violent emotions of furprize, and of concern. Sighs,
death. tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display

the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of diffimula-
tion and artifice may be traced throtigh every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings, against the life of the Scottinh Queen. The com-
mifiion for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly extorted
from her, by the intrcatics of her privy counfcllors. She delayed pub-
linsing the sentence againfit her, till flie was twice follicitcd by both
houses of Parliamcnt. Nor did file sign the warrant for execution,
without the utmost apparent reluctance. One Icenec nore of thc
boldest and moot folerin deceit remained to le exhibited. She
undertook to make the world believe that M1ary had been put to
death without her knowledge, and against her will. And )avi-
son, wlo neither fufpcded her intention, nor his own danger, was
h.er infiruiient in carlying on this artifice, and fell a victim to it.

Ir
I52

IT was his duty as secretary of state to lay before her the BookVII.
warrant for execution, in order to be signed; and hy her command, --"

1587'

he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
{he had charged him not to communicate what ihe had done to any
person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, without
her expref$ permission; that, in contempt of this order, he had not
only revealed the matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in con-
cert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by whom, with-
out her content or knowledge, the warrant was issued, and the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put it in execution.
Though Davison denied all this, and with circumstances which bear
the strongest marks of truth and credibility; though it can scarce
be conceived that her privy council, composed of the persons in whom
the most confided, of her Ministers and favourites, would assemble
within the walls of her palace, and venture to transact a matter of
tb much importance, without her privity, and contrary to her in-
clination; yet so far did she carry her dissimulation, that, with all
the signs ofdifpleafure and of rage, ihe banished most of her Coun-
fellors out of her presence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so
harshly, and with such marks of difguff, that he gave up himself
for loft, and in the deepest afflicion wrote to the Queen begging
leave to resign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate.
Davison the instantly deprived of his office, and committed him a
clole prironer to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a ,a-ch.
solemn trial in the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a fine of
10,000 pounds, and to be imprisoned during the Queen's pleasure.
-Ie languifled, several years, in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and fear had
bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate this part
of her conduc, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the repu-

Vol. II. X tation

Book VII. putation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in

5--8- her kingdom *
1587'

Elizabeth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furnished
endeavours to

eooth James. Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As the

profpe& of his mother's danger had excited the King's filial care
and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief and
resentment. His fubjeds felt the dishonour done to him, and
to the nation. In order to sooth both, Elizabeth inflantly difs
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter
expressing her extreme affliction on account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as the pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment, or intention. James would not permit her meflenger
to enter Scotland; and with some difficulty, received a memorial
he sent from Berwick. It contained the tale concerning Davison,
dressed up with all the circumstances, which tended to exculpate
Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his rashness or treach-
ery. Such a defence gave little fatisfadion, and was confidered as
mockery added to insult; and many of the nobles, as well as the
King, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely
follicitous to pacify them, and neither wanted instruments, nor rea-
sons to gain her end. Leicester wrote to the King, and Walling-
ham to secretary Maitland. They represented the certain defiruc-
tion, to which James would expose himself, if with the forces of
Scotland alone, he should venture to attack a kingdom, so far fupe-
rior in power; that the history of past ages, as well as his Mother's
fad experience, might convince him that nothing could be more
dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on foreign aid; that the

Camd. 536. Strype 3. 370.

King
x54

King of France would never wish to fee the British kingd6ms united Book VII.
under one Monarch, nor contribute to invef a Prince so nearly --
allied to the house of Guise, with such formidable power; that I587'
Philip might be a more aAive ally, but would certainly prove
a more dangerous one, and under pretence of aflifiing him, would
afiert his own right to the English Crown, which he already began
openly claim; that the fame flatute, on which the sentence of death
against his Mother had been founded, would juflify the excluding
him from the succession to the Crown; that the English, naturally
averse from the dominion of itrangers, would not fail, if exafpe-
rated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner; that Elizabeth
was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother had sus-
sered, by her tenderness and affetion towards the son; and that by
engaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive himself of a noble
inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he mufft infalli-
bly obtain. These representations, added to the confcioufners of his
own weakness, to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous
spirit of rome of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and
to the influence of that facion, which was entirely at Elizabeth's
devotion, convinced James that a war with England, however juit,
would in the present juncure be altogether impolitical. All these
considerations induced him to flifle his resentment; to appear satis-
fled with the punishment inflicted on Davison; and to preserve all
the semblances of friendship with the English court *. In this
manner did the cloud which threatned such a storm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained unavenged
by any Prince; and whatever infamy Elizabeth might incur, she
was exposed to no new danger, on that account.

Spotfw. Strype 3. 377.

255
X 2

,lAA RY' S

BookVII.' MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the Master of Gray, and

8--^-' loft him the King's favour which he had for tome time poffefled.

Di'frace of He x as become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire
the Malter of power without merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually are.

The treacherous part, which he had adted during his late embassy,
was no secret, and filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers observed the fymp-
toms of disgust arising in the King's mind, his enemies feized'the
opportunity, and Sir William Stewart, in revenge of the perfidy
May 10. with which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James, publickly

accused him before a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to take away the life of
the Queen, but of holding correspondence with Popish princes, in
order to subvert the religion established in the kingdom. Gray, un,
supported by the King, deserted by all, and conscious of his own
guilt, made a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual ba-
nishment, a punifhlment very unequal to his crimes. But the King
was unwilling to abandon one, whom he had once favoured so
highly, to the rigour of juflice;. and Lord Hamilton his near relar
tion, and. the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, in
gratitude for the zeal with which he had served them, interceded
warmly in his behalf..

HAVING thus accomplished the deftrudion of one of his enemies,

Captain James thought the junture favourable for prosecuting his
revenge on them all. He tingled out fecretaryMaitland, the most
eminent both for abilities and enmity to him ; and offered to prove
that he was no less accessary than Gray to the Queen's death, and
had even formed a decign of delivering up the King himself into
the hands of the Engliflh. But time and absence had, in a great
measure, extinguished the King's affcAtion for a minion, who so little

deserved
I56

deserved it. All the courtiers combined against him as a common Book VII.
enemy. And instead of gaining his point, he had the mortifica- -
tiQn to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon Maitland, who, 5
together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and influence of a
prime Minister.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Bishops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a parliament was summoned on that occasion,. the Clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to repre-
sent their grievances to that. court, from which great things were
expected.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a work The King at-
worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which fubfifted.between many oftempts to u'

·*'* :-

_ °

\~~~~~~~~~~~~~ ' - nice the no-

the great families, and which were transmitted from one generation tobles.
another,weakened the strength of the kingdom; contributed, more than
any other cir-cumstance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit among
the nobles,; andproved the occasion of many disasters to themselves,
and to their country. After many preparatory negotiations, he invited
the contending parties to a royal entertainment in the palace of Holy-
rood-houfe; and partly by his authority, partly by his intreaties,
obtained their promise to bury their difflntions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he conducted them, in solemn proceflion, through the
flreets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and tweet-meats was prepared at
the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with all the
signs of reciprocal forgiveness, and of future friendihip. The peo-
ple, who were present at a fpee6acle so unusual, conceived the inoit
sanguine hopes of feing concord and tranquillity cflablithed in

every

BotKVII. every part of the kingdom, and testified their fatisfatioh by re-

587."- peated acclamations. Unhappily the effects of. his reconciliation

were not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of the King,
or the fond wiffies of the people.

THE first care of the parliament was the security of the Protef.

tant religion. All the laws paiTed in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified.; and a new and severe one was enaBed against
seminary Prieffts and Jesuits, whose restless industry in making pro-
felytes brought many of them into Scotland about this time. Two
ads of this parliament deserve more particular notice, on account
of the consequences with which they were followed.

General an- THE one refpeded the lands of the Church. As the public reve-
neChuchlaonds nues were not sufficient for defraying the King's ordinary charges; as

the administration of government became more complicated and more
expensive; as James was naturally profuse, and a firanger to oecono-
my; it was necefary, on all these accounts, to provide some fund
proportioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum could be
levied on the Commons, who did not enjoy the benefit of an ex-
tenfive.commerce. The nobles were unaccustomed to bear the bur-
den of heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church were the
only source whence a proper supply could be drawn. Notwith-
fianding all the depredations of the laity since the Reformation, and
the various devices which they had employed to seize the Church-
lands, fome.confiderable portion of them remained still unalienated,
and were held either by the Bishops who possessed the benefices,
or were granted to laymen during pleasure. All these lands were,
in this parliament, annexed, by one general law*, to the Crown,

* Parl. 1 . Jac. VI. c. 29.
4 and
z58

and the King was impowered to apply the rents of them to his BookVII.
own use. The tithes alone were reserved for the maintenance of L
the persons who served the cure, and the principal Manfion-houfe,
with a few acres of land, by way of glebe, allotted for his refi-
dence. By this great accession of property, it is natural to conclude,
that the King must have acquired a vast increase of power, and the
influence of the nobles have suffered a proportional diminution. The
very reverse of this seems, however, to have been the cafe. Almost
all grants of Church-lands, prior to this at, were thereby confirmed;
and titles, which were formerly reckoned precarious, derived from
thence the fanadion of parliamentary authority. James was like-
wife authorized during a limited time, to make new alienations; and
such was the facility of his temper,, ever ready to yield to the fol-
licitations of his servants, and to gratify their moit extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but throughout his
whole reign, he was continually employed in bestowing, and his
parliament in ratifying grants of this kind to his nobles; hence lit-
tle advantage accrued to the Crown from that which might have
been so valuable an addition to its revenues. The Bishops, however,,
were great sufferers by the law. But at this juncture neither the
King nor his Ministers were follicitous about the intereits of an or-
der of men, odious to the people, and persecuted by the Clergy.
Their enemies promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The prof-
pedt of (haring in their spoils induced all parties to content to it;
and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and power of the dignified
Clergy, it was no difficult matter to introduce that change in the
government of the Church which soon after took place *.

* Spots. 365.

TIE

x59

Book VII. THE change, which the other statute produced in the civil con-

~'""'"~ fitution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal system, every
Lefrer Barons Freeholder, or vassal of the Crown, had a right to be present in par-
almitted in 0liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few in number,
priarament by
ticir repre- but possessed of great and extensive property. By degrees, these

vast possessions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or par-
celled out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The number
of Freeholders became greater, and their condition more unequal;
besides the ancient Barons, who preserved their estates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights :were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior.
But, in those rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
tremely imperfect, when parliaments were seldom assembled, and
deliberated on matters little interesting to a martial people, few of
the Lerer Barons took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
jurisdiction was exercised by the Greater Barons, together with
the Ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of
the Englifi constitution, to which he had been long accufiomed,
and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of the'great
nobles, procured an act in the year 1427, dispensing with the
persbnal attendance of the leffcr Barons, and impowering those
in each county, to chuFe two commiffiners to represent them in
parliament. This law, like many other regulations of that wife
Prince, produced little cffet. All the King's valhals continued,
as formerly, pofTcffcd of a right to be present in parliament, and,
unlcfs in fomc extraordinary conjunctures, none but the greater
Barons attended. But by means of the Reformation, the confti-
tution had undergone a great cliange. The ,Irillocratical power of
the nobles had bccn much increaf:d, and the influence of the Ec-
clefiatlical order, which the Crown usually employed to check their
usurpations, and to ballance their authority, had diminishcd in

prO-
I00

proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had been erected intoBookVIL
temporal peerages; and the Protestant Bishops, an indigent race of -
men, and odious to the nation, were far from possessing the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from the exorbitant
wealth, and the fupeiflitious reverence of the people. In this si-
tuation, the King had recourse to the expedient employed by
James I. and obtained a law reviving the statute of 1427 ; and fiom
that time the Commons of Scotland have sent their representatives
to parliament. An ad, which tended so visibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without opposition from many of the nobles,
But as the King had a right to summon the lefler Barons to attend
in person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled with
a multitude of his dependants, and conrented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the restriction of appearing only
by their representatives.

The year tS88 began with an universal expectation throughout r58g,

all Europe, that it was to be distinguished by wonderful eventslheapproach
and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts oftArmado.i
cotemporary historians, had predicted this; and the situation of affairs
in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a sagacious
observer, without any supernatural intelligence, might have hazard-
ed the predidion, and have foreseen the approach of some grand
crisis. In France, it was evident from the astonishing progress of
the league, conduted by a leader whose ambition was refrained by
no scruples, and whore genius had hitherto surmounted all difficul-
ties; as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of
llcnry III. that either that Monarch must submit to abandon the
throne, of which he was unworthy; or by Tome fidden and daring
blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the beginning
(f the year, the Duke of Guite drove his AMafter out of his capital

VOL. 11. Y cty,

i6i

BookV!I.city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which left him only

_-... the shadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he himself

fell a victim to Henry's fears, and to his own security. In Spain,
the operations were ftch as promised something Still more uncom-
mon. During three years, Philip had employed all the power of
his European dominions, and exhaufled the treasures ofths Indies,
in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had ever
appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Lisbon, and a nu-
merous land army was assembled to embark on board of it. Its
deltination was still unknown, though many circumisances made it
probable that the blow was aimed, in the first place, against Eng-
land. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the revolted provinces
in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded them her protec-
tion. A numerous body of her troops was in their service; the
Ea l of Leicester commanded their armies; the had great Sway in
the civil government of the republic; and Some of its mort confi-
derable towns were in her poffefiron. Her fleets had insulted the
coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Wetl Indies, and
threatened the colonies there. Roused by so many injuries, allured
by views of ambition, and animated by a fuperititious zeal for pro-
pagating the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only to invade,
but to conquer England, to which his descent from the house of
Lancaster, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in
his own opinion, a double title.

Condua of ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and prepared to en-
ccameqon that counter it with the utmost intrepidity. The measures for the

defence of her kingdom were concerted, and carried on, with
the wisdom, and vigour, which diftinguiffied her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the fiicndfliip of the King of Scots.. She
had treated the Qccen his Mother with a rigour unknown among

Princes;

8
162

Princes; (he had often used himself harshly, and with contempt; BooKVII.
and though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of n
these injuries, {he did not believe it to be altogether lextinguifled,
and was afraid that in her present situation, it might burtf out
with a fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with
Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, courted James with the ut-
most afliduity. He excited him to revenge his mother's wrongs;
he flattered him with the hopes of sharing his conquets ; and offer-
ed him in marriage his Daughter the Infanta Isabella. At the fame
time, Scotland swarmed with priests his emissaries, who reduced
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawfurd, were the heads of a faction,
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwel,
arriving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In order
to counter-ballance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest profef-
sions of friendship to the King; and Afhby, her ambassador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He assured him
that his right of succession to the Crown should be publickly ac-
knowledged in England; that he (hould be created a Duke in that
kingdom that he should be admitted to fomne ihare in the govern-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he underltood his own interefl in
the present junuure, and pursued it with much steadiness. He rc-
jected an alliance with Spain, as dangerous. Iie refused to admit
into his presence an ambassador from the Pope. He seized Colonel
Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. HIe drove many of
the trafliquing Priests out of the kingdom. He marched suddenly
to Dumfiries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him priloncr.
In a convention of the nobles he declared his rcfolution to adhere

Y 2 inviolably

163

PooKVII.inviolably to the league with Englad d; and, without lifiening to the
'J~^7 fuggeflions of revenge, determined to ad in concert with Elizabeth,

auainft the common enemy of the Proteflant faithl. He put the
kingdom in a pofure of defence, and levied troops 'to obftrua the
landing of the Spaniards. lHe offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
aflifRance, and told her ambaflador that he expected no other favour
fr, m the King of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised
to Ulyfles, that when lie had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel *.

A. na:i-na! TIHE zeal of the- people, on this occasion, was not inferior to
, ,c'na.tn ithat of the King; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
dcfence of
i eligion. were threatened, fuggefled to them an extraordinary expedient for

their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,.
in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This contained
a confession of the Proteflant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the most solemn pronmies, in the name, and
through the firength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the latter, to the utnmof
of their power -[. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumfiances con-
tributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel were accuf-
tomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that
Religion, which the Almighty had eftablilhed among them; this
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to

· Camd. 544. Johnfl. 139. Spotfw. 369.
} Dunlop's Colleat. of Confefl. Vol, 2. 108.

imi-
164

imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprize was undertakenBooKVIL.
in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned ' ^8.
reckoned necessary for their security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from 'those political ones, of which
so many inflances have occurred; the articles, flipulations, and pe-
culiar modes of expression, are exactly the fame in both. Almost
all the considerable Popiflh Princes were then joined in a league for
extirpating the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-affo-
ciation, in order t? oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To these causes, did the Covenant, which was become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times during
,ne reign of James *. It was revived with great solemnity, though
with considerable alterations, in the year 1638. It was adopted by
the English, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil and eccle-
fiafical authority of both kingdoms. The political purposes to
which it was then made subservient, and the violent and unconfti-
tutional measures which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at thejundure, in which it was first
introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a prudent and lau-
dable device for the defence of the religion and liberties of the na-
tion; nor were the terms in which it it was conceived, other than
might have been expected from men alarmed with the impending
danger of Popery, and threatened with an invasion by the most bi-
gotted, and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP's eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him either

with the vigour or difpatcll neccfiary to ensure the success of so
mighty an enterprize. I-Is fleet, which ought to have failed in April,

* Cald. 4. I29.

did

165

PooKVII.inviolably to the league with Englar. d; and, without lifening to the

x` `' suggestions of revenge, determined to at in concert with Elizabeth,

aainft the common enemy of the Proteflant faith. Me put the
kingdom in a posture of defence, and levied troops to obftru& the
landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
aflRanice, and told her amba'hdor that he expected no other favour
fr.i m the King of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised
to Ulyflcs, that when lie had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his lalt morsel *.

. na:a! THE zeal of the-people, on this occasion, was not inferior to

. ,E ~.it in that of the King ; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
dience of
Religion. were threatened, fuggefled to them an extraordinary expedient for

their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,
in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This contained
a confession of the Proteflant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the latter, to the utmofl-
of their power -. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumflances con-
tributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel were accuf-
tomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that
Religion, which the Almighty had established among them; this
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to

* Camd. 544. Johnfl. 139. Spotfw. 369.
'] Dunlop's Collec. of Consef,. Vol, 2. 1o8.

iml-
164

imitate. In-that age, no considerable enterprize was undertakenBooKVII.
in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned _-'-.
reckoned necessary for their security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from 'those political ones, of which
so many instances have occurred; the articles, flipulations, and pe-
culiar modes of expression, are exactly the fame in both. Alinoft
all the considerable Popifil Princes wire then joined in a league for
extirpating the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or feemred more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-affo-
ciation, in order t? oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To these causes, did the Covenant, which was become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times during
ine reign of James . It was revived with great solemnity, though
wi:h considerable alterations, in the year I638. It was adopted by
the English, in the-year 1643, and enforced by the civil and eccle-
fiaftical authority of both kingdoms. The political purposes to
which it was then made subservient, and the violent and unconifi-
tutional measures which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the juncture, in which it was firfl
introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a prudent and lau-
dable device for the defence of the religion and liberties of the na-
tion; nor were the terms in which it it was conceived, other than
might have been expected from men alarmed with the impending
danger of Popery, and threatened with an invasion by the most bi-
gotted, and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him either

with the vigour or dispatch neccffary to ensure the success of so
mighty an enterprize. His fleet, which ought to have failed in April,

* Cald. 4, 129.

did

BooKVII. did not enter the English channel till the middle of July. It ho-

58' vered many days on the coast, in expetation of being joined by

the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of Flan-

ThleArmado ders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spa-
deft:ated.

niards during that time; successive storms and battles, which are
well known, conspired with their own ill conduct, to disappoint
their enterprize. And by the blessing of Providence, which
watched with remarkable care over the Protestant Religion, and
the liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered and destroyed
the Armado on which they had arrogantly beffowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the English seas, they were
forced to steer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ire-
land. Many of them suffered shipwreck, on these dangerous and
unknown coaffs. Though James kept his fubjeds under arms to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
an hostile manner, he received with great humanity 700 who were
forced ashore by a tempest, and after supplying them with necef-
saries, permitted them to return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambassador

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity, he had discovered during a conjunCture so dan-
gerous. But none of Aflby's promises were any longer remem-
bered; that Minister was even accused of having exceeded his
powers, by these too liberal offers; and conscious of his own false-
hood, or afhlamed of being disowned by his court, he withdrew
secretly out of Scotland *.

P,.I, , PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own rashness in

trig.les i attempting the conquest of England, by a naval armament, equipped
Scocland.

* Johnfl. 134. Ca d,. 548.

at
166

at so great a ditfance, and fubjeded in all its operations, to theBooKVI..
delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and winds, t."'
resolved to make his attack in another form, and to adopt the plan
which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invading Eng-
land through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be easily wafted over from the Low Countries to that kingdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure afliltance there, the
frontier of England was open and defenceless, and the northern
counties full of Roman Catholics, who would receive them with
open arms. Mean while, a descent might be threatened on the
southern coast, which would divide the English army, diftraa their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions.
In order to prepare the way for the execution of this design, he
remitted a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary Priest
in Scotland, and employed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, to gain over as many persons of diftindtion
as poflible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful infinua- popish nobe
tions of these etnifaries, induced several of the nobles to favour c"llire a-

gaintit the

a measure, which tended so manifestly to the deflrudion of their King.
country. Huntly, though the King had lately married him to the
daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly
attached to the Romish Church. Crawford and Errol were ani-
mated with the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of 6000 men, to render him master of Scotland, and
to bring so many of their vaflals into the field, that he flould be
able to enter England, with a numerous army. Francis Stewart,
grandson of James V. whom the King had created Earl of Both-
well, though influenced by no motive of religion, for he frill
adhered to the Protcftant faith, was prompted, merely by caprice,

and

167

BooKVII. and the restlessness of his nature, to join in this treasonable corref.
L- " 'J pondence.

1589.
February 7. ALL there letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth, alarm-

ed at the danger which threatned her own kingdom, sent them
immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popish party, called upon him to check this for-

The King's midable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James, though firmly
mix ms with
iegard to Po. attached to the Protestant religion, though profoundly versed in the
perI. theological controversies between the Reformers and the Church of

Rome, though he had employed himself, at that early period of
life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in which he
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, already,
those maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics
to which he adhered through the reft of his life. The R( rnun
Catholics were at that time a powerful and active party in Eng-
land ; they were far from being an inconsiderable faaion in his own
kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part
in all their machinations, and to second every effort of their bigo-
try. The opposition of such a body to his succession to the Crown
of England, added to the averseness of the Englifl from the go-
vernment of firangers, might create him many difficulties. In
order to avoid there, he thought it necessary to sooth, rather than to
irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile them to his fuccedion,
by the hopes of gentler treatment, and some mitigation of the ri-
gour of those laws, which were now in force against them. This
attempt to gain one party by promises of indulgence and adCt
of clemency, while he adhered, with all the obltinacy of a dif-
putant, to the doCtrines and tenets of the other, has given an air
of myfiery, and even of contradiction, to this part of the King's
character. The Papils, with the credulity of a set itruggling

to
j68

to obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs; and theBooKVII.
Protestants, with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al-.----r
ready in possession, viewed every ad of lenity, as a mark of indif- 1589-
ference, or a symptom of apofacy. And in order to please both,
James often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled with diffi-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfeAion of government, and
of king-craft, to consist.

His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general -is excevye

lenity to the

maxims. Notwithstanding the follicitations of the Queen of Eng-confpirators.
land, enforced by the jealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a
short imprisonment was the only punishment he infliced on Hunt-
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent an aa of
clemency, so inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to assemble
their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Mait-
land, an able minister, but warmly devoted to the English interest, April i,
from the King's councils and pretence, they attempted to seize
James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill conduEt, they were forced
to retire to the North, where they openly erected the standard of
Rebellion. But as the king's government was not generally un-
popular, or his miniflers odious, their own vassals joined them
slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King, in per-
son, advancing against them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which though superior in number, followed them with reluctance,
as to hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they furren- Aprl 20.
dered to the King, and threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly,
Errol, Crawford and Bothwell were all brought to a public trial.
Repeated acts of treason were easily proved against them. The

VOL. II. Z King,

I69

BookVII. King, however, did not perrmit any sentence to be pronounced ;

8.--9- and after keeping them a few months in confinement, he took oc-
I589'

cation, amidst the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to let them at liberty *.

The ki::^'s As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of

:i.i vo ,Lth Scotland, in the diret line ; as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the
ma k. two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl of Arran,

the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the king's mar-
riage was, on all these accounts, an event which the nation wished
for with the utmost ardour. He himself was no less desirous of ac-
complifhing it; and had made overtures, fbr that purpose, to the
eldest daughter of Frederick II. king of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
jealous of every thing, that would render the accession of the
house of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endeavoured to
perplex James, in the fame manner mfe had done Mary, and em-
ployed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his marriage. His Mi-
nifters gained by bribes and promises, seconded her intentions ; and
though several different ambafladors were sent fiom Scotland to
Denmark, they produced powers so limited, or infilfed on condi-
tions so extravagant, that Frederick could not believe the king to'
be in earneflt; and fulpccling that there was tome design to deceive,
or amuse lim, gave his daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunf-
wvick. Not dileouraged by this difappointmcl'nt, which he imputed
entilely to the condudt of his owln iminiflers, James made his add:cf-
fes to the priliccfs Anne, Frederick's fccond daughter. And tlhough
r;lizabctli endclavourecd to divert him fiom this, by recommendinlg
Catl erine the Kiing of Navarre's fifler, as a more advantageous match ;
thou.'h fihc lrcv\aild on the privy council of Scotland to declare
againfl tlhe aiiince with Dentnark, he persisted iln his choice. And
.dcfpairing of ovcrc(milig the obfliiacy of his own miniftcrs, in

* Spots. 373, ClJ. 4. 103.

any

any other manner, hle 'fere1bly encouraged the citizens of Edin- BookVI.l
burgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in piecesthe Chan- -
cellor, whom they accused as the person, whose artifices had hither- 5
to.difappointed the wishes of the King, and the expeCtations of
his people. In consequence of this, the Earl Marshal was fentinto
Denmark, at the head of a splendid embassy. He received ample
powers and instructions, drawn with the king's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young queen
set fail towards Scotland. Jatnes made great preparations for her
reception, and awaited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover; when the .unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tempest
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition
so flattered, that there iwas little hope of its putting again to lea,
before the spring. This unexpe6ted disappointment, he felt
with :the utmost: fenlfibilit.v. He in(fantly fitted out some ships,
and without communicating his intention to any of his coun-
cil, ;failed, in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, oa. 22,
and a train of 300 persons in quest of his bride. He arrived ftfely
ill a fnall haibour, not far distant fiom Upflo, where the Queen then
resided. There the marriage was solemnized. And as it would have Nov. 24.
been rafli to trust those boisterous seas, in the winter season, James
accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and repairing
to Copenhagen, passed several months there, amnidft continual feast-
ing, and amusements, in which, both the Queen and himilf ei ad
great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation fiom
llis general charactcr, than this Iudden sally. Il:, 1i11 Clals 1.
v.as capablec of that cxceflivc adminrtion of the other cx, whliici

Mclv, 352. Spotf\V. 377.

Z 2 nrifes

BooKVII. arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by elegance of

- 589- talte; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain suited such a dif-

position. But James was not susceptible of any refined gallantry,
and always expressed that contempt for the female charaaer, which
a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obflacles which had been
laid in his way. He was anxious to secure the political advantages,
which he expected from marriage; and fearing that a delay might
afford Elizabeth, and his own ministers, an opportunity of thwart-
ing him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of pre-
venting them, by a voyage from which he expected to return in a
few weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his conduct, and to be
pleased with this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young Prince.
Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond the time he expeted,
the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with one another in
loyalty and obedience; and no period in the King's reign was more
remarkable for tranquility, or more free from any eruption of those
fations, which so often disturbed the kingdom;

THE
172

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

F
SCOTLAN D.

B O O K VIII.
O N the sirs of May the King and Queen arrived at Leith, Book VIII.

and were received by their fubjets, with every possible ex- ~- o.

prefion of joy. The solemnity of the Queen's Coronation was con- TheKingand
duped with great magnificence; but so low had the order of Bishops iQsotlaarve
fallen, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were pre-
sent on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Mini-
fter of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, adminiftred
the sacred uncion, and performed the other cuflomary ceremo-
nies,

THE zeal and success, with which many of the clergy had

contributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom,
during his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their per-
sons, and even to the Prelbyterian form of government. In pre-

4 fence

Book VIII. fence of an aflrmbly, which met this year, he made high enco.
t3'/-'' miumis on the discipline, as we{ll as the doctrine of the church,

I59a.
\uguait . promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the assembly

to frame such a1s as gradually abolished all the remains of epif-
copal jurisdiction, and paved the way for a full and lega establish-
ment of the Presbyterian model *.
I591. AN event happened soon after., which afforded the Clergy no

small triumph. Archbishop Adamson, their ancient enemy, hav-
ing fallen under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee ini consequence of the act of annexation}, and be-
ing oppressed with age, with poverty, and diseases, made the mean-
eft fubmiifion to the Clergy, and delivered to the assembly a formal
recantation of all his opinions concerning Church government,
which had been matter of offence. to the Presbyterians. Such a
confefion, from the nloft learned yerfon of the order, was confi-
dered as a testimony, which the force of truth had extorted from
an adversary +.
the kingdcn.

Mr.AN while, the King's excefive clemency tow'ards'off6enders

.multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such acs of vio-
lence, as brought his government under contempt, and proved fa-
tal to many of his fubjecs. The history of fevcral years, about
this tinme, is fillcd with accounts of the deadly quarrels between 'the
great families, and of murders and afihlinnations perpetrated in
the most audacious mianner, and with circuniftrnccs of' 'the utmoit
barbariity. All the ldefets in the feudal ariflocracy were now felt
more fcn l1l, han i

; an ' oilher period in the hiilory of Scotland,

and univei... li:ccir-; and anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce con-
iifleni with th ;,;.firv'itio;l of luciety. While the King, too

-t Spotlw. 385. CalW, {. 2xq,
I

gentle
174

,,, CilW. ~ J 2 0 (.

gentle to punith, or too feeble to aft with vigour, suffered all thefeBookVIII.
enormities to pass with impunity. 1591.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, whichAn attempt of

of Boihwcll's

is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and thofefagaifvl tl:
fu{hpeded of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. ManylKiLsg
p-erlons neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were
usually held to be certain indications of this crime, but masters of
famiiiies, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
lif,' w\ere seized and tortured; and though their confessions con-
taincd tihe molt absurd and incredible circumstances, the King's pre-
judices, those of the clergy, and of the people, conspired in be-
li ving their extravagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of there unhappy sufferers ac-
cufcd Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and having employed their art, to
raise the storms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that no-
bleman was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty fpi-
rit could neither fubmlit to the restraint, nor brook such an indigni-
ty. Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and imputing
the accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancellor, a1em-
b'cd his followers, under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. B1ing favoured by some of the King's attendants, lhe
Was admitted, by a fccret paliagte, under cloud of night, into the
court of the palace of H-oly-roud-houfc. He advanced dirccly to-
\w.lds the royal apartmicnt, but happily, before he entered, the
airim was taken, anrd the doors fliut. \hile he nttempted to burfl) CCi, , 27-
o()CI (lom' of thcm, and to fct fire to otiher, tie citizens of l'din-
bttrll Ihal time to run to their armis, and tic efanpcd with the ut-

mioil

175

Book VIII.'mofi difficulty; owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and
""'' the precipitancy with which he fled *.
1592.

HE retired towards the North, and the King having unadvisedly

given a commiflion to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him, and his
followers with 'fire and sword; he, under colour of executing that
commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the house
of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray
Feb. 8. himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such promising vir-

tues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the darling of the people,
excited universal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in
a tumultuous manner; and though they were restrained, by the
care of the magistrates, from any aa of violence, they threw aside
all refped for the King and his ministers, and openly insulted and
threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered him-
self tojuftice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his crime,
and the clamours of the people, the power of the Chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the King's regard for
the memory of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, not only proteced him from the sentence which such an odi-
ous action merited, but exempted him even from the formality of
a public trial -.

Prelfyterian A STEP of much importance was taken, soon after, with regard
Church go-
vernment es- to the government of the church. The Clergy had long com-
tablifhed by plained of the encroachments made upon their privileges and
law.

Mclv. 388. Spotfw. 386. f Spots. 387.

jurif-

jurifdi&ion, by the ats of the parliament I584, and though these BookVIII.
laws had now loft much of their force, they resolved to peti- 12

1592.

tion the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in
form. The juncture for pushing such a measure was well chosen.
The king had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity to-
wards the Popish faction, and still more by his remifnefs in pur-
suing the murderers of the Earl of Murray. The chancellor had
not only a powerful- party of the courtiers combined against him,
but was become odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false flep in the King's condue. Bothwell still lurked in the king-
dom, and being secretly supported by all the enemies of Mait-
land's administration, was ready, every moment, to renew his au-
dacious enterprizes. James, for all these reasons, was extremely
willing to indulge the Clergy in their request, and not only con-
sented to a law, whereby the ads 1584 were rescinded or explained;
but he carried his complaisance still further, and permitted the par-
liament to eftablifli the Presbyterian government, its General Assem-
blies, Provincial synods, Prefbyteries and Kirk sessions, with all
the different branches of their discipline and jurifdidion, in the most
omple manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the administration of Regents, from whom they might have
expected the most partial favour, could not obtain the fandion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclesiastical government.
No Prince was ever less disposed than James to approve a fyfvem,
whose republican genius inspired a paflion for liberty, so repugnant
to his exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any avcr-
lion be more inveterate than his, to the auflere and uncomplying
charader of the Presbyterian Clergy in that age; who, more
eminent for zeal, than for policy, often contradicted his opinions,
and censured his conduct, with a freedom, equally ostensive to his

VOL. II. A a dog-

177

BookVIII. dogmatism as a Theologian, and to his pride as a King. His ritua-

1-5- tion howslever obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to dissemble

his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his fubjeacs, by indulging
the Popish faction more than they approved, he endeavoured to
atione for this, by concefions to the Presbyterian Clergy, greater
than he himself would otherwise have chosen %.

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents wereattainted.

But he soon made a new attempt to seize the King at Falkland
and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly defended
by others, who wifled well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's avow-
ed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert
Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates -.

A r.ew con- THIS danger was scarce well over, when the nation was alarmed
,pirncy of the the discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy.
I'opiih Lords. wit oVy npc

George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were found in
his custody, and among there, several blanks signed by the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary precaution,
they hoped to e'cape any danger of discovery. But Ker's refolu-
tion flhrinking when torture was threatened, he confersed that he
was employed by there noblemen, to carry on a negociation with
the King of Spain ; that the blanks subscribed with their names
were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were in-
ftrudted to ofl-r the faithful service of the three Earls to that Mo-
narch ; and to follicit him to land a body of his troops, either in
Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the fiift place, to cftablllh the Roman Catholic Religion in Scot-
land, and then to invade England, with the wlole forces of the

» Cald. 4. 248, 252. Spof. 388. . Mclv. 402.

kingdom,
178

kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Lady-BookVIIL
land, whom he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were 592
taken into custody, and confirmed all the circumfiances of his
confession *.

THE nation having been kept for some time in continual terror I593.

and agitation by so many successive conspiracies, the discovery of Zealof the
this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of men, as ifp
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to fland forth in defence of their country. The Mi-
nifters of-Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commission, assembled a
considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
inflant remedy against the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus, and committed him to the castle; they examined
Ker; and.prepared a remonfirance to be laid before the King, con-
cerning the slate of the nation; and the necelfity of prosecuting
the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous And procecd-
of every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with subi- ins of tlic

0-*~~~~

r £> *'

. King' againli

jes, who instead of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, thlm.
found it necefhary, during the violence of the ferment, not only
to adopt their pl.n, but even to declare that no consideration should
ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty of so odious .n,. s.
a trcafon. IIe summoned the Earls of bluntly and Errol to fur-
rcnder themselves to juflice. Grahamr of Fintry, whom his peers
pronounced to be guilty of treason, lie commanded to be publiclly
beheaded ; and marching into the Nortl at the head of an army,
the two Earls, together with Angus, who had cfcnpcd out of pri-

* Rymncr, 16. 190.

7-9

1011,
A a z

BookVIII. son, retired to the mountains. He placed garrisons in the castles

which belonged to them; compelled their vassals, and the Barons,
1593. in the adjacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing professions

of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence to the
Proteflant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, constituted the Earls of Athol, and Marshal,
his Lieutenants there %.

March 18. HAVING finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,
Elizabeth where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
follicits iim
to treat them the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a
withrigour. conspiracy, which ohe considered as no less formidable to her own

kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
remifnefs, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, to punish
this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not apprehend
the persons, at least to confiscate the estates of such audacious re-
bels. She weakened, however, the force of these requefis, by
interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac-
cording to her usual policy in nourishing a factious spirit among
the Scottish nobles, ihe had taken under her protection. James ab-
folutely refused to liften to any intercefflon in favour of one, who
had so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both his go-
vernment and his person. With regard to the popish conspirators,
he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but that
he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a frnall fum of
money from Elizabeth, which she, distrustful, perhaps of the
manner in which he might apply it, fihewed no inclination to grant.
The zeal, however, and importunity of his own fubjcdes obliged

* Spotfw. 391. Cald, 4. 291.

him
380

him to call a parliament, in order to pass an aC of attainder againftBookVJIT.
the three Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out of -
prison, and on pretence, that legal evidence of their guilt could not 593
be produced, nothing was concluded against them. The King him-
self was universally fufpeted of having contrived this artifice, on
purpose to elude the requests of the Queen of England, and to
disappoint the wifles of his own people. And therefore, in order
to sooth the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his condut,
he gave way to the pasing of an at, which ordained those who
obstinately contemned the censures of the Church, to be declared
outlaws *.

WHILE the terror excited by the Popish conspiracy possessed the Bothwell
nation, the court had been divided by two rival factions, which urprizes the

King.

contended for the chief direction of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King -reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the Queen's
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord
Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, and
widened the breach. And James, fond no less of domestic tran-
quility, than of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, for
some time, in hopes that the Queen's resentment would subside.
But as he flood in need, in the present juncture, of the affiflance
of so able a minister, he had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him from recovering his former power, the Stewarts had
recourse to an expedient no less illegal, than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame surname, they
brought him back secretly into Scotland; and seizing the gates ofJiy 2+
the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with a nume-

Cald. 4.343. Sponf. 393. Parl. 13. Jac. VI. c, 164.

rous

I8I

BookVIIi. rous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by a11 his
. .--,--' courtiers, and incapable of refinance, discovered more indignation,

593· than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on the

Earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon. The king
was not in a condition to refute his demands. And a few days
after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to whom
he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himself to grant him
a remission for all past offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time, to dismiss the chancellor,
the master of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part, consented to
remove from court, though he left there as many of his aso-
ciates, as he thought sufficient to prevent the return of the adverse
faction.

i-e recovers BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the
lhi libert). fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often subjcd during

his minority. HIe discovered so much impatience to shake off his
fetters, that those who imposed, durst not continue, the restraint.
September 7. They permitted him to call a Convention of the nobles at Stirling,

and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to be
so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult offered to
the King's person and authority to be high treason, and declared
him absolvcd from any obligation to observe conditions, extorted
by force, and which violated so eicntially his royal prerogative.
James, however, frill proffered him a pardon, provided he would
ue for it as an acti of mercy, and promise to retire out of the king--
dorn. Thcef conditions Bothwell rcjectd with disdain, and bc-

taking
8Iz

183

taking himrlf once morre to arms, attempted to ftirprize the King, Bon!kVIII.
but finding him on his guard, fled to the boorers *. '>

1593.

THE King's ardou! against Bothwell, compared with his flow and s'ipectc'i cf

evasive proceedings against the Popish Lords, occasioned a general fao:llh toe
difufltu among his fubjeds; and was imputed either to an excefiIve
att;chnent to the persons of those confpiratois, or to a secret par-
tiality towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no unrea-
fonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the
Proteflant Religion, thought themselves bound, in iuch a jundure,
to take extraordinary steps for its preservation. And the provincial
i\'nod of Fife happening to meet at that time, a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as obstinate Sept. ;5.
a:;d irreclaimable Papists. And though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the fynod, or were fubbjea to its ju-
rifdidtion, such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced againfi them, the sentence of ex-
communication, to which the at of lass parliament added new
terrors. And left this flould be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the ad of a small part of the Church, deputies were ap-
p(inted to attend the adjacent synods, and to desire their approba-
tion and concurrence.

A N event happened, a few weeks after, which increascd theii li,, v ,,to-

peopllc's suspicions of the King. As he was mlarching on an cx- L'"7" I'"
)'ctdition againfl: the borderers, the three Earls, conling fiu(lciily
ii.to hlis prelcence, offered to Iilbmit themfclves to a legal trial; and
J1 Mcs, without committing tlhem to cunfody, appointcd a day for
tlat purpolf . The conspirators prepared to appear with a formi-
dible train of their friends and valffTls. But, in the mca; tilme,

Cal. 4. 326. Spoif. 3'95.

tIkc

BookVIIl. the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, assembling at
'"`" Edinburgh, remonstrated against the King's extreme indulgence

with great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular-courfe of jufice, to commit to sure custody persons charged
with the highell ads of treason, who could not be brought to a legal
trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding against them. At the fame time they offered
to accompany him in arms to the place of trial, left such auda-
cious and powerful criminals Ihould overawe justice, and dictate
to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely offended both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient to put
off the day of trial, and to call a Convention of estates, in order to
quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully, that he himself,
together with a few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much deliberation,
Nov. 26. they ordained that the three Earls, and their associates, should be

exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of
their correspondence with Spain; that, before the first day of
February, they should either submit to the Church, and publickly
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of the Kingdom;
that, before the first of January, they should declare which of
these alternatives they would embrace; that they should find surety
for their peaceable demeanour, for the future ; and that if they
failed to signify their choice in due time, they should lose the bc-
nefit of this at of aholition, and remain cxpofed to all the pains
of law *.

* CalLl. 4. 330. Spot. 397.

By
IS4

BY 'this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much Book VIII.
reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish super- ~"_--

1594;

fition, fubmifiive to all the dictates of their priests, and buoyed up
with hopes and prornifes of foreign aid, the three Earls refused to
accept of-the conditions, and continued their treasonable correfpon-
dence with the court of Spain. A Convention ofeftates pronounced Jan. 18.
them to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which were of-
sered; and the King required them, by proclamation, to surrender
thetnfelves to justice. The presence of the English ambassador
contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of these proceedings. Eliza-
beth, ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing his reluctance
to punish the Popish Lords to a secret approbation of their designs,
had sent to Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to
which he exposed himself, by this false moderation; and to require
him to exercise that rigour, which their crimes, as well as the pof-
ture of affairs rendered necessary. And though the steps now taken
by the King silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, for-
getful of his character as an ambassador, entered into private nego-
ciations with such of the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's
teafures, and held almost an open correspondence with Bothwell,
who, according to. the usual artifice of malecontents, pretended
much follicitude for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
and covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal against
those Counsellors, who restrained the King fiom pursuing the avow-
ed enemies of the Protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in
the name of his Miflrefs, to take arms against his Sovereign.

MEAN while, the King and the Clergy were filled with mutual dif- A new at-

trust of each other.. They werejealous, perhaps, to excess, that his as- Bothi ls.
d'ecions leaned too much towards the Popi fh faction; he fufpeded them,
without good reason, :of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even

VOL. II. B b ,of

185

Book VIII. of supplying him with money Tor that purpose. Little inftigatlon,

L-r indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's,

9 to any daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly, within a mile of

Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by which
he endeavoured to justify this infurresdion, were extremely popular;
zeal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern for the King's honour,
and for the liberties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was accompanied
only with a few horsemen of Lord Home's train. In this extre-
mity, he implored, the aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in
order to encourage them to at with zeal, he promised to proceed
against the Popish Lords with the utmost rigour of law. Animated
by their Ministers, they ran chearfully to their arms, and advanced
with the King at their head against Bot'bwell; but he, notwith-
standing his success in putting to flight Lord Home, who had rashly
charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry, retired to Dal-
keith without daring to attack the King. His followers abandoned
him soon after, and discouraged by so many successive disappoint-
ments, could never afterwards be brought to venture into the field.
He betook himself to his usual lurking places, in the North of
England, but Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's remon-
itrances, obliged him to quit that retreat *.

Sie(l dangers No sooner was the King delivered from one danger, than he was
romL the P-rcalled to attend to another. The Popihh Lords, in consequence
April 3. of their negotiations with Spain, received, in the spring, a supply

of money from Philip. What bold designs this might inspire, it
was no easy matter to conjecture.; From men under the domi-
nion of bigotry, and whom indiulgence could not reclaim, tle

Spots. 403. Cald 4. 359.

mosl:
i86

most desperate actions were to be dreaded. The assembly of the Book VIII.
Church immediately took the alarm; remonfirated against them I59-
with more bitterness than ever, and unanimously ratified the fen-
tence of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their obflinacy and ingratitude, and
afraid that his long forbearance would not only be generally dif-
pleating to' his own subje.s, but give rife to unfavourable fufpi-
cions among the English, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a parliament; laid before it all the circumstances, and June 8.
aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and several of there conneted with the confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his influence
and importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous sentence the law
can inflict. They were declared to be guilty of high treason, and
their estates and honours forfeited. At the fame time, flatutes,
more revere than ever, were enated against the professors of the
Popish Religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater Battle of

difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the coun- Glenivat
try almost inaccessible, surrounded with numerous vasals, and sup-
ported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottish Monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the money, necessary for defraying the expences
of an expedition against them. To attack them in person, with
his own forces alone, might expose him both to disgrace and to
danger. He had recourse to the only expedient which remained
in such a Situation for aiding the impotence of Sovereign autho-
rity; he delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, and Lord
Sorbes, tthe leaders of 'two clans at enmity with the conspirator's;
and gave them a commiflion to invade thcir lands, and to iEizc the

B b 2 caftlec

87

BookVIII. castles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all
"- '--' his high pretensions of zeal for the Proteltant Religion, having

1594. Jnow entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger became

every day more urging. Argyll, follicited by the King, and rouzed
by the clergy, took the field at the head of 7000ooo men. Huntly
and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in num-
ber, but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries, mount-
ed on horseback, and who brought along with them a train of
Ctober 3. field-pieces. They encountered each other with all the fury, which

hereditary enmity and ancient rivalship add to undisciplined courage,.
But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first discharge of the caln-
non, to which they were little accustomed, and unable to resist the.
imprefllon of cavalry, were soon put to flight.. And Argyll, a.
gallant young man of eighteen,. was carried by his friends out,
of the field, weeping with indignation, at their disgrace, and call,
ing on them to stand, and to vindicate the honour. of their
name *.

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to,

pawn his jewels in order to raise money t, aflferbled a ftnall body,
of troops, and marched towards the North. He was joined by the
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other clans at enmity with
Huntly and Errol, who having loft several of their principal fol-
lowers at Glenlivat, and others refuting to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to.the mountains. James
wafted their lands;. put garrisons in. some of their castles burnt
others; and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that
part-of the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to reitrain them
from. gathering to any. head. there, or from infesting the low

* Cald. 4, 408. ' t Birch, Mem, x. 186.

country,

2
I38

country. Reduced at last to extreme distress, by the rigour of the Book VIII.
season, and the desertion of their followers, they obtained the King's ~-15'
permission to go beyond seas, and gave security that they should Popiih Lords

driven out of

neither return without his licence, nor engage in any new intrigues the kingdom.
againft.the Protestant religion, or the peace of the kingdom *.

BY their exile, the tranquillity was re-eflablifhed in the North of 1595.
Scotland; and the firmness and vigour, which James had displayed The Roman

Catholics in-

in his last proceedings against them, regained him, in a great degree, cenfedagainft
the confidence of his protestant fubjeds. But he funk, in the fame James.
proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem of the Ro-
man Catholics. They had asserted his mother's right to the
Crown of England with so much warmth,, that they could not,
with any decency, rejec his. And the indulgence, with which he
asseted to treat the professors of that religion, inspired them with
such hopes, that they viewed his acceflion to the throne as no
undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King pursued
the conspirators, and the severe itatutes against Popery to-which he
had given his content, convinced them that there hopes were vifio-
nary; and they began to look about in quest of some new fucceflor,
whose rights they might oppose to his. The English Papists turned
their eyes towards the Earl of Eflex, whose generous mind, though
firmly established in the Protestant faith, abhorred the severities
infiiled in that age, on account of religious opinions. Those of
the fame fed, who were in exile, formed a bolder scheme, and one
more suitable to their situation. They advanced the claim of the
Infanta of Spain; and Parsons the Jesuit published a book, in which,
by false quotations from history, by fabulous genealogies, and ab-

*' Spots. 44, Cald. 373, &c.

surd

I89

Book VIII. surd arguments, intermingled with bitter invectives against the King
i I-59 of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the Infanta's title to the English

Crown to be preferable to his. And Philip, though involved al-
ready in a war both with France and England, and scarce able
to defend the remains of the Burgundian provinces againfl the Dutch
commonwealth, easily grasped at this airy project. The dread of
a Spanish pretender to the Crown, and the opposition which the
Papists began to form against the King's fucceflon, contributed not
a little to remove the prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare
the way for that event.

Bothwell for-
ced to fly into
Spain.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often mentioned as the

disturber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king-
dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the Popish Lords;
excommunicated by the Church for the fame reason; and deserted,
in his distress, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safe-
ty to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after renoun-
cing the Protestant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and in-
digent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery.
The King, though extremely ready to sacrifice the strongest resent-
ments to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be softened
by his submissions, nor be induced to liften to any interceflion in
his behalf .

TH-Is year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an able Minister,

on whom he had long devolved the whole weight of publiceaffairs.
As James loved him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the compo-
fitions of that age, are far from being inelegant t.

* Winw. Mem. i. Spots. 41o.

3

1t Id. 411.

SOON
I9o

SOON after his death, a considerable change was made in the Book VIII.
administration. At that time, the annual charges of government vo

1I596.

far exceeded the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of ex- A cl,' ge in
pensive amusements. James himself was a stranger to ceconomy. the adminif-

tration.

It became necessary, for all these reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trust was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law *, who, from their number were called OSIavians.
The powers vested in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their content: and
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alienation
of his revenue, no grant of a penfon, or order on the treasury,
should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription of
five of the commissioners; all their ats and decisions were declared
to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts;
and in consequence of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrefled, or their goods seized. Such extensive
jurifdiaion, together with the absolute disposal of the public mo-
ney, drew the whole executive part of the government into their
hands. United among themselves, they gradually undermined the
reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucrative or honour-
able office. The ancient servants of the Crown repined, at being
obliged to quit their flations to new men. The favourites, and
young courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality dinted by
their prescriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed against some of
them as known apostates to Popery, and fufpeted others of secretly
favouring it. They retained their power, however, notwithftand-

* Alexander Scaton Prcfident of the Seflion, Walter Stewart Commendator of
Blantyrc Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy, John Lindsay, James Elphingflon, T'ho-
mas Hamilton, John Skcne Clerk Register, and.Peter Young Elcmofynar.

ing

Book VIII. ing this general combination against them ; and they owed it intirely

- to the order and (economy which they introduced into the adminif-

tration of the finances, by which the necessary expences of govern-
ment were more easily defrayed, than in any other period of the
King's reign *'

Violence of Tag rumour of vast preparations which Philip was said to he
agahe ntion carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with the
'Popith Lords. dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the de-

fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their estates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the ant of forfeiture ineffectual, by supporting
March 24. the avowed enemies of the Protestant faith. The assembly of the

Church took under consideration the state of the kingdom, and
having appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly renewed
the Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the
Proteflant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors. A com-
mittee, confilling of the most eminent Clergymen, and of many
Barons, and gentlemen of diftintion, waited on the King, and laid
before him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the prefer-
vation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the eflates of
the banished Lords, as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers; to
take the ftriaeft precautions for preventing the return of such tur-
bulent fubjeds into the country; and to pursue all who were sus-
pected of being their adherents, with the utmost rigour.

The King's NOTIING could be more repugnant to the King's schemes, or
reniifsllliis
wiTh reganr more disagreeable to his inclination, than these propositions. Averse,
to them.

* Sits. 4s3, 435.

through
192

i93

through his whole life, to any course, where he expeced oppofi- BookVIII,
tion or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the characer 596
of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed with con-
cern the prejudices against him, which were growing among the
Roman Catholics, and resolved to make some atonement for that
part of his conduct, which had drawn on him their indignation.
Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been
in danger; if any Popish competitor flould arise to dispute his right
of succession, a faction, so powerful as that of the banished Lords,
might be extremely formidable; and any division among his own
fubjeds might prove fatal, at a juncure, which would require
their united and most vigorous efforts. Instead, therefore, of the
additional severities which the assembly proposed, James had
thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which they already suffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dispose them to
liften more favourably, than ever, to their suggestions; as despair
might drive them to frill more atrocious actions; he resolved to recall
them under certain conditions, into their native country. Encou-
raged by these sentiments of the King in their favour, of which they
did not want intelligence, and wearied already of the dependant and
anxious life of exiles, they ventured to return secretly into Scotland.
Soon after, they presented a petition to the King, begging his
permission to reside at their own houses, and offering to give fecu-
rity for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour. James called a
Convention of estates to deliberate on a matter of such importance,
and by thor advice he granted the petition.

So soon as they were informed of this, the membersof a committee, The ra.fi pro-
appointed by the last assembly, met at Edinburgh, and with all the pre- 'cedilCg o

VOL. II. C c cipitancy and people.

Book VIII. cipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they thought

--56. nreceflhry for the safety of the kingdom. They wrote circular

letters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the
approaching danger; they exhorted them to stir up their people to the
defence of their just rights; they commanded them to publish, in
all their pulpits, the aa excommunicating-the Popish Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who were fufpeated of favouring Po-
pery under the fame censure, by a summary sentence, and without
observing the usual formalities of trial. And as the danger seemed
too pressing to wait for the stated meetings of the judicatories of the
Church, they made choice of the molt eminent clergymen in
different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to reside constant-
ly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with the Ministers of that
city, under the name of the Standing Council of the Church, and
veited in this body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in imita-
tion of the ancient Roman form, to take care that the Church
should receive no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than unprecedented,

were manifest encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold
tfeps towards open rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jus-
tified in orme degree such excesses. His lenity towards the Papists,
so repugnant to the principles of that age; his pardoning the con-
fpirators, notwithitanding repeated promises to the contrary; the
respect he paid to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romifl
religion, no less than her husband; his committing the care of his
daughter, the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingfton, who was
infected with the fame superstition; the contempt with which lhe
talked, on all occasions, both of the chara6ter of Ministers, and
of their function, were circumstances which might have filled

minds,
194

minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with some suspicions; and BookVIII.
might have precipitated into rash councils, those, who were far re- 6

1596.

moved from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the motives
might be which influenced the clergy, or however laudable the
end they had in view, they conducted their measures with no ad-
dress, and even with little prudence. James discovered a strong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and jealous as he
was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many concessions
for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the Privy Coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate among the Clergy,
and enquired whether Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom of
the Church, and be exempted from any further punishment, on account
of their past apoftacy and treasons. They replied, that though the
gate of mercy stood always open for those who repented and re-
turned, yet as there noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime
deserving death both by the law of God, and of man, the civil ma-
giftrate could not legally grant them a pardon ; and even though the
Church should absolve them, it was his duty to inflic punishment
upon them. This inflexibility in those, who were reckoned the
most compliant of the order, filled the King with indignation,
which the imprudence and obflinacy of a private Clergyman height-
ened into rage.

MR. David Black, Minifler at St. Andrew's, discoursing in one seditio,
of his Sermons, according to cuflom, concerning the slate of the dohrinc

taught by

nation, affirmed that the King had permitted the Popifl Lords to Black.
return into Scotland, and by that action, had discovered the trea-
chery of his own heart; that all Kings were the Devil's children;
that Satan had now the guidance of the court; that the Queen of

C c 2 England

195

Book VIIi. England was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and bri-

j596. bers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy Counsellors

cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayer for the Queen,
he used these words, We muff pray for her for fashion fake, but
we have no cause, (ie will never do us good. James commanded

Nov. io. him to be summoned before the Privy Council, to answer for such
e'ouCe hifr Seditious exprefiions; and the clergy, inflead of abandoning him
delence. to the punishment, which such a petulant and criminal attack on

his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as to espouse his cause,
as if it had been the common one of the whole order. The con-
troverfy concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify against vices of every kind, which had
been agitated in I584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard to their sacred function, Ministers were subjeCt to the
Church alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical superiors
to judge of the truth or falfhood of dotrines, delivered in the
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this
jurifdidion, the church would, from that moment, fink under
servitude to the civil magistrate; that intfead of reproving vice
with that honest boldness, which had often been of advantage to
individuals, and salutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the paflions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of
others; that the King's eagerness to punifli the indiscretion of a
Proteflant Minister, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of
Popish conspirators, called on them to fland on their guard ; and
that now was the time to contend for their privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachments on those rights, of which the church had
been in pocffion ever since the Reformation. Influenced by there
considerations, the council of the Church enjoined Black to decline
the jurifdidion of the Privy Council. And he, proud of such an

oppor-
I96

opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, BookVIII.
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the '^7
questions which were put to him. In order to add greater weight 5
to these proceedings, the council of the Church transmitted the de-
clinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and com-
manded every Minister to subscribe it, in testimony of his approba-
tion.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were at-

tacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority must
fall, if the clergy should be permitted publickly, and with impu-
nity, to calumniate his Ministers; and even to censure himself; and
knowing, by former examples, what unequal reparation for such
offences he might expec from the judicatories of the church, he
urged on the inquiry into Black's condut, and issued a proclama-
tion, commanding the members of the council of the church to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own parishes. Black, in-
Itead of submitting, renewed his declinature; and the council, in
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they met by the au-
thority of the church, obedience to it was a duty still more sacred,
than that which they owed to the King himself. The Privy coun-
cil, notwithstanding Black's refusing to plead, proceeded in the trial;
and, after a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the crimes
of which he had been accused; but referred it to the King, to ap-
point what puniflment he should susser.

MEAN while, many endeavours were used to bring matters to

accommodation. Almost every day produced some new scheme of
reconcilement; but through the King's fickleness, the obstinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all proved inef-
fceual. Both parties appealed to the people, and by reciprocal

I and

BookVIII. and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render each other odi-
.-...... ous. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes, with which

James charged the Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound
with complaints of his exceflive lenity towards Papists and of the
no less excessive rigour, with which he oppressed the established
Church. Exasperated by their bold invedtives, he, at last, fen-
tenced Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to reside there dur-
ing his pleasure; and once more commanding the members of the
ltanding council to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the Mi-
nifters in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to
submit in the fame manner as other fubjeds to the jurifdidtion of
the civil courts, in matters of a civil nature.

THIS decisive measure excited all the violent pafilons, which

possess disappointed factions; and deeds no less violent immediately
followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices of some
courtiers, who expected to reap advantage from the calamities of
their country, or who hoped to leflen the authority of the Odavi-
ans, by engaging them in hostilities with the Church. On one
hand, they informed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh were
under arms every night, and had planted a strong guard round the
houses of their ministers. James, in order to put a stop to this
imaginary insult on his government, issued a proclamation, com-
manding twenty four of the principal citizens to leave the town,
within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to the Miniflers,
advising them to look to their own safety, as Huntly had been fc-
cretly admitted to an interview with the King, and had been the au-
thor of the revere proclamation against the citizens of Edinburgh *.

They

* Though matters were indufirioufly aggravated by persons, who wished both par-
ties to pursue violent measures; neither of thefc reports were altogether dctitutc of

foun-

A tumult in
Ldiiiburgh.
398

They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than theBook VIII.
King had done of that which he received, and fell as blindly into 596
the snare. The letter came to their hands, ju(t as one of their num- Dc .17.
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They iefolved that he should
acquaint the people of their danger; and he painted it, with all the
itrong colours, which men naturally employ, in describing any
dreadful and inflant calamity. When the sermon was over, he de-
fired the nobles and gentlemen to assemble in the Little Church.
The whole multitude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded
thither; they promised and vowed to Rfand by the Church; they
drew up a petition to the King, craving the redress of those grie-
vances, of which the Clergy complained, and beseeching him to
deliver them from all future apprehensions of danger, by removing
such of his Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the Pro-
teftant religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgesses, and
two Ministers were appointed to present it. The King happened The King in
to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef danger.
sion was fitting. The manner in which the petition was delivered,
as well as its contents, offended him. He gave an haughty re-
ply; the petitioners insisted with warmth; and a promiscuous
multitude pressing into the room, James retired abruptly into an-
other apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut behind
him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were still as-
fembled, and to whom a minister had been reading, in their ab-
fence, the story of Haman. When they reported that the King
had refused to liften to their petitions, the Church was filled in a

foundation. As their Ministers were supposed to be in danger, some of the more zea-
lous citizens had determined to defend them, by force of arms, Birch. Mem. 2. 250.
Huntly had been privately in Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not with
the King, at leait with omen of his Miniftern, Birch. Ibid. 230.

moment

BookVIII. moment with noise, threatnings, execrations, and all the outrage

1"596 and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms

some to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, the sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; and rufling out with the most furious
impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatening the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The magistrates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tu-
mult; the King attempted to sooth the malecontents, by promising
to receive their petitions, when presented in a regular manner; the
Ministers, sensible of their own rashness in kindling such a flame,
seconded both; and the rage of the populace, subsiding as suddenly
as it had risen, they all dispersed, and the King returned to the
palace; happy in having escaped from an infurreEtion, which, tho'
the instantaneous and unconcerted effect of popular fury, had ex-
posed his life to imminent danger, and was confidered by him as an
unpardonable affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents assembled,

in order to prepare their petition. The punishment of the Popish
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were fufpeded of
favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late acts
of council, subversive of the authority of the Church; together
with an ad approving the proceedings of the flanding council;
were the chief of their demands. But the King's indignation was
oftill so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpose, durst not
venture, that night, to present requests which could not fail of kind-
ling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all his at-

* Spots. 417, &c. Cald, 5. 55, &c. Birch. Mem, 2. 235.

tendants,
200

attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the feflion, and other courts BookVIII,
of justice, were required to leave a city, where it was no longer con- 1596
fiftent either with their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the He leaves

Edinburgh,

noblemen and barons were commanded to return to their own ad proceeds
houses, and not to reassemble without the King's permission. The ith severity
vigour, with which the king aded, firuck a damp upon the fpiritscitizens.
of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts of juflice, re-
pented already of their conduct. The Ministers alone resolved to
maintain the contest. They endeavoured to prevent the nobles
from dispersing; they inflamed the people by violent invectives
against the King; they laboured to procure subscriptions to an as-
fociation for their mutual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the junction of some of the greater nobles would add to their
cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that
the people, moved by the word of God, and provoked by the in-
juries offered to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to protect the Protestant Religion, which
owed its establishment to the piety and valour of their ancestors; that
they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no lets than his noble birth,
entitled him to that honour: They conjured him therefore not to
disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to refute the suffering Church
that aid, which the so much needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of
complying with their desire, carried the letter directly to the Kinf,
whom this new insult ir itated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magistrates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their Ministers, as
manifest incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The magif-
trates, in order to regain the King's favour, were preparing to

VOL. II. D d obey;

20o

BookVIII. obey; and the Minillers, who saw no other hope of safety, fled
-.ft towards England *.

1597.

T'he King
]umlbles the
power of the
Chu!ch.
J a . 3,

THIS unsuccessful insurrection, inflead of overturning, eflablifh-

ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confounded
and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjeds, in order to avoid sus-
picion, or to gain his favour, contended who. (hould be most for-
ward to execute his vengeance. A Convention of estates being
called, pronounced the late infurreOcion to be high treason; ordained
every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission to the
King's jurifdition, in all matters civil and criminal; impowered
magistrates to commit, instantly, to prison any Minifler, who
in his sermons, should utter indecent reflections on the King's
conduct; prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, without
the King's licence; commanded that no person should be eleted a
magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the King's ap-
probation; and that, in the mean time, the present magifirates
should either discover, and inflic condign punishment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself should be subjected to
all the penalties of that treasonable action -j.

Abridges tle ARMED with the authority of there decrees, James resolved to crush
privilges of entirely the mutinous spirit of his subjects. As the Clergy had, hi-
the citizens of
LEdiburli. therto, derived their chief credit and strength from the favour and zeal

of the citizens of Edinburgh, his firftcarewasto humblethem. Though
the magistrates submitted to him in the most abject terms; though
they vindicated themselves, and their fellow citizens, from the most
distant inttcnt:on of violating his royal person or authority; though,
after the ftrictett iLrutiiy, no circumlftaces that could fix on them

*S JP'tf. 45 i. Cald. 5, i2G.

the
202

-I- Calel, 5. 1,17.
3

the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been discovered; though BookVIII.
many of the nobles, and fitch of the Clergy as frill retained any
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledge- 597
mnents, nor intercessions, were of the least avail *. The King
continued inexorable, the city was declared to have forfeited its pri- Feb. 2o.
vileges as a Corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of trea-
son. The capital of the kingdom, deprived of magifrates, de-
ferted by its miniflers, abandoned by the courts of justice, and pro-
fcribed by the King, remained in desolation and despair. The
courtiers even threatened to raze the city to the foundation, and to
erect a pillar where it flood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in
compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour, and
moved by the continual follicitations of his nobles, James absolved March 2.
the citizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he
stripped them of their most important privileges; they were neither
allowed to elect their own magistrates, nor their own Ministers;
many new burdens were imposed on them; and a great fum of
money was exacted by way of peace-offering -.

JAMES was, mean while, equally assiduous, and no less success- New, reul-
ful, in circumscribing the jurisdiction of the Church. Experience had "tions th r

0ard to the

discovered that to attempt this, by acts of parliament, and fenternces Chlurdi
of privy council, was both ineffectual, and odious. He had re-
cou'rse, now, to an expedient more artful, and better calculated for
obtaining his end. The Ecclesiastical judicatories were composcd
of many members; the majority of the clergy were extremely
indigent, and uhprovided of legal stipends; the ministers in the

* Cald. 5. 149. 1' Spotfw. 434, 414.

203
Dd 2

lncigli-

BookVIIi. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity etablifh.

-/~ ed by the Presbyterian government, had aftlumed a leading in the
J597'

Church, which filled their brethren with envy; every numerous body
of men is susceptible of sudden and firong impressions, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these confide-
rations, James thought it possible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were set to work all
over the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were employed;
the usurpations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated;
the jealousy of their power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different General Assemblies were
held, in both which, notwithflanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
a majority declared in favour of those meifures, which were agree-
able to the King. Many practices, which had continued since the
reformation, were condemned ; many points of discipline, which
had hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which miniflers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was refrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed
againfl particular persons, censured; sentences of summary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Aifembly,
without the King's permiflion, prohibited; and the right of no-
minating ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown.
Thus, the Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily Submitted
to a yoke, more intolerable than any James would have ventured to
impose by force; while those who continued to oppose his mea-
fures, instead of their former popular topic of the King's violent
encroachments on a jurifdidion which did not belong to him, were

obh
204

obliged to turn their-outcries against the corruptions of their own BookVIII.
order. ,

1597.

BY the authority, of these afTemblies, the Popifi Earls were al- Popish Lords

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved pardoned.
from the sentence of excommunication ; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the church of
Rome, and by their apoflacy justified, in some degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the intercession of these

assemblies, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridged
their power. The city was divided into diftind parishes; the num-
ber of Ministers doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King could
rely were fixed in the new parishes; and these circumstances, ad-
ded to the authority of the late decrees of the Church, contributed
to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefiaflical affairs, which
James possesed during the remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfaCions of this period scarce deserve to be retmem-
bered. The Octavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split-
ing into fations among themselves, rcfigned their commiflion ; and
the adminifsration of the revenue returning into its former channel,
both the king and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their
regular and frugal ceconomy.

* Spotfw. 433. Cald. 5. 189, 233.

TOWARDS

20S

BookVIII, : .TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was held in 6rder

J597^ to restore Huntly, and his affbciates, to their estates and honours;
x597,
Dec. 19. by repealing the aft of forfeiture pafied against them. The authority

of this supreme court was likewise imployed to introduce a farther
innovation into the Church; but conformable to the system which

Fcclefiftics the king had now adopted, the motion 'for this purpose took its rife
relored to a
tCat in par- from the Clergy themselves. As the aa of general annexation, and
Lament. that eitablifhing the Presbyterian government had reduced the few

Bishops, who frill survived, to poverty and contempt; as those
who pofiiffed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere laymen, and
many of them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical
order remained to vote in parliament, and by means of that, the
influence of the Crown was considerably diminished there, and a
proper balance to the powver and number of the n'obles was want-
ing. But the prejudices, the nation had conceived against the
name and character of Bishops, were so viol'et that Jaimes was ob-
liged, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a defignto
revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commission ap-
pointed by last assembly to complain to 'thie .parliament, that the
Church was the only body in the kingdom 'deStitute 'ofits repi'e=
fentatives in that fiipreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
order to have some, who were bound to defend its rights; and
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy should be ad-
mitted, according to ancient cuflom, to a feat there. In compliance
with their requcft, an ad was paiCed, by which those Ministers,
on whomn the Kingm fiould confer the vacant Bifhopricks and Ab-
beys, were intitled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy
might conceive no jcaloufy of any encroachment on their privileges,
it was remitted to the General Assembly, to detcermine :what fpiri-

tual

tual jurifdi&ion or authority in the government of the Church these BookVIIIh
persons Should possess *.

....r~~~~~~~~ xr1598.

THE King, however, found it no easy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the at of par-
liament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy per-
ceived how much lustre this new privilege would refle: upon their
order; though they were not insensible of the great accession of
personal power and dignity, which many of them would have
acquired, by being admitted into the supreme council of the na-
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme ; and to that,
they sacrificed every consideration of interest or ambition. All the
King's professions of regard for the present constitution of the
Church did not convince them of his sincerity; all the devices that
could be invented for reffraining and circumscribing the jurifdidion
of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did not dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at first with moderate authority, and under
specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. " Varnifl
over this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
colours you please ; deck the intruder with the uitmoft art; under
all this disguise., I fee the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his brethren, and induced them to re-
jcet power, and honours, with as much zeal, as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were allured by the hopes
of preferment; the King himself and his Miniilers employed the
fame arts, which they had tried so successfully last year; and after Marchl 7
long debates, and much opposition, the Gencral Alrimbly dcclardd

w Spotfw. 450, Pail. i th J.,c. V1. c. 235.

that

20o
BookVIII. that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat in parliament;

- -- that it would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have its re.
1598. presentatives in that supreme court; and that fifty one persons, a

number nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, who were an-
ciently called to parliament, should be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their eleeTion, toge,
ther with the powers to be vested in them, were left unde-
cided for the present, and furnified matter of future delibe-

ration *.

599. As the profpeót of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

James endea-nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it certain.
,ours w ith
fucccif to gain And as he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
t party in
EnPland. marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to their several courts,

in order to explain the juflnefs of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their assistance, if any competitor should arise to dif-
pute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could afford him was
diflant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of
Kinlofs, his ambassador at the English court, follicited Elizabeth,
with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by some public deed,
and to deliver her own fubjeds from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed succession. But age had
firengtllned all the passions, which had, hitherto, induced Eliza-
beth to keep this great question obscure, and undecided; and a
general and evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As no
impression could be made on the Queen, the ambassador was com-
manded to found the disposition of her fubjedts, and to try what
progress he could make in gaining them. Bruce possessed all the

Spots. 450. Cald. 5. 278.

talents

talents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite for conductingBook VIII
a negociation, no less delicate, than important. A Minister of 159).
this character was intitled to the confidence of the English. Ma-
ny of the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated assurances of their resolution to assert
his master's right, in opposition to every pretender *. And as fe-
.veral pamphlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, contain-
.ing objections to his title, James employed some learned men in
his kingdom to answer these cavillers, and to explain the advantages
which would result to both kingdoms, by the union of the Crowns.
These books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to re-
concile the English to that event. A book published this year, by
the King himself, produced an effect still more favourable. It was
intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the art
of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwithfiand-
ing the great alterations and refinements in national taste since that
time, we must allow this to be no contemptible performance, and
not to be inferior to the works of most cotemporary writers, either
in purity of style or justness of composition. Even that vain pa-
rade of erudition with which it abounds, and which now disgusts
us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it was filled with those
general rules, which Speculative authors deliver for rendering a people
happy, and of which James could discourse with great plausibility,
though often incapable of putting them in pra-tice; the Englifl
conceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expected an increase
of national honour and prosperity, under a Prince so profoundly
Ikilled in politics, and who gave such a specimen both of his wis-
dom, and of his love to his people -.

* Johnfl, 242: -1- Camd. Spots. 457.
VOL. II. E e T-rp

A AA .1

Book VIII. THE Queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were
-- 9 '9 very different from there of her fubjecs. His excessive indulgence

59 towards the Popish Lords ; the facility with which he pardoned their

repeated treasons; his restoring Beatoun, the Popish Archbishop of
Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time of the Reforma-
tion, to the possession of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France; the applause
he beflowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
Queen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of
a mind alienated from the proteflant religion; and fufpedted that
he would soon revolt from the profeflion of it. These suspicions

-'ccufes him seemed to be fully confirmed, by a discovery which came from the
ofcorrefpord-
in witllthe Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who, ra-
P'ope. ther than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself so

far as to act as a spy for the Engliih court. He conveyed to Eli-
zabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Clement VIII.
in which the King, after many expressions of regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in order to render the
intercourse between the court of Rome and Scotland more frequent
and familiar, he follicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop of
Vaizon, a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardinal *. Elizabeth, who
had received, by another channel --, some imperfet intelligence of
this correspondence, was filled with just furprize, and immediately
despatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the truth
of the matter, and to reproach James for an aftion so unbecoming
a Proteflant prince. He was no less aflonifhed at the accusation,
and with a confidence, which nothing but the confcioufniefs of in-
nocence could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere calumny,

* Cald. 333. -I Winw. Mem. vol. i. 37, 52.

and

and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose to Book VIII.
bring his sincerity in Religion to be fufpeded. Elphingfton the Se- ."

1599.

cretary of Rfate denied the matter with equal solemnity. It came
to be known by a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth had received was
well founded, though at the fame time the King's declarations of
his own innocence were perfetly consistent with truth. Cardinal
Bcllarmine, in a reply which he published to a controversial .treatise,
of which the king was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had once entertained of
the Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this quoted his let-
ter to Clement VIII. It was impossible, any longer, to believe this
to be a fition; and it was a matter too delicate to be passed over
without flrid inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingflon,
and his confefslon unravelled the whole mystery. He acknowledged
that he had shuffled in this letter, among other papers, which he
laid before the King to be signed, who, fufpeting no such deceit,
subscribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, however, to this ation,
but zeal for his majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government, he
imagined that he was paving the way for his more easy accession
to the English throne. The Privy Council of England entertained
very different sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the King's reputation had been exposed to reproach, but
his life to danger, by this rash imposture; they even imputed the
gun-powder treason to the rage and difappointmcnt of the Papists,
upon finding that the hopes which this letter inspi-rcd were hruf-
trated. The Secretary was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried

E e 2 for

2-11

BookVIII. for high treason. His peers found him guilty; but, by the Queen's
'- -' interceflion, he obtained a pardon*.

1599.

ACCORDING to the account of other historians, James himself

was no firanger to this correspondence with the Pope; and, if we
believe them, Elphingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of Dun-
bar, concealed some circumifances in his narrative of this tranf-
action, and falsified others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil over
this part of his mailer's conduct --.

BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre-

pains to gainary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,
the Roman about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friendship
Catholics.

of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precaution towards
facilitating his accefflon to the English throne. Lord Home, who
was himself a Papist, was entrusted with a secret commission to
the Pope +; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an active instrument
with those of his own religion II. The Pope expressed such fa-
vourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right to the Crown
of England, that James thought himself bound, some years after,
to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner *. Sir James
Lindsay made great progress in gaining the English Papilts to ac-
knowledge his Majesty's title. Of all there intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived obscure hinet, from different quarters. The more imper-
fedly the knew, the more violently the fufpeded the King's de-
signs, and the naturaljealoufy of her temper increasing with age,
the observed his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

Spotfw. 456, 507. Jolhnf. 448. s- Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. 147.
t Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57. |I Cald. vol. vi. 147. ** Ibid. vol. v. 604.

8 TlrE

THiE queflions with regard to the ele&ion and power of the re- Book VIII.

presentatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by the '6oo
General Assembly, which met at Montrose. That place was March2s.
chosen, as most convenient for the ministers of the north, among His regtula-
whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And although great num- gard to the

d0~~~~

* * oo ~~~~~~~~church.

bers retorted from the northern provinces, and the King employed
his whole interest, and the authority of his own pretence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were s ith difficulty agreed
on. That the General assembly hiall recommend fix persons to
every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in Parliament,
out of whom the King (hall nominate one ; that the person so elect-
ed, after obtaining his feat in parliament, shall neither propose, nor
content to any thing there, that may affect the interest of the church,
without special instructions to that purpose; that he shall be answer-
able for his conduct to every General assembly; and submit to its
censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy and excommunica-
tion; that he shall discharge the duties of a Pastor, in a particular
congregation; that he Ihall not usurp any ecclesiastical jurifdiEtion,
superior to that of his other brethren; that if the church inflit on
him the censure of deprivation, he fiall, thereby, forfeit his feat in
Parliament; that he llall annually resign his commission to the
General assembly, which may be reflored to him, or not, as the
Assembly, with the King's approbation, flhall judge most expedient
for the good of the Church %. Nothing could be more repugnant
to the idea of Episcopal government, than there regulations. It
was not in consequence of rights derived from their office, but of
powers conferred by a commission, that ecclesiastical persons were
to be admitted to a feat in Parliament; they were the reprcfenta-
tkes, not the superiors of the clergy. Deititute of all spiritual au-

* Spots. 453, 457. Cald. vol. v. 368.

thority,

2t3

BookVIII. thority, even their civil jurifdiaion was temporary. James, how-

600.3 ever, flattered himself that they' would soon be able to shake off

these fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belonged
to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And
he contended for, and they opposed the nomination of these com-
mifioners, not so much on account of the powers then vested in
them, as of those, to which it was believed they would soon at-
tain .

Gowry's con- DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-
fpiracy' lity. The clergy, after many struggles, were brought under great

fubjedion; the Popish earls were restored to their estates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the content of
the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this fe-
curity, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a con-
fpiracy altogether unexpeted, and almost inexplicable. The au-
thors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowry, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1534. Nature had adorned both there young men, especially the
elder brother, with many accomplishments, to which education had
added its most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than is common at
their age of life; generous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far
from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the
most sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwithifanding all
these noble qualities, some unknown motive engaged them in a
conspiracy, which, if we adhere to the account commonly received,

* Spots. 45g.

muff
214

must be transmitted to posterity, as one of the most wicked, as well BookVIII,
as one of the worif concerted, of which history makes any mention. 6o

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who resided during the

hunting season in his Palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruthven,
who, with an air of great importance, told the King, that the even-
ing before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious afpe2,
walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a
vast quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and without communicating the matter to any
person, had kept him confined and bound in a solitary house; and
that he thought it his duty to impart such a singular event, first of
all, to his Majefly. James immediately fufpeded this unknown per-
son to be a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin, in order to
excite new commotions in the kingdom; and resolved to impower
the Magistrates of Perth to call the person before them, and inquire
into all the circumstances of the flory. Ruthven violently opposcd
this resolution, and with many arguments urged the King to ride di-
rectly to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean
while the chace began; and James, notwithflancing his passion for
that amusement, could not help ruminating on the flrangenefs of
the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At last, he called him,
and promised when the sport was over, to set out for Perth. The
chace, however, continued long; and Ruthven, who all the while
kept close by the king, was frill calling on him to make hafle. At
the death of the Buck, he would not allow James to flay till a fresh
horse was brought him ; and oblerving the Duke of Lennox and
the Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the King, he entreated
him to countermand them. This James rcfuted; and though

. Ruth-

215

THE HISTORY
Book VIII. Ruthlven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the' apparent pertur-

~bOD ci bation in his whole behaviour, raised some suspicions in his mind;

yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on him
to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruthven
rode forward to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
he had already despatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by several of the
citizens, met the King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no pains to attone,
by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guests. When the King's repast was over, his attendants were
led to dine in another room, and he being left almost alone, Ruth-
-ven whispered him, that now was the time to go to the chamber
where the unknown person was kept. James commanded him to
bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with them ; but, instead of that,
-Ruthven ordered him not to follow: and conducting the King up
a stair-case, and then through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him, led him at last into a small lludy, in which
there stood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagger
by his fide. The King, xho expected to have found one disarmed
and bound, flarted at the fight, and enquired if this was the per-
son; but Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour, and holding it to the King's breast, c Remember,

said he, how unjustly my father fuffcred by your command; you

"are now my prisoner; submit to my disposal without resistance, or
" outcry; or this dagger shall inflantly avenge his blood." James
expoflulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him. The man,
whom he found in the fludy, flood, all the while, trembling
and difinaycd, without courage either to aid the King, or to fc-

cond

I

cond his aggressor. Ruthven protested that if the King raised no out- Boo.KVIII,
cry, his life flould be safe; and, moved by some unknown reason,
retired in order to call his brother, leaving to the man in armour the
care of the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make any noise
during his absence.

WIILE the King was in this dangerous situation, his attendants

growing impatient to know whither he had retired, one of Gowry's
attendants entered the room hastily, and told them that the King had
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them ruffed out into the
street; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry, called for their horses.
But, by this time, his brother had returned to the King, and swear-
ing that now there was no remedy ; he behoved to die; offered
to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he scorned to submit
to that indignity ; and closing with the assassin, a fierce struggle
ensued. The man in armour flood as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlefs ; and the King dragging Ruthven towards a window, which
during his absence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Trea-
son! Treason ! Help ! I am murdered !" His attendants heard,
and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand which grasped
the King's neck with violence. They flew with precipitation to his
affiflance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal stair-case, where they found all the doors shut, which they
battered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burst them open.
But Sir John Ramsey, entering by a back-flair, which led to the
apartment where the King was, found the door open ; and rufling
upon Ruthven, who was still struggling with the King, struck him
twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the flair-cafe, where
Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh Herreis met, and killed him; he

VOL. II. F f crying

2,7

FooKVIII. crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this

1600 o " action." During this fcuffRe, the man, who had been concealed

in the tfudy, escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsay, Erskine,
and Herreis, one Willon a footman entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to (hut the door, Gowrie rushed
in with a drawn sword in each hand, followed by seven of his atten-
dants well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them all with in-
slant death. They immediately thrust the King into the little study,
and 1hutting the door upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwith-
tfanding the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced Gowrie
thro' the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his
followers having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the confli&. A dread-
ful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many persons
laboured in vain to force a paflage; and the King being aflured that
they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they unexpectedly found
safe, with transports of congratulation; and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants round him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whole Provost Gowrie was,
and by whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the house, threatened
revenge, with many insolent and opprobrious speeches against the
King. James endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
speaking to them from the window ; he admitted their magistrates
into the house; related to them the whole circuinflances of the
faed; and their fury fubliding by degrees, they dispersed. On search-
ing the Earl's pockets for papers, that might dilcover his dfigns and
accomplices, nothing was found but a small parchment bag, full

of
218

of magical characters, and words of enchantment; and if we may BooKVIII.
believe the account of the conspiracy published by the King, (" while '-,'
c, these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled not;

but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in
great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy

day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland, having commit-
ted the dead bodies of the two brothers to the cultody of the Ma-
giftrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the King gave of The motive

lq CD of the conspi-

all the circumfrances of this conspiracy against his life, the motives f aors cotrp -
which induced the two brothers to attempt an action so detestable, filytxplained
the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words of Ruthven to
the King gave some grounds to think, that the desire of revenging
their father's-death had instigated them to this attempt. But, what-
ever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarce probable that they
could impute them to the King, whose youth and fubjedion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exempted him from being the objet
ofrefentment, on account of actions which were not done by his com-
mand. James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the
father had suffered, by benefits to his children; and Gowrie himself,
sensible of his favour, acknowledged it with the warmest expref-
sions of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being convited
of afTifing him in this assault on the king's servants, were executed at
Pcrth; but they could give no light into the motives, which had
pro'impted their mafler to an action so repugnant to there acknowledg-
mlients. Diligent fcarch was made for the person concealed in the fludy,
a.ln from hiim orcat difcovcries were expected. But Andrew Iender-
fun the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of pardon, confcred

F f z himclf

219

BooKY.VII. himself to be the man, was as mtuch a ira.nger to lis nmafler's de-igns
L'- - '
as the ret1; and though placed in. the Itudy by Gowrie's command,

he did not ev.en know for what end that station had been assigned
him., The whole trarEfadtion remained as impenetrably dark as ever;
and the two brothers, it was concldded, had concerted their fchene
without eit-her confident or accom.piicp with unexampled secrecy
as well as wickedness,

AN accident, no less strange than the other circumstances of the

fory, and which happened nrine years after, discovered that this
opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the two
brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One Sprot,
a notary, having whispered among several persons that he .knew
some secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confeflion was partly voluntary, and partly
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reflalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of dissolute
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in ills ctimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
withl him, in order to consult the plan of their operations; the
Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose ; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dead,
But Sprot affirmed, that he had read letters written both by Gowrie
and Logan, on that occarion ; and in confirmation of his testimony,
fcveral of Logan's letters, which a curiosity, fatal to himself, had
prompted 'prot to Real from among Bour's papers, were produced *.

Theib

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Pour, another to Gowric, and three
of them with' ut any dircdlion ; nor could Sprot dilcovcr tie Lume of the person to

whom

SprOt'S dif-

tuvcri C cn-
cerning ir.
220

These were compared, by the privy council, with papers of Lo- BooR VIII.
gan's hand-writing, and the resemblance was manifef. Persons of ''--
undoubted credit, and well qualified to judge of the matter, exa-
mined them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself did not
exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones were dug up, and tried
for High Treason, and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal ',

his

whom they were written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right h.nw;-ae.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the letter, Crom. 95. that
there were several persons privy to the conrpiracy. The date of the first letter is
July iEth. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears from -the original fummcns cf Forfau'turc against Logan's
heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addrcfied to him with regard to a confpi-
racy equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read.
" Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, diii Georgii opera in legendis omnibus
" fcriptis ad eum miflis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altogether strange;
and nothing but the capricious charatecr of Logan can account for his chufing such
a confident.

* By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High Treason might be tried

even after death. This pracRice was adopted by the Scots, without any limitation,
Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper reftriAions, by an acE A. ID.
1542. which has never been printed. The words of it arc, "' And because the said
Lords (i. e. the Lords of articles) think the said a& (viz. in 1540) too general, and
prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore statutes and ordains that the said
at flall have no place in time coming, but againfl the heirs of them that notori.
oufly commits or shall commit lefe majefly against the King's person, against the
realm for averting the fame, and against them that shall happen to betray the King's
army allenarly, and being notourly known in their time; and the heirs of thcfe
persons to be called and judged within five ycars after the decease of the said per-
sons committcrs of the said crimes; and the said time being bypafl, the said heirs
never to be pursued for the fame." The sentence aga.inst Logan violated this flatute
in two particulars. He was noc notourly known during his life to be an accom-
plicc in the crime for which he was tried; and his heirs were called in queflion more
than five years after his death. It is remarkable that this statute seems net to have

bcc:l t
7

BOOK VIII. his lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot
1ó-0 was condemned to be hanged for misprision of treason. He ad-

hered to his confession to the last, and having promised, on the
scaffold, to give the fpetators a sign in confirmation of the truth
of what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

BUT though it be thus unexpeaedly discovered that Gowrie did

not al without associates, little additional light is thrown, by this dif-
covery, on the motives and intention of his conduc. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such distinguished virtue,
flould revolt, all at once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It appears still more
improbable, that they fiould have concerted their undertaking with

so

been attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular cir-
cimftance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of jutlice that no person can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms, and often absurd
in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that in any process againfl a
dead pjrfon, his corps or bones shall be presented at the bar. Examples of this
occur frequently in the Scottish hiflory. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead
hc:dy of the Earl of Huntly was prefcnted in parliament, before sentence of fr-
f u t:,rc was pronounced ;igainl- him. Fur the fame rearon the bodics of Gowrie
and his brother were preferred, in order th it they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackcnz. Crim.
Law. 13 ok i. Tit 6. §. 22.

* It appears that Archbishop Spotw'lood was present at the execution of Sprot;

Cr:/? l 115 ; lnd )ct lie fcens to have given no credit to his difcoveric,. The man-
ncr in which he (jpc.ks of himi is rclnarkalie, '" Whether or not I should mention
'c tli arraigilnmi':llt anid execcutii of (;corge Sprot, who fuffLrcd at Edliiibnurh,
' la do) lbtful. Ilis conlellion, tlhugh volmltiary and conil.lnt, carrying finail
*l probability. 1 'ls 1man Ldcofed, &c. It eCCIecd to be a very fiilion, and a

meire invention of thl man's own brain, for neither did lie shew the letter, nor

"' could
222

so little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the deed
flould have remained concealed, they could not have chosen a more
improper scene for executing it than their own house. If they
intended that Henderson should have firuck the blow, they could
not have pitched on a man more destitute of the courage, that must
dire& the hand of an assassin ; nor could they expeA that he, unfo-
licited, and unacquainted with their purpose, would venture on
such a desperate action. If Ruthven meant to stab the king
with his own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger after it was
pointed at his breast ? How could he leave the King, after such a
plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not preposterous to corn-
mit him to the keeping of such a timid and false associate, as Hen-
derfon ? For what purpose did he wafle time, in binding the hands
of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched with

" could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so secretly,
" would have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be."
p. 508. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had
bcen tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He himn
fclf was probably present in parliament at the trial. The earl of Dunbar, of whomr
he always speaks with the highest respect, was the person who directed the process
against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against the truth of Sprot's evi.
dence, notwithitanding all these circumfiances, is furprizing. Sir Thomas Hamil-
ton, the King's advocate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre-
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an ori-
ginal letter of his to the King, 21ft of June 16o9. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after
mentioning the manner in which the trial had been conduced, he thus goes on.

" When the probation of the summons was referred to the Lords of Articles' votes,

thcy f;tnid uniformly, all in one voice, the said fumimons to be so clearly proved,
that they fcerned to contend who fliould be able most zealously to cxprels the atilf-
I;sitinn of his healt, not only by the noft pithy words, but by tears of joy ; divci fe
of the blcf rank conlfiling, that that whereof they doubted at their cntry into tlie
hlulc was iow so manil el, thot they behoved to cnfecr them traitors, wlh fllmuld
;an) longer refuse to declare their aflured rcfolutiol of the truth of that trelcasn."

BooKVIII.

I600.
ihis

223
4

BootKVII.I his sword ? Had providence permitted them to embrue their hands

,,o ill the blood of their Sovereign, what ad'van'tage cooil:d have accrued

to them by his death ? And xwhat claims er pretensions could they
have opposed to the rights of his children ¢ ? Inevitable and infiant
vengeance, together with perpetual infamy, were the only confe-
quences they could expeQ to follow such a crime.

0 N the other hand, it is impossible to believe that the King had

formed any design against the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-
gree, the objecs of his jealousy or hatred t; nor was he of a spirit

so

* It has been afl:rted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl of Gow-

rie might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the Ton of Dorothea Stew-
ait daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divo!ce
fiom the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband. Burnet's Hist.
of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded. It appears, from undoubtedevi-
d.nce, that Lord Methven had only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its
infancy, and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen Margaret,
but of Janet Sfewart Lord Methven's second Wife, a daughter of John Earl of
Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had really been descended from the
blood royal of England, the King had at that time a ofn and a daughter; and betides
them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a preferable ti-
tle to the Crown of England.

1- Sir Henry Nevile, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death ds the

two brothers to a caufc not mentioned by any of our Historians. "' Out of Scot-
land we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence be-
twixt the Kinli and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery of rome
affR:tion between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him)
was the truefd caufc and motive of that tragexly." Winw. Mem.e vol. i. 274. Whe-
ther the following paflTges in Nicolson's letter be any confirmation of that fufpi-
cion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22, 1602, he mentions the rc-
turn of Gowric's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, " The coming ia

of

so fanguinaty, or so noted for affi and desperate valour, as to have BookVIIL
attempted to murder them m their own house, where they were 1600.
surrounded with many domestics, he only with a iknder and nn-
armed train; where they could call to their assistance the inha-
bitants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a
distance from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for his
associates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke
of Lennox, the former conneted in close friendship with the house
of Gowrie, and the latter married to one of the Earl's sifters.

WHICIaSOEVER of these opposite systems we embrace; whether A conjeture

we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to the King; the intenti
insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, rnyf- of the con-

fpirators.

tery, and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-
fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it star a
more remote cause, we may discover it to be less criminal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great object of Elizabeths policy. In order to this, fie sometimes
toothed him; and sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites
and when Ihe failed of attaining her end by these means, the en-

of these two, and the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away anA
furnifling Mrs. Beatrix [their sifter] with such information as Sir Thoitas Erlkine
has given, hath bred great suspicion in the King of Scots that they come not ia
but upon some dangerous plot" In another letter January i, 1603. " The day
of writing my last Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the Lady Paify, and Mrs.
of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into the court in the evening, and sowcd
in a chamber prepared for her by the Queen's direstion, where the Queen had
much time and conference with her. Of this the King got notice. and shewed his
dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving her for it, and examininl quietly of
the Queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters tlhcruunto bclonging with
flch discretion and fccrecy as requires fich a matter."

VOL. IL G g couraged

-22

BookV1II. encouraged the Clergy to render any administration (he diflrufted

ó0-0-, unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up some fadion of the nobles

to oppose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with the arts
of undermining a Ministry by intrigues, had recourse to the ruder
practice of rendering themselves makfers of the King's person, that
they might thereby obtain the direcions of his councils. Those
nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of Ruthven, were infti-
gated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connetions which James had been forming of late with the Ro-
man Catholic Princes, his secret negociations in England with her
fubjeds, and the maxims by which he governed his own king-
dom, all contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded some great
Revolution in Scotland to be approaching, and it was her interest
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful
of the Scottish nobles, and descended from ancestors warmly at-
tached to the English interest. He had adopted the fame system,
and believed the welfare of his country to be inseparably connet-
ed with the subsistence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, he had contraEed an intimate friendship
with Sir Henry Nevill, the Queen's ambassador there, and was re-
commended by him to his Court, as a person of whom great use
might be made *. Elizabeth received him, as he passed through
England, with distinguished marks of respect and favour. From
all these circumstances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the
conspiracy against the King was formed at that time, in concert
with her. Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears
not to be destitute of foundation. An Englifl ship was observed
hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the firth of Forth.

* Winw. X. 1 56.
226

1

The

The Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill
success of the conspiracy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great
umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's in-
trigues in Scotland tended to hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the Popish pre-
tenders to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts,
to which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an act of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, firrf of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When these proved more numerous than
was expected, the Earl employed a stratagem in order to separate
them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By (hutting James up, mean while, in a distant corner
of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their design
seems to have been rather to seize, than to assassinate him. And
though Gowrie had not collected his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdomr
by open force, he might soon have been conveyed aboard the
English ship, which waited perhaps to receive him, and he might
have been landed at Fafl-Cafile, a house of Logan's, in which,
according to many obscure hints in his letters, some rendezvous
of the conspirators was to be held. Amidit the furprize and ter-
ror, into which the King must have been thrown by the violence
offered to him, it was extremely natural for him to conclude that
his life was fought. It was the interest of all his followers to con-
firm him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add

Gg 2 to

BookVIII.

1600.

227

Book 'VI.

600oo.

to the importance, and merit of their own services. And thiu
his fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which
the contemplation of any great and tragical event, when not fully
underfood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole tranfation. On,
the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circum-
stances, which were added, detraded from the credit of those,
which really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling
in queflion the truth of the whole conspiracy.

M;.,nv ii, be- ThIE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh
; .:.',;h- next morni-ng. The privy council commanded the Ministers of that
l by, tlhe city instantly to assemble their people; and, after relating to them.

the circumflances of the conspiracy formed against the King's
life, to return public thanks to God, for the protection which
he had so visibly afforded him. But as the firfl accounts transmit-
ted to Edinburgh, written in hurry, and while the circumstances
of the conspiracy were but imperfealy known, and the paflions
which it excited fIrongly felt, were indiftint,. exaggerated, and
contradicory, the Ministers laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's safety, they re-
fuTed to enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from
the chair of truth, what. appeared to be till dubious and uncer-
tain.

A F.W days after, the King returned to Edinburgh; and though

Galloway, the Minilter of his own Chapel, made an harangue to the
people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circumstances
of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing, confirmed
his account; though he commanded a narrative of the whole
tranfadion to be publifsled; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, fill continued incredulous, and unconvinced.

Their
t28

Their high esteem of Gowrie, their jealaufy of every part of the Book VII.
King's condu&, added to some false and many improbable circum- 16oo
flances in the narrative, not only led' them to fufped the whole,
but gave their suspicions an, air of credibility. But at length, the
King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robeht iBruce., to own that they were convinced
of tie truth of the conspiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the tranf-
action, but could not fay that he himself was persuaded of the truth
of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a single man would have bean,
little regarded, but as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread
among the people, the example of one, in so high reputation for
integrity and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King was-
at the utmost pains to convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it
impossible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment, baniflied him the kingdom *-

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any fcruplesProceedings
of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced of parliament'

againif the

there, according to law; an indictment for Hi-gh Treason was pre-confpirators.
ferred against them; witnesses were examined ; and, by an unani-
mous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the
punilhment due to Traitors was inflited on their dead bodies; and
as if the p.unihment hitherto in use did not express sufficient detefta-
tion of their crimes, the parliament enacted that the surname of
Ruthven should be abolished; and in order to preserve the memory
of the King's miraculous escape, and to declare the sense which
the nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages, appointed

* Sots. 461, &S. Cald. 5. 389, &c.

the

2259

THE HISTORY
BookVIII. the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of public

x 600 tlhankfgiving *.

ix~~~~~6oo. 0 ~THOUGH

Tnouca

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King published a ds.

course of their vile and unnatural conspiracy againJ? his life. In the year 1713, George
Earl of Cromertie published an " Hitforical account-of the conspiracy by the Earl
"' of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reflalrig against King James VI." He seems
not to have seen the account which the King himself had given of that matter
and borrows the whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but he
has extracted from the public records the depositions of the witnesses produced by
the King's Council, in order to make good the charge against the two brothers
and Logan their afrociate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the ma.
terial circumstances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which they con-
tain, one would expeEt to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fact, fill
recent, published by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
mined in pretence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a degree of
evidence seldom attained in historical relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt
and uncertainty. But as every thing with regard to this transaction is dark and
problematical, the King's account and the depositions of the witnefes not only vary
but contradiCt each other in so many circumfiances, that much room is flill left for he-
fitation, and historical scepticism. The testimony of Henderson is the fullest and
most important, but in several particulars the King's account and his are contra-
dictory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the
dagger at his breast, c" the fellow in the ltudy flood quaking and trembling." Dife.
17. But Henderson fays that he himself wrested the dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's
hand. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson llkewife boasted to his wife that he had
that day twice saved the King from being stabbed. Disc. 54. Crom. 53. II. The
King afTerts that Henderson opened the window during Mr. Ruthven's absence.
Disc. 23. Henderson deposes that he was only attempting to open it when Mr,
Ruthven returned, and that during the struggle between the King and him, he
opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we may believe the King, the
fellow in the study flood, during the firuggle, behind the King's back inactive and
trembling all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderson affirms that he fiatched away
the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the King; that he pulled
back Ruthven's hand while he was endeavouring to flop the King's mouth, and
that he opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52. IV. By the King's account,

Mr.

231

THOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a greatBookVIII.,
alarm, it was followed by no consequences of importance; and 60o.

havingEfrex's con-

fpiracy againit

Mr. Ruthven left him in the ltudy, and went away in order to meet with his bro.Elizabeth
ther, and the Earl came up the stairs for the fame purpose. Disc. 23. Hender-
son deposes that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, " he believes that he did not pass
" from the door." Crom. 5 1. It is apparent both from the situation of the house,
and from other circumfiances, that there could not possibly have been any interview
between the brothers at this time, Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the privy council in Au-

guR, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliament in November. Not to mention
some leffIr variations between there depositions, we Ihall point out two which are
remarkable. In his first deposition Mr. Henderson relates the most material circum-
fiance of the whole in these words. "Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's
" dagger and held the fame to his Majesty's breast, faying, remember you of my father's
"murder; you hall now die for it, and minting to his Highnesse's heart, with the dag-

geer, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hands, and swore that

"as God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
" hand, the space a man may go fix fleps, he would have firicken the King to the
", hilts with it." Disc. 52. But at his second examination he varied from this in two
material circumitances. First the words which he at that time put in Mr. Ruthven's
mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breast are, " Sir you must be my pri.
" soner; remember onmyfather's death." Secondly when he threatenedhim with death,
it was only to deter him from making any noise. " Hold your tongue or by ChriJ you
" Jhall die." 2. In his firfi deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven when he returned
to the chamber where he had left the King, are " There is no remedy, by God ygu must
" die." But in his second deposition. "By God there is no remedy, and offered to
" bind his Majesty's hands." Crom. 51. The material words you mufI die are omitted.
'Ihe first deposition seems plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to mur-
der the King. The second would lead us to conclude that he had no otherdefign
than to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise fomc remarkable contradictions in the teflimonies of the other

witneflEs. i. In the discourse published by authority it is insinuated that the tu-
mult of the inhabitants was raiscd against the King, and that it required some art

to

3BookVHI. having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any as-

"60'£ fociates, or with such as were unknown, and chore to remain so,

t:he danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after, a
:conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
the first danger was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects,
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy.
As James was deeply interetfed in that event, it merits our particu-
lar notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided between two

powerful factions, which contended for the supreme direction of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of
Eifex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh, was
at the head of the other. The former was the most accomplished,
and the most popular of all the Englifl nobles; brave, generous,
affable.; though impetuous, yet willing to liflen to the councils
,of those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable
enemy; a friend no less constant, than warm; incapable of dif-
guising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for the camp, than for the court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the firit place in the administration, with a spirit

to pacify them. Disc. 3z. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition.
Crom. 44. An ac of privy council summoning the Magifirates of Perth to answer
for that riot is flill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town,
deposes that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in order to affilt
the King. Crom. 66. 2. Henderfondepofes that he gave an evasive answer to Mr.
John Moncrief, who enquired where he had been that morning, bccaufe the Earl
had commanded him n t to let any man know that he had been at Falkland. Dirc.
54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George Hay,
afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose that
the Earl, in their prefencc, asked Henderson, " Whom he found with the Kingat
Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which queflion fcems to prove that he did not aim at
teepinl that journey a fecrct.

whic)
7

which scorned the second, as below his merit. He was Coon dif-
tinguifhed by the Queen, who, with a profusion uncommon to her,
conferred on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest honours,
and molf important offices. Nor did this diminish the esteem and
affection of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at once
the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the people. Ce-
cil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a
father, deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, insinuating, indus-
trious; and though possessed of talents, which fitted him for the
highest offices, he did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining
them, but availed himself of every advantage, which his own ad-
dress, or the mistakes of others, afforded him. Two such men
were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Eflix despised the arts of
Cecil, as low and base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared
to be presumption and folly. All the military men, except Raleigh,
favoured Effex. Molt of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose
manners more nearly resembled their own.

Book VIII.

160o.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle between these Hiscorref.

falcions became more violent. Effex, in order to flrengthen him- Plon'nce
self, had early courted the friendihip of the King of Scots, for cottillhing.
whose right of succession he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him, and with his principal Mini-
fters. Cecil, devoted to the Queen alone, rose daily to new ho-
nours, by the assiduity of his services, and the patience, with
which he expected the reward of them. While the Earl's high
spirit and impetuosity Sometimes exposed him to checks fiom a
Mistress, who, though partial in her affection towards him, could
not easily bear contradiction, and conferred favours often unwilling-
ly, and always slowly. His own follicitations, however, seconded
maliciously by his enemies, who wiflhcd to remove him at a dif-

VOL. II. II h t;nce

233

234
Book VI II, tance from court, advanced him to the command of the army em-

'-~-J' ployc(' iln Ireland, against Tyrone, and to the office of Lord Lieu-

tenant of that kingdom, with a commifion almost unlimited. His
i;hccels, in that expedition, did not equal either his own promises,
or the expectations of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her
disappointment, and exasperated againit Effex by the artifices of his
cnemies, wrote him a harmh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
Thele, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first tranf-
ports of his refentiment, he proposed to carry over a part of his
army into England, and by driving his enemies from the Queen's
pretence, to reinstate himself in favour, and in power. But, upon
more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rafl design, and setting
fail with a few officers, devoted to his person, landed in England,
and posted directly to court. Elizabeth received him, without
any symptom either of affection or of displeasure. By -proper
compliances and acknowledgments, he might have regained his
former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought himself too,
deeply injured to submit to these. Elizabeth, on the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her severity
drew from him the nmoi: humble letters, the confined him to the
Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commifioners to try him, both
for his conduCt during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom without her permission. By their sentence, he was
suspended from all his offices, except that of Master of the horse, and
continued a prisoner during the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having
mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not susser the sentence to be
recorded, and soon after allowed him to retire to his own house.
During thece tranfadions, which occupied several months, Effex fluc-
tuated between the allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire
I.lnic.s ca;u- of revenge; and fornctimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the

1 'luu' other. In one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he sent

a meti

a nmeenger into Scotland to encourage the King to afTcrt his own BookVIII.
right to the succession by force of arms, and to prornife that, be- o
fides the affiltance of the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord
Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
5oo0 men, from that kingdom. But James did not chufe to hazard
the losing a kingdom, which was just ready to fall into his hands,
by a premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the
enterprize, and Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effect of disgust and 'he

I il :it-

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Queen, texpts ot E-
having not only refuted to renew a lucrative grant, which (he had
formerly bestowed, but to admit him into her preSence, that new
injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much fretted,
to absolute despair. His friends, instead of soothing his rage, or
restraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their imprudent and
interested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined
to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
semblance of public utility, by mingling theKing of Scotland's interest:
with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction which now
predominated in the English court, had resolved to support the pre-
tensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown, that the places of
the greatest importance in the kingdom were put into the hands of
his avowed enemies; and that unless he sent ambassadors, without
delay, to insist on the immediate declaration of his right of fuccefiion,
their mcafures were so well concerted, that all his hopes would be
desperate. James, who knew how disagreeable such a proposal
would be to the Qeen of England, was not willing rashly to ex-

IH h 2 pole

BookVIII. pose himself to her displeasure. But Eflex, blinded by refentiment,

-6br and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these passions, and

i aed like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompleatly armed, he attempted to aflault a
throne, the best established in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
out of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wished to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his ftan-
dard. He advanced towards the palace, with an intention to drive
Cecil and his faction out of the Qeen's pretence, and to obtain
a declaration of the Scottish King's right of succession *. But,
though almost adored by the citizens, not a man would join him
in this wild enterprize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted
by some of his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the
troops, which marched under different leaders into the city, he re-
treated to his own house; and without any bold effort, suitable to
his present condition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou-
rage, he surrendered to his enemies.

As soon as James heard of Efex's ill success, he appointed the

Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his ambaffa-
dors to the court of England. The former of there was the per-
son, by whose means Effex had carried on his correspondence with
the King. He was a passionate admirer of the Earl's character, and
disposed to attempt every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendship with Mar, was ready to second
him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the embassy less
friendly to Effex, than the choice of the ambassadors; they were
commanded to follicit, in the warmest manner, for the Earl's ljfe,

* Birch, Mem, 2. 477.

and

and if they found that the King, by avowing his fiiends, could BookVIII.
either promote their designs, or contribute to their safety, they were 1 6.
impowered to lay aside all disguise, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due to him, by force
of arms *. But before the ambassadors could reach London, Eflex
had suffered the punishment he merited by his treason. Perhaps His death.
the fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his pardon, hastened
his death. Elizabeth continued, for some time, irresolute concern-
ing his fate, and could not bring herself to consign into the hands
of the executioner, a man, who had once possessed her favour so
intirely, without a painful struggle between her resentment against
his late mifconduC, and her ancient affection towards him. The
difrefs to which he was now reduced tended naturally to soften the
former, while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and the in-
terceffion of one faithful friend, who had interest with the Queen,
might perhaps have saved his life, and have procured him a remif-
sion, which, of herself, she was ashamed to grant. But this generous
nobleman had at that time no such friend. And Elizabeth, folli-
cited incessantly by her Ministers, and offended with the haughti-
ness of Effex, who, as ({e imagined, scorned to sue for pardon, at
last commanded the sentence to be put in execution. No sooner
was the blow struck, than fie repented of her own raflnefs, and be-
wailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James always confidered
him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his service, and after his
acceflion to the English throne, reltored his son to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the conspiracy, and distinguished them
with his favour -.

* Johnft. 289. Birch, Mem. 2. 5. . Camd. Spots. 464.

TNE

237

BookV111.

i 6oi.

Daimes con-
lizue~, hr. ill.

o" ,
Z>

TiHE Scottiffi ambafadors, finding that they had arrived too late

to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not only
concealed that part of their inftrtudions, with the utmost care;
but congratulated the Queen, in their Maller's name, on her happy
escape from flch an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no
firanger to the King's correspondence with Effex, or to that no-
bleman's intention of afierting James's right to the Crown, was not
willing that these should be known to the people, and, for that
reason, received the congratulations of the Scottish arnbaiadors
with all possible marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union between the
two courts, increased the subsidy which she paid him annually.
The ambafadors resided for some time in England, and were em-
ployed, with great success, in renewing and extending the intrigues,
which Bruce had formerly entered into with the Englill nobles.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each
other in courting the favour.of their future Monarch. Assurances
of attachment, professions of regard, and promises of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil him-
self, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded on the friendship of
the Scottish King, and what advantages he might have derived
from it, thought it prudent to fland no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his Master. But being sensible,
at the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mifirefs naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew fironger
with old age; though he entered into a correspondence with him,
he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution necessary in his
situation, and peculiar to his character. And James, having gained
th' man whose opposition and influence he had hitherto chiely

I
t3

8

dreaded,

dreaded, waited, in perfea security, till that event fiould happen, BookVIII.
which would open his way to the throne of England. It was, I6oi.
with orme difficulty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to diftinguifi themselves
by that officious zeal, with which a Prince, who has a near profped
of mounting the throne, is always served, urged him to allow a
motion to be made in parliament for declaring his right of succession
to the Crown. James prudently discouraged that design; but it
was with no finall fatisfadion that he observed the ascendant he
was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had been, so long, obliged
to obey; and which had either prescribed or thwarted every flep he
had taken during the whole course of his reign "-.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the political sac- I602.
tions which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which Attempts to

civilize the

had happened there, since the King first took the reins of govern- -lighlanders.
inent into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tranquillity,
being undisturbed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intefline
commotion of long continuance. During this period, James endea-
voured to civilize the Highlands and the Isles, a part of his domi-
nions almost totally neglected by former Monarchs, though the re-
formation of it was an object highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restraining their de-
predations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen, than to their
enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gradually,
to forget the use of arms, and to become attentive to the arts of
peace. But the Iighlanders, retaining their natural fierceness,
averse from labour, and inured to rapine, infefled their more indus-

* Spots. 467, 47I. BUlcli, Mcm. 2. 514.

trious

BookVIII. trious neighbours, by their continual incursions. James being soli-
l 602-s citous not only to repress their inroads, but to render them useful

fubjedts *, had at different times enated many wife laws extremely
conducive to these ends. All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were
enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their estates, who could
not find sufficient surety for their good behaviour; they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons under their jurifdic.
tion, to bind themselves to deliver them up to justice, and to in-
demnify those, who should susser by their robberies; and, in order
to ascertain the .faithful performance of there articles, the chiefs
themselves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to put
pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a retreat
for the indufirious, and a nursery for arts and commerce, were ap-
pointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one in Can-
tyre, another in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis; and,
in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Royal
Boroughs were to be conferred upon them. Finding it, however, to
be no easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those countries with
the love of indufiry, a resolution was taken to plant among them,
colonies of people from the more industrious countries. The sirs
experiment was made in the Isle of Lewis; and as it was advan-
tageoufly situated for the filsing trade, a source from which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony transported
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well
skilled in that branch of commerce. But before they had remained
there long enough to manifest the good effects of this institution, the
islanders, enraged at feeing their country occupied by those intru-
ders, took arms, and furprizing them in the night-time, murdered
some of them, and compelled the reft to abandon the settlement.

Basil. Dor. g59.

The
240

The' King's attention being soon after turned to other objects,, we~BokVIlI;
hear no more of this salutary project. Though James did not pur- "60'"
sue the design, with that fteddyapplication.and perseverance, with-
out which it is impoflible to change the manners of a whole people,.
he had the glory,, however, not only of having first conceived the.
thought, but of having first pointed out the proper method of in-
troducing the civil arts-of life into that part of the island*.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, the effect of aE1izabeth's

. lat illness and

found constitution,. and the reward of uncommon regularity and tern-death.
perance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour decrease,
and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having removed
on a very flormy day from WeItminifer to Richmond, whither the
was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She had no
formed fever; her pulse was good; but he eat little, and could January 3.
not sleep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep melan-
choly, which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour.
She delighted in solitude, she fat conflantly in the dark; and was.
often drowned-inrrears.

N o sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons of

all ranks, and of all different feds and parties, redoubled their ap-
plications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in
profeflions of attachment to his person, and in promises of fubmif-
sion to his government. Even some of her own servants, weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid:
of the burden of gratitude for past benefits, and expecting to share
in the liberality of a new Prince, began. to desert her. And crowds
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the favour
of the successor, or afraid of being too. late in. paying homage
to him.

* Parl. 587, 1594, 159.7. Spots, 468.
VOL. II, Ii MEAN

A2t-

Book VIII. MEAN while, the Qreen's disease increased, and her melancholy

.163 appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjecures were

formed concerning the causes of a disorder from which {he seemed
to be exempted by the natural chearfulnefs of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from obse-rving
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who
beheld her health declining with most indecent indifference, and
looked forward to the accession of the Scottish King, with an im-
patience, which they could not conceal. The most common opinion,
at that time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed fronm
grief for the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and though fie
often complained of his obstinacy, seldom mentiohed his name
without tears *. An accident happened soon after her retiring to
Richmond, which revived her affection with new tenderness, and
imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being on
her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, fihe could not die in peace.
When the Queen came into her cha.mber, she told her, that while
EiTex lay under sentence of death, he was deifrous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen herself had p'rescribed by
returning a ring, which during the height of his favour fle had
given him, with a promise that, if in any future distress, he lent
that back to her as a token, it should intitle him to her protection;
that Lady Scroop was the perfonl he intended to, employ in order to
present it; that by a miRtake, it was put into her hands instead of
Lady Scroop's; and that ihe' having comtnunicated the matter to her
husband, one of ETffx's most implacable enemies, he had. forbib

Birch, Mem. 2.. 505,

6 her
242

245

her either to carry the-ring to the QOeen, or to return it to the Book VIII.
Earl. The Cointefs, having thus discloscd her secret, begged the 603
Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjustly she had fufpeted him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never

can ;" and left the room in great emotion i-. From that moment

her spirit funk entirely ; fle could scarce taste food; (he refused ail
the medicines prefciibed her by her physicians; declaring that fie
wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail
on her to go to bed; she fat on cushions, during ten days and nights,
pensive and silent, holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The only thing
to which she seemed to give any attention, were the ads of devo-
tion performed in her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in there she joined with great appearance of fervour. Wafted,
at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long abstinence, fie

t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was firit published by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the
traditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 206.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as one of the causes of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch, Mem, 2. 506. But Effex had been beheaded two years before
her death, and there seems to have been no other reason, but that which we have as-
signed, why her sorrow should revive with so much viole nce at so great a distance of
time. As the death of the Counters of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before
the Queen's death, the coincidence of these events, together witlk the other evidence
mentioned, adds so imuch probability to the flory related by OCborne, as will entitle it
to a place in hiltory. The only objetion to the account we have given of Elizabeth's
attachment to Eflex, arises from her great age. At the age of 68, the amorous
passions are commonly abundantly cool, and the violence of all the pafllons, except
one, is much abated. But the force of this objeAion is entirely removed by an Au-
thor who has illufl'ratcd many pafiages in the Englifll Hiitory, and adorned more.
Catalogte of Roy. aad Nob. Authors, Article Effex..

expired
Ii 2

Book VIII. MEAN while, the Queen's disease increaseds and her melancholy

j603. appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various corijecures were

formed concerning the causes of a disorder from which she seemed
to be exempted by the natural chearfulnefs of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from observing
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who
beheld her health declining with most indecent indifference, and
looked forward to the accefion of the Scottish King, with an im-
patience, which they could not conceal. The mofi common opinion,
at that time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed firom
grief for the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and though she
often complained of his obftiinacy, seldom rientiohed his name
without tears ~. An accident happened soon after her retiring to
Richmond, which revived her affecion with new tenderness, and
imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being on
her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, she could not die in peace.
When the Qeen came into her chamber,. ihe told her, that while
ElTex lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Qyeen herself had p'rescribed by
returning a ring, which during the height of his favour she had
given him, with a promise that, if in any future distress, he sent
that back to her as a token, it should intitle him to her protection;.
that Lady Scroop was the person he intended to enploy in order to
present it; that by a mistake, it was put into her hands iriftead of
Lady Scroop's; and that the having comlfiunicated the matter to her
husband, one of Eflcx's most implacable enemies, he had. forbid

i Birch, Mem. 2.. 505,

6 her
242

243

her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Book VIII.
Earl. The Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the 603
Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjustly she had fufpeted him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never
( can ;" and left the room in great emotion -t. From that moment
her spirit funk entirely; she could scarce taste food; (he refused ail
the medicines prescribed her by her physicians; declaring that fihe
wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail
on her to go to bed; she fat on cushions, during ten days and nights,
pensive and silent, holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The only thing
to which she seemed to give any attention, were the ads of devo-
tion performed in her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in these she joined with great appearance of fervour. Wafted,
at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long abstinence, the

+ This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first publifaed by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the
traditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 206.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Eflex's death as one of the causes of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch, Mem, 2. 506. But Effex had been beheaded two years before.
her death, and there seems to have been no other reason, but that which we have as-
signed, why her sorrow should revive with so much violence at so great a distance of
time. As the death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a fortnight before
the Queen's death, the coincidence of there events, together with the other evidence
mentioned, adds so mtuch probability to the flory related by Osborne, as will entitle it
to a place in hitory. The only objec:ion to the account we have given of Elizabeth's
attachment to Efflx, arises from her great age. At the age of 68, the amorous
paflions are commonly abundantly cool; and the violence of all the pafllons, except
one, is much abated. But the force of this objeciFin is entirely removed by an Au.
thor who has ilYuflratcd many palages in the English History, and adorned more.
Catalogue of Roy. ald Nob. Authors. Article Effix.,

expired
Ii 2

BookVIII.expired without a firuggle, on Thursday the 24th day of March, in

160-3 the 7oth year of her age, and the 45th of her reign *

Her charac- FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indifference and dif-
t"a. trefpect towards their Princes. But without reason; no people are

more grateful than they to those Monarchs who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the Englifl of this age, with the fame warmth as they were
by those who shared in the blessings and splendor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is still adored in England. And the
historians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her
people; her sagacity in discerning their true interest; her tfeadinefs
in pursuing it; her wifdomn in the choice of her Ministers; the
glory she acquired by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her sub-
jects; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce, which
were the fruits of all there; juftlly rank her among the molt illus-
'trious Princes. Even the defects in her character, they observe,
'were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excessive fruga-
lity was not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and though
it prevented some great undertakings, and rendered the success of
others incompleat, it introduced ceconomy into her administration,
and exempted the nation from many burdens, which a Monarch,
more profuse, or more enterprizing, murft have imposed. Her
slowness in rewarding her servants, sometimes discouraged useful
merit; but it prevented the undeferving from acquiring power and
wealth, to which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy of those
Princes, Who pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her
to take such precautions, as tended no less to the public safety,
than to her own ; and to court the affetions of her people, as the

-* Camd. Birch, Mem.. . 506. BirchlNegoc. 2o6. Strype, 4. 373.

firmefl
2444

.

firme'l support of 'her throne. Such is the picure the EnglifhBook VIL
draw of this great .Qeen. 60o3

WHOEVER undertakes to write the Hiflory of Scotland finds him-

self obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different, and in a
less amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom, during the
greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that which ihe pof-
feiTed in her own. But this authority, acquired at first by a service
of great'importance to the nation, she exercised in a manner ex-
tremely pernicious to its happiness. By her industry in fomenting
the rage of the two contending faAions; by supplying the one with
partial aid.; by feeding the other with false hopes; by ballancing
,their power so artfully, that each of them was able to diflrefs, and
neither of them to subdue the other; (he rendered Scotland long the
feat of discord, confusion, and bloodshed: and her craft and in-
:trigues, effe&ing what the'valour of 'her anceflors could not accom-
plith, re!iuced that kingdom to a fiate of dependance on England.
The maxims of policy, often little consonant to those of morality,
may, ;perhaps, justify this conduct. .But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of diflimulation without
necessity; and of severity beyond example. In almost all her other
ations, Elizabeth is the obje& of our highest admiration; in this,
we mufr allow that ihe not only laid aside the magnanimity which
became a Queen, but the feelings, natural to a woman.

THouGH Elizabeth would never permit the queflion conceriingJames pro-
the right of succession to the Crown to be determined in Parliament ;cli"nied King

'of England.

'nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point, which Mhe wished
to remain an impenetrable mystery; she had, however, formed no
:defignof excluding the Scottish King from an inheritance, to which

Ihis

245

246
BookVIII.his title was undoubted. A flfort time before her deadi, Ihe broke

ó^1i . the silence which she had so long preserved 9n that subjet, and

told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne was the throne
of Kings; that fle would have no mean person to ascend it, and
that her CoufiI the King of Scots. should he her successor.'" This
file confirmed on her deatlh-hed. And as soon as the breathed her
lait, the Lords of the Privy-Council proclaimed James King of
England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to support
the titles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, disappeared
in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof
tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of itrangers,
testified their fatisfafion with louder acclamations, than were
usual at the accefion of their native Princes. Amidst this tumult
of joy, a motion.made, by a fewv patriots, who proposed to pro-
firibe some conditions to the successor, and to exaf from him the
redress qs fame grievances, before they called him to the throne,
was scarce heard; and Cecil, by stifling it, added to his. ilock of

perit with his new Master. Sir Charles Percy, brother of thp Earl

of Northur.berland, and Thomals Sopn.erft, the Earl of Wore.ser's
foq, were dispatched to Scotland, with a letter to th Kiing, fignd
by all the Peers and Privy Co.,nfellors then in Lppdon; infogninag
him of the Q(teen's death, of his accedion i9 the throne, of their
care to recognizp his title, and, of the unive.fal applause with which
the public proclamation of it had been attended. They made the
utlinol haste to deliver this welcoeme lage; but were prevented
by tle zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord HqrYfdane's yQpngeft son,
who setting out a few h4qr's Lfter Elzabegh's death, arrived at
l;dib.wrgh on Saturday night, just as the. Kin,g ha goPne to bd.
e vyWg, irpmediatpoy admitted i4tp the royal apartmnrpt a3d kn¢eel-

illg

ing by the Ring's- bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth, Book VIII,
saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and ,6c30
as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented himn a ring, which his fifler Lady Scroop had taken from the
Queen's firger after her death. James heard him with a decent
compofuit8. But as Carey was only a private messenger, the infor-
mation he brought, was not made public, and the King kept his
apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset.. Then his titles
were foleimnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeEs expressed no less
joy than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that k-igdom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to
forlovw hie withiT a few' weeks, He committed' the government
of Scotlanid t6 his Privy Couicil. He intrusted the care of his
children to diffeire noibe-!en. On the Sund'ay before his depar-
ture, h' repaired t the Churtch of St. Giles, and' after hearing a
fermoni, in wvhidc th Ptealcher displayed the gre'atness of theI Diviln
Goodliefs in raisins h-ig m to the throne of fach a' powerful Kingdom
Withou't! oppbfition or bloodshed, and exhorted hiim to express his
gratitude, by pi-orhotifYg to the utmost, the happiness and prosperity
of his flibjcts; the KRing ro6e up, and addleflinfg himsel'f to the peo-
ple, nmde rrniay professions' of unalterable affedion towards them ;.
proti'ifed- ftequeYtly to vifi Scotland ; assured them that his Scottish
fubje'ts, otwith:lfan'ding his abse'nce, ihonld feel' that he was their
native Prilnce, no lets thl!i'a whe'n he resided arnlong them; and. might
flill trust trhat his edtrsfhiodd be alvays'open to their petitions, which.
he would anfwver With' she nlaAity a'nd' lov6 of a' parent. His' words
were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience; who,

though.

247

Book VIII.though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted into fork

6o3

. row by these tender declarations *.

i6 03

T.kes pof- ON the fifth of April he began his journey, with, a splendid,.
leflion of the
throne. but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.

Wherever he came; immense multitudes were assembled to, welcome
him; and the principal persons, in the different Counties through
which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnificence in en-
tertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that most of her fubjeds remembered
no other court but her's; and their notions of the manners and de-
corum suitable to a Prince were formed upon what they had ob-
served there. It was natural to apply this ftandard.to the behaviour
and actions. of their new Monarch, and to compare him, at first
fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he was to be placed.
James, whose manners were extremely different from her's, suffered
by the comparison. He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people;. and though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no lets a stranger to that dignity, with which Elizabeth. tem-
pered her familiarity. And instead of that well-judged frugality,
with which (he conferred titles of honour, he betfowed them with.
an undistinguished profusion, that rendered them no longer marks
of diftind6ion, or rewards of merit. But there were the reflections,
of the few alone; the multitude continued their acclamations;,
and amidst these, James entered London on the 7th of May,, and
took peaceable possession of the throne of England,,

* Spots. 476.

THUS
2^8

THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac- BOOKVIII.

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one great Conclufon.
monarchy. And by this junction of its whole native force, Great
Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe which
England and Scotland could never have attained.

T HE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs as next heirs

to the English throne, that they had full leisure to reflect on all
tile consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But
dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful ene-
my, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in full
expectation of sharing liberally in the wealth and honours he would
now be able to bellow, they attended little to the molt obvious cone
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his accession to the
throne of England, as if it had been no less beneficial to the king-
dom, than honourable to the King. They Toon had reason, how-
ever, to adopt very different sentiments; and from that period, we
may date a total alteration in the political constitution of Scotland.

' view of the
Revolutions
in the cortli-
tltion of Scot-
I.. d since tlie
acc iso of
J-lmeb VI.

T HE feudal Ariflocracy, which had been Subverted in moif

nations of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had
been undermined by the progress of commerce, still fubfifled with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually
to augment the power of the Scottish nobles ; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it prevailed added
to the authority of the Monarch, had increased their wealtlh and
influence. A King, pofeflced of a finall revenue, with a prerogative
extremely limited, and unsupported by a ltanding army, could not
cxcrcife much authority over such potent fubjeds. He was obliged to
govern by expedients; and the laws derived their force not from his
power to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmiflion of the

VOL. 11. K k nobles.

249

BoOKVIII. nobles. But though this produced a species of government feeble

--"-UvJ and irregular beyond example; though Scotland, under the name,

and with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was really sub-
jet to an Aristocracy, the people were not altogether unhappy;
and even in this wild form of a constitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no ad of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims and
pretensions were many, though his power was small, were afraid
of irritating their dependants by unreasonable exactions, and tem-
pered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness and
equality to which it is naturally a itranger. And while the military
.genius of the feudal government, remained in vigour, the vaflals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only free from op-
pression, but courted by their superiors, whose power and impor-
tance were founded on their attachment and love.

B u T, by his accession to the throne of England, James acquired

such an immense accession of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, aftoniihed and intimidated, thought it vain to
firuggle for privileges which they were now unable to defend. Nor
was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they flould partake in his
good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and the hope
of his favour concurred with the dread of his power, in taming
their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the Prince be-
came .the supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles firove, with emu-
lation, who flould most implicitly obey commands, which they
had formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied with having
fubjeded the nobles to the Crown, the King left them in full pof-

8 session
250

feeiTon of their ancient jurifdidion over their own vassals. The BOOK VIIJ.
extensive rights, veiled in a feudal Chief, became in their hands --J
dreadful instruments of oppression, and the military ideas on which
there rights were founded, being gradually loft, or disregarded,
nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the rigour with which
they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the
expence of frequent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbours, multiplied exacions upon the people, who durst scarce
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the ear of
their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any redress. And
from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution in 16S8, Scot-
land was placed in a political situation of all others the most fingu-
lar, and the most unhappy; fubjeted at once to the absolute will
of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurisdiction of an Ariflocracy,
it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both these forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were slaves and ty-
rants; and the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

shake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency. After
the death of James, the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by
our Monarchs with any partial affeAion. Charles I. educated among
the English, discovered no peculiar attachment to the kingdom of
which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to
be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince with whom
they had little connection, and over whose councils they had little
influence, no longer Submitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on their order, and

K k 2 appre-

252
1300o ViII.

apprehensive of others, the remains of their ancient spirit began to
appear. They comnplained, and remonfirated. And the people
being, at the fame time, violently disguised at the innovations in
Religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust; and their ar-
tifices, together with the ill conduct of the court, raised filch a
spirit, that the whole nation took arms against their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought against them the forces of England, and
notwithstanding their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the firuggle. But, the difaffedion which
was growing among his Engliih fubjeas, prevented the King from
acting with vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are well known,
the Scottish nobles, who first began the war, were involved ini the
fame ruin with the throne. At the Restoration, Charles lI. re-
gained full possession of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the
nobles, whose estates were wafted, or their spirit broken by the
calamities to which they had been exposed, were less able and less
willing than ever to resist the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the dictates of the Monarch were
received in Scotland with most abjeEt submission. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always
negleted, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

T H E Revolution introduced other maxims into the government

of Scotland. To increase the authority of the Prince, or to secure
the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almofl the sole ob-

jecd

jed of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce ever men- Book VIII.
tioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the claim of
right, their liberties were secured. And the number of their re-
presentatives being increased, they gradually acquired new weight
and consideration in parliament. As they came to enjoy more fe-
curity and greater power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and of police. But
the ariftocratical spirit, which frill predominated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of
the nation.

ANOTHER great event completed what the revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the
union of the two crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of
the two Kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly, of the
supreme assembly of the nation, instead of bearing the most confi-
derable sway there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the British
Parliament by their representatives only, and form but an inconfide-
rable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative authority is
veted. They themselves are excluded absolutely from the house of
Commons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted to represent
their countrymen in that august assembly. Nor have their feudal
privileges remained, to compensate for this extinction of their po-
litical authority. As commerce advanced in its progress, and go-
vernment attained nearer to perfection, there were insensibly
circumscribed, and at last, by laws no less salutary to the pub-
lic, than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost totally abolihfid.
As the nobles were deprived of power, the people acquired liberty.
E1xempted fiom burdens to which they were formerly subjed,

screened

Book VIII. screened from oppression, to which they had been long exposed,

and adopted into a conflitution, whose genius and laws were more
liberal than their own, they have extended their commerce, refined
their manners, made improvements in the elegancies of life, and cul-
tivated the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political -fate of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three asras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration, in one or other of the three different mem-
bers of which the supreme legislative assembly in our constitution
is composed. At the Acce7ion, the Kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became, in an inflant, the most absolute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their Parlia-
ments were unable to controul, or their nobles to refifl. At the
Union, the feudal aristocracy, which had fabfifted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scottish
nobles voluntarily Surrendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar to
their order, and reduced themselves to a condition, which is no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjeds. Since the Union, the
Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings, and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity ; and being admitted to a parti-
cipation of all the privileges, which the English had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, must now be esteemed a body not
less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been in
the other.

THE church felt the effects of the absolute power which the

King acquired by his acceflon; and its revolutions too, are wor-
thy of notice. James, during the latter years of his adminSftla-
tion in Scotland, revived the name and office of Bishops. But they

possessed
254

possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdiaion or pre-eminence; their- reve- Book VIII.
nues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce diftinguilhed by any
thing, but by their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The King, delighted
with the splendor and authority which the English Bishops enjoyed,
and eager to effec an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved to bring both
Churches to an exac conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From them, their bre-
thren were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the clergy, less obfe-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposed these innovations, James,
long pradifed and well Ikilled in the arts of managing them, ob-
tained at length their compliance. But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom, pressing
too eagerly the reception of the English Liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames of
civil war; and the People being left at liberty to indulge their own
withes, the episcopal church was overturned, and the Presbyterian
government and discipline were re-eftablithed with new vigour.
Together with monarchy, Episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A
form of government, so odious to the people, required force to
uphold it; and though the whole rigour of authority, and all the
barbarity of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was insurmountable, and it subsisted with difficulty.
At the Revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legislature, the Presbyterian government
was again eftabli'hed, and being ratified by the Union, is flill main-
tained in the Kingdom.

NoR

25,5

Book VIIt. NOR did the influence of the Accession extend to the civil and ec-

"'PI clefiaflical constitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its taste

and fp'iit, things of a nature still more delicate, were sensibly as-
feLed by that event. When learning revived, in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a slate equal-
ly barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even of perfpicui-
ty. No author thought of writing in languages so ill adapted to ex-
press and embellifil his sentiments, or of ereding a work for immor-
tAlity, with iuch rude and perishing materials. And as thefpirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any original effort
of the human mind, but was excited by admiration of the ancients,
their compositions were efleemed not.only the standards of taste, and
of sentiment, but of stile; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated to learn-
ing and the muses. Not only the manner of the ancients was
imitated, but their language copied; and, extravagant as the attempt
may appear to write in a dead tongue, in which men were not ac-
customed to think, and which they could not speak, or even pro-
nounce, the success of it was astonishing. As they formed their
stile upon the puref: models, as they were uninfected with those
barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the as-
fectation of courts, intercourse with firangers, and a thousand other
caufcs introduce into living languages, many moderns have attained
to a degree of elegance in their latin compositions, which the
Romans themselves scarce pofliefld beyond the limits of the Au-
guflan age. While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common language, could be
brought to a nearer comparison, the Scottiff writers were not in-
ferior to those of any other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to excel in profc and in verse, more various, more ori-

2 ginal,

2S6
J

ginal, and more elegant, than that of almofi any other modernBook VIII.
who writes in Latin, reflects, with regard to this particular, the
greatest lufre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for their industry which authors met with,
who could be read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying; and men, inflead of wafting half
their lives in learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and to polish their own. The modern tongues were found to
be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal to those
of the antient ones, were at least more attainable. And the Ita-
lians having firfl set the example, Latin was no longer used in the
works of taste; it was confined to books of science; and the politer
nations have banished it even from there. The Scots, we may pre-
fume, would have had no cause to regret this change in the public
taste, and would still have been able to maintain some equality with
other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The English
and Scottiih languages, derived from the fame sources, were, at
the end of the sixteenth century, in ad state nearly similar, differ-
ing from one another somewhat in orthography, though not on-
ly the words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters
of several Scottiflh ftatcfmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the English Miniflers with whom they
corresponded. James himself was matter of a stile far from con-
temptible; and by his example and encouragement, the Scottifl
language might have kept pace with the English in refinement.
Scotland might have had a ferics of authors in its own, as well
as in the Latin language, to boast of; and the improvements
in taste, in the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the

VoL. II. L 1 other

257

Book VHI. the other polished nations of Europe, would not have been un-

known there.

BUT, at the ve'y time when other nations were beginning to drop

the use of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the strength
and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to be a king-
dom. The transports of joy which the Accefiion at firrt occasioned,
were soon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the ob-
jects that refine or animate a people, of the presence of their Prince,
of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor and elegance of a court,
an universal dejection of spirit seems to have seized the nation. The
Court being withdrawn, no domefic standard of propriety and correct-
ness of speech remained; the few compositions that Scotland pro-
duced were tried by the English standard, and every word or
phrase that varied in the least from that, was condemned as barbarous;
whereas, if the two nations had continued diilindt, each might have
retained idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these, ren-
dered fashionable by the example of a court,, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been confidered in
the fame light with the varieties occasioned by the different dialects
in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties, and,
in many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of both nations.
But by the Acceflion, the Englifl naturally became the sole judges
and lawgivers in language, and rejeted as folecifis, every forni of
speech to which their ear was not accustomed. Nor did the Scots,
while the intercourse between the two nations was inconfidcrable *,

and

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the Englifl- and Scots,

before the union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers, one pub]iflied
by Hayncs, the other by Strypc, In the year 1567, Elizabeth commanded the Bi-
lhop of London to take a survey of all the strangers within the cities of London and
Wcftminfcr. By his report, which is very minute, it appears that the whole

number

and ancient prejudices were still so violent as to prevent imitation, pof-BookVIII.
fess the means of refining their own tongue according to the purity of-
the English standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age,
were more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there
did not arise many authors among them, yet being in poffeflion
of the privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hafy pro-
dudtions could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profeflion having furnished more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many
of those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotticisms,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and more correc eloquence might have
been expected. All business was tranfated there by the Lords of
Articles, and they were so servilely devoted to the court, that few
debates arose, and none were conduded with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular assembly.

Tnius, during the whole seventeenth century, the Englifl were

gradually refining their language, and their taste; in Scotland the
former was 'much debated, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out of
barbarity; but the distance between them, which was then incon-

nunmher of Scots at that time was 58. Hayncs 455. A survey of the fame kind was
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor, A. D. I568. The number of Scots had
then increased to 88. Stripe 4. Supplement N° I. On the Accession of James a con-
filcrable number of Scots, especially of the higher rank, rcforted to England ; but
it was not till the union that the intercourse between the two kingdoms became great.

L 1 2 iiderab'e,

259

Book VIII. fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science

V had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking back

into ignorance and obscurity; and acive and intelligent as they na-
turally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of languor and stupe-
fadtion. This, however, must be imputed to the unhappiness of
their political situation, not to any defed of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to dif-
play itself. The ad abolishing the power of the Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws pagfed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate objets
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to lhew that the Scots were still capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able to
express themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diffindions which had fubfified for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame fiandard of tafle, and of purity
in language, is eftablified. And the Scots, after being placed,
during a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty
than to the taste and genius of the nation, were at once put in pof-
session of privileges more valuable than those which their ancestors
had formerly enjoycd ; and every obftrudtion that had retarded their
pursuit, or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was totally
removed. I

1 1)E (r: . A P P E N-
6o0

# APPENDIX.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 180.)
A ME MO R I A L of certain points meet for the reJtoring the

realm of S C o T L A N D to the ancient weale.

MPRIMIs, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity. that Scotland can have, 5th Auguff,
is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to 1559, Cotton.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one island, divided Lib.Cal.B to.
from the reft of the world. fol r7. From

IF the firfl is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then muff it ne- a copy in fe-

ceffarily be provided, that Scotland be not so subjet to the appointments of France, hrety Cecil s
as is presently, which, being an ancient enemy to England, feeketh always to make
Scotland an instrument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a foot-stool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland ihall come into the hands of a mere Scottish

man in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the
commandment of the French, there is no hope to have accord long betwixt these
two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French king's commandment by reafin of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until she have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted ; and on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought to
force that the laws and the old customs of the realm be not altered, neither that the
country be not impoverished by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the manner
of France; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French king
and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovcrnance of the land.

AN) for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the Ficnch grow too strong
and ifolblent.

FIRsT, That it may be provided, by confentof the three eflates of the land, that

tlh land may be free from all idolatry like as England is, for justification whereof,
if any free general council may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the flat
of judgment, they may offer to flew their caulf to be molt agreeable to Chrilt's
religion.

NI:x'r, To provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules and offices, by
t!ie anticnt blood of the realm, without either captains, lieutenants, or fuldicis, as

all

all other princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in the
hands of mere Scottilh men.

THIRDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars againf Er.g-
land, except England hould give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That no nobleman of Scotland should receive pension of France,

except it were whilst he did serve in France, for otherwise thereby the French would
shortly corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
mere Scottish men, by the assent of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence, to
govern the whole realm, and in those cafes not to bc directed by the French.

SEVFNTHLY, That it be by the said three estates appointed how the queen's re-

venue of the realm shall be expended, how much the queen shall have for her por-
tion and estate during her absence, how much fliall be limited to the governance and
defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the I rench king and the queen be found unwil-

ling, and will withstand these provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
efsates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to the said king and queen their
humble requests; and if the fame be not effceaually granted, then humbly they may
commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, binding the fame also
to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen shall be unwilling to this, as it is likely ihe will, in re-

fpeEt of the greedy and tyranous affedion of France, then it is apparent that Al-
mighty God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of
it, and this time must be used with great circumfpecion, to avoid the deceipts and
tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland conrider, being once made free, what

means may be devised by God's goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all
princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. I88.)

A letter of PMaitland of Lethington's, thus dirested.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

:ct'h January UNDERRSTrAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing with
i a9-,6o. zour countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and comoditeys may ensew
oit Lib. Cal. to that rcalm, hereafter giff ze presently assisi ws with zour forces, ze find a nom-
B. i.. Fromw bre of the contrary advi;c, douting that we fall not at length be found trusty frends,
the original in nor mean to contynew in conflant ametyc, albeit we promise, but only for avoyd-
hi.. ovwn hand. ing the pref-nt danger make zow to serve our turne, and after being delivered, becum

cnem;cs as of before. For prose quhareof, they allege things have past betwixt ws
heretofore, and a fewprcfumptiores tending to the fam end, all grounded upon millrufl;
quhilks, at the first filit, h;ave fi)me fiewe ofapparencc, gif men wey not the circum-
Itances of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme pait with the present, confider
the nature of this caus, and eflate of our contrcy, I doubt not butjugcment fal be able to
banish miniruf.. And first, I wad wifli ze flould examyne the caulfs off the old inmi-

tye

h.
2

t.e betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our anceflours to
enter into liguc with the Frenche; quhilks by our ficreys and regiflres offaantiquiteys
appear to be these. The princes of England, some tyme, alledging a certaine kynde
off foveraint. e over this realm ; some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incur-
sions off our bordourares, and feinblableoccafions, inony tymes cnterpriled the con-
queit of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force off armes, that we wer dryven to great
extramiteys, by loss of our princes, our noblemen, and a good p.;rt of our cuntrey,
fa that experience taught ws that our owne firength was fcarfe fuffcient to w.itliltand
the force of England. The Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering well how
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye
England as we being enemyes, foucht to joine ws to theyin in ligue, tending by that
meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion off Irance, and occupy zow in the
defence off zour country at hame, offering for that effect to beflowe some charges
upon ws, and for comparfing off theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the mater,
quhen the frefche memory off injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely
prented on our hartes, that all our myndes were ocupyed how to be revenged, and
arme ourselfes with the powar off a forayne prince againfit zour enterprises thereafter.

THIis wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At quhilk tyme, our

cronicles maks mention, that some of the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and finall frute
should redound to ws thereof at lenth: zit had affection fa blinded jugement, that
the advise of the maift part owercame the best. The maift part of all querells be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came on our fyde, hes ever
fallen out by theyr procurement rather than any one caus off our selfes: and quhen-
faever we brack the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to eschew
the conquest intended by that realm. But now hes God's providence fa altered the
cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to haye zow in theyr rowme.
Our eyes. are opened, we espy how uncareful they have been of our wcile at all
tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in mails dangerous weys
f'ortheyrcommodite, and nevertheless wad not lfyck, oft tymes, againit the natour
us thle ligue, to cont-rak peace, leaving ws in weyr. W,'e fee that their support,
off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection they bare to ws, for pyti they had
off our estate, for recompense off the lykc friendlhip fchawin to theym in tyic off
theyr afflisiones, but for ambition, and inlaciable cupidite to reygne, and to mak
Scotland ane acce-flory to the crown of Fiance. This was na friendly office, but
mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of theyr deserving; a hale
realm for the defence of a part. We fee theym nmanifellly attempt the thing we sus-
lpeited off zow; we feared ze mcnt the conquest off Scotland, and they are planely
fallen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we had ze nent evill towards ws, and
ill we love theymn, qulilks bearing the name off frends, go about to bring ws in mailt
vile firvitude? (Jif by zour frendly support at this tiymn, ze .fal declare that not
only lute ze not the ruyne off our country, hut will preserve the libertie thereof
trom conquest by itrangeares, fall not the occasion of all inimity with zow, and
ligue with tleyni, be taken away? The causes being removed, how fall the cflteles
rcinane ? The fear of conquest made ws to h ,te zow and love theyni, this cais chan-
,cd, quhen we fee them planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws frendfllip,
f;ill we not hate theym, and favour zow ? (.if we have fchawnc fil greaCt conflance,
Continuing fa mony zcares in amity with thcym, ofl' qulhonme wv hild Ia finaill coiu-

mioditc,

modite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes may do ws
greatest plefour?

BuT ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled, and then frends as off before. I

think well peace is the end of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to forgo the ametye
f England, nor do any thing may bring ws in fuil icion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes the
lofle off ellimation and discrediting of ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maift manifell danger, and becum a prey to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
cou'd we implore, being deftirute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attempt
thevr formar enterprise? Quhat nation myght help ws gift they wakl, or waid
gifr' thev might ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not flick hereafter to tak theyr
tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, fee-
ing ambition has fa impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done any
thing nmyght offend theym, but by the contrary p'eased theym by right and wrang,
they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our hale Itate. 1 wald ze should not
efteme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot forefe our owne perril; or fa
foolifche, that we will not itudy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may
be our fafetye; quhilk confifles all in the relaying of zour frendfliips. - I pray zow
confider in lyke cats, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble memory
king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes wer opened off amytye be-
twixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the difference of religion the onely stay
they wer not embraced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of theyr
adherents subvert the devises of the better fort? But now has God off his mercy
removed that blck furth off the way: now is not theyr pracife lyke to tak
place any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off doctrine, and profes the
fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to be the firayteft knot off amitye can be
deviscd. Giff it may be alleged, that some off our countrymen, at ony tyme,
violated theyr promis? gift ze liss to way the circumstances, ze fall fynd the
promis is rather brought on by neceffite, after a great owerthraw off our men,
then comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and decay
off our haill hate, at lkilt fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libcrtie be infcperably joined with the keping off promefle, and the violation off our
fayth ca(t ws in maiit miserable servitude. Sa that giff neyther the feare of God,
reverence of man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes sufficient to
bynd ws, yet fall the zeale off our native countrey, the maintenance off our owne
itate, the safety of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell us to kepe
promitlc. I am afinred, it is trewly and sincerely ment on our part to continew in
perpetual ametyc with zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Gift ze be as
dedyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfcd, quharby all partyes will be out
of doubte. '1 here he gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for the purpos, tyme
serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realmes wifl it, God hes wrought in the peo-
ple's hartcs on bayth parties a ccrtaine flill agreement upon it, never did, at any
tyme, lo niony things .oncurre at ones to knyt it up, the difpolition of a few,
quhais harts arc in (Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun
this work, and maintcyncd it quhilc now, by the cxpcAation of man, sale perlyte
it.

I pray
4

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in consultation, quhether ze fall sup-

port ws or no. Seyng the mater fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the
defence off our caus, giffze have any refpea for zour awne weill. Their preparatives in
France, and levying of men in Germany, (quheyroffI am lately advertised) ar not
altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at; they feke our realme, but
for ane entry to zours. Giff they fiould direly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme; therefor they do, by indiret meanes, to blind
zo ', the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to
th' en i that having assembled theyr hale forces fa nere zour bordours, they may unlok it
to attack zow: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to leyght
on ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne were affaizeit, and
carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was fynely dif-
fembled, I tlhink ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr
policy by prudence. Giff ze fe not the lyke disposition presently in theym, ze fe na-
thing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak
hede ze fay not hereafter, " Had I wist ;" ane uncornely sentence to procede off a
wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow commonly
wiffed, that this countrey myght be divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to
pass as was maift expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeled we would have been ontrufty frends, and
na langer continued itedfafte, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen off our
self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that theyr
evil dealing with ws hes delerved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they fall fynd
ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungently hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais
hands we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever they may get the upper
hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered, escape zow ? giffze do, neglect-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever good luk comme fleaping upon
zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa firang, that afterwards
quhen ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart, as-
ter the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat
harme cometh off oversight, and trufling to zour enemeyes promeffe. We offer zow
the occasion, quheyrby zour former lofles may be repayred. Quhilk giff ze let over
flyde, suffering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frenfche,
that they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, sick is their lust to reygne, that
they can neyther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and be satisfied
when they have gode luck, but will still follow on, having in their awne brayne
conceaved the image offa great a conquefi, quhat think ye fal be the end ? Is ther any
of fa small judgment, that he doth not foresee already, that theyr hail force fall then
be bent againlt zow ?

It fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be presently. Theyr eflate

is not always fa calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr
great redines for weyr made theym to tak this matter on hand, at this tyne, but ra-
ther a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have found na refifance, theyr
opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes them now amafed. The eflates off
the empire, (as I heare) has futed rcflitution off th' Imperial towns, Mctz, Toull,
and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes; and all thing is not a calme within
theyr awne countrey, the les fit they be prefcntly for weyr, the mare oportune cfleme
ye the tyme for zow. Giff the like occasion wer offered to the Frenfche against zow,

VOL. II. M m wey,

5

wev, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour flAuth, to
spare theym that hes already compaffd your deftrution, giff they wer able ? Confi-
der with your self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr againfi theym out with zour
realme or within ? Giftquhill ze feape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fa le to fute zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke zow.
But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not, It is foly to think they wald
not g fs they wet able, quhen before hand the flick not to giff zour armes, and
ufurpe the ityle of zour crown. Then quhat. difference there is to camp within zo r
awne bounds or without, it is rnanifeft. Gifftwa armyes fbould camp in yowr coun.
try, but a moneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should zowr loffe be grea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to bellow on our support will draw to, belydes
the dishonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular refpefls weill

affected to the caus, move zow to fubtraEt zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for that they be possible. It is not, 1 grant, unpoflible that we may
receave conditiones of peace; but I fee lyttle likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws flk as will remove all mi! ruit, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they tcrme ws
rebelles, and diffames our juit querell with the name of conspiracy against our so-
verayne. It is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we
fludy to preserve, with the hazard off our lyves. We are not (God knaweth) comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
frangeare,, feaking to defraude ws off lawful governement. Giff we should susser
ftrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the firenthes of our realme, fortify
the Sey-ports, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest, now
in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we not be thought
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jeAs to hir majefle ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might she not
juitly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent minifleres ? Giff firangeares
should be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people esteem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na wyfe to iubtrak our obe-
dience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off hir dew reverence, rents and
revenues off hir crown. WVe feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of be-
fore, a fre reilme, rewlit by hir hyencs and hir ministeres borne men of the fan;
and that the fucccflion of the crowne may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD 1not ze fould not fa lyttill efteme the friendship of Scotland, that ze

jugcd it lnit worthy to be embraced. It fall be na small commodite for zow to be
delivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more
trouble zow, th n off ony other nation albeit twyfs as puifiant, not lycng dry marche
with zow. Befydes that ze fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackyng
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand. Confider quhat superfluous
charges ze bcltoA c on the foitification and keeping of Barwickk; quhilk ze may re-
duce to a mean fowme, having ws to frendes. The realme of Ireland being of na-
tour a gode and fertill countrey, by reason of the continewalld unquietnes and lak
of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advantages; and gift
it were peaceable may be very commodious. For pacilication quhayroff, it is not
onknouwln to zow quhat I'rvie we ar abill to do. Refufi not theyr commoditeys,

3 besides
6

besides tiony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I study not to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and as the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maift earnestly futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift caryed me be-
yond the boundes of a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have ge-
ven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned, foulde rede the
twa former orations of Denmofhenes, called Olynthyace, and confidere quhat coun-
fall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word theroff myght be apply-
ed to our purpos. There may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed,
when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow liartely fareweill. From
Sant Andrews, the 20th of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 196.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the

camp before Leith, 29th of April, I560.

WI L L only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the earl of An Original.
Huntley, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as one, who with all his Paper Office.

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge
of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myfe'f always measure my
thoughts, as he shall dtferve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great per-
suasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this ac-
tion; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promiftd
to do, with solemn protestation, and many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to
this cause; and faith surely that no man shall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation ; he faith, that there
wais never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, loth August 1560. From Edinburgh.
S INC E the 29-th of July, at what time I wrote last to your honour, I have A Ol iih;al

h' ard nothing worth the reporting. At this present it may please you to know, ill the l'.iacr

that the molt part of the nobles are here arrived, as your honour shall receive their .flicc.
names in writing. 'lhe earl of Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg.
His lieutenant for this time is the lord of I.idinlton, chosen speaker of the parlia-
ient, or harangue-maker as there men term it. The firit day of their fitting in
parliament will be on Thurflay next. Hitherto, as many as have been prefliet of
the lords have communed and deviled of certain heads then to be propouIdedL, as,
who thall be tent into Francc, who into England. It is much caficr t,, ;fid them
than the other. It fccmeth almost to be resolvcd upon that for 1England the
Maler of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington. For France, Pitarrow anrll the Jus-
tiic Clerk. Also they have consultcd whom they think mcctcft to naic for the

M lm 2 XXIV.

wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchanmed of zour sleuth, to
lpare theym that hes already colmpaffed your deftruaion, giff they wer able ? Confi-
der with your self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against theym out with zour
realme or within ? Giffquhill ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fa' le to fute zow in jour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote flole to overloke zow.
But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly to think they wald
not gss they wer able, quhen before hand the flick not to giff zour armes, and
ufurpe the ityle of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to camp within zoAr
awne bounds or without, it is manifest. Gifftwa armyes should camp in yowr coun.
try, but a moneth ; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should zowr loffe be grea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to bestow on our support will draw to, befydes
the dihonour.

LEr not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular refpefqs weill

affeced to the caus, move zow to fubtraci zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for ihat they be possible. It is not, 1 grant, unpoffible that we may
receave conditiones of peace ; but I fee lyttle likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws fik as will remove all mi!lruit, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws
rebelles, and diffanmes our juit querell with the name of conspiracy against our so-
verayne. ]t is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we
fludy to preserve, with the hazard offourlyves. We are not (God knaweth) comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men irpacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
flrangeare-, feaking to defraude ws off lawful governement. Giff we should susser
ftrangeares to plant themiflffes peaceably in all the firenthes of our realme, fortify
the Sey-ports, and mait1 important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest, now
in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we not be thought
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jecs to hir majefte? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might (he not
jaftly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent minifleres ? Giff ftrangeares
should be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people efleem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na wyfe to fubtrak our obe-
dience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off hir dew reverence, rents and
revenues off hir crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of be-
fore, a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir minilteres borne men of the fan;
and that the fucccflion of the crowne may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttill eflene the friendship of Scotland, that ze

jugcd it oit worthy to be embraced. It fall be na small commodite for zow to bs
delivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more
troublezuw, th-n off ony other nation albeit twyfs as puiflant, not lyeng dry marclle
with zow. Befydes that ze fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackyng
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand. Confider quhat superfluous
charges ze belto'A c on the foitification and keeping of Barwick ; quhilk ze may rc-
duce to a mean fowrme, having ws to frendes. The realme of Ireland being of na-
tour a gode and fertill countrey, by reason of the continewalld unquietnes and lak
of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advantages; and gift
it were peaceable may be very commodious. l'or pacification quhayroff; it is not
onknownc to zow quhat fcrvce we ar abill to do. Refutc not theyr commoditcys,

3 betides
6

besides imony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I tfudy not to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and as the rather to be
embraced, for that zor auncefors, by all meanes, maift earnefily futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift caryed me be-
yond the boundes of a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have ge-
ven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned, foulde rede the
twa former orations of Demoflhenes, called Olynthyacae, and confidere quhat coun-
fall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhill
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word theroff myght be apply-
ed to our purpos. There may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed,
when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill. From
Sant Andrews, the 20th of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. 1. p. 196.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the

camp before Leith, 29th of April, 1560.
T WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the earl of An Original.

Huntley, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as one, who with all his Paper Office.

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge
of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myfe!f always measure my
thoughts, as he shall deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great per-
suasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this ac-
tion; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promiftd
to do, with solemn protestation, and many words; he trufleth to adjoin many to
this cause; and faith surely that no man shall lie where he taketh part. fle hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation ; he faith, that there
wais never thing that liked him better.

N.. IV. (Vol. I. p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, loth August 1560. From Edinburgh.

INC E the 29th of July, at what time I wrote liss to your honour, T have A- Oi^iii;il
h'ard nothing worth the reporting. At this present it may please you to know, ii tihe I'.pcr

that the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your honour shall receive their (flkc.
names in writing. 'he earl of [untly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg.
Ilis lieutenant for this time is the lord of I.idin2ton, cliofcn speaker of the parlia-
ment, or harangue-maker as there men term it. Thei firlt day of their fitting in
pr:li;amcnt will be on Thursday next. Hlitherto, as many as havc been prcniit of
the lords have communed and dcvifed of certain heads then to be propoutded,c as,
who lhall be sent into France, who into England. It is much carlel cr faiid them
than the other. It fccmcth almofl to be refolvd upon tllhat for EniiIl.nd the
Mafler of Maxwell, and laird of lidington. For France, Pitarrow a;d the Jur-
tice Clerk. Also they have consultcd whom they think incctcft to name for the

M ml 2 XXIV.

XXIV. of the which the XII counsellors must be chosen. They intend, very
fhoitly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those they
ihall chufe; and'alfo to require the king and queen's consent unto this parliament.
They have devised how to have the contrac with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agreement between them and
their king and queen ratified. Thete things yet have only been had in communica.
tion. For the confirmation of the contract with England I have no doubt; for that
1 hear many men very well like the faime, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Suther-
land, the L. Glamis, who dined yeflerday with the lord James. The I,. James
requested me this present day to bring the contra& unto him. I intend also, this day,
to speak unto the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he promised in my
hearing to subscribe, and then presently would have done it, if the contract could have
been had. For the more assurance againRf all inconvenients, I would, besides that,
that I trulf it shall be ratify'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland had put
his hand and set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument, tho' the a&
of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, fland with your advice,
that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here present to that effect, or
that I might receive from your Hunr. some earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt
not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known with what sub-
ltantial and affectious words or charge you desire to have confirmed it, I think no great
difficulty would be made. The earl Marshal has oft been moved to subscribe, he
ufeth more delays than men judged he would. His son told me yellerday, that he
would speak with me at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to what pur-
pose: I have caused lord James to be the earnester with the L. marshal, for his
autority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between these two realms might be perpetual; and among
diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have
ever been granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earneflly to tfick unto that, that
he had promised for it, that it should pass his power and all the crafty knaves of
his counsel, (I am bold to use unto your H. his own words) to break so godly a
purpose. This talk liked well the aflifters, howsomever it pleated him to whom it
was spoken unto. The barons, who in time pals have been of the parliament,
had yeflerday a convention among themlelves in the church, in very honetf and quiet
fort; they thought it good to require to be restored unto their ancient liberty, to
have voice in parliament. They presented that day a bill unto the lords to that es-
sec, a copy whereof shall be rent as soon as it can be had. It was answered unto
gently, and taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when
they are chosen, to relblve thereupon.- l-lere fo.'lows a lng paragraph cncerning
the fortifications of Dunbar, &c.--- This present morning, viz. the 9th, I under-
itood, that the lords intended to be at the parliament, which caused me fomcwhat
to flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your
Honr. The lords, at ten of the clock, aflembled thcmllelvcs at the palace, where
the duke lieth; from thence they departed towards the tolbooth, as they were in
dignity. Each of them being fat in his feat, in such order as your H. shall receive
them in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the (word, were laid in the queen's feat.
Silence being commanded, the L. of Lidington began his oration. He excused his
infufficicncy to occupy that place. IHe made a brief discourse of things paIl, and of

what

what necessity men were forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and support it pleated God to fend them in the time of their neceflity, how much
they were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the
perluafion that was in many men's minds that lay back, that misdeemed other things
to be meant than was attempted. He advised all eltates to lay all particulars apart,
and to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and of their country.
He willed them to remember in what slate it had been of long time for lack of
government, and exercise ofjuflice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity
and hearty friendship, and to live with one another as members all of one body.-
He prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially
betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended. The
clerk of register immediately flood up, and asked them to what matter they would
proceed : It was thought necefiary, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed
with the common consent, for that it was thought necessary to fend them away with
speed into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might be.
'I he articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to
have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put to their feals, to be sent
away by a herald, who {hall also bring the ratification again with him. The ba-
rons, of whom I have above written, required an answer to their request, somewhat
was laid unto the contrary. The barons alledged for them cutfom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the lords of
the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, ihould find it right and necessary
for the commonwealth, it should be ratify'd at this parliament for a perpetual law.
The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the arti-
cles. TIhe order is, that the lords Spiritual chufe the temporal, and the temporal the
spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and accompanied the duke, all as
far as the Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high fireet) and many down into
the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets founding, and other
mufick such as they have. Thus much I report unto your highness of that that I
did both hear and fee. Other Solemnities have not been used saving in times long
past the lords have had parliament robes, which are now with them wholly out of
ule.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal as are assembled at
this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindley. Athens.
Crawford. Fommcrvil. The bishop of the flies.
Caflils. Cathcart. Abb ts and Priors, I

larfhall. lumne. know not how many.

Mlol ton. Livingflon.
(lcncairn. lnncrmctli.
Sutherland. Boyd.

9

Earls;

Catlinefs,
Rothes.
Monteith.

Spiritual.

Athens.
Isles.
Lord James.
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoris.
Cowpar.
Kinrof;.
Kilwinning.

APPEND

Lords.

Ogilvy,
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltrie.
Gordon.

I X.
The Lords of the Articles.

Temporal. Barons eleAed to be

of the Articles.

The Duke. Maxwell.
Argyll. Tillibardine.
Marshall. Cunninghamhead.
Athole. Lochenvar.
Morton. Pitarrow.
Glencairn. Lundy.
Ruthven. Ten Provosts of the
Erskine. chief towns,which
Boyd. also are of the
Lindsay. Articles.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

Ir were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affecLions of these men, that are at this time chosen Lords of the Articles. May it
satisfy your Honr. for this time, to know that by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftancialler or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen in
Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to infue.
This present morning, viz. the loth, the L. of Lidington, made me privy unto
your letter ; he intendeth. as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He h mfelf is determined not to go into France. He alledgeth
many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that inoveth him molt, which is the
example of the la(t, that went on a more grateful message than he shall carry, and
isood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth
what the world judgeth.

Petition of the Leffcr Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. 1560.

Inlofcd 'In ' Y lords, unto \ our lordships, humbly means and (hows, we the barons and
lIilndolph's .1./ freeholders of this realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas the caufcs
IriT ote ccil. of true religion, and commnon well f this realm are, in this present parliament,
ith Au g. to be treated, ordleed, and cftablifled, to the glory of God, and maintainance of
, ( C. the commonwealth ; anl we being the greatest number in proportion, where the said

c.faucs concern, and has been, and yet are ready to bear the greateff part of
the charges thereuntil, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, and

'ithi our goods ; and feeing there is no place where we may do better service
now than in general cooncils and parliaments, in giving our belt advice, and rcafon,

vote

I

vote and counfell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintainance of virtue, and
punishment of vice, as use and custom had been of old by ancient acs of parlia-
ment observed in this realm X and whereby we underftahnd that we oight to be heard to
rcalon, a':d vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as, well'in counfells as
in parliaments; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and flatutes be'
made concerning us and our eflate, we not being required and suffered to reason
and vote at the making thereof, that the fame should not oblige us to stand thereto.
Therefore it will please your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the
charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this present parliament, and all
counfells, where the common well of the realm is lo be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships would susser nothing to be
pafled and concluded in parliament or councils aforesaid ; and that all adts of par-
li;ament made, in times past, concerning us for our place and estate, and in our fa-
vour, be at this present parliament, confirmed, approved, and ratified, and at of
parliament made thereupon. And your lordflips aufwer humbly beseeches.

Of the jiccf of this petitio', the following account is given by Razdo.ph ; Lett.

to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The matters concluded and past by common coni(e:nt
on Saturday lalt, in such solemn fort as the first day that they afnmlmbld, are Ihefe.
First, that the barons, according to an old ad of parliament, made in the time (,f
James I. in the year of God 1427, shall have free voice in parliament, this aC pafled
without any contradiction.

No.V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englilh resident, to the right wor-

fhipful Sir William Cecil, knr. principal secretary to the queen's ma-
jerfy.
Have received your honour's letters of the first of this month, written at Ofyes9 Aug. i56!.
in Effex, and also a letter unto the lor James, fiom his kinsman St. Come out Cott. Lib.

of France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland is nothin, changed 1. so. so. 32.
of her purpose in home coming. I aflure your honour that will be a flout adven-
ture for a sick cr;fed woman, that may he doubted as well what may happen
unto her upon the ftas, as also how heartily she may be received when she comcth
to land of a great number, who are utterly persuaded th.it ihe intendeth their utter
ruin, come when fl(e will ; the prep Irance is very small whcllbocver that she arrive,
iuirccly any man can be perfiaded that ihte hath any fuci, thought in her head. I have
lilewn your holiour's letter unto the lord James, lord M.,rrorn, lord Lcdlington-, they
wish as your honour doth, that she might be flt ed yet )for a fpacc, andt i it were
no(t fur their obedience f. kc, some of them care not tuo' they never I(t , her face.
11hey travel what they can to prevent the wicked devifcs of thcti mnif'chievous pur-
potls of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be found that Ilij hiijuis le
c(li, they do what they can t htand with the religion, and to maintain amnity with
their neighbours; they have also need to look unto thcmriflves, for their hazard is
great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor safety for themfclves, but to repofc
tlicnflclvcs upon the queen's majesty, our fovercign's favours and support. iriends

abroad

abroad they have none, nor many in Whom they may trust at home. There are in
mind (hortly to try what they may be assured at of the queen's majesty, and what
they may assuredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties. I his the
queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this {he feeketh by all means to
prevent; and bath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to charge him
that no filch things be attempted before her coming home; for that it is said, that
they too already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what fen-blant fom-
ever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their quien's refuf , that
cometh far from their hearts. They intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I
have my answer ready enough for them. If (he thruit all Engliflimen out of this
country, 1 doubt not but there will be some of her own that will bare us some kind.
nets. Of me fie shall be quit, To soon as it pleafeth the queen's majelty my nmif-
trefs no longer to use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that they are of mind that
immediately of the next convention, I /hall repair towards you with their determi-
nations, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice is erneftly re-
quired, and fllortly looked for. Whatfomever I desire myself, I know my will
ought to be subjet unto the queen my sovereign's pleasure, but to content myself,
would God I were so happy as to serve her majesty in as mean a itate as ever poor
gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
her majesty's service, but because my time and years require rome place of more re-
pose, and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when
other troubles in this country arise, or ought {hall be required of me to the advance-
ment of her majefly's service, that either my will is not able to compass, or my
credit sufficient to work to that effeit, as perchance shall be looked for at my hands.
As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so I trufi that
I (hall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it (hall fiand with
the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this place unto rome far worthier than I am
myself, and in the mean season, have my course directed by your good advice how
I may by my contrivance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her majesty's
will and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself. For the ress,

where that is wished that the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I allure
v'our honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accustomed manner of
doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and should now pre-
vail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I doubt more her mo-

ney, than I do her fair words; and yet can I not conceive what great things can he
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her own here I know there is
no sure or ready means to get it. The lord of Lid ngton leaveth nothing at this
time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to fatisfye your desire, in knowledge
of the present state of things here. Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it
ever belt, that she come not; but if fle do come, to let her know, at the firfl,
what she ihall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if ihe embrace
Chrifi, and desire to live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you have
last received, your honour somewhat underftandeth of Mr. Knox hinmflf, and also
of others, what is determined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus together with what comfort

foin-

fomever it will please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's majesty doth
not utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged with
by his own queen, that her Majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will
be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others; his daily prayer is for
the maintenance of unity with England, and that God will never susser men to be so
ungrate as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deffrution of them, that have
saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time,
to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between these two realms,
that God may be glorified to them of this world - At Edenbourgh the 9th of
August, 1561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 224.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefie, our right dear and well-

beloved sifter and cousin the queen of Scotland.
R IGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princefle, our right dear and right 6th of Aug.

well beloved fifler and cousin, we greet you well. The lord of St. Cofme1561.

brought to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Abbeville,. whereby yePaper Office
signify, that although by the answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might from a Copy.
have had occasion to have entered into some doubt of our amity, yet after certain pur-
pores passed betwixt you and our ambaflador, you would assure us of your good mean-
ing to live with us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require us to give credit
to the said St. Cofme. We have thereunto thought good to answer as followeth.
The fame St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part, for your excuse
in not ratifying the treaty as yourself made to our ambassador, and we have briefly
answered to every the fame points, as he can shew you; and if he shall not so do,
yet least in the meane season you might be induced to think that your reasons has fa-
tisfied us, fomerally we assure you, that to our requests your answer cannot be re-
puted for a fatisfacfion. For we require no benefit of you, but that you will perform
your promise whereunto you are bound by your real and your hand, for the refusal
whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet we any thing, but that
which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which yourlelf in words and
fpcech doth confers, that which your late husband's our good brother's anibafiadors
and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were made privy unto,
that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea that, without which, no
perfect amity can continue betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt not
but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Ncverthlefs, perceiving by the report
of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow here n
the advifc of your council in Scotland, we are content to suspend our conceipt of all
unkindncfs, and do assure you that we be fully resolved upon this being performed,
to unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood with you as quietly, friend-
ly, yea as alluredly in the knot of fricndflhip, as we be in the knot of nature and
blood. And herein we be so earncflly determined, that the world should fee if the
contrary should follow, (which God forbid) the very occasion to be in you and not
in us; as the tiory witnefleth the like of the king your father, our uncle, with whom

VOL. I1. Nn a ou

S3

our father fought to have knitt a perpetual bond, by inviting to come in this realm to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us, and we think with you,
fundrv witnefies of our father's earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto
divers evil councellors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that report
hath been made unto you, that we have lent our admiral to the seas with our navy to
empeache your paflage, both your servants do well underfiand how false that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the leas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almot compelled,
by the earneit complaint of the ambaflador of our good brother the king of Spain,
made of certain Scottish men haunting our seas as pirates,. under pretence of letters of
marque of which matter also we earnefily require you, at your coming to your realme,
to h.tve tome goodl consideration, and the rather for relfpet that ought to be betwixt
your icalme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of the house of Bur-

mundy. .nd so, right excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend us
to you with most earnest request, not to negleA these our fiiendly and sisterly offers
of friendfh p, which, before God, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
our signet at Henyngham the I6th of Augufi, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 253.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

15th of May, \F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing worth the writing
1563 v- unto your honour. - Before his coming, we had so little to hint upon, that we
Paper Office did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, masking, and running at the
from the Or- ring, and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters, and such abun-

Sna1- dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but

to reading of writings, and hearing of tales many so truely reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto vour honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage between his youngelt fun, the duke of Auflruche, and this queen; wherein he
hath so far travelled, that it has already come unto this point, that if file find it good,
the said duke will out of hand fend hither his embaltlador, and fatiher proceed to
the confummantion hereof, with as convenient fpccd as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, la Croch is lcnt unto her with this message from the
cardinal, who th.h promilicd unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of
May; and for this caife la Croch is ready for his departure, and his letters writing
both day and night. 'I his queen being before a(lvertizcd ol his towardncfs, by many
means, hatlh loght lar off, to know my lord ofl Murray's mind herein, but would
never lo pl.iinly deal witt hiin, thlit he could learn what her meaning is, or howflie
is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and as-
fuiredly until the L. of Lidington's return, ihe will do what (he ca;n to keep that
fecrct, and becau(e refolluion in his ableince cinnllot be takeln, lhe will, for this time,
return la Croch with request, to have lohng r time to devilc; and after, with the
most fpced [he cat), ihc fully l)urpolcili to advcrtize hiin, 1 nican her uncle the car-

dinal,
14

dinal, of her mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since his arrival
in France, divers letters have passcd between her grace and him, whereof as much
as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as much
as was written in typher, is kept unto themfclves. Whether also the L. of Li-
lington hath had any conference with the Spanifi ambassador in England of this
matter, or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means, to get true know-
ledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be lo:h to write
for verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor hath of-
sered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is said, to
be worth 30,000 franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a letter
unto this queen, out of France, not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottifhmnan, that lafi came into

there parts, he brought also letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis ti-
' midus fortius latrat.' From hence I do assure them, what means fomever they
make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to receive but small com-
fort, for all their long allie. We fland daily in doubt what friendship we shall need
ourself, except we put better order unto our misruled papists, than yet we do, or
know how to bring to pass, that we may be void of their comber.

Tomorrow, the I5th of this inflant, the queen departeth of this town, towards

Edenbourgh. If my hap be good, you shall thoroughly hear some merry tidings of
the Bp. of St. Andrew's; upon Wednesday next he shall be arreigned, and five
other priefis, for their massing at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take my leave;
at St. Andrews the i 5th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 26i.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the qucen's majesty.
j\MI AY it please your honour, the 7th of this infl-ant, Rowlet, this queen's fccre- Irth of April,

tar), arrived here; he reporteth very honefcly of his good usage, he brought I ,(:.

with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of lamcniation ';iper Oflice
and sorrow. She received fior the queen moth r two letters, the one contained floll t':c (li-
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other fignifL the (late of France as then it was, gi":'1 ill is
in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was intended for the appeasing owli Il" d
of the dilcords there, not miftrufling bit that if reason could not be had at the quccni
of England's hands, but that the realm of France should find her ready and willing
to ilpport and defend the right thercof, as by fricndfhip and old alliance between the
two calms ihe is bound.

Hlow well these words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confider,
lMid by her writings in this fort unto this queen, Iwhich I alluie your honour is true)

N n 2) yo

15

you may afluredly know. that nothing shall be left undone of her part, that may
move debate or controverfie between this queen and our sovereign.

It was much muted at by the queen herself, how this new kindness came about,

that at this timie the received two long letters written all with her own hand, faying,
all the time since her return (he never received half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can myself teltify by the queen's own faying, and other good as-
furance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can also farther assure your ho-
nour, that this queen hath fayd that (he knoweth now, that the friendship of the
queen's majefly my sovereign may Rtand her more in flead, than that of her good
mother in France, and as she is desirous of them both, so witl she no' lose the one
for the other. I may also farther assure your honour, that whatfomever the occasion
is, this queen hath some what in her heart that will burfi out in time, which will ma-
nifefR that some unkindness hath pafled between them, that will not be easy forgotten.
In talk sometimes with myself, the faith that the queen mother might have used the
matter otherwise than she hath done, and doth much doubt what will be the success
of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then that
presently they fland in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her
in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet I am assured Ihe {hall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the others did write unto her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lydington of that
purnofe, fle did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if she do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour ihereof, at his return, or I perchance by some means
here. It may, perchance, be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or undertand what mind she beareth unto the queen's majesty our
sovereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothwell is sent for to London.
She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I answered, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it ihould be
judged there. 1 know that f/h thinketh much that he is not frnt into Scotland. It is
yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil instrument.
If the Lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour herein, he is in the
wrong to those who are his friends here, but most of all to himself. There comes a
vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger secretary

for the time, in the parliament holden by our Sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the lime, the time of the restitution
of Urnquile Matthew Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that as it has pleated her majefly

VM rmoft graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuficiently
conceived the cause of this your preflnt aflembly; yet having her majesty's com-
mandmncnt to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee deceased,
I am willed to express the lamie obmewhat more at large.

NOTOUR
3

NOTOUR it is, how, in her H; :-c:is s minority, a process of forfaltour was

decreed against my Lord of Lcninox, tor certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cciiFcniiint of Parliament given thereupon; by reason
whereof he has this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared by divers his suites,
sundry ways brought unto her Maje.ty's knowledge, not only containing most humble
and due submission, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to her majesty
his natural princess, and earnest affection he had to her Highness nmot humble
service, if it should please her Majesty of her clemency to make him able to enjoy
the benefit of a subjed; many refpeas might have moved her Highness favourably
to incline to his request, as the anciency of his house, and the firname he bears,
the honour he has to appertain to her majesty by affinity, by reason of my Lidy
Margaret her highness's aunt, and divers other his good considerations, as also the
effec'tuous request of her good fifler the Queen's Majesty of England, whose earnest
commendation was not of least moment, betides that of her own natural, her ma-
icity has a certain inclination to pity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard, by
her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be the infirument of the uphold,
maintenance, and advancement of the ancient blood, than to have matter miniftred
of the decay or overthrow of any good race. U1 on this occasion, her majefly the
more tenderly looked upon his request, and her good sifter the Queen of England's
favourable. letter, written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration whereof
not only has she granted unto him her letter of restitution, by way of grace, but
also licensed him to pursue, by way of reduction, the remedies provided by the law
for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment, unorderly led, and to have the
process reversed; for examination whereof, it has pleased her majesty presently to
assemble you the three estates of this her realme, by whose advice, deliberation, and
decision at her majefly's mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, law, of the realm, and practice observed in such cafes, will
bear out. The fum of all your proceedings, at this time, being by that we have
heard, thus as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have in hand
gave me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far different from the fame sub-
jed, wherein I would extend the circumflances more largely. If I feared not to
ostend her highness, whose pretence and modest nature abhors long speaking and
adulation, and lo will compel me to speak such things, a may seem to tend to any
good and perfect point; and leafI it fiould be comnpted to me, as that I were obli-
vious, if I ihould omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may accept thie,
and the like demonflrations ot h.er gentill nature; whose gracious behaviour towards
all her fubjecs, in general, may Icrv\e tor a good proof of that felicity, we may
look for under her happy government, io long as it flall please God to grant her
unto us; for a good harmony to lie had in the common weill, the offices between
the prince and the fubje.ts mull be reciprocque; as by her majefly's prudence we
enjoy this pretent peace with all foreign nitions, and quietness among yourfclvcs, in
flch fort, that I think jultly it tiny he affirmed Scotland, in no manl's age that pre-
fcntly lives, was in greater tianquillity; lo is it the duty ot all us her loving fubjcls
to acknowledge the lame as a most high benefit, prcceeding from the good govern-
ment of her majesty, dcclaring ourlclvcs thankful for the anime, and render ng to her
majefly such due obcdicncc, as a just prince may look 'or at the hands of faithful
and obedient fubjc'ts. I mean no forccd nor unwilling obedience, which I know

her

her nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the contemplation of her modest
kind of regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her majesty's benignity these three years, that
fle has lived in the government over you, and many of you have largely tailed of
her larce libeiality and frnk dealing; on the other part her highncfs has had large
appetraince of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continu', as we h ve
begun, in consideration of the many notable examples of her clemency above others
her good qu liiies, and to abhor and detelt all false bruites and rumours, which are
the moll pestilent evils that can be in any common well, and the sowers and inven-
tors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have of her an most gracious princesec,
and she mos faithful and loving fubjeEs ; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the politick bodies, whereof
I made mention before, as the glory thereof flall partly appertain to her majefly, fb
shall no small praise and unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all
univerfaliy her subje2s.

No. X. (Vol I. p. 278.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to come

follow, to the Queen's majesty of England, and state of this realm,
upon the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Lord Darley.

IRST, the minds of such as be affected to the queen of Scotts, either for her-

F self, or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have
charge of the form of religion in this realm, or for the difcontentation they have of
the Queen's majesty, or her fuccefilon, or of the succession of any other beside the
Queen of Scotts, shall be, by this marriage, erected, comforted, and induced to
devise and labour how to bring their desires to pass; and to make rome estimate
what persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed;
the fame may be compafTed in those forts either within the realm or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen of Scotts, or to the Lord

Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as firfl all the house of Lorrain and Guile
for her part, and the Earl of Lenox and his wife, all such in Scot'and as be of the'r
blood, and have received difplcafures by the Duke of Chaltlreault and the Hamil-
tons. The second are all manner of persons, both in this realm and other countries,
that are devoted to the authority of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received;
and in these two forts are the substance of them comprehended, that shall take com-
fort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles there kind of men
shall intend to this realm.

FIIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires is, and always shall be, to

bring the Queen of Scotts to have the royal crown of th s realm; and therefore,
though the dcvifces may vary amongst themfclv cs for the compaffilg hereof, accord-
ing to the accidents of the times, and according to the impediments which they lhall
find by means of the queen's majesty's actions and governments, yet all their pur-
poses, drifts, dcvifcs, and pratcices, shall wholly and only tend to make the queen
of Scotts queen of this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and in their
proceedings, there are two manners to be confidered, whereof the one is far worle thrn

I tlhe

the other: the one is intended by them, that either from malicious blindness in
religion, or for natural affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darley, do per-
fuade themselves that the said Queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the Queen, of which fort be all their kindred on both fides,
a;id all such as are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
xhere; the other is meant by them, which, with less malice, are perfiaded that
the queen of Scots hath only right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majefly
and her issue, of which fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of
them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from these two forts. shall the peril
deviles and practices proceed. From the first, which imagine the queen of Scots to
have perpetually right, are to be looked for these perils. Firif, is it to be doubted
the devil will infe& some of them to imagine the hurt of the life of our dear fove-
reign lady, by such means as the devil shall fuggelt to them, although it is to be
afluredly hoped, that almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously proteCt and
preierve her from such dangers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by persuasions,
by brutes, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good fubjecs from
the queen's majesty, and to counciliate them to the queen of Scotts, and on this be-
half the frontiers and the north will be much solicited and laboured. Thirdly, there
will be attempted causes of some tumults and rebellions, specially in the north to-
wards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow rome open enterprize set by violence.
Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's council and friends, a new league made
with France, or Spain, that flall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance to
their title. And it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as many practices as
they can, both upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty to
cncreafe and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or po-
tent, and for the attempting of all these things, many devises will be imagined, from
time to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen of Scotts, but

that she should succeed in title to the queen's majetfy, is not much to be feared, but
that they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's majesty not to marry,
and so to impeach it, hut to hope that the queen of Scotts shall have iflfe, which
they will think to be more pleafible to all men, because thereby the crowns of Eng-
land and Scotland fhali be united in one, and thereby the occasion of war shall ccafe;
with which persuasion many people may be seduced, and abuftd to incline themselves
to the part of the queen of Scotts.

1TIE remedies againfi these perils.

A Duplicat.
A fnimmary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and others tlju.ciJ (;

of the privy council. Collected out of tlhe sundry and fevcral speeches ct. l.il,.C,.i
ofl the fltid countlclors. i ,).
ri.0.

Lord Keeper. MIr. Comptroler,
Lord Trcafurcr, Mr. Vice Chambcrlain,
Derby, Mlr. Sccrctary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Lciccfter, lPctcr,
Lord Admiral, Malun.
Lord Chamberlain,

Qjefionin

I9

Questions propounded were there two.
x; IRST, what perils might ensue to the queen's Majesty, or this realm, of the

marriage betwixt the queen of Scotts, and the Lord Darnly.
2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the Firfl,

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some counsellors into
oniy one.

i. First, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (being not married) a great

number in this realm, not of the worst fubjeas, might be alienated in their minds
from their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage
of Scotland, as a mean to establish the fucceflion of both the crowns in the iflue of
the fame marriage, and so favur all devises and practices, that should tend to the ad-
vancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them, which furthered the

marriage of the lord Darnley, was laid upon the trust of such as were papists, as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both
in this realm and Scotland, the papists would most favour, maintain, and fortify
this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance of faLcion in religion,
devise all means and pratices that could be within this realm, to disturb the eflate
of the queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve
their purposes by force, rather than fail. By some other, these perils have indeed
many branches, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, into two forts, and these
were in nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one from the other, but
were knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the other.
The first of these fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the lord Darnley,
there was a plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not
only to succeed the queen's majesty, as in her best amity she had professed, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when The was in power, she did manifestly declare.

THE second was, that hereby the Romiifh religion flould be ereced, and increased

daily in this realm, and there two were thus knit together, that the furtherance and
mnairtentace of the title staid, in furthering of the religion of Rome within this
realm; and in like manner the furtherance of the fame religion stood by the title, for
otherwise the title had no foundati n.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to advance the title to diflurh

the queen's majesty, must needs ensue, was confidnr d that always the intention and
will of any pcrfon is mofi nmanifefl, when their power is greatef', and contrary when
power is finall, then the intention and will of every perifon is covered and less seen.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatelt, by her marriige with the dol-
phin of Franice, being afterwards French Kinig, it nanilefily appeared of what mind
she, and all her friciels were, using then manilcflly .,1) the means that could he dc-
vised to inrmpach . d difioflicfs the queen's m;ije y, first by writing and publishing
herielfin all cour tries queen of England; by granting charters, patents, and com-
missions with that fIilc, and with the aris of England both the French ;nd Scotts,
which charters remain f1ill undefaced; and to prosecute it with effeat, it is known
what preparationns o( war were m;ide, and sent into Scotland; and what othe, foices
were afirmblcd in foreign counlties; yea, in what manner a thanieful peace was

made
20

made by the French with king Phillip, to employ all the forces of France, to purfie
all the matters by force, which by God's providence, and the queen's majefly con-
trary power, were repelled ; and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and
power being changed, the intention began to hide itself, and altho' by the Scottifil
queen's comrniflrys an accord was made at Edinbrcugh, to reform all those titles,
anld claims, and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations, the ratifica-
tion of that treaty hath been deferred. And to now, as soon as she fha!l feel her
power, she will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors as were
committed in the firIt, her friends and allies wi!l amend the fame, and proceed sub-
fiantially to her purpose. By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a fubje& of this realm, than with the
nigihiieft prince abroad; for by this, he being of this realm, and having for the
caule of religion, and other refpets, made a party here, should encreafe by force
with diminution of the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make
by the faction of the papifl, and other discontented persons here, should be as it
xere deducted out of the power of this realm; and by the marriage of a itranger,
the could not be aflured of any part here; so as by this marriage ffie should have a
portion of her own power to serve her turn, and a small portion of adversaries at
home in our.,own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble the like abroad;
whereof the examples are in our own flories many, that fore gn powers neverprevailed
in this realm, but with the help of some at home. It was also remembered, that
feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifefily seen, that in
every corner of the realm, the faction that most favoureth the Scottish title, is grown
flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court, both in hall and chamber, it could
notbe (but except good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame falion would shortly encreafe, and
grow so great and dangerous, as the redrefo thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the substance of the
justices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly a third was found fully
aflured to be trusted in the matter of religion, upon which only firing the queen of
Scotts title doth hang, and some doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Le-
nox, and his, had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and thereby made avant
now in Scotland, that their party was so great in England as the queen's majesty durst
not attempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of the perils
declared, being notwithstanding more largely and plainly set out, and made tb ap-
parent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny them to be but
many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

T' i-i . question of this consultation was what were meet to be done to avoid tlirec

perills, or clle to divert the force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein thicie
were a great number of particular deviles propounded, and yet the more part of tlheiC
wlas redluced by tome into three heads.

i. I' E. firit thought necefllars by all persons, as the only thing of the mofl moment

and efficacy, to remedy all thcfc perrils, and many others, and such as without it,
no other remedy could be found sufficient, and that was to obtain that the quen's
i ajicsRy would marry, and make therein no long delay.

VOL. 11. 0 o . TH

2. THE second was to advance, eflablilh, and fortify indeed the profeflion of re-

ligion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to deminlih, weaken, and feeble the
contrary.

3. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to disappoint and break this

intended marriage, or, at the leatf, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful
to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of these three hath no particular rights in it, but an earnefl and unfeigned

desire and suite, with all humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majesty, that she would differ no more time from marriage,
whereby the good fubjecqs of the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jelly, and the iflue of her body, without which no surety can be devised to ascertain
any person of continuance of their families or pofteries, to enjoy that which other-
wife should come to them.

SECOND, concerningthe matters of religion, wherein both truth and policy were
joined together, had there particulars.

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm have taken occa-

sion to comfort and increase their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
with a rumour and expectation that the religion shall be ihortly changed in this realm,
by means that the biffops, by the queen's majesty's commandment, have of late dealt
ftrelghtly with tome persons of good religion, because they had forborn -to wear cer-
tain apparel, and such like things, being more of form and accidents, than of any
fubfiance, for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning to comfort the
adversaries, but only to maintain an uniformity as well in things external, as in the
fubflance; nor yet hath any intention to make any change of the religion, as it is
eflablilhed by laws. It was thought by all men very necessary, for the suppressing of
the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries, indirectly hereby to notify, by her special
letters to the two arch-bishops that her former commandment was only to retain
an uniformity, and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of hermajefiy,
in the change of any part of religion, but that (he did determine firmly to
maintain the form of her religion, as it was eftablithed, and to punish such as
did therein violate her laws. And in these points, some also wilhed that it might
plealt her arci bilhops, that if they fihould fee that the adversaries continued in taking
occasion to fortify their fahtion, that in that cafe they should use a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which time, tome good, uniform, and decent order
might be deviled, and eltahliflhed, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and
gravity might be retained amongst the clergy.

THEl fcond means was, that the quondam bishops, and others, which had refused

to acknowledge the queen's majcfly's power over them, according to the law, and
were of late difpecrfcd in the pl.igue time to sundry places abroad, where it is known
they cea!e not to adv.ice their faction, might be returned to the tower or some other
plif'n, where they might not have luch liberty to reduce and inveigle the queen's
niajefly's fuljeC ls, as they daily do.

I' H E third n.eans was, that where the biflhops do complain that they dare not cxe-

cute the eccleilflickal laws, to the furthcrence of religion, for fear of the prcmunirc,
whrewith the judJies an! la yers of the realm, being not bcft afFcCtcd in religion,
do threaten theml, and in nnioy caifes lett not to pinch and dcfacc them, that upon
fich calcs opened, I;nme conv nient authority might be given them, from the queen's
nijclly, to continue during her plefure.

2B

2
22

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful books in

English broughtfrom beyond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and especially
in the North, seducing of great numbers of good fubjets, the like boldness whereof
was never suffered in any other princess's time, that some itreight order might be given
to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the judges, what manner of
crime the fame is, to maintain such books, made direcAly against her majefly's autho-
rity, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and such lewd per-

sons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in England, especially in the North, as
curates of churches, and all Cuch of them as are not found hones and conformable,
may be banished out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow (edition in the
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings are on the other fide the sea,

and from thence maintain sedition in the realm; that livings may be better bestowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjeds.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no small authority in this

realm in governance of all property of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's
majesty, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they should for
conscience fake maintain the queen's majesty's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this marriage, or to di-
vert the perrils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force, or

fear of force, it is thought by some that these means following might occasion the
breach of the marriage.

i. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed, to be ready at an
hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieutenant-general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness to serve, either at
Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

8. THAT presently the lady Lenox be committed to some place, where (he may
be kept from giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. THAT the earl of Lenox and his son may be sent for, and required to be sent

home by the queen of Scotts, according to the treaty; and if they shall not come, then
to denounce to the queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter
with hostility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (fb the fame be done In deeds
and not in shews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the lead that it may be
qualified from many perils; and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed
with speed, whili flhe has a party in Scotland that favourcth not the marriage, and be-
sure any league made by the queen of Scots with France or .pain.

SoIME other allows well of all there proceedings, saving of proceeding to ho/tility,
but all do agree in the reft, and allb to there particularities following.

ro. H'I-AT the ca ll's lands upon his refusal, or his for's refuting, should be seized
and beflowed in gift or cuflody, as (hall please her majefiy, upon good fubjeóds.

0 0 2 Ii. 'I'IAT

23

II. TI-AT all manifefl favourers of the earl, in the North, or elsewhere, be in.
quired for, and that they be, by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAr enquiry be made in the North, who have the flewardfhip of the queen's

majesty's lands there, and that no person, deserving mifiruft, be suffered to have
governance or rule of any of her fubjeas or l nds in the North, but only to retain
their fees, and more trusty person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

1 . THAT all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scotland, he refirain,

ed to all-S:ottifh men, favingfuch as have safe conduct, or be especially recommend.
cd from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THATr some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as favour not the mar-
riaoe, and they comforted from time to time.

I5. 2THAT the queen's majesty's houfhold, chamber, and pensioners be better seen

unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used by sundry against the slate of the
realm.

16. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles, be removed to
some place, where he may be forth coming.

1 7. THAT confidering the faction and title of the queen of Scotts hath now, of

long time received great favour, and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour here-
in to the queen of Scotts and her miniiters, and the lady Catharine, whom the said
queen of Scotts accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it may lease
the queen's majefly, by some exterior aft, to chew some remission of her displeasure
to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find
some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein,

I8. THAT whofocver ihall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph Sadler may ac-
company him.

19. THAT with specd the realm of Ireland may be committed to a new go-
vernor.

20. FINALLY, that these advises being confidered by her majesty, it may please

her to choose which of them she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all means to put their intention

in execution. Some by pratIice, some by force, when time shall serve, and no time
can serve so well the queen's majefly to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before
tlhe queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 288.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, fiom Edinburgh the 31ft of July

i565.

Cott. lib. Cal. A Y it please ynur lordship, I have received your lordflip's letter by my ser-
11 . fol. 2 18 . vant, frufficint tcflimony of your lordship's favour towards me, whereof I
In Original, think my self always so afnlrcd, that what other mishap foevcr befall me, I have

enough to comfort my self with ; though I have not at this time received neither ac-
cordinlg to the need I llaiil, nor the neceflity of the fervife that I am imnploycd in, I
will rather pass it, as I may with patirnce, than trouble your lordship to be further
fitcr for me, when there is lo little hope that ally good will be lone for me. I doubt

'not

rot but your lordlhip hath heard by such information, as I have given from hence,
what the present state of this country is, how this queen is now become a married wife,
and her husband, the self fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires,
hitherto, they have foun ) lo much to their contentment, that if the reft succeed and
prosper accordingly, they may think themfel es much happier. than there is appear-
ance that they shall be, so many discontented minds. so much miliking of the sub-
jeis to have these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be brought to pass ; I never
heard of any marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men d. talk, was never
seen, at any time, when men should mofi have shewed the ,selves to rejoice, if that
consideration of her own honour and we'l of her country had been had as appertained
in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fe r, the overthrow of religion, the breach of
amitie with the queen's majefly, and the deltrudion of as many of the nobility as she
h th m fliking of, or that he iiketh to pitch a quarile unto. To lee all there inconve-
niencys approaching, there are a good number that may sooner lameint with them-
selves, and complain to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them,
some attempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good, what is
required otherways, or what means there is made your lordship knoweth; what will
be anfweared, or what will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your
intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our
ruin thall prevent your support when council is once taken. Nothing so needfull, as
1Ieedy execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly depend, in her majesty's
hands it flandeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perish; greater honour her ma-
jefty cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majesty's power to do for us; the funis
are not great, the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will dayly be
found, though this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this time, I
think her majesty {hall loofe.butfew-; her friends here being once taken away, where
will her majesty find the like; I speak least of that which I think is most earnefily in-
tended by this queen, and herhufband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared
more for the papists in England, than he did for the protestants in Scotland; if there-
fore, his hops be so great in the papists of England, what may your lordship believe
that he thinketh of the proteflants there; for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honor
he hath to be of kine to the queen my mistress, if in preferring those that are the
queen's majesties worst fubjccts to those that are her bets, he declareth what mind he
bearcth to the queen's majesties fclf, any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his
duty evil forgotten; he would now fecm to be indifferent to both the religions, she to
ule her mass, and he to come fomctimes to the preaching ; they wi re married with
all the foleinnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mars ; his fleech
and talk argueth his mind, and yet would lie fain seem to the world that he were of
tonic religion; his words to all men, against whom he (unceiveth any diiiiplcafure
how unjust soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather lie leemcth a monarch of
the world, than he that, not long since, we have seen and known the lord Dauinlcy;
he lookcth now for reverence of many, that have little will to give it him ; and Iblme
thler are that do give it, that think himi little worth of it All honor that may be
atiilbuted unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully; all praifc l tlhat may
Li( rfoken of him, he lacketh not from herflif ; all dignities that file can indue him
with, which are already given and granted; no man 0,lealctn her that contenctloi not
hlin ; and what may I ay more, she hath given over to him her whole will, to be
itlcd and guided as himself beltliketh; sic can as much prevail with hini, in any

thing

25

thing that is againfl his will, as your lordship may with me to perfwade that I (hould
hang my self; this last dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, the would
have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or he had been himself of 21 years
of age, that things done in his name might have the better authority. He would,
in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is risen amongtl our men of law whether she being clade with a husband, and her
husband not twenty one years, any thing without parliament can be of firength, that
is done between them; upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in de-
bateing. And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three
heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king. This was the night before
the marriage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock the lords, all that were
in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man said so much
as amen, saving his father that cried out aloud God save his queen. The manner of
the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, she
was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the great
mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
which the wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her husband; (he was led into the
chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was she left untill her husband
came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the minister priefis, two, do there
receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and an initrument taken by a Notour
that no man said againfl them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not pro-
ceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
mond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
them, she tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and leaveth her there, and went
to her chamber, whither within a space (he followeth; and being required, according
to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those forrowfull garments, and
give herself to a more pledfant life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for maner
fake than grief of heart, she fuffereth them that flood by, every man that could
approach to take out a pin, and so being committed to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not t.) bed, to fignifie to the world, that it was not lust that moved
them to marry, but only the necessity of her country, not, if God will long to leave
it deflitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of all things to make the
worfs, would that it should be believed, that they knew each other before that they
came there, I would not your lordihip should so believe it, the likelihoods are so
great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an aft done, I would not be-
lieve it. After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and dancing: to their
dinner they were conveyed by the whole nobility; the trumpets found; a laigefs
cried ; mony thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as were happy to
get any part; they dine both at one table, the upon the upper hand, there serve her
these earls Athole Sewer, Morton Carver, Crnufoord cupbearer; these serve him in
like office?, carls Eglington, Cafl[ls, and Glcncairn; after dinner they danced
awhile, and then retired themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined lb do
they fupe, some dancing there was and so they go to bed ; of all this I have written
to your lordship I am not Oculatus tcflis, to this, but of the verity your lordship
shall not need to doubt, howfoevcr I came by it; I was sent for to have been at the
supper, but like a currifl or uncourtly carle I refused to be there; and yet that which
yuur lor(lfhip may think night move me much, to have had the fight of my miflrcls,
of whom thcfe eighteen days byjult account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by

all
26

all that fort as a very evill person, which in my heart I do well allow, and like of
ryfelf the better, for yet can I not find either honest or good that liketh their do-
i;,gs; I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, craving pardon for my
long silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad
by night than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of that which I con-
ceive, or receive in the night. As your lordship, 1 am sure, is partaken of such
letters as I write to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he shall be to this, to save
me of a little labour, to write the fame again, molt humbly I take my leave atEdin-
burgh, the last day of July, 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 291.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William Cecil, knt.

her majesty's principal secretary, and one of her highness's privy
council.
A FTE R my hearty commendations, this day at noon, captain Brickwell came 2d of Sept.

hither, who brought with him the queen's majesty's letters containing her full '565·

resolution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give information of, fav-p fr L

th

ing that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing determined, ri al
or at the leafi expressed in the fame letters, and for that purpose received I, this
morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others,
craving to be holpen with 3co harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better
defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and thequeen's
majesty our fovere.gn', good will, and care towards them; and do also underhand
that it were very requisite to have them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in
this manner decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter overthrow and un-
doing, since the queen's part is at ,he least 5000, and they not much above Ioo;
betides, that the queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do yet
want the power that the earl of Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet
joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majefly's pleasure in this behalf. what, and how, I shall answer them, or
otherwifie deal in this matter, now at this their extreme necessity. For, on the
one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable sub-
vcrlion of religion there; and, on theotherfide, to adventure To great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldier., for a f(all time) without good
warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradventure, upon our heads rome wilful warrs,
anll in the mean time to leave the place unfurniflhed, (having in the whole but xoo)
without any grant of new supply for the fame; and by that means also, to leave the
marches here the more fuiljeCt to invalion, wh le in the mean fcafon new helps arc
preparing; to this know not I what to fay, or how to do. And so much more I
marvel thereof, as that having so many times written touching this matter, no rcfo-
lutc determination cometh. And t; between tl:e writing, and looking for answer,
the occasion cannot pass, but mult needs proceed and have success. God turn it to
his glory ; but surely all mens reason hatli great cause to fear it. Such a push it is
now come unto, as this little fuipply would do much good to advance God's honour,
tu continue her majefly's great and careful memory of them, and to preserve a great

many

27

A ?P P E N D X

manv noblemenl and gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone f-.r ever'. Your
good will and affection that way, I do nothing miflruit, and herein shall take such
good adv-ice, as by any means I can. I rece ved from these lords two papers inciofed,
the effic-t whereof shall appear unto you. For those matters that captain Brickwell
hl-',uht, I shall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr.
llndolph, both received this day. By him you fiall hear that the proieftants are
ictired fiom Edenborough further off. So as I hope your refolition for their ad
flall come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so prcfently
need them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you. to God. From lcerwick,
tih 2d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol .

I. p. 291.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

: Sep:. 1 -6;. U PO N the advertizements lately received from you, with such other things as
Paper Otlice. came also from the lord Scrol:e ard 1 homas Randolph, and upon the whole

matter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that
we can, fend toyou 3oo0 1. to be thus used. If you shall certainly underfiand that
the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the ilnprclting to hini of loool .
might l}and him in flead for the help to defend himself, you fh!ll prcfntly I t him
secretly to underf'and. that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so
we will that you let him have, in the most secret fort that you can, when the said
fum shall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him Come part
there before hand.

The other 2oo0 1. you (hall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that you

shall fee neceflary caufc to imprest: ome part thereof to the now numbers of the
Cco footmen, and too horfcrnen ; or to the cafling out of wages of such workmen,
a, by tickners, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry 1 tters, the earneit request of the fa c carl of Murray and his afl;ciates,
that they might have, at the lcat, 300 of our soldiers, to aid theim. And that you
all'o write, that tho' we Aould not c mmand you to givethem aid, yet if we would
but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such things,
a. you with the help of cthers (hould bring about, you doubt not but things would
do well; you ihall underfiand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many re-
fpceCs, to maintain any other princes fubjeEts, to take arms againfl their sovereign;
neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make warrs betwixt us
and that prince, which hath caufdc us to sorbe..r, hitherto, to give you any power
to let them be aided with ,lny mncn. BIt now, confidering we take it, that they arc
pursued, notwithstanding their humble fubnmiffir i, and ofter to be ordered and tried
by law and jultice, which bcing refuled to the)n, they are retired to Domfiefc, a
place near our weft marches, is it ccemeth there to defend themselves, and adding
thereuntothe good intention that prefenily the French king prctendeth, by Ifndilg
oneof his to join with Iome one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and
to induce her to forbear this manner of violent anl rigorous proceeding againl her
ifljccts, for which purpose, the French ambaffhl or here with us hath lately writ-
ten to that queen, whereof anfwcr is; daily looked for, to the intent in the nman

timte

time the said lords should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help to de-
fend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you shall fee it necessary for their
defence, to let them (as of your own adventure,, and without notifying that you
have any direEtion therein from us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you flall fee cause.
And to cover the matter the better, you shall fend these numbers to Carlisle, as to
be laid there in garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that such powers
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you hlall
fee. cause to diledt of, the fame numbers or any of them may mofl covertly repair to
the said lords, when you shall exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only
for their defence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any
thing that may offend her person, wherein you shall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it should otherwise appear, your dan-
ger should be so great, as all the fiiends you have could not be able to save you to-
wards us. And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to
proceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield
to give them aid of money or men: And yet we would not that either of there
were known to be our ate, but rather to be covered with your own desire and
attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 300.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. i565-6.

Y humble duty confidered ; what to write of the present state of the country An Original.
I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it

maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
some good hope that this queen would have hewed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin should have returned unto them with comfort, upon rome
conditions. Since that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorneton by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glaf-
gow. Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appearance
of any good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's ma-
jefty our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write of
this nothing less than I know that fle hath spoken. And by all means that she
thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pals. There is a band lately devised, in
which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spa:n, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpeced to be of the fame confeldeacy
to maintain papifiry throughout Chriftiandom; this band was sent out of France
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
her, and the principal to be returned very filortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willlbn,
a fit minister for such a devilifi devie ; if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that
Thall he sent as I conveniently may. MonfietJr Rambollet came to this toun upon
Mlonday, he spoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not long; the next
day he had long conferences with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge
of any whereof they intreated, I cannot ipeak with any that hath any hope that
there will be any good done for the lords by him, though it is said that he hath very
good will to do lb to the uttcrmoft of his power. He is lodged nicr to the court,

VOL. II. P p amd
w .

29

and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given, whereat
means made to many to be prelent that day at the mass. Upon Candlemas day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband, the earle of Lenox, and
earle Athole; divers other lords have been called together and required to be at the
mass that day, orme have promiscd, as Cafiels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs.
Others have refused, as Fleming, Iivingfion, Lindsay, Huntly and Bothell; and
of them all Bothell is the ftoutefi, but worst thought of; it was moved in council
that mass (hould have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to tempt
men's minds, than intended indeed:. She was of late minded again to fend Robert
Melvin to negotiate with such as ihe trufteth in amongst the queen's majesty's sub.
jecas, of whose good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the truth,
but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
for the worlt; rome in that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, whereof I am sure there is some things,.
though perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers ..quarls,
contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain mischief and dif-
order, David yet retaineth still his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee
their sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do
any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that ihall be the first voyage that the
will make after she is delivered of her being with child; the bruit is common that
she is, but hardly believed of many, and. of this, I can assure you, that there have
of late appeared rome tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. 1. p. S38.).
Part of a letter from the earl es Bedford and Mr.. T;ho.. Randolph to the

lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th of March, 1566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B. to. fol. 372.

MA'ay it pEaofe your alonours,

-
'7 aih, E A RI N G of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie in the
'i6. 1h, reports, we have-myche ado to decerne the veritie: which maketh us the

flower amn loothcr to put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not that
your honours, and by you the queen's majeftie, our Ibvereigne, should not be ad-
verticed b t of the verie trothe as we can possible. To this end we thought good
to (ied upcaptain Carewe, who was in'Edinbourge at the tyme of the last attemp-
tate, who floke there with diverfc, and after that with the queen's self and her hus-
hand confornme to that, which we have learned by others, and know by this reporte,
we fend the fame, colfirmed by the parties self, that were there prelent and ailyltels
unto these that were executors of the ale.

THIls we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband being entered into a veh-

ment suspicion of David, that by hym tome thynge was commytted, which was
most agayn(te to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte, fyrfie commu-
nicated his mynde to George Duglafs, who fynding his sorrowes fb great fought all
the means he coulde to put rome remedie to his griefs; and communicating the
fame unto my lord Ruthcn by the king's commandmcnt, no other wayc coulde be

found

4
3o

found then that David should be taken out of the waye. Wherein he was so ear-
ileit and daylye pressed the fame, that no refle could be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton and lord Linfaye
tiould be made previe to th' intente that theie might have their friends at hande, yf
jieade required; which caused them to aflemble so mayny, as thaie thought fuffici-
cnt a2airnlt the tyme, that this determination of theirs should be put in executione
which was determined the ixth of this inflante 3 daies afore the parliament Ihould
begyne, at which time the fayde lordes were assured, that the eries Argyle, Mor-
rayc, Rothes and their complyces fholje have been forfeited, yf the king could not
be p-,'ruadcd through this means to be their friends: who for the def)yre he hade
that this intent should take eftref th' one waye, was content to yiclde without all
(ifficultie to t' other, with this condition, that thaie flould give their contents, that
he might have the crowne matrimonial. lie was so impatient to fee there things he
saw, and were daylye brought to his ears, that he dayly pressed the said lord Ru-
then, that there might be no longer delaye; and to the intent yt myglit ma.ni
fedte unto the world, that he approved the a(qe, was content to be at the doing of
that himself.

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto viii of the clock the king conveyeth himself,

the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and two others, throwe his owne chamber by
the privy ftayres up to the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabin:t
about xii foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David with his
capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen,
who willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The queen
said, that it was her will, Her howfband anfwerede, that yt was againit her
honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that he Should lerne better his deutie, and offer-
ing to have taken him by the armi David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put hifnfelf behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him:
But the king having loosed hss hand, and holding her in his arms, David was
thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of prefens,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have referv-
ed hym, and the next day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore
hym evill will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a
great many others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for
certayne, that the kinges own dagger was left ificking in him. Whether he struck
him or not we cannot be here certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prefens,
as was said, but going down the ftayres out of the chamber of prelcns.

'I'HERE remayned along tyme with the queen her howfland and the lord Ruthen.

She made, as we here, great interccffion, that he flold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howiband that was thee ador of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did
answer, that David had more companie of her boddie then lie for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own contentment he gave his consent
that he should be talen away. " It is not" (laythe she) " the woman's part to seek
" the husband," and therefore in that the fault was his own. He said that when lie
came, lie either wold not or made herself sick. " Well," faythec jlic," you have
" taken your last of me and your lalewell." Then were pity, faith the lord Ru-
then, he is your majcfly's hufland and must yield dutie to each other. " Why
"C may I ihot," faythe fhc, " leave him as well as your wife did her husband ;"

P p 2 Other

3'

Other have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that she was lawfully divorced
from her husband, and for no such cause as the king found himself greve. Be.
fydes this man was mean, baffe, enemie to the nobilitie, shame to her, and de.
itriition to herself and country. 1" Well, faith mhe, that shall be dear blude to
" iome of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, faith the lord Ruthen; for the more
your grace fhowe yourself offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill at ease and weak called for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
" with your majefiies pardon," and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that
(he would pacific herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacific which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl
to quiet them, and to assure them for the king that nothing was intend against
them. These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Mur-
ray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
get out of a window and so depart. Athol had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores (who was lately called Dyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went
that night to such places, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen the

was contents that he (hold lie with her that night. We know not how he ** him-
self, but came not at her, and excused hymfelt to his friends, that he was so- fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

THERE were in this companie two that came in with the king; the one An.

drewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would have ftroken her with a
dagger, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the jpuftice-clerk, who also her grace
fayth, offered a dag against her belly with the cockcdtown., We have been ear-
neftly in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varite ; but he affoureth us of the
contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin,
one or two others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen
drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen in her
prefens, as we are by this lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to, Dunbar Castle, whither

resorted unto the lords Huntly and Bothwell: That the Earl of Morton and lord
Ruthven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds and fubfcrip-
tions. That he had protested before the council, that he was never consenting to
the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " That of the great sub-
"' fiance David had there is much spoken, Come fay in gold to the value of I mL.
i' his apparel was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose. His chamber
' well furnished, armour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebuffes, 22swords. Of all this
' nothing fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or three dagger. He had the cutfody of all the
' queen's letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear of ajuill, that
c he had hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be heard of. He had
" upon his back, when he was flayn, a night gown of damask furred, with a fatten
" dublet, a hose of ruifft velvet."

No. XVI,
32

33

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 315.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. I6, 1565-6.
- --- - CANN OT tell what mifliking of late there hath been between her

grace and her husband, he prefleth earneHtly for the matrimonial crown,

which she is loath haflily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat in itore, until she
know how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought
that the parliament for a time shall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to Secretary Cecil.

H E juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause than any desert, 4April, r566.
and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worst, for neither hath the Paper Office,

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was against her will, from the ori-
nor the people that he hath denied so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by ginal.
his commandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them that did
as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was yesterday
arreigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for certain, by one, that
upon Monday last spoke with the queen, that {he is determined that the house of
Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continueth tick, fore
troubled in mind; he flaith in the Abbey, his son has been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since the came to the castle. The queen hath now seen all the
covenants and bands that pased between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, beforihlie'randmcouncil, of his innocency of the death of David,
was false; and grievously ofi;'efdd that, by their means, he should seek to come to
the crown matrimonial.

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April, i566.
-H E. RHERE is continually very much speech of the discord between the queen

and her husband, so far that, that is commonly said and believed of him-

self, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce between them.
It is very certain that Malevafier had not spoken with him within these three days.
He is neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman: attended upon by
certain of his own servants, and fix or seven of the guard; at liberty to do, and go
where and what he will, there have no hope yet among themselves of quietness.

--DAVID'S brother, named Joseph, who came this way with Malevafier, un-
known to any man here, is become secretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII.

No. XVII. (Vol1. I. 39 )

The Earl of Bedford to Cecil, ad Auguff, I566.

H E queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather worse. She
eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,

nor loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her going out
of the castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. I; cannot
for modefiy, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what the said of hii.
One Hickman, an English merchant there, having a wattr-fpaniel which was very
good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure which he
fIiw the king had in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The quten thereupon
fell marvellously out with Melvil, and called him dissembler and flatterer, and laid
she could not trust one, who would give any thing to such one as flie loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.

HE disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rather
increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of

Edinburgh, could not tell where to find the Queen; sith which time ihe is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nor
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company. The
king her husband is gone to Dumfernlling, and paffeth his time as well as he may;
having at his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband heavy at the
heart.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.
rT- H E queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the Earl of Lennox

came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, i th Dec.

H E Earl of Bothwcll is appointed to receive the ambafTadors, and all things

T for the chrifrcning are at h s lordship's appointment, and the fame is scarcely

well liked of the nubility, as is said. The king and queen is presently at Craigmil-
lar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all the which past.

Advertilfcments out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

Augur i. Tm H A AT the king and the queen agreed well together two days, after her coming

Paper Otlice, T from - --, and after my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new
fromn the ori- discord has happened. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray that the
ginal. king bears him evil will, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him,

find-

finding fault that she doth bear h'm so much company: and in like manner, hath-
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since in
the queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The king contfeed, . hat reports
were made to him, that my lord of Murray was not his friend, wh ch In :d him
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that the king lai d iiken such
words unto her, and confessed before the whole house, that Ihe could not be contt nt that
either he or any other should be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of Murray
enquired the fame fioutly, and used his speech very modestly, in the mean time the
king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that the queen should use familiarity
either with man or woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Marre,
who keep most company with her. My lord of Murray and Bothwell have been at
evil words for the L, of Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir James Blal'oure
had new come from Ledington, with his answer upon such heads or articles as
Bothwell and he bhould agree upon, which being reported to the said earl 'n the
queen's pretence, made answer, that ere he parted with such land, as was desired,
he should part with his life. My lord of Murray said stoutly to him, that twenty
as honest men as he should lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. 1 he queen
spake nothing, but heard both ; in these terms they parted, and since, that I hear of,
have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and carrieth the
prince thence to Stirling with her. This lafi Saturday was executed a servant of
the lord Ruthven's, who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of
the fadt. The queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that money was font
from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what purpose it was
brought..

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. )
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, I569. A copy inter-

lined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the. imprisoning of. the Biflop of Ross.

A- A FT E R this, [i e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how patiently did I bear

with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own

commiffioncrs, whereby I received no small unkindness, betides the manifold caufc
of suspicion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with nme, to entice my fubje and near kinfmlan, the lord Darnly,
under colour of private suits for land, to ome into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the lame without my
afcnt or liking. And how many unkind parts accompanied that fad ; by receiving of
my fubjeds that weic base runnagates and offenders at home, and enhanfing theni
to places of credit againlt my will with many such like, I will leave, for that the
remembrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you. And yet all these did I
as it were suppress and overcome with my natural inclination of love towards you;
and did afterwards gladly, as you know, chriffen your son, the child of my said
kinfmian, that had before lo unloyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and in
other undutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly allb dealt I by mef-
fages to reconcile him, being your husband, to you, when others nourified discord

betwixt

bctwixt you, who as it seemed had more power to work their purposes, being evil to
you both, than i had to do you good, in reflpet of the evil I had received. Well
i will overpass your hard acidents that followed for lack of following my council.
And then in your most extremity, when you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of
your life from your notorious -evil willers, how far from my mind was the rerlem-
brance of any former unkindncfs you had (hewed me. Nay how void' was I of
rtfpet to the designs which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my state by your death, when I finding your
calamity to be great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat f r )our life, but so threatned some as were irritated againfl
you, that I only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 384.)
Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus marked on the back with

Cecil's hand.- Copia Literarum Regie Majejatis ad Reginamn Sco:o.
rumn. VAII°. i4prilis.
Pip. Office. r A D A M E, vous ayant trop moleflR par M. de Crocq, je n'euffe eu si peu de

J.MJ, consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les rui-
nez, et les prieres des miserables ne m'y contraignaflent. Je entens que un edit a ete
divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veultjuftifier que ons efle les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viiennenta le faire le xIIme de ce
mois. La quelle chore, comme c'eft plus honorable t.ineceffaire, qui en tel cas
fe pourra faire, ne y eflant cache quelque miftere ou finieffe, ainfi le pere et amis du
mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de prolongue le
jour, pource qui'lz cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combines par force de faire ce
que par droict ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour
de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter le leur conceder cette requefle, laquelle, si elle les feroit nie, vous tourneroit
grandement cn foupyon, de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volontiers
ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle fincerite & prudence en ce cas
qui vous touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in-
nocente d'un crime si enorme, chore quefi ne fifles, feriez dignement efbloye hors de
ranczde princefTes, & non fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot-que cela
vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honoiable, qu'une vie maculee;
vous voiez madame, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et vous promets, que fijen
eulfe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me
porte tefinoignage, a qui je prie de bon coeur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous
sera plus a honneur, ct a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles re-
commendations conmm a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus de bien, qui vous pourra en
ce monde avcnir. De Weft. cc 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

* A miltake in the date corrlcad with Cecil's hand VIII". Aprilis. No.

No.

-31

No.'XX. (Vol. I. p. 362.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry Darnley.

AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I thought good to write a few E. of Mortoa'a
words unto you.. I have recd.; some writs from you; and some I have seen Archieves,

lately sent others from you, as namtely to the earl of Bedford of the 16th of May. I Bundle B. :".;
have participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure ';.
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was not one
papifi nor ptoteflant which did not consent thatjuflice shou!d be done, be the queen
my fovns. aid and support, against such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack and coldners did not rife from such as
were called to council, but from such as lhould give life and execution thereunto.
And further, I assure you, I never knew no matter of estate proponed which had Co
many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto you, no man
promoted the matter with greater affeation, than the Spanish ambassador. And sure
i am, that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever
is guilty of this murder, handfafled with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I shall not
need to tell you, which be our letts and flayes from all good things here. You are
acquainted with them as. well as I. Neds I must confers, that howsoever we omit
oscafions of benefit; honour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and namely
such as before, and. after the murder, were deemed to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute
with sword and jufticethe punishment of those abominable aEts, though we lend you
but a cold aid, arid albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and honest, be
well known to me, and sundry others here, t) be justifiable in all their alions and
doings; yet think ndt the contrary but your whole nation is blemished and infamit by
there doings which lately pafled among you. What we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you assuredly, for We be subjet unto many mutations, and yet I think
we'fhall either aid you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your prince,
so as it appear to us that you mean his frfeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own deftrution, if you be unadvised. I know not
one, no not one of any quality or estate in this country, which does allow of the
queen your sovereign, but would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame
were done without farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary justice. This I fend the
2;d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 370.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil, iith of July,

i567, from Berwick.
- -IR, Your letter of the 6th of Jully I received the 1oth at Berwick. I am forty Ai Or;iinal.

-S to fee that the queen's majesty's disposition altereth not towards the lords, forpaper Oflice.
when all is done it is they which must stand her more in flead, than the queen

VOL II." I Q.q her

her cousin, and will be better infiruments to work rome benefite and quietners to her
majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Faflcafile,, 12th of'

July, 1567.
Paper Office. OIR, as yo-w might perceive by my letter of the IIth July, I lodged at Fa-..

S cafrle that night, accompanyed with the Lord Hume, the lord of Ledington,
and James Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the State of the
place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it
is very strong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I find the-
lords his associates and he hath left nothing unthought of, which may be either to thir
danger, or work them fuerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likewise they confider the-fame of England; but as farr
as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more perill to grow unto them,.
through the queens majetfys dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faction amongeft themselves, for they aiffre themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her majesty's doings at Leith,.
whereof they fay mutually her majefly and both the realms have received great fruit ;
yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they have obierved fuchthings in
her majestys doings, as have ended to the danger of such as she hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little tb the fuerty of any party ; and upon
these considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I find a difpofiion. in them,
that either they mind to make their bargain with France, or else to deal neither with
France nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet 'for their state and fiuerty, and
to use their remedies as occation shall move them; meaning neither to irritate France
nor England, untill such time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one of
you; for they think it convenient to proceed with you both for a while pai paffu,
for that was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they take the matter very
unkindly, that no better answer is made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her
majesty, and likewise that they hear nothing from you to their fatisfa&tion. I have
answered as well as I cal, and have alledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with
the queen, and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet happened, and there-
fore her majesty hath sent me to the end I may inform her ,thoroughly of the fate of
the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such purposes as
shall be by me proposed on their majeflys behalf unto them, they (hall be reasonably
and refolutcly a, fwered. At these things the lord of Ledington smiled and {hook his
head, and said it were better for us yow vould let us alone, than neither to do us nor
your selves good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if there be any truth in
Ledington, La Croq is gone to .procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a ;man of
like quality, and to deliver themof their queen for ever, who shall lead her life in France
in a abbay reclufed, the prince at the French devotion, the realm governed by a
council of their eledion of the Scottish n',tion, the forts committed to the custody of
such as shall be chosen amongst therrfelves, as yet I find no great likelihood that I
lhall have access to the queen, it is objc&ed they may not so displease the French king,
unless they were sure to find the queen of England a good friend i and when they

once¢
38

once by my access to the queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty, which was
the firit head that I proposed, they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the ret -of the matters it was but folly to talk of them
the liberty going before; but said they if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they said, we should refuse our own
commodity, before they concluded with any other, which I should hear of at my
coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the band concluded by Hamiltons,
Argyll, Huntly, and that faaion, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edin',
as that which was sent into France; thus having no more leasure but compell'd to
leap on horseback with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from FafR-
castle the 12th of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the queen the 14th

Jully 1567;
T RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think that the causes Paper Office,

L will often charge upon variety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry refpecs,

not amiss, that as yow thall deal with the lords having charge of the' young prince
for the committing of him into our realm, so shall yow also do well, in treaty with
the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be fubje& to sundry troubles
from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son cannot be free, if she
shall be contented that her. on may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this our realm,
being so near as the knows it is ; we shall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein
for her child, as can be devifeti-for any that might be our child born of our own bo-
dy, and ihall be glad to '.igqwtt her therein the trew effect of nature; and herein
the may be by yow rememnbered how much good may ensue to her Ton to be nourished
and acquainted with our coupttry; apd therefore, all things confidered, thisoccatipn.
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us; and to this end, we mean that yoyv shall so deal with her, both to fay her in deed
from inclining to the French praafife, which is to us notorious to convey her and the
prince into France, and also to avoid any just offence, that she might hereafter con-
ceive, if she thould hear that we [hould deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, I4th July 1567, from

Edinburgh.
IT may please your majefRy to be advertised, I did signify unto Mr. Secretary by my An Original.

letters of the I th and 12th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the Paper Oflice.

causes of my flay, my lodging at Faficafile a place of the lord Humes, where I was
met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had pafled in conference
betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Faftcaftle. Since which time, accompanyed
with the lords aforesaid, and with 4oo horses by their appointment for my better
condu(t, I came to Edinr the 1 2th of this present. The 13th being Sunday appointed
for a folemne communion in this town, and also a folemne fatl being publithed, I
could not have conference with the lords which be aflfembled within this town as I

Q(1 2 defe-cd,

deftedJ, that is to fay the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Lidington, Sir James Balfour captain of the cafle, Mr. James McGill and the prefi-
dernt of the fcflion.

NL\ ER THELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would use no

protracie of time in mine audience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom
I met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit the day were deflined to
sacred exercises, such as were there of the council would consult upon any moyen
touching my access unto them and my conference with them, and said also that in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I should hear from them. About 4
of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th diy, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others, that they re-
quired me to have patience tho' they had deferred my conference with them, which
was grounded principally upon the absence of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the
lords Semple, Crighton and others of the council, faying also that they did confider
the matters which I was on your behalf to treate with them of, were of great
importance, as they could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor give me
anfwcr without the advice of the lords, and others their af[ociates; the lord of Liding-
ton also said unto me, that where he perceived, by his private conference with me in
my journy hitherwards, that I pressed greatly to have speedy access to the queen their
sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in that matter
there was great difficulty for many respects, but specially because they had refused to
the French ambassador the like acceft, which being granted unto me, might greatly
offend the French, a matter which they desired and intended to eschew c for they did
not find by your majesty's dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate
the French King, and to loose his favour and good intelligence with him; I answered
that as to their refusal, made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville Roye
was dispatchcd forth of France before there accidents'here happened, and his special
errand was to impeach the queen's marriage with the'earle of Bothel, (for so indeed
since my coming hither I learned his commiflion tended to that end, and to make of-
ser to the queen of another marriage) and as to monsieur de Croq, he could have no
order forth of France concerning these matters'fince they happened ; and therefore they
might very well hold them suspeCted to have conference with the queen, least they might
treate of matters in this time without inftrudions and so rather do harm then good;
but your majetfy being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent me hi-
ther to treat with them for the well of the realm, for the Conservation of their ho-
nors and credit, and for their fucrty; and I might boldly fay unto him, that your
majcfey had better deservcd than the French had. He said, for his own part, he was
much bound unto your majefy, and had always found great favour and courtesy in Eng-
land, but to be plain with you, Sir fayed he there is not many of this afembly that
have found so great obligation at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the caries of M/lorton and Glencairn be the only persons which took benefit
by the queen's miajctys aid at Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the aftion,
and we think said lie, the queens majety your sovereign, by the opinion of her own
council, and all the world, took as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scot-
land, or any particular person; and not to talk with yow as an ambassador, but with
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, miy lord Morton, and such as were in pain for the death
of Davie, found but cold favour at the queens majelty's hands, when they were ba-
nifh'd forth of their own country; but I would all our whole company were as wcl

willing

willing to accomplish the queen your sovereign intents and desires as I am, for mine
own part, I am but one, and that of the meanest fort, and they be many noblemen
,and such as have great intereit in the matter, mary yow (hall be assured I willim-
ploy m) self to imploy my credit, and all that I may do, to satisfy the queen your mif-
trefs, as much as lyeth in me, and for your own part you have a great many friends
in this assembly, with many other good words. But for conclusion I must take this
for an aniwer to stay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought meet
to advertize your majesty what hath pafled, and how far forth I have proceeded ; your
expectation being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majesty of the slate of all things, as I have learned
since my coming hither, it may please your majesty to underiiand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the castle ofLochleven, guarded

by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
plo!ed in another commission, because he began to show great favour to the queen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewo-
men, and 2 chambers, whereof one is a French woman. The earle of Buchan,
the earle of Murray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the
lords afore-aid, which have her in guard, doe keep her very siraitly, and as far as I
can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order from there men, because that the
queen will not by any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murr-
der, nor will not content by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her hus-
band, but avoweth constantly that (he will live and die with him; and faith that if
it were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the lord Bothell,
/he would leave her kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and
that (he will never consent that he shall fare worse, or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her detention is, for that these

lords do fee the queen being of so fervent affeQcion towards the earle Bothell as she is,
and being put at, as they fiould be compelled to be in continual arms, and to have
occasion of many battles, he being with manifest evidence notoriojfly detected to be
the principal murderer, and the lords meaning prosecution ofjuftice against him ac-
cording to his merits.

'HE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as a marriage not to

be suffered for many refpc'ts, which separation cannot take place if the queen be at li-
berty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoined with the danger of the prince,

but as far as I can perceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in luerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with refped and revcrence, and do affirnm, as I do
lc:irn, that the conditions aforesaid accomplishcd, they will both put her to liberty, and
rftore her to her eflate.

T'IESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harqubufhers , hich be in very

good order, for the entertainment of which companies, untill all mattcrs be com-
pounded, they did sue unto your majesty to aid them with such fum of ninny, as
hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons writting, amounting
as I perceive to ten or twelve thousand crouns of the

'1 ItV were latly adveitized that the French King doth mind to fend hither mon-

ficur de la Chapell dez Urfitne, a knight of the i rencli order, and always well assec-
tionate to the hoife ofGuyfe, and howfoevcr la ForeIt, Villaroye, and du Croq have
tuld language in the queens favour and to there lords disadvantage there, to your rna-

jely' ;
3

jefft; la Croq doth carry with him such matter as shall be little to the queens adrn..
tage; so as it is thought theFrench King, upon his coming to his presence, will ra-
ther fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they have their party so well made,
as the French will rather make their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majesty the lalq bond agreed on, and signed by the Ha-
miltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons have sent unte

me a gentleman of their surname named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the bi-
ihop of St. Andrews and the Abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your majesty
and mine answer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of some things,
as there did by him unto me.

THE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, Cent another unto me with a letter and

credit, I have used him as I did the others, the copy of both which letters I fend
your majefly also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me but not written, and I
have returned unto him in like fort.

AGAINST the2Dth day of this month there is a general assembly of all the churches,

shires, and boroughs towns of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
these lords to this town, where it is thought the whole slate of this matter will be han-
deled, and I fear me much to the queen's disadvantage and danger; unless the lord of
Lidirnton ard Come others which be best affeced unto her do provide Come remedy;
for I perceave the great number, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,
which have assisted in these doings, do greatly dishonour the queen, and mind feri-
oufly either her deprivation, or her deflruation; I used the best means I can (confi-
dering the furie of the world here) .to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth to me
to be the best remedy: I may not speak of diflblution of it, for that may not be abiden,
and I should thereby bring my self into great hatred and perill. The chiefeft of the
lords which be here present at this time dare not show so much lenity to the queen as
I think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people. The women
be most furious and impudent againif the queen, and yet the men be mad enough;
so as a itranger over bufie may Coon be made a sacrifice amongeft them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their adherents would put their

force into the fields against the 24th of this month, but I do not find this intent so true,
as the common bruit goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trouble among his own
countrymen.

TIHE earle of Lennox is by there lords much desired here, and I do believe your

majesty may so use him, and dire& him, as he shall be able to promote your purpose
with there men.

TH i earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible. --- I do find a-
mongti the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two firange and sundry humours.

HAMNILTONS do make Lhow of the liberty of the queen, and prosecute that with

great carncftncfs, because they would have there lurds destroy her, rather than che
should be recovered from them by violence; another time they seem to desire her li-
berty, and Bothell's dcftruction, because they would compass a marriage betwixt the
queen and the lord ofArbroth.

THE earle of Argyll doth affect her liberty, and Bothell's deftrution, because he
would marry the queen to his brother.

~~4~~~~~AN

A~nr

AND yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open concurance, (as appeareth

by their bond) doth dircover their minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is
not here, but in the wefl parts, he and the reft of the ministers will be here at the
great assembly, whos austerity against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY. some conferrence which I had with some of this councill, methinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland, toleave
this realm,. and to retire herself either into England, or into France, but mofi willing-
ly into England, for fuch-and miflikings as she knoweth hath been, and is meant
unto her in France, leaving the regiment either. to a number of persons deleagued,
and authorized by her or to some one or more.

AND.it please your majelty, I think it not amiss to put yow in remembrance, that

in cafe the said queen come into England by your allowance, without the French
king's consent, she {hall loose her dowery in France, and have little or nothing
from hence to entertain her; and in care she do go into France with the king's con-
tentment, she may be an inflrument (if the can recover favour, as time will help to
cancell.her disgrace) either by matching with some husband of good quality, or by
fonm other devise, to work new unquietness to her own country, and so consequent-
iy to your majesty's..

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confider of this matter, and to let me

know your pleasure with convenient speed, how I flall answer the fame, if it he
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end
and composition,' For I am sure, of late, she hath seemed very desirous to have the
matter brought to pals, that {he might go into England, retaining her estate and
jurifdition in herself, though ihe do not exercise it; and likewise I understand that
tome of this council which be least asseted to her safety do think there is no other
way to save her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majesty in health honor and
all felicity; at Edinr the 4th July I 567.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Queen Elisabeth the 18th of July 1567, from,

Edinburgh.
IT may please your majesty, yow might perceave by my letters of the i6th, how An Orioinal.

far I had proceeded with there lords, and what was their answer ; since which la.per Ossie.

time I have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the Lord of Lidington, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this cafle, at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet
access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted me, flaying thenlmflves itill by the
absence of the lords and others their associates, which (they fay) they look for with-
in two days; and for.that I find, by likelihood and apparel t presumptions, that mine
access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have thought good not to defer this dif-
patch' untill lihave a resolute answer in that matter.

MAY it therefor please your majefiy to understand Robert Melvin returned from

the queen in Lochleven, tothis town, the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her
written of hor own.hand to there lords, which doth contain as I underltand matter as
followeth-A requeft.unto them to have consideration of her health, and if they will
not put her.to liberty, to change:the place of rief iaint to the caitle of Stirling, to the
end The might have the comfort. :aid.company of her son, and if they will. not change

her

43

her from Lochleven, she required to have tome other gentlewomen about her, nam.
ing none.

To have her apothecary, to have some modest minifter.-To have an imbroiderer

to draw forth such work as she would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.--'ouching the government of the realm, she maketh two offers, which
are but generally touched in her letter, the particu!aritys be not specified but refered
to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and wholly to the earl of Mur-
ray; the other is to the lords whose names ensue, afflted with such others, as th:y
ihall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of Mortcn,
Murray, Marr, and Glencairn. '

SHE hath writteu unto them that I might have access unto her.-She requireth

further that if they will not treat her and regard her as their queen, vet to use her
as the king their sovereigns daughter, (whom many of them knew) andas their
prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her husband,
nor relinquish him; which matter will do her most harm of all, and hardeneth these
lords to great severity against her.

SHE yieldeth, in words, to the prosecution of the murder.
I HAVE the means to let her know that your majefly hath sent me. hither for her
relief.

I HAVE alto pcrfwadcd her to conform herfelfto renounce Bothell for her husband,

and to be contented to susser a divorce to pars betwixt them ; she hath sent me word
that Ihe will in no ways content unto that, but rather die ; grounding herself upon
this reason, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing Bothell,
{he should acknowledge herself to be with child of a bastard, and to have forfeited
her honour, which she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her
own life and her child, to choose the lealt hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6 of this month, with whom I have had
some conference, and with Mr. Craig alto, the other minister of this town.

I HAVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I find them both very

austere, in this conference, what they shall do hereafter, I know not, they are fur-
nifhed with many arguments, some forth of the scripture, tome forth of hitfories,
some groundt d (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon practices used in
this realm, and tome upon the conditions and oth made by their prince at her coro-
nation.

TlHE bishop of Gal'oway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath sent hither to these

lords, that his nephew the earle and some others of that fide, may, at Linl.thgow or
at Stirling, have some communication with some appointed on this fide, assuring
them that there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to concurre with
thcfc, afluring further that they will not dissent for triffles or unneceflary things, and
(as I am given to understand) they can be pleased the queen's reflraint be continued,
until the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the Separation of the queen and
Bothell is implycd, the preservation of the prince, the security for all men, and a
good order taken for the governance of the realm in tranquility.

CAPTAIN Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark and served at Newhaven,

did the 16th of this month (accompanied with one of his soldiers, or rather, the fol-
dier as the greater fame gocth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and futh a. one as had
great eflimation with there lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, hdnefty, and wilr
lingncfs in this action; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself; their quarrel was about

the

the filip which took Blacketer, which ihip was appointed by there lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the paliage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he went ei-
ther to the isles, or to any other place ; by the death of this man, this enterprize was
dashed.

THE bilhop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth desire to speak with
the lord of Lidington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath sent for Sir James Balfour, captain of the cafile,
to have conference with him.

A s I wrote unto your majesty in my lafi, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

difever these lords and them asunder, but would concurr in all things (yea in any
extremity against the queen) so as that they might be assured the prince of Scotland
were crouned king, and should die without iflue, that the earle of Lenox's son liv-
ing should not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverently, mildly, and charitably

of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or vio-
lence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life,
by reason that the people assembled at this convention do mind vehemently the de-
firuilion of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, ard amongst all eitates, (saving of

the counselors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor pr.vilcdge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither by God's law, nor by the
laws of the realm.

THE earl Bothwell, and all his adherents and aflociates, be put to the horn by

the ordinary jutfice of this town, named the lords of the feflion; and command-
nent given to all fhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other
his followers and receiptors.- The earl of Bothel's porter, and one of his other
fcrvitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confessed such sundry circum-
flances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said earl was one of the principal exe-
cutors of the murder, in his own person, accompany'd with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three of them, that is to fay,
two of the Ormiflon's of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would
be glad that none of the murderers should have any favour or receipt in England,
and hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the border may be warned ; Bothell
loth still remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming, which have
been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelli-
gence doth grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of; and notwith-
ltanding there lords have sent an hundred and fifty harquebufliers to Stirling, to
keep the town and paflage from furprize; and To have they done in like manner to
St. Johnston, which be the two paflages from the north, and well to this town, I do
iunderfland the captain of Dunbar is much buried in foi tifying that place, I do mervile
the carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.

O( late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the said caflle, which

hath been furprized ; and thereby matter is difcovcrcd which maketh little to the
qucen's advantage.

'I'llu, having none other matter worthy your majcfly's knowledge, I beseech
(;od to proi)er your majefly with long life, pcrfcct hcalth, and proflicrous felicity.

At Edinburgh the ilth of July, 1567.
VL.'II, R r Letter

45

Letter of fir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the earl of

Leicefler, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her majesty's
most honourable privy Council.

B Y my former dispatches sent to her majefly, and Mr. Secretary, since the I2th

:4th of July,, J of July, your lordfhi:s might have perceived the state of this country, and to
I 56. what end these matters be like to come; so as not to trouble your lordship with
':.per Of,.ce, many words; this queen is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
f in the Ori'son to be crowned king, and fe detained in pri'on within this realm, and the fame

£ t"al to be governed, in the young king's name, by a councel, confifling of certain of

the nobility, and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, rift in the hands of these
lords, and others their associates, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's ma-
jefly will till persist in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (unto
whom she shall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that tlefe lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the French king can wish, to all
intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye,
and that faction, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the state of things so
come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined un-
to them, to all purpofcs, as ever it was; and what an instrument, the young prince
will prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lordships wisdoms, and there-
fore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, I trufft your
lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her majesty,
to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her possession,
or, at the leafi, to be at her devotion. And amongfl other things, that I can ima-
gine, for the first degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to cfftel, than to al-
lure this company here assembled, to bear her majesty their favour. Some talk hath
palTed between the lord of Liddington and me, in. certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majefly ihall have won these men to her
devotion, the principal point that will make them conformable to deliver their prince
irno England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fuc-
cefiion of the crown of England, for fault of issue of the queen's majesty's body,
bine other things wi!l also be required, as the charge of the said prince and his train,
to be at the charge of England. I do well perceive that there men will never be
brought to deliver their pIrnce into England, without the former condition, for the
fuccei:ion of England ; f r (faith Liddington) that taking place, the prince shall be
as dear to thbe rcople of England as to the people of Scotland ; and the one will be
as carciul ( f his preservation as the other. Othcrwife, he faith, all things conlider-
ed, it will be reported that the Scottifhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety,
as thole which commit the (leep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion,
your lordihips may perceive here will he the scope of this matter. As unto the dc-
livering of him upon holtagYe, he fayeth, let no nian think, that the condition of

tit'
46

the fucccllion not being accompli shed, the nobility and the gentry will never consent
to leave themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages, neither upon any
pro.nifes, nor likelihood of good to iflue in time to come. It were not good for your-
ielves (faith he) that the matter were so handled; for then you should adventure all
your goods in one ship, which might have a dangerous effect, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to content to establishing any fucceflor to the
crown. And then, how unmete were it, that her majesty having in her pofleflion
already all such persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her cufiody. For so there might follow, without good capitula-
tions, a firange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen your mistress do think that such
imaginations could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on
her behalf. Wthat is come to pass since my last dispatch, and how far forth things
ale proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed by my letters sent unto her ma-
itety, at this tinie. And so I pray almighty God, preserve your lordship in much ho-
nour and felicity. At Edenburgh this 24th of July, 156?.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stuard partner of this letter.

The queen to fir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.
'T- RUS TY and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as much as we do-tl of Aug.

confider that you have now a long time remained in thole parts, without ex- -67

pedition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet feeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that tfate,
vwhili good reafbn would have required, that you should continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therefore, i-, that you shall, immedittely upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant Middlemore unto the lords and estates of that realpi, that are assembled
together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot blt seem very firange
into us, that you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them,
in matters tending so much to their own quiet, and to the benefit of the whole
cRate of their country, they have so far forgotten themnfelves, and so slightly re-
garded us and our good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is ftrangcit of all, in njt
vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho' there dealings be such, in-
deed, as were not to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find their usage ami
proceedings towards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in so franlgce
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but
thiik them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of fubjecs, as must needs
remain to their perpetual touche for ever. And therefore he flhall fay, that we have
tho't good, without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our pre-
fence, requiring them to grant you licence and pafrport so to do, which when you
flhall have obtained, we will that you make your repair hithcr, unto us, with as
convenient speed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorlfd 6th August, 1567.

r ,, 'I' rou-
b.

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight, one

of her maijefy's privy council and principal secretary, give these.

S IR,
12th Awu--i-', -- HAT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Murray, and Mons.

ópr c, 57.'\ de I,;nnerd, you shall underfiand by my letter to her majefly, at this time.

Paper

t ),i The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their

1roxn tie (Uji_. n
ginal. wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart

how the queen sleep, whether the live or die; iwhether she be at liberty or in pri-

zon. The m hrk

they shoot at, is, to renew their old league, and can be as well

contented to t;.:e it of thl c little king, (howfoevcr his title be) and the fame by the
order of these lords, as ,therwife. Lyneroll came but yeftcrday, andi me thinkclh
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will feck to difplcafe these
lords, when they changed the coming of La Chappelle des Ourfins for this man,
because they doubted that de la Chappelle lhould not be grateful to them, being a
papist. bir, to speak mere plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me think-
eth the eerl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be partaker
of their fortune. 1 hear no man speak more bitterly against the tragedy, and the
players thereil, than he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inklingr
that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any thing,
for our purpose. I can aflure you the whole protefiants of France will live and
die in there mens quarrels; and where there is bruit amongst you, that aid should
be sent to the adverse party, and that Martigues fliould come hither with some
force; Mlonf. Baudelot hath aflured me of his honour, that inltead of Martigues
coming againfl them, he will come with as good a force to succour them: And
if that be sent under meaner conduct, Robert Stuart flall come with as many to
fortify them. But the conitable hath assured there lords, that the king meaneth no
way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here to no purpose, unless it be to kindle these lords
more againfl us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, from Edcnburgh the
i ith of Auguflt, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throclkmorton.
Tr RUSTY an:l well b loved we greet you well. We have, witliii there two

days, rcceivcd three sundry letters of yonr;, of the 20th, 22d, anld 23d, of

this month, having not beore: those receivel any fcvcn ldays bcfnrc; 1andl do( ftlJ,
by tlhefl )our ctters, th:.t you l ave very diligently and l.iigelY :nslvLi fc(d Is of all
the ha sty and peticmptory proceedin :rs there ; wlhich as we nlh l,g like, io we trul:
in time to fee thenm wVax c ller, and to receive :tme rCeforniiliun. Ior wOe Cliiiiiot
; rcivc, that they with whom you have dc;.lt, can aillwcrlt the llls Inoved by tlic
I nimiltUns, who Ihowlicve. tlh:y may Ie canlieod or their private rclfjcc'ts, yet thiofc
thlngs which tlhey move, will be allvywd by ;Il realfililtblc p. Ifll. 1'or if they

.iiy

may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their sovereign
declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep her
in, aptivity, how should they believe the reports, or obey them, which do report it?
and therelore our meaning is, you fliall let the Hamiltons plainly underfiand, that
wve do well allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
ciucen tl;eir sovereign for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reasonable for
11 thercin to do, for the queen our filter, we will be ready to perform the fame.
Prd where it is lb required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should
(icl with the lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your letters, and ro will him to flew himself favourable to thein in their aftions, that
i!ay appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
Jisy. And as we willed our Secretary to write unto you, that upon your meflage done
to tle earl of Murray, you might return, so our meaning is you shall. And if these
our letters fllall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advei tifc both the lord
Scrope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbishop of St. Andrew's and the

abbot of Arbrothe.

FTER my good commendations to your good lord(flips, this shall be to adver- ,3 Aug. 6 ,-.

j-A tize you, that the queen's majesty my sovereign having sent me hither herpaper-Oflice,
ambasSador to the queen her sifter your sovereign, to communicate unto her such fom a copy
matter as she thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence betwixth;ich SirNi-
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordships know) contrary to the duty cholas tent to
of all good fubjeEts, for the enlargement of whose perion, and the restitution of her the queen.
to her dignity, her majesty gave me in charge to treat with these lords afscmbled at
idenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for
tie affeguard of the young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder, the
ifloblution of the marriage between the queen and the earl of Bodwell, and laflly,
i/r their own sureties. In the negotiation of which niatters I have (as your lordflips
,til know) spent a long time to no purpo'!, not being able to p-evail in any thing
w'with thlofc lords, to the queen my fovcrcign's OhtisfaEtion. Of which fRrange pro-
ccclidns towards her majctly, riad undutiful behaviour towards their fovercign, I have
;\crnitlfd the queen's majclty; file (not being minded to bear this indignity) hath
,.vcln me in charlge tj dccldric her furllher plcaflurc unto them, in such foi t as they
il;,:, v'cll perceive her majefly doth dif.illow of their proceedings, .and thereupon
1: .;I revoked me. And furihcr hath given Ime in cliarge to comnliniei.calc the nllme
.,: i;(l uur lord filps, requil inlg you to let me know, belore my departure hence, (which
1:!l ,.-, (God wiilin asz, as soon is 1 have re e:ved all!vver fronl Votn) what v '

.l and

x1:r co:ll'cdtrit-l s will flilrcily do, to fct the cqueen your i; vc'rci.i ;t ilihcry, amdl to
ltioui lier to liher frmer dllin(ity by forcc, or olherwilfc; licing thccl lords i ave rc-
iilld ;all other mediation, to the end the queen's majcfy my lovcrcign lm;iy Couicur
v.. 'l )our lordlllips in tils 1. nour; blc entcrprize.

.AND

49

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your afnbciates, your lordships can neither

communicate this matter amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so many of you as may confer
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the 19th of this August; for I in-
tend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
most humbly take my leave of your lordflips at Edcnburgh, the i3th of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the I3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorto: l to the lord Herrys.

. arT. i -,6-.\/ OUR good lordfllip's letter of the i 3th of Auguu't I have received the Igth of
f'aper-Ofihce, j the fame. For answer whcicu::to it may like your lordlhip to understand, that
from a co;py I will fignifl unto you plainly, how air forth I am already thoroughly inftruaed of
\ hich bSi .\i-the queen's nmajeftl my fovcrcign's pilealfre, concerning the detention of the queen
,i.',ii I-'at tW.your tovereign, and concerning her relief.
;reletil. C- ' Io the si lt her majesty hath given in charge, to us: all kinds of persuasion in lier

name, to move there lords assembled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and un-
dutiful behaviour, which they ufc t wiard their sovereign. And in this part, besides
the shew of n:Irn reasons, and sundry rertuafions of amicable treaty with them, her
majerty hath willed me to ufc ofme plain and severe speech u;ito them, tending so
far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform these their outrageous
proceedings excrciled again2t their fovercign, that then they nmight be assured her ma-
jefty neither would nor could indure such an indignity to be done to the queen, her
good cousin and neighbour.

ANr notwithstanding these my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby, for as yet neither will they consent to the enlargement,
neither susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to
treat any more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have advertiscd the
queen's majel'ty my sovereign, expe6cing daily her majesty's further order; and asI
shall be advertised thereof, fb will not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship;
and in the mean time will advertise her majeftyalfo, what your lordship hath written
unto me. Thus with my due commendations to your good lordship, I commit the
fame to almighty God, re'ting always to do you the pleasure and service that I can
lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 2 th of August, 1 ;67.

No. XXIII. (Vol. 1. p. 383.)
Account of lord Ilcrreis's Behaviour in the Parliament held December

15, 1567.
';:re1-(f'cc. T HE lord Hcrrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the duke and him-

j Hfelf, their fliends alld adherents, (the duke himlelf, the earl of Caflilles, and
the abbot of Kilwinig beiing alsb pI- lrclnt) to perfuadc the union of the whole rcalm

in

in one mind. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that
part of this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning took meanes for punifiment
of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing the queen's inordinat affection to that wicked
man, and that she could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
fequeftring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. That their
honoi rable doings, which had not spired to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
their native country from the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among other
nations, had well deserved that all their brethren fh-uld join with them in so good
a cause. That he and they, in whose names he did speak, would willingly, and
without any compulsion, enter theinfelves in the fame yoke, and put their lives and
lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen herself
were in Scotland, accompanied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame mind,
and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder noblemen of their party, Hunt-
ley, Arguile, and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly move them. And if they
will remain obflinate, and refuse to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to correct them, that otherwise will not reform themselves.
So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by the name of re-
gent, (there was no mention- at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at
every word, when his speeches were directed to him, accompanying all his words
with low courtesies after his manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 402.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. 1568, from

Bolton.
--BUT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form,

D but also the chief article of the religion of the gospel, namely, justification l Or.g...

by faith only: and she heareth the faults of papeftry revealed, by preaching or other-Paer slce
wife, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and she doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 September, 1568,

from Bolton.
--i T came to this queen's cars of late that she was bruited to be lately turned

j to the religion of the gofpell, to the great disliking of the p;pifls herc-

abouts, which thing she herfclf confeflcd unto me, and yetterday openly in the great
chamber, when the aflembly was full, and tome papills present, ihe took occasion

'to pc;ak of religion, and then openly she profcflcd herself to be of the papist religion,
alld took upon her to patronize the fame, nore carnllclly than she hadl lone a great
while afore, altho' her defences and arguments were tb wedk, that the flnct of her
fpecch was only to flcw her z.eal; and afterwards to me alone, when I mifliked to
!c herc become lb confidently backward in religion, why, fhid i c, would )ou have

hie

chnnge my relicion, and yet I am not assured the queen my g 'od sifter will be my
afiured friend, to the fatisfadtion of my honour and expectation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Pa'er-Ofice. ~ IGIHT trufly and right wel: beloved cousin, we greet you well. Where we
From a copy j1- hear fay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what-
correcled by soever flould fall out now upon the healing of the queen of Scotts caufc, in any
fic.etarl Ce- proof to convince or to acquit the fa:d queen concerning the horrible murder of her
cIl. late husband our cousin, we have determined to reflore her to her kingdom and go-

vernment, we do so much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive
any credit: and therefore we have thought good to aflure you, that the fame is un-
truly deviled by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been always certified
from our said lifter, both by her letters and mefilge;, that fle is by no means guilty
or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so surely if she should be
found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would be
very sorry, then, indeed, it should behoove us to confider otherwise of her cause than
to satisfy her desire in restitution of her to the government of that kingdom. And
tb we would have you and all others think, that thould be disposed to conceive
honourably of us and our aflions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. I568.

No. XXVI. (Vol . I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Otober, 1568, from York.

An Original.
Pl'per- G ice.

---M- V^/'Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon

V him here ' hurl ay lat, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

ing to flay here until Munday next; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that
his grace and the refl have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of
all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto pafled, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of
mine own thereof, )et I fee that nay lord Herris for his parte laboureth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had without the extremity of odious accusations ; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, that he could wish there matters to be ended in dulce maner, so
that it might be done with Iffety ; of the reft you can conceive, by the advertifc-
mcnts and writings, lsent up by our commiflioncrs.

No. XXVII.

A PP EN D IX.
52

A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

O0tober 1568.

Cott. Lib. Ca-

I-LEIS your majefly I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, lit. c. i. a
. who affurit me that he had reafbned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who Copy.
determinate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end your cause at
this time, but to hold the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her-power, to
make the E. pursue extremity, to the effect F. and his adherents might utter all they
could to your dishonour, to the effect to cause you come in disdain with the hail
fubjeAs of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any thing to her
diradvantage. And to this effect is all her intention, and when they have produced
all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter inflantly, but transport
you up in the country, and retain you there, till the think time to flew you fa-
vour, which is not likely to be hastily, because of your uncles in France, and the
fear the has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubjeas which
has offendit you.-- This in effect that your majesty hearing the-eltate of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majefly was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubje6ts in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay ofthis controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effeclually not to trust any who had made such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as moss tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use hercounfell in all your
affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to all others, as well uAcles as others, and
aflure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice. And if
D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing within
her realm in secret and quiet manner, where hers G. pleased, until the time her G.
were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that in the
mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubjets reflored
and maintained in their own eflate, and sic other things tending to this effeft.
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months ihe may become
better-minded to your grace, for now lhe is not well minded, and will not siew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following key is added ir
another hand.

A. the laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commissioners.
F. The earl of Murray.

No, XXVILn
Vo L. II.

.53
S f

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 418.)

Deliberation of secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2 I, 1 68,
Paper Office. rT HE best way for England, but not the eafief,. that the queen of Scots might

j remain deprived of her crown, and t-.e state continue as it is.
THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard.- That the queen

of Scotts might be induced, by some perfwafions, to agree that her son might con-
tinue king, because he is crown'd, and herself to remain also queen; and that the
government of the realm might be committed to such persons as the queen of Eng-
land should name,. so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered, that a
convenient number of persons of Scotland should be .firlt named to the queen of
-England indifferently for the queen of Scotts, and for her son, that is to fay, the
one half by the queen of Scotts,. and the other by the earle of Lennox and lady
Lennox, parents to the child; and out of those, the queen's majesty of England to
make choice for all the offices of the realm, that are, by the laws of'Scotland, dif-
posable by the king or queen of the land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's mnaefty, the government remain

in the hands of the earl of Murray as it is, providing he {hall not dispose 6f any of-
sices or perpetuals to continue any longer but to these offered of the premises.

THAT a parliament be summoned 'in Scotland by several commandments, both of
the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

-- THAT hostages be delivered into England on 'tIe young king's behalf, to.the

number of twelve persons of the earle of Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts shall
name; and likewise on the queen's behalf to the like number as the earle of Murray
shall name; the fame not to be any, that have by inheritance or office ca fe to be in.
this parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons of that parliament,
untill three months after the parliament; which hostages flall be pledges~ that the
friends of either part Lhall keep the peace in all cafes,, tilil by this parliament it be
roncluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England hall devise for the go,
vernment of the realm, (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,. nor con-
trary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the
parliament at Edin'. the Decemr, I567.) {hall be established to be kept and
obeyed, under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

--THAT by the fame parliament alfobe established all executionsvand judgments
given against any person to the death of the late king.

- THAT by the fame parliament, a remission 'o be made universally from the

queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also from every one fubje& to another,
saving, that restitution be made of lands and houses, and all other things heritable,
that have been, by either fide, taken from them which were the owners thereof at
the committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

1THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who shall be successors to the crown

next after the Qz of Scots and her ifue ; or efe, that 'such right as the D. of Cha-
telherault had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scots with the lo0rl Darnlcy, may be
contsrved and not prejudized.

THAT the Q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's majcfly of England, twelve

months after the said parliament, and that she flall not depart out of England, with-
a4t (pccial licence of the queen's majesty.

THAT the young, king. (hall be nourished and brought up in England till lie be

years of age.

2

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition between the queen and
her subje&s may be made with certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for
-her honour, as though all the parts (hould come of her, and yet for the fuerty of con-
trarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majefly are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 42 i.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. I568-9.

E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, to renew Paper Oficeo
that which it hath pleased God to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow;

but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow
in our service, and yow also whileft yow are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hitherto yow
have accuflumate in our fervife; at the time of our last letters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we had underfianding
out of Scotland of certain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongst
the which one is found to contain great and manifest untruths touching us and-o-
thers also, as shall and may plainly appear unto yow by the coppy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were advertised, that it should
be ihortly proclainred in Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good first to
remove the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and then exped the issue there-
of; and now, this day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writing are published in di-
vers parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet, for the discharge
of our honor, and to confound the falsehood contained in that writting, not only
to have the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as The may be moved to declare the authors thereof, and persuaders of
her to write in such slanderous fortfuch untruths of us; and-in the' reah feafor, we
have here flayed her commiffioriers, knowing no other whom we may more proba-
bly presume to be parties hereunto, than they, untill the queen fha-llname some
other, and acquit them: who being generally charged, without exprefling to them
any particularity, do use all manner of speeches to discharge themselves; wherefore
our pleasure is, that ye flall, after ye have well perused the coppy of this writting
sent to yow, speedily declare unto her, that we have good understanding given us
of diverse letters and writtings, -sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hand,
amnongft which, one such writting is sent with her commandment expressly as now it
is already published, as we are much troubled in mind that a princess as she is having
a cause in our hands so implicated with difficulties and calamitys, flould either con-
c avc in her own mind, or allow of them that should dcvife fuich falle, untrue, and
i nprobable matters against us, and our honor, and specially to have the aventure to
have the fame being known so untrue to be published; and.you (hall also fay, be-
cause we will not think so ill of her, as that it {hould proceed of her self, but rather
lhe hath been counselled thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part thereof to
be true, we require her, even as file may loolc for any favour at our hands, that
file will disburden herself as much as truly file may herein, and .name them which
have been the authors and pcrfwaders thereAf, and so she flall make-as great amends
to us as the cafe may require; after you have thus far proceeded, and had some

S 2 anfwcr

in the Paper
OUice.

A P P' E' N D- I X

answer of her, whether she ihill deny the writing absolutely, or name any that have-
been the advisers thereof, you lhall fay unto her that we have stayed her commifion-
ers here, until we may have some answer hereof, because we cannot but impute to
them some part of this evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may be known;-
and as soon as you can have direct answers from her, we pray you to return us the
fame; for as the cafe flandeth, we cannot but be much difquieted:with it, having our
honour so deeply touched contrary to any. intention in us, and for any thing we-
know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame writtinl
void of thought for the matters, to them therein imputed; you may impart to the
qcueen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous letter, or (hew her the copy
to read it, and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to.join with you
there as you shall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from .Wetherby the 2zth January,

1568.
- IT WILL fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them over with silence, for the

present learning of your majefly; and for this queen's answer to the coppie-

of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I must add this unto my brother's letter,.
sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late; in process of time she did not deny but
that the first lines contained in the fame. copie,. was agreeable to a letter that she
had sent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her
fan into your majesty's hands, and to avoid that the fame should not be done without:
her consent, made her, she faith, to write in that behalf; hle faith also that. (he wrote
that they should cause a proclamation to be made to fir her people to defend my
lord of.Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her said Ton, and impunge his,
rebellious government, as she termed it, but she utterly denyeth to have written any
of the other slanderous parts of the said letter touching your majesty; lhe said also,.
that she fufpeted that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the author of tome.
Scotch letters devised in her name, but fhe.would not allow me.to write this for any,
part.of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 428.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of Lidding-

ton.

zoth of July, 'OUR letter of the 3d of July, I have received the i5th of the fame. For'
1569. j answer whereunto you (hall understand, that friends here to my lord Regent
from the Ori- and you do wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and circumfiances
ginal. there arise no dissention, or at the least, no more nor other than the difference of

countries doth necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as few delays'
be used as may be, for the consummation of the matter in hand, which principally
to advance, yourallowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland, is most
requisite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted with the slate- of the world, and
with all our humours, as you know that some do allow and disallow for reason, some
for refpe6t of multitude, forne for rcfpe& of persons, and so the cause is to go for-
ward as men do like to set it forward. You arc not to fcek that some will use cau-

tions,.

tions, some neutrality, some delays, and Come will pla'nly impugne it. And yet all'
and every of these forts will alter their doings, when they shall fee the regent and his
fvourcrs accord with the belt and greatest part there, and agree with the wisess
and ftrongefc party here. Tho' the matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep
and weighty confideratiohis, for the weil of both the princes and their realms, as
well prelently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent
and the realm of Scotland, by you, should propose the matter to the queen our so-
ereign, if you like to use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a
scar, and no wound of the hurts past. I would be glad that this my letter fh')uld
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it seems your queen's reftoratidir
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk shall be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, because you pray me to write
fiankly, I fay, and reason thus, me t-hinketh you use a propoflerous order, to demand
the consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath ra-
ther been felt or prepared, and therefore there muff needs follow either a universal re-
fufal, or a faclious division amongst you, whereby a blouflering intelligence mufl
needs come to queen Elizbeth of the intended marriage from thence, which ought
to haive been secretly and advisedly propounded unto her highness; hereby you fee
then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majesty shall be made inexorable; and so
bring the matter to such passe, as this which should have wrought surety, quietness,
and a stay to both the queens and their realms, shall augment your calamity, and
throw us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy division amongst
ourselves; for you may not conjecture that the matter is now in deliberation, but ex-
peceth good occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of
the managing of this matter, as to think we have not cast the worfl, or to enter
therein so far without the affiflance of the nobility, the ablefl, the wisest, and the
mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed
until you, as the fittest minister, might propound it to her, on the behalfof the re-
gent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far Mr. Woddes defamations do carry
them of queerr Elizabeth's affedions, and Mr. secretary's, to afflft the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I do aflured-
ly think, that her majesty will prefer her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and
the conservation of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vain dif-
course, or imperfeAcions of pafiions, and inconsiderate affections. And as for
MIr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fast afore, so he
coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and specially when the reliques be of no great
value or power. If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and conflan-
cy, as of h s present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may repose as well
of him in this matter,. as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the nobility; all'which do
embrace and protefle the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to your
advice written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame zeal and' care of his
well-doing that 1 owe to him, whom I love and honour.. Mr. Secretary hath as-
tured unto him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he
feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, as I'truft, haflen your coming hither,
for it is very neceflary that you were here presently. Q Elizabeth both doth write
to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood'e discourses of her

majesty 'g.

majeRy's affelion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he ccnje&urefh
of him, the effet of which her majesty's letter you shall underhtand, by my lord
Leiceter's letter unto you at this dispatch. At the court, 20th July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 430.)

Patt of a letter from the earl of Murray, to L. B. probably lord Burleigh.

.1 ;(,. BECAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small occasions, and that

Harl. Lib.37. B the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
B. so. 4i. and the D. of No;folk, hath this while part been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I myself to be fpokcn of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come
to her majesty's ears. I will, for fatisfacion of her highners, and the discharge
of my duty towards her majeity, manifest unto you my interest, and. medling in
that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudicial to her
highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me.
-What conferrences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were
with me within the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife
forgetful of any thing that pafged betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her majeflv may understand how I have been dealt with, in this
matter, I have been compelled to touch some circumltances, before there was any
mention of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commissioners, I found
very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and others her highness's commiflioners,
in the beginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely,
and so further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flicking at our
just defence in the matters that were objecled againfi us, by the said queen's com-
missioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cognition in the cause
of controversy, with a small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day, the
lord Lithington's Secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they had
I cannot fay, but that night Lithington returning, and entring in conferrence with
me upon the state of our a6tion, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and
require familiar conferrence, by the which I might have some feeling to what iflue
our matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten time and place
convenient in the gallery of the house where the duke was lodged, after renewing
of our first acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the assize of Leith, and
some fpecches passed betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he in England had
favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendmfip of many, it was to
be tho't there could be none more fit instruments to travel for the continuance
of the amity betwixt the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the pre-
sent slate of both, and how I was entered in that aCtion tending so far to the queen's
dishonour, I was willed by him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inconveniencics her defimation in the matters
laid to her charge might breed to her posterity. Her refpeL was not little to the
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my unfriends had the
next respect, and that I should eftcem the iflue of her body would be the more as-
fcetionate to me and mine, than any other that could attain to that crown. And
.so it .hould be mcetel, that lhe affirmed her dimiflion.made in LochJevin, and we
58

ab flralt the letters of her hand writes that she should not be defamed in England.
ilMy reply to that wad, how the matter had passed in parliament, and the letters seen
to manyl, so that the abftracEing of the fame could not then secure her to any pur-
poie, and yet should we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us. Affirming it
would not be fair for us that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of England
was not made piivy to the mat:er as ihe ought to be, to be in refpet we were pur-
o!fely come into England for that end, and for the- of the grants of our cause.
The duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle matters well enough at the
court. After this, on the occasion of certain article, that were required to be re-
oblved on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very ground of our
a. lion, we came up to the court; where some new commissioners were adjoined to
the firmer, and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament house
at Westminster, in presence of which commissioners of the said queen, and--
through the-- rebuking of the queen of England's own comniffioners, we uttered
the whole of the action, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations, as we
had, which might move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause. Where-
upon expecting her highness declaration, and feeing no great likelihood of the fame
to be suddenly given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, fianding in hazard and
danger, we were put to the uttermost point off our witt, to imagine whereunto the
matters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for justification of our
causes, yet appeared no end, but continual .motions made to come to some accord with
the queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no other answer to give them,.
but that I should neither do againtf conscience nor honour in that matter. Notwith-
hianding feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I
was informed that the duke began to mislike of me, and to speak of me, as that I,
had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her --and murderer, Probably
I'was advised to pass to him and give him good words and to purge myself of the Adulterer,
things objected to me, that I should not open the sudden entry of his evil grace,
nor have him to our enemy --- confidering his greatness, It being therewithal
whispered, and shewed to me,. that if I departed, he sanding discontented and not
satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble in my way, as my throat might
be cut before I came to Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough appear
to her marriage, I should not put him in utter difpair that my good will could not
be had therein. So few days before my departing, I came to the park in Hampton-
court, where the duke and 1 met together, and there I declared unto him that it
was come to my ears, how some misreport flould be made of me to him, as that
I should speak irreverently and rashly of the said queen my sovereign's mother, such
words as before expressed, that he might ----- thereby my affeCtion to be Probably
so alienate from her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her preferment,JAi'ct.-
howbeit he might persuade himself of the contrary, for as the once was the person
in the world that I loved befl, having that honour to be so near unto her, and hav-
ing received fudh advancement and honour by her, I was not To ungrate or so un-
natural ever to wish her body harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of
me, (howfocver the truth were in the ielf) and as to the preservation of her son,
now my sovereign, had moved me to enter into this cause, and that her own pref-
sing was the occasion of that was uttered to her --- whensoever God flould move Pr bably
her. heart.to. rpent of her by past behaviour and life, and after her known repent- dio,;o,.

ance,

ance, that (he should be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that ,he
was entered in, and then after were joined with such a godly and honourable a per-
fonage, as were affecioned to the true religion, and whom we might truif, I could
find in my heart to love her, and to shew her as great pleasure, favour, and good-
will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe, he should be that personage, there was
none whom I could better like of, the queen-- in---of England being made
p-ivy to the matter, and she allowing thereof, which being done, I should labour in
all tnings that I could, to h r honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
king my sovereign's ellate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my
affection was rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God ihould dire&t
her to know herself, than utterly alienated and abltraCteJ from her; which he seem-
ed to accept in very good part, faying, Earl of Murray, thou thinks of me that thing,
whereunto 1 will make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all
light, I was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in
that w.ightv matter, first, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempt-
ed without the queen's majelty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm
and I myself in particular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole ife such peace and quietness, since God possessed her majefRy
with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protesting none other were or should be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not
find in my heart to utter any thing, that might endanger him; moved to the utter-
most with these cogitations, and all desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to
fend me some good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfaacion of my trou-
bled mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find flrange with me, that in the matter I made so diffi-
cult to him, flanding so precisely on conferrcnce, and how when I had in my com-
munication with the duke, come so far and there he made some discourse with

Probably me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had---
dif/.fld. the matter to my lord of Leicefler, and thinking me thereby discharged at the duke's

hands, therefore I repeated the famecommunication in every point to my lord of Lei-
cefler, who desired me to shew the fame to the queen's majefly, which I refused to
do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that he as
one-- by her majefy, and for many benefits received at her highness's hands
is obliged to with her well, should make declaration of the fame to her majesty,
as I understand by rome speech of her highness to me, he did. This my declara-
tion to the duke was the only cause, that flaid the violence and trouble prepared
for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways understand. The fame declaration I
was obliged to renew since in writings of-- -- nt to my servant John Wood.
The fum whereof, I truss, he Ihewed the duke, and something also I wrote to him-
self, for it was tho't this mould redeem some time, that the duke ihould not suddenly
declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft laid before me, and what friendship
he had of the chief of the nobility in England, so that it might appear to the queen's
majesty of England-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing.publickly that might seem
favourable for us, we had rome cause to fufped that her highness should not be contra-
rious to the marriage when it should be proposed to her. The (harp message sent by
Jler majesty with the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the duke tending

fa

so far to the rlad queen's preferment, as it were proposing one manner of conditions
from both, gave us to think that her highness had been forefecn in the duke' design,
and that she might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised in Eng-
land, that the Lord of Lethington Should come as from rme, and break the matter
to her highneSs, as her majelty in a letter declared that she looked for his coming,
vet that devise proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention could
n;o wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether mifo
liked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies, to the surety and quietness
of this whole isle; for our proceedings have declared our mifl king and disallowance
of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleased, he was ready for the jour-
ney. And in likewise it was devised to give consent, that the-- - between the Probably
said queen and Bothwell, ihoulJ be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was de- Divorce,
fired by the said lord Boyd, by reason we could not understand what was the queen's
niajefty's pleasure, and allowance in that beh:lf-----And whereas ye mean, that
her highness was not made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me.
The first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of Leicester, and by
him imparted to her majefly, so far as I could perceive by some speech of her high-
ness's to me, before my departi.ig. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been
dealt withal for this marriage, and how just necessity moved me not to require diret-
ly, that which the duke appeared so - - unto, And for my threatnings, to
ailent to the fame, I have exprefteJ the manner; the persons, that laid the matter
before me were of my own company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her
majesty, that (he let no speeches nor any other thing pafitd and objected to my pre-
judice, move her majefly to alter her favour--towards me, or any wife to doubt
of my assured conitancy towards her highness; for in any thing which may tend to
her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bestow myself, and all that will do for
me, notwithstanding my hazard or danger, as proof (hall declare, when her maje.
ity finds time to employ me.

i\ 1 1P EIN I) I X
Vol.. I11,

'1' t

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

APP PE N D I X

To THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leiceffer, March 2oth,

1570, from Ledington.

HE great desolation threatened to this whole realm, be the divisions thereofAn Original.
T in dangerous factions, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordship,

in other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other respect, but

only to maintain my private credit; therefor I am driven to furnish them with mat-
ter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by mifconfiruing my meaning,
rome there may take occasion of offence, thinking that i rather utter my own pas-
filoi, than go about to inform your lordship truly of the state; but I trust my plain
dealing shall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
I will lay before your lordflip's eyes, the plat of this country; which firit is divided
into two factions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other
alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withal, and unjuftlv deprived of her
itate; the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen, and prin-
cipal burroughs of the realme, who shall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in
hand, the queen's majesty your sovereign's allowance and protection ; the other hath
in it rome most principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the in-
fLrior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look afliredly that all kings do
allojw their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What confcquence this division
will draw after it, I leave it to your lordflip's consideration, there is fallen out another
divirion, accedentally, by my lord regent's death, whicl is like to change the (tate of
the other two factions, to incrcafe the one, and diminifil the other, which is grounded
upon the regiment of the realm. Some number of noblemen aspire to the go-
verniicnt, pretending right thereto by rcalon of the queen's demiflion of the croun,
and her commiflion granted at that time for the regiment duinig the king's mino-
lit), a lother faction doth altogether repine against that dirifion, thinking it neither
lit nor tolerable, tlat three or four of the mca nclt fort aniong tie earls, shi;ll Ilrc-
'umn" to challenge to themfclve; a rule over the whole realmlc, the next of the blood,
thei fi;l in rank, the greatCef alway both for the ancientry of their houses, degree,
anIl tirces, being rncglecktcd ; this order they think prepoflerous, that the meaner
I(il't fhlill be placed in publick funtlion to comnn11ld, alnd the gr:ater Hiall continue
;i , pinte menl to obey; hefides that, they think if the comiiiilron had in the bc-
' llillni een valewable, (whiclh the mtl l p.lr will not grant) yet can it not he cx-

,',iled io the prcfent, for that the conditioiis theretinto a:lnxcl arc ccafeil, and so

Ilre tlldt of tile whole void; the latter pairt of this diilion h;lil In;y pretenlres,
hr hIclies tlie q(tccn', Lfcition, whichl is wliiy) oil tIhalt liJe, ; gltet. nunilcr of tl(cf

']' t . that

that have heretofore professed the king's obedience, do favour' the fame, and will not
yield to the government of the other, whose preferment for refpecE they mislike,
when the queen's faction shall be increased, with a part of the king's, and these not
of leat substance, and yow may judge what is like to infue; an other incident is
like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given out here in Scotland,
that the queen's majesty is setting, forth Come forces towards the border,, which (hall
enter this realm, to countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the
contrary facion, and bruts are spread, that the fame {hall be here out of hand;
these that think themselves of equal force with their contrary faction at home, or
rather an over-match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another
prince, rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advise of neceflity,
and cvill councillors, and seek aloi the maintenance of rome foreign prince, whereby
her majefly (altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) mufc be driven to ex-
ceffive charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at
one time to set us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived at
Dumbarton, a galzeon with a messenger tent expressly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to learn the state of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this meflage will be well received, and suffered accordingly,
this is the present slate of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my o-
pinion, how to choice the best, as the cafe standeth; 1 will in that also fatisfie
your lordihip, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lordlhip Ihall judge
wither I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter my judge-
ment, and go not about to disguise' my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which she hath gone about
to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and the loss of some of her people; this
desire is honourable for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and of none
to be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove com-
modious for her to suit the friendship of a fation of Scotland, for in ib doing, in
g ining the best, (he may lose the more, and the lime would bring all her aOilins
with us in suspicion, if (ie should go about to nourish factions amongfl us, which
me.ining I am sure never entered into her majefly's heart; then if it be the friend-
(hip of the whole she doth demand, let her not, for pleal(;re of one part, go about
to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifable, as fume may give her io
underi1and; but ra:her, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
state, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means to an uniformity, so
thall the give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that the tendeth our wealth,
and provoks us universally to with unto her majelfy a molr prosperous continuance;
by the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, the will fend forces to suppress theis
whom they miflikc, and so confequcntly offend many ; men be not so faint-hearted,
but they have courage to provide for their own fafty, andi not only will embrace ilhe
means partly offered, but will also procure further, at the hand of other princes.
T'his for mine own part, 1 do abhorr, and proted I desire never to fee forces of
firangers to set foot within this land, yet I know not what point neccflity may drive
men into, as if men in the middle of the Tea were in a (hip, which suddenly (hould
be set on fire, the fear of burning would make them to leap into the lea, and loon after

the
64

the fear of the water would drive them to cleive again to the fired ship, so for avoid-
ing present evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourse to another, no
lels dangerous. Trulf me forces will not bring forth any good fruit to her majefly's
behove, it must be some way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein by my former let-
ters your lordship doth know already what is my judgement; you fee how plainly I
do write, without consideration in xwhat part my letters may be taken, yet my hope
is that such as will favourably interpret them, shall think that I mean as well to her
majesty, and that realme, as these that will utter other language. I wish the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two contrys, without other refpet, and will not
conceal from her majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice therc-
of; if I shall perceave -her majefly taking frank dealings in evil part, flhall fiom
thenceforth forbear; in the mean season 1 will not cease to trowble your lordship, as
I fall have occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your lordship.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

A letter of queen Eiifabeth to the earle of Suffckc, July 2d, 1570.
R IGHT trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day we have Cal.erw.

received your letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters, sent from M. S. H-iiory

Scotland, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is desired to be given be- V. 2. p. 189.
fore the tenth of this month; which is a very short time, the weightiness of the
matters, and the diflance of the places confidered; nevertheless we have, as the
shortne's could susser it, resolved to give this answer following, which we will, that
vow, by warrand hereof, (hall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox
and the reft of the noblemen conveend with him. Where it is by them, in their
letters,, and writings alledged, that for lack of our resolute answer concerning the
eflablilhing of the regiment of the realm under their young king, great inconveni-
ences have happned, and therefore they have deferred now at their lait convention to
determine of the famine, who shall have the place of governour, until the 21it this
month, before which time they require to have our advise, in what person or perfns
the government of that realm shall be eftablilhed, we accept very thankfull the good
will and reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our
advise in a matter, that toucheth the fLte of their king, their selves, and realm so
near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to intermeddle therein,
they have taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to their
fiac and fueity, so on the other part, they of their wisdoms ought to think, that it
might he by the whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form of go-
vceninent, or a governour by name, for that howsoever we flould mean well if we
iliould do so, yet it could not be without fomejealoufy in the heads of the cliate, no-
bllily, and community of that realm, that the government thereof fiould be by me
flccially named and ordained ; so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet miflik-
ing most that they should take any discomfort by our forbearing to flow our mind
therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, confidering with ourfielves how
now that realm had been a good (pace of time ruled in the name of their kin, and
by reason of his bale age, governed heretofore by a very careful and honourable per-
son, the earle of Murray, untill that by a mischievous pcrfuo, (an evil example) ho

was

was murdered, whereby great disorder and confusion of necfirty had, and will more
follow, if determination be not made of some other fpeciall person, or persons, to
take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpeciall, for adminiflration of law
and justice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
special governour to be chosen; and therefore being well assured, that their own un-
derttandingof all others is best to confider the tfate of that realm, and to discern the
abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we shall
better fatisfie ourselves, whom they by their common consent {hall first choose and
appoint to that purpose, then of any to he by us aforehand uncertainly named, and
that because they shall perceave that we have care of the person of their king, who
by nearness of blood, and in refpeft of his so young years, ought to be very tender
and dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they shall all ac-
cord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be governor alone,
orjointly with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their common con-
sent appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none can be cho.
fen in that whole realm, that shall more desire the preservation of the king, and be
more meet to have the government for his safety, being next to him in blood of any
nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet, hereby, we do not mean to p:e-
fcrive to them this choice, except they shall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would hive them well assured, that whatsoever reports
of devises, ale, or shall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind to alter the state of the king or government of that realm, the fa'ne are
without just cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised them,
that although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refuse, what
the queen of Scots or her part shall fay and offer, not only for her own assurance,
but for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that (hall
be offered, we mean not to break the order of law and juflice, by advancing her
cause, or prejudging her contrary, before we shall deliberately and afluredly fee, upon
the hearing of the whole, some place necefflry, and just cause to do and therefore
finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm,
and thereof invefled by coronation and other folemni.ies used and requisite, and ge-
nerally so received be the whole efatcs, we mean not, by yielding to hear the com-
plaints or informations of the queen against her ftn, to do any act whereby to make
conclusion of govcrments, but as we have found it, so to fuffcr the fame to continue,
yea not to susSer it to be alteied by any means that we may impeche, as to our ho-
nor it doth belong, as by your late actions hath manifeflly appeared, untill by omen
jtiiice, and clear cause, we fli:Il be directly induced oti!eilwife to declare our opi-
niin ; and this we would have them to know to be our determination and courre that
we mean to hold, whereon we trust they for their king mais' fee how plainly and ho-
nourlably wc menan to procted, and how little cautl they have to doubt of us, what-
soev'er to the contrary they have or flall hear; and on the other part, we pray
them of their wiilolmi to thiink how tunlionoourable, and contrary to all human order
it were for us, wlhen tile (lucen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear her
caure, and dotlh osier to be oiderndl be us in tile lime, as well for matters betwixt
ourfelvcs and her, a;s betwixt herself alnd lier ('1 anld his party of that realm, anainft
whichl offers no re;i(on oiuld move us to refuife to give c;lr, that we should alforc-
liand openly and dirnclly, bclore the caulest be heard and conlidcred, as it were,
give a judgment or fcntclcc eliher fur ourlclves or for tlicm, whom lhe maketh to be

11 r
67

her contraries. Finally ye Thall admonish them, that they do not, by mifcon.
ceiving our good meaning toward them, or by indirect assertions of their adver-
fary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our
good meaning towards them shall not take such effeEt towards them, as they shall de-
fire, or themselves have need of. All this our answer ye {hall cause be given them,
and let them know, that for the shortness of time, this being the end of the second
of this month, we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor yet
write any several letters, as if time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570..

No. 1II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

The bishop of Ross to secretary Lidington from Chattifwortlh.

I HAVE received your letters dated the z6th of May, here at Chattifworth, the IjJune 1-7c.

Ioth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like

as the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you will be resolved of
many points contained in your said letter. I writ to you that I received your letter
and credit from Thos. Cowy at London, and sent to Leicester to know the queen of
England's mind whether if you ihould come here or not. He sent me word, that
She will no ways have you come as one of the commissioners, because she is yet of-
fended with you; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither, but remain
where you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best advance the queen's
affairs, for I perceive your weil and safety depends thereon, in refpet of the great
feid and ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the great heirship taken
of your father's landis; both were sure demonstrations of their malice. Yet I am
encouraged by your flout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no deligence shall
be omitted to procure supports forth off all parts where it may be had. We will not
refuse the aid neither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and to this end,
during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And feeing my lord Seaton is de-
firous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very neceflary that he so do, for the
duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain to give support, and
I am sure that there he shall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it abides
only on the coming of rome men of countenance, to procure and receive the fame.
He mufft needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty, which
will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The queen has already written to the
duke D'Alva for this est'ecd, advertizing of his coming; there is certain fums of mo-
ney coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote to you before, from the pope.
WVhercupon I would he had a general commission to deal for them, and receive such
fitms as shall be given. The means shall be found to cauCe you be anfuerit of the
ftinis you writ for, to be difponit upon the furniflhing of the castle of Edenburgh, so
being tome honest and true man were sent to Slanders to receive it, as said is, which
I would you prepared and sent. Orders shall be taken for the metils as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entring to treat with the queen of England, for
retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of aid. Your anfwes to the Englifhlmen
are tho't very good, but above all keep you well out of their hands, in that cafe,
cltote prudentes ficut ferpcntes. You may take experience with the hard dcaling
itll me, how ye would be uscd if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of danger,

Lbcill

being in medio nation.s prava; alway no fear, w:th God's grace, shall make me
ihrink from her m.:jety's service. Since the queen of England has refused that you
come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and
therefore if Athol or Cathenes might by any means be procured to come, they were
the most fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet if he and I were not both of one
lirname; so the treaty would get the less credit either in Scotland or here. There.
fore avys, and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come
with them, whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure; in my last packet, with
James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the queen's own
hand writing to him, which I trust ye received. I am sorry ye come not for the great
relief I hoped to have had by your pretence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to
your good wifdiom, praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth the lsth
of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 26.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grainge and Lethington

zoungare upon the 8th Day of Oft. 1571.

Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure, what she will do
for appeasing of there controversies, and therewith has offered yourfelvesto

be at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole isle, and
the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this bel/alf, that ye should leave off the
maintenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom she
will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and the king's party, to receive
you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for security of life and livings.

ALSO she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she has praftifed with the pope

and other princes, and also with her own fubjecas in England, great and dangerous
treasons against the state of her own country, and also to the deftrudion of her own
perlon, that {he shall never bear authority, nor have liberty while ihe lives.

IF )e refuse there gentle offers, now offered unto you, she will presently aid the

king's party, with men, ammunition, and all neceflary things, to be had against
you.

\IWHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with speed, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 34.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general afTembly, August 5th, 1572.

CalJerw.M. F IRST, desiring anew at to he made ratifying all things concerning the king and
Jlil ry \. . 2 his obedience that were enacted of before without any change, and that the
3 56. minifiers who have contriavccid the former aCts be correcEed as accordeth.

I'THAT fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintaining the king's
cause, that whatfocvcr procccdcth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kitk

be

be not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of the nininlfers, that have
been robbed of their poffeflions within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or
a.therwife dung and injured may be restored.

'I'o site at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other benefice be given to

any person contrary to the tenor of the ads made in the time of the first regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said acts, or to any unqualified
person, may be revoked and made null be an at of secret council, and that all bi-
shopricks so vacand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat thereunto, within
a year after the vakingthereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the com-
ifilioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January l.s(, and in fpe-
cial to complain upon the giving of bifhoprick of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or finall, be given be simple donation of

any lord regent, without content of the possessor of the saids benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admiflion of the superintendent or commifiioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the biihops lawfully elected according to the said
order taken at Leith; and desire an aft of council to be made thereupon, until the
next parliament, wherein the famine may be especially inaated, with inhibiti-.n to the
lords of session to give any letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices
or pentions not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk presently
aflembled declare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which were in the first and fe-

cond regents time be not chang'd as now it is commonly ; but that this clause be
contained in the presentation that if the persons presented make not residence, or
be slanderous or found unworthy either in life or docr ne be the judgment of the
kirk, (to which alwife he shall be fubjcdt,) or meet to be transported to another
room at the fight of the kirk, the said presentation and all that shall fall thereupon
{hall be null and of no force nor effect; and this to have place also in the nomina-
tion of the bishops.

THAT an ad be made in this aflembly that all things done in prejudice of the

kirk's assumptions of the third, either be papists or others, by giving of fews, life-
rents, or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an a.t be made decerning and ordaining all Bishops, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromissions
Thcrewith once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk n.ay
easily confider the fame to be 'mos expedient and neceflar.

N ENT the jurifdicion of the kirk, that the fame be determined in this assembly,

becaufc this article hath been long pofpond to make fute to the legent and council
for remedy against mcllengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who procure against
miniflers and ministry, and for futting of juflice of the kirk's acions in the feflion.

VOL. II.

69

No. VI.
U u

No. VI. [Vol. II. p. 39.]
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

23d Feb. 1572.
B E it known to all men, by there presents, that I Henry Killigrewe Efq; am-

baffador for the queen's majesty of England, forasmuch as, at the earnest mo-

tion and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and
pacification of the publick troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed
and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honourable George
earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenoch, and the lord John HWmilton, son to
the duke's Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of Abirbrothock,
for the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their kinfolks,
friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending on them; treating of
the which said pacification, the murderers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the
earl of Levetnx grandfather, late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm
and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the fruais or moveable goods,
which the said persons have taken fra perfonis profcf)ing the king's obedience, or for
the damages done or committed by them, since the I5th day of Junij, 1567, and
before the penult day of July las passed, by reason of the common cause or any
thing depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commifaries matteris of such
wecht and importance, as the king's present regent could not conveniently, of him-
self, remit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpet of the necessity of the present pa-
cification, and for the weil of the king, and common quietness of this realm and
lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of remission of the said murderers, and of
the discharge of the said fruais, moveable goods, and other, damages, moved by the
persons desiring the said remiflions and discharge to the queen's majefly my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the king of Scots.
And whatsoever her majesty ihall advise and councel touching the said remiflion and
discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and universal quietness of
the realm of Scotland, shall perform, observe, and fullfil the fame. And in likewise,
the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of the Abirbrothock, being urged to have
delivered pledges and hostages for observation of the conditions of the said accord
and pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majesty's name, by vir-
tue of my commiflion, to promire for them that they ihall truly and faithfully ob-
serve and keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their
parts, and that it would please her majesty to interpose herself, as surety and cau-
tioner for them to that effet, to the king's majesty of Scotland their sovereign and
his said regent, which I have done, and promise to do, by virtue of his majefly's
commission, as by the honourable and plain dealing of the said carl and lord, tlhci.
intention to peace well appears, the fame being molt agreeable to the mind of the
queen's majlfty my fovcreign, which so long by her minilters hath travelled for the
said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and solicitation, the fame is ac-
corded, knowing her majesty's godly desire, that the fame may continue unviolate,
and that the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedience (hall have
fuficient surety for their li es, livings, honours and goods. Therefore in her ma-

jely's
^.

71

jeRfy's name, and by virtue of my commifion, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good means, the said re-
mission and discharge shall be purchased and obtained to them, their kinfolks, friends,
servants and partakers, now properly depending upon them, (the persons specified
in the firfi abftinance always excepted) as also that the said pacification shall be truly
observed to them, and that her majesty shall interpose herself as confervatrix thereof,
and endeavour herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points
and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to this present fubfcrib-
ed with my hand, and fealed the fame with mine own feal the i3th day of Febry,
Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof,
and the parliament which shall be appointed for their reflitution, or at the furtheit
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's dowry.

H E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry, besides other

J possessions, the dukedom of T'urene, which was solemnly contralced and given Cott. Lib.
to her by the king and estates of parliament; which dukedom ihe possessed peace-
ably till 1576, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his
brother to augment whose appennage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who were her near relations,
provided the equivalent which was promised her should be faithfully performed.
So that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, ihe had grant-
ed her the county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry;
tho' 'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of equal value with Tu-
rene, but was promised to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an
equal value. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirmed in the
courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court of aids, chamber of the treasury,
and others necessary; upon which The entered into poffeflion of that county, &c.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commitfioners of the chamber of accompts, it
was found that the revenue of that county, &c. did not amount to thore of Turene
by 3000 livres. But inflead of making up this deficiency according to justice,
some of the privy council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of Bellievre, Ni-
cocholay, and St. Benet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of her aforesaid
lofles, did fell and alienate the lands of Senlis, and the dutchy of Eftaimpes, to
madam de Monpenfier, from whom the king received money; of which sale the
councellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath hindre(d
the aforesaid queen to have justice done her. So that madam de IVionpenfier hath
been put in pofeffion of these lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration, pro-
tcefation, and aflurances of the king of France to queen Mary's ambafladors. So
that the queen of Scotland is difpoffeffed of her dowry, contrary to all equity, with-
out any regard to her quality.

No. VII,
U U2

No. VII. [Vol. II. p. 44.]

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

T will please your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and has confidered the
;,d March, fame. The parson of Camsey was here at me before the receit thereof, diret.

i:--. ed fra my lord of Mar, and the matier anent my last written, which was the an.

i-.. of Mor fswer of the writing that the master sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
rtoils Ar- nme to come to Sterling to confer with them, I had given my answer before the re.
chieves.
Bned. B. No. ccipt of vour grace's letter, that I behuiffit to be byfyd San& Androis, at ane friends

tryst, which I might not omit; I underfand by my said cousin, that the king's
n'ajefly is to write to diverse of the nobility to come there, anent your lordship's
trial, and that he had written before his departing to my lord Monthruis. I under,
fland, likewise, he wi!l write to your grace to come there for the fame effect, which
I tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace, for the
love of God Almighty, to look upon the best, and not to sleep in security, but to
turn you with unfeigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that when the
king's majesty was very young, God made him the inftrunent to divedl his mother
from her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of his divine majefly,
and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as largely in you, except
that your grace condescended not to the deftrution of your wife. For as to har-
lotry, and ambition, i think your grace has as far offended God, and far more in
avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left unplagued, except speedy repentance,
which I pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never have the
love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace be-
lieves that ye have the good wil of them that are the king's good willers ye deceive
yourself; for surely I fee perfectly that your own particulars are notcontented, lat
by the reft, and that most principally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace,
beir with me that am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but
from the very affeEtion of my heart towards your grace, which has continued since
we were acquainted. And now I fee, because the matter flands in your grace's
handling with the king's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I lee not how ye shall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to God, and
look on the bcft, and cast from your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition ani
avari:ioufiiefs. I am riding this day to SanLt Androis, and trust to return on Wed-
nefday at the fartheff. If your grace will command me in any offices that are ho-
nest, that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your grace's
mind, and ihall do to iny power and knowledge, and this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To our trulty cousin the lord Loclleven.

r rrn tle Ori. R U S T Y cousin, after our mot hearty commendations, we received your letter
ii:, 1', . c, ol' the 3(1 of M1ar;., ai,:d as we take your plainnels therein in good pait, as pro-
Mlortlon', .\. \ cecdil from a friendl aind kinilfnii, in who'e good affcdlion towards us we never
llicvcs, ullnd duubtcd, so ye may not think it llrange that we purge ourlclf so far of your accutla-

1. N4o. 3~. ^~3 ~tio l,

tlon, as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended in. As touching our of-
fence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to tubmit us to his mercy ; for ambi-
tion surely we think none can justly accuse us ; for in our private estate we could,
and can live a, well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without further
aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm, indeed,
mon lead us, or any other that Lhall occupy that place, not fimi ly to refpe& our-
self, but his majesty's rowme which we supply, and therein not transcending the
bounds of meaf re, as, We trust, it shall i;ot be found we ha, e done, it ought not
to be attril uted to any ambi'ion in us. For as soon as ever his majesty shall think
himself ready and able for his own government, none lhall more u illingly agree and
advance the fame nor I, since I think n ver to set my face against him, whose ho-
nour, safety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to
find otherwise at his hand than favou!, although all the unfriends I have in the earth
were about him, to persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our friendly
dealin and confiderce in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit; as we trust
youiftlfconfiders, but because the ambassadors of England, my lord of Angus, the
chancellor, treasurer, and fomne noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we
pray you heartily yo rfelf to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye shall find
the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized thereof with your own advice, by
Alexr Hay, whom, we have tho't good to fend Wtft, feeing my lord of Angus from
Sterling rides to Douglass. And so we commit you in the protection of God. At
Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, I577.

FOR theavaricioufnefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in us so liberally to

deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers, nor never shall any sovereign and na-
tive born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them judges
to their own reward; in many causes, 1 doubt not to find the affiflance of my friends,
but where my actions shall appear unhonefl, I will not crave their assistance, but
kt me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 83.)
The coppy of the king of France his direEtions sent to Scotland with

Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Tralnlated out of the French.

F IRST on their majeft)s most christian part, he shall make the mol hionourable
F lalutation and visiting to the most ferenc king of Scotland, their good brother
and little (on, tlhat in him is pfo'able.

'I'o give him their letters that are closed, such and such like as they have written

to himn with their ha,.ds, and to shew exprcfly the pcrfet fricndfhip and singular ;f-
fe ioln, that their majeflys bear to him, and to bring back the anfwrer.

'I'o take head to the things which toclch near the nmilt serene king, to the efre't
that Ilb pecrfn may be in no danger, but that it may be most lurely preserved.

AND that he be not hindred in the hnenlt liberty that he ought to have, and that
no greater, or firaiterguards be about him than lie hhad hbeorc.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the authority, that God hath given

to hIin of king and prince foverci n above his fubjccts, to the cfli:t he nimay a;
fieely ordain and command in his affairs and in the aflfirs of his couintr\, witl his
ordinary council, as he was used to do of before.

'T1A'T

73

C ildcrw.
\''ol.3.p. :c't

THAT his nobility, barons and commonality of his contry may have their siee

liberty to resort to his serene majesty, without fulpicion of greater guards or more
armed men about his person then the use was, that they be not afraid and hindered
to resort; and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon i;il liberally and freely
speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re-establishing of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of good

behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are content
with the fonn of government presently with the said serene king, to the end that if
their be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that he return
not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have not used them To reverently

towards the said serene king their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalf ot his majesty moif christian the said serene
king his good brother, giving him council wholly to forget the fame, and exorting
them to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all respects with the
obed ence and true fubjetioi they ought him.

AND If the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the said serene king to be in any

manner constrained of his person, authority, liberty, and disposition of his effairs,
than he used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty
of a prince does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to place him in
the famine, and that he imploj as much as the credit of his most christian majesty
may do toward the nobility, and fubjeids of that contry, and as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he loves
and confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates, of his content, and

to all the nobility and ,gprincipall personages of the contry, that his mos itCliriftian
mnajefie will continue on his part in the most ancient alliance and contedracy,
which he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying hi' nobility
and contry, with his principal fubjets, to persevere in the famine, in all good un-
derftanding and friend hip with him ; the which, on his part, he shall do, observing
the famine most inviolable.

FURTHER his most chriltian majesty understanding that the serene king his good

brother was contented with the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignicur
Dc la Motte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he might remain betide
him to his contentment, believing that he flould more willing intertain the points
of love and confederace, betwixt th ir majestys and their contrys, because he was a
good iut'je&t to them both; and if he might not remain, without tome alteration of
the tranquility of his eftLitc, that he might retire tim to his own house in the said
contry, in furencs, or if he pleased to return to France that he might surely-
and if it plafcls his fcren- majesty, to cause ccafe and stay the impeachments, that
are nmade of new upon the frontiers, to the cftcit that the natur-al Frenchmen niay
cnter as freely into thecontry, as they wc;:e wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor no speech but honour-

able of the mo!t Chri.lian king, in that rontry, but such like as is spoken most ho-
nt 'irablv of the: lfr.ne king ol coutland in France.

I 1 i h, :Il;)t:el head to propone, which he concealed till a little before his depar-

'l v.A:, tthlat the (queen, the king's mother, was content to receive her son in

:
..:: t I hc kiln dotm.

No, IX.
74-

75

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 98.)
Lord Hundfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the 14th of August, 1584.

from Berwick.

SIR,
ACCORDING to my former letters, touching my meeting with the earl of Calderw.

Arran upon Wednesday last, there came hither to me from the carle, the jus- M. S. Hilto-
tice clerk, and fir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's ry, Vol. 3.

privie council, to treat with me about the order of our meeting, referring wholly to p. 374.
me to appoint the hour, and the number we should meet withal; so as we concluded
the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves
to be 13 of a fide; and the reft of our troops to stand each of them a mile from the
town ; the one on the one fide, the other on the other fide, so as our troops were two
minles asunder; I was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen, where I
had loo shot on horse, but they were very near 500 horse well appointed: Accord-
ing to which appointment, we met yesterday, and after some congratulations, the
earle fell in the like proteflations of his good will and readiness to serve the queen's
majesty, before any prince in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnest vows, as unless he be worse
than a devil, her majefly may dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him, and so near as I could,
left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge the king or him with any unkind deal-
ing toward her majesty, according to my inftruAiohs, which without any delay he
answered presently, as ye shall perceive by the said answers, lent herewith; but I
replying unto him, he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but to this es-
set. Then I dealt with him touching the point of her majesty's fatisfadion, for
the uttering such practices as had been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty, and her estate, who thereof made sundry discourses, what marriages have
been offered to his majesty by sundry princes, and by what means the earle has fought
to divert them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage vith Spain or
France, he must also alter his religion, which as he is sure the king will never doe,
so will he never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he has any credit with
him; he denys not but the king has been dealt withal be practices to deal against her
majefly, which he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they have left deal-
ing therein, but whatsoever the king or he knoweth therein there shall be nothing
hidden from her majesty, as her majesty shall know very shortly ; surely it seems by
his speeches, that if the king would have yielded thereunto there had been no Cnlall
company of French in Scotland ere now to disquiet her majesty.-- This being
ended, I dealt with him earnestly for the itay of this parliament, which now ap-
proacheth; or at the least that there may be nothing done thercin, to the prejudice
of there noblemen and others now in England, for the forefaulting of their livings
and goods, hereupon he made a long difcourrf to me, first of thc eail of Angus
dealing about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwithflan .:ig of lindrie
gracious offers the king had made him, then of the road of Ruthlvcn, li w that pie-
fently after they had the king's niajefly in their hands, ihey irmpriiell)e himse'f, dealt
with the king for putting of the duke out of the reall, the king refufld I; to do,
they told him plainly that if he would not he should have the caile of Arran's

he: d

head lit a di , the king afied what oftfnce the earl had made ; and they anrwered
it mufi b: f(, a', d imould le so hereupon for the fafeguardof Arran's life, the king
was content to fend away the dukle, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie times in dan-

er. f his life; I alldced unto himl the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and his
a'ls in coulncil, that they had done noth ng but for his service, and with his good
l;king and contentment, who anf.v red me he durss di no otherwise, nor could not
:!o any thing but hait which pleased them, with such a number of other their dealingq
vhih the king whileft he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and ton bad
if they were true ; I fTid the king might have let the queen's m jefty's ambaffa.tor have
known h s mind secretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he answerel,
that the king was not ignorant that the apprelenrfions in th t manner, pro:eeded
fronm lr. Bcw's praclice, and thereby dural rot impart so much to him, and yet the
kin ritas conrenw, and did give remitlin to as many, as would acknn)wledge their
fiult, and ads remi.Fo , an-i such as would nor, he thought fit to banilh, to try
their fartherloylty, in vhich time they conspired the king's second apprchenfion,
and the killing of the carle, and other, and ieduced the minil. rs to th'ir faction,
and 'et not f.ti.fied with ihe'f: confpira;ies and tre fonable dealings, (as he terms
them) are entered into a third, being in En land under her majesty's protection, to
difn:onour her majety as far a, in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
folne unkindness in her maj fly, fr harhouring of them; I wrote to yow what the
con piracy wa, the taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and forme
others, the taking of the cast'e of Ed nr, and bringing home the earles to take the
charge of the king; all which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provctl of Glencudden not greatly denied and the constable of the castle thereupon
sPed ; the earl brought Druinmond with him as far as Langton, where he lay to
have confcffed the conspiracy before me, but having at his lighting, received a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further, 1 replied that I thought
verilv they would not work any such practices, in respect of the queen's majefy,
abiding within her realme, and if there be any such praaices, they have proceeded
from o hers, and they not privie unt them : and that if it be not apparently proved
against them, that it will be thought to be tome practice to agravate the fault, and
to make them the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it should be pro'
ved 1; ftiuficirentlv, that they (hould not be able with truth to deny it, for their
own h ndl is to be showed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that If her ma-
je(ly should so prcfs the king for them at this ime, th ;t would rather hinder this
na:.tcr of t!e a-nitty, nor further it, and that lince they seek chiefly his life, he could
riot, in any reason, feck to do them any good ; and. besides he aft;red me, that if he
would,) he dare nor, th s la'I matter being tallen out a; it is; and fuerly if this matter
had not fallen ruit, I would 1not ihave doubted the rcftoring of the earl of Marr very
short!'y, if her mi:jefly would hive employed me th rein, but for the earl of Angus,
1 perceive the king is I erfuat(ed that both he- and the reft of the D)ollglafies have
conceived sI mort.ill an hatred againIt him and the carl of Arran, about the death
(cf the Ciil of Morton, as if they were at home, tomorrow next, they would not
leive ton pr tl ice and( conspire the death of them both, and therefore a hard matter
to do any thing fr himl: finally, lie concluded and required me to assure her mnjeny
from the king, ht thetre Il11ii nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone
that may fitisfie her m.ijefly wiih realon, and that the king (hall never do any thing,
nor confunt to have any thing done in her prejudice, so long a3 he had any credit

with

with him, or authority under him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to (how
me his commission, which is under the great feal, to himself only, which is as large
as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie councel there with him, but not one in com-
mission, nor present, nor near us all this time; having spent almofi five hours in
these matters, he presented to me the Master of Gray, who delivered to me a let-
ter from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to
her majesty, and therefore requires a safe conduct for his passage, which I pray yow
procure, and so fend it so soon as you may I let him understand of the lord Seaton's
negottition with the French king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave,
and that it was partly against his will, that he should be sent thither. But his com-
miflion and inftruócion being of no great importance, he yielded the sooner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his infirufions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seaton smart for it. Touching Williarn Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protested
he never heard of any such ; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither abegging, who said he was an enemy to Definond, to whom he gave
a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into Ireland,
he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may be some few rafkels that he
knows not of; and touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is
but the flandrous devise of the King's enemys, and such as would have the world
believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who the world liall we l fee will
continue as constant therein, as what prince soever professed it mofi; and the earle
himself dos protest to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they should not do so much harm
in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if they preach such doótrine as they did
in Scotland; and touching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from
MIr. Colvil, the earl avows constantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any
such man, but he would inquire at the juflice clerk, and would inform me what he
could learn of that; thus I have made yow as short a discourse as I can, of so many
matters, so long di`courfed upon, but these are the principal points of all our talk,
so near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At
Berwick, the 14th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
1 pray yow know her majelty's pleasure.
Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord Hunfdane,

let down in another form.
A S to the itrait and revere persecution of all such, as have been noted to have

been well affeced to the queen's majesty, it cannot appear they were either

for that cause punished, or hardly dealt with, since his majesty of late hath been so
careful and diligent to choice out good initruments to deal betwixt her majesty and
him, as his majesty has done in elecing of your lordlhip and me; belides that in all
their accusations, their good will and affection born to her majesty was, at no time,
laid to their charge, but capital aaions of treason many way tried now be the whole
three cftates, and more than manifest to the world.

VOL. II. X x A

77

to repair in England; the bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn they accomplified, so far as in them
lav, moved his majefly to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's
realm, leaat they should have attempted these things, which shortly they did attempt,
being farther off, and more distant both by sea and land.

As for reception ofjeluits, and others, her majeflys fugitives, and not delivering

them according to his promise, as your lordship propones, his majesty would be most
glad that so it might fall out by your lordships traviles, that no fugitive of either
realme should be received of either, and when so shall be, it shall not fail on his
majesty's part, albeit in very deed this time by gone his majesty has been confirained
to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since
her majesty hath receipt, in effect, the whole and greatest rebells and traitors his
majesty in his own blood ever had ; as for the agreement with his majesty's mother
anent their association, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of your lordship's
servant, to assure her majesty and your lordship, in his majef+y's name, that it is al-
together false, and an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majefly has also commanded me to assure your lordship, that it is also false

and untrue, that his majesty has, by any means direc or indirect, sent any message
to the pope, or received any from him; or that his majesty has dealt with Spain or
any foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his majefly could have no
honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as 1 hope in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's ministers, sent unto his

majesty, his majesty used none of them so; and if his majelly had, sufficient cause
was given by them, as some of their own writs do yet teffify; as I more particu-
larly shewed your lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. i I .)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,

Cot. Lib.Col. AfT'Affeurant que vous avez eu communication d'une Icttre de Gray que voC-
B. VIII. frl. 1Vl tre hornme Semer me livra hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoiffant
147. -An Ori- quasi de mot a mot Ics mefmes raisons que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre eftant der-
ginal. nierement pres de vous dcfmontrant la fuffifance & bonne intention du personage je

vous prieray, feulement fuivant ce que si devantje vous ay tant inftantement impor-
tun6 que vous me permettiez defclaircir librement & ouvertement ce point de l'afo-
ciation d' entre moy & mon filz & me deflier les mains pour proceder avec lui comme
jejugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le mien. Et j'entreprendz quoy que l'on
vous die & puifse en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit brouillon qui persuade par au-
cuns de vos miniftres a entrepris cette separation entre moy & mon enfant, & pour
y commencer je vous fulpplie m'oc'-royer que je puiffe parler a cc justice clerk qui
vous a este nouvellemcnt envoye pour mander par luy a mon filz mon intention fur
cela, ce que je me promis que ne me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demon-
trcr cn effect la bonne intention que vous m'avcz affnuree avoir a I'accord & entre-

I ticn

A P PE N D1 N.
Is

ticn de natural devoir entre la mere & 1' enfant qui dit en bonnes termes eftre em-
pefche pour vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez mieux def-
mentir & faire paroitre vofire bon defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d'y
proceder, & non m'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos. miniftres pre-
tendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finifires praaiques entre nous.
La Icttre porte que I'affociation !'eft pas passee, aufli ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bienque mon
filz avoit accept6; & que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme l'acte sign6 de
fa main, & ces lettres tant a Mioy, que en France en font' soy, ayaInt donne ce m'eme
temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & petfo'nne de credit, s'ex-
curant de ne l'oser faire publier par craint de vous feule-ment, deifaandant forces pour
vous refifler d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement eftan'tjournellemenit per'fuide atl
contraire par vos minifires qui ]uy prometoyent avccque une entreire a Yorck le
faire declarer votre heretier. Au furpl's Madam'e quand mon enfant feroit fe malheu-
reux que' de s'opiniafetre en cette extremre impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne
puis penser que vous non plus qu'aucu'n aultre prince de la Chretiente le vou-
liffiez, en cela' applaudir oui meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediaion,
ains que plutos introviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raifbn trop juste et evi-
dant devant Dieu & les hommes Helas & encores ne luy voulbier je'n ofter, mrtays
donner avec droit ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du toutcommife a vous,
& fidelement faites si il' vous ptleff que je ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faul-
fetedes uns ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien r;ecevant mal, & la plus
grande afflition qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous sup-
plie de me mander en cas qu'il perfifRe en cette m'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que de
]uy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous
aves agreable de pourfuivre avec moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoy
je vous requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouverne enfant vous en re-
querrant avec autant d'affeEtion que je fens mon cour oppress6 d'ennuy. Pour Dieu
louvcnez vous de ]a promeffe que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre protection
me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de
touts vos ennemys & difimulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler & de me
venger de ceulz qui pourchaflUnt un tel malheur entre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefleray
de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque conlblation de
vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril. Futh-
bery xii Mars.

Vofire fidelement voucc foeur

& obeiffante coufinc,

A la rcyne d'Angleterre MARIE Q.
madame ma bonne feur

\ (o. XI.

79

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. ix .)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

Cott. Lib. N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd Mr. Crawford late regius
Vefpaf.L. x6. profefror of church history in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
P' 4r 5 according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's secretary, the reft with the queen's

own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's hand.

Onfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eflat de vie humaine, si incertain, que

\jC perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande & infinie
misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et ac-
cidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivit6, mefmes a cause
des grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenu6 jufques a present; j'advise tan-
dis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de
mon ame, enterrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eflat, et affaires,
par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S'. Esprit. Premierement, me recong-

noiffant indigne pecherefe avec plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfadion
par toutes les adverfites quej'ay fouffert; dontje la loue fa bont6. Et m'appuyant
fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame
a la benoifte et individue Trinit6, et aux prieres de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et
de tous les anges fainds and fainaes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et intercef-
sion, efire aydee a obtenir de eftre faiae participante avec eulx de felicite eternelle. Et
pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net entitr, defpouillant des a present tout ref-
sentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient
avoir efit fades durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebelles et aultres ennernis; J'en re-
triet la vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affeetion, que
je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles que je puis avoir offenfC
de faiAs ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs contain directions concerning
the place and circumJtance of her burial.

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de I'Eglife catholique,

apoftolique et Romaine, en la quel!eje veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe
mon filz y puef etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon trcs
grand regret en 1' herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le laifle feul et unique heri-
tier de mon royaume d'Efcofle, de droid queje pretende juftement en la couronne
d'Angleterre et pays quc en dependent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meu-
bles et immeubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de ce present testament.

Si non, ct que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie, Je cede, tranf-

porte, et fai'te don ' de touts et chacuns mes droits, queje pretende etpuis pre-
" tendre a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droits, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en
" dependantz, au roy catholique, ou aultre de fiens q.u'il luy plaira, avefques advis,
"confentement de fa faintetc; tant pour le voyr aujourdhuy le feul feurs appui de la

religion catholique, que pour rcconoiffance de gratuites favcurs que moy, et les miens
'" recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma plus grande neceffit6; et

" refguard

APPENDIX.

,' rerguard aufli an droift que luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,
,' je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si
" il ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
' coite de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon feul enfant, lequel
" eftantCatholique j'ay tousjours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de
' I'accepter, ou.faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.

,, Je layfie mon filz a la proteltion du roy, de prince, et dues de Lorrayne et

" de Guise, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recommende et son eltat en Efcofle, et mon
" droi& en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compte de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu par feu son pere,

et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en ceft en droit
a mon volonte.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe troveront par moy deues,
tien mis cause de doid eftre faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement payes et acquittes,
et tout tort et griefs repares par lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la conscience.
Oultre, &c. [Follow two or three paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
aided] Fai& au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour de- Mil cinq cens foi-
xant & dix sept.

After a blank page follows in the queen's hand:

Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamilton lequel fe montrera

le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus constant en religion, au jugement de Dues
"de Lorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay la
"charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condition de fe marrier ou
"allier en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of particular legacjs.

"Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droia quelle peut pretendre a la cont6 d' An-
" gous avant l'acort fait par mon commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et
" I comte de Morton, veu quil a eft6 fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,
' fur la prorreffe de fa tidelle affiifance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et be-
" soing d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos ennemis rebelles,
" qu' attemtprient contre fa vie, et pour cefi effect pris les armes, et ont porte les
"bannieres defploiees, contre nous, je revoque auffi toute autre don que je luy ay fait
"de cont6 de Morton fur promefies de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que
" la dite Conte foit rcunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes tra-
"hifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, quc en mon baniffement, et pourfuit

de la micnne l'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de fe jamays fervire de luy pour

" de luy pour la hayne qu'l aye a fes parents, la quclle je crains ne s'cflende jufques
"a luy, le connoiffant du tout affeclionne aux ennemis de mon droite en ce roy-
i aume, du quel il eR penconnaire.

" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et luy commande de-
tcnir pres de luy et s'cnfervir, etje luy layfie le bien du conte de Boducl son oncle,
e cn rcfpce qui'l eft de mon fang, mon fillcul, et ma efl laifl en lutellc par son perce
" Je declare que mon frere baflard Robert Abbe de S'. Croix na'en que par cir-
" convention Orkenay, et que le ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il, apret par
" larevocation que j'ay fayte dcpuis, et ct6 auffi faite d'avant la afgc de xxv. ans,

IC c;t

c ce que j'amois deliberer si il ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx

" eft;its je veulx done que OTkenay foit reune a la couronne comme une de plus
" neccffaires pour mon filz, et fans la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Lcs filles de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains revient la conte a la Cou.

c, ronne, si il luy pleft luy donner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'en
" iiennc ligne."

No. XI:. (Vol. 11. p. 121.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scots.

iA1rl. Lib. 37. p1 E A S E your majesty, I received your letter of the date the 12th of Novr. and
JL. . so. 'z6. in like manner has seen some part of the contents of one other of the fame

date, directed to Monfr. de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty the most Christian
king, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity; as by the one your high-
ness desires to know the true cause of my. banishment, and' offers unto me all favour
if I shall be innocent of the heinous sacs committed in the person of your husband
of good memory, so by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare unto me,
if your husband's murder could be laid jutly against me, that you could not follicit
in my cause, neither yet for any person that was participant of that execrable fad,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you fhbuld have any means to do it;
vour majeftv's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable, and your
desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and therefore that I should
with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer thereunto-is most reasonable, to the
end that your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence shall sufficiently
appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any matter, except in the
knowledge of the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility againit your
said husband, and not revealing of it, which I am assured was sufficiently known to him-
self, and to all that had judgment never so little in that realm; which also I was con-
flrained to understand, as he, that was specially employed betwixt the earl Morton,
and a good number of your nobility, that they might with all humility intercede at
your majesty's hand for his relief, in Such matters as are more specially contained in
the declaration following, which I am conitrained for my own jutification, by this
letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Notwithstanding that I am assured to
my grief, the reading thereof will not fnally offend your princely mind. It may
please your majfety to remember, that in the year of God 1566, the said earl of
Morton, with divers other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majefly,
and banished your realm for insolent murdercommitted in your majesty's own chamber,
which they alledged was done by command of your husband, who tnotwithftanling
affirmed that he was compelled by them to subscribe the warrant given for that effeCt,
howfoevcr the truth of that matter remains amongflt them ; it appertains not to me at
at this time to be curious ; true it is that I was one of that number, that heavily of-
fended against your majesty, and pafled in France the time of our baniflhment, at the
desire of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Christian king, to inter-
ceed that our offences might be pardoned, and your majelty's clemency extended'to-
wards us, albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was of the opinion,
that the said faa merited neither to be requifit for, nor yet pardoned. Always such

was

was the careful mind of his majesty towards the quietness of that realm, that the
dealing of that cause was committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was directed at that
time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom Al-
mvighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy estate and perpetual felicity;
the careful travel of the said de Movifir was so effecfual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I was permitted to repair in
Scotland, to deal with earls Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and fecrety Leding-
ton, in the name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Linfay, and re-
nmanent complefis, that they might make offer in the names of the said earl, of any
matter that might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your clemency to be
extended in their favours; at my coming to them, after I had opened the effec
of my meflage, they declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband had
been the occasion already of great evil in that realm, and if your husband ihould be
suffered to follow the appetite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effetss; for helping of such inconvenience
that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join
themselves in league and band with some other noblemen, resolved to obey your ma-
jefty as their natural sovereign, and having nothing to do with your husband's command
whatsoever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band and confederacy
with them, they could be content to humbly request and travel by all means with
your majefly for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed, they desired
to know the said earl's mind herein; when I had answered that he nor his friends,
at my departure, could not know that any such like matter would be proponit, and
therefore was not infiruated what to answer therein, they desired that I should re-
turn sufficiently initru&ed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of your son,
whom God might preserve; this meflage was faithfully delivered by me at New-
castle in England, where the said eail then remained, in presence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no farther dealing with your hus-
band, and to enter into the said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Molt Chriiflan king and the queen's majefly of
England by their ambassadors present, your majesty's gracious pardon was granted
unto them all, under condition always that they hould remain banifled forth of the
realmn, the space of two years, and farther during your majesty's pleasure, which li-
mitation was after mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so that im-
mediately' after the said earl of Morton repaired into Scotland to Quhittingaime,.
where the earl Bodveli and secretary Ledington come to him t what speech paflcd
thee amnongft them, as God shall be my judge, I knew nothing at'that time, but/
at their departure I was requested by the paid earl Morton to accompany the earl
loidvell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such answer as they mhould
obtain of your majesty, which being given to me by the said peribns, as God shall
be my judge, was no other than these words, " SchaW to the earl Morton that the
" queen will hear no speech of that matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit
that the answer might be made more fcnfible, fScretary Ledington said, that the carl
would ftifficiently undorfiand it, albeit few or none at that time undeiftand what
lali:id amongst them. It is known to all men, ala veill be.railling lctters pafl be-
twixt the said eail and Lidington when they become in divers fa6tions, as altb ane
buck fitt furtht by the miniflers wherein they affirm that the earl of Morton has
confculled to them, before hii death, that the earl .Bodvell come to Quthittingaime

to

to prepon the calling away off the king your hilfb.nd, to the which prop-fition the
laid earl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto such time he might
know your majefy's mind therein, which he never received. As to the abomina-
ble murder, it is known too by the dispositions of many persons that were executed
to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was execute by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band fi.r hat effeet ; by this
unpleasant declaration, the most part thereof known to yeurfel , and the remain-
der may be undcrtood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in torture,
and that are extant in the custody of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency
so far as may concern any faas does appear sufficiently to your majefy. and as for
my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherways charged therein; but as what would ac-
cufe the vefel that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such as
immoderately use the fame. As for the fpccial cause of my banishment, I think
the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the
earl of Mlorton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have confefleo before
he died, and would not be induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part
th.reof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punishment
1 should deflrve I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful every ilk gentleman should be of hi' fame, reputation, and honour, and how
far every ilk man (hould abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to n-e to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwith-
fianding all the injuries I was conitrained to receive at his hand all the time of his
government, and for no o.lier cause, but for (hewing of particular friendship to par-
ticular friends in the time of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now
to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff, be such
kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always for my own part, I have
been banished my native country those three years and four months, living in anxiety
of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and defponit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my last troubles at
the desire of Mons,. de Movifir, attended to know your majesty's pleasure, and to
await upon what service it should please your majesty for to command. Upon the
8th of April inft. your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I hould retire myself where I pleated, I de-
clared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform that desire, until such time
as I ihould receive it from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to dired me, until such time as I should have received further information
from you. Upon this occasion and partly by permiflion, 1 have taken the hardrefs
to write this present letter, whereby your majelty may understand any part of my
troubles pals, and strait present. As to my intention future, I will never deny that
I am fully resolved to spend the reft of my days in your majesty's service, and the
king your son's, whereloever I shall be direced by your majesty, and for the better
performing thereof, if so (hall be your majesty's pleasure, to recommend the tryal
of my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding narration, to the
king your (on, with request that I may be pardoned for such offences as concerned
your majefly's service, and var common to all men the time of his les aige and per-
donit to all, except to me, I should be the bearer thereof myself, and be direced
in whatsoever service it should please your majesty for to command. Most humble
I beseech your majesty to confider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that

I may
84

$5

I may have means to fe:ve your majefly according to the sincerity of my meaning,
and so expegting your majesty's answer, after the kiring your hand with all humility,
I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 140.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr Archibald Couglas his ambaffidor

in England, Ocober, 1586.

Eferve up yourself na langer in the earnest dealing for my mother, for ye havecott. I,
done it too long; and think not that any your travellis can do goodxe if hir y.

fe C b.

b: takin, for then adeu with my dealing with thairne that are the special inftrumentisA ,1Oi-irial
thairof: And theirfore, gif ye looke for the contilicuance of my fa'lour towartisi.i tl.e ki,j's
you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in th:s cate, but reade my letter wretten to W-il-hand.
li.m Keith, and conform yourself quhollie to the contentis thairof. and in this re-
qteift let me reap the fru.tis of youre great credit there, ather now or never. Fair-
well. October I586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in England, probably from fecre-

tary Maitland. Nov. 27, I586.
BY your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no pleasant fubj&ct hisA copy in the

majesty conceives well of your earnefinefs and fidelity in your negotiations, ascollet. of fir

alfo,of Nr. Arch.bald's aacivity and diligence, whom you so greatly praif_ and rccom-A. Dick. Vl.
mend. I wish the iflue correspond to his majesty's opinion, your care and traveli,A. fol. 219.
a:d his gr at diligence as you write. His rnajety takes this rigorous proceeding
agaifift his mother deeply in he, rt, as a matter greatly concerning fim both in ho-
nour and otherwise. His highnefles acaions and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of
what moment he esteems it. There is an ambaffade shortly to be direcfed, wherein
will be employed an earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will de, end the
continuance or dissolution of the amity and good intelligence between the princes
of this isle. In the mean season, if farther extremity be used, and his majesty's suit
and requeit disdained, his highness will think himfclf dishonoured and contemned
far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive his majesty's disposition
by his letter to you, which you fliall inrpart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal accord-
inig thereto. I need not to recommend to you care, concerning your master's ser-
vice both in weil and in honour. As you and your colleague Ihall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your affection to your mailer. [
am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Ar-
chiba'd, whose friends here make great account of his professed devotion to the
queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majefly her Ton. Farther 1 am con-
ltrained to remit to next occasion, having scarce time to Icribble there few lines
(which of themselves may bear witness of my haltc.) Wiihing you a prosperous
ifue of your negotiation, 1 commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Novr. 27'h, 1586.

VOL. I[.

Yy

T-Ei

TIHE people, and all estates here, are so far moved by the r'gorous proceedings

again ft the queen, that his majesty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations against them, and imprecations against the queen of
England.

No. X1V. (Vol. II. p. I43.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

16 oCa. ,6. 6 LEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the date the 28th of September,
From the Ori- JL the 5th of OLcober, which was the fame day that I directed Wrm. Murray to-
ginal in the wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates, your
callet. of majesty may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un-
fir A Dick. to, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in the said letter befor
Vol. B. ful. the receipt thereof, which by these presents I must repeat for answering of the
3'2. faidis. As to the firfr, so far as may concern the interceed ng for the queen your ma-

jerfy's mother her life, I have dvers times and in every audience travelled with this
queen in that matter, specially to know what her full deiermination must be in that
point, and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this proceed ng against
her by order of justice was no lets aga;nft her mind, than against their will that
loved her best: As towards her life {he could give no answer thereunto, until such
time as the law hath decl!red whether she was innocent or guilty. Herewithall it
was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a number of the affociants that
earnestly pressed her that the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so
long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this realm be in
quiet, neither her life, neither this state in assurance, and in the end they used this
protestation that if he would not in this matter follow their advice, that they should
remain without all blame whatsoever should fall out; whereupon she had granted
them liberty to proceed, least such as had made the request, might hereafter have
charged herself with inconvenience if any thould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both papist and pro-

teftant has behaved them, as it hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers
refpeSs, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived against them,
the o:hcr upon zeal and care that they will be known to have for preservation of
their sovereign's life and state in this perrclous time, upon consideration whereof,
I have been constrained to enter into some dealing with both, wherewith I made
her majesty acquainted; the protestants, and such as in other matters will be known
to bear no small favour unto your majesty's service, hath prayed that they may be
cxcufcd from any dealing in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have
avowed, and by their filecc r to their Covcreign requested for, and that before my
comin' in this country ; if they should now otherwilc do, it woull produce no bet-
ter effr'c1 but to make them 'iibjcLt to the accufaiion of their sovereign, when it
fhurld please her to do it, of their i conflancy, in giving coun iel whereby they
nmiht incur the danne r f ill coullccllrS , and be consequent worthy (,f punifhineit.
Such of the papils, as I did deal with, went immediately, and told her maji sty
what I hlad fpokein to them, who albeit file underflood the matter of before, sent
for me and declared to me my own fpccch that I had uttered to them, willing me

for

for the weil of my maifter's service to abflain from dealing with such, as were not
yet sufficiently moved to think of my master as file did. I craved leave of her ma-
jefty, that I might inform them of your majesty's late behaviour towards her, and
the frate of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave her consent. At
my late departure from court, which was upon the 5th of this instant, and the day
after that the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majesty to go
northward to Fothringhame, it was her pleasure to promise to have further speech in
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to give full answer accordi.ng to
your majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I had proponit in name
of your majesty. As to the 2d part concerning the aflociation, and desire that the
promise made to the mater of Gray concerning )our majeiiy's title may be fulfi!leJ ;
it appears by the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the q eftion that may
bring your majefly's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said
letter confidered, which I take to have proceeded f r lack of reading of the ast of
parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to the said mafiler,
and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise against your said title, except that an
opinion flould be conceived by there lords of this parliament that are so vehement at
this time against the queen your majesty's mother, that your majesty is, or may be
proved hereafter assenting to her proceedings, and some that love your majesty's ser-
vice were of that opinion that too earnest request might move a ground, whereupon
suspicions might grow in men so ill-affecled in that matter, which I tho't might be
helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of your majesty's innocence at
this time, and by reason that good nature and public honefiy would constrain you to
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with itself, without any fur-
ther, foire suspicion that might move ill affeled men to doubt. In my former let-
ters 1 humbly craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws, might be
moved to advise with the words of the association, and the mitigation contained in
the ad of parliament, and withall to advise what suspicious effets your majesty's re-
quest might work in there cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might
be best moved to receive reason; and upon all there confiderat;ons they might have
formed the words of a declarator of your majesty's innocence to be obtained in this
parliament, and failing thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame effed
that might best serve for your majesty's service, and for my better information. Al-
beit this was my simple opinion, I shall be contented to follow any diredion it shall
ILafe your majesty to give; I have already opened the substance hereof to the queen
of this realm, who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to
d(al therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind.
This being the Tum of my proceedings in this matter, besides the remainder, contained
in other letters of several dates, I am constrained to lay the whole open before your
majesty, and to humbly pray that full information may be sent unto me what further
to do herein, in this middle time, while I hlall receive more ample direEtion I
lhall pioceed and be doing according to such direction as I have already received.
And Io, mort gracious sovereign, wishing unto your majesty all happy fucccfs in
your :flfiirs, I humbly take my leave from London, this l 6th of Or 1586. Your
mliijetfy's mnoft humble and obeat servant.

Y y 2

87
A me-

APPENDIX,

A memorial for his majesty by the malter of Gray.

a. 6 T will please your m jefty, I have tho't meeter to set down all th:ngs as they oc-

,Jan: ·

·6 l cur, and all advertilements as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.

in his ogn I came to Vare the 24th of Dec'. and sent to W"i. Keith, and Mr. Archibald
hand in the Douglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they did at their audience. She pro.
colleEt. of fir mifed the queen your majesty's mother's life should be spared till we were heard.
A. Dick. Vol.The 27th, they came to Vare to me, the which day Sir Robt. came to Vare, where
A. fol. 2zz. they shewed us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but for that the

discourse of it is tet down in our general letter, i remit me to it, only this far I will
teitify unto your majesty that Vv ". Keith hath used himself right honelily and judly
till our coming, respeCting all circumfiances, and chiefly his colleague hi3 dealing,
which indeed is not better than your majesty knows already.

THE zgth day of Decr. we came to London, where we were no ways friendly

received, nor after the honcft fort it had pleated your majeliy use her amnbafladors,
never man sent t) welcome or convey us. The fame day we unuerffood of Mr.
de Bellevre his leave taking, and for that the custom permitted not we sant our
excuses by IMr. George Young.

THE lit day of JanrY, Wi. Keith and his colleague according to the custom

sent to crave our audience. We received the answer conta ned in the general letter,
and could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done that day your majesty
has it in the general, yet we was not out of expectation at that time albeit we re-
ceived hard anlwers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our conferrence was, as

is set down in the general. I remarked this, that he that day fa:d plainly the de-
taining of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that fle pretended a fucceflion to
this crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majefy as ye shall hear a
little after.

THE 9th we speak with the French ambassador, whom we si, d very plain in

making to us a wife discourse of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we
thanked him in your majefly's name and opened such things as we had to treat with
this queen, save the last point, a- more largely set down by our general.

ITr is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's advised me, that Bellievre his

negotiation was not effcltual, and that the relident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bcllievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chalteauneuf his
servants taken with his wlhole papers and pacquets, which lie was fending in France,
fur that they charg" him with a colfl)iracy of late againit the queen here her life.
It is alledged his lervant has co, felled the matter, but whom I li,1dl trult I know
not, but till I fie proof I fihll account him an i.oncft manr, (or indeed so lie ap-
pears, and one (without doubt) who hath been very inflant in this matter. I shew
hiim that the que.en and call of Lcicefler had (desired to fpeaLi with me in private,
and craved his opilioll; hle gave it freely that he tho't it imcctc(t, I (hcw him the
lealoll why I cotInllnuin.;itc that to hin), for that I 1hid been 'uf-pec:led by lonie of
her majelty's frieiics il l'rance to hive done evil offites in her fcivice, tlit he should
I.c ity witinefs that ny carnlelt de ling in this Ihoulld be ia fulficicnt tcflitioly that
ali was lyce, and that this knave Nauc who now had betr(ayed her, had in that done

evil

evil offices; he desired me, feeing file saw only with other folks eyes, that I (hould
no ways impute it to her, for the like lhe had done to himself by Naui his perfua-
fiun. 1 answered he should be my witness in that.

THE 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, whi h we got the loth day; at

the sirss, ihe said a thing long looked for should be welcome when it comes, I
would now fee your master's offers, I anfwcred, no man makes offers but for fume
cause; we would, andl like your majefly, firit know the cause to be extant for which
we offer, and likewise that it be extant till your majefly has heard us. I think it be
extdnt yet, but I will not promise for an hour, but you think to flift in that furt. I
anwlered we mind not to shift, but to offer from our sovereign all things that with
reason may be; and in special, we offered as is set down in our gener.l, all was re-
fuled and tho't nothing. She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord adm:ral, and chamberlain, and very despitefully rcpeated all
our cofl'frs in pretence of them all. I opened the last part and said, Madam for what
re!pect is it that men deal againit your person or eflate for her cause ? She al;fwered,
iectute they think the shall lucceed to me, and for that fle is a papist, appearingly
fnid I both the causes may be removed, Ihe said flie would be glad to understand it.
it MaIam, said I, all that he has of right of fucceflion were in the king our fove-
reign'i perlfn, were not all hope of pa;ifis removed. She answered I hope so.
'I'llel Madam I thiink the que.n his mother liall willingl, demit ali her rights in
i:is perion. She anlwered lhe hath no right, for (he is declared un ble. Then I
said, if fle have no right, appearingly the hope ceases alr, ady, so that it is not to be
!earel that any man attempt for her. The queen answertd, but tthe papists allow
Int our declaration; then let it fll, fays i, in the king's person by her aflignation.
'I'he carl of Lcicftcer anrfwzred, She is a prifoncr, how can The demit. I anfAered
tlc (lemiflion is to her fen, by the advice of all the friends she has in Europe, and
in cjfe, as God forbid, that anly attempt conttit the queen here away, who shall
palty with her to prove the demiflion or fifignation to be ineffl' fual her lon being
opl)oite party and having all the princes her friends for him, having bonded for the
c.icac) of it with his majesty ol before. The queen ma!e as flbe could not compre-
htn;l my meaning, and fir kob' opened the matter again, fle yet made as tho' tlie
ultdertloo(d not. Sio :he carl of Lcicelter answered that our meaning was, that the
k;lig should be put in his mother's place Is it so, the quet l antwered, then I put
minI;lf in a wolfe calf tihan of before; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own
throat, aid for a dutchy, or an earldom to yourl'lf, you or such as you would caule
foiuc of your dieferate knaves kill ne. No, by God, he shall never be in that place.
] ;lnl'wered he craves nothing of your majelty but only of his mother. The earl of
Lcic:flcr anli\ered thit were to make hill party to the queen my mifirefs. I said,
Ire will 1b falr nm e pa.rly if he be in her place thio' her death. ihe would flay no
lo(l, r, but said ihe would not have a worse in his mother's place. And laid, tcll
)'ill kinrig what good I have done for himn in holding the crown on his head ftrin
: e Was bo(in, and tlhat I miidl to keep the league that now lands betiween us, a;id
il Ine lb; ik it f(iall be a double fault, and with this iinded to have bidden uIs a
flit wll; but we clfheuit. And 1 speak craving of her that her life mnay be lisa e.l
fi:r 15 ldays; fin rcfu!ed. S r Robt craved for only eight days, she lrsid not (or
11 Ih,,: r; ;Ild fio !'cid hle away. Your majefly fees we have declivtred all we hl.il
Ir filfcrs, but all is for nuthing, for lhe and her councel has laid a cteiniiiiitiori
lthat they miind to follow forth, and I fte it comes rather of her council than her-

Iel t,

89

felt, which I like the worse; for without doubt, fir, it flall cut off all frienlfthip
ye had here. Altho' it were that once they.had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themlelves, that they have meddled with your mother's blood, good faith
they cannot hope great good of yourfclf, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further
your majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I proponit, if th.y had
meaned well to your majesty, they had used it other \ife than they have done, for
reason has bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something to speak in
this matter, because we look fiurly our letters shall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their determination, altho'

the queen again and the earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me in particular;
I mind not to speak, nor ihall not; but afluredly shall let all men fee that I in par-
ticular was no ways tyed to England, but for the respect of your majefly's service,
So albeit, at this time, I could not effcauate that I desired, yet my upright dealing
in it shall be manifefled to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave audi-
ence, where we mind to use sharply our infiructions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than
the French ambaflador has said for his master.

So I piay your majesty confider my upright dealing in your service, and not the

effe-q, for had it been double by any I might have here had credit, but being I came
only for that cause I will not my credit shall serve here to any further purpose.
I pray God preserve your majesty and iend you a true and sincere friendship. From
London this 12th of Jan. 1586.

I understand the queen is to fend one of her own to your majefly.
To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and secretary to his majefry,

from the master of Gray.

12th Jan. a Y lord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to his majesty, whereby your
1i 86, an Ori- lordship {hall understand how matters goes here. And before all things I pray
ginal in the your lordfliip move his majelty to refpeR my diligence, and not the effct in this
collet. of fir negotiation, for I fwcar if it had been for the crown of Enpland to myself I could
A. Dick. Vol. do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the world shall fee
A. fol. 17. th.t I loved England for his majesty's service only. I look shortly to find your lord-

lhip friend as ye made promnfe, and by God 1 flall he to you if I can. Win. Keith
and I desired, if matters had gone well, to have run a courle that your lordship milit
have here been in credit and others disappointcd, but now I will do for you as for
myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in conscience they mean not honlef-
ly to the king our fovercign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is gone
or shortly to go, therefore, my lord, without all kind of scruple I pray you to advifc
him the best is not this way. They fly here, that it has been said by one who
heard it from you, that )c desired not the king and England to agree, becaufc it
would rack the noblemen, and gave an example of it by king James the fourt, I
answered in your name that I was aflured you never had fijoken it. Mr. Archibald is
the fpeakcr of it, who I aflure your lordship has been a poilon in this matter, for they
lean very mickle to hiis opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king will
be filin to deal this way, either by fair means or neceflity, (o that cwhenl he deals this
courfc he is iflurcd to be wclcome ; to fct down all llat is pilt of the like purpolCs,

it
9°

it would consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting. There is
a new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambalfador resident three of his men taken, but I think in the end it shall prove no-
thing. Mr. Stafford, who is ambaflador for this queen in France, is touched with
it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our negotiation, that
all this council would not move this queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's
blood, till this invention was found forth. I remit all other things to theinclofed.
We minded to have sent to his majesty a discourse, which we have set down of all
our proceedings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized that the bearer
is to be truflant by the way for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our own coming;
this I have put in a privy part beside the pacquet We shall I think take leave on
Fryday the 13th day, where we mind exactly to follow the rigour of our inftruc-
tion-, for it cannot fland with the king's honour that we fay less then the French
ambaflador, which was, le roy mon mailtre ne peult mons faire que fe refentir. So
that about the 24th I think we shall, God willing, be at home, except that some ltay
come which we look not for. The queen and the earl of Leicester has desired to
tibak with me. I refused save in prerence of my collegues, by reason I fee a de-
termination which particular credit cannot help, and Icrave no credit but for that
cause. It will please your lordship retire the inclosed from his majesty and keep it.
t'o after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, 1 commit you to God.
From London the 12th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvil.

T may please your majesty, since the direcion of our former letters, we had au- zoth Jan.
ience, and her majesty appeared to take our overtures in good part in presence 1586. An

(,f her council; alhe.t no offence would take place with them, having taken rcfoli- Onginal in
tion to proceed with extremity, not the less it pleated her majesty to desire us to flayi '1 ,'w hand,
for two days on taking our leave, until she had advised upon our propositions; fincei1 the collct.
which time her majesty is become more hard by some letters (as we are informed) Vol' A. soli
has come from Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty takes not 8
this matter to heart. as we know the contrary in effect, and had of before removed
the lile opinion out of her majesty's mind, which by sinister information was cre-
dited, their reports ha, hindered our commission, and abused this queen, fearing in
like manner we shall be flayed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well enough known to all men
how heavily your majesty takes there proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they
lhave by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our negotiation.
\s alto Allynour Stewart is to be directed in their party, by our knowledge, w lo
hias awantyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we willed hill
t) delifc from this dealing. faying it does harm, and he is not meet for that purpoll',
Icmitting to your mijelty's good direcrion to take order herein as we illall be anflv.r-
llce to your majetly not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth is, the
iniadcr of (rhayc ha, behaved himtelf very rightly and dilcreetly in this charge, and
\eil taylc with be divers in their parties who were of before his friends. WV have
llelt bIchalding to the menfirals who has horn us best company, but has not been
tioublcd with others. Wy'zeme Kethe hath left nothing undone that he had in

clhage.

91

charge. As for mailer Archibald he has promised at all times to do his dewo)r,
whUic-in he ihall find true report made to your majelty, craving pardon of your ma-
jclly that I have been so t, dious, after I have kified your majefiy's hand I humbly
take ny leave. Praying God to grant your majcfly many good days and happy, in
whofl protection I commit your niajefty at London, the 2oth of Jan. 1586.

S I R,
Ai BLI Master George has not been in commission, he is not inferior in h;s

for ice to any of us, as well by his good advice and diligent care he takes for the
advancement, of your service, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the k'ng's majcfty, from the malter of Gray and fir Robert Melvill.

'P~LEASE it your majefy in the lad audience we had, since our la(t advertizement,

S(61. bn- b ty WXV". Murray, we find her majefly at the resuming our offers something mi-

()iginal in tigated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we g.It our leave, at
the coilet. oisur reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord of LeicefRer, fir Chriffopher
fir A. Dick. Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being pre'ent in the chamber, gave
Vol. A. fol. little {hare of any great contentment to have her from her former refiolut on, now
ICo. caffin in perplexity what (fh flould do, always we left her in t'at fate, and since

have daily prefced conferrence with the who!e council, which to this hour we have
not yet obtained. T1hi; day we have Cent down to crave our leave. The greatest
hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have here that
either yo r majesty deals fuperfcially in this matter, or that with t me ye may be
moved to digetl it, which when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we finl
anew that certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special message, they have made choi, e of fir Alexander Stewart to
try your highness's meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of theer pro-
ceedings, wherefrom no terror we can lay out unto him is able to divert him, he
has given out that he has credit with your majefly, and that he doubts not to help
this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
majefly A ill not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts shall give us here, if he
be not tane order with be'ore that he be further heard, and if so be that any other
be directed (as our intelligence gives us there (hall) our humble suit is to your ma-
jerry, that it may please your highness to hear of us what we find here, and at what
point we leave this matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the
causes whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your majesty for the
present to God's eternal protection, From London this a ift of Jan. 1586.

No. XV,
<i

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL

A P P E N D I X.
I had no opportunity of secing several of thefollowing Papers, till those /'ets of the

hijlory, to which they relate, were printed off. For this reason no references are
made to them there; but I have supplied that defed by mar/ing the particular pas-
fages in the hitory which theyferve to illuf/rate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 358. Line Io.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and lady

Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.

P 0 U N the 29 of Apryle I567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Mait-
U land dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson dotor in the laws, two of

the senators of the college ofjuflice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex-

ander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edenr; compeered Mr. Henry Kinrofle, pro-
curator for Jean Gourdoune countes of Bothwell, constitute be her for perfewing of
ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James erie Bothwell her husband
for adultry, committed be him with Befile Craufurde, the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the said erie, compeared Mr. Edmund Hay, who efter he
had pursued and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just
caus to purfew the said action, and obtained it, denyd the libell, and the said Mr.
Harric took the morne, the last day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The
quhilk day, having produced rome witnesses, he took the next day, being the x of
May, to do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk I of May, he produced some moe
witnefles, and renounced farther probatioune. After quilk, he desired a term to be
afligned to pronounce sentence. To whom the said commissars alfigned Setterday
next, the 3 of May, to pronounce sentence therein, fecundum alligata et probata,
quhilk accordingly was given that day in favour of the perfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl of Bothwell contra

his lady, for to have their marriage declared nul, as being contra(ced against the ca-
n"ons, without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within degrees defendand,
viz. ferdis a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a commiffioune
grantit to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognoce and determine it, and Rot. bishop
of Dunkeld, William bishop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glaf-

VOL. II. Z z gow,

goW, ant parson of Egelfhane, Mr. Alexan ler Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cook
chi.mcl!oi of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Jot-ne Manderflonne, chanon in Dunbar and pre-
bclndar ,f Peltune, or any ane of them. 'Ihis commiffione is datit 27 Aprile
156-, was preelnted to two of the saids commissioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfurd
and Mr. John Manderfioune on Setterday 3 May, by MVlr. Thomas lepburne patron
of Auldhamflocks, procurator for the erle of Bothwell, who accepted the delega-
tioune, and gave out their citation by precept, diretedt, Decano Chrifiianitates de
Hadingtorie, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. paroehie de Creichtoune, feu cuicunlq
alteri cappeilano debite requifitis, ser fimmoning at the said erles infianca, both of
the lady perfunally if she could be had, or otherways at the parofche kerk of COsekh-
toune the time of service, or at her dwelling place before w.itnefies, primo, fecundo,
tcrtio et pelemp:orie, unico tamen contextu plotuplice ediLto. And I keways to be
wirnefiLs in the said matter; mlex. bishop of Galloway, who did marry the said erie
anJ his lacy, in Halyreud-lioufe kirk, in Feb. 1555, fir John Bannatyne of Auch-
noule jullice clerk, Mrr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliot the queen's a !vocate, - Mr. Da-
vid Chalmers provost of Creichtoune and chancellor of Rots, Michael - abbot
of Melrofs, and to compear before the said judges, or any one of them, in St.
Geils ki:k in Edinr. on Monday the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators,
Upon the said 5 day, ir. John Manderftoun, one of the judges delegat only beinr
present compeared the fame procurators for both the parties that were'in the former

-r, ,.3^. ,;, 1process, iMlr. Edmund Hay ( articulatlie ) and some of the wit-
tle parenhc- neffes summoned produced, and received for proving the fame. The said procu
ii. ileible. rator renounced farder probatioune, and the judge afijgnle the morne, the

6th of May, ad publicandum produta, nempe depolitiones ipforum teflium. The
quhilk day, post publicatas depofitioncs praedictas, Mr. Hen. Kinrofre, procurator
for the lady instanter objecit objealiones juris generaliter, contra pro ducaI, in-
luper renunciavit ulteriori defenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum
hinc inde caufa, judex praediCus flatuit cratinum diem pro termina, ad pronunci-
andam fuam fententiam definituram, ex dedutis coram eo, in prafenti caufa et pro.
ccfli. Conform hereunto, on Wednefday.the 7th of May, the said judge-gave out
his sentence in favour ot the erle, declaring tie marriage to be, and to have been
null from the beginning, in refpeat of their contingence in hlo>d, which hindered
their lawful marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXXII. (Vol. I. p. 40I. line 6.)

QLueen Mary to Queen Elizabch.

MADAM,

C;t. Lib.Cal. A Lthough the necessity of my cause (which marketh me to be importune to you)
(:. iX. copy, do make you to judge that I am out of the wa)y, yet such as hlave not my
and. pIrol)bly passion, nor the refpetAs whereof you are prrfluatld will think that 1 do as my cause
a t:anllation. doth Icquire. Madam, I have not acculed yolz, ncither in words, nor in thought,

to have used yourfclf evil towards me. And I believe, that you hlave no want of
good underflanding, to keep you from per fwafion ;'goirlft your natural good jinti-
nation. But in the mean time, I can't chil'' (haviln miy

I fc1nr(c) hut p)rcCie ivery

evil furtherance in my matters, fiice my cOnmng hthcr. I ti)ltoi rt that I ladl fl-
ficicntly discoursed unto you the difcommnoditic, vli.ch this (lciy ripgncth tuiio

Die.,

me. And especially that they think, in this next month of Augufi, to hold a par-
liament against me and all my serva-nts. And in the mean time, I am flayed here,
and yet will you, that I should put myself forther into your country, (without fee-
inlg you) and remove me further from mine; and there do me this dishonour, at the
requcft of my rebels, as to fend commiflioners to hear them against me, as you
wold do to a mere subject, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have pro-
mifed you to come to you, and having there made my moan and complaint of these
rebels, and they coming thither, not as pofieffors, but as fubjets, to answer. I
would have besought you to hear my jufiification of that which they have falfly set
furth against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof, you might then discharge
your hands of my caufls, and let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if
I were culpable I would be better advis'd ; but being not so, I can't accept this dif-
honour at their hands, that being in possession they will come and accuse me before
your commiffiners, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think it to be against
your honour and confignage to do otherwise, I brfeech you that you will not be
mine enemy, until you may fee how I can discharge myself every way. And to
susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me; or at the least
to go into Scotland, with affurance'it.hat if there come any frangers thither, I will
bind myself for their'return without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to
do thus, I protest that I will not impute it to falfCood, if I receive Itrangers in my
country, without making you any other discharge for it. Do with my body as you
will, the honour or blame shall be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my
faithful servants may be succoured (tho' you gxou'd not so) by strangers, than to
susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in time to come, particular
commodity. There be many things to move me to fear that I shall have to do, in
this country, with others, than with you. Butforafmuch as nothing hath followed
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I have as lees to
,liLc, mny fortune, as to fee

k

it, and not find it. Further, it pleased you to give

licence to my fubjecs to go and co ne. This has h been refused by my lord Scroo;)
and Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, because I would not depart
hence to your charge, until 1 had answer of this letter, tho' I (hewed them that you
required my answer, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

'l'Iie one is to let you briefly undciftand, I am come to you to make my moan

to you, the which being heard, I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then
rceqlire your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to
(0;ol, that I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to

shave refpcat thereiint,) as my cafe requircth ; and to you, madam, firit of all, when

you Ghall have examined your confcicnce befbre him, and have hini for witners.
-And the other, which is to come further into your country, and not to come to
yoar presence, 1 will cltecm that as no favour, hut will take it for ihe contla;, y)
oblivint it

a

s a thing forced. In the mran time, I beseech yti., to return to mic

,.Y lorhdl Ilcrrics, for 1 can't he

withou t hi i, haly;in Olon of imv cotnrfal here, naid

>l'o) to fillf'r me, if it please you, witho ut ftirtl'.r d :lay, t') dc 'piTt henceC wlrit l r-
lucvcr it he out of this cotuntm v. I ;an firc you

s

will not dery mr.e this finpic re-
cieft' lor your honour's fake, 'eeing it doth not pie afi: you to ul vyour niatinl i noj,.

tiil rd
tow.lrds me otherwi, and ftccint' r!;at o(f mine nown accord , i nil como n h:it h.,
let tme deplit ags iIn, with yoms. And if Cod pcmliit imy cal:; to ficccd t 'l, 1

Zz z (h:1 il

95

bhall be bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't blame you. AS
for my lord Fleming, feeing that upon my credit you have suffered him to go home
to his house, I warrant you he {hall pass no further, but shall return when it shall
please you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. Eutfrom
Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Fleeming shall be in the Tower. For they
which are within it, will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't assure them of
yours: no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more refpea to my servants and to my estate, than to my life. Good lifter, be
of another mind, win the heart, and all ihall be yours, and at your commandment.
I thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the
serpent, that floppeth his hearing, sorI am no inchanter, but your fifler, and natural
cousin. If Caesar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint of an advertiser,
.he had not so died; why should princes ears be flopped, feeing that they are paint.
ed so long ? Meaning, that they should hear all and be well advised, before they an.
fwer. I am not of the nature of the bfilifk, and less of the chamelion, to turn
you to my likeness, and tho' I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently arm'd with constancy and with justice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to use it well with long and hLppy life. From Carlile, the sth of
July 1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 403. line I2.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop and

September 3d, i 568.

fir F. Knollis,

Cott. Lib. Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordihips, I am informit by James Borth-
Cal. C. an -

0- wick, lately come from the queen's majeffy your foverane, that it is fchawin

riginal in his to her highness, I fhuld have ridden in Crawfurdmure, fen my last cuming into this
own hand. realm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants. And that Ifuld have caufit, or been

of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her majesty's
fubje6cs.

MY lords, I thought it right needful because your lordships is, be your foverane,

commanded to attend lupon the queen's majesty my mistress, so having daily access
in thir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lordships will,
for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife had knowledge of ony

Scottifman's rydiog in England, to do the fubjets thereof hurt in bodies or goods, fcne
the siege of Leith; and as I understand it ahall be furnd true, that gif ony sic open
hurt be done, it is by the queen my sovereign's disobedients, and that I have not
ridden nor hurt no Scottifhman, nor commanded any hurt to be done to them, fen
my coming from the queen's majesty of England, it is well kend, for that never ane
will complain of me.

I HAve done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the earl of Murray 'has done,

and will be loathefi to do them any harm than he will. Except the queen's ma-
jefly your fovcreign, command sic false reports to be tryit, quhereof this is altogid.
der an inventit leafing, her grace fall be trublir, and tyne the heart: of true men

here,

96
~perhaprsfir.

here, quhom es ic report fall be made, that baith would serve hir, and may, bet-
ter than they unworthy liars.

MY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your Sovereign is not contented of

this bruit, that there should ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of Chat-
tierault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
inajefty your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is true indeed, her
grace self is all the wyitt, and the counfall that will never let her take order with
my maiftrefs cause. For that our sovereign havand her majesty's promise, be writ-
ing, of luff, friendship, and affifance giffneed had so requirit, enterit that realm,
upon the 16 day of May, fen that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse times to declare {he would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in
peaceable possession of this realrne, and when I required of her majesty, in my maif-
trefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her special trust was The
wold) according.to her former promises, or otherwise gif her counfal wold not con-
lent, (as I show her grace I fdnd diverse repugnant) then that he would permit her
to pals in France, or to some other prince, to seek support, or failing hereof,
(quhi:k was agains all reason) that hfe would permit her to return in her awin coun-
trie, in sic fimpil manner as ihe came out of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir,
of her honour, would not be refufit, fecand that she was corned in her realm upon
her writings and promises of friendship. And ficlike, I said to her highness, gif
my maifirefs had the like promire of her nobility and estates, as she had of herself,
I should have reprovit them highly, gif thay had not condefcendi.t to one of thir
three, and so I fay, and so I write, that in the warld it shall be maift reprehendable,
gif this promise taketh not other good effect, nor yet it does. Notwithstanding, I
get gud answer of thir promises of friendship made to my sovereign, and to put her
grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary working by
Mr. Middlemore, directit from her highness to stay the army that cuift down our
houses. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pretendit parliament, promised
twenty days before the time to myself to have caused it been difchargit. And yet
contrary to this promise, have they made their pretendit manner of forfaulture of 31
men of guid reputation, bishops, abbottis, and barronis obedient filbjets to our so-
vereign, only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our sovereigns cause was taken upon hand be the

queen's majesty of that realm, an hundred thousand pounds Scots worth of her awin
true fubjets geir, under the color of their law, groundit upon their false, treason-
able, ftowin, authority.

THE murders, the opprefflions, the burnings, the ravishing of women, the de-

ftruction of policy, both ecclesiastical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my
former writings I said it was lamentable to ony christian man to hear of, except God
gifgrace, the profeflion of the evangile of Jesus Christ profeffit be your prince,
counfall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity that has stand betwixt the
realms, many of my countrymen will doubt in this article, and their proceedings
puttis my self in fanA Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realm, upon -luhais promise and

honour my maiftrefs came there, as J have said, will leave all the French writings,
and French phrafcs of writings, quhilks amongis them is -over meikle on 'baith the
didcs unfit, and plainly, according to theauld true custom of Ingland and Scotland,

lquhcreiz

97

qiherein be a word promiat truth was observed, promise, in the name of the eter-
lial God, and upon the high honour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of
Itlgland, quhercof (he is defcendir, and presently wears the diadem, that {he will
put my maiftrefs in her awin country, and cause her as queen thereof in her autho-
rity and firength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day with-
in two months, at the farthest, as we underhand this to be our weill, fua will
we, or the maifl part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen, and their
evil French phrases togidder. And therefore, and for the true perpetual friendlhip
of that realm, will condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God,
keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men can condescend
upon, for the weill of this haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your sovereign, quhilk I shew to your lordships felfis, both in religion, in
the punishment of the earl Bothwile, for the queen's last husband's slaughter, and
for a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

DOUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and friendful work-

ing, as may gif us occasion baith to forget Middlemore, and this late pretendit par-
liament, we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where
The is, under the promise offriendfhip. As I have baith Eaid, and will ever affirm,
made be your sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her grace's coming in that realme,
and seek the help and moyen of French, or Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable
and false pretendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire your lordships confider, that it is he, that maif desires the

amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to continue, and of a poor man best cause has,
that writes this.

MY brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lordships commun-

ing with him, it appearit to him, your mind was we ihold susser the earl of Mur-
ray to work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's
majesty, and her highness wald fee it reformit. My lords, her majelty will be over
meikle troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already. For I am sure,
gif reason and juflice may have place, our maiftrefs, and we her fubjeas, have re-
ceived express wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds tferling, in the time
of this unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes, comes, now
a days, io slowly, and the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle pratis'd,
I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordships would fua
mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
sic advcrtifcmcnt hereof, as your good wisdoms shall find in this cause meet. It
will be true and friendful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases, nor
boafling, and finding little other eftfc, that will cause us to hold away the French-
men. This is plainly written, and I d fire your lordlhips plain answer, for in
truth and plainncfs langeft continues gud frienclfhip, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang continue, and have your lordflips in his keeping. OflfDumfreis,
the 3d day of Septembcr 1568.

Your lordships at my power

to command leifully

i-i F. R RI S.

99

Queen Mary to Q_ Elizabeth,

D
A AM E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, d'une mefme date; 27 Au g i16g.

'q , l'une, ou v, us faites mention de l'excufe de Moist. de Murra pour tenir fonCutt. Lib.
pictendlu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que jeCal. 1. an 0-
i'clois perfuadee n'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant a n'ofer donner commission deriginal.
vecir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblesse alors, je vous refpons,
ceu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatre d'avantage, qui euflTnt aufli bien dit leur opinion
hors de parlement, qui n'a este tenu tant pour cette effect, mais pour faire ce qu'ex-
preflirment nous avions requis efire empefches, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjeas
pour m'avoir eltes Pidelles, ce que je m'affurois, jufques a hie, avoir eu en promefie
de vous. par Ja lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup e Mailtre Knoleis vous induire a ire
contre .ulx, voire, a le, enfayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal pris, j'en
luis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je
l'ay si divulguement affuray que pour vengeance que j'en difiraffe, si non mettre dif-
ference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens sinceres. Dans votre lettre auffi
datee du Ionim d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. " I-think your adverse party, upon

mvy sundry former advices will hold no parliament, at all; and if they do, it

" {hall be only in form of an afiembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm,
" and in what fort; for otherwise, if they shall proceed in manner of a parliament,
" with any a&t of judgement against any person, I ihall not, in any wife, allow

thereof; and if they ihall be so overseen, then you may think the fame to be
" of no other moment, than the former procedures; and by such their rash man-

ner of proceeding, they flall most prej dice themselves; and be assured to find
me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay contremand6 mes

ferviteurs, les faifant retirer, fouffrant felon voftre commandement d'etre fauflement
nommes traitres, par ceulx, qui le font de vray; et encore d'etre provoques par
efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de roes gens et lettres, et au contraire vous etes in-
formee que mes subjects ont evahis les voftres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'est pas
homme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont elies mes rebelles depui. le
commencement; enquir6s vous, s'ils n'efioient a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois offri
relpondre de fa fiontiere, ce qui me fut refuse, ce qui m'endevroit asses defcharger,
neanmoins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelit6, et de leur falfite, s'il vous mefayte
lonn r le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier je commanderay mes fubjecas les pour-
Ifivre, ou si vous voules que ce foit Ics vofires, les miens leur ayderont; je vous
lpic m'cn mander voftre volontc, au refte mes subjects fidelles fcront refponfables a
lotu cc que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni le voftres, ni les rebelles, defpuis que
ine confeillates le. faire retirer. Quiant aux Francois, j'cfcrivis que l'on m'en fit
nulle pourfuite, car j'efpeiois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,-je ne fceu
si Ic dliil aura en mes lettres mais, je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fsay chose du
monde de leur venue, que ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
lu monde, et ne le puis croire pour celt occasion, et si ils si font, c'eft fans mon fccu
iii confli'tment, Pmurquoy je vous fuplplic ne me condamner fans m'ouire, c,,r jo
fiis prcft dc tenir. tout ce que j'ay offert a Mefetr Knolei., et vous assure que voftre
:mmitc, qu'il vou. plelf n'ofrir, fcra rescue avant toutes les choses du nonde, quanl
Irance fervit la pour prcefr Iclur retour In ccffe coniition, clue prenies Incs affili cs en
miien, cn foeur, en bonne amni, comnme ma F'rance eft en vous ; mais une chole feule

c renlde confule j'av rant dc'cnemis qu'ont votre oreille, laquclle ne pouvant avoir.
par parolle, toutcs mcs aclions vous font dcfguifcs, ct falfcmrent aportecs, par quoi

8 il

A PPENDII.'

il m'efi impoiTable de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pou
deftruite voftre bonne volonte de moy par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous
faire entendre ma sincere et bonne affection, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que
rnes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir,
n'entres en jalousie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire que votre bonne grace;
je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et apres
vous avoir baifee les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en fante, longue et heu-
reuse vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques voftre
bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d' Aouft.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 68. line 9.)

Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, r580-r.

SIR,

Cot. Lib. H A V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter on the 25th of
Calig. . 6. J the lars direEted unto his lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with

the king and his council, in your second audience, wherewith having made her
majefly acquainted, she seemed somewhat to mijlike, that you should so long defer to
dealfar the enlargemnent of Empedocles. But 1 made answer in your behalf, that I
thought you were directed by the advice of the said Empedocles friends, in the fol-
liciting of that caure, who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal there-
in, with most effCe, and best success, with which answer her majesty did in the
end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

YOUR putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won at her majefly's

devotion, was at firfi interpreted to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
feemeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man,
or at least kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently proved, was only'to advance
the queen's liberty, and reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you may
use to good purpose there, shall partly give you rome light; there is no man here can
be persuaded that he will change his purpose, for so small advantage, as he is likely
to find by it, and therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
filing, as I have already written to you. The prince of Orange ftnding, I fear
will not be in time that it may do any good; for bfidcs that these people are in
themfeves flow in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present, so great, their
slate so confuftd, and the prince's authority so small, that he cannot so soon take or-
der in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or careless in the
matter, having, more than three weeks past, sent one about it, from whom never-
thelefs I dq yet hear nothing. The letters, you desire should be written thither by
the French minifiers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I
doubt not, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I shall have them to fend you by
the next. And so I commit you to God. At Whitehall the third of February 1580.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
This letter is an original, and in some parts of it wrote in cyphers, and explaintd by

another hand. ]iy L;,pedocles is undejitood Morton, hy F il!enarius het king of Scots,
D'/Aiubigny is marXed thus o- o. 3

3 Feb. 1580.
Sundry Notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to be

better minifefted, being now thought meet to be in convenient fort
used, and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the king,
the nobility, and that state.

RS T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubigny was privyCott. Lib.
and acquainted with La Nave theking's mother's secretary, coming into Scot- Calg. C. 6.

land, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think andAn Otiginal.
citeem it an evil president for princes, that fubjees might have power to deprive
their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded, by any mean,
to defeat him, either of the present government of that realm, or yet of the posTef-
sion of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to him ; and
that for the accomplishment of that assurance, the king should have been advised and
drawn to have governed, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule
as governor of the prince, by commilfion from the queen his mother, untill the
kin's enemies were fupprefl d; after which time, D'Aubigny fhlould have power
given to eflablifh and relign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary
consent, whereby all such, as had before been in action against the queen or her
authority, might be brought to ifand in the king's mercy. And for that the king
mi.ht live in more surety, D'Aubigny should be declared both second person in fuc-
ceflion of that crown, and alSo lieutenant-general of Scotland, and that D'Aubigny,
before his departure out of France, received commission from the king's mother to
the eficcs remcmbred, or near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference
with the bi(hops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with Sir James Eaford, with which
pecions, and with the Duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent intelligence, and
by Sir J.!mes Baford he was advised to confer with the Lord John Hamilton be-
fore his replir into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one
John Hamilton to the said Lord John to excuse him in this part, alledging, that he
lidl forbear to come to him, leat thereby lie thould marr or hinder greater cffecs to
be executed by him in Scotland.

'IHAT before his conting into that realm, the nobility and country were well

(liclted ande united in good concord, with great love ltctwixt the king and nobility,
alnl alnonglt the noblefle, but he hath both drawn the king against sundry of tli
clicfecl of his nobility, that have been most ready and have expended their blool
and poll'cffiols to prcfcrve rcligion, and defend the king's person, his government and
cliate, and allo hath given occalions of great suspicions and offence to be cngcn-
i1(1cd betwixt the liin and his nobility, and especially with such as have bccn in
:li, n aleinilllt the irig's mother, and her authority, who by force anrl mrans of
t!: ;lidl com miflion and I rahitcc, fhouldl have been brought int molt' Cll:!','i'ci;is
i'. nlition; a;id who fioll may find tlhemtl'lvs in no fi;nll pr ll, w.lliL; l1t 1l-

.I., i le r's catr, lifelth llis prefcic' , and ioldCthl fuclh of tilc plOlil'il)l k )ry

1 ! i(,its ol lis ic'lnce, is hl prelc itly cll jo) ctli.
\r, .. 1 .

A la ai

T'11 A 1'

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great benefits done to

him and his realm, by the queen's majesty of England, but also to require the fame
with sundry signs of great unthankfulnefs, and wounding therewith the honour of
her majcfly, and thereby hath adventured to shake tle happy amity long time conti-
nued betwixt those princes.

AN'D whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good offers, to

have passed, and been done betwixt them: In which refpelf, the king and c uncil
having resolved to write to her majefiy, for her highness' better fatisfadtion in the
late negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had given order to the
king's secretary to frame that letter: He minding to break the bond of amity in fun-
der, willed the secretary to be lure that nothing Should be inserted in that letter,
whereby the king should crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut off all
lovingcourtefies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the said secretary may be
better learned, and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's proteEtion, Alexander

King presumed with that boldness to make his lewd harangue, and by his means
hath hitherto escaped chastisement and correction, due for his offence.

THAT Sir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the king's father, hath

been called into the realm by Lennox, without the privity of the king. And where-
as the said Sir James found in a green velvet desk, late the earl of Bothwell's, and saw
and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that murder, and
can befi declare and witness who were authors and executors of the fame; he is
drawn by Lennox to fupprefsthe truth, and to accuse such as he himself knoweth
to be innocent; and as by order of law, will be to found, if they may have due trial,
which, contrary to all justice, is byLennox means denied.

This is the charge again/f D'Azubigny), mentioned in the firegging letter by ?Waringham;
bat by Baford they mean Sir James Balfour.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. I02, line 18.)
The Scottish queen's offrs upon the effect of her liberty propounded by

her secretary Naw, November 1584.

Cott. Lib. H E queen my miflrefs being once well aflured of your najefty's amity,
Calig. C. 8. L I. WILL declare openly that she will (as it is finccrely her meaning) strait-
A copy. ly to join unto your Majelty, and to the fame to yield and bear the chief honour and

refpcLt, before all other kings and princes in Chriftcndom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere forgetfullncrs of all wrongs

which the may pretend to have been done unto her inz this realm, and will never, in
any fort or mnnner whatfoevcr, lhewoflencefor the fame.

3. SHE will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own particular name, as alfa

for her heirs and others dlecending of her for ever, your n .jelty for jult, true, and
lawful queen of England.

4, ,IX
; D

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as for ier said heirs, all

rights and pretences which she may claim to the crown of England, during your
majesty's life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all acts and lhews, by her heretofore made, of pretence to

this said crown, to the prejudice of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms
and stile of queen of England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord
and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may be expounded to turn

in her favour, and for her behoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and will
declare that she will never help and serve hrrfelf with it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life, by open force or other-

ways, any publick declarati n of her right in the succession of this realm, so as fe-
cret assurance be given unto her, or at the least publick prcmife, that no deciding
thereof shall be made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, during your
majesty's life, nor after your decease, untill such time as they have been heard there-
upon, in publick, free, and general aflembly of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not practice, directly or indiretly, with any of your majesty's sub-

jeSts, neither within nor out of your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or so-
reign, against your majesty and your estate, be it under preteAt of religion, or for
civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your fubjeas declared rebels, and
convicted of treason against you.

10. SHE will enter into the association, which was {hewed her at Wingfield

for the surety of your majesty's life, -so as there be mended or right expricated
rome clauses, which I will shew to your majesty, when I shall have the copy there-
of, as I have before time required.

11. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any war or trouble

against this state, and will renounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that refped.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being assailed by any civil or foreign war, she

will take part with your majesty, and will assist you in your defence with all her
forces and means, depending of herself, and with all her friends of Chriftcndom.

13. AND to that effet, for the mutual defence and maintenance of your majesty,

and the two realms of this isle, she will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
five, as shill be more particularly advised, and will perfwade as much as in her,
the king her son to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm;
and cfpccially the antient league between France and Scotland, in that which hiall
not be againfl this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good assurance, or secret de-

claration and acknowledgment of her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and
promise, that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm, (which she
prayeth God never to h .ppen) the just value of her dowry shall be placed for her
in lands of the revenue of the crown.

15. IFOR aflurance of her promises and covenants, she doth offer to abide hcr-

self in this realm for a certain time, (better hostage can she not give than her own
perlbn) which, so as flie be kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in
cars to escape secretly out of this country in tle sickly fate she is in, and with the
go<od order which your mnajefty can take therein.

A a a a 16. AND

Io3

16. AND in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and whole deliverance, to

retire herself at her will out of this realm, the said queen of Scots ihe will give sus-
ficient hostage for such time as will be advised.

17. IF flie abide in this realm, she will promire not to depart out of it, with-

out your licence, so as it be promised unto her that her state, in such liberty as shall
be accorded unto her, flall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryal to have at-
tempted against your life, or other trouble of your estate.

18. IF fie go into Scotland, she will promise to alter nothing there in the religion

which is now used there, fle being suffered to have free exercifc of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and further, to pull out every
root of new dvifion between the fubjeits, that none of the fubjedls of Scotland nlail
be sifted for his confcuence, nor constrained to go to the service of the contrary reli-
gicn.

19. SnIE will grant a general abolition of all offences done against her in Scot-

land, and things lhal! remain there as they are at this present, for that refpel, sav-,
ing that Ah:ch hath been done againfi her honour, which she meaneth to have re-
voked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation between the nobi-

lity of the country, and to cause to be appointed about the king her son, and in his
council, such as shall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the coun-
try, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majefly, in favour of the Scots lords

banished and refuged hither, upon their due submission to their princes, and your
mijefiy's promise to assist the said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with the advice and,
good counsel of your majcfty.

23. As she will pass nothing without the king her son, so doth she desire that

he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, for the greater and perfecier
afiLrance thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be efiablifhed to be found
and continue.

24. THE said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king her good brother, ac-

cording to the g',od aftfedion which he hath always thewed her, and hath been afreih
tctified unto me by Mons. de Manniflicre for this said treaty, will very willingly
intervene, and will assist her for the surety of her promises.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following the will of the
said king, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. IFOR other kings and princes of Chriftendolm, she will afny to obtain the

like of them, if for greater folcmnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
neceaflry.

27. SHE doth desire a speedy anfwcr, and final conclusion of the premises, to
the end to meet in time with all inconveniencics.

28. AND in the nocan ti:m:, the more to Iticngthen the s;iid treaty, ns made by

her of a pure ;and frank will, she dcfircth that temofitration be made of morne rc-
lca inc li t of iher c;l 'i viv,

Obljec( ons
o04

Objetions agalnft the Scottish queen, under secretary Walsinghame's

hand, November 1584.

H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill asseted to her majesty, and
therefore it cannot be but that her libtrty should bring peril unto her majefly.

'FHAT her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and other ill affected sub-
jeas, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as successor.

THATr as long as she ihall be continued in her majesty's possession, {he may

serve as it were a gage of her majesty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the
danger ihe may be thrown into, in cafe any thing mhould be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the offence of her majesty.
November } What course were fit to be taken with the queen of Scots,

1584. 5 either to be enlarged or not.

H E course to be taken with the said queen may be confidered of in three

o Lib,

degrees; either, C

1. To continue her under custody in that slate she now is.
2. To reflrain her of the present liberty the now hath.
3. OR to let her at liberty upon caution.
i. TOUCHING the first, to continue her under custody under that frate she now is;

it is to he confidered, that the princes that favour that queen, upon the complaint she
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with cornmiferation towards her, 'and pro-
mise to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose, her miniflers follicit
thcm daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquainteth them with her of-

lr: made to her majesty, which appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable
ior licr majesty, so as the refusal and rejecting giveth her friends and favourers cause
to think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground and rea-
ion, attempt somewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

IT is alto likely that the iaid queen, upon this refusal, finding her care desperate,.

will continue her practice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her
lc!ivery, btt to attain to the present possession of this crown upon her pretended
tid', as lice hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is nioft manifest by letters and
I(,ts intercepted, and liicfly by that late alteration of Scotland, which hath pro-
tr'icJ: altolcthcr by her dirceCion, whereby a gap is laid open for the malice of
:irl hli m;ijelty's enemies, so ;s it appearcth that this manner of keeping her, with

I:l.i nluml)r of pcrfnils is fle now hath, and with liberty to write and receive let-
tl'r;, ( lcilg dJuly confidlced is offclfive to the princes, the said queen's friends; ra-
iltl . chirGi!(.hle, tha;ln prol(l;ale to h r ,m ajefly; and fibjeCt to all such pracices as
;' v i':il li mil;ijclty's pc1lrfin or fitte, without any provision for her majesty's fhfcty,
.,tiii rtl l rcl no way to bc liked of.

2. I'OTUCITIN thle f'cConl, to riclrain her in a more flraightcr degree of the Ii-
!, hl lathl hitherto clnjy)'cd.

IT

IT may, at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop the course of the

dangerous pratices fofiered heretofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy
might prove very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to
her majetfy, as few years past it did; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as well for the release of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pretended
title, to attempt somewhat against this realm and her majesty, wherein he should
neither lack foreign affiflance, nor a party here within this realm: But the king and
that realm standing affected as they do, this restraint, inflead of remedying, is
likely to breed these inconveniencies following:

FIRST, It will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft of the princes her
fiiends that mifliked of her restraint.

SECONDLY, It will give them'juft cause to take some way of redress.
LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke some desperate ill disposed

person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt somewhat against her majefly's
own person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being
duly confidered, it will appear manifestly, that the reitraint, in a ftraightcr degree,
is likely to prove a remedy subjed to very hard events.

1THE latter degree, whether 'twerefit to set the said queen at liberty, minitreth

some cause of doubt, touching the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is
to be performed, whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be restored
into her own country.

BUT firfl, this proposition, before the particularities be weighed, is to be confi-
dered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well asseted subject, that tendreth her majesty's surety,

and weigheth either the nature of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition
and revenge, or her former actions, what practices the hath set on foot most dan-
gerous for her majefly and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not made ac-
quainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less perilous than it
hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both
her ambition and malice ; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother, is now grown

to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title she doth : Such as do asset her, both
at home and abroad, do asset him; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man, where-
by he may enter into action in his own person) where the is retrained, he is at
liberty; his own realm is now altogether at his devotion, and the party afifeed to
this crown abaled; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty nor restraint
doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majefly, unless by such promises as
may be made by way of treaty with her, the dangcr likely to grow from the king
her son be provided for.

BuT in this behalf it may be objected, that so long as the mother remains in her
majesty's hands, the king will attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objection it may be answered, fils, That they hope that her majefly,

being a prince of juitice, and inclined to mercy, will not punifli the mother for the
son's offence, unlels ihe fliall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily,
That men will not be ovcr-hally, confidering in what predicament the king stand-
eth touching his expecaation of this crowu, to advise any thing that in time future
may be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach to his mother's peril.

AN)

AND lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being firong in the field through

both foreign assistance, and a party here within the realm, will appear so weak a re-
medy, (which may rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard mreafure should be (ffcred unto
her) as they will suppose for the reason above fpccified, that no such extremity will
be used.

IT may also be objected, that the setting of her at liberty will greatly encourage

the papists both at home and abroad ; but herein, if the provifinn be duly confidered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they flall rather find cause of
dilcomfort than otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the mother ap-

pearing most manifestly to be seen in the son accompanied with more danger, with
due consideration had also of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing
of the dangers, that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of; there will be
good cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than perils.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty shall be performed; if it shall be

thought meet she shall be continued within the realm with some limitation, efpeci-
ally in that place where she now refideth, the country round about being so infected
in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much increase the cor-
ruption, and failing away in that behalf. Betides she should have commodity,
with much more ease, and speed, to entertain practices within this realm, than by
being in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France, then shall her'

majcfty lose the gages of her safety, then shall the be at hand to give advice in fur-
therance of such praEtices, as have been laid for to stir trouble in this realm, wherein
file hath been a principal party.

FtOR the first, it is answered before, that the respect of any perils that may be-

fal unto her, will in no fort reflrain her son. For the other, if it be confidered
what harm her advice will work unto herself, in respect of the violation of the
treaty, and the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought,
that the will then be well advised, before the attempt any such matter, which now
(ihc may do without perill. Besides such princes, as have interposed their faith and
promise for her, cannot with honour assist her, wherein the French King will not
he found very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath lately rejected all such re-
quelts, propounded either by her, or her son's miiiifters, that might any way of-
fend her majefly. And lb to conclude, feeing the cause of her grief (hall be taken
away; the F'rcnch king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and will miflikc, that,
by lay Spaninh practice, {lie should be drawn to violate her faith; that the reft of
the pllinces ihall have no just cause of offence, but rather to think honourably of lier
Ilnj(fly, confidering the Scottish queen's carriage towards her, which hath deservcd
iiu way any such favour; the noblemen of Scotland shall be refloi et, who will be
;a ;(iood flay of such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, especially
hlwiv nrg f good a ground of warrant as the parliament to itand unto ; tlhe charges
;:'.n1 ;1 rils which her prat iccs might have bred to this realm fiall be avoided; and
!,iily, the hope of the papills llithl be taken away, by ;fich good prvilions, as ill
I,,t1l tile rcalmls may be Inl(lde, whereby tile perils that nighrlt f'll irnto her Iiaj-tety's
<' \ 1 p1crf(i), (mlatter us all othiis to he weCipged) flall be avoitled, whlien by the

nll ,.'c that nmay grow l,y any IJch wicked andii unilodly ipr.Licc, they fliall fee
itlhi a(e no \vway idlieved in | oint of t liLio

Rcaluns
5

Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the treaty under Secre-

crctary Walsingham's hand.

Cott. Lib. H AT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to the raising of
Calig. C. 8. trouble within this realm) have grown from the Scots queen's ministers and fa-

vourers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear to the
said plots, is principally grounded upon some commiseration had of her reflraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath proceed-

ed, for that the said princes have, for the most part, been entertained with home
and domeftick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is aifo to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of her majcfiy.

TH ,. 1 for the preservation thereof, it fhla!l be convenient for ler majefly to proceed
to the finishing of the treaty, not lung fithence btgun between lier and the said queen,

No. XVII. [Vol. II. p. 128, 1. 4.]

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

Oigi:'. C.l. T Did forbear according to your direction signified in your letters of the 4th of
C. 9. this present, to proceed to the execution of the contents of Mr. Vaadcs letters

unto you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecesSary servants, and for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bolJ to write unto you my simple opinion, (although
in vain as it now fallcth out) by my letters of the 7th of this inflant, which I
doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the
Sth, which came not unto my hands until thl 8th in the evening, by rcafon as
d:d appear by indorlcment, that they lad been mistaken, and were scent back to
WVindfor, after t!cy were entered into the way towards me, I confidered, that
being accompanied only with my own firvants, it might be thought that they would
be intrcited to fay as I would command tl;cin, and therefore 1 thought good, for
my better discharge in thcf money ni.t!crs, to crave the afift;lnce of Mnr. Richard
&giottt, who rep.iring unto me the next morlniing, we hadl accfs to this ]queen,
whom we foun I in her bed, troubled after the old manner with a dcfuxioin, which
was fallen down into the fide of her neck, and had bercft her of the uce of one of
her hands, unto whom I declared, thatt upon o.:cafion of lihc former )practices, duulht-
in: left file would perfifll therein hy corruplting undcrlliild sonic bad mnmclrbe. of
this flat , I w.l, x.pi ,fly comrnminded t tAkce her money into my l;i 's, ;and to rl It
;mfweralble for it, when it fliall be required ; advising her to (dllivei lie l.idl nioney
1titto me with quieticetls. AfI e.r ml i;l,

any decxclanias, manyl nls , ly hi tcr

woird a.lirist ou, (I la)y ntolliin of her rai'ing ;ar;iil} mnyfe ls) with fl.t affiirmatioi
th:lt her inaljcly might have Iher body, but her lheart she thouild never have, rcfuinlg

to

to. delier tlIeey.of the cabinet, I called my servants, and sent for bares to break
opien the door. whereupon.. le yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in; the coffers -rmenpioed in Mr. Waae's remembrance, five rogls of canvass,
coptainig ive thqufand French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had,
in gold, one hu.ndred and four pounds, two shillings, and the.other had three pounds
in. filyer;, wJichk.bag of silver was left with her, affirming that she had no more mo-
ney in tlhis hqufe, and that fihe was indebted to her servants for their wages. Mr. Curle can tell
Waades nqte nagkeb mention of 3 rolls left in Curlp's chamber, wherein, noou the truth
doubt,, he was nmifreckoned, which is evident as well by the te4imonies and oaths of of thismatter.
diverse perf9.ns, as also by probable conjetures; so as in truth we found only two
rolls, every of which cont4ineth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at he rmarriage. There is found in Naw.'s chamber, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by eftimatiop one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine
hundred pounds, in a fecon bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
h.illipgs. All. the aforesaid parcells of money are bestowpd in bags, and fealed by
Mr. Richard Bagot, faying five hundred pounds of Nawv's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the use of this houfhold, and may be repayed at London, where
her majesty (hall appoint out of the money, received lately by one of my servants
out.of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed this money in
all this time, or have hidden the fame in Come secret corners, for doubt whereof; I
had caused all this queen's family, from the higheftto the lowest, to be gyarded in the
several places Vhere I found them, so as yff I had. n.t found the money, with qqiet-
nets, had been forced to have searched first all their'lodgiigs, and then their own per-
sons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a singular blefling, that that fallith
out so well, fearing left a contrary success, might have moved some hard conceits
in her majesty.

TOUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I have done so much,

as may suffice to satisfy her nlajefty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, untill I'heard again from you, partly because her majesty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer.to your consideration to return such as flall be discharged to
their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to
deliver youropinion; partly, for that as yet, 1 have received no answer from you, of
your resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, what persons
you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have done, I have beflowed all such, as
are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame may
suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink fliall be brought unto them
by my servants. It may please you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what
fort, and for what course, i ihall make their pal'ports, as also, if they shall fay that
they are unpaid of their wages, what I (hall do therein. Yt is said tliat they have This lady
been accutfomed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the whole year. Her ath good
majefly's charge will be somewhat diminished by the departure of this people, and my ftorcofmoney
charge, by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the persons, all save Baftiqn, at prccfnt in
are fitch filly and simple fouls, as there was no great cause to fear their prac:ices, and the French
upon this ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all this dismissed train Ambalffadol's
fiould have followed their mistress, until the next remove, and there to have been hands.
discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that the said remove might be delayed, yf she
did fear, or expcet any hard mea.sure.

VOL. II. B b OTHERS

OTHERS (hall excuse their foolish pity as they may ; but for my part, I renunce

my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or done,
I have had any other refpeet than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and so I
shall most earneflly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not feafingof the
money by Mr. Manners, the other commiffloners and myself. I trust Mr. Waade
hath answered, in all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our commission reaching only to the papers, we might be bold
to touch the money, so as there was no speech of that all to my knowledge, and as
you know I was no commiflioner in this search, but had my hands full at Tyxhall,
discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great matters, without warrant, and efpe-
cially where the cause is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

YOUR advertisement of that happy remove hath beengreatly comfortable unto me.

I will not fay, in refpe&t of myself, because my private interest hath no measure of
comparison with her majesty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God grant
a happy and speedy yffue to these good and godly counsels; and so I commit you to
his merciful protection. From Chartley the loth of September I586.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. I49. line. I7.]
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c. touching

their proceedings with regard to the death of the Scottish queen, to her
majesty's council.

T may please your honble good lordships to be advertired, that, on Saturday the
4th of this present, I Robert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in

the county of- to whom your lordship's letter and message was delivered, and her
rnajefly's commiflion shewn; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flay-
ing of such hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring the oficers to make
flay of all such persons, as should bring any such warrants without names, as be-
fore had been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace, to the intent
that upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites might
be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of Kent mhould
on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and
readier to confer with my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale
came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commission, &c. unto us
fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-
covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix
miles of; it was thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go
unto him, which we did on morning; and together with the delivery of her
majefiy's commission, and your Lordship's letter, imparted unto him what both the
carl of Kent and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordship hi-
ther the day following, to confer with me the said earl, concerning the fTme; which
his lordship promiscd. And for the better colouring of the matter, I the said earl of
Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Bcale, ajuftice of peace of the county of Huntingdon next
adjoining, to whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under
your lordfbip's hand for the flaying of the hues and cries, requiring him. to give
notice thereof to the town of Petcrborough, and especially unto the jultices of peace

1 of
I10

of Huntingdonflire, and to cause the pursuers and bringers of such warrants to be
stayed, and brought to the next jufiice of peace; and to bring us word to Fother-
ingay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he should in the
mean time underfiand of the authors of such bruites. W hich like order, I also fir
Amias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other places ad-
joining. The fame night, the sheriss of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordihip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were sent to me
the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention and meeting here on
Tuesday by noon; and other letters were also sent with their lordships assents
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to
be here on Wednesday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time
it was thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came hither, where the sheriss met us; and upon conference between us it
was resolved, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary
provision should be committed unto him against the time. And we forthwith re-
paired unto her, and firfi in the presence of herself and her folks, to the intent that
they might fee and report hereafter that {he was not otherwise proceeded with than
according to law, and the form of the flatute made in the 27th year of her majelly's
reign, it was thought convenient that her majefly's commission lhould be read unto
her, and afterwards (he was by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself against the
next morning. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable man-
ner of proceeding with her, and the necessity that was imposed upon her majesty to
proceed to execution, for that otherwise it was found that they could not both stand
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurfl's his being here new conspiracys
were attempted, and so would be still; wherefore since she had now a good while
since warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare herself
to die, we doubted not but that {he was, before this, fettled, and therefore would
accept this mefrage in good part. And to the effee that no christian duty might be
said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of
her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would please
her to confer with the bishop and dean of Peterborough, {he might; which dean,
we had, for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Here-
to she replied, crofling herself in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, faying that she was ready to die in the catholic Roman Faith, which her an-
ceftors had professed, from which she would not be removed. And albeit we used
many persuasions to the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
she demanded the admittance of her priefi, we utterly denied that unto her. Here-
upon, she demanded to underifand what answer we had touching her former petition
to her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the bestowing of her body.
To the first we had none other answer to make, but that we thought if they were
not sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Wade's cuflody, who was now in France,
and feeing her papers could not any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but
that the.fame would be delivered unto such as she ihould appoint. For, for our own
parts, we undou.tedly thought that her majesty would not make any profit of her
things, and therefore (in our opinions) hle might set down what she would have
done, and the fame should be imparted unto her majefly, of whom both fle and
others might cxlpe all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her majeffy's
pleafurc, and therefore could neither fly that her petition flould be denicd, or grant-

13 b2 cd.

ed. For the practice of Babington, ihe utteily denied it, and woulddh'aVe inife'rredl tf'
that her death was for her religion ; whereunto it was eftfborns'by us replied, thatr'6
many years she was not touched for religion, nor fiould h'av'e been 'rlow, but'thA't
this proceeding againlt her was for treason, in that she was culpable of that hotrible
confipiracy for destroying her rnajefty's person; which'fhe again denied, adding fur.
ther, that albeit she for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
yet she doubted not but that 'God vould take vehgeance thereof. A'nd being chatged
with the depositions of Na'ue and Curl to prove it againfl i'er, 'he replied, 'thathfi
acculed none, but that hereafter when (he flall be dead, and they rema'ins:aive, ;t
iball be seen how indifferently she had been dealt with, and vh't'tneau:fre had 'beei
used unto her; and asked whether it had been heard before this, 'that Servants had
been practised to accuse their mistress, and hereupon also required what'was beconme
of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it feemed'by the coinnilti'dnthat the charge

of her was in the dilpofition of us'the earls, we required S. Amias :Pilet arid 'S.
Drue Drurie to receive, for that night, the charge, which 'they had before, amnd to-
cause the whole number of soldiers to 'watch that night, and that her folks 'should'bi
put up, and take order that only four of them'fliou'ld be at the'execution, reiiaining
aloof of, and guarded with certain persons, so as they should not cbrfie near unto
her, which were Melvil her fieward, the physician, surgeon, and apothecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were repaired'uhto the c'afle, andr

the sheriff had prepared all things 'in the hall for the executioh, he 'Was'coddm'anded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her dow'n'to tle place ,where were present, 'we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, 'efq; fir Edward Mdhtague, kh't.
his son and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly,
knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenell, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John 'Wingefield, Mr.
Forefl, and Raynor, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

AT the flairfold, she paused to speak to Melv'il in our hearing, which was to this

effect, " Melvil, as thou hatl been an honest servant to me, To I pray thee continnui
to my Ton, and commend me u'nto him. I 'have not impugned his religion, nor 'tlh
religion of others, but wish him well. And as I forgive all that have offended ''si
in Scotland, so I would that he should also; and beseech God, that he Would fend
him his holy spirit, and illuminate'himi." Melvil's anfwer'was, that he would fo'do,
and at that instant, he would beseech God to assist him with his spirit. Then (he
demanded to speak with her priefr, which was denied unto her, the rather for that
ihe came with a fuperltitious pair of beads and a'crucifix. She'then 'efted to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest requefi, and faying that When other
gentlewomen were executed, she had read in chronicles that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it-was permitted that she fhonld have two named by herself, which
were Mrs. Curle and Kennedy. After (he came to the scaffold, firfl, in pretence of
them all, her majeflic's commiilion was openly read; and afterwards Mr. Dean of
Peterborough, according to a direction which he had received, the night before,,
from us the carls, would have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and d',e
well in the fear of God and charity to the world, but at the first entry, the utterly
refuted it, faying that the was a catholique, and that it were a folly to move her,.
being so resolutely ni.nded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon,
to the intent it might appear that we, and the whole atrembly, had' a christian dnfre
to have her die well, a godly prayer, conceived by 'Mr. Dean, was read and pro-

nounced
112

nounced by us all. " That it would please Almighty God to fend her his holy fpi.
rit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of his
mercy to receive her nito his heavenly and everlasting kingdom, and finally to bless
her majesty, arid confound all her enemies ;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to re-
pair up shortly, can [hew your lordihips a copy.

THIS done, the pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effec, " To be-

feech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that the trusted to receive her Salvation in
his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, besought God to for-
give her enemies, as she forgave them ; and to turn his wrath from this land, to
bless the queen's inajeftie, that The might serve hiin. Likewise to be merciful to her
tbn, to havecompaffion of his church, and altho' file was not worthy to be heard,
vet the had a confidence i'n his'mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray unto her
Saviour to receive her." After 'this, (turning towards her servants) the desired them
to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made by
the executioners, 'she pardoned them; and said, she was glad that the end of all her
lfrrows was so near. T'hen (he miflik'd the whinning and weeping of her Women,
laying, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution, and kisting them,.
willed them 'to 'depart from the scaffold, and farewell. An'd so resolutely kneel'd -
down, and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incontinently removed, and order taken
that none should approach unto her corps, but that it should be embalm'd, by the fur-
geon appointed. And further her'croffe, apparell, and other things are retained here,
and not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that might follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by such as sent him hither.

THIS hath been the mianner of our dealings in this service, whereof we have

thought good to advertise your lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time,
and further have thought good to signify unto your lordships besides, that for the avoid-
ing of all finiiter and slanderous reports, that may be raised to the contrary, we have
caused a note thereof to be conceived to the fame effec in writing, which we the
saids lords have subscribed, with the hands of such other there the knights and gen-
tremr'en above named that were present at the action. And so beseeching Almighty
God long to bless her majesty with a most prosperous reign, and to confound all his,
and her enemies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the 8th of Febru-
ary 58 6, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix, is taken from a col-

leetion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drumfoy, historiographer to Q Anne, now
in the library of the faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has o-
mitted. to mention the book in the Cott. Lib, where it is to be found.

No, XIX,

APPENDIX.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 154. line 2.]
The objecions against Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late Scottish queen,

mufi concern things done either, I. Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that feflion. 3. After the fame.

Cott. Lib. I. E FORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand
Cal. C. I, j at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-

cerning the fame diretly, or indirectly.

z. DURING that session, he remained at court, where the only interest he had

therein, was as her majesty's secretary, to receive the letters from the. commiflioners,
impart them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commissioners, it is well known to all
her council,

I. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

or council, concerning the cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jefty's warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, passed against her.
3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation publishing the fame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever, concerning the fame.
And

THAT the only thing, which can be specially and truly imputed to him, is the

carrying up the said warrant unto her majesty to be signed. She fending a great
counsellor unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great feal
of England, by her own special direction and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
1. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was delivered by him un-

to Mr. Davison, with her majesty's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when (he
should be pleased to call for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix weeks unpre-

sented, nor once offering to carry it up, till hfe sent a great counsellor unto him for
the fame, and was sharply reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majesty's own
presence.

3. THAT having signed it, the gave him an express commandment to carry it to

the feal, and being fealed to fend it immediately away unto the commissioners, ac-
cording to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringay for the place
of execution, mifliking the court-yard, in divers refpeas, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or lt her hear any more thereof, till it
was done, she for her part, having (as she said) performed all that, in law or reason,
could be required of her.

4. Wi-iici direcQions notwithstanding, he kept the warrant fealcd all that night,

and the grcatcft part of the next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majesty withal, and finding her majefly resolved to proceed
therein, according to her former dirc~tions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so,

as

as ihe might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely resolved to quit his hands
thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's chamber, together with

Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence restored the fame into the hands
of the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the refi of the council sent it away.

WHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had
in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the ge-

neral a6t of her majesty's council, (as is before mentioned,) and not any private ac
of his, may appear by

I. THEIR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent down therewith to the com-

missioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and others to whom they were directed.
As also 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majesty's
firif commiflion for their calling to the flar-chamber for the fame, and private ap-
pearance and fubmiflion afterward inltead thereof, before the lord chancellor Broom-
ley. 6. The confeflion of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By
the sentence itself upon record. 8. Besides a common ad of council, containing
an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottiih ambalfador then remaining here,
avowing and jufnifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some extraordinary furtherance there-
unto, the contrary may evidently appear by

I. His former absolute refusal to frgn the band of association, being earnerfly
pressed thereunto by her majefiy's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commiflioner, in the examination
of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to flay the commissioners from pronouncing of the sentence
at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they should return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefented, without once of-
fering to carry it up, till her majefly sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5 His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed unto the commissioners, as he

was specially commanded, flaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of the lord treasurer, of whom
he had before received the fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison did nothing in this

cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the place he then held in her majefly's
service.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,
THE innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late Scottifi queen,

Letter

A .,P ,EN1D

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 238. line-29.]

Letter from o, Sir Robert Cecil, to his MajesRy King Janmes.

From the O- a r S T- worthy prince, the depending dangers upon, your affetionates have
riginal Bibl. ?j,. been fucb, as hath inforced silence in him, who is faithfu,lly devoted to ypur
Sac Jur.
Edin. A. 4 person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main-
No. 4. tenance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations,

is invelred in your royal person. Fall not then, most noble and renowned prince,
from him, whose providence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to he an
infirument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have
been revealed to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited perfi.n near your majesty in council and favour; no man in particular will I
accuse, bit I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with who,m, for your service,
I have held correspondence; otherwise, I had, long since, been disabled from per-
formance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only
known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of thriftendom
for his fidelity to your person and slate, and to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal
servant, my firif and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudf9ne, whom I
have found in all things that concern you, most secret and assured. It may, there-
fore please your majesty, at the humble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to be
the indorfement of your commands unto me, that by some token of your favour,
he may understand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and service. My
passionate affe6tion to your person, (not as you are a king, but as you are a good
king, and have just title, after my sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me
to presumption. Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
altho' mixed with defeEs in judgment.

r. I, therefore, first beseech your majesty, that for the good of those, whom

God, by divine Providence, hath destined to your charge, that you would be pleased
to have an extraordinary care of all prafticers, or pracices, against your person ; for
it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, fatLion,
or scar, there are many that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the
sovereignty and state might be swayed by partiality of subalternate persons, rather
than by true rule of power and justice. Preserve your perron, and fear not the
pracices of man upon the point of your right, which will be preserved and maintain-
ed against all afaulis of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protecaion of your
person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bless and preserve
yof and all yours, in all regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the conservation and secret keep-

ing of your councclls, which, as 1 have said, are often betrayed and discovered,
either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faaion, or base conception, the
which your majesty is to regard with all circumfpeLcion, as a matter most dangerous
to your person and ftatc, and the only means to ruin and destroy all those, that
stand faithfully devoted to your majesty's service. Some particulars, and persons of
this nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this noble-
man, the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty may be further informed.

3. THE

2

3, THE 3d point considerable is, that your majefly, by all means poflible, secure

yourself of the good affeaion.of the French king and States, by the negotiation of
some faithful secret confident; the French naturally diftafting the union of the Bri-
tifh Islands under one monarch.. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
allies and friends, but by reason of their remote fate, they do not so much importe
this affair, which mufi be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4 WiMs* God, by whose. Providence the period of all persons and times rs de-

ternmined, shall call to his. kingdom of glory her majesty, (altho' I do afluredly hops
that there will not be any quefiion in competition, yet for that I hold it not fitting.
to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature) I do humbly beseech
your majefly to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident servant of yours,
being of an appioved fidelity and judgrent, continually to be here resident, whose
negotiation, it were convenient your majesty should fortiffe, with such secret truf
and powers, as there may not need 14 days respite, to post for authority, in a cause;
that cannot endure lo hours respite, without varieties of danger. In the which it is
to be confidered, that all fueh as'pretend least good to your eflablifhment, will not
in publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambition, will seek to gain
time, by alledging their pretence of common good to the fiate, in propounding of
good conditions for diiburtliening the common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy
impositions, corruptions, oppressions, &c. which is a main point to lead the popu-
lar, who are much disgusted with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convenient, that there motives, out of your majesty's providence, should be prevent-
ed, by your free offer in these points following, viz.

I. THAT your majesty would be pleated to abolish purvaiors and purvaiance, be-

ing a matter infinitely offensive to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and
not profitable to the prince.

2. 'rHAT your majesty would be pleased to dissolve the court of wards, being the

ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally repined against by

the subjec, in regard of their uncertainty, being many times altered from their true
meaning, by variety of interpretation.

4. THAT your majefy will be pleased admit free outport of the native commo-

dities of this kingdom, now often refrained by fibalternate persons for private pro-
fit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plain deftrution
to the true industry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and againit the profit of the
crown.

THESE, being by your majesty's confidents in the point of time propounded, will

assuredly confirm unto your majeftie the hearts and affections of the whole kingdom,
and absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of
pretext of cQar on good, would seek to patronize themselves in popular opinion and
poer arrd

an hereby to derogate from your majefly's bounty and free favour, by
princely merit of your moderation, judgment, and juflicc.

YouR majesty's favour, thus granted to the subject, will no way impeach the

profits of the crown, but advance them. The difpro;ortionable gain of some chequer
olliccrs, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle unneceflary clerks and atten-
dants, will only fuftcr some detrimcnt; but infinite will be the good unto the king-

VOL. II.. C c c dom,

117

dom, -which-will confirm unto your majesty the universal love and afifeion of the
people, and eflablifh your renown in the highest esteem to all poflerity.

THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make youtriumphant over all your ene-
mies.

MY care over his perron, whose letters pass in-this pacquet, and will die before he

leave to be yours, ihall be no less then of mine own life, and in like esteem will I
hold all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will hold myself reserved from
being known unto any of them, -in my particular devoted affealions unto your ma-
jefty, only this extraordinary worthy man whose associate I am in his misfortune,
doth know my heart, and we both will.pray for you, and if we live you {hall find
us together.

I BESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

0.
4 DE C)-

A C1ImJcAI

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
DISSERTATION

CONCERNIN G
The Murder of King HE NRY, and the Genuineness of

the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.
IT is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which

the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary to
Bothwell, have given rife ; far less to appear as an adversary to

any particular author, who hath treated of them. To repeat,
and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points,
which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from par-
tiality, from malevolence, and from diflonefty, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of my readers. All
I propose, is to assist others in forming some judgment concerning
the fats in dispute, by flating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame
attention and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scottifl hiflory.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two difflrent fyfRcms

have bcen formed. The one fuppofcs Pothwcll both to have con-
trived and cxccutcd this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls
of Murray, Morton, and their party.

VOL. 1 1. D d TIii

THE decision of many controverted fads in history, is a matter-

rather of curiolity than of use. They stand detached; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the story
remains untouched. But the fat under dispute in this place is a,
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion which
an Historian adopts with regard to it, he mufd vary and dispose the
whole of his subsequent narration. An historical lyftem may be
tried in two different ways, whether it be confiflent with probabi-
lity, and whether it.be 'upported by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge theKing's murder upon Bothwell' argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been men-
tioned already in different places of the narrative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a sudden
and youthful parson. The beauty of his person was his chief
merit. His capricious temper soon railed in the Queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust into an indignation,
which she was at no pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of as-
fecion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal
both to the Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at diffe.-
rent times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself into
her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her
heart. In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it-was ne-
ceffiry to get rid of the King. Mary had rejeced the proposal made
to her tor obtaining a divorce. The King was equally hated by the
partizans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the
kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful and popular persons
in his country; by Morton and his afibciates, whom he had deceived;
and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour.
Among the people ]).irlly was fallen under extreme coi.tempt. He
expeteed, for all thetf rcafons, that the murder of the King would
pals without any enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to. his own

address

4.
2

:address and good fortune, he trusted for the accomplishment of the
*reft of his withes. What Bothwell expected really came to pass.
Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an action
which rid her of a man whom she had such good reason to detest.
A few months after, she married the person who was both sus-
peced and accused 'of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason in

this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless ambition.
Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's return into
Scotland, he insinuated himfelfinto her favour, and engrossed the
whole power into his own hands. He set himself againfk every pro-
pofal of marriage which was made to her, left his own chance of
succeeding to the Crown should be destroyed. He hated Darnley,
and was nolefs hated by him. In order to be revenged on him, he
entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and mor-
tal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving
him hopes of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a de-
sign to throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceifory to the murder, and under that pretext, to defiroy Bothwell,
to depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which he had
wrested out of her hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of probability, is con-

fiftent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, some as-
fertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effects
appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and
by his prudent administration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with ease to quash a formidable insurrection
raised by himself in the year i565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her
neglect, had reduced to the lowest state of contempt, and who,
after a long disgrace, had regained (according to the most favoura-
ble filppofition) the precarious possession of her favour only a few
days before his death ? It is difficult to conceive what Murray had to

D d d 2 fear

-3

fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no pre-
vious attachmne t to 'Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical
than a Iclheme to perlifade her to marry a man, whole wife was fiill
alive, and who .as not only fufpeded, but accused, of murdering
her former hufbalndl. But that such a scheme flhould really succeed
is itill more extraordin ry.-If Murray had inffigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had hinifelf been accessory to the commiflion
of it, what hopes were there tlat Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the perfccution;, which he fuiffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadly feud had subsisted between
Murray and Bothwell; the Qleen witl difficulty had brought them
to some terms of agreement. But is it probable that Murray would
chufe an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commission of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife
man, first to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that after-
wards he should find some opportunity of depriving him of that
power ? The most adventrous politician never hazarded such a dan-
gerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trufled such
an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong these general reasonings may be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we now
proceed to examine.

TIAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, I.

From the concurring teftiniony of all the cotemporary hiflorians.
2. From the conteffiont of those persons who suffered for aflliing at
the colmmlifion of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumidances. AnderLf v. 2. 165. 3. From the ac-
knowledgmrenct ot Mary's own commifiloners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
v. 2. 213. 4. I;From the exprcfs teftinony of .efley Bishop of Ross
to the famc cftSct with the former. Dcf. of Q(Mary's lion. And.
2.76.. Id. V 3. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

I Both-
4

Bothwell had foliicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy formed against the life or the King ; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the confpii-ators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Miem. App. 4. The letter
from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. II.
No. 12. confirms Morton's teilimony. 6. Lord Herreis promi!'es,
in his own name, and in the name of the nobles w*ho atidhered to
the Queen, th.t they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append. vol. T. No. 23.

THE most dire& charge ever brought against Murray iq in these

words of Bifflop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addressing himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis fid to your face openly,

even at your own table, a few days after the murder xvas corn-

" mirted ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
"fame murder ? Did not he, nulla circziticnie u1ss, flatly and

plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming with one of

"your most affired and trusty servants the fame day whereon you
"departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This
t night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his life ?" Dcf. of Q_
Mary, Anders . . 2.75. But the afTertion of a man so heated with
facion as Lefiey, unlels it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken
these words, is not named; nor the manner in which this secret con-
verfation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was one
of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable that
in all his negotiation at the court of England, he never once re-
peated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge gi-
ven him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder; but though he openly
accLufs of that crime some of those who adhered to him, lie in-
duitrioufly avoids any iniinuation against Murray himifelf. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary herlelf, in a conversation with Sir Francis
Knollcs, accuscd Morton and Maitland of being privy to tie inurder,
but does not mention Murray. And. 4. 55. When the 13illop of
Ross and Lord Herreis themselves appeared before the Englith coun-
cil, January I , 1569, they declared thcinmflves ready, in obedience

to

5

fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no pre-
vious attachme nt to 'Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimer.ical
than a fcheime to perfilade her to marry a man, whose wife was frill
alive, and who v.is not only fufpeded, but acculed, of murdering
her former husband. But that such a scheme flhould really succeed
is Itill more extraordin ry.-If Murray liad infi-igated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himself been accessory to the commifiion
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the periecution' which he suffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadly feud had subsisted between
Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with difficulty had brought them
to some terms of agrieement. But is it probable that Murray would
chute an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commiflion of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imaginatio.i of a wife
man, sirs to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that after-
wards he should find some opportunity of depriving him of that
power ? The most adventrous politician never hazarded such a dan-
gerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trufled such
an uncertain chance,

BUT however firong these general reasonings may be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we now
proceed to examine.

THIAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, i.

From the concurring teftinmony of all the cotemporary historians.
2. From the confeflion of those persons who suffered for affiliingat
the comminfion of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumitances. Anders. v. 2. 165. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commiflioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been ,ne of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
v. 2. 2 13. 4. Irom the expres testimony of l eflcy Bi(iop of Ross
to the famn cffett with the former. Def. of Q(Mary's HIon. And.
2.76. Id. v. 3. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

I Both-
4

Bothwell had foliicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy fornmed against the life oF the King ; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conlpirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The l:tter
from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. II.
No. 12. confirms Morton's teilimony. 6. Lord Herreis promires,
in his own name, and in the name of the nobles whol adhered to
the Queen, th.t they would concur in punifling Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append. vol. 1. No. 23.

THE mot direc charge ever brought against Murray is in these

words of Biflop Lefley, "Is it unknown," addressing himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis siid to your face openly,

even at your own table, a few days after the murder was corn-
nmiltted ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
fame murder? Did not he, nulla circuitiCne U/us, flatly and
plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming with one of

"your most astured and trusty servants the fame day whereon you
"departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This

night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his life ?" Dcf. of QL

Mary, Anders. v. 2. 75. But the assertion of a man so heated with
faction as Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken
thele words, is not named; nor the manner in which this secret con-
verfation wis brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was one
of the moit zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable that
in all his negotiation at the court of England, he never once re-
peated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge gi-
ven him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder; but though he openly
accuses of that crime some of those who adhered to him, lie in-
dultrioufly avoids any insinuation againfl Murray himself. Keith
Pref. XII. Mary herlelf, in a conversation with Sir Francis
Knollcs, accused Morton and Maitland of being privy to the murder,
but does not mention Murray. And. 4. 55. When the 13ifolo, of
Ross and Lord Herreis themielves appeared before the Englith coun-
cil, January I , 1569, they declared thcmfelves ready, in obedience

to

5

to the Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his associates of being
acceflory to the murder, but " they being also required, whether

they or any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said
"Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty

thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to witness that
none of them did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that

"murder, or were in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither
-' who were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it
"was publickly discovered long thereafter by some of the affaflins
"who suffered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herreis them-
selves, and seem to be a direc confutation of the bifiop's assertion.
The bishop himself repeats the fame thing in fill stronger terms.
And. 3. 3I-

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protef/ation touching

the murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given an
account vol. I. 33o. add "' So after these premisses, the murder
" of the King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold
"for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Le-

thington were authors, inventors, counsellors and causers of the
fame murder, in what manner, or by whatfomever persons the
fame was executed." Anders. v. 4, 188. But, I. This is no-

thing more than the private opinion or personal affirmation of these
two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make. has no con-
neetion with the premisses on which they found it. Because Mur-
ray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband
with her own content, it does not follow that therefore he com-
mitted the murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll
were at that time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of facion. 4. Both of them were Mur-
ray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment
which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll
was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms. Knox 328. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Peer. j9. She was Murray's fifler, and by his intercft he

had
6

had obftruded that design. Keith 55I. These circumstances would
go far towards invalidating a positive testimony; they more than coun-
tcrl alance an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain
whether Huntly and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Queen thought would be of advantage
to her cauie, was transmitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4. I86.
The protestation itself publiffed by Anderlbn is taken from an unfub-
fcribed copy with blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On
the back of this copy is pasted a paper, which Cecil has marked
"Answer of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Hunt-
' ly and Argyll." Anders. 194, 195. But it can scarce be esteemed
a reply to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears
date at London, January 19, i568. The Queen's letter, in which
ihe inclosed the copy of the proteflation, bears date at Bowton, Jan.
5, 568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy could be
lent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and
answered by Murray within so short a time. Murray's reply seems
intended only to prevent the impression which the vague and uncer-
tain accusations of his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil
had got the original of the Queen's letter into his custody. Anders.
v. 4. 186. This naturally leads us to conjecture that the letter it-
self, together with the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before'
they came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere-
conjeture alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation,
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal'. C. I. fol. 280, and is
an original subscribed by Mary, though not written with her own
hand, because (he seldom chose to write in the Finglifh language.
The proteflation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is manifestly
written by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter.. This is
a clear proof that both were intercepted. So that much has been
founded on a paper not fibfcribed by the two Earls, and probably
never seen by them. Bclides, this metlhod which the Queen took of
fending a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for themt to
declare with regard to a conference held in their own pretence, ap-
pears fotnewhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and.
Inot bo liable to any misinterpretation, to have desired them to,

write,

7

write the moil exaa account, which they could recolleac of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Qeen's commiflioners at the Conferences in England accused

Murray and his associates of having murdered the King. Good. 2.
28 i. But these accusations are nothing more than loose and general
affirmations, without descending to such particular circumitances,
as either ascertain their truth, or discover their falsehood. The
fame accusation is repeated by the nobles aftembled at Dumbarton
Sept. I 68. Good. 2. 359. And the fame observation may be made
concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
pole, that he might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's admi-
niftration, and thereby rendering ineffecdual her general Revocation
of Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his associates
of the best part of their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scottifl Monarch, will
fee that such a revocation could not be veiy formidable to the no-
bles. Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles
rendered it ineff'etual. The best vindication of Murray and his
party tom this accusation is that which they presented to the Queen
of England, and which ha h never hitherto been published.
rPaper-Ollice. Anfg'rs to tleie o jcclions and at ledgance of the .tleen, allcdging the

I:arl of Murray1 Lord RIegent, the Earl of Milortoln, Marr, Glen-
ci/irn, , Il uithve, R&lt/.'', &c. to have beeil movted to armour, Jor
lat hl .: .!' rb.'rrd/ and ,'n glJt t abidtle her revocation oJ the aliena-
tizoz ?.,'(IL o heir /ro ery.

IT is annrv.crcd, that is alledced but all appearance, and it appears

God h.is b :: (it, tlic alledgnnce of all wit lnd good rocilemibranice,
bor thirl rcal 'iL) b llo\ving.

L.,l-
S

9

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occaflon to grudge

thereat, in refpea the Queen made him privy to the fame, and took
resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his Lordfhipl
know she would assuredly in the famine except all things fie had
given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament, as lie did
indeed; and for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind hini
Master John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom flse de-
clared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it should be
provided, yea of siee will did promise and offer before ever he de-
manded, as it came to pass without any let or impediment, for all
was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the Parliament,
but any difficulty.

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property quilk

alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him, in the said parliament
preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of miscontent of
that revocation, far less to have put their lives and heritage to so open
and manifest ane danger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and show any miF-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the manifcft corruption of
ane act of Parliament past upon her Majefly's return, and si did
lctt any revocation at that tinme; but the armor for revenge of the
King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there was
no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thereof.

VOL. II.

IIAV-
E c c

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been produced

againfl the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to enquire whether the Q.een herself was accefibry to the murder
of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than firong

suspicions arose, among tome of her fubjeds, that Mary had given
her content to the commifiion of that crime. And. 2. 156. We
are informed, by her own ambaiiador in France, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her noblesloudly
accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation, by support-
ing them, seem to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOIE crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce ad-

mit of a positive or direa proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom be
brought perfetly to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Pr/i1cipa/s, but only of being Acce/aries to a crime; not of having
committed it themselves, but only of giving content to the com-
milion of it by others; the proof becomes t1i1 more difficult: and
unless wvhen some accomplice betrays the' secret, a proof by circum-
flances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained. Even
in judicial trials, such evidence is Sometimes held to be sufficient for
condemning criminals. The degree of conviction which such evi-
dence carries along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises
from positive teltimony; and a concurring series of circumstances
satisfies the underflanding no less than the express declaration of
wvitne res.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been produced against Mary.

We shall first confider that which is founded upon circumstances
alone.

SOME of these suspicious circumflances preceded the King's death;

tthers were Iubfcquent to it. With regard to the fornner, we may
observe that the Queen's violent love of Darnly was soon converted
into an aversion to him no les violent; and that his own ill conduC,

an d

and excefles of every kind were such, that if they did not jullify,
at least they account for this sudden change of her disposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this domestic rupture, I have
traced with great care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers published by other authors, I have added
those contained in App. N° XVI. and XVII. The Earls of
Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly confidered the
scheme of procuring for the Queen a divorce from her llufband,
as one of the most flattering proposals they could make to her, and
employed it as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to
content to a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 188. Du
Croc the French ambassador, who was an eye witness of what he
describes, not only represents her disgust at Darnly to be extreme,
but declares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do affureDce''lr '

i

you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of her dif-
ease to conrift in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem possible
to make her forget the fame. Still {he repeats these words, I could
'ijh to be dead. You know very well that the injury (he has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her Majesty will never forget it.-
To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expec, upon several ac-
counts, any good underflanding between them [i. e. the King and
Queen] unless God effectually put to his hand.-His bad de-December- 2
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expected
from him for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present
with you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I
will fay, that matters cannot fubfifl long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad consequences." Keith, Pref. vii.
Had Henry died a natural death, at this jundture, it must have been
confidered as a very fortunate event to the Queen, and as a fcafon-
able deliverance from a husband who had become altogether odious
to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks afterwards,
and as nothing had happencd to render the Queen's aversion to
him less violent, the opinion of thole who conlider Mary as the
author of an event, which was nanife(lly Io agreeable to her,
will appear perhaps to fomc of our readers to be lnither unnatural

E c c 2 1)

1

nor over refined. If we add to this, what has been observed- in the
hilor-y, that in proportion to the increale of Mary's hatred of her
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favour; and that he be-
carme the obLje& not only of her confidence but of her attachment,
that opinion acquires new itrength. it is easy to obfcrve many ad-
vantages which might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from
the King's death; but excepting thenm, no peifon; and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit Irom that event. Both-
wel, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was, in that age,
thiug,'t no violent imputation on Mary's character, to suppose that
fl-e had consented to the deed.

THE fleps which the Queen took after her husband's death add

strength to that supposition. I. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, afierts that " every body fufpeded
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others,
said plainly that it was He." p. 155. 2. Mary having issued a
proclamation, on the i2th of February, offering a reward to any
person, who should discover those who had murdered her husband,
And. I. 36. a paper in answer to this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth, February 16, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was ac-
cufed of having given her content to it. And. 2. I ;6. 3. Soon
after, February2zo, the Earl of Lennox, the King's father, wrote
to WMary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prolecute the mur-
derers with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own sus-
picions of' Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding agailnf
lim, and for discovering the other authors of tlie crimne, no lels
obvious than equitable. Ile advised her to seize, and to commit to
sure cuflody Buthwell Iiimfclf, and those who were already named
as his accomIlpices; to call an Assembly of the nobles; to iflue a
proclamatiln, inviting Bothwcll's accufcrs to appear; and ii; on that
encour;-agemellnt, no pcrfon appeared to accuft them, to hold themi
as il)n(cenit, and to dlfmilis them without farthcr trial. And. i. o.
4. Archbiflhop BcatoLn, her ambaflhtlor in France, illn a lettr to
Mary, March 9th, Lemploys argumenets of the utiloft weighlt to
perluadc her to prolccute tic murderers with the grcatet fzevcrity.

I1 can
12

%' I can conclude nathing, (fays he) by quhat zour Majefly writes
to me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to take
a rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be not actually taine,
it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. 1
ask your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing
to zour prejudife, but I man conftraindly writ the farnin, that all may vrjy
come to zour knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth (haw now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greite yertue, magnanimitie, and constance that God has
grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this most
heavie envie and difplefir of the committing thereof, and conserve
that reputatioun in all godliness, ze have conquift of lang, quhich
can appear na way is mair clearlie, than that zow do sick justice that e'h
the haill world may declare zowr innocence, and give tetirnony
forever of thair treason that has committed (but fear of God or without
man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther, quhairof there is fa mcikile much
ill spoken, that I am conftrainit to ask zow mercy, that neither
can I or will I make the rehearsal therof, which is owr odious.
But, alas! Madame, all over Europe this day there is na purpose in
head fa frequent as of zour Majeflie, and of the present state of
zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit finiferly." Keith,
Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. N° XIX.
urged the fame thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances of the
cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and remonstrances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her own presence. Her
fulbjcts were filled with the utmost horror at that crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, had been publickly accused as
the author of it. RefleCtions, extremely dilhonourable to herself,
had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of justice, did
not prompt her to purfle the murderers with ardour, decency, at
least, and concern for vindicating her own c hlradtcr, should nave
induced her to avoid any appearance of remifilefs or want (o
zeal.

BUT instead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all lier ac-
ti,)!i;, the utmolt partiality towards Lothwell. I. On the i5th of

February,

February, five days after the murder, Ihe beflowed on him the re-
version of the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the year
I 565 (he had morgaged to the citizens of Edi:burgh. This grant
was of much importance, as it gave him not only the command
of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant over
the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of keep-
ing possession of it *. 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous to

* Copy from the original in the Charter ouse of the city of Edinburgh of an A./igna-
tion to the reversion of the superiority of Leilh by Queen Mary to the Earl of Bothwell.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos

prafentes litera pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
tiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam noftra chariffiima
matri Maria Regina regni nofiri pro tempore in noftra minoritate fatum et impen-
fum, verum etiam nobifmet ipfis, tarn intra partes Gallia quarn intra hoc nofirum
regnum, ad extentionem nofiri honoris et auhtoritatis in punitione furum, malefac-
torum, et tranfgrefforum infra idem, per nofirum confifum confanguineum et confilia-
rium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum Halis, Creighton et Liddifdale, mag-
num admirallum regni noftri, commiltionem et onerationem ad hune effeaum ha-
bentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in
performatione et extentione nofiri dici fervitii, fuam hereditatemn supra fummam
viginti millium mercarum hujus noflri regni, alienavit ac lefrt. Et nos cogitantes
quod, ex nofira principali honore et devoria, didum noitrum confifum confanguineum
& confiliarium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine recompenfare et gratificare in-
cumbit quse nos commode fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
affuturis temporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis
feu eventibus : In recompenfationem quorum prxemifTorum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris
rationabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dikumr Jaco-
bum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos haeredes mafculos quofcunque noflros legitti-
mos, &c. affignatos in et ad literas reverfionis faEtas, &c. per Symonem Preston de
codem militem, praepofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri
burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefloribus, &c. nobis, noftrifilue here-
dibus, fucctfloribus, et affignatis pro redemptione, &c. fupcrioritatis totius villa de
Lcith, &c. impignoratx per nos dictis prapofito,&c. lub reverfione alienate continentis
fummarn dccem millium mcrcarum monetre prafcriptae numerandam et calculandam
in parochilli cclelia de Edinburgh, super premonitione quadrigintadierum, ut moris
cfl, veluti in dilcis rcverfionis litcris, &c. de data Svo Odtob. 1565, &c. (The reft is
form, and contains a Clause of absolute warrandice.) IN cujus REI T ES'TIMONIUM
prefentibus magnum figillim nofirum apponi fecimus. Apud F.diniburgh, dcciino
quinto die mnlcis lcl)ru.irii, anno Donmini mille fio (quingentefimo fcxagcimo sexto,
ct regni noftri vicefimo quilto.

The great fcal entire.

obtain

obtain the command of the castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his custody. Mar
consented; and ihe instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the
cattle. And. I. Pref. 64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conduced
with the utmost remifnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this.
And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evi-
dent from a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his mailer
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbish. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the Queenis
fervandis the keyis of her fhalmir. Quhilk the Laird of Tillibar-
din hearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground. Efter quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
tion." And. 4. P. 2. I67. Had there been any intention to search
into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much im-
portance merited the most careful enquiry. 4. Notwithstanding
Lenox's repeated follicitations, notwithstanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with them, in
order to encourage any accuser to appear against Bothwell, file not
only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him
f;oom her pretence and councils; And. I. 42, 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances, diScovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing
Bothwell to a publick trial; but mhe permitted him to fit as a mem-
ber in that meeting of the Privy Council, which directed his own
trial; and the trial itfeif was carried on with such unnecessary
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumtfances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumstances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. i. p. 344, &c. and therefore are not repeated in this
place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of
her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the fccptre
bcfbre her at the meeting of Parliament. Keith, 378. 7. In that

par-
8

is

liament, flhe granted him a ratification of all the vast poflefllons
and honours, which lhe had conferred upon him, in *which was
contained an ample enumeration oi- all the services he had performed.
And. I. 117. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which would attend that adion, ihe
not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered what
had passed between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation, Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as fie
returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this, without
her knowledge and consent, such an insult could not have failed to
have filled her with the most violent indignation. But according
to the account of an old M. S. " The friendly love was so
highly contraced between this great princess, and her enormous
subjed, that there was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteem-
ed by all men that either of them loved other carnally) so that lihe
suffered patiently to be led where the lover lift, and all the way
neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour or refifance, as in
such accidentsuxfe to be, or that she might have done by her prince-
ly authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly,
and Secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was
done without the Queen's content. Melv. 158. Io. On the z2th
of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that {he
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her
by seizing her person, she was so much satisfied with his dutiful
behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for pait services,
that flhe not only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him
to higher honours. And. . I87. I i. Even after the confederate
nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's pretence, and though
the saw that he was confidered as the murderer of her former hus-
band by so great part of her subjeCts, her affection did not in the
least abate, and file continued to express the most unalterable at-
tachment to him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
tlat the rigour with which the Qeen is kept, proceedeth by order

from

17

from these men, because that the Queen will not, by any means,
be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murder; nor
will not content by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Bothwell for
her husband, but avoweth constantly that she will live and die
with him; and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquifli
her crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, the would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple damsel with him, and that
fie will never consent that he {hall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself. App. p. 42. See also p. 44. From this long enu-
meration of circumstances, we may, without violence, draw the
following conclusion. Had Mary really been accessary to the mur-
der of her husband; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her
content, or at her command; and had fie intended to flifle the
evidence against him, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, -(he
could scarce have taken any other steps than those ihe took, nor
could her conduEt have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced againfl Mary may be classed un-
der two heads.

i. THE depositions of rome persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was twice examined,
and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
are flill extant. It is pretended, that both these are notorious for-
geries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and Zait'vet/ which
it is almost impofiible to imitate; they abound with a number
of minute fads and particularities, which the mofi dextrous forger
could not have easily aiffmbled, and connected together with
any appearance of probability; and they are filled with circum-
flances, which can scarce be supposed to have entered the imagi-
nation of any man, but one of Paris's profefiion and charatCir.
But, at the fame time, it muff be acknowledged that his depolitions
contain tome improbable circumitances. He seems to have been
a fooli/h talkative fellow; the fear of death; the violcnce of tor-

VOL. II. F f f ture;

ture; and the desire of pleating those in whole power he was, tempt-
ed him, perhaps,.to feign some circumstances, and to exaggerate
others. To fay that some circumstances in an affidavit are improbable
or falls, is very different from faying that the whole is forged. I sus-
pedc the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance of the lat-
ter. Be that as it will, some of tlhe most material fads in Paris's
affidavits reft upon his tingle testimony; and for that reason, I have
not in the Hiflory, nor fiall I in this place, lay any stress upon them,

2. TIlE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. These

have been frequently published. The accident, by which the
Queen's enemies got them into their possession, is related Vol. I.
371. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or internal evi-
dence. Both these have been produced in the present caie.

i. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. I.

Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, upon their
word and honour, that the letters were written with the Queen's
own hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2.
64, 92. 2. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament
of Scotland, December I167, Good. 2. 360; and were so far
conlidered as genuine, that they are mentioned, in the ata against
Mlary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3.
They were fihewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Suliex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In
the account which they give of this matter to their Mistress, they
leem to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion
of any forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter con-
tained in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and
deviled by any other than herself; for that they discourse of
Iome things, which were unknown to any other than to herself
and Bothwcll; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, si the mat-
ter of them, and the manner how thelfc men came by thein is ifch,
as it feemeth that Cod, in whole light nmuider and bloodllled of the
innocent is abominable, would not permit the famen to be hli or
C r:ccalcd." Good. 2. 142. 'l lh'y Cc' c to have lllade such an
mi1prcsi ioli oni the 1)ukc of' Ni Foltli:, tihat inl a iuIelllquont letter to

Pc111-
18

Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has these words, " If the mat-
ter shall be thought as detestable and manifest to you, as for ought
we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 154. 4. After
the conferences at York and Weftmninfer were finished, Elizabetl
resolved to call together the Earls who were then at court, and to
lay before them the whole proceedings against th? Scottish Q;een,
particularly that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regent,
as the Queen of Scots letters and writings, should also be thewed,
and conference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight, with
the letters of the said Queen's being extant, and heretofore writ-
ten with her own hand, and sent to the Queen's Majefly; where-
by may be searched and examined what difference is betwixt them."
Good. 2. 252. They assembled, accordingly, at Hampton-Court,
December 14 and 15, 1568; and " The originals of the letters
supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand, were
then also presently produced and perused; and being read, were
duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters long since here-
tofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the Queen's
Majesty.- In collation whereof no difference was found." Good.
2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical letter for her con-
dud to the Countess of Lennox, July Io, I570 *, she transmitted
it to her husband then in Scotland; and he returned to the Countess
the following answer: " Seeing you have rem'ittit to me, to answer
the Queen the King's mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay

but

· Mary's letter has never been publiflhed, and ought to have a place here, where

evidence on all fides is fairly produced. " Madam, if the wrang and false reportis
of rebellis, enemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trusted
of me by zour advice, had not so far flurred you aganis my innocency, (and I nuft
fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not onelie as it were condemnit me wrang-
fullie, bot so hated me, as rome wordis and opene deides hes teftifeit to all the
swarlde, a manyfeft miflyking in zow againis zowr awn blude) I wold not have omit-
mit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow excusing me of those untrew rcporties
made of me. hot hoping with Godis grace and tyme to have my innocency knawn
to zow, as I trufl it is already to the naifl pairt of all indiffcerent perfonis, I thocht
it hell not to trouble zow for a tync till that fich a matter is moved that tuichis
us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure little fonc, and my onclic child in this

F f f 2 cuntrcy.

but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the best fie can for hirfelf,
to feanme to purge hir of that, quhair of many befyde me are certainly
perluadit of .the contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffionis of men gone to the
death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in obliviun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is f wveill knawin.
The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
and my cause, and of the just occafioun of our miflykyng. Hir
iicht dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis interefl, were hir trew
confefion and unfeyned repent!nce of that lamentable fat, odious
for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God isjuft,
and will not in the end be abused; but as he has manifested the
trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lcnnox's Orig. Regift. of
Letters. In their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be sus-
peted of advancing what would be most subservient to their cause ;
not what was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own in-
ward convidion. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox had
no occasion to dissemble; and it is plain, that he not only thought
the Qieen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

2. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the genuinnenes of the

Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, i. That whenever a

cuntrey. To the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. 1 have born him, and God knawis
with quhat daunger to him and rne boith ; and of zow he is defcendit. So I mcane
not to forzet my cewtie to zow, in fchewn h:rein any unkyndnefs to zow, how
unkyndlie that ever ze have delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and refpciS
zow as my moy .r in law. And gif ye pies to knaw farther of my mynde in that and
all uther thingis betwixt us, my ambaflndor the Bishop of Ross fall be ready to con-
ser with zow. And so after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me to my faide am-
bafador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zow to the protectioun of Al-
myghty God, quhom I pray to preserve zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow
to knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladic Lennox Youre natural gude Nice

my moder in law. and lovynge dochtcr.

paper

piper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to eftablilf the point in view, his solicitude to cut off all
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncertairty, al-
ways prompt him to use expressions the most explicit and full to his
purp fc. The paflages foisted into ancient authors by Heretics in
different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romilh faints; the
supposititious deeds in their own favour produced by monasteries;
the falie charters of homage mentioned Vol. T. p. i i. are so many
proofs of this afTeltion. No maxim fteems to he more certain than
this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls
into the error of proving too little. The point which the Queen's
enemies had to establish, was " that as the Earl of Bothwell was
chief executor of the horrible and u:lworthy murder perpetrated, &c.
so was file of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, and
commander of the said murder to be done." Good. 2. 207. But
cf this there are only imperfet hints, obscure intimations, and
dark exp eflions in the letters, which however convincing evidence
they might furnith if found in real letters, bear no resemblance to
that glare and superfluity of evidence which forgeries commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof
of her guilt. Lefley, Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with passages
to this purpose ; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet still it might have been expeded (fays her latest
defender) that tome one or other of the points or articles of the ac-
cufation should be made out clearly by the proof. But nothing of
that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing in the let-
ters, that could plainly flew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, counsel, or device of any mutrder, far less to have
persuadcd or commanded it; and as little is there about maintaining
or juflifying any murderers." Good. 1. 76. How ill advised were
Mary's adversarics to contract so much guilt, and to praEtife so many
artifices in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for efta-
blifhing the conclusion they had in view ? Hlad they been so base
as to have recourse to forgery, is it not natural to think that they
would have produced something more explicit and decisive ? 2. As
it is almost inpoffible to invent a long narration consisting of many

circuilm-

circunflances, and to connea it in such a manner with real fats,
that no mark of fraud flall appear; for this reason skilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and
iLuerfluous ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
the more are the chances of detetion increased. Now Mary's
letters, especially the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circum-
flances, extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether
foreign to the lpur'opfe of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been perfect folly to have inserted if they had been altogether
imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and reality of feve-
ral circumstances in the letters, and these, too, of no very publick na-
ture, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Lett. i. Good.
2. p. I. The Queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gentlemen,
and to have some conversation with him. Thomas Crawford, who
was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commitlioners, and
confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumstance. He likewise
declared, that during the Queen's flay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to him, every night, whatever had parsed, through the day,
between her Majesty and him, and that the account given of these
conversations in the first letier, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245. According to the
fame letter there was much discourse between the King and Queen
concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 8, Io, II.
What this might be, was altogether unknown till a letter of Mary's
preserved in the Scotch College at Paris, and published, Keith,
Pref. vii. discovercd it to be an affair of so much importance as me-
rited all the attention fie paid to it at that time. It appears by a
letter from tlle French ambassador, that Mary was subjeC to a vio-
lent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumflance is mentioned,
Lctt. i. p. 3o. in a manncr so natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine produclion. 4. If we shall (lill think it probable to
fuppolc that lo many real circumftanccs were artfully introduced into
the letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
their produdtion; it will scarce be pofliblc to hold the fame opinion
concerning the following particular. Before the Queen began her
first letter to Bothwell, fhc, as is ufal amlong those who wiitc long
letters concerning a variety of fubjicdt, made notcs or memlorandums

o1'
272

of the particulars (he wished to remember; but as Ihe fate up writ-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
asleep, her paper failed her, and she continued her letter upon the
fame sheet, on which she had formerly made her memorandums.
This she herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: " It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you, yet now after
the kifling of your hands, I will end my letter. Excuse my evil
writing, and read it twice over. Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had na paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial. Good.
2. 28. These memorandums still appear in the middle of the letter;
and what we have said seems naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be supposed
however that any forger would think of placing memorandums in the
middle of a letter, where, at firfr fight, they make lb absurd and
so unnatural an appearance. But if any iaiall still carry their refine-
ment so far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as to throw
in this circumstance, in order to preserve the appearance of genuine-
ness, they mut at least allow that the Queen's enemies, who em-
ployed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of there short notes and memorandums; but we find them
miflaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit cf lc/t
bearcr, i.e. points concerning which the Queen had given him
verbal inftrudtions. Good. 2. 152. This they cannot possibly be;
for the Queen herself writes with so much exadtnfs concerning the
different points in the memorandums, that there was no need of
giving any credit or inliruc'tions to the bearer concerning them.
The memorandums are indeed the contents of the letter. 5. Mary,
mentioning her conversations with the King about the affair of
Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, " The morne ji. e. to-morrow] I will
tpcik to him upon that point ;" and then adds, " As to the relt of
Willie Iliegait's, he confel]t it; but it was the morne, [i. c. the
morningl ofter my cumn ing or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This ad-
dition, which could not have been made till after the coiivcrla ion
lal pprunel, fccmls either to have lbct- inlirted by the Q2lccn into
the body of the letter, or, pelha1ps,, fle lIaving w\'ri;tcn it (n the
inarl.'in, it was takenI thence ilto the text. Ji' wvc li olc tilc
letter to be a real one, and w riittn at diffcrelt tines, as it pllinliy

8 1 .1, ;,

23

bears, this circumflance appears to be very natural; but no reaSon
could have induced a forger to have ventured upon such an ana-
chionilm, for which there was no necessity. An addition, perfectly
limilar to this, made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good,
2. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by her
enemies, on purp fe to blast her reputation, and to jufiify their own
rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the arguments,
which were produced, in her own age, in support of this opinion;
the obtervations which we have already made, contain a full reply
to tlcmn. An author, who has inquired into the affairs of that pe-
riod with great industry, and who has acquired much knowledge of
them, has lately published (as he affirms) a demonstration of the
forgery of Mary's letters. This demontlration he founds upon evi-
dence both internal and external. With regard to the former he
c*blerves that the French copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a
translation of Buchanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scotch copy; and by consequence, the afertion
of the Q(een's enemies, that she wrote them originally in French, is
altogether groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. He
accounts for this strange fuccetfTon of translations, by supposing
that when the.forgery was proje(ted, no person could be found ca-
pable of writing originally in the French language, letters which
would pass for the Quecn's; for that reason they were first compored
in Scotch; but unluckily, the French interpreter, it would seem,
did not underlhand that language; and therefore Buchanan tranfated
tlhen into Latin, and fromn his Latin they were rendered into
French. Good. 1. 79, So.

Ir is scarce necccfliry to observe that no proof whatever is pro-

duced of any of these suppositions. The manners of the Scots,
in that age, when almoot every man of rank ftjent a part of his
youth in France, and the intcrcourfe between the two nations was
great, render it altogether improbable that so many complicated

opera-

6

operations should be necessary, in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced by
Murray and his party in the Scottish parliament, and at York and
Westminster. But this he has not attempted; and if we attend to
the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, must
have been unsuccessful. The letters were first published at the end
of Buchanan's deteetioz. The firlf edition of this treatise was in
Latin, in which language three of the Queen's letters were rubjoined
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soon after a Scottish
translation of it was published, and at the end of it were printed
likewise in Scotch, the three letters which had formerly appeared
in Latin, and five other letters in Scotch, which were not in the
Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the Detetion,
and of seven of the letters; this bears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem 1572. The name of the place, as
well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties to be a manifet im-
posture. Our author, from observing the day of the month, on
which the printing is said to have been finished, has afierted that
this edition was printed at London; but no stress can be laid upon
a date found in a book, where every other circumstance with regard
to the printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to
Lefley) was the best informed of all Mary's advocates in that age,
affirms that the French edition of the Detection was publiflcd ill
France: " 11 [Buchanan] a depuis adjoufte a cefte declamation un
petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la fagon
de son proces, et la tout envoys aux frercs a la Rochelle, lefquelc
voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, l'ont traduit en Francois, et
iceluy fut imprim&e a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par
Thomas Waltem, nom apofle et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie.
Jebb. 2. 256." The author of the InnocLnc e e Marie goes farther,
and names the French translator of the D)etection. Et iccluy pre-

VoL . II. C g g micrcment

mierement compos6 (comme il femble) par George Buchanan Efcof-
soys, et depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un Hugonot, Poi-
tevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhonme, et un
de plus remarquez fcditeux de France. Jebb. 1. 425, 443. The
concurring teflimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of information, must
outweigh a flight conjedure. This French translator does not pre-
tend to publimh the original French letters as written by the Queen
herself; he exprefly declares that he translated them from the Latin.
Good. i. 103. Had our author attended to all these circumstances,
he might have saved himself the labour of so many criticisms to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is a translation.
from the Latin. The French editor himself acknowledges it, and
so far as I know no person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was so ignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French, partly
in Scotch. Good. I. 103. Had this translation been published at
London by Cecil, or had it been made by his diredion, so gross an
error would not have been admitted into it. This error, however,
was owing to an odd circumstance. In the Scottifl translation of the
DeteEion, there was prefixed to each letter two or three sentences
of the original French, which breaking off with an &c. the Scottish
translation of the whole followed. This method of printing tranf-
lations was not uncommon in that age. The French editor o'b-
serving this, fuolifily concluded that the letters had been written
partly in French, partly in Scotch.

IF we carefully confider there few French sentences of each

letter which still remain, and apply to them that species of criticism,
by which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof will
arise, that there was a French copy not translated from the Latin,
but which was itself the original from which both the Latin and
Scotch have been translated. This minute criticism must necessarily
be disagreeable to many readers, but luckily a few sentences only
are to be examined, which will render it extremely short.

IN
26

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, y faifoit bon. It is plain that this expression veu ce que
peut un corps fan c4aur is by no means a translation of cum plane
perinde effem atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a spirit
and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor Scottish
have retained. yufques a la din'e is not a translation of toto prandii
tempore; the Scottifl translation qubile denner-time expresses the
fenie of the French more properly ; for anciently quhile signified
z/ntill as well as during. ye n'ay pas tenu grand propos is not justly
rendered neque contulerimfermonem cumn quoquam; the phrase used in
the French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and gives a more
probable account of her behaviour, than the other. Jugeant bien qu'il
ny faifoit bon, is not a translation of ut qui judicarent id non Je ex zfu.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with apprendre. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted
altogether these words, et toutefois je ne puis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with preJfnter. Y'aye veill/ plus tard
la haut is plainly no translation of diutius illic morata funz; the
sense of the French is better expressed by the Scottifli I have walkit
later there up. Again, Pour exczfer voJire affire is very different
from ad exczfandum noJtra negotia. The five remainingletters never
appeared in Latin ; nor is there any proof of their being ever
translated into' that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lifhed in French. This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis
concerning the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the DeteEion the whole Sonnet is printed

in French as well as in Scotch. It is not possible to believe that
this Scottish copy could be the original from which the French was
translated. The French confifs of verses which have both mea-
sure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far from being
inelegant. The Scottish confifrs of an equal number of lines, but
without measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever think of a
thing ob absurd and impracicable, as to require one to translate a
certain given number of lines in prose, into an cqual number of
verfcs, where both measure and rhyme were to be observcd. The
Scottiflh, on the contrary, appears manifcflly to be a tranflaion of

G g g 2 the

27

the French ; the phrases, the idiomns, and many of the words are
French, and not Scottish. Besides, the Scottilh translator has in fe-
veral instances mift.iken the sense of the French, and in many more
expresses the sense imperfectly. Had the sonnet been forged, this
could not have happened. The direcors of the fraud would have
understood their work. I (hall satisfy myself with one example,
in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luyje veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottish but a French phrase; the

two last lines do not express the sense of the French, and are abfo-
lute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It contains

much refined mysticism about devices, a folly of that age, of which
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumfiances,
particularly from a letter concerning impreJas by Drummond of
Hawthornden. If Maiy's adversaries forged her letters, they were
certainly employed very idly when they produced this.

FROMI these observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottilh were
only translations. Nothing now remains of this copy but those
few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish translation. The
French editor laid hold of there sentences, and tacked his own
trantlation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a servile and
a very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas in those
introductory entences, we have discovered strong marks of their
being originals, and certain proofs that they are not translated from
the Latin.

IT
28

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin aid Scottish tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Scottish translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early translated into
Scotch, Good. 2. 76 ; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation not from the French but from this Scottish copy. Were
it necessary, several critical proofs of this might be produced. One
that has been already mentioned seems decisive. Diutiuzs illic mo-
ratafum bears not the least resemblance to jay veille plus tard la
hat ; but if, instead of Iwalkit [i. e. watched] loiter there-up, we
suppose that Buchanan read Iwaitit, &c. this mistake, into which
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranf-
lation.

THESE criticifis, however minute, appear to be well found-

ed; But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the
other arguments with regard to the internal evidence remain in
full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already examined. ACcording to Mur-
ray's diary, Mary Let out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January 21,
1567; lie arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the 27th;
fle, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th, flayed
in that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But according to our author, the Queen did
not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th; as she flayed a night
at Callendar, she could not reach Glasgow sooner than the evcn.
ing of Saturday the 25th, and the returned to Linlithgow on
Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the firit letter which supposes
the Queen to have been at leaf- four days in Glasgow, as well .a
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturday morn'lig,
whereas fle did not arrive there till the evening, mull be forgeries.
That the Queen did not let out from Edinburgh sooner than the
24th of January, is evident (as he contends) from the public re-
cords, which contain a Precept of coaritn7ic' of a il/-relct bl

;1'111U"'

29

James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the Queen on the
24th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the Queeli's,
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis
taylor to the Prince her son. That the King and Queen had re-
turned to Linlithgow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there, dated at
Linlithgow January 28. Good. I. 118.

Tins has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by Mary;
but how far it falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations.

I. IT is evident from a declaration or confession made'bv the

Bishop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of October 1568, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her fubjeds accused her of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly probable that
the Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote the defence
of Queen Mary's honour, in the year 1570. They were published
to all the world together with Buchanan's Detecion, A. D. 157I.
Now if they had contained any error so gross, and so obvious, at
that time, to discovery, as the supposing the Queen to have pafled
several days at Glasgow, while Ihe was really at Edinburgh; had
they contained a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning, though
fine did not arrive there till the evening; is it poflible that fle her-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo-
cates who appeared for her in that age, should not have published
and exposed this contradition, and, by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an imposture ? In disquisitions which are
naturally abfrbufe and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest author
may discover many things, which have escaped the attention, or
baffled the sagacity of those who have formerly conidered the fame
subjed. But when a matter of fat lay so obvious to view, this cir-
cumftance of its being unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any
of her adherents, is almost a demonflration that there is some mif-

4 take

rake or fallacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any either
of our historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in queflion
the common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the least
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this point.
But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our author refts

the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions, are not
the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tranfla-
tions of copies of those originals. It is not necessary, nor would
it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unacquainted
with the forms of law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conversant
in business will underitand me, when I.fay that the precept of con-
firmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the Privy Seal, on a warrant from
the signet office, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh.the 24th of January ;. and that the deed in favour of
James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Privy-feal,
proceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some degree of reason,
that a proof founded on papers, which are so many removes diflant
from the originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name both.

of the King and Qeen ; by law, the King's subscription was no less
requisite to any paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original signatures be produced in order to ascertain the particular
day when each of them signed, or to prove. that it was signed only
by one of them, the legal proof arising from these papers would
be, that both the King and Qgeen signed them at Edinburgh, on
the 24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the sovereign,

in that age, seem to have been in a great measure arbitrary, and
affixed at the pleasure of the writer ; and of consequence, these
dates were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never be relied

utpon .

upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found to be fo-per-
nicious, that an aa of parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the as-
iixing a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. TiHRE still remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the necelity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any particular
date to be falie, yet furprizing inflances of this kind shall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from hitfory than that the King
\Va3 at Glasgow 24th January 1567 ; and vet the record of figna-
tulres from I565 to 1582, Fol. i6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonfton said to have been subscribed by our
Sovereig, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24th
1i 67; so that if we were to trust implicitly the dates in the records
of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it would
prove that not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Biflop of Ross that on

the 25th of Odober i566, Mary lay at the point of death; Keith,
App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the publick records,
which bears that it-was iigned by the Queen that day. Privy feal.
Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlozny.

ACCORDING to papers in the fame book, fol. I 13, the Queen muit

have been at Edinburgh December 21, 1566. According to other
papers, fol. 99, ioo. the must have been at Stirling December 21;
and if we depend upon other papers, fol. I I 2, ihe muff have re-
turned to Edinburgh on December 22d. These various motions
are altogether repugnant to history. The Queen during all that
time remained at Stirling, on account of the Prince's baptism ; and
we particularly know that she was there December 22d, by a let-
ter of Du Croc the French ambassador, who mentions an interview
he had with her at Stirling on that day. Keith, Pref. VII.

BOTH-

33

BOTHWELL feined the queen as she returned from Stirling, April

24th, 1567, and (according to her own account) carried her to
Dunbar with all diligence. And. 1. 95. But our author, relying on
the dates of some papers which he found in the records, supposes
that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to tranfac
business there. Nothing can be more improbable than this fuppo-
fition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to Wright
Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by our au-
thor, Vol. i. 124. among the inflances of the false dates of papers
which were issued in the ordinary course of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid.
it is signed April I4th, not April 2.th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is, that the

remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her thither,
till she returned to Edinburgh along with him in the beginning
of May. Our author himself allows that fie resided twelve days
there, Vol. I. 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar during
that time, yet there are others which bear that they were signed
at Edinburgh; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April z th, Privy
feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at Dun-
bar on that day. Lib. 3I. Chart. No. 524, 526. lb. Lib. 32.
No. 154, 157. There are some signed at Dunbar April 28th. 0-
thers at Edinburgh April 3oth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others
at Dunbar May i ft. Id. ibid. No. 58. These different charters sup-
pose the Queen to have made so many unknown, improbable, and
inconsistent journeys, that they afford the clearest demonstration
that the dates in these records ought not to be depended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter said

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sunday,
which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland, as ap-
pears from the books of fiderunt, then kept by the Lords of fef-,
sion.

VOL. II,

FROM
11 h h

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far from
amounting to demonstration.

ANOTIHER argument against the genuineness of there letters is

founded on the (tile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produdions. It
is plain both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in a fair
hand, that the valued herfelfon those accomplishments, and was
desirous of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when (he wrote
at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy appear.
A remarkable instance of this may be found in a paper published,
Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
most hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of a translation,
they are not destitute either of spirit or of energy. The manner
in which he expresses her love to Bothwell hath been pronounced
indecent and even (hocking. But Mary's temper led her to warm
expressions of her regard; those refinements of delicacy, which
now appear in all the commerce between the sexes, were, in that
age, but little known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royflon's papers there is a series of letters, from Mary
to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her love to that nobleman in
language, which would now be reckoned extremely indelicate.

TIHE sonnets and rome of Mary's letters to Bothwell were written

bcfrc the murder of her hutband; some of them after that event,
and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior to
the death of her huiband abound with the fondest expressions of
her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their familiarity
had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, some dark
expreflions, which her enemies employed to prove that flie was no
itranger to the schemes which were i frming igainft her husband's
life. Of this kind are the following pafiages, " Alace ! I nevir dif-
favit ony body; hot I remit me altogiddir to zour will. Send me
advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhatfacver thing come therof,

I fill

4

I fall obey zow. Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
rnair secret inventioun by medecine, for he fuld tak medecine and
the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2. 22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit
teiris fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eftemit, as the-trew and faith-
full travellis quhilk I fuflene for to merite hir place. For obtain-
ing of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may
impefche me. God forgive me," &c. ibid. 27. I have walkit
laiter thair- up, then I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw
something out of him, quhilk this berer will chaw zow, quhilk
is the fairert commodity that can be offerit to excuse zour affairis."
ibid. 32. From the letters posterior to the death of her husband,
it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing Mary by force,
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert with
herself, and with her approbation .

H h h 2 HAV-

* THAT letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to Bothwell flould have

been entirely loft, appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being produced
in England before Elizabeth's commifioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 235. He seems to have kept them in his posses-
sion during his life. After his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his fuc-
cefnor, who restored them to the Earl of Morton, Good. 2. 91. Though it be
not necessarily conneAed with any of the questions which gave occasion to this Dif-
fertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some of my readers, to inform them,
that after a very diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's let-
ters to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their being delivered to
Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EX'IRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador from Queen Eliza-

beth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of
Ifate, from the original regifler book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from l5th of August
1 582, to 28th September 1583, in the poffellion of Christopher Hunter, M. D. of
Durham.

1582., 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALnBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein were the originals

of letters between the Scottifl Queen and the Earl of Bothwell, had beell delivered
to sundry hands, and thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it
refled, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufcardyne's means, that both
the coffer and also the writings are come, and now remain with the Earl of Gow-

ric,

35

HAVING thus flated the proof on both fides; having examined

at ib great length the different fyflerns with regard to the fads
in controversy; it may be expected that I should now pronounce

fen-

ric, who, I perceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Majetly accord.
ing to her Majesty's desire.

THIS time pals I have expended in searching where the coffer and writings were,

wherein without the help of the prior I flould have found great difficulty, inow I
will essay Gowrie, and of my success you flall be flortly adverlifed.

12th of November 5 82, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the casket and letters mentioned in my lass,

before there were come to the polleffion of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found
that no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own con-
sent and privity; in which behalf F had employed fitt infiruments, that neverthe-
less profited nothing, therefore I attempted to essay himself, letting him know that
the said casket and letters should have been brought to her majesty by the offer
and good means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majesty
before they came into his baids and custody, and knowing that he ('id bear the like
affection, and was ready to pleasure her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this
that had been thus far tendered to her Majesty, and which thereby ihould be well
accepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort and
contentment; I moved him that they might be a present to be sent to her Majesty
from him, and that I might cause the fame be conveyed to her Majefy, adding
hereunto such words and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and
a!lo best effete the purpose; at the filft he was loth to agree that they were in his
poffeflion, but I let him plainly know that I was cert:.inly informed, that they were
delivered to him by Sanders Jordin, whereupon he prefred to know who did so in-
form me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Morton had done it or no;
I did not otherways in pliin terms deny or answer thereunto, but that he might
think that he had told me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well ple-ased that
1 shall give him to be the author thereof; after he iad laidl [though] all there let-
ters were in his keeping (which he wo Id neither grant nor deny) vet he might not
deliver them to any perlon without the contents and privities, as well of the king,
that had interest therein, as also of the reft of the noblemen enterpiifers of the
aftion against the king's mother, and that would have them kept as a:: evidence
to warrant and nmake good that accti)on. A\nd albeit I rtplieil, that their aftion in
that part touching the aflignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had re-
ceived fitch ellablilifhmcn t, confirmation, ani firength, by ads of parliament arnd
other publick authority and inflruments, as neither ihould that cafel e fluftled to
come in debate or qucftion, nor such (crolls and papers ought to be flewed for the
fircngthening thereof, fb ais these might well be left an I he rcniilicel to the hands
of her Majesty, to whom they wete destined before they fell in his keeping ; yet he

wouldl

37

sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
can be drawn from the fads which have been enunerated,

O0 E,

would not be removed or satisfied, concluding, after much reasonings, that the
Earl of Morton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durst at
any time make delivery; and because it was the firet time that I had moved him
therein, and that he would gladly both answer her Majesty's good expectation in
him, and also perform his duty due to his sovereign and associates in the action
aforesaid, therefore he would seek out the said casket and letters, at his return to his
house, which he thought should be within a short time; and upon finding of the
fame and better advice, and consideration had of the cause, he would g ve further
answer. This relolution I have received as to the thing; and f(;r the present I
could not better, leaving him to give her MajelSy such titii:ti ny of his good will
towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as the may have ctufi' to confirm her
highnlffes good opinion conceited already of him, and be thereby ur.Lvln to gre. ter
goodness towards him. I shall still labour him both by Inyfelf and Jdib by all other
means, but I greatly difiruft the desired success herein.

24th of November 1 52, from Edinburgh.

FoR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the hands of the Lail of

Gowvrie, I have lately moved him earnestly therein, letting him know the purpose of
the Scottih Queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels, and
also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or defaced, and that the means which
' file will make in this behalf {hall be so great and effectual, as these writings cannot be
fifely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath the custody
thereof, neither shall he that is once known to have them be suffered to hold them
in his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that action,
and the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now openly known to have
the possession of there writings, and I have lettin him fee what surety it mhall bring
to the said cause and all the parties therein, and to himself, that these writings may
be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping of her Majesty, that vwill
have them ready whcnfoever any ule flall be for them, and by her highnle fl' coun-
tenance defend them and the parties from fu. h wronigfull olje'lions as {hall be laid
against them, offlring at length to him, that if he be not fully f itisficd hcrt in, ,r
doubt that the reft of the alociate fli.ill not like of the delivery of them to her
inajefty in this good manner, and for the ilitereft rehearsed, that I flh.l readily, til-on
nmeeting and conference with them, procure their afl'int in this part; (a matter more
c.ly to offer than to perform) and, laflly, moving him that (for the lccrccy and
lbnefit of thi caulc, and that her Majcfty's good opinion towards himiiucf may be
1illnly fettled and confirmed by his acceptable forwadnlfs herein) he would, with-
out needless scruple, frankly commit there writings to her Mlajefy's good cuflodly
lfr the good uscs received. After long debate he rcfulved, and said, that he tIvuld
unfeignedly fliew and do to her Majefly all the pleasure that he might withou, otcince
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the aflociates in the a:lion, and i Ihec-
iorc he would sirss make search and view the fa d letters, liand herein tIake ad;l ice

\V hlat

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and pre-
iurniing on her attachment to himself, struck the blow without
lhaving concerted with her the manner or circumflances of perpe-
tratin that crime. That

cMary, inilead of testifying much indig-

nation at the deed, or discovering any resentment against Both-
well, who was accuted of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conduced his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it impossible to discover his guilt, and soon after,

what he might do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty; promif-
ingT thereon to givc more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly, that after he had
found and seen the writings, that he might not make delivery of them without the
privity of the King. Albeit I flood long with him against his resolution in this
}point, to acquaint the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
(if her MIajetty, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to
the cause ; yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth to put
over the matter from himself to the King, upon fight whereof I shall travel cflsc-
tujllv to obtain the King's consent, that the letters may be committed to her Ma-
ijfr)ys keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the pre-
sent love and affection that he beareth to her Highncfs, than to win any thing at the
hands of the associates in the action, whereof some principal of them now come and
remain at the devotion of the Kinl's mother; in this I shall tlill call on Gowrie
to learch out the coffer, according to his promise; and as I lhall find him minded
t;3 do therein, Co Ihall I do my best and whole endeavour to effed the success to
her MVlajcity's belt contentment.

2d December 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the Earl of Gow-

r c for recovery of the lettcrs in the coftcr in his hands, therefore I put him in mind
thereof; whereul.on he told me, th.it the Duke of Lennox had fought earnestly to
have lhad thrfe letters, and that the King did know where they were, so as they
could not be delivcred to her M.ijclty without the King's privity and consent, and
he pretended to be lill willing to pleafire her Majefly in the fame, so far as he
may with hii dutv tO the Ki:g aind to the rcft of the aflbciates in that aEtion; but
I greatly diltrudt to efRedt this to her Majcfty's pleasure, wherein, nevcrthele's, I
.nall do my uttermolt cndeavours.

WIVE'VrI Tii James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death, A. D. 1584, and

seizcd all his cil;t , took care to dellroy his mother's letters, for whose honour
he was at tlat time extremely zealous; whether they have pcrifiled by onme un-
known accident ; or whethler they may not still remain unoblirved among the ar-
chives of fomn of our trcal families, it is impoflible to determine.

in

in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, vo-
luntarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every confidera-
tion should have induced her to detest. By this verdid, Mary
is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her
husband, or even of having previously given her consent to his
death; but ihe is not acquitted.of having discovered her approba-
tion of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the author
of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to eflablifh, " That as James, fumtyme Erle of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy mur-
der, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of gude
memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis lauchfull
husband; fa was she of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise, per-
fwadar and commandar of the said murder to be done." Good. 2,
207.

WHICH of these conclusions is moit agreeable to the evidence,
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

IN D E X

32

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Vol. and the Figures to the

Pages.

A.

DAMSON, archbishop of St. An-
drews, is excommunicated by the fy-
nod of Fife, II. 119. He excommu-

nicated his opponents, ibid. is restored by
the general assembly upon conditions, 120.
His mean fubmiliion to the general assem-
bly 74
Albany, Alexander, duke of, cabals with his

nobles against his brother K. James III. I.
48. is made prisoner but escapes to France,
ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of
England, 49. procures afliftance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ibid. returns
to Scotland, and is restored to favour, 50.
cabals again but is forced to fly to France,

.

- _

- ibid. 5 l

--- Duke of, made Regent during the

minority of K. James V. I. 31, 53. after
several unsuccessful struggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France, ib. 54
Alehnfon, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses

the court of France, by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him, - I. 59
Al/en, cardinal, publifled a book proving the

lawfulness of killing excommunicated
Princes - - 11. 107
A/l.a, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q

Mary, II. 23, 26, 37. is recalled from his
government of the Netherlands 43
/winbj/adors, their office . 73, 74
.,,rireuws St. the archbillop of, remarkably

cured of a dangerous diltcmper, 1. lio.
the motives of his opposition to the Q Re.
gent. 136. his great influence on the bench
of Bishops and weight in PIarliament, 10.
governed the church with great moderation,
i -1. prof(cutes the reformers, 142. per-
forms great cfrvice to the congregation
iagainit the ;French, I(o. is impifioned fur
:clclbratlig Mal;, z;S. ruins Q(Mary's
\,uL. 11.

affairs by his imprudent conduEt, 388. is
taken prisoner in Dunbarton cattle, and
hanged -- 1I. 15
Alzdrews St. the cattle of, demolished by the

French - - 199

- the prior of, promotes a treaty be-
tween the Q Regent and the Reformers,
I. 153. is provoked to leave the court,
15 . is one of the chief promoters of the
reformation, i68. some account and a cha-
rater of him, ibid. i69. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 169. pre-
fumption of his innocence of the designs
charged on him, ibid. is Sent by the con-
vention to invite the Queen to Scotland,
216. is received by her with confidence and
affection, 217. refirains the turbulent spirit
of the people against popery, 228. is sent
to reflrain the licentious practices of the
borderers, 233. executes his commiflion
with vigour and prudence, 234. a confpi-
racy against him discovered, 242. is crea-
ted Earl of Mar, 244. becomes obnoxious
to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. fee Mar and
Murray
Angus, Earl of, was the only man who asserted

the independency or his country, 1. 19, 20.
assumes the Regency during the minority
of K. James V. 31. 54. is unable to gain
his aflelions, 54, is attainted and flies into
England -- --

Obtains leave to return into Scotland,

If. 70. surrenders himself to K. James Vl.
88. he with fcveral others fc ze the castle
of Stil ng to oppose Arran, 9?. they arc
lorccd to fly into I,.ngland on the approach
of the King with an army, 92. he is at-
tainted and his ell:lte forftitcd, 99 is con-
cerned in a plot in favour of Spain, i78.
is seized and committed prisoner to the caflle
of' l.dinburgli, 179. elicapes and Jlies to the

1 i i iI1oun-

mountains, ibid. 180. offers to submit to a
trial, 183. sentence is pronounced against
him, 184. he refutes to submit 185
1njo;:, Duke of, a marriage proposed between
him and Q. Elizabeth - 1. 21
An.e, a Plincefs of Denmark, married to K.

James VI. II. 170, 171. her arrival in
Scotland and coronation, 173. heads a
party that opposes the chancellor 18
Ar.-J:bijh ps, BIh/srs, Deans, and (Chapters revi-

ved in Scotland during the King's minority,
II. 33, 34+ this gives great offence to many
of the clergy, ibid. an ad of afiembly
againit thele offices, 74. Bishops made
subject to prefb) tries and assemblies, 119.
a great stroke given to their authority, 159.
None of them present at the Queen's coro-
nation - 1- 73
Argyil, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown

matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I.
140. uses his interest with the reformers to
make a treaty with the Queen Regent, 1 53.
leaves her court in resentment of her trea-
chery, 155. refuses to accede to a treaty
with Murray the Regent, 422. is soon as-
ter forced to submit, 423. ats as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's mur-
der, II. 5. is prevailed on to join the
King's party, 8. quarrels with Athole, 47.
confederates with him againit Morton, the
Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they
renonltiate against him to the King, 50.
they ra:ile forces againit him, 55. negoci-
ate a treaty with him by the mediation of
Q(.Llizabeth, 56. is promoted to the of-
fice of chancellor, 57. the King's autho-
rity delegated to him and Lord Sorbes
agatinft the popish Lords, 187. his forces
are defeated in an engagement with them,

- -- 188

A.'fl:;racr', predominant in Scotland 1. 201
Armada, Spanish, preparations for it. II. 61i.

it is delsated - i66
,rrran, Earl of, is appointed Regent during the

minority of Q Mary, I. 83. his clharater,
ibid. 84. conlents to the fcheices of Eng-
land which diguflts the public, 8(. be-
comes suspicious of the Earl of Lenox, 87
i. forced to renounce the fricndlhip with
England and dcclare for France, 88. and
to perfccute the reformers, 89j. publickly

abjures the docAline of the reformers, 9o.
is contemned by one half and little trufled
by the other part of the nation, oi. heads
the partizans of France and defenders of
popery, ibid. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 97. is forced
to make a truce with the conspirators, 98.
his eldelt son is conditionally excluded all
right of fucceflion, oo his mean conceflion
to the court of. France, G17. gets the title
of Chatelherault, ibid. is undermined by
the Qo Dowager, 113, 14. propofils and
arguments for his resignation, I 15. he con-
sents to it, 16. retracts by the influence of
the archbishop of St. Andrews, 117. is at
laif prevailed on and gets advantageo.s
terms, ibid. 1fe Chatelherault.
Arran, EldeRt on of the Duke of Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an aflociation with the refor-
mers, 1. 166. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 167. is fill of
refentmnent against the French on that ac-
count, ibid. i68. the congregation follicit
Q Elizabeth to marry him, o209. his great
imprudence with regard to Q. Mary, 235.
discovers a conspiracy againit the Q.Leen s
favourites, 242. lores his reason, ]I. 57,
58. is imprisoned by Morton 58

late capt. Stewat, gets that title and

eflate, IL. 69. is appointed to conduct
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, ib.
tortures several of his servants cruelly, ibid.
his infamous marriage with the countess of
March, 71, 72. his variance with Lenox,
72. is fiulfrated in an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthven, 78. is confined prisoner
to the castle of Stirling, ibid. 79. regains
his liberty and the King's regard, 85, 86.
resumes his power and arrogance, 86. gets
the Ruthven conspirators declared guilty of
high treason, 88. is detefled as author of a
persecution againfl the clergy, 94. is gain-
ed over to Q. Elizabeth's interell, 97, 98.
gets several forfeited ellates, 99. his cor-
ruption and insolence, 1o5. is madechan-
cellor and has unlimited power, ibid. his
venality is imitated by his wife, ibid. his
monltrous tyranny and oppreflion, 106, 107.
his power undermined by Wotton the Eng-
lifl envoy, 1 5. is confined in the caflle of
St. Andrews but oon recovers favour, 116.

his

his interest finks much, 17. is stripped of
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original station - - 118
Articles, Lords of, their origin and business, I.

69. by whom chosen, 70. the fubfcquent
variations and political use made of this in-
tlitution --- 7, 72
Arrundel, Earl of, is appointed a commillioncr

to the conference at Weftminlter 1. 414
A//ybr, ambassador from QElizabeth to bcot-

land, 11. 163. his great promiles to King
James, ibid. his promiles are soon forgot,
166. he is aihanied and withdraws pri-
vately from Scotland - ibid.
A.as7/ination, the frequency of it in Scotland,

how accounted for, I. 311-313. several
instances of it in France, 313, 314. a flop
put to it there and in Scotland, 314. feve-
ral great men approved of it, 315. pre-
vailed greatly afterwards - 11. 174
A.4imb/y of the church of Scotland, the firlt

but feeble and irregular, I. 215. another
assembly, their demands from the conven-
tion, 235. two other assemblies in vain fol-
licit an augmentation of their revenues, 252.
they address Q Mary. in high strains of
complaints, z94. anaffembly proceeds at
Glagow notwithstanding the King's inter-
cittion, I:. 74. two assemblies yield many
ct the privileges of the church to the King,
04. declare it lawful for ministers to fit in
Parliament, 207, o208. fee Clergy.
4ftociation, formed in defence of Q. Elizabeth
against Q.Mary 11. Io1
Az4ho'e, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the Earl of Argyll, II. 74, joins with
him in opposing Morton theRegent, ib. dies
soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 57.
iufpicions of his being.poifoned ibid.
lubigne, Lord de, second ton oftheEarl of Lc-
nox, arrives in Scotland fiom France, 11. 60
becomes soon a great favourite of K. James,
ibid. high titles and polls bellowed on him,
ibid. notes againll him, appendix, 1ol. fee
Lenox.
,Ai.lrian family, their origin and power, I. 74

B
B Abi/gon, Anthony, some account of him,

11. z22. the rife of his conspiracy againtl
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. the names and fchcme

of operations of his associates, ibid.
they are betrayed, seized and executed,

.- ..- i 4, 125
Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the

commissioners to the conference at Well-
miniler - --- 1. 414
Balicl, John, his claim to the crown ofbcot-

land, 1. 8. is preferred by Ed. I. o1. soon
forced by him to resign -ibid.
Ballard, a trafficking priest, follicits an inva-

sion of England from Spain, II. 122. joins
in a confiiracy to murder Q.Elizabeth, 123
is discovered and taken into cullody, 124.
and executed - - 125
Barons, their jurifdition very extensive, I. 18.

the difference between the greater and lefier
whence, 66. three hun.red of them remon-
firate againit the conduct of the Q(. owa.
ger, 13o. the lesser admitted by their
representatives into Parliament, 11. ,16-.
petition of the leper Barons to Parliament,
app. io. fee Nobles.
Blafilcon Doron, a book published by King

James VI. ftrengIhens his interest in Eng-
land - - 11. 209
Beatoun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V.

to mortify the nobles, I. 58. his preten-
sions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince, 82. forges a testament of the late
King, ibid. his views how disappointed,
ibid. his character, 83. opposes the earl
of Arran Regent, 86. excites most of the
nation against the Englifl, 87. seizes the
young Queen and her mother, ibid. cajols
the Earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for
France, 88. and to persecute the refor-
mers, 89. engrofles the chief direcion of
affairs, 91. his double dealing with the
Earl of Lenox resentcd, ibid. is murdered,
95, 96. his death fatal to the Catholics,
97. a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid.
scandalous reports concerning him 126
Bcdfrrd, Earl of; comes as Ainbafljdor froi

Q. Elizabeth to witness the baptifin of
James VI. I. 332. his inflrunions, ibid.
333. his letters to Sir W. Cccil, appendix

27, 3.o, 34
Bellendon, Sir Lewis, jullice clerk, K. J.ames's

rcfident at London, 11. 114.. jois in pro-
moting Q.Elizabeth's interell in Scotland,

1 i i z ibid.

ibid. is sent with her Envoy into that coun-
try - i bid.
B'ack, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews,

his ridiculous and seditious exprefflons in the
pulpit, II. 195, 196. being supported by
the clergy, he declines the civil jurilf
diftion, 196. is condemned by the privy
council, 197. is sentenced by the King
to relide beyond Spey 198
Blockaier, captain, and three others executed

for the murder of Darnly - I. 370
Boetbius, Hector, his hiflory of Scotland, Ibime

account of - - I. 4
.Blton Caf'.e, Q_ Mary confined a prisoner

there - I. 401
Bonat, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney,

I. 129.
Bordeers, an attempt to refirain their licen-

tious praftices, I. 233, 234. QMary vi-
fits them, 323. afcuffle there in which the
English warden, &c are made prisoners,

- - . II. 46
Bortkhwick, Lord, assists the Queen Regent in

defending Leith I. 183
.Bothb.'e, Earl of, intercepts a fum of mo-

ney from England to the congregation,
I 181. favours theQueen Regent, but re-
fides at his own houle, 183. his resent-
ment againfi the prior cf St. Andrews,
245. is by him when Earl of Murray and
Regent summoned to a public trial, 280.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid.
a sentence of outlawry against him pre.
vented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted
to return, 289, eicapes with her after the
murder of Rizio, 310. some account of
his former behaviour, 317. commences a
favourite of the Queen, ibid. 318. she re-
conciles him to several Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. he increases in
aavour with her, 320. circumstances con-
curring in this, 321. he is wounded in at-
tempting to fcize one of the borderers, 323.
the Qucecn's extraordinary regard for him
on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for IMlortoni and his as-
(ociates, 3 . 335. pi pofls the reftora-
tion of tile ,rpili eccleiiallical jurisdiction,
336. lhis views in thil, ibid. 337. is sus-
pcctcd the author of I)arnly' murder, 343.
is charged with it by Lenox, 345. but Lill
favoured by the Quen, ibid. ;appointed

governor of Edinburgh Cafile, ibid. his
trial is hurried on, 346. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 347. Lenox accuses
him openly, 348. comes to his trial with-
a great retinue, 348, 349. is acquitted by
a jury, 3'9. the trial universally censured,
ibid. 350. challenges any that would ac-
cufe him, 350. several acts of Parliament
passed in his favour, 351. he procures an
act in favour of the reformation, ibid. 35 z.
prevails on several of the nobles to recom-
mend him as a husband to the Queen, 352,
353, 354. seizes the Queen on a journey
fiom Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
356. his view in this, 357. obtains a par-
don under the great feal, ibid. procures a
divorce from his wife, 358. carries the
Queen to the cattle of Edinburgh, ibid. is
created Duke of Orkney, 359. and mar-
ried to the Queen, ibid. is not allowed the
title of King, 360. he watches the Queen-
very closely, ibid. endeavours to get the
Prince into his cuftofty, ibid. 361. is a-
larmed with an affeciation of the nobles
againfl the Queen and him, 36z. carries
the Queen to the caffle of Borthwick,.ibid.
raises forces against the confederate Lords,
364. he marches against them, 365. pro-
poses a single combat, 366. this how pre-
vented, ibid. takes his last farewel of the
Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a casket of letters from Q Mary to him,
371. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 380, 381.
refletions on his conduc, 381. copy of-
his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, ap-
pendix 93
--- late Francis Stewart, created Earl of

Bothwell, II. 1(7. is imprisoned for con-
fulting witches, 17;. escapes and attempts
to break into the King's presence; ibid. re-
tires to the north, 176. he and his adhe-
rents are attainted, 178. fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken un-
der protection of Q. Elizabcth, who follicits
for him, 180. seizes the King's person,
181, 182. forces him to difinif the clian-
cellor and his other fzvourites, 182. and
to grant him a rcmifion, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, ibid. 183.
is encouraged by the English ambafltdor,
185. makes another attempt to colIe at

the

the King, 186. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north of England, ibid. is aban-
doned by Q. Elizabeth, and forced to fly
into Spain and Italy, 90o. remains in in-
digent obscurity, and is never after recon-
ciled to the King - ibid.
---- Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs

the ceremony of marriage of Q Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell - I. 359

B.otgiuell/auagh, fee Hamilion.
Boulogne, wrested by the French out of the

hands of the Englilh, I. 106. they consent
to restore it and its dependencies to the
French - - 10o
Boures, Envoy from Q. Elizabeth, accuses Le-

nox of disturbing the peace, 11. 63. is re-
fused an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 79. to
inquire about K. James's correspondence
with me pope - 210
Boy I, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of

K. James III. frustrated - I. 30
-- is prevailed on to join the King's party

against Q. Mary, II. 8. joins the Ruth-
ven conspirators - 77
Brienne, Count de, comes as ambaflador from

France to witness the baptism of K. Ja. VI.

- - - . 332
Bruce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. his grandson asserts his right
and vindicates the honour of his country,
Io. he attempts to reduce the power of
the nobles - - 39
-- a priest, employed by the King of Spain

to seduce the Scottilh nobles - 11. 167
- Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian minister,

performs the ceremony of the coronation of
K. James's Queen - I1. 173
- Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits him-

self with addrels and reputation as ambafa-
dor at the court of England II. 208, 209
--vr. Robtrt, a minifler, his resolution

in refuting to publish the King's account of
Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 229. is deprived
and baniflld on that account ibid.
Buchanan, George, his hillory of Scotland,

oine account of, 1. 4. remarks on his dia-
logue de jure Regis, 157. alone accuses
(. Mary of a criminal coin efpondcnce with
Rizio, 305. approved of afhllilnation, 315.
his partiality in overlooking an at of Par-

liament in favour of the reformation, 32z.
attends the Regent into England when cal-
led on to accuse Q. Mary, 404. was one of
the preceptors of K. James VI. II. 48.
commended for his great genius, 256, 25.7.

Burleigh, fee Cecil.
Burroughs, when first represented in parlia-

ment -I. 179

C.
CAIS, John, a declaration of his in name-

of

Q. Elizabeth to the Lords ofGrainge

and Lethington, app. - 6-
Caithbief, Earl of,his protefl at the trial of Both-

well for the murder of Darnly I. 350.
Calvin, the patron and reftoler of prcfbyte-

rian church government - 1. z 13

Camden, some millakes of his I. 333. 54+
Canongate near Edinburgh, a parliament held

there - -I. 16.
Cardan, some account of him, I. I 6. his

remarkable cure of the bishop of St. An-
drews - - ibid.
Carey, Sir George, sent ambaflador from Q.

Elizabeth to encourage the conspirators at
Ruthven - - iI. 79
- Robert, sent by Q. Elizabeth to tooth

K. James after the death of his mother, II.
154. is not permitted to enter Scotland,
ibid. was the firlt that brought K. James
intelligence of the death of Q_ Elizabeth

246, 247
Ca.Aet of letters from Q Mary to Bothwell

seized by the Earl of Morton, 1. 371. her
enemies avail themselves much of them

ibid.

CaGils, Earl of, joins the King's party, II. 18
Laftelnau, the French nmbafaidor is employed

to procure the consent of his court to her
marriage with Darnly, I. 273. he endea-
vours to make up the difflernces between
the Queen and him, 320. his interceflion
in behalf of Q. MIary - 11. 110
Catherine of Medicis, assumes the government

after the death of Francis II. her son, 1. 2 I i.
her harlh treatment of Q. Mary, ibid her
v iews in behaving more friendly to her, 26 1.
bends her whole endeavours to dcllroy the
Protcftants, 1[. 21. her artful conduct
with that view - ibid. 2

Cecil,.

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, I. 198,

219. is employed to negotiate a peace with
France, ibid. over-reaches the French
ambaflhdor in the treaty of Edinburgh, 219.
is appointed a commissioner to the confe-
rence at Weliminlter, 414. is sent by Q_
Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, II.
9. has an inteview with her which ex-
cites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 4'. is treat-
ed hardily by Q(Elizabeth for consenting
tod. Mary's death - 153
- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads

the party againil Effex, Ii. 232. his cha-
racter, 233. his great assiduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K.
James, 238. a letter from him to his Ma-
jefty, app. -- 1i6
Celibacy of the popilli clergy, a chief engine of

their policy -. 123, 148
Char.es V. Emperor, his great power, 1. 74.

and unlimited ambition, 75. is checked by
Francis I. - ibid.
---- -K. of France makes a league with Q.

Elizabeth - II. 27.
Chateilrault, Duke of, that title conferred on

the Earl of Arran, Regent of Scotland, I.
107. his right of fuccefflon to the crown of
Scotland maintained, 136. enters a pro-
teftation to save his right, 138. joins the
reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 163, 164. joins in affocia-
tion with them, 166. is looked on as the
head of the congregation, 168. his pufil-
lanimity, 180. becomes obnoxious to Q
Mary, 235. his jealouft of the prior of
St. Andrews, 242. deprived of his French
pension, 261. is alarmed at the Earl of
Lcnox's return to Scotland, 268. an ac-
commodation brought about by the Queen's
influence, 269. adheres to Murray in op-
poling the Queen's marriage, 290. is par-
doned on his humble application, but forced
to reside in l rance, 293. his partizans
grumble at AMurray's being advanced to the
Regency, 384. returns fiom France and
heads the Queen's adherents, 4a2. is
made her licutenant-general, ibid. his rc-
solution wavering, the Regent commits him
prisoner to the calllc of Edinburgh, 423.
is set at liberty by Kirkal(ly and joins the
Queen's party, 11. 4. is proclaimed trai-

tor by Lenox the new Regent, 8. is recon-
ciled to Morton the Regent, 39. articles
of a treaty between them, ibid. his death

-- - 45
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the

union of the crowns, II. 254, 255. fee as-
Jtazby, c/ergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parlia-

ment 11. 158

C.ans the inflitution and nature of, I. 23
Clergy popiih,their great riches and power,l. 57,

I z I. were made use of by K. Jam. V. to sup-
press the noiles, 57, 58. made a confider-
able body in Parliament, 122. their great
influence over the laity; ibid. they engrof-
fed learning, l2'3. and held many of the
chief employments, ibid. their power en-
crcafed by celibacy, ibid. they seized the
estates of the inteltare, 1c4. and tried all
matrimonial and teilamenrary causes, ibid.
become obnoxious to the laity, 125. their
great corruption, whence, ibid. those of
Scotland particularly diflblute, 126. their
weak defence of their tenets, 127. try in
vain to impose false miracles, ibid. their
impolitic conduct to the reformers 143
---- reformed, try in vain to recover the

revenues of the church, 1. 215, 216, 218.
procure a debolition of all relicts of po-
pery, ibid. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 236-240. they are no
gainers by it, 240. their tlipends what in
those days, ibid. are offended at the mo-
deration of their leaders, 259. occasions
a tumult among the people, ibid. 260.
mote complaints of their poverty, 269, 335.
are jealous of Q. Mary, ibid. the small al-
lowance appointed to support them all, 336.
their application for payment of their lti-
pends of little cfecrt, 383. fresh complaints
of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, , 43 434. are put off with
fair words and promites, 434. archbiflmops
&c. introduced among them by Morton,
11. 33, 33[. their grievances under his ad-
minillration, 45. they approve of the Ruth-
ven conlpirators, 8o. by favouring them
they provoke the King, 89. Icvere laws
made Igainl them, 92, 93. they of F.din-
burgh fly into Englandl, 93. as do fcveral
others that were moll eminient,, 9. more

vigI (Jus

vigorous measures againit them, 99. they
obtain no redress on the reitoration of the
exiled Lords, 118. represent their grie-
vances to parliament, 157. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 159. they
prevail to get Presbyterian government efta-
bliflied by law, 177. their zeal againit the
Popish Lords, 183, 184, 192. their ralh
proceedings, 192, 194. they eret a fland-
ing Council of the Church, i94. vindicate
one of their number who declined the civil
jurifdi&ion, g19, 197. their lianding Coun-
cil ordered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this
occasions a violent tumult there, 198, 200.
they use their utmost efforts to spirit the
people, 201. are deserted and fly to Eng-
land, 22o. their power greatly reduced,
ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, 203, 204. are restored to
a feat in parliament, 2c6. this violently
opposed by many of them. 207. but car-
ried in their general Assembly, 208. those
entitled to this privilege are laid under
many regulations and rellriflions, 2 13.
they are brought under great fubjedion,
214. the revolutions among them since the
Union of the Crowns - 254, 2 5
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commiflioner at the

conference at Weftminlter 1. 41
Cckburn of Ormitlon, receives a supply of

money from the English to the congregation,
I. 1 81. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

Coin in Scotland,fome account of, I. 177. II.44.
Ccmm t/iirties appointed to try causes in place of

the Spiritual Court, 1. 258. they are de-
prived of all authority - 336
Co61feion of faith by the Reformers, conrented

to by Parliament -- 1. 205
Congregation, the Protestants diitinguifled by

that name, 1. 149. their leaders enter into
an afbciation, i3. are involved in diffi-
culties, - 9. apply to Q(. Elizabeth for al-
lillance, 180. money sent them by her in-
tercepted, 18i. make a ralh and desperate
attempt on I.eith, and are rcpulfed, ibid. 182.
are no Icl's unfortunatein a ficond fkirmill,
ibid. are quite dispirited and retreat to Stir-
ling, ibid. 183. are joined by the body of
the nobles, 1 83. their army dwindles away,
1,. arc animated by Knox, ibid. they

apply again to Q Elizabeth, 185. their
parties harras the French, 190. are aflillcd
by a flect horn England, ibid. conclude a
treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk,
19 1. the design and ltubiance of this treaty,
l92. negotiate a peiace with France, 198.
articles of the treaty, 199. they reap many
advantages from it, 20c, 201. fee Refor-
mation.
Covrnalt, national, framed in defence of the

King and Governmenr, II. i64. the na-
ture and reafonableneis of it, ibid. 165.
the progress of it since 165

Cour-te of Scotland, what - I. 136
Craig, a miniller, boldly teflifies againll Q.

Mary's marriage with Bothwell I 359
CravwfJord, Capt. of Joidan Hill, furprizes

Dumbarton Catlle, II. 13, 14. the diffi-
culties of that enterprize 14
---Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nifl faction, II. 163, 167. offers his ser-
vice to the K. of Spain, 167 joins in re-
bellion against the King, 169. is forced
to submit to him, ibid. and imprisoned a
short time 170
Crichton, Regent during the minority of K.

James 1I. his barbarous policy. 1. 44, 45

a jesuit, a plot againit Q_ Elizabeth

discovered by his means - II. Ioo
Criminals, a remarkable instance of the diffi-

culties of bringing them tojuftice I. 1 7
Croc du, the French ambassador, refutes to

countenance Q. Mary's marriage with Both-
well, i. 359. attempts in vain a reconci-
liation between the Queen and the confe-
derate Lords, 365. mediates a truce be-
tween the King's and Queen's party in
Scotland I1. 28
Crow.tn zmarimonial of Scotland granted by Par-

liament to the Dauphin of France, 1. 138.
deputies appointed to carry it, but are pre-
vented - 140
Cuninglham, Robert, appears at the trial of

Bothwell in name of the Earl of Lenox,
1. 3+9. demands a delay, which is refufied

ibidl.
Curi', one of Q. Mary's ficretaries, is fcized

and carried prisoner to London, II. 127,
lzS. is produced an evidence againll her

D13

D.
D Arn!, Henry Lord, proposed as a hus-

band to QtMary, I. z65. his right of

fuccellion confidered, ibid. 260. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 271.
arrives there and quickly gains the Queen's
heart, z7-. his character, 274. disgusts
fevcral of the nobles, particularly Murray,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David
1Jizio, 27;. 1; delpifed on that account,

-27. grows intolerably intblent and haugh-
ty, 2Sz. lciieinres to aflillinate Murray,
284. a plot to seize and fend him to Eng-
land prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, 28;, 286. his marriage
with the Queen celebrated, 287. is ho-
nouied with the title of King of Scotland,
288 is implacable with refpedt to the ex-
iled nobles, 297. loses the Queen's assec-
tion by his untoward belaviour, 302. de-
mands the Crown matrinonial, ibid. 303.
becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, 303. his resolution to be aven-
ged of him encouraged by the nobles, 305.
articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 306. heads the conspirators who
perpetrate the murder, 307. confines the
Queen after it is committed, 308. prohi-
bits the meeting of the Parliament, ibid.
makes his escape with the Queen, 309, 3 1o.
her hatred to him increases, 315. is neg-
lected by her and treated with little refpec
by the nobles, 319. resolves to leave Scot-
land, 321. his wayward and capricious
behaviour, 322. he writes the reasons of
his conduct to the Queen, ibid. his tlrange
behaviour at the baptism of the Prince, 33 .
a fllie reaobn alledged for this confuted,
3 3. retires to his father at Glasgow, 3: .
falls sick there, 337. conjectures concern-
ing his dillemper, ibid. is neglected by
the Queen, 3 S. fie alterwards visits and
exprefics atffcCion for hillm, 339. he is pre-
v:aled on by her to conic to Edinburgh,
341. is lodgdcl in a fcpairate hlule, ilid.
he is murd'licd there, 342. hiis character,
ibid. a ploclaniiatio, illued for dilcovecrmlg
the murderers, 34 3. a reinil; i(qury naide
into it. 344-3;o. C'apt. Bla;cka.lder and
three others executed on thait ;icouuiit, 38..
the conlfllion of l\orton the Regent t his

death concerning the murder, If. 70. pa
per of objections of the Court of England
against his marriage with Q Mary, App.
a dissertation concerning his murder at the
end of vol. 1I.
Da.vd I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the

church -- -- . .z

-- I. troubles during his minority, 1. z8
Davijon, lent into Scotland by QElizabeth,

as a spy on the French Ambaflador, It. 83.
is sent to gain Arran's interest to Q Eliza-
beth, 98. this he soon accomplishes, ibid.
brings the warrant for Q_ Mary's death at
Q. Elizabeth's desire, 144, 145. is char-
ged by her with disobeying her orders, 153.
is impriloned, tried and fined, and loses all
favour, ibid. objections against him in the
cause of the late Scottish Queen, App. I 14.
Defic, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces

to affilt the French against the English in
Scotland, I. Io6. his success there, ibid.
Di/cipline in the Church, the firIt book of

composed, 1. ziS. why objected againit in
a convention of the States, ibid. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline fruf-
trated - 1I. 73
Douglas, the power and property of that fa-

mily, I 29. they aspire to independency,
44. Will. Earl of, murdered by K. James
II. 45. his son endeavours to resent it,
ibid. is forced to fly into England 46
.---- William, Q_ Mary committed a pri-

soner to his castle of Lochleven 370
----George, brother to the above, affilts

the Queen in making her escape 385
---- rArchibald, one of Darnly's murder-

ers, 11. 121. undergoes a mock trial for
that crime, and is acquitted, ibid. is sent
Ambaflador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the Q. of Scots, app. to the King.
D- uri, Sir Win. enters Scotland with an army

to support the Queen's party, 11. 5. they
join him and drive off the King's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the Kiig's and
(Qceen's panlies, 28. conies with forces to
allilt Morton in beficging the cailll of Idlin-
burgh, 40. which is forced to surrender 4q
-- Sir Drue, is appointed one of [s Mar y's

keipers -

-. I. 103
Dud.//O, Iord lRobcrr, recommendeld byhv (Qecn

Ilizabeth as a litill ai;1 to Q(_ Mary, I. z2z.
why ;a ftvourile of ( )_

( l';llz..i til's, ibid. is
highly prumotedl y her, ibid. z2 . hiis

fituatlotl

situation extremely delicate, 264. becomes
iufpicious of Cecil ibid.
Dumbarton Cafile, furprized and taken in the

King's name by the Regent II. 13. 14
Dury, a miniierof Edinburgh, banished from

his charge by K. James, for his free invec-
tives againit the courtiers, 11. 75. after
being restored he is driven from it a second
time for approving the Raid ofRuthven 89

E.

Dinburgh, is taken and burnt by the Eng-
lifh, I. 93. a great fray there between

the French and Scots, ilo. is seized by
the Reformers, 158. its inhabitants are
terribly alarmed by the French, 182. a
treaty there with the French and Englifl,
199. a loan demanded of it by Q Mary,
293. which is granted for the superiority
of Leith, 294. the treaty of infiited on by
Q. Elizabeth, 333, 334. is poffefled by
the Queen's party, 11. 3. and fortified by
them, 16. the City and Castle hold out
against the King's forces, 26. is reduced
to great firaits by famine, ibid. 27. is re-
lieved by a truce, 28. the citizens take up
arms to promote the King's marriage, 171.
they r fe again and insult the King and his
ministers on the murder of the Earl of Mur-
ray, 176. assist the King against Huntly,
186. a violent tumult there on account of the
Clergy, 19--2oo. they are severely pu-
nifhed for it by the King, 201-203. their
minifiers return to their charges, zo5. di-
vided into parishes and number of ministers
increased, ibid. they decline publilhing
the account of Gowrie's conspiracy, 228.
all, except one who is banished, are per-
fuaded by the King to do it 229
f.ad'ard 1. of England, destroyed the public

archives of Scotland, I. 4. is made um-
[ire between Bruce and Baliol, 7. his art
to acquire the fisperiority of Scotland, ibid.
his wars with the Scots under R. Bruce

10, 39
Egnglion, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the

King's party - - II. 1 8
ElizarietiL, her peaceable acccflion to theLrown

of England, 1. 140. supports the congre-
gation in Scotland, So. is sparing in her
iupplies, 181. rclolves to support them on
a Iccond acplication, 185. her good con.

Vol.. 11.

du&l in matters of importance. i86. mu-
tives that determined her to aflif them, ibid.
i88. her deliberate and resolute condut,
19 . fends a firong fleet to their affiitance,
ibid. concludes a treaty with them, ibid.
192. her right to the Crown of England
alerted by Francis and Mary in France,
2co. obtains advantageous terms for the
Scots, 2ol, is follicited by the Parliament
of Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran,
209. this Ihe declines, 21o. the feeds of her
discontent with Q..Mary, 219, 220. her
jealousy of the succession, ibid. 223. her
excessive vanity and jealoufyof Mary's beau-
ty, ibid. her dissimulation to her, 224.
refuses her a safe conduct, ibid. fends to
congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 230.
refuses a concession made by Q.Mary, 23 1.
herjealoufy of her right betrayed her into
mean a&ions, 232. her resemblance to
Hen. VII. ibid. a perfonalinterview with
Q.Mary proposed, 25z. she artfully de-
clines it, 252. her views in regard to Q,
Mary's marriage, 255,256. assumes a dif-
agreeable authority, 256. names one for a
husband to Q Mary, 262. the different
qualifications of her miniiters and favourites,
ibid. dissembles with Q.Mary about her
marriage, ibid. 265. and likewise with re-
gard to L. Darnly, 266. affronts Q. Mary
by her insinuation concerning Lenox, 267.
is perplexed about the marriage of the Scot-
tifh Queen, 271. permits Darnly to visit
the Court of Scotland, ibid. asse&s to de-
clare against Q Mary's marriage to him,
277. her reasons for this conduct, 278.
her great diflimulation in that affair, 283.
her harsh and deceitful behaviour to Mur-
ray and his associates who had fled to her,
292. is firuck at hearing of the birth of
James VI. 319. contents to stand godmo-
ther to him, ibid. The Parliament address
her to fettle the fucceflion, 325. this greatly
embarrasses her, ibid. 326. fle sooths and
gains her Parliament, 327. endeavours to
accommodate her differences with Mary,
333. writes to her to delay the trial of
Darnly's murderer's, 348. interposes in her
behalf when a prisoner, 372. her ambaf-
fador is refused access to Q Mary, 373.
flie offers affiltance to the other nobles, ibid.
her deliberations concerning the disposal of

. Mary 6n her arrival in England, 392,

Kk k 393.

393. resolves to detain her there, 394.
her motives to this condu&t, ibid. 395.
fends her letters of condolance and gives
orders to watch her condut, 395. fle
gladly accepts the office of umpire between
her and her fubjets, 3(6, 397. receives a
very pressing letter from Q( Mary, 399.
her precautions againit her, 400. appoints
commiflioners to hear QCMary and her ac-
cufers, 405. her important situation on
that occasion, ibid. her views in this as-
fair, 406, 407. receives the Regent's de.
mands. 4Io. removes the conference to
Weftminlter. 411. her mean artifices to
get the evidences of Q_ Mary's guilt from
the Regent, 417. treats her with greater
rigour, 418. writes a harsh letter to Q.
Mary, ibid. Ihedifmiffes the Regent without
approving or condemning him, 419. but
secretly supports his party, 420. makes
proposals to the Regent in her favour, 423.
Norfolk's projet concealed from her, 425,
427. discovers and defeats a rebellion in
Q. Mary's favour, 43 1, 432. resolves to
deliver her up to the Regent, 434. her
great concern at his death, I.1. i. conti-
nues to encourage facions in Scotland, 2.
her political condact with regard to Lenox,
6, 7. is excommunicated and deprived of
her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 7. sup-
ports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lenox to be Regent, 7. proposes a
treaty of accommodation between Q.Mary
and her fubjecEs, 8. procures a cessation of
hoftlities, 9. fends proposals to Q Mary,
ibid. her artifices in the conduEt of this
affair, to, I .. appoints commissioners to
frame a treaty, 1i. finds a pretence to
render their meeting fruitless, 12. a marriage
proposed between her and the D. of Anjou,
21. declares openly against the Queen's
party, 25. concludes a treaty with France,.
27. her motives for negotiating a peace
between the two parties in Scotland, 36, 37.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q Mary,
43. negociates a treaty between. Morton
and his adversaries, 56. her anfwcr to K.
James's demand of a possession of an ellate
in England, 56, 57. a marriage between
her and the I)of Aenconprnpofcd, 59. in-
terpofes in behalf of Morton, 63. her
measures in order to save him, 66. coun-
tenances the conspirators at Ruthvcn, 79.

is alarmed at a conspiracy againll her, 95,
96. the designs of QL Mary's adherents
against her, 97. endeavours to recover her
interest in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interest, 98. amuses Q. Mary with a fruit-
less negociation, Io0. a new conspiracy
againlt her, ibid. an association formed.
for her defence, ioi, Ioz. her suspicions.
of Q. Maxy, o02. her life endangered by
a conspiracy, 107. this how discovered.
and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraor-
dinary statute for her preservation, ioS.
is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 1z2. endeavours to
form a confederacy of the protestant princes,.
ibid. and to proceed with rigour against
Q.Mary, ibid. 114. advances her interest
in Scotland, and proposes a league with it,

1 4. fettles a pension upon K. James, 1 i5.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 120. ac-
count of Babington's conspiracy againfc her,
I 22- 25. her diflimulation after Q Mary's
convition, 137, 138. her answer to K.
James's interceflion for her, 14 . her far-
ther dissimulation and anxiety, 143. signs
the warrant for her execution, 144. her
speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid.
affecs to lament QO Mary's death, 152.
several marks of her artifice in that affair,.
ibid. 153. she endeavours to sooth K.
James, 154. provocations given by her to
Spain, 162. prepares to meet its resent-
ment, ibid. 163. endeavours to secure
Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's
marriage, 170. follicits him to treat con-
fpirators against him with rigour, 180.
evades the decision of K. James's right of
fucceflion to the Crown of England, 208.
is disgusted at several of his proceedings,
210. discovers his correspondence withthe
Pope, ibid. fresh grounds of her suspicion,
232. her conduct with regard to the Earl
of Effex, 233-237. her irresolution con-
cerning his death, 237. and great concern
after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from
K. James with regard and increases his sub-
fidy, 238. her last illness, 241. conjec-
tures concerning the causes of her melan-
choly, z2z2, 243. her death, 2-14. and cha-
radter, ibid. 245. declared the K. of Scots
her successor, 246. Some of her letters,
app. 13, 28, 35, 36, 39, 47, 48, 52, 65.

.lbphilN-

E;phinlon, secretary to K. James VI. deceives

him into a correspondence with the Pope,
Ir. 211. is tried and found guilty of high
treason, 212. and pardoned on the Queen's
interceflion - - ibid.
England, the Englifl seize and detain King

James I. of Scotland long a prisoner, I. 29.
the nobles there humbled, 32. had early
two houses of Parliament, 68. they in-
vade Scotland, 92. their depredations there,
94, 95. a peace between England, France
and Scotland, 95. invade Scotland again,
lor. gain a great victory, 102, 103. it
proves of little advantage to them, 104.
they force- ite Scots into a closer union with
France, IoS. conclude a peace, io8. an
English fleet arrives in Scotland to affil the
congregation, 190. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 191. they enter Scotland and
besiege the French in Leith, 19z. are fe-
veral times repulsed, 194. causes of their
bad success, ibid. 195. articles of a treaty
of peace, 199. they quit Scotland, 202.
reflections on the right of fucceflion to their
Crown, 220-223. the Parliament favours
Q.Mary's right of fucceflion, 225. a league
between England and France, II. 27. be-
tween England and Scotland, 120. the
national covenant adopted in England, 165

Entails, with what view introduced I. 19
Epif/opal government in the Church, some ac-

count of, 1. 213. an attempt to revive it,
1I. 33, 34. it is abolished by the Assem-
bly, 74. Jurifdicion abolished, 174. lee
Archb, /'ops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nifli faction, 11. 163. his offers of service to
the K. of Spain, 167. appears in rebellion,
169. is forced to submit to the King, ibid.
imprisoned for a lhort time, 70. joins in
another conspiracy, 179. is summoned by
the King to fiillender, ibid. oficrb to sub-
mit to a trial, 183. sentence pronounced
againf him - - 184
ErjfXine of Dun, is employed by the Q(ecn-

Regent to deceive the lrotcftants, 1. 50o.
his resentment of this usage - ibid.
.--- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Callle,
adts a neutral part between the Queen-Re-
gent and the congregation, I. 183. receives
the Quecn-Repent into the Callc, 193. is
created Earl of Mar, 248. lee Mar.
*---- Alexander, has the chief dircclions of

the education of K. James VI. II. 48. ad-
mits some of the nobles to make complaints
to him againit Morton the Regent, 50. is
turned out of Stirling Castle by his Nephew
the Earl of Mar 53
EJne.val, the French Envoy, endeavours to

obltruc a treaty between England and Scot-
land - - I. 1zo
LE.§x, Earl of, fct up by the English Papill;

as a candidate for the Crown, 11. 189.
heads a party in England, 232. his cha-
racter, ibid. is greatly diflinguilhed by the
Queen, 233. favours the K. of Scots, ibid.
obtains the office of Lord Lieutenant and
Commander in Chief in Ireland, 234. is
unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. re-
ceives a harlh letter from the Queen, ibid.
returns to England and is confined, ibid.
is tried and cenfurel, ibid. endeavours to
spirit up King James, 235. his rafl and
frantic condut, 236. is again taken into
custody, ibid. his death, 237. his son and
ailciates are restored to their honours after
the accession of King James - ibid.
Europe, the slate of, at the beginning of the

Sixteenth Century - I. 71
Excommunication, a terrible engine of the Po-

pifll Clergy -- - . 1z24

F.

EL TON, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's
excommunication of Q.Elizabeth, on the
gates of the bishop of London's palace,

1I. 7.
Fenelon, M. de la Motte, lent by the French

King to interpose for K. James when con-
fined by the Ruthven conspirators, II. 82.
is forced to return without fuccels, ibid.
Feudalgovernmcnt, its original and arillocratical

genius, 1. 12, 13. caufcs which limited
the power of feudal monarchs, 14. feudal
vaflals liable to few taxes, 15. a rmark-
able inflance of the fccblcncfs of feudal go-
verlnmLent, 17. the moll pe rsec idea of
the feudal fyllcm, how attained, 37. Hate
of it in England, 65-67. and in Scotland,

67, 08
Ffe, a populous and powerful county much

devoted to the congregation, I 189. is
dcelroyed and plundered by theFrench, ibid.
the fynod of, exconlmmullicates the alchbi-
fllop of St. Andrews lor contumacy, 11. 119.

K k k 2 they

they excommunicate the popish Lords,

183
Sorbes, Lord, with the Earl of Argyll, is sent

against the popith Lords, 11. 187. are de-
feated by them -- 188
Fordun, John de, his history of Scotland when

wrote - I- . 4
Fofler, Sir John, warden of the English bor-

der, a scuffle between him and the Scots

II. 115
Fcthertigay Cattle, Q. Mary's imprisonment,

trial and death there II 28-149
Fran:e, the consequences of the fubverlion of

the feudal government there, I. 72. a body
of French arrive in Scotland to support the
Catholics, 99. they reduce the castle of
St. Andrews, ibid. another party of them
arrive there, 106. their tranfaEtions there,
ibid. 107. conclude a peace with England,
108. their politic condut, Iog. they
leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a
treaty of marriage between the Dauphin
and the Q of Scots, 135, 136. endeavours
to expel the French army out of Scotland,
163. another party of them arrive there
and fortify Leith, I70. they exasperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they
are sent against the congregation, 189. they
defiroy and plunder Fife, and are much har-
raffed by parties of the congregation, 190.
are greatly alarmed by the arrival of the
English fleet, 190. they return to Leith
greatly harralfed and exhausted, 191. are
besieged there by the English and the con-
gregation, 194. they gain several advan-
tages, ibid. 195. their motives for con-
cluding a peace, 197. negotiations for that
purpose, 198. articles of the treaty, 199,
zoo. they leave Scotland, 202. the French
advise Q Mary to moderate measures, 217.
their proposals by an ambassador reje&ed,
ibid. they agree to Q Mary's marriage
with Lord Darnley, 274. the licentiousness
of their morals, 340
France, King of, a copy of his direfions sent

to Scotland, app. 73
Francis I gives a check to the ambitious pro-

jecs of Charles V. I. 75. his fidelity
to the Scots, 95. his death 99

II. comes to the crown of France,
I. 16;. his character, ibid. 210, is guid-

ed by the Duke of Guise and
Lorrain, ibid. 166. he treats
Rants with great rigour, 197.

cardinal of
the Prote-
his death,

210

G.

IFFORDS, Doctor and Gilbert, their
notion concerning the lawfulness of kil-

ling heretical excommunicated Princes, 1I.
122. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q.
Elizabeth, ibid. Gilbert teing gained by
Walsingham betrays his associates, Iz4, is
employed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q Mary --125
Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for

witchcraft I. 58
--- .Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's

older to Morton to surrender the Regency,
II. 50. is killed in a rencounter of Stilling,

53

the tutor of, joins the conspirators of

Ruthven, II. 77. his bold speech to King
James, 78. he with the other conspirators
seize the castle of Stirling and ered their
standard, 91. he is attainted and his eflate
forfeited - -99
Glasgow, biihop of, a note of his concerning

the Queen of Scotland's dowry, app. 7 1
Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven confpira-

tors II. 77

Glenli'vat, the battle of If. 188
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the fireets of

Edinburgh between him and Lord Ogilvy,
I. 295. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, ibid. when ordered by the
Queen to surrender himself he takes up arms
against her, 245, 246, 247. is defeated
and together with his brother made prifo-
ners, 249. he is beheaded and his brother
pardoned - - ibid.
Gordon, Lord, set at liberty - 289

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen's interelt in the north, 1I. z6. his
character and good conduct as a soldier, 28
Go'wrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize

the King at Ruthvcn, 11. 77. is visited and
pardoned by the King after his escape, 85.
becomes fufpested and is ordered for France,
91. delays his voyage, and is taken into
custody, ibid. he is tried and executed,

92

Goqu, te
3

Gawrie, John and Alexander, sons of the above,

their character and conspiracy, 11. 214.
the surprising circumstances of that remark-
able tranfation, 215-218. several diffe-
rent conjectures concerning it, 219-228.
their dead bodies brought into Parliament
and condemned, 229. their ellates and
honours forfeited, and name abolished for
ever, ibid. different accounts of this affair
publithed, but not satisfactory, 230--232. fee
Ruthtven.
Graham, Sir David of Fintry, accused of a

conspiracy with the popilh Lords in favour
of Spain, II. 179. is convicted and be-
headed ibid.
Gray, mrniler of, some account of him, Il. 103.

he becomes a favou;ite of King James Vl.
ibid. is gained to Q_ Elizabeth's interest,
104. betrays Q Mary, ibid. persuades
K. James to write a harm and undutiful let-
ter to her, i Io. joins with others in pro-
moting Q. Elizabeth's interelt in Scotland,
114. his treachery when sent to intercede
for ,Q Mary, 143. his baseness discovered
he is disgraced, 1 o0. his vain attempt
against secretary Maitland, ibid. acs in
Italy as a spy from the court of England,
210. a memorial of his for his Majefly,
app. 88, .92. to the secretary offtate 90
Guise, duke of, his violent counsels with regard

to the Scots, I. 166. is murdered at the
siege of Orleans 255
-- his intrigues against Q: Elizabeth, 11..

96, 97. is a principal promoter of the
holy league, x11-, 161. drives.theFrench
King out of his capital - 16

H.

'

1DDINGTOUIN, seized and forti-
sied by the English, I. o105. is relieved

by the French - jo6
Ilamilton, the rife of that family, 1. 30. ar-

bitrary proceedings of Morton the Regent
againit it, 11. 57. fee Chatelherault.
--- of Bothwelhaugh, taken prisoner at

the battle of Langfide, I. 4c0. is tried
and condemned for rebellion, ibid. obtains
a pardon from Murray the Regent by the
intcrceffion of Knox, ibid. an account of
Jhis murdering Murray, 435, 436. makes
his escape, 436. is received in triumph at
h-I.wiltqn - J 1.

Hamilton, Mr Patrick, the- first who ftffered in

Scotland for the Proteflant religion 1. 141
Hartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an

English army, I. 93. burns Edinburgh
and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protecor of England,: Io. fee
Somerset.
Ha'ton, vice-chamberlain of England, the ar-

gument by which he prevailed on QMary
to plead at her trial - II. 13 I
Heny 1I. of France, fends forces to affill the

Scots, I. 99. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the young Queen of
Scots, o15, ic6. 'excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 131. his infamous impofi-
tion on Q.V Mary in the treaty of marriage,
135. persuades his Con and Q. Mary to
assume the titles of King and Queen of Eng-
land, 145. his death . - 104
---- II. degenerates greatly on his ac-

ceflion to the crown of France, II. I I l, en-
ters into a private negotiation with Q: Eli-
zabeth, 113. interposes feebly in behalf of
Q Mary - 138
- VIII. of England, by his fyflem of
leformation, becomes formidable both to
Papists and Protestants, I. 59. proposes
an interview with K. James V. ibid. is
diffppointed by him and declares war
against Scotland, 61. invades it, but is
forced to retreat, ibid. 62. his impor-
tance as to the balance of power in Europe,
76. his influence in Scotland how ob-
tained, 78. his schemes with regard to it
on the death of James V. 84. were ill-
conducted by himself, and odious to the
Scots, 85. attempts to gain the Regency
by great promises, 88. invades Scotland,
92. this being ill-condu1ed turns to no
account, 93. receives and rewards the
Earl of Lenox, ibid. encourages the mur-
derers of cardinal Beatoun, 9.8. his death
and character, ibid. 99. his inconfifnent
conduct, 145. excluded the Scots line by
his testament - 34
J.erreis Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing

the Regent, I. 421. comes to .a treaty
with him, 422. he and the duke are cQm-
nmitted prisoners to the caltle of Edinburgh,
423. intimates the King's order to M,or-
.ton to rcfign the Regency, 11. 50. account

as

his behaviour in Parliament, app. 50.
a letter from him to Lord Scroop and Sir F.
Knollis-- 96
Jlic-krd, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk,

betrays him by discovering his intrigues
with Q. Mary II. 23, 24
Il ghian s and ies, an attempt to civilize them

by K James VI. 11. 239. regulations for
that purpote, 240. three towns endued with
the privileges of royal burroughs ordered to
be built there -ibid.
HordgJn, a priest of Reims, maintained the law-

fulness of killing heretical excommunicated
Princes II. izz
Home, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fe-

cret embafly to the Pope - II. z21

Hoc,'ard, fee Al¥folk.
HunJ/iane, Lord, governor of Berwvick, his in-

terview wirit Arran - 1I. 98
Huntly, Earl, tho' a catholic, joins the refor-

mers in opposing the French army, I. I63,
i64. aflitis them only with fair promises,
183. his further concurrence with them,
195. Some account of that family,
243. his enmity against the young Queen's
iminifters, ibid. his resentment inflamed by
an accident, 245. appears in open rebellion
against the Queen, 247. his plot against
her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks
out into open rebellion, 248. is trodden to
death in a battle, 249. his family prose-
cuted with the utmolt rigour, 250. several
anecdotes and conjecures concerning his
plot, ibid. 25z. is attainted by Parliament,
258. the attainder repealed and the family
reltored to elate and honours 35
*--his attachment to Bothwell, 347,

353. refuses to submit to the Regent, 322.
is forced to do it, 423. acts aslieiten;nt
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, II.
5. is proclaimed a traitor by Lenox the
new Regent, 8. receives some money and
promises of affiflance from Spain, ibid.
agrees to a treaty with Morton the Regent,

39. is one of the heads of the Spanish sac-
tion, 163. engages to the Prince of Parma
to serve the King of Spain, 167. is impri-
lbned for a fliort tme, 199. erects a flan-
dard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to sub-
mit to the King, ibid. i. again imprisoned,
j 70. is soon set at liberty, ibid. receives

a commission from the King, '176. his bar-
barous murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid.
is summoned to surrender tojuflice, 17y.
flies to the mountains, r8o. offers to sub-
mit to a trial, I83. sentence pronounced
against him, 184. refuses to submit, 185.
makes another desperate attempt, but is
forced to fly - 186

I.

T MIE S 1. was detained long a prisoner
Jin England, I. 29. troubles in Scotland

during that time, ibid. was much im-
proved by an Englith education, 40. his
policy on his return to Scotland, 41. his
charater, 42. fupprefles the power of the
nobles, ibid. they being exasperated con-
spire againit and murder him 43, 44
-- 11I. troubles in Scotland during his

minority, I. 30. his attempts againit the
nobles, 44, 45. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45. procures several good laws
to be passed, 46. reduces the power of the
nobles, ibid. 47. his death 47
-I- III. the slate of Scotland during his

minority, I. 30. his impolitic conduct,
47, 48. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 48, 49. is greatly in-
fulted by his nobles, 50. his despicable
minions, ibid. was the first that appointed
a flanding guard to his person, 51. the
nobles are provoked to take arms against
him, ibid. is killed in a battle againfi them,
ibid. 5z. his character ibid.

IV. his character, I. 52, 53. is

killed in a battle againit the Englilh at

Flowden "n 53
--V. his minority long and turbulent, 1. 3 1.

tranfaciions during that time, 53, 51. ai-
fumes the government while very young,
541, 55. his character, 55. his lcheme
for humbling the nobles, 56-59. is di-
verted from it by the clergy, 60, 61. takes
arms for the defence of his kingdom, 61.
his nobles refusing to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 62, 63.
which is incrcafed by a surprising defeat of
his forces, 63. his death, 64. reflectiois
on his conduct, ibid. he refused an alli-
ance with Charles V. Emperor 77

yanm s

James VI. his birth, I. 318. his baptism,

332. the care of him committed to the
Earl of Mar, 345. is by him preserved
from falling into the hands of Bothwell,
361. is crowned, 376. the nobles op-
pressed by Mcrton the Regent turn their
eyes to him for redress, II. 48. his edu-
cation and dispositions, ibid. 49. he be-
comes suspicious of the Regent's power,
49. discovers early a great attachment to
favourites, 60. adopts two of different
dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with
great solemnity, 6z. is by his favourites
engaged in unpopular meaillres, 75, 76.
is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven,
77. and forced to receive complaints
against his favourites, ibid. 78. dissembles
with them and banishes Lenox, 79. is
brought to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 81.
his concern at Lenox's death, and regard for
his memory, ibid. receives the French
ambaflador with great refpeat, 83. makes
his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 84.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 85.
visits Gowrie and grants him a pardon, ibid.
renews his fondness for Arran, ibid. 86.
is by him persuaded to violent measures
against the conspirators, 86. his answer to
a haughty letter from Q: Elizabeth on their
behalf, 87. is by her interposition rendered
more violent against them, 88. is pro-
voked by the clergy, 89. his lteps to
humble them, 92. his profusion to Arran,
99. fends a new favourite to-England againlt
the baniihed Lords, 103. devolves the
whole regal authority on Arran, o15.
writes an undutiful letter to his mother,
l1o. is threatened to be disinherited by
her, 1 1. receives a pension from Q. Eli.
zabeth, 15. is reconciled to the exiled
Lords, 117. becomes popular by conclu-
ding a treaty with England, 120, 121. his
cfandalous behaviour with regard to Archd.
Douglas, ibid. his endeavours to save his
mother's life after her condemnation, 139,
140. is greatly incensed at her death, 154.
arguments used by the English minilters to
pacify him, ibid. 155. is forced to stifle
his refentmcnt, 155. attempts to unite the
nobles, 157, 158. is courted both by
Spain and England, x62, 163. resolves

8

vigorously to adhere to the latter, i63.
takes several iteps with that view, ibid.
164. his Ikill in the popish controversy,
168. wrote a commentary on the revela-
tions, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pery, ibid. 169. his excessive lenity to
conspirators against him, 69. resolves to
marry the Princess of Denmark, 170. arts
used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is
consummated in Norway, 171. passes fe-
veral months in Denmark, ibid. reflec-
tions on his conduca there, ibid. 172. his
arrival in Scotland with his Queen, 173.
indulges the Presbyterians, 174. the ill
consequences of his lenity, ibid. 175. his
zeal againfi witchcraft, 175. is solicited
by Q. Elizabeth to treat the conspirators
against him with rigour, 8o. is fufpeted
of conniving with them, 181. is furprized
and seized by Bothwell, ibid. and forced
to comply with his terms, 1 82. his lenity to
Bothwell abused, ibid. 183. is fufpeded
of favouring the popifl Lords, 183. is in
new danger from them, 186. delegates
his authority to Argyl and Sorbes against
them, 187. goes in person against them,
ibid. waltes their lands and garrisons, their
castles, ibid. his right of the fuccelion to
the crown of England opposed by the pa-
pills, 189. his lenity to them incenses the
clergy and people, 193, 194. is much
provoked by the obilinacy of the clergy,
195. gives orders againit them, 197, 198.
is much insulted and in great danger at
Edinburgh, 198-zco. leaves Edinburgh
and proceeds with severity against the citi-
zens, 200-203. acquires absolute domi-
nion in ecclefialtical affairs, 204, 20.
strengthens his in Parliament byrefloring
the feats of the ecclefiaflics, 206, 207. en-
deavours with success to gain a party in
England, 208. increases his reputation by
publilhing his Bafilicon Doron, 209. is
accused by Q. Elizabeth of corrcfponding
with the Pope, 210. this he denies and
how accounted for, 211. other reports
concerning this, 21z. is atgreat pains to
gain the Roman Catholics, ibid. his regu-*
lations with regard to the church, 213. the
myfferious affair of Goyvry's conspiracy,
2,1 4-23 3. his cautious behaviour in regard

to

to the Earl of Fsex, 235. fends ambaffa-
dors to save him, 236. they arrive too
late, z37. he reftorts his fo.i and associates
to their honours atter his acceflion, ibid.
continues his intrigues in England, 238.
z39. his interest greatly strengthened there,
ibid. 239. endeavours to civilize the high-
lands and ifes, 239, 240. is proclaimed
King in England after the death of Q Eli-
zabeth, 24;, 246. is proclaimed likewise
in Scotland, and prepares for his journey to
England, 247. enters London and takes
polfeflion of the throne, 248. his charac-
ter how different from that of Q Elizabeth,
ibid. a letter from him to Mr. Archd.
Douglas, app. 85
Inqverne.s, Castle, refuses to surrender to Q.

Mary, I. z47. it is forced, and the gover-
nor punilhed ibid. 248
Italy, the liberty of, how preserved I. 73

K.

TEITH, Sir William, lent to intercede
K. for Q_ Mary when under sentence, II.

140. letter to him from Secretary Mait-
land, app. - -85
Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence

against QMary executed II. 145
Ker, of Ferniherit, ravages England on the

murder of Murray the Regent, I. I, z.
his design, 4. has a scuffle with the Eng-
lilh - -11
- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is dif-

covered when ready to fail to promote a
plot in Spain, II. 178. his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison 18 1
Killigrew, Henry, his declaration on the

peace, 157. app. - 70
Kingó, feudal, the most limited of all Princes,

1. 12. general causes of this, 14. their
revenues were but small, ibid. 15. had
no flanding ;:rmies, 15. and jurifdition
limited, 16. means used to extend the
royal authority, 33. their jurisdiction en-
larged, 35. the extraordinary influence of
the Scottilh Kings in Parliament, 65. the
reason of this - ibid. 69

Kirkaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of

Beatoun, is recalled by the (, Dowager, T.
132. his attainder reversed in Parliament,
za8. offers to fight Bothwell in tingle

combat, 166. his interview with Q.Mary,
in name of the confederate Lords, ibid.
rescues Maitland sio:n confinement, 43t.
la;,.urs to support the King's authority and
rellore harmony after the murder of the Re-
gent, 11. 3. accedts to the Queen'sparty,
ibid. 4. provides for a siege by increasing
his garrison, and fortifying I dinburgh, 15.
proclaims Lenox's authority unlawful and
usurped, 16. attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the larliament, ibid. forms a
scheme for surprising the King's party, 19.
is at first successful, but afterwards defeated,
20. comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 31. a treaty with Morton,
breaks it off, 37, 38. fires upon Edin-
burgh from the cattle, 38. is besieged
by the Regent affilled by Englilh forces,
40. is forced by a mutiny of the garrison
to capitulate, 41. surrenders to Drury the
English general, ibid. is by order of Q,
Elizabeth delivered up to the Regent, 42.
he and his brother are executed 43
Knollys, Sir Francis, sent by Q.Elizabeth with

letters of condolence to QMary on her ar-
rival in England, I. 395. some of his let-
ters, app. 51, 52, 56
Knox, John, a famous reformer, his character,

I. il i. after being some time abroad he is
recalled by the persecuted Protestants, 5 .
inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
againfi the Papifls, ibid. his notion con-
cerning the government of women whence,
156, 157. his residence fixed in Edin-
burgh, 161. complains of the lukewarm-
nels of the reformers, 174. his opinion to
the convention of reformers that it is lawful
to refill and deprive tyrannical Princes, 176.
animates and revives the desponding con-
gregation, 184, 185. complains of tile ne-
glect of the reformers in providing maintai-
nance for their preachers, 207. recom-
mends the Geneva model of church go-
vernment, 213. propores superintendents
in the church, 214. composes the lifit
book ofdifcipline, 21 . renounces fiiend-
ship with the Earl of Murray for his mode-
ration, 239. is tried for encouraging a mu-
tiny among the people and acquitted, 260.
popish judges concur in this decision, ibid.
261. is publickly accuscd by Maitland of

prcaching

preaching seditious doetrine concerning re.
itllance, 11. 270. characters of the two dif-
putants, ibid. approved of several instances
of afatlination, 315. agrees to tome regu-
lations concerning the eleftion of Bishops,
II. 34. his death and character, 35. 36.
his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 36.
articles sent by him to the general assembly,
app. - 68

L,
L AN.G SIDE, the battle of, I. 389

Laurea cardinal, is sent as Nuncio

from the Pope with a present to Q.Mary
of Scotland, I. 328. is flopped at Paris,

329
League, holy, a confederacy of roman catho-

lics so called, If. 11z. was universally
agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.
Learning, the revival of, promotes the refor-

mation I. 119
Lteeter, Earl of, appointed a commilfioner to

theconference at Wellminfler, I. 414
Leith, burnt by the English, 1.93. fortified by the

French, 170. besieged by the Englith, 192.
Q.Mary lands there from France, zz5. the
superiority of it -granted by her to Edin-
burgh, z24. is feizedand fortified by Mor-
ton and the Regent - II. 16
Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland fiom France,

1. 87. is much courted by cardinal Beatoun,
ibid. his pretensions to the fuccellion how
founded, 9o. resents Eeatoun's deceitful-
ness to him, 91. heads the reformers and
the advocates for the Englifl alliance, ibid.
furprizes the Regent and cardinal, 92. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues
alone in the interell of England, 93. is
lorced to fly to that court, where he is re-
warded, ibid. is married to a niece of K.
Henry's, by which he became father to a
race of King's, ibid. 94. his claim to the
iucceffion, 265. is imprisoned for a fecrct
correspondence with Q Mary, 266. is in-
vited secretly by her to return to Scotland,
ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received
with great familiarity by her, 268. his for-
feiture is repealed, and he is rellored to his
elate and honours by the Parliament, 269.
his lady lent prilbner to the tower of Lon-
Ion, 279. and treated with rigour, 283. he
infills on the prolccution of his fol D.irnly's

VOL. U.

murderers, 344. charges Bothwell with it,
345. the prosecution is hurried, 346. he
craves a delay which is refused, 347. he is
left alone in it, ibid. follicits Q Elizabeth's
interefl to obtain a delay, 348. infiits on it
by proxy at the trial but i, over-ruled, 349.
being apprehensive of danger he flies to-
wards England, 35o. his countess accuses
Q.Mary of the murder to Q.Elizabeth,
39'. he appears at the conference at Weil-
miniter and accuses Q.Mary of the murder
upon oath, 415. returns to Scotland pro-
tected by an English army, If. 6. is cleCted
Regent,7,8. his progress against the Queen's
party, 8. appoints commissioners to trame
a treaty with those of the Queen, 1 i. far-
prizes Dumbarton cattle, 13, 4. joins the
Earl of Morton at Leith, 16. holds a Par-
liament in the Canongate, ibid. another at
Stirling, 9. he is furprized and killed there

-- -- ibid. zo

Lensx, late Aubigne, his charaCter, II.61.

joins with the King's other new favourite to
undermine Morton, ibid. renounces pope.
ry, 62. Q Elizabeth demands him to be
removed from the privy council, 63. is ac-
cufed by her ambaflador, 67. Arran tries
in vain to supplant him, 72. is commanded
by K. James at the request of the nobles to
leave the kingdom, 79. puts off his depar-
ture on various pretences, 80, 8S. returns
unwillingly to France where he loon dies,
82. his memory vindicated and much re-
garded by the King, ibid. died a Pro-
teftant - -ibid.
- E. of, left as the King's lieutenant in the

north after dispersing the popifhLords 11. 188
Leslie, Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, 1.

96. he and his afbociates keep poffeflion of
the catle of St. Andrews, 97. makes a truce
with the Regent, 98. are encouraged by
Henry Vlli. - ibid.
-- bifliop of Rose, is Lent by the catlho-

lics in Scotland to engage Q. Mary in their
interest, 1. 216. his p opohLls to her rejec-
ted, ibid. z 17. his negotiations in England
in favour of Q.Mary, 11. 22, 23. is con-
fined long in the tower and afterwards is ba-
nilhed England -2-
Lzndjja), Lord, carries the proposal from the

confederates to Q; Mary, that Ihe lloull re-
sign the government, 1, 375. joins the Ruth-
ven conspirators - 1. 77

L 11 Lochlcwvin

X.

Ler r i'tw cable, QLM ary committed a prisoner

there, 1 37o, her escape from thence, 385
-- Loid, letters to and sion him, ap-
pendix -
Lcgan of Reftalrig, an alledged accomplice in

Gowrie's contpiracy, II. 220, 221. is tried,
and his eltate forfeited long after his death,

222, 2.23
Lord., confederate, aflbciate against Bothwell

and Q.Mary, 1. 362. raile forces againfl:
them, 363. publifn the motives of their
condut, 364. prevail on the Queen to fur-
render to them, 3t.7. afiume the title of
Lords of the secret council and the royal au-
thority - - 37
---- popish, conspire against K. James, II.

167. are treated by him with great lenity,
169. form anew conspiracy, 178. the King
proceeds against them, 179. more of his le-
nity to them, 183. frelh dangers from
them, 186. they receive money from Spain,
ibid. zeal of the clergy againfl them, 187.
are declared guilty of treason and their
estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the King's ar-
my, 188. are dispersed on the King's ap-
proach, ibid. go abroad and give security
to keep the peace, 189. return to Scotland,
and petition for leave to reside in their
own houses, 193. this granted by a con-
vention of el.ates, ibid. recant their errors
and are absolved from excommunication,
205. relapse, and are again reconciled to
the church of Rome, ibid. are restored to
their estate5 and honours - 206
Lorrain, cardinal, gets some of the bell bene-

sices in Scotland, I. 140
--- Princes of, their ambitious views, I.

144. instigate the Dauphin and Q Mary
to take the titles of King and Queen of
England, 145. resolve to invade Eng-
land, 146. and to check the reforma-
tion in Scotland, ibid. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, 165, 166.
drives the Queen Regent of Scotland to vio-
lent measures, 171, 172. their violences oc-
cafion a conspiracy against them, 198. are
forced to withdraw their troops fiom Scot-
land, ibid. they insult the Scottish ambaf-
fitdor, 209. have great power over the
young King and Queen, zio. are forced to
contract their views on the death of the
King -- - 11

Lather, a bold and principal promoter of the

reformation, 1. 1 19. the rapid progress of
his dorine 120

M.
rM/ , A7 0 R, John, his history of Scotland,

fi)ome account of, ' I. 4
Mlia. la;d, of Lethington, secretary to Mary

Queen Regent, leaves her service and joins
the congregation, I. 183. his charaAer,
184. is lent by them ambassador to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 185. fends them aflhrances of her
protction, 188. is sent by Q.Mary to the
court of England, 231. makes a conceflion
to Q.Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Q.Mary-
in a progress to the north, 245. he is em-
ployed by Q_Mary to desire a personal in-
terview with QElizabeth, 251. publickly
accuifes Knox of preaching seditious doc-
trine concerning refifiance, 270. intimates
to QElizabeth the intention of Q. Mary to
marry Darnly, 277. prudently conceals her
resentment from Q Elizabeth, 279. pro-
poles moderate measures with regard to Q.
Mary when imprilbned, 373. -attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in Eng-
land, 404. he disapproves of this measure
ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Nor-
folk, 408, 409, 424. is imprisoned by the
Regent, 430. is relieved by Kirkaldry and
secured in the cabtle, ibid. 431. proposes
a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 2, 3. accedes to the
Queen's party, 4. is deprived of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 8. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's par-
ty, 16. agrees with Mar, 31. his views
in refusing a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 37, 38. rejects overtures ofa treaty
with him, 37. is besieged by him in the
cafile of Edinburgh, 38. is forced to capi-
tulate and surrenders to the English general,
41. to avoid the Regent's resentment he
dispatches himself, 43. several of his let-
ters, app. - - II. 63, 85
*--- Sir John, is made secretary for Scot-

land, II. 114. concurs with others in pro-
moting Q Elizabeth's interests there, ibid.
attempts against him by capt. James Stew-
art, late Arran, 156. they prove abortive,
and he is advanced to be chancellor, 157.
an attempt to remove him from that office,

frustrated,
X,

frustrated, 169. -his death, 9go0. a copy of
verses in honour of him wrote by the king,

-- ibid
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior

of St. Andrews, I. 244. accompanies the
Queen in a progress to the north, 246. he
and his associates narrowly escape alfafli-
nation, 247. he is created earl of Murray,
248. fee Murray.
*- the title is conferred on L. Erikine, 248.

the person of the young prince put into his
hands, 345. his resolution in preserving
him from Bothwell, 361. is chosen regent,
II. zI. labours to bring about a general
peace, 31. is thwarted by Morton and his
associates, ibid. 32. dies of melancholy,
ibid. his character, ibid. his merit and in-
tegrity was acknowledged by both parties,

-ibid.
-t- the young Earl, being imposed on by

Morton, turns out his uncle from the caflle
of Stirling, II. 53. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 77. he with the others seize
Stirling catle, and ereA their standard, 91.
is attainted and his estate forfeited, 99. is
pardoned and reflored to eflate and ho-
nours, 117, 118
March, Countess of, her infamous marriage

with the Earl of Arran, II. 71, 72
Maiy of Guise, Q.Dowager of Scotland, takes

a considerable hare in the government, I.
Io5. is much addicted to the French inter-
eft, ibid. projeAs a marriage of her daugh-
ter to the Dauphin of France, ibid. o16.
becomes inRrumental in promoting the re-
formation, 113. aspires to the office of
Regent, ibid. promotes difaffe&ion to the
present one, and favours the reformers, 1 14.
visits the court of France, 1 5. returns to
Scotland to take possession of the Regency,
116. after some opposition he obtains it,
117. confers several offices of trust upon
Itrangers, 129. proposes to lay a tax upon
land, 130. is forced to drop it, 131. tries
in vain to excite a var with England, ibid.
the nobles vigorously oppose her measures,
1 3. treats the reformers with great re-
fpet, 133. obtains a conceflion from the
Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 138.
her artful management of the reformers,
ibid, 139. bellows the vacant benefices on
foreigners, 140. ihe alters her condu& to
the reforlmers, 143. rcninlltratcs ;gainlt

the violent measures of the Princes of Lor-
rain, 147. is persuaded by them to perse-
cute the reformers. 148. her rash answer
to their remonstrance, 149. fummos their
preachers to appear before her, ,b1d. breaks
a promise she had made them, o5. marches
with an army against them, 152. co:ncludes
a treaty with them, 153 this file again
breaks, ibid. her feve-ity at i-erth, ibid.
her schemes discovered 15-.. she goes to
attack them, 155. has again recourse to
negociation, 15 . she is ltartled at their de-
mands, and gets time to answer them, 157.
violates another treaty, 158. loses Perth,
and is forced to abandon -t.irling and Edin-
burgh, fle retires with precipitation to Dun-
bar, ibid. marches to attack the reformers
at Edinburgh, i61. gains time by her ar-
tifice, ibid. makes another treaty with
them, 162. her artifices to undermine the
prior of St. Andrews, 169. the absurdity
of her scheme, ibid. 170. gets a reinforce-
ment of French troops, who fortify Leith,
ibid. the disregards a remonfirance of the
reformers, 171. is influenced by French
counfellers, and persuaded to violent mea-
fures, ibid. 172. retires toLeith, onthe
approach of the reformers army, 173. her
prudent and artful conduc there, ibid. her
haughty and imperious answer to a fresh re-
monllrance from them, 174. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her office of
Regent, 176. the foundation of this fen-
tence, ibid. 178. foments differences among
them, 179. is deserted by her principal
secretary, 183. fends French troops against
the reformers, 189. retires into the castle
of Edinburgh on the approach of the Eng-
lifh, 193. her death and charadIer, 196.
repented of her violent measures, 197. li-
llened to the inftruaions of a reformed
preacher ibid.
Maly, Queen of England, her persecuting

reign, I. 118. her death - 140
- Queen of Scots born, I. 81. a propo-

fal to marry her to Ed. VI. 84. she is de-
manded by Henry VIII. 85. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, loS.
a treaty for that purpose concluded, 107.
fle is sent to be educated in France, ibid.
the fatal confequcnce of this, ibid. is im-
polfd on by the altificcs of the elcnch in
the treaty of mi;arri;ag, 135. her imrriii.g
LII 2 celc-

celebrated with great pomp, 136. they
take the title of King and Queen of Eng-
land, 14-. The makes concessions to the
congregation, 199, 200. declares Q Eli-
znabeth's right to the crown of England,
ibid. The acquires an entire ascendant over
her husband, zIo. she is overwhelmed
with great affliction on his death, and retires
to Rheims, 211. theis invited by the con-
vention to return to Scotland, 216. an
emifltry from the Catholics in Scotland pro-
poses violent measures to her, ibid. she is
determined to moderation by the French
and the prior of St. Andrews, 217. is pre-
vailed on to prepare for her return to Scot-
land, 218. the origin of the discord be-
tween her and Q. Elizabeth, 219, 220.
her pretensions to the crown of England,
220. is envied on account of her beauty,
223. demands a fafe-conduct from QEli-
zabeth,whichisrefufed, 224. leaves France
with great relucance, 225. lands at Leith,
ibid. is much affected by the change of her
situation, 226. several disadvantages at-
tending her accession, ibid. 227. some cir-
cumftances to her advantage, 227, 228.
her accomplimhments of body and mind, ib.
the servants of her chapel insulted, ibid.
procures the free exercise of her religion, z29.
issues a proclamation in favour of the Pro-
tefants, ibid. 230. employs them only in
the administration, 230. attempts to gain
Q.Eliz:tbeth's favour, ibid. makes a con-
cifiton to her, 23 I. which is rejected, 232.
she makes her public entry into Edinburgh,
ibid. an insult offered to her religion on
that occasion, 233. discourages the at-
tempts of the palpifts to gain her favour,
234. her averiion to the family of Hamil-
lon. 235. makes aprogreti into the north,
246. her miniflers narrowly escape affafli-
nation, 247. is refused access to the castle
of Inverne(s, ibid. when in the utmolt
conflernaiion is relieved by the Monros and
other Clans, ibid. her forces defeat Hunt-
ley's rebellion, 249. the desires an inter-
view with QTl.hzabeth, z2 . negocia-
tons concerning her In;Irriage, 2 2. is fol-
lILited bydiflerent lritce., 2z3, 254. her
deliblerr.t iit s co:;ccrning it, ilid. is forced
to hear the imuther:tative Lelhaviour of Q
I I :lctllh, z ;(. to ,lenae 1lor hIbje~ (!d -
t(ltllill b ;..g;II il it lieigni ;Illa;:tce, ;: 7.

determines not to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, 25S. further negociations for her
marriage, 261. discovers the views of Ca-
tharine of Medicis, ibid. 262. Lord Ro-
bert Dudley recommended to her as a hus-
band by Q_ Elizabeth, 262. the is high-
ly offended at this, 263. dissembles with
Q(_Elizabeth, ib. 265. entertains thoughts
of marrying Lord Darnly, z65. she re-
calls Lenox, 266. is affronted at a letter
of Q, Elizabeth, 267. her indifference
as to the reformed, and zeal for the ca-
tholic religion, 269. is taken with Darnly
at first fight, 27 . is greatly moved at Q.
Elizabeth's insulting craftiness, ibid. 273.
negociates with the court of Rome for a dif-
penfation to marry Darnly, 273. and the
consent of the court of France, 274. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q.
Elizabeth forconfent to her marriage, 276,
277. which The affecs to refute, 277. in
relentment she proposes to fe.d an angry
message to Elizabeth, which Maitland pre-
vents, 279. juflifies her conduct to the
Englilh ambassador, ibid. endeavours to get
Murray's content, 281. courts the Pope's
proteation, and receives a subsidy from him,
ibid. her great address in gaining the con-
sent of her subjects, 283. prevents aplot
against Darnly, 284. summons her valfals
to take arms against Murray, z86. and
him to appear before her, 287. her mar-
riage with Darnley celebrated, ibid. fle
confers the title of King of Scots upon him,
288. this ftep censured, ibid. her refcnt-
ment against the malecontents, ibid. she
marches againlt them, 289. rejets the
intercession of QElizabeth in their behalf,
290. continues her march against the re-
bels, ibid. her condu&t and courage on
that occasion, ibid. 291. drives themn out
of Scotland, 291. her further iefCntment
against them, 293. has recourse to several
devices to raise money, ibid. 294. her
prosperity promotes her religion, 295. her
deliberations concerning the exiled Laords,
296. determines to treat tllem with lenity,
298. is diverted fiom this by her religion
amid l'rench influence, ibid. 300. this tlI
source of her alter misfortune., 3oo. her
iutention to reflore pop)ry, ( l,. . is dii-
g;llled vith Darrnly''; ilolcnlt l h);;i\ nor,
-, .-- her fainiLiamity with l(iio uffi'ld til:c

KiIM,.

King, 303. vindicated from any criminal
correspondence with Rizio, 305-307. uses
her utmost endeavours to prevent his mur-
der, 308. she is confined by the confpi-
rators, ibid. she gains the King, and es-
capes fom them, 309. is reconciled to
the exiled nobles, 310. her hatred to
Darnly increases, 315, 316. and favour
for Bothwell commences, 317. extinguishes
some domestic feuds among the nobles,
318. is delivered of her son James VI. in
the Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. invites fe-
veral foreign Princes to his baptism, 319.
continues to treat Darnly with neglect,
ibid. her attachment to Bothwell increases,
320. prevents Darnly's intended flight,
322, 323. visits the borders, 323. an in-
fiance of her regard for Bothwell on that
occasion, ibid. how ihe rivaled Q. Eliza-
beth, 324. her right of fucceflion favoured
by the English parliament, 325. she endea-
vours to avail herself of that opportunity,
326, 327. she takes an extraordinary itep
in favour of popery, 328. receives a pre-
sent from the Pope, but flops his Nuncio at
Paris, 329. endeavours to procure a bet-
ter fubliftence for the reformed clergy, ibid.
33-0. her aversion to the King excessive,
becomes melancholy, 330. The declines a
divorce from him, ibid. 331. goes to
Stirling, to celebrate her son's baptism, 332.
is g;eatly offended at the King's behaviour
onthat occasion, ibid. restores the popilh
ecclefialtical jurifdidtion, 336. her neglet
of the King during his sickness, 338. the
breach between them becomes irreparable,
ibid. 339. she visits him at Glasgow,
339. the motives of her diflimulation
on that occasion, ibid, 340. prevails on
him to come to Edinburgh, 341. her sus.
picious behaviour to him there, ibid.
342. issues a proclamation for discover-
ing his murderers, 343. is supposed to
have been accessory to it, ibid. is charged
with it abroad as well as at home, 344.
goes to visit her son at Stirling, 356. is
met on her return by Bothwvell, who seizes
and carries her to Dunbar, ibid. this lip-
poled with her content, 3 7. is c6ndntded
to Edinburgh, 3 8. and ni.lricrd to tBoth-
well , 3a 9. (fi''ds ain apolop'y to lhec Courts
of I;Fricc and l:nglanld, ibid. her coii-lutt
atilCs a general inidigiiaiioi apginlt Ih r
abroad, 30(1. is alarmed at a combination
of thc niobles agaig;ill lhcl, 3Oz. lhe pub-

lifhes a manifesto to vindicate her condu&,
363. is conducted to the castle of Borth-
wick, ibid. marches with Bothwell's forces
againit the confederate Lords, 365. an at-
tempt of an accommodation proves vain,
ibid. is forced to surrender to the confe-
derates, 367. is insulted by the soldiers and
mob, ibid. is carried to Edinburgh, where
many abuses are offered her, ibid. 368. is
sent a priftner to Lochlevin Castle, 370. Q.
Elizabeth interpoles in her behalf, 372. the
English ambassador is refused access to her,
ibid. various proposals among the confe-
derates concerning her, 373. they oblige
her to resign the Government, 374, 375;
different reasonings on this measure, 376-
379. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 379, 380. her party
among the nobles become dispirited, 381.
her resignation of the Crown accepted by
the Parliament, and her imprisonment de-
clared lawful, 383. her letters to Bothwell
read, and she declared accefflbry to the
King's murder, ibid. escapes from Loch-
levin, 385. arrives at Hamilton, ibid. is
attended by many nobles, and a numerous
army, 386. an association signed in her
defence, ibid. her imprudence in hazard-
ing a battle, 388. her army defeated by
the confederates, 389. herprecipitate flight
into Galloway, 390. rashly determines to
retire to England, ibid. goes thither againit
the advice of her attendants, 391. arlives
at Carlisle, 392. writes to Q.Elizabeth,
imploring her good offices, ibid. receives
letters of condolence from her, and demands
admittance into her presence, 395. this re-
fused and why, ibid. 396. offers to ftbmit
her cause to Q.Elizabeth, 396. is much
deceived in her expectation from this, 398.
and offended at discovering the artifices of
Q. Elizabeth, 399. earnestly follicits to be
admitted into her pretence, ibid. flie is
carried to Bolton Caltle, 401. chagrined
at finding herself a prisoner, ibid. agrees
to an enquiry into her conduif, 4.02. her
diflimulation with regard to religion, ibid.
comniflioners appointed to appear in her
naimen. 40o; . her chiefiew in this affair,
400. conllcnts to moving the collnfrence to
Wclthninller, , l i. flne is calie'd to Tutl-
bury iin tafuordlithi, 4 2. is illnCIh olend-
ed at the rig.ird licwn tile l(cg'nt, and
recalls her co lnc1t to tihe (OIlt CitL'(n, .1 3.
[the ;ccuitin al inillt ll produced by the

R Lccnt,

Regent, 4t4. is accused likewise by the
Earl of Lenox, 415. her commissioners re-
fuse to ainfwer, and demand a perbonal in-
terview, 416. they protest against future
proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circumstance
againlt her, ibid. 417. her commiflioners
withdraw from the meeting, 417. her re-
solute anfiter to a harsh proposal of Q. Eli-
zabeth, 418. avoids any farther progress
in the enquiry, 419. is enraged at the pro-
ceedings, and proposes desperate measures,
420. spreads chimerical conjectures with
that view, ibid 421. proposes a divorce
from Bothwell, 424. is influenced by the
D. of Norfolk's schemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, 425.
contents to proposals from the Englifls no-
bles, 427. their views in this tranfaftion,
426-428. a rebellion by her adherents
againlt Q Elizabeth, 431. is removed to
Coventry, 433. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
delivering her up to the Regent, 434. this
project how disappointed, ibid. 435. ac-
cession of several to her party after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 4. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ibid. her
authority proclaimed at Linlithgow, 5. her
parties defeated by the new Regent, 8, 9.
ihe answers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, 1o.
attempts in vain to get foreign aflillance,
ibid. appoints commissioners to frame a
treaty for her liberation, I. this proving
fruitless, she is more itricly confined, 12.
the invalidity of her resignation declared in
a Parliament held by her adherents, 1 7. aft
of Parliament in England to curb her and
her party, 21. she looks for protection
from the King of Spain, 22. is denied the
privilege of an ambafTador at the Court of
England, 25. is more close confined and
watched, ibid. proceedings against her in
England, 28. her intcrert neglected by the
Irench, 29. is hurt by the mafracre at
Paris, 30, 31. her adherents divided into
two fatlions, 37. one of them joins with
Morton the Regent, j9. review of the
charaCters of her adherents and opponents,
41, 42. her forlorn situation, 42. is car-
ried to Buxton Wells, 43, loles several of
her friends by death, 45. fends a letter and
presents to her ion, 5() her mnefenger why
(illinifiicd. wvithout lecing himi, ibid. her un-
earfnefl at liis conliincinet by the Ruihven
confpiraitors, 8z. complarins to (t.. liza-

leth. of ilher hard usage, ibid. and begs her

4

intercession for the King her son, ibid.
Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour,
95-97. a fruitless negociation with Q. Eli-
zabeth, loo. is alarmed at an, association
in defence of Q Elizabeth, ioz. is com-
mitted to more severe keepers, 103. betrayed
by Lord G ray the Scots ambaf'ador, 104. a
statute for the preservation of Q Elizabeth
pro'es fatal to her, o18. is more rigor-
oufly treated, o09. her complaints to Q
Elizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French aimb.fiador's interest, removed to
Tuthbury, l l. is undutifully treated by
the King her son, ibid. her paflionate
complaint to the French ambassador on that
occasion, ibid i l. threatens to disinherit
him, i I. several discoveries alledged a-
gainft her, 125, 126. she is guarded with
unusual vigilance, 127. her domeflics, pa-
pers, &c. are seized, ibid. 128. iheis con-
veyed to Fotheringay Castle, 128. delibera-
tions concerning the method of proceeding
against her, ibid. 129. is suspicious of poi-
son or private murder, 1 29, 1 30' vindicates
herself to the D. of Guise, 130. the com-
miflioners for trying her arrive at Fotherin-
gay Castle, ibid. her spirited speech when
restsing to plead, ibid. '31. is at length
prevailed on, ibid. she protefis againit the
authority of the court, 132. the accusation
againll her, ibid her defence, ibid.-134.
her sentence, 1 3 . irregularities in her trial,
136. the sentence is confirmed by Par-
liament, ibid. who demand the execution
of it, ibid. 137. France interposes feebly
in her behalf, 138, 139. the sentence a-
gainft her publilhed, 141. she is treated
with the utmost rigour, ibid. her last re-
quell to Q Elizabeth, 142. refuses the
alfiftance of a Proteflant Bishop, or Dean,
ibid. artifices used to inflame the people
against her, 1.44. her behaviour at her
death, 146-149. sentiments of historians
concerning her, 149. her character, 150,

5i. her person described, 151. is bu-
ried, firfl at Peterbolough and afterwards
at Wefpminfler-Abbey, i ;2. letter, from
her, app. 78, 94, 99. her will, app. So.
objecions againfi her by Walsingham, app.
lo5. what course to be taken with her,
ilid. a difirtation on the genuincncfs of
her letters to Bothwcll, end of Vol. 11.
Miaxx el/, Lord, arrives fiorm pain and pre-

parcs forces to join them, 11. 163. his fol-
lowers dilipcrlcd, he is taken prifoncr, ibid.

A1l-rIll
E X.

Ie..'v'. is sent by the French King to observe

the motions of the Queen-Regent and her
adversaries, I. :6S. lent to make up a dif-
ference between llizabeth and Mary, 268.
brings about an appearance of friendship
between them, ibid. is lent to inform Q
Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 3 19.
puts a letter into the Queen's hand againit
her marriage with Bothwell, 355. is forced
to fly from court, 356 advifs K. James
to moderate meafuc.s upon his elcape fiom
the Ruthven conipirators - It 85
----- , Mr. Andiew, a clergyman, his cha-

racler, 11. 46. zealoudy opposes Epi'co-
pacy, ibid. declines the civil jurisdiction
in ecclefiaflical matters, go. is forced to
fly into England to avoid persecution, ibid.
--- Sir Robert, lent by K. James to inter-

cede with QElizabeth for Q_ Mary when
under sentence, 11. 142. executes his con-
miflion with fidelity and zeal, 143. a me-
morial of his to the King, app. 91.
--- Master of the houlhould to Q_Mary,

takes his lalt farewel of her, II. 1.47. her
partingfpeech to him - - 148
Mildmay, Sir Wm. sent by Q_Elizabeth with

proposals to Q Mary - II. 9
lMonluc, Bishop of Valence, employed by the

French to conclude a peace with England
and Scotland, 1. 198. terms agreed to by
him - I199-2o z
Montgomery appointed Archbilhop of Glasgow,

II. 74. is refused and excommunicated by
the general Assembly for his immoral life

ibid.
Montnrorency, Conflable of France, endeavours

to prevent the Dauphin's marriage with Q.
Mary, 1. 133, 134. his prudent advice to
Henry II. 165. makes a slender appear-
ance in favour of Q Mary - 1. 29
Morton, Earl of, his irresolute conduc as to

the Reformation, I. 183. accompanies Q:
Mary in a progress to the North, 246. in-
Itigates Darnly to be avengedof Rizio, 305.
takes the direction of that enterprize, 307.
is admitted into the Queen's presence, who
promises him a pardon, 309. is forced to
fly into England, 310. obtains his pardon
on Bothwell's interceflion, 334, 335. seizes
a casket with letters from Q. Mary to Both-
well, 371. lie is, by QElizabcth's inter-
position, in favour with the King's party as-
ter the murder of the Regent, 11. 3. ap-
pointed one of the commiflioners to treat
with the Queen's party, 1 . his demands
frultrate the meeting, 12. is entirely in-
fluenced by the Court of England, 18. com-
mands the King's forces at Leith, 26. has
fcvcral flirmifles with the Qeen's forces,

ibid. closely besieges Edinburgh, and com-
mits great cruelties, ibid. a hfupenfion pro-
cured by the Englith and French ambafih-
dors, 27 . a coalition of parties prevented
by him, 3 1, 3 2. he is cholen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the h.al- of
Northumberland, 33. o0 tains the tempora-
lities of the Archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's,
ibid. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 36. attempts in vain to gain
Maitland and Kirkaldy, 37, 38. makes
a treaty zxith Chatellierault and Huntly, ,9.
gets pofeflion of the Caltle of Edinburgh,
41. his severity to Kirkaldy and his bro-
ther, 4.3. his admiiiilration becomes odi.
ous, 44. his various methods of gratifying
his avarice, ibid 45. connives at the dif-
putes of the Clergy, 47. he irritates the
nobles, ibid. Argyll and Athol refuse to
answer his summons, ibid. makes a vain
attempt against Lord Claud Hamilton, 48.
diliovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and proposes to resign his office, 50.
his resignation accepted by the King gives
universal joy, 5 . obtains an approbation
of his conduct and a pardon in ample form,
52. continues to watch the motions of his
adversaries, ibid. is forced to surrender the
Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his au-
thority, 53. gains the Cafile of Stirling
and a feat in the Privy Council, 54 pro-
cures a meeting of the Parliament at Stir-
ling, ibid. 55. his security ratified in it,
55. force, are raised for and against him,
ibid. he is reconciled to his adversaries by
the intercession of Q. Elizabeth, 51. is
fufpeded of foul play at an entertainment
in his own house, 57. his illegal proceed-
ings against the family of Hamilton, ibid.
58. the King's new favourites undermine
him, 6i. he endeavours to prevent them,
z6. Q Elizabeth interposes in his favour,
63. is charged with being acceflbry to the
late King's death, 64. he is confined in
diffirent prilons, 6;. discourages an at-
tempt to rescue him, ibid. all his friends
are turned out of office, 68. he is tried
and condemned, 69. his retlut t cali be-
haviour and confeflion before and at his
death, 70, 7 1. his body is treated with ig-
nominy, 7 1.
Jllorra, IEarl of, late prior of St. Andrew's,

goes with a handful of men againi H unltly,
1. 248. by his great ikill and courage he
gains a complete victory, 249. his grant
is confirmed by Parliament, 257. cabals
againit him by ,enox and Darnly, 274.
his aversion to Darnly and other court ta-
vourites, 280. calls Bothwell to Iland a

trial,
E X.

tiAl, ibid. his reaonis for opposing Darn-
ly's ran iage with the (Qucen, 281. he
znd his afociates are mnade the dupes of Q
]Elizabeth's policy, 2Sj. concerts to seize
Darnly and carry him to Lngiand, 284.
this prevented by the (uceen, ibid. avoids
affaflination intended 'him by Darnly, ibid.
evidences of thele plots, z28, 286. the
Queen's v.lffals are called to arms against
him, 286. he is summoned to appear be-
fore her, 287. is again summoned and
outlawed on his non-appearance, 288. is
forced to fly with his associates into Argyl-
shire, 289. they are interceded fcr by Q.
Elizabeth, 290. are pursued by the Queen,
and obliged to fly into England, 291. they
meet with unexpetted ill tieatment fiom Q
Elizabeth, ibid. 292. courts Rizio to in-
tercede with the Queen for tim, 297.
many of his old friends foilicit for him,
ibid. the (Quen's favour how intercept-
ed, 2(,8, 299. a Parliament ib called to
attaint them, 3cl. this how prevented,
302. he and his aflociates arrive at Edin-
burgh, 309. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ibid. are alarmed at
the Queen'i eliape, but soon reconciled to
her, 3 o. he is appointed Regent during
the minority of King James VI. 379. his
harsh behaviour in a visit to the Queen,
ibid. the success of his wife adminiftra-
tion, 381. procures many of the Queen's
party to join him, ibid. gets the places of
strength into his hands, 382. his office of
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 383. his
severe and haughly behaviour difgults fc-
vcral, 384. his adherents in great conl!er-
nation at the Queen's escape fiom Lochlc-
ven, 386. his prudent conduct on that
occ;.fion, 387. Defeats the Queen's army
at L;iagfide, 389. he improves this vic-
tory, 40o. his lenity to the plilbners, ibid.
he calls a parlament, 402 is called upon
by Q( llizalicth to vindicate his condtiurt,
403 he arrives at Yoi k, 405. hib views
in tlii.s affair, 4c6. conplaints ot the
Qucen', commiifloners nga:;nlt him, 407.
he be;aves with great rtlcrve on this oc-
cafion, ibid. 4c8. thii part of his, conilut
accounted for, ,|Oii, 409). inltliities with
the D)!;.e of Noltflk, il id. his denlllalds
from the linglilh coniiiiillioncrs, 40o(, 4 1o.
an Iwvrs the (omeplaints of the (Qu n 's coin-
millioners without touching (ol tlc niuider,
410, 1 i. agrees to have the coiierence
noved to Wclllninlller, 4 1 . is aflctliontitely
reccived hy Q. , li;zalbet, t\hich o(llCnl.s t .,
Mary, 413. is prevailed on by Elizabeth
to accuie: Mary of the mnuider, tI I. pro-
duces his cvidences, 417. is diliniflcd by

Q. Elizabeth without approving, or con-
demning his conduc, 419. his party is
secretly supported by her, 420. returns to
Scotland and by his vigorous conduct breaks
the Queen's party, 421. he receives pro-
pofals both from Q Elizabeth and Q. Mary,
423. he disappoints Norfolk, 429. an ac-
count of his murder, 435, 436. his cha-
racter, 436, 437. his death much lamented
by Q: Elizabeth and the King's party, II. I.
much anarchy the consequence of it. 2. part
of a letter of his, app. 58. his heir mur-
dered by the Earl of Huntly II. 176

N
N AuIe, secretary to Q Mary, is sent by her

with a letter, and presents to her ion,

11. 59. why difmifled without feeing him,
ibid. is sent with offers of humble refigna.
tion to Q( Elizabeth, o02. is fcized and
sint priloner to London, 127, 128. is pro-
duced an evidence againlt her 1 3
Nevil discovers and prevents Parry's design to

murder Q Elizabeth, 11. o10, io8
NIi'/es, theirextenfse power, I. iS, 19. be-

come turbulent and formidable, 2o. their
power greater in Scotland than in any other
kingdom, z2. the causes of this, 22-27.
their power of long duration, 32. it be-
comes intolerable to the Princes, ibid. they
are humbled in France and England, ibid.
but continue rigorous in Scotland, 33. dif-
cords among them encouraged, ibid. their
jurifdiftion circumscribed, 35. are greatly
mortified by K. James V. 06-59. are dif-
appointed in a scheme to shew their resent-
ment, 61. leftfe to attend the King into
England, 62. they seize the revenues of
the church, zc6. refute to part with them
to the relormed clergy, 207, 215, 216.
diflenfions among them, 241. a conven-
tion of them approve the Queen's marriage
to Darnly, 282. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a hulband to her, 353, a ttrange
combination of them on this occtaion, 354.
a body of them aflbciate againll her and
llot h eell, 3( z. their diltfe cut views in this,
ibid. a paity of them favours the (Queen
371. they are much dilpiritedl by the good
conduct of Murray, 381, 382. tl.ey are
much provoked by Mloirton the Regent, II.
47. think of redrcls horn the King, 48.
infiife fulfpicion of tlle Regent's power into
limn, 49. a meeting of theml called by
him, So. a party of them conlfpire againllt
tlhe King's ftvourlitcs, 77. they ei.ze his
pello n and drive thleir of'; 78. their nc-
glh'C of; and ingratitude to the clergy, i 8H.
tlle King atteillP'ts to recorliilh' the-il feuds
alid unite them, 57. lce .oras.

S X.

Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commifiloner

to hear the cause between Queen Mary and
her accusers, I. 405. forms a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 408. in-
trigues with the Regent and Maitland with
that view, ibid. 409. he represents the de-
mands of the Scots to Q Elizabeth, 410.
his farther negociations with refpet to Q.
Mary, 424, 425. endeavours to conceal
his designs from Q.Elizabeth, 425. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent,
425, 426. gets the consent of many of
theEnglilh nobles, 426. his projec ap-
proved at foreign courts, 428. is disco-
vered and defeated by QElizabeth, 429.
flies to Norfolk, 430. he surrenders on a
second summons, and is sent prisoner to the
Tower, ibid. is let at liberty, and continues
his intrigues with Q. Mary, II. 22. is
betrayed by his secretary, 23. is seized
with his dependants, and accused by them,
24. is executed, ibid.
Northumberland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q.Mary, 1. 431. his scheme
defeated, 43 2. he is seized by the Regent,
433. is delivered up to the governor of
Berwick, and put to death at York, II. 33.
Nottingham, Countess of, some account of the

transaction concerning the Earl of EIfex's
ring, 1., 242.

0.

C TA VIA NS, their intfitution and ex-
tensive powers, II. 19i. they under-

mine the King's ministers, ibid. become
odious, and a combination is formed against
them, ibid, 192. being split into factions,
and envied by the courtiers, they resign
their commiflion, 205.
Ogilvie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John

Gordon in the streets of Edinburgh, I. 245.
Oliphant, Mailer of, joins the Ruthven con-

fpirators, [I. 77.
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scot-

land, 11. 67. his inftru&ions, ibid. is
aflaflinated, l 2.
D'Oyfel, commander of the French troops in

Scotland, endeavours to promote a war
with England, I. 13z. his design frullrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his com-

VOL. 11.

mand, 154. initigates the Queen Regent
to violent measures against the Reformers,
155. is lent by Q.Mary to dea:and a safe
conduct from Q. Elizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland, 224.

P.

P A IS LE , Abbot of, arrivesin Scotland,
p I. 87. creates a suspicion of the Earl of
Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent, ibid,
88. is made Archbiflop of St. Andrews,
99.
Paris, the maiaacre of, II. 29, 30. rejoicings

of the popish party on account of it, 30.
the consternation and horror of the Pro-
teftants, ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original con-

ftitution, I. 65-67. particularly that of
Scotland, 67-81, 202. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 202. a dif-
ficulty started and answered, 203, 204.
their proceedings with regard to religion,
204. condemn the Popish and approve the
Reformed Doctrines, 205. several other
regulations of the fame tendency, 206.
their validity called in question, 207. ex-
ceed their powers, 208. their proceedings
laid.before the King and Queen, ibid. a
parliament in favour of Bothwell, 3,1.
pals an aft in favour of the Reformation,
ib. 3-2. confirm the proceedings of the
confederates, 383. parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, 11. 16,
17. another of the Queen's adherents, 18.
attaint upwards of 200 of their opponents,
ibid. a parliament at Stirling by the King's
party, 19. furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. another at Stirling, 54, 55.
one at Edinburgh, 61. and on the King's
being of age, 58. several new laws made
there, ib. 161. the lesser Barons admitted
into parliament, 160.
Parr', Doctor, undertakes to murder Q: Eli-

zabeth, II. 107. is encouraged by and
gets absolution fiom the Pope, ibid. his
dcfign how prevented, ibid. loS. is exe-
cuted, ibid.
Par/;':s, a Jesuit, publiflies a book in favour

of the Infanta of Spain's right of lfcceflion
to the Crown of England, 11. I 89

M m m Ps-

Pajquinades and Pictures, accusing iothwellof

Darnly's murder, 1. 343, 351. a law
made aL niin them, 351.
Patton, VWilliam, his account of the Scottifl

antient military discipline, I. 103.
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of QO

Mary's keepers, II. 103. his rigid severity
to her, log. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, 125. his rude treatment of
her, I41. refuses to be concerned in pri-
vately affaflinating her, 145. a letter from
him, App. o18.
Pelie've, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to

support the popish interest in Scotland, I.
172. drives the Queen Regent to violent
measures againit the Protestants, ibid.
Perth, an iniurrecion of the Reformers there

against the Papilts, I. 15 . its inhabitants
are severely treated by the Queen Regent,
153. a French garrison placed there, ibid.
154. is besieged and taken by the Pro-
tellants, 158. a great tumult there.on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy, II 31 8.
Pbilip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen

of England, I. 118. reinforces his army
with her troops, I31. his great power, II.
112. joins in the holy league, ibid. re-
solves to invade and conquer England, 162.
his preparations for it dilatory, 166. his
design frufirated, ibid. meditates an inva-
sion of England through Scotland, 167.
intrigues with some Scots Lords with that
view, ibid. remits money to them, 186.

Pinkey, the battle of, I. 102.
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q Elizabeth,

deprives her of her kingdom, and absolves
her fubjecfs, II. 7.
Polly, one of Babington's conspirators againit

QElizabeth, 11. 123. discovers the plot.
124.
Poltor, a frantic zealot, affafinates the Duke

of Guise at the siege of Orleans, I. 255.
Pont, Mr. Robert, a minitler, and one of the

Lords of Seflion, protests againfl laws op-
preflive to the Church, II. 93.
Popery, where molt flourishing, 1. 120. what

kind prevailed in Scotland, ibid, i zi. was
partly grafted on Heathenism, 159. is
much hurt by the congregation, 205.
their dotrines condemned by parliament,
ibid. the jurisdiction of their courts abo-

lifhed, zo6, thei worlhip prohibited, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's fa-
vour, 234. the great influence of Popery,
299, 300.
Power, the ballance of, the great consequence

of preserving it, II. 73.
PreJIyierian church government eftabliihed in

Scotland, 1. 212. is confirmed by King
James VI. 177.
Proteflants, in France, violently persecuted,

I. 167. are moderate on Q Mary's arrival
from France, 229. are employed by her
in the administration, 230. a scheme for
suppressing them all over Europe, 299. a
league formed for that purpose, II. 112.
See Reformarion.

R.

AMSAr, a favourite of K. James ii.
narrowly escapes the fate of his affo-

ciates, I. 50. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Both-
well, 5 I. See Bothlwell.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French

to negociate a peace with England and
Scotland, T. 198. terms agreed on by
him, 200, 201.
Randolph, sent to encourage the congregation,

I. 180. (See App. i.) congratulates Q.
Mary's arrival in Scotland, 230. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh,
231. is imposed on by QMary in the
affair of her marriage with Darnly, 276.
fentinto Scotland on the murder of Murray,
II. 2. interposes for Morton, 66, 67. flies
from Scotland in the night, 68. is sent
again there, and concludes a treaty with
England, 123. several of his letters, App.
7, 14, 15, 24, 29, 30, 33.

Ratclih. bee Suffx.
Re/fornatron, its progress in Scotland, I. 110.

account of its firlt preachers, 1 i 1. is much
influenced by England, 2la. two remark-
able instruments of promoting it, 113.
it makes great progress, 1 8. causes con-
tributing to promote it, 119. its advan-
tages over popery, 128. is favoured by
the Q. Regent, 133. an instance of re-
gard for it in Scotland, 134. the whole
party not chargeable with Cardinal Bea-

toutn's

-r

toun's murder, 1 4i a priest burnt for em-
bracing it, 142. the reformers violently per-
fecuted by the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
ibid. are proteced by the Q. Regent, ibid.
apply in vain to the popish clergy, 14-3. a
persecution against them pulhed on by the
French interest, I48. the preachers fum-
moned before the Regent, 149. they are
deceived and declared but-laws by her, i 5o.
a riotous infurreCion of them at Perth a-
gainft the papists, 15 . prepare to defend
themselves against the Queen, 152. con-
clude a treaty with her which ihe presently
breaks, 153. they take arms again against
the Queen, I55. insist on redressing civil
as well as religious grievances, 56. the in-
fluence of the reformation on liberty, ibid.
they besiege and take Perth, 5 8. they seize
Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violences on churches and monasteries,
59. their condua how accounted for,
ibid. an instance of their moderation, 160.
fix their residence at Edinburgh, 16I. the
Queen prepares to attack them, ibid.
make another treaty with her, 162. are
forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but al-
lowed the exercise of their religion, ibid.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
163. are aware of their danger from
France, I66. their party strengthened,
ibid. remonstrate against the French for-
tifying Leith, 171. take arms in their
own defence, 172, 173. remonstrate again
to the Regent, 174. are highly incensed
at her imperious answer, ibid, i75. by
advice of a convention deprive the Queen
Dowager of the office of Regent, 176.
the foundations of this conduct, ibid, 177.
the growth of it encouraged by parliament,
383. See Congrrgation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdition of I. 18
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belong-

ing, - - 1. 18
Revenge, encouraged both by cullom and

law, I. 34
Revenues of the church, proceedings of par-

liament coccrning them, - I. 206
Rido/phi, an agent for the Pope at London, ne-

gociates for Q Mary, II. 22. his argu-
ments with the D. of Norfolk, 23, 24

Rigio, David, Come account of him and his

rife, I. 275, z76. Darnly's connection
with him, z76. his good offices courted
by Murray, 297. his great interest and
familiarity with the Queen, 303. incurs
the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, ibid. several
concurring causes of this, ibid. 304. a
combination formed to murder him, 305.
he is murdered in the Que;f's palace,

~--. -~- 307, 308
Romans invade Britain, I. 2. give the ear-

lieft accounts of the Scots, ibid.
R',ss, bishop of, zealously promotes Queen

Mary's interest at London, II. 23, 24.
is confined to the Tower, and threatened
with capital punimhment, z2. is set at li-
berty, and banished the kingdom, ibid.
some letters of his, Appen. 53, 67
Rutay, a foreigner, made keeper of the

great feal of Scotland, I. 129
Ruthven, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed

to him by Darnly, I. 305. heads the con-
fpirators against him, 308. his part in
that tranfaetion, ibid. i, admitted into
the Queen's presence, who promises him a
pardon, 309. did not repent of it at his
death, - - 3
--- created Earl of Gowrie, he and his

associates seize the King, and remonstrate
againif his favourites, II. 77, 78. drive
them from him, ibid. their condua ap-
proved in an aflembly of the flated, 80.
the King escapes from them, 84. by Ar-
ran's influence violent measures are de-
termined against them, 86. Q. Eliza-
beth intercedes in their behalf, ibid. 87.
are declared guilty of high treason, 88.
take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are harshly treated by ~. Elizabeth, 104.
a reconciliation with her brought about,
1 5, 116. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 117. their modera-
tion on being restored to their eflates and
honours, 118. their neglet of their
friends the clergy, ibid.
--- that name abolished by parliament,

II. 229. fee Goqvrie.

Rutlvcen raid, what, II. 78.
M m m 2

S.

S.
S D DLE R, Sir Ralph, appointed acom-

miflioner to hear the caule between Q.
Mary and her accusers, - I. 405
Santdlaids of Calder, lord St. John, sent to

lay the proceedings of the congregational
parliament before the King and Queen in
France, ,I. o28. is coldly received and dif-
milled without a ratification by them, 209
Sa.vage, a Spanish officer, his desperate refo-

lution to kill Q Elizabeth, II. 122
S o!iand, its ancient history fabulous, I. I

the origin of the Scots, 2. their hitfory
why remarkably obscure, 3. fomeaccount
of the writers of it, 4. is divided into
four periods, 5. a review of the third
era, 6. some account of the controversy
concerning its independency, ibid.-I o. this
the cause of great animofities and much
bloodflhed, il. the state of Scotland
when Bruce began his reign, 12. It be-
gins to have an influence on the fate of
diltant nations, 76, 77. influence as to
the ballance of power, 77. state of Scot-
land at the birth of Q. Mary, 81. is in-
vaded by the English, and several places
burnt and plundered, 93. much alienated
from the English, ibid 94. a peace con-
cluded between England, France, and Scot-
land, 95. computation of damages done
by the nglilh in Scotland, 94, 95. a new
breach with England, 1oo. is invaded by
a great Englifl army, I o . The Scots are
defeated with great slaughter, 1oz, 103.
their manner of fighting at that time, 103,
104. a marriage agreed of their young
Queen and the Dauphin of l'rance, 107.
they loon repent this tfep, o9. a f;ay at
Edinburgh occasions tlcir utter aversion to
the French, I to. this inflamed by another
incident, 129. they decline a war with
England, 131. fend representatives to wit-
ness QMary's marriage, 134. thei care as
to the marriage articles, ibid. 135. they re-
fule content to the demands of the French,
136. four of their deputies frifpecled to be
poisontd, 137. whi h much increases the
avcrfion, 13d. giant the crowit matrimo-

nial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply, to
the hnglifl for aliftance against the French,
180, iS5. an English fleet arrives for
that purpose, 19o. conclude a peace with
England, and receive an English army,
191, 192. all parties agree in resenting the
French, 195. a treaty between [England,
France, and Scotland, 198, 199. both
English and French armies leave Scotland,
202. they rejoice much at the death of
the young King of France, 212. fend to
invite the Queen to Scotland, 216. rejec
proposals of an ambassador from France,
217. slate of Scotland on Q. Mary's re-
turn from France, 226. the great zeal of
the nation against popery, 229. the Scots
brought into contempt by Q Mary's con-
duct, 361. in a miserable condition after
the murder of Murray the Regent, II. 17.
slate of factions at that time in it, ibid. 8.
a league concluded between Scotland and
England, 120. a view of the revolutions
of Scotland, since the acceflion of James
VI. 249-2t 0. of the policy of the fate,
249-254. and of the church, 2 4, 255.
of the genius and taste as to learning, 256,

260
S&ott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages Eng-

land after the murder of Murray the Re-
gent, II. i, z. the design of this 4
Scroop, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch

Q Mary on her arrival in England, I. 395.
Seffin, Lords and Court of, by whom firit

appointed, 1. 36. the President and one
half of their number of the Clergy 123
Setan, Lord, aflills the Queen Regent in de-

fending Leith, I.. 183
Shlcr,',uty, Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's

perbon committed to him, I. 412. why
removed from that office, II. Ioz. is ap.
pointed to fee the sentence against her exe-
cuted, 145. letter fiom him and the Earl
of Kent concerning her death, Appendix,

10
Sinclair, Bishop of Ross, a zealous Papill,

concurs as President of the Seflion in ac-
quitting Knox of a charge of treason, I.

_- - 2(0
So;erfet, Duke of, enters Scotland with a

powerful army, 1, o10. is reduced to a very

critical

critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 102. this viEtory why
of little advantage, 1o4. cabals againit
him at the court of England, force him
to return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies,

10o8
Spain, great warlike preparations there, II.

x6z. See Armada. the Infanta of, set up
as candidate for the Crown of England, 189
SpaniJ ambassador is ordered to leave Eng-

land, for intriguing in favour of Q Mary,

_--- If. 2z
Slrot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's con-

fpiracy, 11. 220-222. is executed, zzz
Stiewart, James, prior of St. Andrews, is ap-

pointed to carry the Crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of France, I. 40o. See
St. Andrews.
---. Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in

Scotland, II. 60. See Aubigny.

---- apt. James, his characfer, II. 6I.

becomes a favourite of King James. ibid.
accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 64. is created Earl of Arran. See
As r an.
~---- Col. William, commander of the

King's guard, contributes to his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators, I1. 84. seizes
the Earl of Gowrie 91
---- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell,

II. 167. joins in a treasonable correfpon-
dence with the popiih lords, 168. See
Bothwell.
-- , all of that name combine in oppo-

sing the Chancellor, II. 18
Si, lir.g seized by the Reformers, I. 58. a

parliament there by the King's party, II.
19. is furprized by the Q.een'sadherents,
and a great fray ensues, ibid. 20
Srozzi Leon, commands a body of French

sent into Scotland, I. 99. reduces and de-
molillics the Caltle of St. Andrews, ibid.
Sec Fr aine.
Slrccrfiot, a remarkable flatute concerning it,

-- II. oo00
Siipe, inlendents proposed in the Church of

Scotland, 1. 214. their business, ibid.
S.Jtx, .Earl of, one of the commiflioners to

lic.a the cause between Q Mary and her
accufcrs, 1. 405. aflemblcs a powerful

army on the borders, II. 3. he and Scroop
enter, and ravage Scotland, .

T.
TA X upon land first proposed in Scot-

land, - 1. 130
Throgmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador

extraordinary from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose
Q. Mary's marriage with Darnly, . 2z.9.
his intercession for the exiled lords is mutch
regarded, 297, 298. his enmity to Cecil,
ibid. is sent to negociate Q.Mary's libera-
tion, 372. is refused access to her by the
confederates, ibid. some letters of his,
Appen. 37, 39, 43, 46, 48, 49
-- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy

against Q. Elizabeth, II. 95. at firlf he
denies, but afterwards confesses it, ibid.
96. reflections on his confefion, ibid. 97.
is executed, 97
Tichbourne designs to aaffainate Q.Elizabeth,

II. 123
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their

death by the law of Scotland, II. 221

U.

ILMOT, a foreigner, made comptroller
V of Scotland, I. 129
Union of S:otland and England, the advan-

tages of, II. 253, 254

W.
lW I ALL ACE, Sir William, bravely afiert-

ed the liberty of his country I. to

''al7ingham, secretary to Q. Elizabeth, sent

ambaflador to K. James VI. II. 87. re-
turns without success, ibid. makes a fa-
vourable report to her concerning James,
88. interposes in favour of Q Mary, lot.
discovers Babington's conspiracy, 124.
why a determined and inveterate enemy to
Q Mary, 127. a letter from him, Appen.

100
Warwick, Earl of, fuccecds Somerset in the

government of England, 1. 108
If'jimNilerj, the conferences concerning Q.

Mary there, 1. 4- 11
5 IJicfi ior/tifi,

X,

* Wejmorland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in

favour of Q Mary, 1. 431. his schemes
discovered and defeated, 432, 433. he
escapes to the Netherlands, ibid.
Wh'ithorn, the prior of, imprisoned for cele-

brating Mass, I. 258
Wil.ox, a minister, declares for resistance and

deprivation of tyrannical rulers, I. 176. is
called to attend the Q.Dowager on her
death-bed, 197

WtiJhart, George, his illegal execution re-

venged, I. 46
Witchcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland,

II. 175
Wotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France, I. 198
--., Sir Edward, lent by Q. Elizabeth

into Scotland, II. 114. his character, ib.

soon gets into high favour with King James,
ibid. procures a league between the two
kingdoms, ibid, 15. undermines Arrah's
power, 15. forms a plot on King James,
and forced to withdraw without taking
leave, - - 116, 117

Y.

OR K, the conferences there concerning
Queen Mary, I. 405

Z.

O U C HE, Lord, sent ambaflador by Q.

Z Elizabeth, to remonstrate againif King
James's lenity to the Popiih lords, II. 185.
his treachery on that occasion, ib.
F I N I S.

I E 65
