THE

J I S T O R

OF

AMhIER I CA.

BOOKS II. ANn L1

CONTAINING

THE H~ISTORY OF; VIRGINIA,

TO THE YEAR 1688; AND

THE HISTORY OF NEW ENGLAND,

TO THE YEAR 165a-

, By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE U1NIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIOGRAPHER

TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND MEMBER OF THE

ROYAL ACADEMY OF EISTORT AT MALDRIDa

THE THIRD EDITION.

LONDokr:

$*RINTED FOR A. STRAHAN j T. CADELL JdN. AND W. DAVIAS

IN THE STRANDI AND E. BAdLFOUR, EDINBURGH.

MD)CCXCILX

# ADVERTISEMENT.

aT HE Origrinal plan of my Father, the

late Dr. Robertson, with Irefpeat

to thle Hiffory of America, compre-
hended not only an account of the
dificovery of that country, and of the
conquests and colonies of the Spa-
niards, but embraced also the history
of the British and Portuguese Eflablithl-
ments in the New WTorld, and of the
Settlements made by the s~everal na-
tions of Europe in the Weft India
Islands. It was his intention not to
have publiihed any part of the Work
until the whole was completed. In
the Preface to, his ]Hiffory of Americ~a,
he has slated the reasons which in-
duced him to depart from that refolu-
tion, and to publish the Two Volumes
which contain an account of the dif-
covery of the New Wrorld, and of the

a progress

AhDVERTISEMEN T.

1 u; 3

progirefs of the Spaniih arms and colo-
nies in that quarter of the globe. He
says, " he had made some progres~s in
the Hiffory of British America;" and
he announces his intention to return
to that part of his Work, as soon as the
ferment which at that time prevailed
in the British Colonies in America,
thould s~ubside, and regular· govern-

.ment be re-established. Various caus~es

concurred in preventing him fronti
fulfilling: his intention.

DURINGe the cours~e of a tedious ill-

ness, which he early foresaw would
have a fatal termination, Dr. Robertson
at different times destroyed many of
his papers. But after his death, I
found that part of the Hiflory of British
America which he had wrote many
years before, and which is nowoffered
to the Public. It is written with his
own hand, as all his Works were; it
is as carefully correfied as any part
of his Manuscripts which'I have ever
s~een; and he had thought ,it worthy

of

v il

of being preserved, as it escaped the
flames to which so marty other papers
had been committed. I read it with
the utmost attention; but, before I
came to any resolution about the
publication, I put the LMS. into the
hands of some of those friends whom
my Father used to consult on such
occasions, as it would have been rath-
ness and presumption in me to have
truffed to my own partial decision. It
was peruled by some other persons
also, in whose taste and judgment I
have the greatest confidence: by all of
them I was encouraged to offer it to
the Public, as a fragment curious and
interesting in its~elf, and not inferior
to any of my Father's Works.

WHEN I determined to follow that

advice, it was a circumstance of great
weight with me, that as I never could
think myself at liberty to defiroy thos~e
Papers which my Father had thought
worthy of being preserved, and as I

could

V 111i

could not know into whole hands they
might hereafter fall, I considered it·
as certain that they would be publithed
at s~ome future period, when they
might meet with an Editor, who, not
being adtuated by the fame s~acred
regard for the reputation of the Au-
thor which I feel, might make altera-
tions and additions, and obtrude the
whole on the Public as a genuine and
authentic work. The MS. is now pub-
lifhed, s~uch as it was left by the Author ;
nor have I presumed to make any ad-
dition, alteration, or correAion what-

ever.

WM ROBERTSON.

QU E ENH-TRPIEETI

EDINBURG H,

April I796.

THE

# BOOK IX.

THE

HI S T: O R Y

OF

A M E RI C A.

B O OK IX.

T HE dominions of Great Britain in B O OK

America are next in extent to thos~e

of Spain. Its acqulietions there are a re. Spirit of

adventure

compence due to thos~e enterprlfing talents awakened
which prompted the Engliih to enter early n~,nbp
on the career of discovery, and to pursue bCo~u~m.~r
it with pers~evering ardour. England was coveris a
the s~econd nation that ventured to visit the
New World. The account of Colutnbus's
fuccef~sful voyage filled all Europe with
affonifhment and admiration. But in Eng-
land it did something more; it excited a
vehement desire of emulating the glory of

a Spain,

a o o KL Spain, and of aimingr to obtain forne share

IX. Sin those advantages which were expeaed in

this new field opened to national adtivity.
The attention of the Englith court had been
turned towards the discovery of unknown
countries, by it's negociation with Bartho-
lomear Columbus. Henry VII. having lif--
tened to his propositions ·with a more fa-
vourable ear than could have been expeded
from a cautious, diff rufifulprince, averse by
habit as well as by temper to new and
hazardous projeats, he was more easily in-
d-uced to approve of a voyage for dis~covery,
proposed by some of his own f~ubjeas, soon
after the return of Chriffopher Columbus.

chtecked BvT though the English had spirit to
by unikril-
fulners in form the scheme, they had not, at that pe.

x -riod, attained to such fkrill in navigation as

qualified them for carrying it into execution.
From the inconsiderate ambition of its mo-
narchs, the nation had long waited its genius
and adtivity in pernicious and ineffeaual
efforts to conquer France. When this ill-
dire~ted ardour began to abate, the fatal

contest

contel between the houses of York and· a o o
Lancaiter turned the arms of one half of I
the kingdom againit the other, and exhauff-
ed the vigour of both. During the course
of two centuries, while induffry and com-
merce were making gradual progrers, both
in the- south and north of Europe, the
English continued to blind to the advan-
tages of their own situation, that they
hardly began to bend their thoughts to-
wards those objea~s and perf~uits, to which
they are indebted for their prefeat opulence'
and power. While the trading vel~els of
Italy, Spain, and Portugal, as well as those
of the Hans Towns, visited the moss re-
mote ports in Europe, and carried on an
aaive intercourse with its various nations,
the Engliih did little more than creep along
their own coasts, in fmnall barks, which con-
veyed the produaions of one county to an-
other. Their commerce was almost wholly
passive. There wants were supplied by
firangers ; and whatever necessary or luxury;
of life their own country did not yield, was
imported in foreign bottoms. The cross of

a o a IT St. George was seldom dirplayed beyond the
· Jx. Sprecinas of the narrow seas. Hardly any

English thip traded with Spain or Portugal
before the beginning of the fifteenth cen-
tury; and half a century more elaps~ed be-
fore the English mariners became so adven-
turous as to enter the I/iediterranean.

Expedi- fN this infancy of navigation, ]Renry
tion from
Briaol, could not commit the conduat of an arma-
u~nhder th tent, dellined to exuplore unklnown regions,
o&Cabot. to his own f~ubjeas. He invefied Glo-

vanni Gaboto, a Venetian adventurer, who
had. fettled in Bristol, with the chief com-
mand; and ifrued a comnmition tohim and
his three sons, empoweringr them to fail,
under the banner of England, towards the
east, north, or weft-, in order to discover
countries unoccupied by any Christian slate;
to take poffefEon of them in his name, and
to carry on an exclusive trade with the in-
habitants, under condition of paying a fifth
par~t of the free profit on every voyage to
the crown. This commifflon was granted
on Mlarch Sth, r495, in less than two years

, after

after the return of Columbus from Ame- a o o i
rica*. But Cabot (for that is the name X
he afl~umed in England, and by which he
is best knowa) did not set out on his voy-
age for two years. He, together with his
irecond son Sebaffian, embarked at Briitol, t497. May.
on board a ship furniihed by the king, and
was accompanied by four fmnall barks, fitted
out by the merchants of that city.

As in that age the most eminent navi- Cabot

gators, formed by the infiruations of Co- Ne-er
lumbus, or animated bjr his example, were ~~
guided by ideas derived from his superior and faila
knowledge and experience, Cabot had ca of
adopted the fyfiem of that great' man, con- Virgji'ia
cerning the probability of opening a new
and shorter passage to the East Indies, by
holding a western course. The opinion
which Columbus had formed with refpe~t
to the islands which he had dis~covered, was
universally received. They were s~upposed
to lie contiguous to the great continent of

* Haklayt, iii. 4.

India,

a o o IT Idia, and to conflitute a part of the vast

Scountries comprehended under that general

name. Cabot, according-ly, deemed it pro-
bable, that by fleering to the north-west,
he might reach India by a thorter course
than that which Columbus had taken, ancy
hoped to fall in with the coast of Cathay,
or China, of whole fertility and opulence
the deferiptions of Marco Polo had excitec)
high ideas. After failing for some weeks
due weft, and nearly on the parallel of the
port from which he took his departure, he
discovered a large island, which he called
Prims Vyla, and his sailors Ne~wfoundland;
and in a few days he deferied a finaller
ille, to which he gave the name of St,

JunP r4. John. He landed on both these, made

fomne observations on their foil and pro-
dutions, and brought off three of the na-
tives. Continuing his course westward, he
loon reached the continent of North Ame-
r~ica, and failed along it from the fifty-fixth
to the thirty-eighth degree of latitude,
from the coast of Labrador, to that of Vir-
grinia. As his chief objet was to dif-

cover

cover some inlet that might o ien a passage a o> o It
to the weft, it does not appear that he X.
landed anywhere during this extensive run;
and he returned to England, without at-
tempting either s~ettlement or conquelt in
any part of that continent *.

IF it had been Henry's purpos~e to Henry

does not

prosecute the obje~t of the commiimon profit by
given by him to Cabot, and to take pof- d~co *.t
Ffeion of the countries which he had dif- very;
covered, the su~cces~s of this voyage- muff
have anfwvered his moss fadnguine expea-
ations. His f~ubjeas were, undoubtedly,
the frirt Europeans who had vilited that
part of the American continent, and were
entitled to whatever right of property prior
disc~overy is suppos~ed to confer. Countries
which firetched in an uninterrupted course
through s~uch a large portion of the tem-
perate zone, opened a profped of fettling

*Monfon's NavalTra~ts, in Churchill's Colkc~t. iii.

21II

5 o oK to advantage under mild climates, and in

Sa fertile fail. But by the time that Cabot
returned to England, he found both the itate
of affairs and the king's inclination unfa,
yourable to any scheme the execution of
which would have required tranquillity and
leis~ure. Henry was involved in a war with
Scotland, and his kingdom was not yet
fially comppf~ed after the commotion excited
by a formidable infurreaion of his own
fubjeats in the weft. An ambassador frons
Ferdinand of Arragon was then in Lon-
don; and as Henry s~et a high value upon
the friendship of that monarch, for whole
charadter he profeffed much admiration,
perhaps from its flmilarity to his own, and
was endeavouring to firengthen their union
by negociating the marriage which after-
wards took place between his eldest son and
the princess Catharine, he was cautious of
giving any offence to a prince, jealous to
excels of all his rights. From the po-
fition of the islands and continent which
Cabot had discovered, it was evident that
they lay within the limits of the ample

donative

donative which the bounty of Alexan. a o o

IX.

der VI. had conferred upon Ferdinand and
Isabella. No person, in that age, questioned
the validity of a papal grant; and Ferdi-
nand was not ofa temper to relinquish any
claim to which he had a thadow of title.
Submifion to the authority of the Pope,
and deference for an ally whom he courted,
fieem to have concurred with Henry's own
situation, in determining him to abandon a
scheme, in which he had engaged with
some degr~ee of ardour and expeaation.
No attempt towards dis~covery was made
in England during the remainder of
his reign; and Sebastian Cabot, find-
ing no encouragement for his aaive ta-
lents there, entered into the service of
8pain *.

THIS

* Some schemes of discovery seem to have been

formed in England towards the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. B3ut as there is no other memorial of
them, than what remains in a patent granted by the
king to the adventurers, it is probable that they were
feeble or abortive projefts. If any attempt had been

made

B O O K THIIS is the most probable account: of the

.,_.sudden cessation of Henry's adivity, after

nor is such s~uccess in his first essay as might have
are sue- encouraged him to persevere. The ad-
CC rOrs. vantages of commerce, as well as its na-

ture, were so little underflood in Eng-.
land about this period, that by an at
of parliament in the year 1488, the taking
of interest for the use of money was pro-
hibited under severe penalties *C. And by
another law, the profit arising from deal-
ing in bills of exchange was conderoned as
favouring of usury f . It is not surprising;,
then, that no great effort thould be made to
extend trade, by a nation whole commer-
cial ideas were flill to crude and illiberal.

' aade in consequence of this patent, it would not

have escaped the knowledge of a compiler to in-
duffrious and inquilitive as Hakluyt. In his patent,
Henry reflrills the adventurers from encroaching on
the countries discovered by the kings of Portugal, or
any other prince in confederacy with England. Ry-
tner's Foeders, vol. xiii. p. 37-

* 3 Hen. VII. c* 5* t 3 Hen. VII. c. 6,

I But

But it is more difficult to dilcover what a o o
prevented this [cheme of Henry VII. from 'X
being resumed during the reigns of his fore
and gra~dfon ; and to give any red~on why
no attempt was made, either to explore
the northern continent of America more
fully, or to fettle in it. Hienry VIII. was
frequently at open enmity with Spain: the
vlalue of the Spanish acquisitions in Americe
had become so well known, as might have
excited his desire to obtain some footing in
those opulent regions; and during a cont
fiderable part of his reign, the prohibitions
in a papal bull would not have restrained
him from making encroachment upon the
Spanish dominions. But the reign of
Henry was not favo~urable to the progress
of discovery. During one period of it,
the a~tive part which he took in the as-
fairs of the continent, and the vigour with
which he engaged in the contest between
the two mighty rivals, Charles V. and ,
Francis I. gave full occupation to the en-
terprifing spirit both of the king and of his
n~obility. Durin~g another period of his ader

miniffration,

ministration, his famous controverly' with
the court of Rome kept the nation in per-
petual agitation and fulpenfe. Engrossed
by those objeas, neither the king nor the
nobles had inclination or leifore to turn
their attention to new pursuits; and with-
out their patronage and aid, the com-
mercial part of the nation was two in-
confidcrable to make any effort of con-
feqluence. Though England, by its total
separation from the church of Rome, soon
after the acceflion of Edward VI., dif-
claimed that authority, which, by its pre-
s~umptuous partition of the globe between
two favourite nations, circums~cribed *he
a~ivity of every other slate within very
narrow limits, yet a feeble minority, dif-
traaed with faalon, was not a junature for
forming schemes of doubtful fulccefs, and re-
mote utility. The bigotry of Mary, and her
marriage with Philip, disposed her to pay a.
sacred regard to that grant of the Holy See,
which vefied in a husband, on whom the
doated, an exrclufive right to every part of
the New World. Thus, through a singular

f~ucceflion

fuccefflon of various causes, fixty-one years B O o K
elapsed from the time that the Englity, _X
dii-covered North America, during which
their monarchs gave little attention to that
country which was dellined to be an-
nexed to their crown, and to be a chief
fiource of its opulence and power.

But though the public contributed little Expedi-

towards the progrels~ of discovery, naval s,,,
skill, knowledge of commerce, and a [pirit Amer~ica
of enterprize, began to spread among the command
Englith. During the reign of Henry VIII. atn
s~everal new channels of trade were opened, Cabot.
and private adventurers vilited remote
countries with which England had formerly
no intercours~e. Some merchants of Bristol
having fitted out two thips for the southern
*regions of America, committed the condu~t
of them to Seballia.n Cabiot, who had ,quit-
ted the s~ervice of Spain. He visited the apsl.
coasts of BrasIl, and touched at the islands
of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico ;and though
this voyage seems not to have been bene-
ficial to the adventurers, it extended the

sphere

B o o K [rphere of Engliih navigation, and added to

Ix. I _the national flock .of nautical icience *.

. Though disappointed in their expe~ations
of profit in this firlt essay, the merchants
were not dilcouraged. They sent, sue-
celirvely, several vessels from different portS
towards the fame quarter, and seem to
have carried on an interloping trade 1.0 the
Portugues~e settlements· with Success i. N~or
was it only towards the wcft, that the adti-
vity of the English was direated. Other
merchants began to extend their commercial
views to the east; and by eftablithing· an
intercourse with s~everal iflanlds in the Ar·-
Schipelago, and with some of the towns on
the coast of Syria, they found a new mar-
ket for woollen cloths, (the only manu-
faaure which the nation had begun to cul-
tivate,) and s~upplied their countrymen with
various produaions of the eaff, formerly
unknown, or received from the Venetians
at an exorbitant price $.

* Hakluyt, liii. 498. t Ibid. iii. 7oo,
4 Hakluyt, ii. 96. &ic.

BUT

BUT the dis~covery of a shorter passage s o o

to the Eait Indies, by the north-west, was
11ill the favourite proje61 of the nation, unrneT-~
which beheld, with envy, the vait wealth tempts to

dilcover a

that flowed into Portugal, fr~om its com- north-
merce with those re ions. The scheme wl~ebtf-r t pr
was accordingly twice resumed under the the in.

dies.

long adminiffration ofHenry VIII.; firit,
w~ith Tome slender aid from the king, and 'Ia3"d
then by private merchants. Both voyages
were difaffrous and unfuccef~sful. In the
former, one of the ihips was loft. In the
latter, the flock. ofprovirlons was to ill-
proportioned to the number of the crew,
that although they were but fix months at
sea, many perithed with hunger, and the.
survivors were confirained to s~upport life
by feeding on the bodies of their dead
companions *.

THE vigour of a commercial s~pirit did sir Hugh

not relax in the reign of Edward VI. The wilbugh
great fishery on the banks of Newfoundland rearhorf

cast pas.

* Haklayt, L ar3, 8c. iii. l29, I3o. sage.

became

So o a became an objea of attention; and front

fX, ome regulations for the encouragement of
that branch of trade, it seems to have
been lprofecuted with aaivity and fuc-
cers *. But the profpedt of opening a
communication with China and the Spice
Islands, by some other route than round the
Cape of Good Hope, flill continued to al-
lure the English, more than any scheme
of adventure. Cabot, whol~e opinion was
deservedly of high authority in whatever
related to naval enterprise, warmly urged
the English to make another attempt to dif~-
cover this pallage. As it had been thrice
searched for in vain, by fleering towards the
north-well, he proposed that a trial thould
now be made by the north-east; and sup-
ported this advice by such plausible reasons
and conjeaures, as excited sanguine expeQ-
ations of success. Several noblemen and
persons of rank, together with some prin-
cipal merchants, having associated for this
purpole, were incorporated, by a charter

* Halkluyt, lii. r31.

from

from the kIcng, under the title of The 8 o o
Company of Merchant Adventurers for the
Diifcovery of Regions, Dominions, Islands,
and Places unknown. Cabot, who was
appointed governor of this company, soon Isss;
fitted out two thips and a bark, furnished
with infiruaions in his own hand, which
discover the great extent both of his naval
skill and mercantile sagacity.

SIR Hugh Willoughby, who was en-

truffed with the command, flood direaly
.northwards along the coalk of Norway, May so.
and doubled the North Cape. But in that
tempestuous ocean, his fmnall ihquadron was
separated in a vriolent florm. Willough-
by's ship and the bark took refuge in an ob-
feure harbour in a desert part of Ruf~an
Lapland, where he and all his companions wit.
were frozen to death. Richard Chancelour, 10.,:~~T
the captain of the other vessel, was more one of

his thips

fortunate; he entered the White Sea, and wintercrat
wintered in s~afety at Archangel. Though anel
no vessel of any foreign nation had ever
visited that quarter of the globe before, tshe

c inhabitants

B o o K irthabitants received their new visitors with

San hopitiality which would have done ho-
nour to a mlore polished people. The
English learned there, that this was a pro-
vince of a vast empire, f~ubje~t to the Great
Duke or Czar of M/us~covy, who resided in
a great city twelve hundred miles from

T'he caP- Archangel. Chancelour, with a spirit be-
tain Viilts
MaIrcosy. coming an officer employed in an expe-

dition for discovery, did not hesitate a mo-
ment about the part which he oug~ht to
take, and set out for that difiant capital.
On his artival in Moscow, he was ad-
mitted to audience, and delivered a letter
which the captain of each thip had received
from Edward VI. for the sovereign of
whatever country they should dis~cover, to
John Vafilowiitz, who at that time filled
the Ruffian throne. John, thoug~h he ruled
over his f~ubjeats with the cruelty and ca-
price of a barbarous deipot, was not de-
flitute of political s~agacity. He inflantly
perceived the happy consequences that
might flow from opening an intercourse
between his dominions and the weffern

nations

nations of Europe ; and, delighted with the B o O K

IX.

fortunate event to which he was indebted L
for this unexpeded benefit, he treated
Chancelour with great ref~peQ; and, by a Feb.
letter to the king of England, invited his 'ss4.
f~ubjeas to trade in the Ruffian dominions,
with ample -promis~es of proteaion and
favour *.

CHANCELOUR, on his return, found Trade

Mary s~eated on the English throne. The fen~ed
success ofthis voyage, the dis~covery of a RumaP.
new cours~e of navigation, the eftabliihment
of commerce with a vast empire, the name
of which was then hardly known in the
weft, and the hope of arriving, in this di-
reaion, at those regions which had been
so long the objeQ of desire, excited a won-
derful ardour to pros~ecute the design with
greater vigour. Mary, implicitly guided
by her husband in every aa of adminiffra-
tion, was not unwilling to turn the com-

* Hakluyt, i. 226, &rc.

C 2 mercial

B o O K mercial adivity of her fubjeas towards a

cc3quarter where it could not excite the

jealouijy of Spain, by encroaching on its
poffeffl~ons in the New World. She wrote
to John Vafilowitz in the most refpeaful
terms, courting his friendship. She con-
firmed the charter of Edward VI., em-
powered Chancelour, and two agents ap-
pointed by the company, to negociate with
the Czar in her name; and according to
the rpirit of that age, the granted an exclu-
five right of trade with RufiTa to the
Corporation of Merchant Adventurers *
In virtue of this, they not: only established
an aaive and gainful commerce with Russia,
but, in hopes of reaching China, they
pushed their dis~coveries eastwards to the
coast of Nova Zembla, the Straits of Wai-
gatz, and towards the mouth of the great
river Oby. But in those frozen seas, which
Nature seems not to have destined for navi-
gation, they were exposed to innumerable

* Hakleyt, i. 252, 8(c*

disasters,

difanrters, and zuet with f~uccefirve difap. I o o

IX,

pointmoents. L

NjOR were their attempts to open a commu.

. iCatlOR

communication with India made only in with In-
this channel. They appointed some of '7~bJ
their faaors to accompany the Ruffian
caravans which travelled into Persia by
the way of Aitracan and the Caspian Sea,
inftruaing them to penetrate as far as pof-
fible towards the eait, and to endeavour,
not only to establish a trade with those
countries, but to acquire every information
that might afford any light towards the
discovery of a passage to China by the
north-eait ". Notwithitanding a variety of
dangers to which they were exposed in
travelling through so many provinces, in-
habited by fierce and licentious nations,
some of ther~e fadtors reached Bokara, in
the province .of ChorafaBn; and though
prevented from advancing farther by the
civil wars which desolated the country,
they returned to Europe with fame hopes

*rHakrluyt, i* 30s.

B o o of extending the commerce of the Com-

Spany into Persia, and with m~uch intelli-
gence concerning the slate of thos~e remote
regions of the eaff*.

Expedi- THE f~uccefsful progrels of the Merchant
tion to the
coan of Adventurers in dilcovery, rouzed the emu-
Africa. lation of their countrymen, and turned their

aaivity into new channels. A commercial
intercours~e, hitherto unattempted by the
English, having been opened with the coast
of Barbary, the specimens which that as-
forded of the valuable produalons of
Africa, invited some enterpriiing navi-
gators to visit the more remote provinces of
that quarter of the globe. They failed
along its weltern shore, traded in different
ports on both Edes of the Line, and after
acquiring coni~derable knowledge of those
countries, returned with a cargo of gold-
dust, ivory, and other rich commodities,
little known at that time in England. This
commerce with Africa seems to have been
pursued with vigour, and was at that time

* Haklolyt, i. 3re. &cc.

no less innocent than lucrative; for as the B o o Kt

IX.

English had then no demand for slaves, they
carried it on for many years, without vio-
lating the rights of humanity. Thus far
did the English advance during a period
which may be considered as the infant slate
of their navigation and commerce; and
feeble'as its fleps at that time may appear
to us, we trace them with an interesting
curiosity, and look back with fatisfadion
to the early essays of that spirit which we
now behold in the full maturity of its
firength. Even in thos~e first efforts of the
Englilh, an intelligent obs~erver will discern
prelages of their future improvement. As
soon as the aaivity of the nation was put in
motion, it took various diremtons, and ex-
erted it-self in each with that fleady, pers~e-
vering induffry, which is the fbul and
guide of commerce. Neither discouraged
by the hardships and dangers to which
they were exposed in those northern seas
which they first attempted to explore, nor
afraid of ventu'ring into the sultry climates
of the torrid zone, the English, during the

c 4 reigns

a o O K reigns of Henry VIII., Edward VI., and)

. Mary, opened some of the moll confider-

able sources of their commercial opulence,
and gave a beginning to their trade with
Turkey, with Africa, with Russia, and
with Newfoundland.

Reign of BY the progrels which England had al.
.icious ready made in navigation and commnerce,
to dilco- it was now prepared for advancing far-

er. ther; and on the acceflion of Elizabeth to

the throne, a period commenced, extremely
auspicious to this spirit which was rising
in the nation. The domeltic tranquillity of
the kingdom, maintained, almost without
interruption, during the cours~e of a long
and pros~perous reign; the peace with so-
reign nations, that fubfilled more than
twenty years after Elizabeth was seated on
the throne; the Qu~een's attentive eco-
nomy, which exempted her fubjefts from
the burden of taxes oppressive to trade;
the popularity of her adminiffration; were
all favourable to commercial enterprise,
brnd c~alled it fortly into vigorous exertion.

The

The discerning eye of Elizabeth having a o o
early perceived that the security of a king , IX.
dom, environed by the sea, depended on
its naval force, she began her government
with adding to the number and itrength
of the royal. navy ; which, during a fadious
minority, and a reign intent on no obje~t
but that of s~uppressing heresy, had been
negleaed, and f~uffered to decayT. She
filled her arsenals with naval Rtores; the
built several ships of great force, accord-·
ing to the ideas of that age, and encouraged
her fubjeas to imitate her example, that
they might no longer depend on foreignl

- ers from whom the English had hitherto

purchased all vessels of any considerable
burden*. By those efforts the skill of
the English artificers was improved, the
number of sailors encreafed, and the at-
tention of the public turned to the navy,
as the most important national objea. In-
flead of abandoning any of the new chan-
nels of cornmerce which had been opened

* Camd. Annales, p· 70. edit. I6I5 ; fol.

B o O K in the three preceding reigns, the English

IX. Sfrequented them with greater afliduity, and

the patronage of their s~overeign added vi-
gour to all their efforts. In order to secure
to them the continuance of their exclusive
trade with RufiTa, Elizabeth cultivated the
conneation with John Val~lowitz, which had
been formed by her predecessor, and, by
f~uccefirve embaiffes, gained his confidence
so thoroughly, that the Englith enjoyed
that lucrative privilege during his long
reign. She encouraged the Companny of
IVerchant Adventurersl whole monopoly
of the Ruflian trade was confirmed by at
*of parliament*, to resu~me their design of

'362* penetrating into Persia by land. Their fe-

cond attempt, conduaed with greater prul-
dence, or undertaken at a more favourable
junaure than the firit, was more fucceffl-
ful. Their agents arrived in the Perflan
court, and obtained such proteation and
immunities from the Shah, that for a courle
of years they carried on a gainful com-

* Hakluyt, i. 369.

merce

merce in his kingdom*; and by fre- BO O K
quenting the various provinces of Persia, fXL
became to well acquainted with the vast
riches of the eaff, as firengthened their de-
sign of opening a more direa intercourse
with thos~e fertile regions by s~ea.

Bu'r as every effort to accomplish this by Frobilher

the north-east had proved abortive, a ,h at.,
scheme was formed, under thle patronage pt 0e~
of the Earl of W1~arwick, the head of the thenorth-

well pal-

enterprising family of Dudley, to make a rage.
new attempt, by holding an opposite cours~e
by the north-west. The condua of this
enterprise was committed to IVartin Fro-
bilher, an officer of experience and repu-
tation. In three faccefirve voyages he ex- 1576.
plored the inhorpitable coast of Labrador, an1517577
and that of Greenland, (to which Elizabeth
gave the name of Meta IncogSnita,) with-
out discovering any probable appearance of
that passage to India for which he fought.
This new dis~appointment was sensibly felt,

* Hakluyt, i* 344, &c.

and

B o o K and might have damped the spirit of naval

IX. enterprize among the English, if it had not

res~umed freih vigour, amidit the general
exultation of the nation, upon the f~uc.

Sir Fran- cefsful expedition of Francis Drakxe. That
cis Drake
railsround bold navigator, emulous of the glory which
the world. Magellan had acquired by failing round the

globe, formed a scheme of attempting a
voyage, which all Europe had admired for
sixty years, without venturing to follow the
Portuguese discoverer in his adventurous
cours~e. Drake undertook this wvith a
feeble iquadron, in which the largest vessel
did not exceed a hundred tons, and he ac-
complilhed it, with no less credit to him-
self, than honour to his country. Even in
this voyage, condufted with other views,
Drake s~eems not to have been inattentive to
the favourite objett of his countrymen, the
discovery of a new route to India. Before
he quitted the Pacific Ocean, in order to
firetch towards the Phillippine islands, he
ranged along the coast of California, as high
as the latitude of forty-two degrees north,
"in hopes of dif~coveringr, on that fide, the

I2 commu-

communication between the two seas, which B O O K
had to often been searched for in vain on X
the other. But this was the dnly unfuc-
cef~isful attempt of Drake. The excefirve
cold of the climate, intolerable to men who
had long been accuffomed to tropical he~at,
obliged him to flop thort in his prog~ress
towards the north; and whether or not
there be any passage from the Pacific to the
Altlantic Ocean in that quarter, is a point
itill Ipnaf~certainled *.

FROM this period, the English seem to Enthufi-

arm of

have confided in their own abilities and dilcovery..
courage, as equal to any naval enterprize.
They had now visited eve'ry region to
which navigation extended in that age,
and had rivalledi the nation of highest re-
pute for naval skill in its moss rplendid ex-
ploit. But notwithflanding; the knowledge
which they had acquired of the different -
quarters of the globe, they had not hitherto
attempted any fettlemnent out of their ow~n

* HIakluyt, 111. 44o. Camdi. Annal* 30s, &rc.

country.

I o oK couintry. Their merchants had not yet

1 acqluired such a degree, either of wealth

or of political influence, as were requ~ite
towards carrying a scheme of colonization
into execution. Persons of noble birth
were destitute of the ideas and information
which might have dis~posed them to pa-
tronize s~uch a design. The growing power
of Spain, however, and the alcendant over
the other nations of Europe to which it had
attained under Charles V. and his son, na-
turally turned the attention of mankind to-
wards the importance of those settlements
in the New W~orld, to which they were so
much indebted for that pre-eminence. The
intercourse between Spain and England,
during the reign of Philip and Mary; the
resort of the Spanish~ nobility to the English
court, while Philip resided there I the fludy
of the Spanish language, which became
fashionable; and the translation of several
hiffories of America into English, diffilled
gradually through the nation a more dil-
tin~t knowledge of the policy of Spain in
planting its colonies, and of the advan-

tag~es

tages which it derived from them. WThen B O O K
hoffilities commenced between Elizabeth
and Philip, the profpeat of annoying Spain
by sea opened a new career to the enter-
prifing spirit of the English nobility. Al-
Inof1 every eminent leader of the age aimed
at diflingulfhingrhimfe~lf by naval exploits.
-TFhat s~ervice, and the ideas conneaed with
it, the discovery of unknown countries, the
establishment of distant colonies, and the
enriching of commerce by new commodi-
ties, became familiar to persons of ranlk.

IN consequence of all those concurring yirit pro-

causes, the English~ began seriously to form j(eo o
plans of f~ettlingr colonies in thos~e parts of Nons~c·
America, which hitherto they had only
visited. The projeaors and patrons of
these plans were moilly persons of rank
and influence. Among them, Sir Hum-
phry Gilbert, of Compton in Devonshire,
ought to be mentioned with the diflin~ion
due to the condudtor of the firlt English
colony to America. He had early ren-
dered hims~elf conspicuous by his military

s~ervices

B O O K services both in France and Ireland; and

IX. _ ,having afterwards turned his attention to

naval affairs, he publithed a discourse con-
cerning the probability of a north-weit
pass~age, which d~iscovered no inconsiderable
portion both of learning and ing~enuity,
mingled with the enthufialmn, the credu-
lity, and sanguine expedations which in-
cite men to new and hazardous under-
takings*., With thos~e talents he was
deemned a proper person to be employed
in eflablifhing a new colony, and eafly

JUne 1r, obtained from the Qeen letters patent,

vef .,ting in him fufficient powers for this
purpore.

Chatter As this is the first charter to a colony,

a endd, granted by the Crown of England, the ar-

ticles in it merit particular attention, as they
unfold the ideas of that age, with refped to
the nature of fach settlements. Elizabeth
authorizes him to dilcover and take pof-
fieffion of all remote and barbarous lands,

* Hakluyt, iii. Ilr

unocI

unoccupied by any Christian prince or· B oo K

IX.

people. She vefls in him, his heirs and ,
assigns for ever, the full right of property
in the foil of those countries whereof he
shall take JpoffefiTon. She permits such of
her f~ubjefts, as were willing to accom-
pany Gilbert in his voyage, to go and
fekttle in the countries which he shall plant.
She empowers him, his heirs and assigns, to
dispos~e of whatever portion of those lands
he ihall judge meet to persons f~ettled there,
in fee-fimple, according to the laws of
England. She ordains, that all the lands
granted to Gilbert shall hold of the Crown
of England by homage, on payment of the
fifth part of the gold or silver ore found
there. She confers upon him, his heirs
and assigns, the complete juridiietions and
royalties, as well marine as other, within
the said lands and seas thereunto adjoin-
ing;; and as their common safety and in-
terest would render good government ne-
ceffary in their new settlements, the gave
Gilbert, his heirs and afigins, full power
to convift, puniih, pardon, govern and

D rule,

B O O K rule, by their good diferetion and policy,

L~3 as well in causes capital or criminal as

civil, both marine and other, all perf'ons
who shall from time to time f~ettle within
the said countries, according to s~uch fla-
tutes, laws, and ordinances as thall be by
him, his heirs and afirgns, devised and
eftabliihed for their better government.
She declared, that all who fettled there
should have 'and enjoy all the privileges of
free denizens and natives of England, any
law, cuffom, or usage to the contrary not-
withstanding. And finally, the prohibited
all persons from attempting to f~ettle within
~two hundred leagues of any place which
Sir Humphry Gilbert, or his associates,
ihall have occupied, during the space of
fix years *.

Fira ex- Wrr a those extraordinary powers, suited
pedition
fails. to the high notions of authority and pre-

rogative prevalent in England during the
sixteenth century, but very repugnant to

# Hakla~yt, Hi*i r35*

more

more recent ideas with refpea to the o o a

1X.

rights of free men, who voluntarily unite J
to form a colony, Gilbert began to colled
associates, and to prepare for embarkation.
His own chara~ter, and the zealous es-
forts of his half-brother Walter Ralegh,
who, even in his early youth, displayed
those splendid talents, and that undaunted
spirit, which create admiration and confi-
dence, soon procured him a fufficient num-
ber of followers. But his success was not
suited either to the sanguine hopes of his
countrymen, or to the expence of his
preparations. Two expeditions, both of
which he conduated in person, ended disC-
affroufly. In the las1, he himself perifheds so
without having effeaed his intended f~ettle-
ment on the continent of America, or per-
forming any thing more worthy of no-
tice, than the empty formafity of taking
poffeflon of the island of Newfoundland,
in the name of his sovereign. The dif-
·fenfions among his officers; the licentious
and ungover~nable spirit of some of his
.crew; his total ignorance of the countries

oz a wih

B o o K which he purposed to occupy ; his misfor-

L tune in approaching the continent too far

towards the north, where the inhos~pitable
coast of Cape Breton did not invite them
to f~ettle; th~e shipwreck of his largest vef--
fel; and above all, the scanty proviflon
which the funds of a private man could
make of what was requiGte for establishing
a new colony, were the true caules to
which the failure of the enterprise muff
be imputed, not to any deficiency of abili-
ties or res~olution in its leader *.

Thd~e Plan BUT the mi~scarriage of a sc~heme, in
by Ra- which Gilbert. had wasted his fortune, did
legh. not dilcourage Ralegh. Hleadopted all his

brother's ideas; and applying to the
Queen, in whole favour he flood high at

4-sg that time, he procured a, patent, with ju-

Marchs6. ridii~ion and prerogatives as ample as had

been granted unto Gilbert t. Ralegh, no
less eager to execute than to undertake the

April27. iEcheme, instantly dis~patched two [m~ll

*Haklayt, ill. r43, &tc. ( Ibid. 243-

vessels,

vessels, under the command of Amadas B OO K
and Barlow, two officers of trust, to vilit
the countries which he intended to f~ettle,
and to acquire some previous knowledge of
their coasts, their foil, and prodridtions.
In order to avoid Gilbert's error, in holding Dircovery
too far north, they took their course by the ,Ofrgi.p
Canaries and the Weit India ifiands, and
approached the North American continent
by the Gulph of Florida. UTnfortunat~ely
their chief researches were made in that
part of the country now known by the
name of North Carolina, the province in
America moRt deititute of commodious har-
bours. They touched first at an island,
which they call WIokocon (probably Oca-
koke), situated on the inlet into Pamplicoe
Sound, and then at Raonoke, near the
mouth of Albemarle Sound. In both,
they had fibme intercours~e with the na-
tives, whom they fou~nd to be savages,
with all the charaderiitic qualities of un-
civilized life, bravery, averflon to labour,
hiofpitality, a propensity to admire, and a
willingnel~s to exchange their rude pro-

D 3 dualions

B o o dualons for English commodities, efpe-

IX.cially for iron, or any of the de~ful metals

of which they were deititute. After [pend-
ing a few weeks in this traffc, and in visit-
ing fomne parts of the adjacent continent,

sept. 8. Amadas and Barlow returned to England

with two of the natives, and gave such
[plendid deferiptions of the beauty of the
country, the fertility of the foil, and the
mildness of the climate, that Elizabeth, de-
lighted with the idea of occupying a terri-
tory, superior, so far, to the barren regions
towards the north hitherto visited by her
fubje~ts, bestowed on it the name of Vir-
ginia; as a memorial that this happy
discovery had been 'made under a virgia
qu~een *.

colony TuERn report encouraged Ralegh to

edn.r baften his preparations for taking poss~es-

7iU~~ sion of foch an inviting property. He fitted

abu out a squadron of seven finall thips, under
vu the command of Sir Richard Greenville, a

* Hakiluyt, ill. 246.

man

man of honourable birth, and of courage 8 o o
so undaunted as to be conspicuous even
in that gallant age. But the s~pirit of that
predatory war which the English carried
on against Spain, mingled with this scheme
of settlement; and on this account, as
well as from unacquaintance with a more
direit and shorter course to North Ame-
rica, Greenville failed by the Weft India
islands. He spent some time in cruifxng
among these, and in taking prizes; so that
i-t was towards the close of June before he
arrived on the coast of North America.
He touched at both the islands where
Amadas and Barlow had landed, and made
s~ome excurflons into different parts of the
continent round Pamplicoe and Albemarle
Sounds. 1But as, unfortunately, he did not
advance far enough towards the north, to
dis~cover the noble bay of Chef~apeak, he
Cffablifhed the colony which he left on Aug. zs-
the island of Raonoke, an incommodious
flation, without any safe harbour, and al-
Inoff uninhabited -t.

* Haklayt, iii. 246. t· Ibid. 25r,

9 4 .This

-3 o o K THIs colony consisted only of one hun-

Sdred and eighty persons, under the com-

In dangr' mand of Captain Lane, assisted by some
of perish-
ing by a- men of note, the most diftingulfhed of
milne; re-
turns to whom was Hariot, an eminent mathema-
England* tician. Their chief employment, during

a residence of nine months, was to obtain a
more extensive knowledge of the country.;
and their researches were carried on with
greater spirit, and reached farther than could
have been expeaed from a colony so
feeble, and in a flation to dis~advantageous.
But from the fame impatience of indigent
adventurers to acquire sudden wealth,
which gave a wrong direaion to the in-
duffry of the Spaniards in their settlements,
thle greater part of the Englilh seem to have
considered nothing as worthy of attention
but mines of gold and silver. There they
fought for, wherever they came; there
they inqluired after with unwearied eagere
nes~s. The savages soon discovered the fa-
vourite objefts which allured ,them, and
artfully amuled them with so many tales
concerning pearl filheries, and rich mines

of various metals, that Lane and his corn- 5 o a i
panions wa~ted their time and aaivity .
in the chimerical pursuit of ther~e, initead
of labouring to rais~e proviflons for their
own fubifitence. On discovering the de-
ceit of the Indians, they were to much ex-
alperated, that from expoftulations and
reproaches, they proceeded to open hof-
tility. The supplies of proviflons which asse.
they had been accuffomed to receive from
the natives were of course withdrawn.
Through their own negligence, no_0ther
precaution had been taken for their Cup-
port. Ralegh, having engaged irl a scheme
too expensive for his narrow funds, had not
been able to fend them that recruit of flores
with which Greenville had promiled to fur-
nifh them early in the [pring. The colony,
reduced to the utmost diffreifs, and on the
point of perishing with famine, was pre-
paring to disperse into different diiarias
of the country in qluelt of food, when Sir June r.
Francis Drake appeared with his fleet, re-
turning from a fuccefsful expedition againf1
the Spaniards in the Weft Indies. A

scheme

3 6 OI K cheme which he formed, of furniahing

,,ILane and his associates with fulch supplies

as might enable them to remain with com-
fort in their flation, was disappointed by a
sudden florm, in which a finall vefrel that
he destined for their service was dalhed to
pieces; and as he could not supply them
with another, at their joint reqlueft, as
they were worn out with fatigue and

JUner9. famine, he carried them home to Eng;-

land *.

Knour. SUCH was the inaus~picious beginning

dp~t of the English s~ettlements in the NeI~w

try ac- World; and after exciting high ex'pedta-
quired in
this expe. tions, this sirs1 attempt produced no effeQ

dio. but that of affording a more complete know-

ledge of the country; as it enabled Hariot,
a man of science and observation, to de-
scrib.e its foil, climate, produaions, and the
snanners of its inhabitants, with a degree
of accuracy which mhrits no inconsiderable
praise, when compared with the childish

* IIakIu)·: lii. 2;;. Camd. Annal. 387.

and

and marvellous tales published by several of B o o it
the early vifitants of the New World.. X
There is another consequence of this abor·-
tive colony important enough to entitle it
to a place in hiffory. Lane and his affoci-
ates, by their conflant intercourse with the
Indians, had acquired a relish for their fa-
vourite enjoyment of fmnoking tobacco; to Ure onto
the uife of which, ~the credulity of that b~ao dOiend ,
people not only as~cribed a thoufagnd imag~i- in Eng-

land.

nary virtues, but their s~uperstition con-
fidered the plant itself as a gracious gift of
the gods, for the s~olace of human kind, and
the most acceptable offering which man can
present to heaven *. They brought with
·them a specimen of this new commodity
to England, and taught their countrymen
the method of using it ; which Ralegh, and
fobme young men of faihion, fondly adopted.
From imitation of them, from love of no-
velty, and from the favourable opinion of
its salutary qualities entertained by freveral

* Hariot ap. Makluyt, iii .27'. De Bry. America,

Tars i.

physicians,

B og o hyficians, the pradlice spread among the

Enghfih. The Spaniards and Portuguele
had, previous to this, introduced it in other
parts of Europe. This habit of taking to-
bacco gradually extended from the extremi-
ties of the north to those of the south, and
in one form or other seems to be equally
grateful to the inhabitants of every climate ;
and by a singular caprice of the human fpe-
cies, no less inexplicable than unexampled,
(so bewitching is the acqiuired talle for a
sveed of no manifeRt utility, and at firit not
only unpleasant, but nauleous,) that it has
become almoit as univers~al as the demands
of those appetites originally implanted in
our nature. Smoking was the firRt made of
taking tobacco in England; and we learn
from the comic writers towards the close of
the sixteenth century and the beginning of
the seventeenth, that this was deemed one
of the accomplishments of a man of fashion
and [pirit.

A Fr wV days after Drake departed from

Roanok~e, a iimall bark, dispatched by Ra-

'3 legh

legh with a fulpply of flores for the co- a oo I
lony, landed at the place where the English .
had fe~ttled; but on finding it deserted by
their countrymen, they returned to Eng-
land. The bark was hardly gone, when
Sir Richard Greenville appeared with three
ships. After searching in vain for the co-
lony which he had planted, without being
able to learn what had befallen it, he left
fifteen of his crew to keep poffefiron of the
island. This handful of men was soon
overpowered and cut in pieces by the fa-
vages *.

THOUGH all Ralegh's efforts to establish Raleghr,

second at.

a colony in Virginia had hitherto proved tempt to
abortive, and had been defeated by a fuc- fe~nin
cefilon of disasters and dis~appointments, virginia.
neither his hopes nor resources were ex-
hauffed. Early in the following year, he rS81
fitted out three thips, under the command
of Captain John White, who carried
thither a colony more numerous than that

* Hakluyt, iii. 265* 283*

which

I o o which had been fettled under Lane. On

JX .

Stheir arrival in Virginia, after viewing the

face of the country covered with one con-
tinued foreRt, which to them appeared an
uninhabited wild, as it was occupied only
by a few scattered tribes of savages, they
discovered that they were deititute of many
things which they deemed essentially ne-
ceffary towards their fubliltence in such an
isncomfortable situation; and, with one
voice, requeited White, their commander,
to return to England, as the person among
them molt likely to solicit, with efficacy,
the supply on which depended the exilt-
ence of the colony. White landed in his
native country at a molt unfavourable sea-
son for the negociation which he had un-
dertaken. He found the nation in uni-
versal alarm at the formidable preparations
of Philip II. to invade England, and col-
leding all its force to oppose the fleet to
which he had arrogantly given the name
of the invincible Armada. Ralegh, Green-
ville, and all the moit zealous patrons of
the new settlement, were called to aal a

diftin-

diftingulfhed part in the operations of a o o K
year equally interest~ing and glorious to
England. Amidst danger so imminent, 's88-
and during a contest for the honour of their
sovereign and the independence of their
country, it was impossible to attend to
a les~s important and remote Objea. The Colony
unfortunate colony in Roanoke received by sa.~c
no s~upply, and perished mis~erably by fa- mine.
mine, or by the unrelenting cruelty of
those barbarians by whom~ they were f~ur-
rounded.

DURING the remainder of E11zabeth's Rategh

reign, the ifcheme of eftablithing a colony "fede
.in Virginia was not refiimed. Ralegh, e~i ao
with a moss~ aspiring mind and extraordi- coloay ma
nary talents, enlightened by knowledg~e no virgunia.
les~s uncommon, had the s~pirit and the de-
seas of a projedor. Allured by new ob-
jeaQs, and always giving the preference to
such as were most splendid and arduous,
he was apt to engage in undertakings so
vast and to various, as to be far beyond
his power of accomplithing. He was now

intent

I o a intent on peopling and improving a large

diitriet of country in Ireland, of which
he had obtained a grant from the Qu~een.
He was a deep adventurer in the s~cheme of
fitting out a powerfull armament againit
Spain, in order to eitablifh Don Antonio
on the throne of Portugal. He had begun
to form his favourite but vilionary plan,
of penetrating into the province of Guiana,
where he fondly dreamed of taking pof-
ifeffon of inexhauffible wealth, flowing
from the richeRt mines in the New World.
Amidlt this multiplicity of projefts, of such
promifmge appearance, and recommended
by novelty, he naturally became cold to-
wards his ancient and hitherto unprofit-
able scheme of fettling a colony in Vir.
ginia, and was easily induced to aflig~n his
right of property in that country, which he
had never visited, together with all the
privileges contained in his patent, to Sir

IMlrch, Thomas Smith, and a company of mer-
1596. chants in London. This company, satisfied

with a paltry tr~affic carried on by a few
finall barks, made no attempt to take pof-

f~efiron

feffl~on of the country. Thus, after aperiod B O O K
of a hundred and fix years from the time ,
that Cabot difcovertd North America, in
the name of Henry VII., and of twenty
years from the time that Ralegh planted
the first colony, there was not a single
English~man fettled there at the demis~e of
Queen Elizabeth, in the year one thousand
fix hundred and three.

I HAVE already explained the causes of circum.

flances in

this, during the period previous to the Eliza-
accefilon of Elizabeth. Other cauifes pro- be'ths

TCign llR*

duced the fame effed under her admini- ravour-
firation. Th~ough for one half of her reign cotoi a-
England was engaged in no foreign war, tion.
and commerce enjoyed that perfedt security
which is friendly to its progress; though
the glory of her latter years gave the
highest tone of elevation and vigour to the
national spirit; the Queen hers~elf, from
her extreme parsimony, and her averflon
to demand extraordinary supplies of her
f~ubjeats, was more apt to restrain than to
second the ardent genius of her people. Se-

E Veral

B OO K veral of the moit iplendid enterprizes in

IX. Sher reign were concerted and executed by

private adventurers. All the Cchemes for
colonization were carried on by the fixnds
of individuals, without any public aid.
Even the felicity of her government was
adverse to the e~tablifhment of remote colo-
nies. So powerful is the attra~ion of our
native foil, and such our fortunate parti-
ality to the laws and manners of our own
country, that men seldom choose to aban-
don it, unles~s they be driven away by
opprefilon,, or allured by vaRt profpeas
of sudden wealth. But the provinces of
America in which the English attempted to
fettle did not, like thos~e occupied by Spain,
invite them thither by any appearance of
silver or golden mines. All their hopes
of gain were distant; and they s~aw that
nothing could be earned but by persevering
exertions of induitry. The maxims of
Elizabeth's adminiitration were, in their
generad tenor, so popular, as did not force

Sher fiibjeats to emigrate, in order to elrcape

from the heavy or vexatious hand of power.

It seems to have been with difficulty that a o o it
these slender bands of planters were col-
leated, on which the writers of that age
beffow the name of the firRt and second
Virginian colonies. ' The fulnels of time
for English colonization was not yet
arrived.

But the faucceffon of the Scottish line to 16o4.

the crown of England hastened its approach. e~C,,:O~
James was hardly s~eated on the thr~one be- vourable
fore he discovered his pacific intentions, eftablilh.
and he soon terminated the long war which c ico3,,
had been carried on between Spain and
England, by an amicable treaty. From
that period, uninterrupted tranquillity con-
tinued during his reign. Many persons of
higrh rank, and of ardent ambition, to
whom the war with Spain had afforded
conflant employment, and presented allur-
ing profpeas, not only of fame but of
wealth, soon became so impatient of lan-
guilhing at home without occupation or
objeat, that their invention was on the
firetch to find some exercise for their adti-

E 2 Vity

8 o oK vity and talents. To both there, North

_ America seemed to open a new field, and

schemes of carrying colonies thither became
more general and more popular.

m~rea A VOYAGE, undertaken by Bartho-
froor lemew Gorn~old in the last year of the
"E~aP Queen, facilitated, as well as encouraged,
America the execution of ther~e schemes. He failed
first at-
tempted from Falmouth in a fmnall bark, with thirtr-~

~~dor, two men. Inflead of following former na-

vigators in their unnecessa~ry circuit by the
Weft India illes and the Gulf of F~lorida,
Gofnold fleered due weft, as nearly as the
winds would permit, and was the first
English commander who reached America
by this shorter and more direst course.
That part of the continent which he first
d~eferied was a promnontory in the province
now called Maffachufets Bay, to which
he gave- the name of Cape Cod. Holding
along the coast, as it firetched towards the
south-west, he touched at two islands, one
~of which he called Martha's Vineyard,
the other Elizabeth's Island; and visited

the

the adjoining continent, and traded with its B O O K
inhabitants. He and his companions were
i0 much delighted everywhere with the
inviting afpedt of the country, that not-
withstanding the finallnel~s of their number,
a part of them consented to remain there.
But wuhen they had leisure to refleQ upon
the fate of former settlers in America, they
retra~ed a resolution formed in the first
warmth of their admiration; and Gofnold
returned to England in less than four months
from the time of his departure *,

THIS voyage, however inconsiderable it conre-

may appear, had important effeals. The ,9r""~c'
English now discovered the afpea of the nold's
American continent to be extremely in- voyage.
viting far to the north of the place where
they had formerly attempted to fettle. The
coaff of a vast country, firetching through
the most desirable climates, lay before
them. The richness of its virgin foil pro-
mifed a certain recompence to their indus--

* Purchas, iv. p. 1647.

B o o try. In its interior provinces unexpedted

IX. q ~urces of wealth might open, and un-

known objeas of commerce might be
found. Its diitance from England was di-
miniihed almost a third part, by the new
course which Gofnold had pointed out.
Plans for eitabithing colonies began to be
formed in different parts of the kingdom;
and before these were ripe for execution,
one finall vessel was s~ent out by the mer-
chants of Briitol, another by the Earl of
Southampton and Lord Arundel of War-
dour, in order to learn whether Golnold's
account of the country was to be confi-
dered as a just reprele~ntation of its itate,
or as the exaggerated defecription of a fond
dis~coverer. Both returned with a full con-
firmation of his veracity, and with the
addition of so many new circumitances in
favour of the country, acquired by a more
extensive view of it, as greatly increased
the desire of planting it.

Haklayt THE most aative and efficacious pro-
smproves
the com. moter of this was Richard Hakluyt, pre-

bendary

bendary of Weftminfier, to whom Eng- o o K
land is more indebted for its American
poffefflons than to any man of that age. mDerEia:ll
Formed tmder a kinsman of the fame name, ikit of

that age.

eminent for naval and commercial know-
ledge, he imbibed a limilar taste, and ap-
plied early to the fludy of geography and
navigatjon. These favourite sciences en-
gross~ed his attention, and to diffuife a re-
lifh for them was the great objet of his
life. In order to excite his countrymen to
naval enterprize, by flattering their national
vanity, he published, in the year one thlou-
sand five hundred and eighty-nine, his
valuable colleaion of voyages and dis~co-
veries made by Englishmen. In order to
supply them with what information might
be derived from the experience of the most
f~uccef~sful foreign navigators, he tranilated
some of the best accounts'of the progrefps
of the Spaniards and Portuguese in their
voyages both to the East and Weft Indies,
into the Englith tong~ue. He was consulted
with refp~ea to many of the attempts to-
wards diifcovery or colonization during the

7 4 latter

B o o K latter part of Elizabeth's reign. He cor-

Srefponded with the offcers who conduaed
them, direded their res~earches to proper
objeas, and published the hillory of their
exploits. By the zealous endeavours of a
person, equally rerpedted by men of rank
and men of bufinels, many of both orders
formed an association to estab~lish colonies
in America, and petitioned the king for
.the fanalon of his authority to warrant the
.execution of their plans.

James JA Mos, who prided himself on his pro-

bassa~d, found sk~ill in the feience of government,

Of Nor'h and who had turned his attention to cone
America
into two fider the advantages which might be de-
parts; rived from colonies, at a time when he

partronifed a ifcheme for planting them in
some of the ruder provinces of his ancient
kingdom, with a view of introducing
industry and civilization there *, was now
no less fond of direaing the a~ive genius
of his Englith fub~jeas towards occupa-

Y Hilt. of Scotland, li* 139*

tions not repugnant to his own pacific B OO K
anaxims, and liffened wvith a favourable ear X
to their application. But as the extent as
well as value of the American continent
began now to be better known, a grant of
the whole of Euch a vast region to any
one body of men, however refpedable, aps
peared to him an at of impolitic and pro-
fus~e liberality. For this reason, he divided
that portion of North America, which
firetches from the thirty-fourth to the
forty-fifth degree of latitude, into two dif-·
trias, nearly equal; the one called the first
or south colony of Virginia, the other, the
second or north colony. He authorized lb60.
Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers, April ro.
Richard Hakluyt, and their associates,
mofily resident in London, to fettle any
part of the former which they should
choose~, and vefied in them a righlt of pro-
perty to the land extending along; the coast
fifty miles on each fide of the place of
their first habitation, and reaching into the
interior country a hundred miles. The anagrants

charters

latter diffria he allotted, as the place of to two

fettle- com'pa-

mies.

B OO K iettlement, to sundry knights, gentlemen,

and merchants of Briffol, Plymouth, and
other parts in the weft of England, with
a limilar grant of territory. Neit'her the
monarch who ifrued this char~ter, nor his
fubjeas who received it, had any con-
ception that they were proceeding to lay
the foundation of mighty and opulent
itates. What James granted was nothing
more than a funple charter of corporation to
a trading company, empowering the mem-
bers of it to have a common feal, and to
aa as a body politic. But as the objea
for which they asso~ciated was new, the plan
established for the adminiffration of their
affairs was uncommon. Inficad of the
power us~ually granted to corporations, of
eleding officers and framing by-laws for
the condua of their own operations, the

Tenonof supreme government of the colonies to be
there chanecrs. fettled was vefied in a council resident in

England, to be named by the king, accord-
ing to such laws and ordinances as thould
be given under his sign manual; and the
subordinate jurifiid~ion was committed to

a coun-

a council resident in America, which wvas a o o
likewis~e to be nominated by the king, and .''
to adt conformably to his inficuaions. To
this important claule, which regulated the
form of their conflitution, was added, the
concession of s~everal immunities, to en-
courage persons to f~ettle in the intended
colonies. Some of these were the fame
which had been granted to Gilbert and
Ralegh; such as the securing to the emi-
grants and their descendants all the rights
of denizens, in the fame manner as if they
had remained or had been born in Eng-
land; and granting them the privilege of
holding their lands in America by the freest:
and least burdensome tenure. Others were
rnore favourable than those granted by
Elizabeth. He permitted whatever was
necessary for the fuftcnance or commerce
of the new colonies to be exported from
England, during the space of s~even years,
without paying any duty; and as a farther
incitement to induffry, he granted them
liberty of trade with other nations, and ap.
propriated the duty to be levied on foreign

commo-

8 o it commodities, for twenty-one years, as a

, fund for the benefit of the colony *.

Defeas IN this singular charter, the contents of

cbrer.which have been little attended to .by the

hiitorians of America, some articles are as
unfavourable to the rights of the colonilts,
as others are to the intereit of the parent
slate. By placing the legislative and ex~e.
cutive powers in a council nominated by
the crown, and guided by its initruaions,
every person fettling in America seems .to
be bereaved of the nobleit privilege of a
free man; by the unlimited permiiTon of
trade with foreigners, the parent slate is
deprived of that exclusive commerce which
has been deemed the chief advantage re-
fulting from the eitabliihment of colonies.
Bhit in the infancy of colonization. and
without the guidance of obs~ervation or
experience, the ideas of men with ref~ped
·to the mode of forming new s~ettlements,
were not fully unfolded, or properly ar-

*Stith. Hist. of Virginia, p. 35. A5ppend. p. r.

Purchas, v. 1683*

ranged.

ranged. At a period when they could not B O0 O
foresee the future grandeur arid importance
of the communities which they were about
to call into exiitence, they were ill quall-
fied to concert the best plan for governing
them. Befxdes, the Eng~lish of that age,
accuffomed to the high prerogative and
arbitrary rule of their monarchs, were
not animated with s~uch liberal s~entiments,
either concerning their own personal or
political rights, as have become familiar in
the more mature and improved slate of
their conflitution.

Wrrnour hesitation or reluatance the Colonica

proprietors of both colonies prepared to iOE8~
execute their refpetive plans; and under New Eng-

land.

the authority of a charter, which wrould
now be rejeated with dis~dain, as a violent
invasion of the fact-ed and inalienable rights
ofliberty, the first permanent lettlements
of the English in America were established.
From this period, the progress of the two
provinces of Virginia and N~ew England
form a regular and conneated flory. The

I2 fo~rmer

B O OK former in the south, and the latter in the

I north, may be considered as the original

and parent colonies; in imitation of which,
and under whole thelter, all the others have
been faccefirvely planted and reared.

Advan. THE sirs\ attempts to occupy Virginia
tages of
tracmg, and New Eng~land wrere made by very
the h~i. feeble bodies of emi rants. As theie fettled
there co- under great disadvantages, among tribes of
lonies in
their in- savages, and in an uncultivated desert; as
rant nate. they attained gradually, after long firug-

gles and mnanyr dis~asters, to that maturity
of firength, and order of policy, which
entitles them to be considered as relpedt-
able slates, the hillory of their perf~ever-
ing efforts merits particular attention. It
will exhibit a f~peaacle no lels firiking than
infiruaive, and prelents an opportunity,
which rarely occulrs, of contemplating a
society in the firfl moment of its political
exiflence, and of obs~erving: how its ipirit
forms in its infant slate, how its principles
begin to unfold as it advances, and how
those chara~terific qualities, which dii-

tingulfh

tingulfh its maturer age, are f~uccefirvely B O O
acquired. The account of the eitablifh-c~
ment of the other English colonies, unter-
taken at periods when the importance of
s~uch poffeilions was better underitood, and
effeated by more direa and vigorous exer-
tions of the parent slate, is less intereffing.
I shall therefore relate the hiitory of the
two original colonies in detail. With re-
rped to the f~ublequent s~ettlements, some
more general oblervations concerning the
time, the motives, and circumitances of
their establishme-nt, will be fufficient. I
begin with the hiffory of Virginia, the most
ancient and most valuable of the British
colonies in North America.

THOUGH many persons of diftinalon Newport

fails for

became proprietors in the company which virginia.
undertook to plant a colony in Virginia, its DeC. ,9:
.funds seem not to have been considerable,
and its frirt effort was certainly extremely
feeble. A fmnall vessel of a hundred tons,
and two barks, under the comniand of
Captain N'ewport, failed with a hundred

and

B OO K and five men, deitined to remain in thle

Scountry. Some of these were of refpea~-
able families, particularly a brother of the
Earl of Northumberland, and s~everal of-
ficers who had s~erved with reputation in
the reign of Elizabeth. Newport, I know
not for what reason, followed the ancient

1607. course: by the WIeRt Indies, and did not

Arl6.reach the coaff of North America for four

months. But he approached it with better
fortune than any formner navigator; for
having been driven, by the violence of a
florm, to the northward of Roanoke, the
place of his deffination, the first land he
discovered was a promontory which he

Dircovers called Cape Henry, the southern boundary
iaea.e of the Bay of Chefapeak. The English

flood direaly into that s~pacious inlet, which
seemed to invite them to enter; and as they
advanced, contemplated, with a mixture
of delight and admiration, that grand re-
fertvoir, into which are poured the waters
of all the vast rivers, which not only dif-
fule fertility through that diffriat of Ame-
rica, but open the interior parts of the

country

country to navigation, and render a com- 11 o o it
mercial intercourse more extensive· and IX.
commodious than in any other region of
the globe. Newport, keeping along the
southern shore, failed up a river, which
the natives called Powhatan, and to which
he gave the name of James-River. After Sails up
viewing its banks, during a run of above Janun.e,"
forty miles from its mouth, they all con-
cluded that a country, where safe and con-
venient harbours seemed to be numerous,
would be a more s~uitable flation for a trad-
ing colony, than the ihoally and dangeri;
oils coast to the south, on which their
countrymen had formerly fettled. Here
then they determined to abide; and having
chosen a proper spot for their residence,
they gave this infant settlement the namC
of James-Town, which it flill retains; and Founds

. ~Janies.

though it has never become either popu- Town.
lous~ br opulent, it can boaff of being the
moil ancieht habitation of the English in
the New W'orld. But however well-choferi
the situation might be, the members of the
colony were far from availing thems~elves of

r its

B O 0 its advantages. Violent animofitles had

JX. cc broke out among some of their leaders, du-

ring their voyage to Virginia. There did
not s~ubside on their arrival there. The
sirs1 deed of the council, which affilmed
the government in virtue of a commiirorn

sad ad-~ brought from England under the feal of the
tion. comp~any, and openled on the day after they

landed, was an a~t of injuffice. Captain
Smith, who had been appointed a member
of the council, was excluded fromn his feat
'at the board, by the mean jealoufyl of his
colleagues, and not only reduced to the
condition of a private man, but of one ful-
peaed and watched by his superiors. This
diminution of his influence, and restraint
on his aaivity, was an essential injury to
the colony, which at that junaure flood
in need of the aid of both. For soon after
they began to f~ettle, the English were in-
volved in a war with the natives, partly
by their own indifecretion, and partly by
the fulpicion and ferocity of those barba-

an (ae rixans. And although the Indians, icattered

InIq over the countries adjacent to James-River,

were

14ere divided into independent tribes, so 8 0 0K
extremely feeble that hardly one of then t
could muffer above two hundred warriors "i
they tested anid annoyed an infant colony
by their incess~ant hoffilities. To this was
added a calamity still more dreadful; the
flock of proviflons left for their f~ubifftence,
on the departure bs their ships for England, june '5.
was to scanty, and of such bad quality,
that a fearcity, approaching almoff: to ab-
solute famine, soon followed. Such poor sufese
unwholesome fare brought on difealfes, the '~~,
violence of which was foa much increas~ed the Un-

healthi.

by the sultry heat of the climate, and the nersofrhe
molflure of a country covered with wood, iae
that before the beginning of September,
one half of their number died, and most
of the survivors were sickly and dejefted.
In such trying extremities, the cimpara-;
tive powers of every indiv~idual are difed-
vered and called forth, and each naturally;
takes that flation and ass~umes thait lif.-
cendant, to which he is entitled by his tj

* Purchas, vol. iv. r692. Smith'sTravels, p. 23*

F 2 lents

B ox K lents and force of mind. Every eye was.

c--· now turned towards Smith, and all wil-

call to lingly devolved on him that authority of
thcdom-~ which they had formerly deprived him.
flor- one His undaunted temper, deeply tinaured
prosperity ...
or the co. with the wild romantic sp~irit charaacrifhec
lony. of military adventures in that age, was pe-

culiarly suited to such a2 fltuation. The
vigour of his conflitution .continued, for-
tunately, still unimpaired by disease, and
his mind was never appalled by danger.
He initantly adopted the only plan that
could save them from deftrual~on. He
began by s~urrounding James-town with
such rude fortifications as were a fificient
defence againit thle at'aults of s~avages. He
then marched, at the head of a fmnall de-
tachment, in quest of their enemies. Some
tribes he gained by careffees and presents,
and procured from them a supply of pro-
viflons. Others he attacked with open
force; and defeating them on every occa-
sion, whatever their superiority in num-
bers might be, compelled them to impart
to him some portion of their winter flores.

As

As the recompence of all his toils and dan- B O O K

IX.

gers, he law abundance and contentment
re-efiablifhed in the colony, and hoped
that he should be able to maintain them in
that happy slate, until the arrival of thips
from England in the spring: but in one
of his excurflons he was s~urpris~ed by a
numerous body of Indians, and in mak-
ing his eifeape from them, after a gallant
defence, he funk to the neck in a [wamp,
and was obliged to s~urrender. Though Ne i
he knew well what a dreadful fate awaits taken priloner
the prisoners of savages, his presence of by the
mind did not forsake him. He thewed thos~e
who had taken him captive a mariner's
compass, and amul~ed them with s~o many
wonderful accounts of its virtues, ap filled
them with affonifhment and veneration,
which began to operate very powerfully in
his favour. They led him, however, in
triumph through various parts of the.
country, and condulted him at lass to
Powhatan, the most considerable Sachim'
in that part of Virginia. There the doom
of death being pronounced, he was led to

r 3 the

B o O the place of execution, and his head al-,

-- ready bowed down to receive the fatal

blow, when that fond attachment of the
American women to their European in-
vaders, the beneficial effetts of which the
Spaniards often experienced, interposed in
his behalf. The favourite daughlter of
Powhatan rushed in between him and the
executioner, and by her entreaties and
tears, prevailed on her father to spare his
life. The beneficence of his deliverer,
whom the early English writers dignify
with the title of the Princess Pocahuntas,
did not terminate here; she soon after
procured his liberty, and sent him from
time to time seasonable presents of provi-
fions *.

On his SMIITH, on his return to James-Town,
return, he
Lnas the found the colony reduced to thirty-eight
n~do nrui@ persons, who, in derpair, were preparing
ed. to abandon a country which did not feerp

deffined to be the habitation of English-~

* Smith's Travels, p* 44, &c. Furchas, iv. I7o4*

Stith* P* 45, &c.,

men.

men. He employed careffles, threats, and a o o a

IX.

even violenc~e, in order to prevent them
from executing this fatal resolution. With
difficulty he prevailed on them to defer it
so long, that the succour anxiously ex-
peded from England arrived. Plenty was searon-

. able sac-

initantly reffored; a hundred new planters cours
were added to their number, and an ample (untEng-
flock of whatever was requilite for clear.
ing and sowing the ground was delivered
to them. But an unlucky incident turned
their attention from that species of induffry
which alone could render their situation
comfortable. In a fmnall fiream of water colonias

deceived

that ifOuqd from a bank of sand near bytheap-
James-town, a sediment of some thining ;a n ac~
mineral fubitance, which had some re-
semblance of gold, was discovered. At a
time when the precious metals were con-
ceived to be the peculiar and only valuable
produaions of the New WTorld, when
every mountain was s~upposed to contain a
treasure, and every rivulet was searched
soir its golden sands, this appearance was
fondly considered as an infallible indication

B o o K of a mine. Every hand was eager to dig ;

Slarge qluantities of this glittering duit were
amassed. From some assay of its nature,
made by an artist as unfkrilful as his com-
panions were credulous, it was pronounced
to be extremely rich. " There was now,"
says Smith, "' no talk, no hope, no
" work, but dig gold, wash gold, refine
"' gold *." With this imaginary wealth the
first vessel returning to England was load-
ed, while the culture of the land, and every
us~eful occupation, were totally neg~leaed.

smith THE effeats of this fatal deluflon were

- under-

takes a fCoon felt. Notwithilanding all the pro-
ofthe~ vident adtivity of Smith, in procuring corn
COUntry. from the natives by traffc or by force, the

colony began to f~uffer as much as formerly
from fearcity of food, and was walled by
the fame diftempers. In hopes of obtain-
ing some relief, Smith proposed, as they
had not hitherto extended their researches
beyond the countries contiguous to James-

* Smith's Travels, P. 53*

River,

Itiver, to open an intercourse with the a o a

J X.

more remote tribes, and to examine into
the slate of culture and population among
them. The execution of this arduous de-
sign he undertook himself, in a fmnall open
boat, with a feeble crew, and a very scanty
flock of proviflons. He began his survey
at Cape Charles, stud in two different
excursions, which continued above four
months, he advanced as far as the river
Sufquehannah, which flows into the bot-
tom of the bay. .He visited all the coun-
tries both on the east and weft (Ihores; he
entered most of the considerable creeks; he
failed up many of the great rivers as far as
their falls. He traded with some tribes;
he foug~ht with others; he oblerved the
nature of the territory which they occupied,
their mode of fubliftence, the peculiaritiesj
in their manners; and left among all a
tvonderful admiration either of the bene-
ficence or valour of the English. After fail-
ing above three thousand miles in a paltry
vessel, ill fitted for s~uch an extensive navi-
gation, during which the hard ships to which

he

13 o O K he was expoled, as well as the patience

I with which he endured, and the fortitude

with which he s~urmounted them, equal
whatever is related of the celebrated Spa-
nifh discoverers in their most daring; en-
terprizes, he returned to James-Town; he
Sbrought with him an account of that large
portion of the American continent now
comprehended in the two provinces of Vir-
ginia and Maryland *, so full and exad,
that after the progres~s of information and
research for a century and a half, his
map exhibits no inaccurate view of' both
countries, and is the original upon which
all subsequent delineations and deferiptions
have been formed "r.

BU T whatever pleasing profped of future

;;enefit might open upon this complete dif~
covery of a country formed by nature to
be the feat of an exclusive commerce, it
afforded b~ut little relief for their prefeat
wants. The colony still depended for s~ub.

* Smith's Travels, p. 6;, &#. t Stith. p. 83*

Efftence

s~ilence chiefly on supplies from the na- 8 oo K
~tives; as, after all the efforts of their own ·-
inlduflfry, hardly thirty acres of groun4r
were yet cleared to as to be capable of cul-
ture ". By Smith's attention, however,
the flores of the English were Sp regularly
filled, that for some time they felt 40 con-
12derable diffreis; and at this jun~ture a
change was made in the conflitution of the
company, which seemed to promjile an in-
crease of their s~ecurity and happineifs. That
supreme direation of all the company's
pperations, which the king by his charter
had reserved to hiefelf, dis~couraged persons
of rank or property. from becoming mem-
bers of a society to dependant on the arbi-
trary will of the crown. Upon a repre- so09
fentation of this to Sames, he granted A new

chlarter

them a new charter, with more ample pri- granted.
vileges. He enlarged the boundaries of
the colony; he rendered the powers of
the company, as a corporation, more ex-
plicit and complete; he abolithed the juril--
diftion of the council refadent in Virgi-

# Stith. p. 97.

nia ;

SO o K nia; he vefied the government entirely in

IX. S- Ia council residing in London; he granted

to the proprietors of the company the
right of ele~ing; the persons who wvere to
compose this council, by a majority of
voices; he authorized th~is council to efta-
blifh s~uch laws, orders, and forms' of go-
vernment and magiffracy, for the colony
and plantation, as they in their dilcretion
thould think to be fittest for the good of
the adventurers and inhabitants there; he
empowered them to nominate a governor
to have the adminiffration of affairs in
the colony, and to carry their orders into
execution '. In cons~equence of these con-
cellions, the company having acquired the
power of regulating all its own tranfadions,
the number of proprietors increased, and
among them we find thle most refpeaable
names in the nation.

LordTHIE firit deed of the new council wa~s
ap. to appoint Lord Delaware governor and

pointed captain-general of their colony in Vir-
governor.

* Stith. Append. 8.

ginia.

ginia. To a person of his rank, thos~e B O OK
high-founding titles could be no allure- X
ment; and by his thorough acquaintance
with the progres~s and slate of the fettle-
meht, he knew enough of the labour and
difficulty with which an infant colony is
reared, to expeat any things but anxiety
and care in dilcharging the duties of that
delicate office. But from zeal to promote
an establishment which he expeaed to
prove s~o highly ,beneficial to his country,
he was willing to relinquiflh all the com-
forts of an honourable flation, to under-
take a long voyage to fettle in an uncul-
tivated region deffitute of every accom-
modation to which he had been accuf--
tomed, anld where he foresaw that tail, and
trouble, and danger awaited him. But as Gates
he could not immediately leave England, ann a)_
the council dispatched Sir Thomas Gates pointed to
and Sir George Summers, the former of till the

arrival of

whom had been appointed lieutenant ge- Lord De-
neral and the latter admiral, with nine sh~ips lawar'e.
and five hundred planters. They carried
with~ them commniio~ns, by which they

6 were

a oo K were empowered to supersede the jurifdIic;

'X.tion of the former council, to proclaim

Lord Delaware governor, and, until he'
should arrive, to take the adminiffrationl

Their thip of a~s sirs into their own hands. A vio.
Atranded
onthe lent hurricane separated the vessel in which
'"oan of Gates and Sumlmers had embarked from
das. thle reft of the fleet, and firanded it on the
Aug. I . coast of Bermudas. The other ships arrived

safely at Jamles-Town. But the fate of
their commanders was unknown. Their
commillion for new-modelling the govern-
ment, and all other public papers, were s~up-
posed to be loss, together with them. The
present form of government, however, was
held to be abolished. No legal warrant
could be prodtued for establishing any
other. Smith was not in a condition at
this junaure to afrert his own rights, or
to aa with his wonted vigour. By an ac-
cidental exploflon of gunpowder, he had
been 10 miserably ifcorched and mangled,
that he was incapable of moving, and
under the neceirty of committing himself
to the guidance of his friends, who c~ar-

ried

ried him aboard one of the (hips returning B O O K
to England, in hopes that he might reco- .I.
ver by more skilful treatment than he
could meet with in Virginia *.

AFTER his departure; every thing tend- Anarchy

ed salt to the wildeit anarchy. Fadian otheco
and dis~content had often risen to high
among the old settlers, that they could
hardly be kept within bounlds. The spirit
of the new-comers was too ungovernable
to bear anly reltraint. Several among theux
of better rank were fulch diflipated hopeless
youngs men, as their friends were glad to
fend out in queff of whatever fortune might,
betide thern in a foreign land. Of the
lower order, many were so profligate or
desperate, that their country was happy
to throw them out as nuiiances in f~ociet;.
Such persons were little capable of the re-
g~ular fiibordination, the firidt ceconomy,
and persevering induffry, which their fxtua-.
tion required. The Indians observing their

* Purchas, iv. r734, &cc. Smith's Trvels, p. 89.

Stith, p. xc2, &;c.

mifcon-

B O O K miircondue, and that every precaution for'

f~uffenance or s~afety was negleaed, not only
withheld the supplies of proviflons which
they were accuffomed to furnish,, but ha-

nTe co- raffed them with continual hoffilities. All
lon ye their subsistence was derived from the flores
famnine. which they had brought from England:

these were s~oon cons~umed; then the do-
meffic animals s~ent out to breed in the
country were devoured; and by this in-
considerate waste, they were reduced to
such extremity of famine, as not only to
eat the most nauseous and unwholesome
roots and berries, but to feed on the bodies
of the Indians w'hom they flew, and even
on those of their companions who funk
umder the oppreflion of such complicated
diftreirs. In less than fix months, of five
hundred persons whom Smith left in Vir-
ginia, only sixty remained; and these to
feeble and dejeaed, that they could not
have s~urvived for ten days, if succour had
not arrived from a quarter whence they did
not expedt it *.

* Stith, p. x I6. Purchas, iv. 1748.

1YVHEN

'WHEN Gates and Summers were thrown B 6 o it

IX.

ashore on Bermudas, fortunately not a
single nerion on board their thin nerifhed. Guatens an
A cotifderable part of their proviflons and arrive

from Ber-

flores too was saved, and in that delightful mudas,
s~pot, Nature, with s~pontaneous bounty,
presented to them such a variety of her
produaions, that a hundred and fifty people
f~ublifed in affluence for ten months on an
uninhabited island. Impatient, however, to
es~cape from a place where they were cut
off from all intercourse with mankind,
they set about building two barks with such
tools and materials as they had, and~by
amazing efforts of perseverance and inge-
nuity they finished them. In ther~e they
embarked, and fleered direaly towards Vir-
ginia, in hopes of finding an ample confo-
lation for all their toils and dangers in the
embraces of their companions, and amidlt
the comforts of a flourishing colony. After
a more prosp~erous navigation than they
could have expelled in their ill-confiruded
vefrels, they landed at James-Town. But IVay 23*
inficad of that joyful interview for which

a they

B o a I they fondly looked, a [peaacle prelented

Sitielf which firuck them with horror. They

Find the beheld the miserable remainder of their
colony in
themtmon countrymen emaciated with famine and
dilirefs sickness, thnk in derpair, and in their figure

and looks rather resembling f~peares than
human beings. As Gates and Summers,
;n full confidence of finding plenty of pro-
visions in Virginia, had brought with them
no larger fl~ock than was deemed neceffaryr
for their own s~upport during the voyage,
their inability to afford relief to their
countrymen, added to the angulfh with
which they viewed this unexpeded scene
of diffrefs. Nothing now remained but
inflantly ·to abandon a country, where it
was impofiible to fuubfift any longer; and
·though all that could be found in the flores
of the colony, when added to what remain-
ed of the flock brought from Bermudas,
did not amount to more than was fufficient
to support them for sixteen days, at the
most scanty allowance, they set fail, in
hopes of being able to reach Newfoundland,
where they expeaed to be relieved by their

country-

countrymen employed.at that season in the B O O K

IX.

flibery there ".

But it was not the will of Heaven that Are about

all the labour of the English, in planting :: r wa'_
this colony, as well as all their hopes of land
benefit from its future pofferity, thould be Lord De-

laware ar-

for ever 10ft. Before Gates, and the me- rives.
lancholy companions of his voyage, had
reached the mouth of James-River, they
were met by Lord Delaware, with three
ships, that brought a large recruit of provi-
fions, a considerable number of new s~et-
tiers, and every thing requisite for defence
or cultivation. By perf~uaflon and authority
he prevailed on them to return to James-
Town, where they found their fort, their
magazines, and houles entire, which Sir
Thomas Gates, by some happy chance,
had pres~erved from being set on fire at the

* A minute and curious actcount of the thipwreck

of Gates and Summers, and of their adventures in
Bermudas,· was composed by Strachy, a gentleman
who accompanied them, and was publithed by Purchas,
iy. r734.

time

o 2

1X.

Wife ad-

tio ora
Lord De.
laware,

16r.

IMirchz8.
His health
obliges time of their departure. A society to

feeble and disordered in its frame required
a tender and skilful hand to chierifh it, and
reffore its vi our. This it found in Lord
Delaware: he searched into the causes of
their misfortunes, as far as he could dif-
cover them, amidit the violence of their
mutual accufattions; but inflead of exert-
ingr his power in punifhling crimes that
were pall, he employed his prudence in
healing their dissensions, and in guarding
%gainft a repetition of the fame fatal errors.
-3y unwearied alliduity, by the refpe~t due
to an amiable and beneficent charafter, by .
knowing how to mingle feverityr with in-
dulgence, and when to allilme the dignity
of his office, as well as when to display
the gentleness natural to his own temper,
.he gradually reconciled men corrupted by
anarchy to s~ubordination and discipline, he
turned the attention of the idle and pro-
fligate to indultry, and taught the Indians
again to reverence and dread the English
name. Under s~uch an adminiffration, the
colony began once more to assume a pro-

miling appearance ; when unhappily; for it, B o o $
a complication of dileafes brought on by x.
the climate obliged Lord Delaware to quit himtore.
the country *; the government: of which England.
he committed to M~r. Percy.

HE was soon s~uperseded by the arrival May Io.

of Sir Thomas Dale; in whom the com- maso.l
pany had vefied more abl~olute authority appointed

governor.

than in any of his predecessors, impower-
ing him to rule by martial law; a short Ivartial
code of which, founded on the pra~tice of 'beek"
the armies in the Low Countries, the most
rigid military fchool~at that time in Europe,
they s~ent out with him. This ffitem of
government is so violent and arbitrary, that
even the Spaniards themselves had not ven-
tured to introduce it into their settlements;
for among them, as soon as a plantatior1
began, and the arts of peace s~ucceeded to the
operations of war, the juriildiaion of the
civil magiffrate was uniformly established.

* Stith, p. x x7. Purchas, iv. I764*

0 3 But

B o o But however unconititutional or oppreflive

IX. 'y this may appear, it was adopted by the

advice of Sir Francis Bacon, the moRt en-
lightened philosopher, and one of the molt·
eminent lawyers of the age *. The com-·
pany, well acquainted with the inefficacy
of every method which they had hitherto
employed for reltraining the unruly mu-
tinous [pirits which they had to govern,
eagerly adopted a plan that had the fanc-
tion of such high authority to recommend
it. Happily for the colony, Sir Thomas
Dale, who was entruffed with this danl-
gerous power, exercis~ed it with prudence
and moderation. By the vigour which the
summary mode of military punishment gave
to his adminiftkration, he introduced into the
colony more perfeit order than had ever
been eitablifhed there; and at the fame time
he tempered its vigour with 10 much difere-
tion, that no alarm, seems to have been given
by this formidable innovation -f.

*Bacon, Eflhy on Plantations, p. 3.
-f Stith, p. 122,

THE

THE regular form which the colony now a o o E

began to afliame, induced the King to ilifue
a new charter for the encouragement of Mla6'>1
the adventurers, by which he not only Newchar.
confirmed all their former privileges, and r i us
prolonged the term of exemption from coelonpy.
payment of duties on the commodities vileges COnfer*
exported by them, but granted them more red.
extensive property, as well as more ample
jurifdiiaion. All the iflandrs lying within
three hundred leagues of the coast were
annexed to the Province of Virginia. In
cons~equence of .this, the company took
poffeffjon of Bermudas, and the other fmnall
illes dis~covered by Gates and Somers;
and at the fame time prepared to fend out
a considerable reinforcement to the colony
at James-Town. The exupence of thos~e
extraordinary efforts was defrayed by the
profits of a lottery, which amounted nearly
to thirty thousand pounds. This expedient,
they were authoris~ed to employ by their
new charter *; and it is remarkable, as

* Stith, p. 19'. Appendix, 23, Sic.

o 4 the

]} O O the first inflance, in the Englilh hiflory,

Ix. Sos any public countenance given to this

pernicious seducing mode of levying mo-
ney.' But the House of Cornmons, which
towards the close of this reign began to
obs~erve every meas~ure of government with
jealous attention, having remonfirated
against the inflitution as unconflitutional
and impolitic, James recalled the licence
under the fanalon of which it had been
established *.

Cultiva. BY the severe dis~cipline of martial law,

In pogf: the aaivity of the colonists was forced into

moted, a proper direaion, and exerted itself in

us~eful induffry. This, aided by a fertile
foil and favourable climate, s~oon enabled
them to raise such a large flock of pro.
viflons, that they were no longer obliged
to trust for f~ubiffence to the precarious
s~upplies which they obtained or extorted
from the Indians. In proportion as the
English became more independent, the na-

* Chalmer's Annals, i, 32*

tives

tives courted their friendship upon more o o a
equal terms. The happy effeas of this ·1.
were quickly felt. Sir Thomas Dale con- Treaty
cluded a treaty with one of their moit .,i,
powerful and warlike tribes, situated on
the River Chickahominy, in which they
consented to acknowledge themselves sub-
jeas to thle King of Great Britain, to as.
fume henceforth the name of Englishmen,
to fend a body of their warriors to the
afifitance of the English, as often as they
took the field against any enemy, and to
depof~t antiually a flipulated quantity of
Indian corn in the flore-houl~es of the co-
lony *. An event, which the early hiffoL·
rians of Virginia relate with peculiar fa8til-
faation, prepared the way for this union.
Pocahuntas, the favourite daughter of
the great Chief Powhatan, to whol~e inter-
cefi~on Captain Smith was indebted for
his life, persevered in her partial attach-
ment to the Engrlith; and as the fre-

* Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry. Pars x. p. 33*

Stith, p. 130*

quently

I o o K quently vilited their settlements, where the

IX. Swas always received with refpe~ful hof~-

pitality, her admiration of their arts and
manners continued to increase. During
this intercourse, her beauty, which is
represented as far superior to that of her
countrywomen, made such imprefilon on

Erole the heart of Mr. Rolfe, a young' man of
nam" rank in the colony, that he warmly foll-
daughter cited her to accept of him as a husband.
dian Where mnanners are limple, courtship is not
Chief. tedious. Neither artifice prevents, nor cere-

mony forbids the heart from declaring its
sentiments. Pocahuntas readily gave her
conrent; Dale encouraged the alliance, and
Powhatan did not disapprove it. The mar-
riage was celebrated with extraordinary
pomp; and from that period a friendly
correspondence fubfified between the co-
lony and all the tribes f~ubjea to Powhatan,
or that flood in awe of his power. Rolfe
and his Princes~s, (for by that name the
writers of the last age always diftinguilh
her,) set out for England, where the was
received by James and his Qyeen with the

9 refpeat

refpedt faited to her birth. Being care- B 0o K
fully in~truaed in the principlds of the
Chriitian faith, the was publicly baptized,
but died a few years after, on her re-
turn to America, leaving one son; from
whom are s~prung some of the moRt refpe~t-
able families in Virginia, who boait of their
des~cent from the race of the ancient rulers
of their country ". But notwithfl-anding
the visible good effeas of that alliance,
none of Rolfe's countrymen seem to have
imitated the example which he set. them,
of intermarrying with the natives. Of all
the Europeans who have fettled in Arne-
rica, the English have availed themselves
least of this obvious method of conciliat-
ing the affeaion of its original inhabit-
ants; and, either from the thynels confpi-
cuous in their national charader, or from
Sthe want of that pliant, facility of man,
ners which accommodates itlelf to every
situation, they have been more averse than

* Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars r.

P. 23. Stith, p. 129. 146. Smith's Travels, p. I>3*

a o oK the French and Portuguese, or even the

IX. ,-.Spaniards, from incorporating with the

native Americans. The Indians, courting
thlch an union, offered their daughters in
marriage to their new guests: and when
they did not accept of the proffered alli-
ance, they naturally imputed it to pride and
to their contempt of them as an inferior
order of beings .

Land in DURING the interval of tranquillity

~;ga procured by the alliance w~ith Powhatan,

comes an important change was made in the slate
property, of the colony. Hitherto no right of pri-

vate property in land had been eftabliihed.
The fields that were cleared had been cul-
tivated by the joint labour of the colonists;
their produft was carried to the common
flore-hoqfes, and diffributed weekly to
every family, according to its number and
exig~encies. A society, destitute of the first
advantage res~ulting from s~ocial union, was
not formed to prosper. Induffry, when

* Beverley's Hist. of Virg. p. 25-

not

not excited by the idea of property in what B O O K
was ac uired by its own efforts, made no ix. X
vigorous exertion. The head had no in-
ducement to contrive, nor the hand to
labour. The idle and improvident trusted
entirely to what was ifllbed from the com-
mon flore; the afirdulty even of the sober
and attentive relaxed, when they perceived
that others were to reap the fruit of their
toil; an~d it was computed, that the united
induffry of the colony did not accomplish
as much work in a week as might have
been performed in a day, if each indivi-
dual had laboured on his own account. In Advan.
Order to remedy this, Sir Thomas Dale tgs
divided a considerable portion of the land
into fmnall lots, and granted one of these to
each individual in full property. From the
moment that induffry had the certain pro-
fpett of a recompence, it advanced with
rapid progres~s. The articles of primary
tIeceirty were cultivated with so much at-
tention as secured the means of s~ubsistence;
and ' uch schemes of improvement were

formed

a o oK formed as prepared the way for the intro-

Sdualion of opulence into the colony *.

Cultureor THIE induitrious ipirit, which began to
o raco- rife among the planters, was soon dire~ted
duced. towards a new objeat; and they applied

to it for some time with such incon-
fiderate ardour as was produative of fatal
consequences. The culture of tobacco,
which has since become the flaple of
Virginia and the source of its prosperity,

1616. was introduced about this time into the

colony. As the taite for that weed con-
tinued to increase in England, notwith-
flanding the zealous declamations of James
againit it, the tobacco imported from Vir-
ginia came to a ready market; and though
it was to much inferior in quality or in
effimation to that raised by the Spaniards
in the WeRl Indian illands, that a pound of
the latter fold for eighteen shillings, and of
the former for no more than three shillings,

*Smith's TravelP, p. I!4. Stith, p. r3,*

it yielded a considerable profit. Allured by B o o 1
the prof~ped of such a certain and quick X
return, every other species of induffry was Bad con-
negleaed. The land which ougrht to have aeuncrriang
been reserved for raising proviflons, and from ir.
even the fireets of Jamnes-Town, were
planted with tobacco. Various regulations
were framed to reltrain this ill-dire~ed
saivity. But from eagerneifs for present
gain, the planters disr~egarded every ad-
monition. The means of ~ubliftence be-
came to scanty as forced them to renew
their demands upon the Indians, who,
feeing no end of thos~e exaaions, their an-
tipathy to the English name revived with
additional rancour, and they began to form
ichemes of vengeance, with a secrecy and
silence peculiar to Americans ".

MEANWHILE the colony, notwithfland-

ing this error in its operations, and the
cloud that was gathering over its head,

* Stith, p. 14o. r47. 164. 168. Smith, p. Iqo.

Aurchas, iv. 1787.

conti-

B O O K continued to wear an af~pee? of prosperity.

IX. -JIts numbers increased by s~uccessive migra-

tions; the quantity of tobacco exported
became every year more considerable, and
several of the planters were not only in
an easy situation, but advancing fait to
opulence *; and by two events, which
happened nearly at the fame time, both
population and induffry were greatly pro-
moted. As sewN women had hitherto
ventured to encounter the hardships which
were unavoidable in an unknown and un-
cultivated country, moRt of the colonists,
confirained to live single, considered them-
selves as no more than sojourners in a land
to which they were not attached by the
tender ties of a family and children. In
order to induce them to fettle there, the
company took advantage of the apparent

Young tranquillity in the country, to f~end out a

"" considerable number of ·youngr women, of

fromEng- humble birth, indeed, but of unexception.
land to
virginia. able character, and encouraged the planters,

* Smith, p. I39*

by premiums and immunities, to marry B o o I
them *. There new companions were re- X
ceived with s~uch fondness~, and many of
them To comfortably eftabliihed, as invited
others to follow their example, and by de-
grees thoughtlels adventurers, afiruming the
s~entiments of virtyous citizens and of pro-
vident fathers of families, became solicitous
about the prosperity of a country, which
they now considered as their own. As the
colo~nists began to form more' extensive
plans of induffry, they were unexpedledly
furnished with means of executing them
with greater facility. A Dutch thip from Negroes
the coast of Guinea, having failed up e .tro-~
Jamas-River, fold a part of her cargo of
negroes to the planters ·t; and as that hardy
race was found more capable of endur-
ing fatigue under a sultry climate than
Europeans, their number has been in-
creat~ed by continual importation; their aid
seems now to be essential to the exillence
of the colony, and the greater part of fieldl

* Stithl, p. r66. 19~7* t· Beverleyr P. 37-

H labour

B o o K labour' in Virginia is performed by s~ervile

1%. hands.

BUT as the condition of the colony im-

proved, the ipirit of its members became
more independent. To Englishmen the
summary and severe decillons of martial law,
however tempered by the mildnel~s of their
governors, appeared intolerably oppreflive;
and they longed to recover the privileges
to which they had been accuffomed under
the liberal form of government in their

16rg. native country. In compliance with this
Fri ge. spirit, Sir George Yeardley, in the year

n r- 619, called the Biri general assembly that

of repre- was ever held in Virginia; and the num-
twves. bers of the people were now so increased,

and their settlements to dispersed, that
eleven corporations appeared by their re-
preientatives in this convention, where they
were permitted to aifume legislative power,
and to exercile the noblest fundion of free
men. The laws enaaed in it seem neither
to have been many, nor of great import-
aLnce; but the meeting was highly accept-

able

~able to the people, at they now beheld a o o 1
among themfeklves an image of the English
;conflitution, which theyT reverenced as the
moit perfea model of free govrernment. In
order to render this res~emblance more com-
plete, and the rights ·of the planters more
certain, the company issued a charter or or- July 24.

New COR*

dinance, which gave a legal and permanent ititutio
form to the government of the colony. ~~en a'
The supreme legillative authority in Virgi- lony.
nla, in imitation of that in Great Britain,
was divided and l~odged partly in the
governor, who held the place of the
forereign; partly in a council of slate
named by the company, which poffeffed
rome of the diftinalions, and exercised
some oif the funalons belonging to the
peerage; partly in a general council or as-
fembly compos~ed of the reprelentatives of
the people, in which were vested powers
and privileges similar to those of the House
of Commons. In both these councils all
quefflons were to be determined by the ma-
jority of voices, and a negative was re-
served to the governor; but no law or or-

a 2 dinance,

B OO K dinance, though approved of by all the

1%. _,three members of the legislature, was to be

of force, until it was ratified in England by
a g~eneral court of the company, and return.
ed under its feal ". Thus the conflitution
of the colony was fixed, and the members
of it are henceforth to be considered, not
merely as s~ervants of a commercial com-
pany, dependant on the will and orders
of their superior, but: as free men and
citizens.

Indultry' THE natural effe~t of that happy change
increased. ..

in their condition was an increase of their
induffry. The produa of tobacco in Vir-
ginia was now equal, not only to the con-
fiimption of it in Great Britain -t, but could

furnith

* Stith, Appendix, p. 32, &c.
t It is a matter of some curiolity to trace the pro-

grefs of the consumption of this unnecetrary commo-
dit~y. The de of tobacco seems to h'ave been first in,
troduced into England about the year I586. PoiTbly
a fe~w sea-faring persons may have acquired a relish for
it by their intercourse with the Spaniards previous to
that period j but the ule of it cannot be denominated

a nzr

fulrnifh fame qluantity for a toreign mar- a o a
ket. The company opened a trade for
it with H-olalad, and eflablifhed warehoules rirea

trade of

in Middleburgh and Fluthing. Jamnes, and thecolony

. . .wrth Hol-

his privy council, alarmed at feeing the land.
commerce of a commodity, for which~the Givesor.

. . fence to

demand was daily increating, turned into James.
a channlel that tended to the diminution of
the revenue, by depriving iC of a confider-
able duty impos~ed on the iplportation of
tobacco, interpos~ed with vigour to check
this innovation. Some expedient was
found, by which the matter was adjuffed
for the pres~ent; but it is remarkable as
the firlt inflance of a diff~erence in s~enti-
ment between the parent state and the co-
lony, concerning their refpeative rights.

a national habit sooner than the time I have mention-
ed. Upon an average of the seven years immediately
preceding the year 16=2, the whole import of tobacco
into England amounted to a hundred and forty-two
thoulandand eighty-five pounds weight. Stith, p. 246,
From this it appears, that the;ta~te had fpreadl witly a
rapidit~y which is remarkable. But how inconsiderable
is that quantity to what is now confurned in Great
PBritain I

The

H 3

5 o oK The former concluded, that the trade of

IX. Sthe colony thould be confined to England,

and all its producions be landed there.
The latter claimed, not only the general
privilege of Englifhmenl to carry their com-
modities to the best market, but pleaded
the particular concellious in their charter,
by which an" unlimited freedom of com-
merge seemed to be granted to them *.
The time for a more full dircufflon of this
important question was. not yet arrived.

TIhe colo- Brrr while the colouy continued to in-
Dy ne-
gleas the crease to fast, that settlements were ifcatter-

""_ed, not only along the banks of James and

4eara~ryfor York Rivers, but 'began to ex~tend to the
fence Rapahannock, and even to the Potowmack,

.h

n the English, relying 09 their own numbers,

dians. and deceived by this appearance of pro-

Iperity, lived in full security. They nei-
ther attended to the movements of the In-
dians, nor f~uipeded their machinations,
and though surrounded by a people whom

* Stith, p. loo, &c.

, they

they might have known from experience o o 4
to be both artful at d vindiaive, they ne- X
gleaed every precaution for their own
safe~ty that was requisite in such a situation.
Like the peaceful inhabitants of a society
completely established, they were no longer
soldiers but citizens, and were t~o intent on
what was subservient to the comfort or em-
bellifhment of civil life, that every martial
exercise began to be laid aside as unnecef.-
fary. The Indians, whom they commonly
employed as hunters, were furnished with
fire-arms, and taught to use them with de~x-
terity. They were permitted to frequent the
habitations of the English at all hours, and
received as innocent vilitants whom there
was no reason to dread. This inconfider-
ate security enabled the Indians to prepare
for the execution of that plan of vengeance,
which they meditated with all the deliberate
forethought which is agreeable to their
temper. Nor did they want a leader ca-
pable of conduaing their s~chemes with ad-
drels. On the death of Powhatan, in the ,,ar
year I6I8, Opechaneanough succeeded him, ,en

a 4 not.

B o O K not only as wirowanee, or chief of his own

Stribe, but in that ex~tensive influence over

ga~ed n all the Indian nations of Virginia, which
dians. induced the English writers to diftingulfh

them by the name of Emperor. Accord-
ing to the Indian tradition, he was not a
native of Virginia, but came from a dittant
country to the fouth-wef1, paf~bly from
some province of the Mc~exican Empire*.
But as he was conspicuous for all the qua-
lities of highest estimation among favrtges,
a fearless courage, great firength and agility
of body, and crafty.policy, he quickly role
to eminence and power. Soon after his
elevation to the supreme command, a ge-
neral massacre of the Englith seems to
have been resolved upon, and during four
years, the means of perpetrating it with
the greatest facility and fuccels were con-
certed with amazing secrecy. All the tribes
contiguous to the Eng~lish settlements were
iuccellively gained, except those on the
callern shore, from whom, on account

* Bevegey, p. p1.

Of their peculiar attachinent to. their, new: B o o.I
neighbours,- every circumf~tansp~that -might X
difqover what they intended- was carefully
concealed. To each tribe its flation was
allotted, and the part it was to a £t pre-
fecribed. On the morning of the day con- Mar. sz.
fecrated to vengeance, each was at the place
of rendezvous appointed, while th~e English
were so~ little aware of the impending
deftruaion, that they received with un-
s~uspicious hosp~itality, several persons sent
by Opechancanlough, under pretext of de-
livering presents ps veniso~n and fruits, but
in reality to observe their motions. Find- Executed
ing them perfealy secure, at mid-day, the t"e er-
moment that was previously fixed for this ments.
deed of horror, the Indians rushed at QPpe
upon them in all their different lettlements,
and murdered men', women, and children,
with undiftinguilhling rage, and that ran-
corous cruelty with which savag~es treat
their enemies. In one hour, nearly a
fourth part of the whole colony was· cut
off, ahnoft without knowing by whole
hands they fell. Theilaughter would have

been

a do g beers univerfagl; ·if compafflon, or a sense of

, duty, had not moved a converted Indian,

to whom the secret Fras communicated the
night before the massacre, to reveal it to
his master in such time as to save James-
Town, and some adjacent settlements; and
if the English, in other diffrias, had not
run to their arms, with resolution prompted*
by derpair, and defended themselves to
bravely as to yepulfe their assailants,
who, in the executiqu ps their plan, did
not diicover courage equal to the saga-
city and art witly which they had con-
certed it 4J.

BUT though the blow was thus prevent-

ed from descending with its full effea, it
proved very grievous to an infant colony.
In some settlements not a single English-
man escaped. Many persons of prime note
in the colony, and among there several·
members of the council, were slain. The
survivors, overwhelmed wvith grief, allo-

* Stith, p. o8, &rc, Purchas, iv. 1988, &ce

niihment,

nithment, and terror, abandoned all their a o0 o

IX.

remote settlements, and, crowding together ·-
for safety to James-town, did not occupy
a territory of greater extent than had been
planted soon after the arrival of their
countrymen in Virginia. Confined within
those narrow bgundaries, they were less
intent on schemes of induffry than on
thoughts of revenge. Every man took
arms. A bloody war against the Indians slaood
commenced; and, bent on exterminating the In-
the wnhole race, neither old nor young were dians.
[~pared. The condult: of the Spaniards itx
the Southern regions of America was openly
proposed as the most proper model to imi,
tate "; and, regardless like them of those
principles of faith, honour, and humanity,
which regulate hoffility .among civilized
nations and s~et bounds to its rage,- the
English deemed every thing allowable that
tended to accompliih their design. They
hunted the Indians like wild beasts, rather
than enemies; and as the pursuit of them

*Stith, p. 233*

2 oO K to tljeir places of retreat in the woods,

Ix.

v ihich covered their country, was both dif,
ficult and dangerous, they endeavoured to
allure them from their inacceffablee fast-
neffes by offers of peace and promiles of

1613. oblivion, made with such an artful appear,

ance of sincerity as deceived their crafty
leader, and induced them to return to
their former f~ettlemnents, and refumne their
usual peaceful occupations. The behavi,
our of the two people seemed now to be,
perfe~tly reversed. The Indians, like met!
acquainted with the principles of integrity
and good faith, on which the intercourse
between nations is founded, confided in the
reconciliation, and lived in ablolute fecu-
rity without fulfpicion of danger·; while,
the English, with perfidious craft, were
preparing to imitate savages in their re-
venge and cruelty. On the approach of
harvef1, when they knew an hoffile attack
would be molt formidable and fatal, they
fell suddenly upon all the Indian planta-
tions, murdered every person on whom
they could lay hold, and drove the reft to

I2 thle.

the woods, where to many ~perished with B O O K.
hunger, that some of the tribes nearest to X
the English were totally extirpated. This
atrocious deed, which the perpetrators la-
boured to represent as a necessary aa of
retaliation, was followed by some happy
effeas. It delivered the colony so entirely
from any dread of the Indians, that its
settlements began again to extend, and its
induffry to revive.

But unfortunately at this junaure the Company

at home

slate of the coznpany in England, in which dividedby
the property of Virginia and the govern- raaions.
ment of the colony fettled there were
vefled, prevented it from s~econding the
efforts of the planters, by such a rein-
forcement of men, and such a s~upply of
necessaries, as were requisite to replace what
they had loft. 'The company was orig~in-
ally compos~ed of many adventurers, and
incr.ease so faf by the junaion of new
members, allured by the profpeQ of gain,
or the desire of promoting a fchemre of
public utility, that its general courts form-

B o o K ed a numerous assembly *Y. The operation

IX. of every political principle and pafflon, that

[pread through the kingdom, was felt in
those popular meetings, and influenced their
decisions. As towards the cloie of James's
reign more juff and enlarged sentiments
with refpeQ to conflitutional liberty were
diffuided among the people, they came to
underfland their rights better, and to assert
them with greater boldnes~s; a diftinalon
formerly little known, but now familiar in
English policy, began to be established be-
tween the court and country parties, and
the leaders of each endeavoured to derive
power and consequence from every quarter.
Both exerted themselves with emulation, in.
order to obtain the direaion of a body so
numerous and refpedtable as the company
of Virginian adventurers. In consequence
of this, business had been conduaed in
every general court for some years, not with
the temperate ipirit of merchants deliberat-
ing concerning their mutual interest, but
with the animosity and violence natural to

*, Stith, p. 272. 276.

nume-

numerous assemblies,, by which rival sac.. ao o

IX.

tions contend for s~uperiority *.·

As the king did not often assemble the Jamesin.

. Aitates as

great council of the nation in parhiament, inquiry
the general courts of the company became ~:,'s:,':,'~~~~~
a theatre, on which popular orators dif-
played their talents; the proclamations of
the crown, and arts of the privy council,
with refped to the commerce and police of
the colony, were canvassed there with free-
dom, and cent~ured with severity, ill-f~ulted
to the lofty ideas which James entertained
of his own wisdom, and the extent of his
prerogative. In order to check this grow~-
ing spirit of difcufflon, the miniffers em-
ployed all their addrels and influence, to
gain as many members of the company as
might give them the diredtion of their deli-
berations. But so unfuccefsful were they
in this attempt, that every measure pro-
poled by them was reprobated by a vast
majority, and sometimes without any rea-
son, but becaule they were the propos~ers of

* Stith, P.229, &c. Chalmers, p. jg.

B o o K it. Jaines, little favourable to the power of

IX. r any popular assembly, and weary of con-

tending with one over which he had la-
boured in vain to obtain an ascendant, began
to entertain thoughts of diffolvting the com-
pany, and of new-modelling its conflitu-
tion. Pretexts, neither unplaufible, nor
deflitute of fonte foundation, seemed to
juffify this measure. The flow progress of
th~e colony, the large sums of money ex-
pended, and great number of men who had
perished in attempting to plant it, the late
massacre by the Indians, and every dilatter
that had befallen the English from their
first migration to America, were imputed
solely to the inability of a numerous com-
pany to conduet an enterprise so complex
and arduous. The nation felt sensibly its
disappointment in a scheme in which it
had engaged with sanguine expedations of
advantage, and withed impatiently for such
an impartial scrutiny into former proceed-
ings as might suggest more salutary mea-
fures in the future adminiffration of the
colony. The present 11ate of its affairs, as

well

well as the wishes of the people, seemed to B O O K
call for the interposition of the crown; and -
James, eager to display the s~uperiority of
his royal wisdom, in correaing those errors
into which the company had been betrayed
by inexperience in the arts of g~overnment,
boldly undertook the work of reformation.
Without regarding the rights conveyed to 1623.

May 9.

the company by their charter, and without
the formality of any judicial proceeding for
annulling it, he, by virtue of his preroga-
tive, iFliedd a commifiron, empowering some
of the judges, and other persons of note, to
examine into all the tranf~a~ions of the com-
pany from its firff establishment, and to lay
the refiult of their inquiries, together with
their opinion concerning the mos1 effec-
tual means of rendering the colony more
proiperous *, before the privy council. At
the fame time, by a firain of authority flill
higher, he ordered all the records and papers
of the company to be seized, and two of its
principal officers to be arrefied. Violent:

x Stith, p. 288.

I and

B o b Kt andl arbitrary as these adts of' authority may

IX. Snow appear, the commifiloners carried on

their inquiry without any obftrualon but
Swhat arose from some feeble and ineffeAual
remonfirances of the company. The com-
miironers, though they conduated their
f'crutiny with much aaivityT and vigour*,
did not communicate any of their proceed-
ings to the company; but their report,
with refpea to its operations, seems to
have been very unfavourable, as the king,
in consequence of it, signified to the com-
pany his intention of veffing the supreme

on. a. government of the company in a governor
@ Ca"d and twelve affifiants, to be resident in Eng-
tocrr:en. land, and the executive power in a coun-
charter, cil of twelve, which thould reside in Vir-

ginia. The governor and afif~tants were
to be originally appointed by the king.
Future vacancies were to be supplied by
the governor and his afifitants, but their
nomination was not to take effea until it
thould be ratified by the privy council.

* Sm~ith's Travels, p. 165r &'c.

The

The twelve counsellors in Virginia.were to a o o x
be chosen by the governor and afif~iants; ._-
and this choice was likewis~e f~ubje~ted to
the review of the privy council. With an
intention to quiet the minds of the colo-
nifts, it was declared that private property
thould be deemed sacred; and for the more
Seff ~ual security of it, all grants of lands
from the former company were to be con-
firmed by the new one. In order to faci-·
litate the execution of this plan, the king
required the company inflantly to surrender
its charter into his hands ".

BUT here James and his miniffers en* Company

countered a s~pirit, of wyhich they fkeem not retures.
to have been aware. They found the
members of the company unwilling tamely
to relinquilh rights of franchifies conveyed
to them with s~uch legal formality, that
upon faith in their validity they had ex-
pended considerable sums -f; and itill more
averse to the abolition of a popular form of

* Stith, p. 293, &rc. t Chalmers, p. 61.

I 2 govern-

3 o o K government, in which every proprietor had

cl~a voice, in order to fubjeat a colony, in

which they were deeply intereited, to thPe
dominion of a fmnall junto absolutely de-
pendent on the crown. Neither promiles
nor threats could induce them to depart

on. 20. frOm these sentiments; and in a general

court the king's proposal was almost una-
nimoufly rejeated, and a resolution taken
to defend to the utmoit their chartered
rights, if there thould be called in queition
in any court of juffice. James, highly
offended at their prefumnption in daring to

Nov. .0. oppole his will, direaed a writ of que

wa~rranto to be issued agrainft the com-
pany, that the validity of its charter might
be tried in the Court of Kiing's Bench;
and in order to aggravate the charge by
colleaing additional proofs of mal-admi-
niffration, he appointed some persons, in
whom he could confide, to repair to Vir-
ginia to inf~pedt the slate of the colony,
and inquire into the condua of the com-
pany, and of its offcers there.

STHE law-suit in the King's Bench did 3 o o
not hang long in fulpIen~e. Ittemiatd
as was usual in that reign, in a decision Trial in

theging's

perfealy consonant to the wishes of the sench,
monarch. The charter was forfeited, the oi,.
company was dissolved, and all the rights the com.

pany.

and privileges conferred upon it returned June
to the king, from whom they flowed1 ,C 624.

SOME writers, particularly Stith, the Dereasin

the first

moss intelligent and best informed hiffo- consta.,
rian of Virginia, mention the dissolution of io9n

ofthfe:

the company as a most dif~affrous event to
the colony. Animated with liberal senti-
ments, imbibed in an age when the prin-
ciples of liberty were more fully unfolded
than under the reign of James, they viewed
his violent and arbitrary proceedings on
this occallon with s~uch indignation, that
their abhorrence of the means which he
employed to accomplish his design s~eems
to have rendered them incapable of con-
templating its effeas with dil~cernment and

* Rymer, vol. xvil. p. 6I8, &rc. Chalmers, p. 62.

I 3 can-

8 o oI candour. There is not perhaps any mode

"' 1of governing an infant colony less friendly

to its liberty, than the dominion of an
exclusive corporation, poflkTeffd of all the
powers which James had conferred upon
the company of adventurers in Virginia,
During several years the colonists can
hardly be considered in any other light
than as s~ervants to the company, nourithed
out of its flores, bound implicitly to obey
its orders, and f~ubjeated to the most ri-
gorous of all forms of government, that of
martial law. Even after the native spirit of
Englishmen began to route under oppref~-
sion, and had exutorted from their fupe-
riors the right of enaaing laws for the go-
vernment· of that community of which they
were members, as no a~t, though approved
of by all the branches of the provincial
legislature, was held to be of legal force,
until it was ratified by a general court in
Englanel, the company filil retained the
paramount authority in its own hands. Noy
was the power of the company more fa-
vourable to the prosperity of the colony,

than

than to its freedom. A numerous body of B o o Je
merchants, -as long as its operations ar·e ·-
purely commercial, may carry them on
with dikcernment and success. But the
mercantile [pirit seems ill-adapted to con-
duet an enlarged and liberal plan of civi~l
policy, and colonies have feldoom grown
up to maturity and vigour under its nar-
row and interefied regulations. To the un-
avoidable defeas in adminiffration which

Sthis occasioned, were added errors .arifmg

from inexperience. The Engliih mer-
chauts of that age had not those extensive
views which a general commerce opens t~o
such as have the direaion of it. When
they first began to venture out of the
beaten track, they groped their way with
timidity and hesitation. Unacquainted with
the climate and foil ~of America, and igno.
rant of the produalions belt fauited to them,
they seem to have had no fettled plan of
improvement, and their schemes were con-
tinually varying. Their fyfiem of govern-
ment was equally fluatuating. In the course
of eighteen years ten different persons pre-

I 4 sided

B o oH K ided over the province as chief governors.

J No wonder that under such adminiffration

all the efforts to give vigour and flability
to the colony thould prove abortive, or
produce only slender effe61s. There efforts,
however, when effimated according to the
ideas of that age, either with refpe61 to
commerce or to policy, were very confi-
-derable, and conduated with affonifhing
pers~everance,

weakness " ABOVE an hundred and fifty thous~and
loy;'nthe co- pounds were expended in this first attempt

to plant an English colony in America*;
and more than nine thousand persons were
sent out from the mother country to people
'this new settlement. At the dissolution of
'the company, the nation, in return for this
waffe of treat~ure and of people, did not
receive from Virginia an annual importa-
tion of commodities exceeding twenty
'thouland pounds in value; and the colony
was to far from having added firength to

* Smith's Travels, p. 42. 167.

the slate by an increas~e of population, that, B o o K
in the year one thous~and fix hundred and
twenty-four, fearcely two thoufagnd persons
survived*, a wretched remnant of the
nume~rous emigrants who had flocked
thither with sanguine expedations of a
very different fate.

THE company, like all unprofperous Tempe-

societies, fell unpitied. The violent hand $',Cp·
with which prerogative had invaded its fboor ,e,
rights was forgotten, and new profpeats geve~rn
of success opened, under a form of govern- Virginia.
ment exempt from all the defeats to which
past disasters were imputed. The king and
the nation concurred with equal ardour in
resolving to encourage the colony. Soon
after the final judgment in the Court of
King's Bench against the company, James
appointed a council of twelve persons to
take the temporary diretion of affairs in
Virginia, that he might have leisure to Aug. as
frame with deliberate consideration proper

SChahaers' Annals, p. 6p.

regu-

B o 0 10 regulations for the permanent govermnent
,IX.~ of the colon *. Pleased with such an

opportunity of exercising his talents as a
leg~islator, he began to turn his attention
towards the fubjea; but death prevented
him from completing his plan,

sa. CHARLES I. on his accession to the

' g;fio throne, adopted all his father's maxims

o'fCh.l. with refped to the colony in Virginia.
tHs ar bi-
rrary go. He declared it to be a part of the empire

'"g .~b annexed to the crowfn, and immediately

lony. subordinate to its jurifdi~tion: he con-

ferred the title of Governor on Sir George
Yardely, and appointed him, in conjunc-
tion with a council of twelve, and a f~e-
cretary, to exercise fiupreme authority there,
and enjoined them to conform in every
point to such infiruaions as from time to
time they might receive from him J·. From
the tenor of the king's commifflon, as well
as from the known spirit of his policy, it
is apparent, that he intended to vest every

*Rymer, xvii. 618, &c. -j-Ibid. xviii. 72. 3"*.

power

power of government, both legislative and B o o 1E
executive, in the governor and council, ]_
writhout recourse to the repreientatives of
the people, as poffeffing a right to enaQ
laws for the community, or to impose taxes
upon it.' Yardely and his council, who feern
to have been fit in~truments for carrying
this fyitem of arbitrary rule into execu-
tion, did not fail to put such a confiruc-
tion on the words of their commiiron as
was moss favourable to their own jurif-
dialon. During a great part of Charles's
reign, Virginia knew no other law than
the will of the sovereign. Statutes were
published, and taxes imposed, without once
calling the representatives of the people to
authorize them by their fandtion. At the
fame time that the colonists were bereaved
of political rights, which they deemed
essential to freemen and citizens, their
private property was violently invaded. Ai Grants
proclamation was ifred, by wvhich, under ool or
pretexts equally absurd and frivolous, they tobacco,
were prohibited from felling tobacco to any

person

B 0 0 x person but certain commiffloners appointed

I by the king to purchase it on his account*;

and they had the cruel mortification to
behold the sovereign, who should have
afforded them proteation, engross all the
profits of their induffry, by seizing the
only valuable commodity which they had
to vend, and retaining the monlopoly of it
in his own hands. W'hile the flaple of the
colony in Virginia funk in value under
the opprefiron and restraints of a mono-
poly, property in land was rendered infe-
cure by various grants of it, which Charles
inconsiderately beffowed upon his favour-
ites. There were not only of such exor-
bitant extent as to be unfavourable to the
progres~s of cultivation; but from inatten-
tion, or imperfeit acquaintance with the
geography of the country, their boundaries
were to inaccurately defined, that large
traas already occupied and planted were
often included in them.

* Rymer, xviii. l9.

THE murmurs and complaints which a o o

such a lyfiem of adminiffration exucited,.
were augmented by the rigour with which
Sir John Harvey, who focceeded Yardely
in thle government of the colony #, enforced
every at of power. Rapacious, unfeeling, 1627.
and haughty, he added insolence to op-
preflion, and neither regarded the senti-
ments, nor liffened to the remonfirances
of the people under his command. The
colonists, far from the feat of government,
and overawed by authority derived from
a royal commifflon, submitted long to his
tyranny and exaaions. Their patience colonals
was at last exhauffed, and in a transport of Hrve
popular rage and indignation, they seized 'e go.
their governor, and sent him a prisoner to and feml
England, accompanied by two of their a r r~
number, whom they deputed to prefer their England
accusations ag~ainst him to the king. But
this attempt to redress their own wrongs,
b~y a proceeding so summary and violent as
is hardly con~iftent with any idea of regu-

* Rymer, xviii. 980.

a o o fC lar government, and can be justified only

.,.in cafes of such urgent necessity as rarely

occur in civil s~ociety, was altogether
repugnant to every notion which Charles
entertained with refpe:& to the obedience
due by f~ubjeas to their sovereign. To
him the conduet of the colonists appeared
to be not only an usurpation of his right to
judge and to punish one of his own officers,
but an open and audacious aa of rebellion
against his authority. W-ithout deigning
to admit their deputies into his presence, or
to hear one article of their charge againit

ste isrec Harvey, the king inflantly sent him back
she a~ to his former flation, with an ample re-

~f~- newal of all the powers belonging to it.

liP go, But though Charles.deemed this vigorous
StfDrCBCe. flep necessary in order to assert his own

authority, and to teffify his displeasure with
those who had presumed to offer s~uch an
insult to it, he seems to have been so s~ensible
of the grievances under which the colonists
groaned, and of the chief source from which

1639. they flowed, that soon after he not only re-

moved a governor so juitly odious to them,

but

but named as a lucceffor Sir William Berke- a o o it
ley, a person far superior to Harvey in rank X
and abilities, and still more d~ilinguiihed by
poffefling all the popular virtues to which
the other was a firanger *.

UNJDER his governtnent the colony in sic W.

Berke-

Virginia remained, with s~ome short inter- ley ap-
vals of interruption, almost. forty years; pointed

governOr.

and to his mild and prudent adminiffration His mild
its increas~e and pros~perity is in a great admini.
meas~ure to be alcribled. It was indebted, n'ation.
however, to the king himself for such a
reform of its conflitution and policy, as
gave a different afpeat to the colony, and
animated all its operations with new ipirit.
Though the tenor of Sir William Berke-
ley's commiiron vias the fame with that
of his predecessor, he received infiruaions
under the great feal, by which he was em-
powered to declare, that in all its concerns,
civil as well as ecclefaiatical, the colony was

* Beverley's Hist. of Virg* P* So. Chalmers' An-

nals, i. I18, &c.

2 oO K to be goveroed according to the laws of

SEngland: he was direaed to iilue writs for-

~;w peri~ ereAing representatives of the people, who,
granted in conjunaiion with the governor and coun-
bCharles. cil, were to form a general assembly, and to

poff~cfs s~upreme legislative authority in the
community : he was ordered to eltablikh,
courts of juffice, in which all qlueffions,
whether civil or criminal, were to be de-
cided agreeably to thle .forms of judicial
procedure in the mother country. It is
not easy to dis~cover what were the motives
which induced a monarch tenacious in ad-
hering; to any opinion or fyfitem which he
had once adopted, jealous to excels of his
own rights, and adverse- on every occallon
to any extenflon of the privileges claimed
by his people, to relinquifhl his original
planl of adminifiration in the colony, and
.to grant s~uch immunities to his f~ubje~ts
fettled there. From the hifforians of Vir-
g~inia, no les~s s~uperficial than ill-informed,
no light can be derived with reilped2 to this

kfotivcs point. It is most probable, the dread of

tr ap- the spirit then rising in Great Britain ex-

9 torted

torted from Charles conceflions 10 favoulr- B o o K
able to Virginia. After an intermifflon of .IL
almost twtelvte years, the slate of his affairs hav~e i~n-
compelled him to have recourse to the great the king.
council of the nation. There his fubjets
would find a jur~ifdiAion independent of the
crown, and able to control its authority.
There they hoped for legal redress of all
their grievances. As the colonists in Vir-
ginia had applied for relief to a former
parliament, it might be expeated with cer-
tainty, that they would lay their cafe before
the first meeting of an assembly, in which
they were secure of a favourable audience.
Charles knew, that if the spirit of his ad-
miniffration in Virginia were to be tried by
the maxims of the English conflitution, it
muff be severely reprehended. He was
aware that many measures of greater~mo-
ment in his government would be brought
under a firia review in parliament; and
unwilling to give mal-contents the advan-
tage of adding a charge of opprefiion in
the remote parts of his dominions to a ca-
talogue of domeffic grievances, he artfully

K endea-

ia o o 1 endeavoured to take the merit of having

Sgranted voluntarily to his people in Vir-
ginia su~ch privileges as he foresaw would
be extorted from him.

virgini BT though Charles eitablifhed the in-

under the ternal government of Virginia on a model

rjwgo. similar to that of the English conititution,
ment. and conferred on his fub~jeas there all the

rights of freemen and citizens, he was ex-
tremely solicitous to maintain its connec-
tion writh the parent Rtate. Wtith this view
he inftruded Sir William Berkeley firialy
to prohibit any commerce of the colony
with foreign nations; and in order more
certainly to secure exclusive poffefilon of all
the advantages arising from the sale of its
produaions, he was required to take a bond
from the malter of each vessel that failed
from Virginia, to land his cargo in some
part of the king's dominions in Europe *.
Even under this reitraint, such is the kindly
influlence of free government on society,

* Chalmers' Annals, p. zz9- 232*

the colony advanced to rapidly in induffry 3 o o
arid population, that at the beginning of.
the civil war, the English f~ettled in it ex-
ceeded twenty thous~and *.

GRATITUDE towards a monarch, fronri Remains

whol~e hands they had received immunities an ed
which they had long withed, but hardly InUt
expe~ted to enjoy, the influence and ex-
ample of a popular governor, pafflonately
devoted to the interests of his master, con-
curred in preserving inviolated loyalty
among the colonists. Even after mo-
narchy was abolished, after one king hadi
been beheaded, and another driven into
exile, the authority of the crown tontinued
to be acknowledged and revered in Vir- 1sso.
ginia. Irritated at this open defiance of its
power, the parliament issued an ordinance,
declaring, that as the s~ettlement in Virginia
had been made at the cost and by the
people of England, it ought to be f~ubor-
dinate to and dependant upon the English

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 125*

K 2 common-

3 o o commonwealth, and f~ubjeQt to such

,-.laws and regulations as are or shall be

made in parliament : that, inficad of this
dutiful f~ubmifiron, the colonists had dif-
claimed the authority of the slate, and au-
dacioufly rebelled ag~ainst it; that on this
account they were denounced notorious
traitors, and not only all vef-els belonging
to natives of England, but those of foreign
nations, were prohibited to enter their ports,
or to carry.on any commerce with them.

Parnia- IT was not the mode of that age to wage
Ilent
makes a war of words alone. The efforts of an
virgnia high-fpirited government in asserting its

own dignity were prompt and vigorous.
A powerful squadron, with a considerable
body of land forces, was dis~patched to re-
duce the Virginians to obedience. After
compelling the colonies in Barbadoes and
the other islands to submit to the com-

iC6ss- monwealth, the squadron entered the Bay

of' Chefapeak. Berkeley, with more courage
' than prudence, took arms to oppole this
formidable armament; but he could not

.3 long

long maintain such an unequal contest. His a o o E;
gallant refiltance, however, procured fa- x.
vourable terms to the people under his go-
vernment. A general indemnity for all yirginia
past offences was granted; they acknow- a exce
ledged the authority of the commonwealth, know-

ledge the

and were admnitted to a participation of all common-
the rights enjoyed by citizeos *. Berke-wel.
ley, firm to his principles of loyalty, dif`-
dained to make any flipulation for him-
self ; and choosing; to pass his days far re-
moved from the feat of a government which
he detefied, continued to reside in Virginia
as a private man, beloved and refpeated by
all over whom he had formerly presided.

NOT fat'isfied with takcing mealitres to Rearaint,

fulbjea the colonies, the commonwealth on edfi
turned its attention towards the most effec- the co.
tual mode of retaining them in dependance lony.
on the parent slate, and of securing; to it
the benefit of their increasing commerce.
With this view the parliament framed two r6ss.

* Thurlow's State Papers, i. rg7. Chalmers'

Annals, p. 122. Beverley's Hist* P* 53*

K 3 as,,

B o O K laws, one of which exprelsly prohibited all

IX. Smercantile intercourse between the colonies

and foreign slates, and the other ordqined,
that no prodution of Asia, Africa, or Ame,
rica, should be imported into the dominions
of the commonwealth, but in vessels be-
longing to English~ owners, or to the people
of the colonies f~ettled there, and navigated
by an English commander ", and by crews
of which the greater part muff be English-
Inen. But while the w~ildom of the com-
mnonwealth preferibed the channel in which
the trade of the colonies was to be carried
on, it was solicitous to encourage the cul-
tivation of the flaple commodity of Vir-

163:. g~inia by an aR of parliament, which gave

legal force to all the injun~tions of James
and Charles againfl planting tobacco in Eng-
land -F.

UNDER! governors appointed by the com..

monwealth, or by Cromwell, when he
vfiurped the supreme power, Virginia re-

+ Scobel's Alis, p. 132. r y6. t Ibid. p. x 87.

maine~

tnained almost nine years in perfedt tran- B O O K
qluillity. During that period, many ad- ,X
herents to the royal party, and among
ther~e forpe gentlemen of good families, in
order to avoid danger and oppreflion, to
which they were exposed in England, or
in hopes of repairing their ruined fortunes,
resorted thither. Warmly attached to the The co-

lonifts dil-

caule for which they had fought and sus- ratisfied
fered, and animated with all the pairoqs with thre
natural to men recently engaged in a fierce
and long; protraded civil war, they, by
their intercourse -with the colonists, con..
firmed them in principles of loyalty, and
added to their impatience and indignation
under t~he restraints impos~ed on their com-
merce by their new masters. On the death
of Mathews, the last governor named by
Cromw~ell, the sentiments and inclination
of the people, no longer under the control
of authority, burlt out with violence,
They forced Sir William Berkeley to quit
his retirement; they unanimously eleaed
him governor of the colony : and as he
refuied to aA under an usurped authority,

it they

B o o JC they boldly ereted the royal flandard, and

IX. . acknowledging Charles II. to be their law-

Arq~e the ful forereign, proclaimed him with all his
know- titles; and the: Virginians long boaited,

ee that as they were the laR of the king's sub-

1I- jess who renounced their allegiance, they

were the firit who returned to their duty*.

'7 =r HAPPJLY for the people of Virginia, a

llr- revolution in England, no less sudden and

evarded. unexpeded, s~eated Charles on the throne

of: his anceitors, and saved them from the
severe cha~ifeiment to which their pre-
mature declaration in his favour muff have
exposed them. On receiving the first ac-
count of this event, the joy and exultation
of the colony were universal and unbound-
ed. These, however, were not of long con-
tinuance. Gracious but unproduaive pro-
fefl~ions of efleem and good-will were the
only return made by Charles to loyalty and
services, which in their own effimation
were to diflingulfhed that no recompence

rl Beverley, P*5;. Chalmers, p. Iz24

was

was beyond what they might claim. If the a o o K
king's negledt and ingratitude dis~appoint- ^-
ed all the sanguine hopes which their va-
nity had founded on the merit of their past
condua, the s~pirit which influenced parlia-
ment in its commercial deliberations opened
a profpedt that alarmed them with ref~pedt
to their future situation. In framing re-
gulations for the encouragement of trade,
which, during the convulsions of civil war,
and amidit continual fluatuations in go-
vernment, had met with s~uch obitruaion
that it declined in every quarter; the1-loule
of Commons, inflead of granting the colo-
nies that relief which they expeded from
the reitraints in their commerce imposed
by the coinmonwealth and Cromwell, not
only adopted all their ideas concerning this
branch of legislation, but extended them·
farther. This produced the aEl of naviga- Naviga.
lion, the mnoR important and memorable of tion sa.
any in the Rtatute-book with ref~pedt to the
hillory of Eng~lish commerce. By it, be-
sides several momentous articles foreign to
the f~ubjeQ of this work, it was enaaed,

that

that no commodities thould be imported
into any fettlenient in Asia, Africa, or
America, or exported from them, but in
vefiels of English~ or plantation built, where,
of the maller and three-fourths of the ma.
riners (hall be English fub~jeas, under pain
of forfeiting thip and goods; that none but
natural-born [ubjea~s, or f~uchl as have been
paturalized, thall exercise~ the occupation of
Inerch~ant or f~aaor in any Eng~lish fettle-.
ment, under pain of forfeiting their goods
and chattels ; that no sugar, tobacco,
cotton, wvool, indigo, ginger, or woods
uiled in dying, of the growth or manu-
faa~ure of the colonies, shall be thippedd
from them to any other country but Eng,
land; and in order to l~ecure the performs
ance of this, a fufficient bond, with one
surety, shall be given, before failing, by the
owners, for a specific f~um proportional to
the rate of the veffell employed by them #X,
The produalons fub~jeaed to this reflric-
tion are diftingulfhed, in the language of

* r 2 Car.11I. c. z 8.

contmerce

commerce and finance, by the name of a o o 5
enumerated com modities; and as induffry in X
its progres~s furnifhned new articles of value,
,these have been fiuceirvely added to the
roll, and f~ubjeated to the fame restraint.
Soon after, the at of navigation was ex = 663.
tended, and additional restraints were im-
posed, by a new law, which prohibited the
importation of any European commodity
into the colonies, but what was laden in
England in velfels navigated and manned
as the at of navigation required. More
effeatual proviflon was made by this law
for exading the penalties to which the
transgressors of the a~t of navigation were
f~ubjeated; and the principles of policy, on
which the various regulations contained in
both flatutes are founded, were openly
avowed in a declaration, that as the planta-
tions beyond seas are inhabited and peopled
by fubjeas of England, they may be kept
in a firmer dependance upon it, and ren-
dered yet more beneficial and advantage-
pus unto it, in the further employment and

increase

B O O increase of English thipping and seamen,

IXas well as in the vent of English woollenr

and other manufa~tures and commodities;
and in making England a flaple, not only
of the commodities of those plantations,
but also of the commodities of other
countries and places, for the s~upplying of
them; and it being the ufagre of other na-
tions to keep the trade of their plantations
to themselves ". In prosecution of thoer
favourite maxims, the English legislature
proceeded a flep farther. As the at of
navigation had left the people of the co-
lonies at liberty to export the enumerated
commodities from one plantation to ano-

1670. ther without paying any duty, it fubjeaed

them to a tax equivalent to what was paid
by the coixfumers of thes~e commodities in
England ·t.

EReas of BY these successive regulations, thle plan
the as. of securing to England a monopoly of the

commerce with its colonies, and of shutting

* x5 Car. II. c. 7. 1- 25 Car. 11. c. 7-

up every other channel into which it might B o o g

IX.

be diverted, was perfeaed and reduced into
complete flytem. On one fide of the At-
lantic these regulations have been extolled
as an extraordinary effort of political saga-
city, and have been considered as the great
charter of national commerce, to which the
present slate is indebted for all its opulence
and power. On the other, they have been
execrated as a code of oppreflion, more
suited to the illiberality of mercantile ideas,
than to extensive views of legislative wis-
dom. WVhich of there opinions is .best
founded, I shall examine at large in another
part of this work. But in writing the his-
tory of the English s~ettlements in America,
it was necessary to trace the progress of
those reffraining laws with accuracy, as in
every subsequent tranf~adion we may ob-
serve a perpetual exertion, on the part of
the mother country, to enforce and extend
,them; and on the part of the bolonies,
endeavours no less unremitting, to elude or
to obfiruft their operation.

HARDLY

3 o oK HIARDLY was the aat of nlavigation

Sknown in Virginia, and its effeas begun

colonia'R to be felt, when the colony remonfirated
itrate against it as a grievance, and petitioned
aIgainit
the act. earnefily for relief. but the commercial

ideas of C~harles and his miniffers coin-
cided so perfealy with those of parlia-
ment, that, inficad of listening with a fa-
vourable ear to their applications, they la-
boured afi~duoufly to carry the aat into
firia2 execution. For this purpos~e, infiruc-
tions were ifrued to the governor, forts were
bu~ilt on the banks of the principal rivers,
and small veffelss appointed to cruize on the
coast. The Virginians, feeing no profpedt
of obtaining exemption from the aa, s~et
themselves to evade it, and found means,
notwithstanding the vigilance with which
they were watched, of carrying on a con.
fiderable clandeffine trade with foreigners,
particularly with the Dutch fettled on
Hudfon's River. Emboldened by obl~erving
difaffeaion spread through the colony, some
veteran soldiers who had se~rved under

Crom·

Cromwell, and had been banished to Vir- a o o a

IX.

ginia, formed a design of rendering them-
selves matters of the country, and of assert- '663.
ing its independence on England. This
rash proje61 was dilcovered by one of their
afibciates, and disconcerted by the vigorous
exertions of Sir William Berkeley. But
the s~pirit of discontent, though repressed,
was not extinguiihed. Every day some-
thing occurred to revive and to nourish it.
As it is with extreme difficulty that com-
merce can be turned into a new channel,
tobacco, the flaple of the colony, funk
prodigiously in value, w~hen they were
compelled to fend it all to one market. It
was some time before England could fur-
nifh them regularly full assortments of
thos~e neceffaryy articles, without which the
induffry of the colony could not be carried
on, or its prosperity secured. Encouraged colont
by the fCymptoms of general languor and aq~~
del~pondency which this declining slate of lamaxC
the colony occasioned, the Indians seated
towards the heads of the rivers ventured
first to attack the remote settlements, and

then

3 O O K then to make incurflons into the interior

IX. . arts of the countr . Unex eted asthefe

hoffilities were, from a people who during
a long period had lived in friendship with
the Eng~liih, a measure taken by the king
seems to ha~ve excited still greater terror
among the molR opulent people in the co-

bircon- lony. Charles had imprudently imitated
tetts prO*
duced by the example of his father, by granting s~uch

'flanb"d large traas of land in Virginia to several of

sheerown. his courtiers as tended to uns~ettle the dif-

.tribution of property in the country, and
to render the title of the molt ancient

1676. planters to their estates precarious and quel`-

tionable. From those various caules, which
in a greater or lesser degree affeaed every
individual in the colony, the indignation of
the people became general, and was worked
up to such a pitch, that nothing was want-
ing to precipitate them into the most
derperate aAs but some leader qualified to
unite and to direat their operations *t.

# Chalmers' Annals, ch. lo. 13, r4, paflim. Be-

rerley, P* 58, &c.

Secu

Surca a leader they found in Nathan'lel B o o iE

Bacon, a colonel of militia, who, though .''
he had been fettled in Virginia only three n a~~
years, had acquired, by popular manners, virginia,

headed by

an insinuating addres~s, and the confidera- N. Bacon.
tion derived from having been regularly
trained in England to the profetiron of law,
such general esteem, that he had been ad-
mitted into the council, and was regarded
as one of the moss refpee~able persons in the
colony. Bacon was ambitious, eloqu~ent,
daring, ~and prompted either by honest zeal
to redress the public wrongs, or allured
by hopes of raising hims~elf to diftinalion
and power, he mingled with the malcon-
tents, and by his bold harangues and con-
sident promises of removing all their griev-
ances, he inflamed them almost to madnels.
As the devailations committed by the In-
dians was the calamity most sensibly felt by
the people, he accus~ed the governor of hav*
ing neg~leAed the proper meas~ures for re-
pelling the invasions of the savages, and
exhorted them to take arms in their own
defence, and to exterplinate that odious

. r ac e.

B O O K race. Great numbers assembled, and chose

Eacon to be their general. He applied to
the governor for a commifflon, confirming
this eletion of the people, and offered to
snarch inflantly againf1 the common enemy.
Berkeley, accultomed by long poffefiion of
supreme command to high ideas of the
refped due to his flation, considered this
tumultuary armament as an open insult to
his authority, and fulp~eaed that, under
specious appearances, Bacon concealed most
darigerous designs. Unwilling, however,
to give farther provocation to an incens~ed
multitudie, by a direa refuflal of; what they
demanded, he thought it prudent to nego-
clate, in order to gain time; and it was.
not until he found all endeavours to sooth
them ineffeaual, that he issued a proclama-
tion, requiring them, in the king's name,
under the pain of being denounced rebels,
to disp~ers~e.

BU T Bacon, s~ensible that he had now

advanced to far as rend:ered it impoflible
to recede w~ith honour or ifafty, instantly

took

tookc the only resolution that remainedi inl B OO IC-
his situation. At the head of a chosen
body of his followers he marched rapidly
to James-Town, and s~urrounding the houfi~
t~vhere the governor and council wTere
assembled, demanded the commillion for
w~hich he had formerly applied. Berkeleyi
tvith the proud indignant spirit of a cava-
lier, dis~daining the requilitions of a rebel,
p~eremptorily refused to comply, and calmly
prel~ented his nlaked breast to the weapons
which were pointed against it. The coun-
til, however, foreseeing the fatal conf~e-
quences of driving an enraged multitude,
in whol~e power they were, to the last
extremities of violence, prepared a com-
miiron, constituting B3acon general of all
the forces in Virg~inia, and by their entrea-
ties prevailed on the governor to sign it.
Bacon with his troops retired in triumph.
hIardly was the council delivered by his
departure from the dread of present danger,
when, by a transition not unulual in feeble
minds, prefiailptuous boldness s~ucceeded to
excessive fear. The commission granted to

a 2 Bacca

B O O K Bacon w~as declared to be null, having been

IXu ~3extorted by force; he wasproclaimed a rebel,

his followers were required to abandon his
-itandard, and the militia ordered to arm,
and to join the governor.

Bacon ENRAGED at condua which he branded
WBr r- With the name of base and treacherous,
leyandthebYnc:o Bacon, inficad of continuing his march to-

y. wards the Indian country, inflantly wheeled

about, and advanced with all his forces to
James-Town. The governor, unable to re-
sift such a numerous body, made his es~cape,
and fled acros~s the bay to Acomack on the
Eastern shore. Some of the counsellors
~accompanied him thither, others retired to
their own plantations. U on the flight of
Sir William Berkeley, and difperflon of the
council, the frame of civil government in
the colony seemed to be dissolved, and Ba-
can became poffeffed of s~upreme and un-
controlled power. But as he was f~enfble
that his countrymen would not long s~ub-
mit with patience to authority acquired and
held merely by force of arms, he endea-

voured

voured to found it on a more conititutional B o o it
basis, by obtaining the fandion of the X
people's approbation. Wiith this view he
called together the moit considerable gen-
tlemen in the colony, and having pre-
vailed on thern to bind thems~elves by oath
to maintain his authority, and to resist
every enemy that thould oppole it, he
from that time considered his jurifdialon
as legally eitablifhed.

BERKELEY, meanwhile, having colle~ed str w.

. Berkeley

some forces, made inroads into different ,poliesror
parts of the colony, where Bacon's autho- i~lfgmunlnd.
rity was recognized. Several sharp con-
flias happened with various f~uccels. James.
Town was reduced to ashes, and the belt
cultivated diiariats in the province were laid
waite, sometimes by one party, and s~ome-
times by the other. But it was not by his
own extertions that the governor hoped to
terminate the conteRt. He had early tranf-
mitted an account of the tranfadions in
Virginia to the king, and demanded such

L 3 a body

a o o K a body of soldiers as would enable him to-

IX. Squell the insurgents, whom he reprel~ented,

as to exasperated by the restraints im-
posed on their trade, that they were im-
patient to shake off all dependence on the.
parent slate. Charles, alarmed at a commo.,
tion no less dangerous than unexpeaed,
and solicitous to maintain his authority
over a colony, the value of which was
daily increasing and more fully under-
flood, s~peedily dispatched a fmnall fqluadron,
with foch a number of regular troops as
Berkeley had required. Bacon and his
followers received information of this ar-,
rnament, but were not intimidated at its
approach. They boldly determined to op-
pole it with openl force, and declared it to
be confiffent with their duty and allegiance,
to treat all who fhauld aid Sir WIlilliam
Berkeley as enemies, until they thould have
an opportunity of layin-g their g~rievances,
before their sovereign .

* Beverley's Hist. P- 75;1 76.

BUT

Buvt while both parties prepared, with a 0 0

equal animosity, to involve their country ;
in the horrors of civil war, an event hap- D6a7h f1
pened, which quieted the commotion al- Bacon
most as fiiddenly as it had been excited. ,,ns-the
Bacon, when ready to take the field, reenlion,
sickened and died. None of his followers
poffeffed s~uch talents, or were so much ob-
jeats of the people's confidence, as entitled
them to aspire to the supreme command.
Deffitute of a leader to condua and ani-
mate them, their fangauine hopes of su~ccess
fulbfded; mutual diffruff accompanied this
univers~al despondency: all began to with
for an accommodation; and after a thort
negociation with Sir William Berkeley,
they laid down their arms, and submitted
to his government, on obtaining a promis~e
of general pardon.

THUS terminated an infurretion, which,

in the annals of Virginia, · is diflingouifhed
by the name of Bacon's rebelion. During
Eeven rponths this daring leader was maiter
'af the colony, while the royal govetrnor was

i·L 4 thut

B o oK lehut up in a remote and ill-peopled corner

of it. What were the real motives that
prompted him to take arms, and to what
length he intended to carry his plans of
reformation, either in commerce or govern-
ment, it is not eafyT to dilcover, in the
scanty materials from which we derive our
information with refpea to this tranfac.
tion. It is probable, that his conduat, like
that of other adventurers in fation, would
have been regulated chiefly by events; and
accordingly as thes~e proved favourable or
adverse, his views and requli~tions would
have been extended or circumforibed.

An nalm. SIR WVILLIAM BERKELEY, Rs SOOn as
bl~ycalled~; fe was re-inflated in his office, called to e.
uation. ther the reprefrentatives of the people, that

by their advice and authority public tranr
quillity and order might he perfealy efta-
blithed. Though this assembly met a few
weeks after the death of Bacon, while the
memory of reciprocal injuries was ftilli
recent, and when the pafflons excited by
such a fierce contest had but little time to

Eubfide,

subside, its proceedings were condulted o o r
with a moderation seldom exercised by the . , '
fuccefsful party in a civil war. No man
fuffered capitally; a fmnall number were
fubje~ted to fines; others were declared
incapable of holding any office of trufl;
and with those exceptions, the promil~e
of generall indemaity was confirmed by
law. Soon after, Berkeley was recalled,
and Colonel Jefferys was appointed his
successor,

FROIM that period to the Revolution in state of

1688, there is fearcely any memorable e leony"
occurrence in the hiflory of Virginia. A Reoqlnu-
peace was concluded with the Indians. lsss.
Under several s~uccessive governors, admi-
niffration was carried on in the colony
with the fame arbitrary spirit that dif-
tingulfhed the latter years of Charles 11.
and the precipitate couns~els of James II.
The Virginians, with a conflitution which,
in form, resembled that of England, enjoy-
ed hardly any portion of the liberty which

that

B oo K that admirable fyrtem of policy is framed

IX. Sto secure. They were deprived even of the

fat~ cons~olation of the oppref~ed, the power
of complaining, by a law which, under
s~evere penalties, prohibited them from
s~peaking; difrefrpeafully~ of th~e governor,
or defaming, either by n or~s or writing,
the administration of the colony 9. Still,
however, the lawrs reitraining their com-
rnerce were felt~ as an intolerable grievance,
and nourithed in s~ecret a spirit: of difcon-
tent, which, from the neceirty of con-
cealing it, acquired a greater degree of
acrimony. But notwithitanding those un-
favourable circum~tances, the colony con-
tinued to increase. The use of tobacco
was nowi become general in Europe; and
though it had fallen considerably- in price,
the exrtent of demand compensated that
diminution, and by giving conitant em-
ployment to the induitry of the planters
cliffufed wealth among them. At the Re-

* Beverley, p. 8I. Chalmers, P- 34r.

volution

volution the number of inhabitants in the a o o i
colony exceeded sixty thousand *E, and in i
the course of twenty-eight years its popu,
lation had been more than doubled Sr,

+ Chalmers' Annals, p. 356. ·t 1614. p. r25,

# BOOK X.

THE

HIST ORY

A MERICA

SO O I X.

WH EN James I. in the year one thou- a o o

san~d fix hundred and fix, made that _

magnificent partition, which has been men- tamo~ry o
tioned, of a vast region in North America, ern colo.
extending from the thirty-fourth to the "hyd p;~of
forty-fifth degree of latitude, between two mouth

company.

trading companies of his fubje61s, he ella-
Sblithed the residence of the one in London,
and of the other in Plymouth. The for-
mer was authorized to fettle in the southern,
and the latter in the northern part of this
territory, then diflinguifhed by the general
name of Virginia. This arrangement seems

B O O K to have been formed upon the idea of fa~me

[". peculative refiner, who aimed at diffufingi
the s~pirit of induffry, by fixing the feat of'
one branch of the trade; that was rfow to be
opened, on the east coast of the island, and
the other on the weft. But London po~f-
feffes such advantag~es of situation, that the
commercial wealth and aalvity of England
have always centered in the capital. At
the beginning of the last century, the f~u-
periority of the metropolis in both these re-
p~eats was so great, that though the powers
and privileges conferred by the kingr on t'he'
two trading companics were p'recif~ely the
fame, the adventurers fettled in Plymouth
fell far short of those in London, in the
vigour and s~ucces~s of their efforts towards
accomplishing the purpole of their inflitu-
tion. Though the operations of the Ply-
mouth company were animated by the
piublic-f~pirited zeal of Sir John Popham,
chief juffice of England, Sir Ferdinando
Gorges, and fomne other gentlemen of the
weft, all its exertions were feeble and un-
fortunate.

TH'E firit veff'el fitted out by the com- B O O K

pany was taken by the Spaniards. In the .X
year one thousand fix hundred and seven, = 606.

Firlt at-

a feeble s~ettlement was made at Sagaha- tempts to
doc; but, on account of the rigrour of the ijo h-~
climate, was soon relinquilhed, and for some ern COaa.
time nothing fa~rther wras attempted than a
few fifh:ng voyages to Cape Cod, or a piti-
ful traffic w;ithl thle natives for skins and
oil. One of the veGcls equipped for this Smithfur-
purpose was commanded by Captain Smith, 2 s,th:a~ne
whos~e name has been so oftren mentioned cansiti NewEng-
with diftintiion in the Hiitory of Virginia. land.
The adventure was prosperous and lucra-
t~ive. B~ut his ardent enterprising mind
could not confine its attent-ion to objeas
to uneqcual to it as thle petty details of a
trading voyage. H-e employed a part of
his time in exploringr the coast, and in de-
lineating its bays and harbours. On his
return, he laid a map of it before Prince
Charles, and, with the usual exaggrerat~ion
of discoverers, painted the beauty and ex-
cellence of the country in such glowing
'colours, that the ~young Prince, in the

warmth

a o o K warmth of admiration, declared, that It

t hould be called New England": a name
which effaced that of Virginia, and by'
which it is skill diftingulfhed.

Firit at. THE favourable accounts of the country

meeby Smith, as well as the success of his
aCCetr voyage, seem to have encouraged private

adventurers to prosecute the trade on the
coast of New England with greater brisk-
ness; but did not ins~pire the langulfhing
company of Plymouth with such vigour
as to make any new attempt towards effa-
blifhing; a permanent colony there. Some-.
thing more than the profpeft of diitant
gain to thems~elves, or of future advantages
to their country, was requdirte, in order to
induce men to abandon the place of their
nativity, to migrate to another quarter of
the globe, and endure innumerable hard-
thips under an untried climate, and in an
uncultivated land, covered with woods, or
occupied by fierce and hostile tribes of

* Smith's Tray. Book vi. p. so3, &cc Purchas, iv.

p. '837* savages.

savages. But what mere attention to private l o o K
emolument Dr to national utility could not ,~
effea, waa accomplished by the operation
of an higher principle. Religion had gra- Religious
dually excited among a great body of the digve^ ri
people, a s~pirit that fitted them remarkably to the

New Eng*

for encountering the dangers, and surmount- land co-
ing the obitacles, which had hitherto ren- lony.
dered abortive the sc~hemes of colonization
in that part of America allotted to the com-
pany of Plymouth. As the various fettle-
ments in New England are indebted for
their origin to this spirit, as in the course
of our narrative we shall discern its influ-
ence mingling in all their tranf~adions, and
giving a peculiar tinaure to the charaater of
the people, as well as to their inflitutions,
both civil and ecclefaiatical, it becomes ne-
ceffary to trace its rif~e and progres~s with
attention and accuracy.

WHKEN the f~uperflitions and corrupt~ions Different

sentiments

of the Romith church prompted different re paing

church

nations of Europe to throw off its yoke, govern-
and to withdraw from its communion, the ~:e"""" '"gd

M mode at the Re-

formaition,

B op o mode as well as degree of their separation

was various. Wherever reformation was
sudden, and carried on by the people with-
out authority from their rulers, or in op-
polition to it, the rupture was violent and
total. Every part of the ancient fabric was
overturned, and a different iyriem, not only
with refped to doarine, but to church
government, and the external rites of wor-
thip, was established. Calvin, who, by his
abilities, learning, and aufferity of man-
ners, had acquired high reputation and
authority in the Protestant churches, was a
zealous advocate for this plan of thorough
reformation. He exhibited a model of that
pure form of ecclefiaffical policy, Iwhich he
approved in the conflitution of the church
of.Geneva. The simplicity of its inflitu-
tions, and flill more their repugnancy to
those of the Popish churchf, were to much
admired by all the firiaer reformers, that
it was copied, with some fmnall variations,
in Scotland, in the Republic of the United
Provinces, in the dominions of the Houle
of Brandenburgh, in those oif the Eleaor

Palatine,

Palatine, and in the churches of the Hugo- B op o
nots in France.

But in those countries where the fleps

of departure from the church of Rome
were taken with greater deliberation, and
regulated by the wis~dom or policy of the
supreme magistrate, the separation was not
so wide. Of all the reformed churches,
that of England has deviated leait from the
ancient inititutions. The violent but ca-
pricious spirit of Henry VIII. who, though
he dis~claimed the su~premacy, revered the
tenets of the Papal fee, checked innovations
in doarine or worship during his reign.
W Vhen his son ascended the throne, and the
Protellant religion was established by law,
the cautious prudence of Archbiihop Cran-
mer moderated the zeal of thos~e who had
espous~ed the new opinions. Though the
articles to be recognized as the ijytem of
national faith were framed conformably to
the doatrines of Calvin, his notions with
refpedt so church government and the
inode ·of worthip were not adopted. As

n 2 'the

B O O K the hierarchy in England was incorporated

"'.with the civil policy of the kingdom, and

conflituted a member of the legillature,
archbifhops and bishops, with all the s~ub-
ordmnate ranks of ccclefaiatics f~ubjea to
them, were contiqued according to ancient
form, and with the famne dignity and juriif-
dialion. The peculiar veffments in which
the clergy performed their sacred funalions,
bowing at the name of Jes~us, kneeling at
receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's Sup-
per, the fgEn of the Crol~s in baptifinl, the
ofe of the Ring in marriage, with several
other rites to which long us~age had accuf~-
tomed the people, and which time had ren-
dered venerable, were flill retained. But
though Parliament enjoined the observance
of there ceremonies under very s~evere pe-
nalties *, several of the more zealous clergy
entertained s~cruples with ref~ped to the law-
fulness of complying with this injundion;
and the vigilance and authority of Cranmer
and Ridley wvith difficulty s~aved their infant

* 2 & 3 Edw. VI. c. I.

church

church from the diigrace of a fchifmn on this B O O K
account.

ON the accefilon of Mary, the furious Religious

zeal with which the persecuted all who had " ]"'re~
adopted the tenets of the reformers forced Mvary.
many eminent Protellants, laymen as well
as ecclefiaftics, to seek an afyrlum on the
continent. Francfort, Geneva, Bas21, and
Strafburgh, received them with affeftionate
hospitality as ~fuferers in the caus~e of truth,
and the magiffrates permitted them to al.
femble by thendelves for religious worship.
The exiles who took up their residence in
the two former cities modelled their little
congregations according to the ideas of
Calvin, and, with a spirit natural to men in
their situation, eagerly adopted inflitutions
which appeared to be farther removed fronr
the fuperflitions of Popery than thos~e of
their own church. They returned to Eng-
land as soon as Elizabeth re-efiablithed the
Protellant religion, not only with more
violent antipathy to the opinions and prac-
tices of that church by which they had

a 3 been

B op o been oppressed, but with a firong attach.

-' ment to that mode of worship to which

they had been for some years accuffomed.
As they were received by their country-
.men with the veneration due to confeffors,
they exerted all the influence derived from
that opinion, in order to obtain such a re-
formation in the English ritual as might
bring it nearer to the flandard of purity
in foreign churches. Som of th qee
most confidential miniffers were warmly
dis~posed to co-operate with them in this

Quleen meas~ure. But Elizabeth paid little regard
;Ei~zabeth, to the inclinations of the one, or the fen-·

timents of the other. Fond of pomp and
ceremony, accuffomed, according to the
mode of that age, to fludy religious con-
troverijy, and poffeffing, like her father, such
confidence in her own underflanding that
the never doubted her capacity to judge
and decide with refpe61 to every point
in dispute between contending fe£1s*,

the

* Of the high idea which Elizabeth entertained with

trepe66 to her own superior Dkill in theology, as well as

the

(he chof'e to aft according to her own ideas, a op o
which led her rather to approach nearer to L

the haughty tone inl which the diaated to her sub-
jeas what they ought to believe, we have a firikinlg
piaure in her [peech at the clos~e of the parliament
A. D. I585·--" One thing I may not overikcip. Re-
ligion, the ground on which all other matters ought to
take root, and being corrupted, may mar all the tree.
And that there be some fault-finders with the order
of the clergy, which To may make a slander to myself,
and to the church, whole over-ruler God hath made
me, whole negligence cannothbe excused, if any fchifms
or errors heretical were fuffered. Thus much, I muit
fay, that some faults and negligences must grow and
be, as in all other great charges it happeneth; and
what vocation without ? All which, if you my lords
of the clergy do not amend, I mean to depose you.
Look ye, therefore, well to your charges. This may
be amended without needless or open exclamations.
I am s~upposed to have many itudies, but most philo-
fophical. I must yield this to be true, that I suppose
few (that be not profeffors) have read more. And I
need not tell you, that I am not to simple that I under-
stand not, nor so forgetful that I remember not; and
yet, amidit my many volumes, I hope God's book hath
not been my feldomeft le£1ures, in which we find that
which by reason all ought to believe. I fee many
over-bold with God Almighty, making too many subtle
feannings of his blessed will. The presumption is so
great that I may not fuffer it," &~c. D'Ewes's Journal,
p. 3 *.

M 4 the

B o o K the church of Rome, in the parade of ex-

'''.ternal worship, than to widen the breach

by abolithing any rite already established ".
An at of parliament, in the firff year of
her reign, not only required an exaa con-
formity to the mode of worthip preferibed
in the service book, under mos1 rigorous
penalties, but empowered the Qu~een to
enjoin the observance of such additional
ceremonies as might tend, in her opinion,
to render the public exerciles of devotion
more decent and edifying -t.

Paritans. THE advocates for a farther reformation,

notwithfianding this cruel difagppointment
of the sanguine hopes with which they re-
turned to their native country, did not
relinqulfh their design. They disseminated
their opinions with great induffry among
the people. They extolled the purity of
foreign churches, and enveig~hed againf1 the
s~uperstitious praftices with which religion

* Neal's Hill. of th~e Puritans, i. 138. z y6.

t I Eiz. c. 2.

was

was defiled in their own chlurch. In vain a o o x
did the defenders of the established f flem x. _
reprelent that thes~e forms and ceremonies
were, in thems~elves, things perfealy indif-
ferent, which, from long usage, were view-
ed with reverence; and, by their imprefiron
upon the s~enses and imagination, tended
not only to fix the attenion, but to affea
the heart, and to warm it with devout and
worthy s~entiments. The Puritans (for by
that name such as ferupled to comply with
what was enjoined by the at of uniform-
ity were distinguished) maintained, that
the rites in queffion were inventions of
men, f~uperadded to the fzmple and reason-
able s~ervice required in the word of God;
that from the exceilive solicitude with which
conformity to them was exa~ted, the mul-
titude muff conceive such an high opinion
of their value and importance, as mighlt
induce them to reft s~atisfied with the mere
form and thadow of religion, and to imai-
gine that external obs~ervances may com-
penfate for the want of inward fadnaity;j
that ceremonics which had been long em-

ployed

B O OK ployed by a society manifellly corrupt, to

JX. - veil its own defeets, and to seduce and

fas~cinate mankind, ought now to be re-
jefled as relics of fuperflition unworthy
of a place in a church which gloried in the.
name of Reformed.

Intoltrant THE people, to whom in every religious
[pirit of
the controverly the final appeal is made, liffened
church. to the arguments of the contending parties ;-

and it is obvious to which of them, men
who had lately beheld the fuperflitious
spirit of Popery, and felt its persecuting
rage, would lend the most favourable ear.
The desire of a farther separation from the
church of Rome [pread wide through the
nation. The preachers who contended for
this, .aid who refused to wear the f~ur-
plice, and other veffments peculiar to their
order, or to obierve the ceremonies en-
joined by law, were followed and admired,
while the minitry of the zealous advocates
for conformnity w;as deserted, and their
persons often expos~ed to ins~ult. For some
time the non-cionformilts were connived

G at;

at; but as their number and boldness in- B oo g
creased, the interposition both of ipiritual .X
and civil authority was deemed necessary in
order to check their progress. To the
dis~grace of Christians, the sacred rights of
conscience and private judgment, as well
as the charity and mutual forbearance s~uit-
able to the mild spirit of the religion
which they profeffed, were in that age little
underflood. Not only the idea of tole-
ration, but even the word itifelf in the
sense now affixed to it, was then un-
known. Every church claimed a right to
employ the hand of power for the protec-
tion of truth and the extirpation of error.
The laws of her kingdom armed Elizabeth
with ample authority for this purpose, ardd
the was abundantly dis~posed to exercise it
with full vigour. Many of thle most erdli-
nent among the Puritan clergy were de-
prived of their benefices, others were im-
prifoned, several were fined, and some put
to death. But pers~ecution, as usually hap-
pens, inflead of extinguilhing;, inflamed
their zeal to such a height, that the jur·if-

di~tion

B op O dialion of the ordinary courts of law was

"-·deemed infufficient to fupprels it, and a

new tribunal was e~tablifhed under the title
of the high comm~ilon for ecclefafical afairS,
whose powers and mode of procedure were
hardly less~ odious or less hoitile to the
principles of juffice than thos~e of the
Spanish inqlulfition. Several attempts were
made in the House of Commons to check
thele arbitrary proceedings, and to mode-
rate the rage of persecution; but the Qu~eenr
always impose~d silence upon those who
prefiimed to deliver any opinion with re-
fpea to a matter appertaining solely to her
prerogative, in a tone as imperious and
arrogant as was ever used by Henry VIII.
in addrefling his Parliaments; and so tame-
ly oblequious were the guardians of the
people's rights, ~that they not only obeyed
those unconflitutional commands, but con-
f~ented to an aa, by which every person
who thould a~ifent himelf from church
during a month was fubjeaed to punish-
ment by fine and imprisonment; and if
after convidion he did not, within three

months,

months, renounce hris erroneous opinions 8 o o
and conform to the lawns, he was then .X
obliged to abjure the realm; but if he
either refused to comply with this condi-
tion, or returned from banishment, he
thould be put to death as a felon without
benefit of clergy *.

BY this iniquitous flatute, equally re- Entire fe-

. . paration

pugnant to ieis· rSof civil and of religious of he
liberty, the Puritans were cut off from any j~~:S
hope of obtaining either reformation in the church.
church or indulgence to themselves. Ex-
aifperated by this rigorous treatment, their
antipathy to the eflablifhed religion in-
creased, and, with the progress natural to
violent pafflons, carried them far beyond
what was their original aim. T'he firit
Puritans did not entertain any scruples with
ref~pelt to the law~fulneifs of Epitcopal g~o-
vernment, and seem to ha've been very un-
willing to withdraw from communion with
the church of which they were members,

S35 Eliz. c. r.

But

a o O K But when they were thrown out of her

X'.bofom, and confirained to hold separate

al~emblies for the worship of God, their fol-
lowers no longer viewed a society by which
they were oppressed with reverence or as-
feation. Her governmnent, her dilcipline,
her ritual, were examined with minute at-
tention. Every error was pointed out, and
every defeQ magnified. The more boldly
any teacher inveighed against the corrup-
tions of the church, he was liffened to with
greater approbation; and the farther he
urged his dis~ciples to depart from such an
impure community, the more eagerly did
they follow him. By degrees, ideas of eccle-
flaitical policy, altogether repugnant to those
of the established church, gained footing in
the nation. · The more sober and learned
Puritans inclined to that form which is
known by thle name of Presbyterian. Such
as were more thoroughly poffe(Ten~d with the
spirit of innovation, however much they
might approve the eqluality ofpaffors which
that lyfitem eflablifhes, reprobated the au-
thority which it vests in various judicato-

ries,

ries, desc~ending from one- to another in re- B op o
gular, s~ubordination, as inconfiffent with .~
Chr~istian liberty.

THEse wild. notions floated for some

time in the minds of the people, and amuled
them with many ideal ~Ehemes of eccle-
flaffical policy. At length Robert Brown, Browanits
a i(popular declaimer in high effimation, '5so.
reduced them to a fyfitem, on which he mo-
delled his own congr~egation. He taught,
that the church of England was corrupt,
and antichriftians, its miniffers not lawfully
ordained, its ordinances and sacraments in-
valid; and therefore he prohibited his people
to hold communion with it in any religious
fundion. He maintained, that a society of
Christians, uniting together to worship God,
conflituted a church, poffeffed of complete
jurifdiaion in the conduat of its own as-
fairs, inldependent of any other society, and
unaccountable to any s~uperior; that: the
priesthood was neither a diflinR order in
the church, nor conferred an indelible cha-
ralt~er; but that: every man qualified to

teach

B o O K teach might be s~et apart for that off~ee by

^··the eledion of the brethren, and by im-

pofntion of their hands; in like manner,
by their authority, he mlight be dis~charg~ed
from that fundion, and reduced to the
rank of a private Christian; that every
person when admitted a member of a
church ought to make a public confefi~on
of his faith, and give evidence of his be-
ing in a slate of favour with God; and
that all the affairs of a church were to be
regulated by the decision of the majority of
its members.

Brownufts TmIs democratical form of government,
'"k r- which abolished all diflinAion of ranks in
Hqlland. the church, and conferred an equa~l portion

of power on every individual, accorded so
perfeatly with the levelling genius of fanati-
cifmn, that it was fondly adopted by many
as a complete model of Christian policy.
From their founder, they were denomi-
nated Browfnifts; and as their tenets were
more hoffile to thle estab~lished religion than
those of other feparatifts, the fiercest florm

of

of persecution fell upon the'ir heads. Many B OXO K
of them were fined or imprisoned, and ~u
some put to death; and though Brown,
with a levity of which there are few ex-.
amples among enthuf~aits .whole vanity
has been s~oothed by being recognized as
heads of a party, abandoned his dilciples,
conformed to the established religion, and
accepted of a benefice in the church, the
seR not only f~ubl>ifed, but continued! to
spread, especially among persons in the
middle and lower ranks of life. But as
all their motions were carefully watched,
both by the ecclefaiatical and civil courts,
which, as often as they were deteated,
punished them with the utmost rigour, a
body of them, weary of living in a slate of
continual danger and alarm, fled to Hol-
land, and f~ettled in Leyden uinder the
care of Mr. John Robinson, their paffor.
There they resided for several years un-
molefied and obs~cure. But many of their
aged members dying, and some of the
younger marrying into Dutch families,
while their church received no increase,

N either

B op o either by recruits from England, or by

p rofelytes gained in the country, they be-
gan to be afraid that all their high at-
tainments in s~piritual knowledge would be
loft, and~ that perfeLd fabric of policy,
which they had ereded, would be diffolvedE
and confignedl to oblivion, if they remain-
ed longer in a ifrange land.

Remove DEEPLY affeaed with the profpedt of
from
thence to an event, which to them appeared fatal
America. to the interests of truth, they thought

themselves called, in order to prevent it,
to remove to some other place, where they
anight profess and propagate their opinions
with greater s~ucces~s. America, in which
their countrymen were at that: time in-
tent on plantingr colonies, presented its~elf
to their thoughts. They flattered them-
selves with hopes of being permitted, in
that remote region, to follow their own
ideas in religion without diflurbance. The
dangers and hardships to which all former
emigrants to America had been exposed, did
not deter them. " They were well weaned

(accordE-

(accordingr to their own defeription) fr'oni B qO O
the delicate milk of their mother country,
and enured to the diffculties of a firange
land. They were knit together in a firia
and sacred band, by virtue of which thley
held themselves obliged to take care of the
good of each other, and of the whole. It
was not with them, as with other men,
whom finall things could dis~courage, or
fmnall dif~contents cause to withl thems~elves
at home again "." The first objea of their zIxs.
solicitude was to secure the free exercif'e of
their religion. For this purpol~e they ap-
plied to the king; anld though James re-
fused to give them anyf~explicit afirurance of
toleration, they s~eem to have obtained from
him some promise of his connivance, as
long as they continuled to demeain them-
s~elves qulietly. So eaget; were they to aci
complifh their favourite rcheme, that, rely·
ing on this precarious security, they began
to negrociate with the Virginian company
for a tradt of land within the limits of'

* Hutchinfon's Hist. of Mlaffach. p- 4*

N 2 their

B o o K their patent. This they easily procured

Sfrom a society desirous of encouraging mi-

gration to a vait country, of which they
had hitherto occupied only a few ifpots.

1620. AFTER the utmost efforts, their prepara-

Sis at tions fell far short of what was requisite for
'n u>~ti beginning the' settlement of a new colony.
Mafra- A hundred and twenty persons failed from
chukcts
Bay. England in a single ship on this arduous

undertaking. The place of their deitina-
tion was Hudfon's River, where they in-
tended to f~ettle; but their captain having
been bribed, as is said, by the Dutch, who
had then formed a f~chemne, which they as-
terwards accomplished, of planting a colony
there, carried them to far towards the
north, that the firRt land in America which

o. ,they made was Cape-Cod. They were

now, not only beyond the precinats of the
territory which had been granted to them,
but beyondi those of the company from
which they derived their right. The s~ea-
son, however, was fio far advanced, and
iEcknefs raged to violently among men un-

accuffomed

accuitomed to the hardships of a long a o o i
voyage, that it became necessary to take X
up their abode there. After exploring the settle at

New Ply.

coast, they chos~e for their flation, a place month.
now belonging to the province of M~assa-
chufets Bay, to which they gave the name
of New Plymouth, probably out of refpelt
to that company, within whose jurididtiion
they now found themselves fltuated *.

No season could be more unfavourable

to settlement than that in which the colony
danded. The winter, which, from the pre-
dominance of cold in America, is rigorous
to a degree unknown in parallel latitudes
of our hemisphere, was already set in; and
they were slenderly provided with what
was requisite for comfortable fubliffence,
under a climate considerably more severe
than that for which they had made prepa-
ration. Above one half of them was cut
off before the return of spring, by diseases,
or by famine : the survivors, instead of hav-

* Hubard's Pref. State, P* 3. Cotton's Magnalia,

9- 7* H·utchinfon's Hist. p. 3, 8cc.

N 3 ing

B Op O ing leisure to attend to the supply of their

"'1own wants, were compelled to take arms

againit the savages in their neighbourhood.

pr n or }Iappily for the English, a pellilence, which
govern.
ment. tag~ed in America the year before they

landed, had [w~ept off so great a number of
the natives, that they were quickly re-
pulled and humbled. The privilege of
profefirng their own opinions, and of being
Sgoverned by laws of their own framing,
afforded cons~olation to the colonists amidst
all their diangers and hardfhlips. The con.
flitution of their church was the fame with
that which they had eitablifhed in Hol-
land. Their lyfiem of civil government
was founded on thos~e ideas of the natural
equality among men, to which their eccle-
flaftical policy had accuf10medl them. Every
free man, who was a member of the
church, was admitted inlto the s~upreme
legrifiative body. The laws of England
were adopted as the bafts of their jurif.-
prudence, though with some diversity in
the puniihments inflifted upon crimes, bor-
rowied from the IVolaic inflitutions. The

executive

executive power was vefied in a governor a op o
and some afif~iants, who were eleaed an- · q~
nually by the members of the legislative al~
fembly ". So far their inflitutions appear
to be founded on the ordinary maxims of
human prudence. But it was a favourite~
opinion with all the enthuf~afts of that
age, that the scriptures contained a corn-
plete lyfiem, not only of spiritual infiruc-
tion, but of civil wildom and polity; and
without attending to the peculiar circum-
flances or situation of the people whos~e
hiffory is there recorded, they often de-
duced general rules for their own conduEt,
from what happened among men in a very
different slate. Under the influence of this
wild notion, the colonists of New Ply-
mouth, in imitation of the primitive Christ- Commu.

. nity of

ians, threw all their property into a com- goods.
mon flock, and, like members of one -fa
mily, carried on every work of industry by
their j oint labour for public behoof ". But,

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 87.
·f Ibid. p. 89. Douglas's Summary, i. P* 370.

N 4 however

B o O K however this resolution might evidence the

fme Gnerity of their faith, it retarded the pro-
grefs of their colony. The fame fatal effeits
flowed from this community of goods, and
of labour, which had formerly been ex-

This in- perienced in Virgrinia; and it soon became
ititution..
hurtrl to necessary to rehinqudh what was too re-
'he colo- fined to be capable of being accommo-

dated to the affacirs of men. But though
they built a fmnall town, and fuirrounded
it with such a fence as afforded fufficient
security against the assaults of Indians, the
foil around it was to poor, their religious
principles were so unsocial, and the supply
sent them by their friends so feanty, that
at the end of ten years, the number of
people belonging to the settlement did not
exceed three hundred *. During fame years
they appear not to have acqluired right by
any legal conveyance to the territory which

1630. they had occupied. At length they ob-

tained a grant of property from the coune
cil of the New Plymouth company, but

* Chalmers' Annals, p. 97*

wero

were never incorporated as a body politic B qo o x
by royal charter ". Unlike all the other ^,
settlements in America, this colony mult be Th~Is co
considered merely as a voluntary affocia- incorpo-

rated by

tion, held together by the tacit consent of charter
its members to recognize the authority of
laws, and faubmit to the juriditiion of
magiffrates framed and chosen by them-
selves. In this slate it remained an in-
dependent but feeble community, until it
was united to its more powerful neighbour,
the colony of Maffachuiets Bay, the ori-
gin and progress of which I now proceed
to relate.

THE original company of Plymouth hav- Grsan council oP

ing done nothing effeaual towards efla- Plymouth
blithing any permanent settlement in Ame- Jame-"
rica, James I. in the year one thousand fix
hundred and twenty, ilirued a new charter
to the Duke of Lenox, the Marquis of
Buckingham, and several other persons of
diftintion in his court, by which he con-
veyed to them a right to a territory in

* Chlalmers' Annals, p. 97. rol.

America,

8 O OK America, flill more extensive than what

L had been granted to the former patentees,

incorporating them as a body politic, in
order to plant colonies there, with powers
and jurifam~ion similar to those contained
in his charters to the companies of South
and N~orth Virginia. This society was
distinguished by the name of the Grand
Council of Plymouth for planting and go-
verningr New England. What confidera-
tions of public utility could induce the
king to commit s~uch an undertaking to
persons apparently 10 ill qualified for con-
duaing it, or what profpea of private ad-
vantage prompted them to engage in it,
the iniformation we receive from contem-
porary writers does not enable us to de-
termine. Certain it is, that the expeda-
tions of both were dilappointed, and after
many schemes and arrangements, all the
attempts of the new associates towards co-·
lonization proved unfiitcefs~ful.

Projeaor NEW England must have remained un-
P,"Ony occupied, if the fame causes which occa-

fioned

froned the emigration of the Browniits had a op a
not continued to operate. Notwithitanding
the violent persecution to which Puritans
of every denomination were itill exposed,
their number and zeal daily increased. As
they now despaired of obtaining in their
own country any relaxation of the penal
Rtatutes enaaed againit their s~ea, many
began to turn their eyes towards some
other place of retreat, where they might
profess their own opinions with impunity.
From the tranqluillity which their brethrea
had hitherto enjoyed in New Plymouth,
they hoped to find this desired asylum in
New England; and by the aaivityr of Mr.
WChite, a non-conformist minister at Dor-
cheiter, an association was formed by feve-
ral gentlemen who had imbibed Puritani-
cal notions, in order to condua a colony
thither. They ·purchas~ed from the coun.
cil ofC Plymouth, all the territory, extend-
ing in length from three miles riorth of
the River Merrimack, to three miles south
of Charles River, and in breadth, from the
Atlantic to the Southern Ocean. Zealous

B O OK as these proprietors w~ere to 'accomplifh

Stheir favourite purpoki, they qluickly per-

'627* ceived their own inability to attempt the
luar. '9. population of such an immense region, and

deemed it necessary to call in the aid of
more opulent co-partners *.

Or thele they found, withlout diificulty,

a fuffcient number, chiefly in the capital,
and among persons in the commercial and
other induffrious walks of life, who had
openly joined the sea of the Puritans, or
Eecretly favoured their opinions. Thes~e
new adventurers, with the caution natural
to men converlant in bufinel~s, entertained
doubts concerning the propriety of found-
ing a colony on the basis of a grant from
a private company of patentees, who might
convey a right of property in the foil, but
could not confer jurif~diaion, or the privi-
lege of governing that society which they
had in contemplation to eftablilh. As it
was only from royal authority that such

* Nezal's Hist. of NeCw Engl. i. p. 122.

powers

Ipowers could be derived, they applied for B O O K
there; and Charles granted their requeit,
with a facility which appears aitonifhing,
when we confider the principles and views
of the men who were fulitors for the fa-

vour.

TIME has been considered as the parent: charrtr

of political wisdom, but its inltruaions are olfohny of
communicated flowfly. Although the ex- ~l
perience of above twenty years might have Bay.
taught the Engolifh the impropriety of com-
mitting the government of settlements in
America to exclusive corporations resident
in Europe, neither the king nor his s~ub-
jeas had profited 10 much by what passed
before their eyes, as· to have ~extended their
ideas beyond those adopted by James, in
his firit attempts towards colonization.
The charter of Charles I. to the adven-
turers associated for planting the province
of Maffachulets Bay, was perfeatly similar
to thos~e granted by his father to the two
Virginian companies and to the council of

Plymouth.

B op o K Plymouth. The new adventurers were In·

"'~corporated as a body politic, and their right

to the territory, which they had purchased
from the council of Plymouth, being con-
firmed by the king, they were empowered
to dispose of thle lands, and ·to govern the
people who thould f~ettle upon them. The
first governor of the company, and his
amflants, were named by the crown: the
right of elefting their s~uccessors was vefled
in the members of the corporation. The
executive power was committed to the go-
vrernor and amritants; that of leg~illation to
the body of proprietors, who might niake
statutes and orders for the good of the com-
inunity, not inconsistent with the laws of
England, and inforce the oblervance of'
them, according to the cours~e of other cor-·
porations within the realm. Their lands
were to be held by the fame liberal tenure
wvith thos~e granted to the Virginian comL
pany. They obtained the fame temporary
exemption from internal taxes, and from
duties on goods exported or imported; and

a notwith-

notwith~ianding their migration to Ame- 8 o o
rica, they and their des~cendants were de- .X_
clared to be entitled to all the rights of na-
tural-born fub>jets #.

THIE mnanifeft obje~t of this charter was

to confer on thle adventurers who under-
took to people the territory on MLaffachu-
s~ets Bay, all the corporate rights poz~fifeffd
by the council of Flymouth, from which~
they had purchaled it, and to form themu
into a public body, resembling other great
trading companies, which the s~pirit of mol
narchy had at that time multiplied in the
kingdom. ~The king seems not to have fore-
s~een, or to have fuf~peaed, the secret in-
tentions of those who projeaed the mea-
sure; for so far w~as he from alluring emi-
grants, by any hopes of indulgence with
refpedt to their religious rcruples, or from
promising any relaxation from the rigour of
the penal flatutes ag~ainf1 non-conformists,
that he expressly provides for having the

*Hutchinfoiz's ColleGt. of Orig, Papers, p. r, &c.

oath,

B O O K oath of s~upremacy adminiffered to every

^·~,person who shall pass~ to the colony, or in-

habit there *.

v629. BUT whatever were the intentions of the

Settle-
ment mn king, the adventurers kept their own objeft
cone-~b~o fleadil in view. Soon after their powers
thischar- to eitablifh a colony were rendered com-
ter. plete by the royal charter, they fitted out

* Hutchinfon's Colle8t. of Orig. Papers, p. 18.-

It is surprising, that Mr. Neal, an induffrious, and
generally a well-informed writer, thould affirm, that
(' free liberty of conscience was granted by this
charter to all who thould fettle in those parts, to
worfhipGodl in their own way." Hist. of New Engl. i.
1224. This he repeats in his Hiflory of the Puri.
tans, ii. 210; and subsequent hifterians have copied
ILim implicitly. No permifflon of that kind, however,
is contained in the chartet; and such an indulgence
would have been inconliftent with all the maxims of
Charles and h~is miniffelrs during the course of his reign.,
At the, time when Charles iiffixd the charter, the ine
fluence of Laud over his councils was at its height, the
Puritans were prosecuted with the greatelt severity, and
the kingdom was ruled entirely by prerogativte. This
is not an :era in which one can expedt to meet with
concefions in favour of non-conformists, from a prince
of Chdrles's charadter and principles.

`five ships for Newv England; on board of B O O K
which embarked upwards of three hundred~I
passengers, with a view of f~ettling there.
There were mofily zealous puritans, whole
chief inducement to relinquish their native
land, was the hope of enjoying religious
liberty, in a country far removed from the
feat of government and the opprefion of
ecclesiastical courts. Some eminent non-
conformist miniffers accompanied them as
their s~piritual infiruaors. On their ar-
rival in New England, they found the
wretched remainder of a small body of
emigrants, who had left England the pre- June 29.
ceding year, under the condua of Endi-
cott, a deep enthufaiaf, whom, prior to their
incorporation by the royal charter, the al-
fociates had appointed deputy governor.
They were lettled at a place called by the
Indians Naunekeag, and to which Endicott,
with the fond affedtation of facatics of that
age to employ the language and appella-
tions of scripture in the affairs of common
lif, had given the name of Salem.

THE

B Op O THE emigrants under Endicott, and such

"'.,as now joined them, coincided perfedtly in

BwZ a_ relig~ious principles. They were Puritans

blithing a of the firi~teft form; and to men of this
church. charader the inflitution of a church was

naturally of s~uch intereffing concern as to
take place of every other objeat. In this
firfi tranf~adion, they diifplayed, at once, the
extent of the reformation at which they
aimed. Without regard tq the sentiments of
thlat monarch under the fagnalon of whole
authority they fettled in America, and from
whom they derived right to at as a body
politic, and in contempt of the laws of
England, with which the charter required
that none of their aats or ordinances should
be inconfilent, they adopted in their infant
church that form of policy which has since
been, diftinguiihed by the name of Inde-

Aug. 6. pendent. They united together in religious

society, by a solemn covenant with God,
and with one another, and in firia con-
formity, as they imagined, to the rules of
scripture. They eleaed a paflor, a teacher,
and an elder, whom they fret apart for their

refpet~ive

icer~pedivie offices, by imposition of the B o a
hands of the brethren. All vwho were that X
day adtnitted members of the church, fig-
nified their assent to a confeffion of faith
drawn up by their teacher, and gave an
account of the foundation of their o~wn
hopes as Christians; and it was declared,
that no pers~on thould hereafter be received
into communion until he gave fatisfaaion
to the church with refped to his faith and
fanality. The form of public worthip which
they inflituted was without a liturgy, djfnin
cumbered of every s~uperfluous ceremony,
and reduced to the lowest flandard of Cal-
vaniffic simplicity ".

IT was with the utmost complacence intole-

thlat men, passionately attached to their own ::eow
notions, and who had long been restrained church.
from avowing them, employed thems~elves
in framing this model of a pure church.
But in the first moment that they began to

* Math. Magnal. p. I8. INeal's Hill. of N. Engl. I.
~16. Chalmers, p. 143*

tafic

o 2

B O O K taite of Chriitian liberty themfeklves, they

1_ forgot that other men had an equal title to

enjoy it. Some of their number, retaining
an high veneration for the ritual of the
English church, were to much offended at
the total abolition of it, that they with-
drew from communion with the newly-
initituted church, and assembled separately
·for the worship of God. With an incon,
fitency of which there are such flagrant
inftancesaamong Chriitians of every deno-
mination that it cannot be imputed as a
reproach peculiar to any felt, the very men
who had thems~elves fled from persecution
became pers~ecutors; and had recours~e, in
order to enforce their own opinions, to the
fame, unhallowed weapons, against the em-
ployment of which they had lately remon-
firated with so much violence. Endicott
called the two chief malcontents before
him; and though they were men of note,
and among the number of original pa-
tentees, he expelled them from the society,
and feat them home in the ships which

were-

were returning to England ". The colo- B o o K
nifts were now united in f~entimnents; but, c"
on the approach of winter, they fuffered to
much fromn dil~eafes, which carried off al-
most one half of their number, that they
made little progress in occupying the
country.

MEANWHILE the direaors of the com-

pany in England exerted their utmoff en-
deavours in order to reinforce the colony
with a numerous body of new settlers; and Em gra.
as the intolerant spirit of Laud exaded con- En mn
formity to all the injundtions of the church n r a caer
with greater rigour than ever, the condi-· into e.

rance of

tion of such as had any s~cruples with re- Laud.
f~peQ to this became so intolerable, that
many accepted of their invitation to a f~e-
cure retreat in N~ew England. Several of
there were pers~ons of greater opulence and
of better condition than any who had hi-
therto migrated to that country. But as
they intended to employ their fortunes, as
well as to hazard their pers~ons, in efta-

* Mlather, p. 19. Neal, p. r 29.

blifhing:

o 3

a o oK bliihing a permanent colony there, and

X foresaw many inconveniences from their

f~ubjeaion to laws made without their own ,
consent, and framed by a society which
rnuft always be imperfeatly acquainted witl(
their situation, they infited that the corr
porate powers of the company thould be
transferred from England to America, and
the government of the colony be veited en-
tirely in those who, by fettinog in the latter
country, became members of it *. The
company had already expended confider-
able sums in prosecuting the design of their
inititution, without having~ received almost
any return, and had no profpea of gain,
or even of reimbursement, but what was
too remote and uncertain to be fiiitable tq
the ideas of merchants, the moRt nume-
rous class of its members. They hesitated,
however, with refpea to the legality of
granting the demand of the intended emi-

Ch 'er grants. But Tuch was their eagerqels to be
cornpaY direngaged from an unprpmifing adven-
transfer
red to the ture, that, " by general codfent, it was de-
colonists.

* Hutchidion's Coll. of Papers, p. 25*

termined,

termo'ned,, that the charter thould be tranr- B o o K
folr ed, and the government be fettled in
New- England *." To the members of the
corporation who chose to remain at home
was reserved a share in the trading flock and
,profits of the company during leven years.

Isr this singular tradfation, to which

there is nothing similar in the hiflory of
Engliih colonization, two circumitances
merit particular attention: one is, the power
of the company to make this transference;
the other is, the silent acqttief~cence with
which the king permitted it to take pla'ce.
If the validity of this determination of the
company be tried by the charter which con-
flituted it a body politic, and conveyed to
it all the corporate powe~rs with which it
was invefied, it is evident that it could
neither exercise those powers in any mode
different from what the charter preferyibed,
nor alienate them in such a manner as to
convert the jurirdialon of a trading cor-

* Mather, p. 20. Hatchinfon's Hill. p. I2. Chal-

zuers, p. 150.

paration

S4

a o oK poration in England into a provincial go.

cZ vernmrent in America. But from the firdt

ini~itution of the company of Mlaffachu.~
sets Bay, its members seem to have been
animated with a spirit of innovation in
civil policy, as well as in religion; and by
the habit of rejeaing eitablifhed us~ages in
the one, they were prepared for deviating
Ifrom them in the other. They had applied
for a royal charter, in order to give legal
effeQ to their operations in England, as
aas of a body politic; but the pers~ons
whom they sent out to America, as s~oon
as they landed there, considered thems~elves
as individuals, united together by voluntary
association, poffefirng thle natural right of
men who form a society, to adopt what
mode of government, and to exaa what
laws they deemed moit conducive to gene-
ral felicity. Upon this principle of being
entitled to judge and to decide for them-
f~ielves, they eitablifhed their church in Sa,
lem, without regard to the inititutions of
the church of England, of which the chare
ter fulppofecd them to be members, and

bound

bound of consequence to conformity with B OO K
its ritual. Suitably to the fame ideas, we .X
ihall observe them framing all their future
plans of civil and ecclesiastical policy. The
king, though abundantly vigilant in ob-
serving and checking slig~hter encroache
ments on his prerogative, was either so
much occupied at that time with other cares
occaGoned by his fatal breach with his par-
liament, that he could not attend to the pro-
ceedings of the company; or he was so
much pleas~ed with the profpeat of remov-
ing a body of turbulent futbjeas to a dif-
tant country, where they might be use-
ful, and could not prove dangerous, that
he was disposed to connive at the irregu-
larity of a meas~ure which facilitated their
departure.

Wrruour interruption from the crown, colony

the adventurers proceeded to carry theirexedd
scheme into execution. In a general court,
John Winthrop was appointed governor,
and T'homas Dudley depulty-governor, and
eighteen afr~ftants were chos~en; in whom,

together

4 O O together with the body of freemen wvho

t'_ hould fettle in New England, were vested

1630. all the corporatte rights of the company.

With such zeal and a~tivity did they pre-
pare for emigration, that in the course of
the enulng year seventeen thips failed for
New England, and aboard there above
fifteen hundred pers~ons, among whom were
several of refpettable families, and in eafyr
circumffances. On their arrival in New
England, many were so ill-fatisfied with the
situation of Salem, that they exrplorecd the
country in quest of some better flation;
and fettling in different places around the
Bay, according to their~ various fancies,
laid the foundations of Boflon, Charles-
town, Dorcheffer, Roxborough, and other
towns, which have since become confider-
able in the- province. In each of there a
church was established on the fame model
with that of Salem. This, together with
the care of making proviflon for their s~ub-
fiftence during winter, occupied them en-
tirely' duri~ng some months. But in the

cA. 19. sirs1 general court, their diipolition to con-

fider

fider thcmfelves as members of an inde, B o o
pendent faciety, unconfined by the regula- rr
tions in their charter, began to appear.
The pleation of the governor and deputy
governor, ~the appointment of all other of-
ficers, and even the power of making laws,
all which were granted by the charter to
the freemen, were taken from them, and
refied in the council of afifiAants. But the
arillocratical spirit of this resolution did not
accord with the ideas of equality prevalent
among the people, who had been s~urpris~ed
into an approbation of it. Next year the 2631,
freemen, whole numbers' had been greatly
augmented'by the admiflion of new mem-
Imrs, refumned their former rights.

BU'r, at the fame time, they ventured to Nonesse

deviate from the charter in a matter of o~e a,~S
greater moment, which deeply affe~ted all church adnutted
the future operations of the colony, and es free.
contributed greatly to form that peculiar men.
chara~er by which the people of New Eng-
Jand have been diftinguilhed. A law was
passed, declaring that none shall hereafter

be

B O O K be admitted freemen, or ibe entitled to any

f', hare in the government, or be capable of
being chosen magiffrates, or even of serving
as jurymen, but fuL1h as have been received
into the church as members *. By -this re-
solution, every person who did not hold
the favourite opinions concerning the doc-
trines of religion, the dis~cipline of the
church, or the rites of worthip, was at once
cast out of the society, and firipped of all
the privileges of a citizen. An uncon-
trolled power of approving or rejeafing the
claims of those who applied for admifiron
into communion with the church being
vefied in the miniffers and leading men of
each congregation, the most valuable of all
civil rights was made to depend on their
deciflon with refpedt to qualifications purely

runici. ecclefaiafical. As in examining into there,
ODS conle-
quences they proceeded not by any known or efta-

OsfeS"~ bif~hed rules, but exercised a direretionary

judgment, the clergy role gradually to a;
degnree of inlfluence and authority, from

* HIutchinfion, p. 26. Chahners, p. '53*

which

which the levelling spirit of the inde- B OO K
pendent church policy was calculated to x.-
exclude them. As by their determination
the political condition of every citizen was
fixed, all paid court to men poffeffedd of
such an important power, by affilming
those auffere and fantimonious manners
which were known to be the most certain
recommendation to their favour. In con-
sequence of this ascendant, which was ac-
quired chiefly by the wildest enthusiasts
among the clergy, their notions became a
flandard to which all fludied to conform,
and the singularities charaderiffic of the
Puritans in that age increas~ed, of which.
many remarkable inflances will occur in
the course of our narrative.

THoucH a considerable numberof plant- Tndse

ers was cut off by the dif'cafes prevalent in **~ro,
a country 10 imperfeelyr cultivated by its lated by

ther Imalit

original inhabitants as to be frilll almoll one pox.
continued forell, and sever~al, dis~couraged
by the hardflhips to which they were ex-
posed, returned to England, recruits f~uffi- zp

12.1 cent

B O O K cle~nt to replace them arrived. At the famd

,_' 1time the fmnall-pox, a distemper fatal to

the people of the New World, [w~ept away
such multitudes of the natives that some
whole tribes disappeared; and Heaven, by
thus evacuating a country in which the
English might fettle without molefiation,
was supposed to declare its intention that
they thould occupy it.

settle- As several of the vacant Indian flations
ments of
the colo- were well chosen, such was the eagerneis

.^ed of the English to take poffefllon of them,

that their settlements became more nume-
rous and more widely dispersed than suited
the condition of an infant colony. This
led to an innovation which totally altered
the nature and conflitution of the governl

r634. ment. When a general court was to be
Freemen
meet by held in the year one thoufadnd fix hundred
:regreent·- and thirty-four, the freemen, inficad of

attending it in person, as the charter pre-
fcribed, eleaed representatives in their dif-
ferent diffriats, authorizing them to appear
in their name, with full power to deliberate
and decide concerning every point that fell'

-under

under the cogniz~ance of the general court, o o K
Whether this measure was fu~geftied by x.
fasme designing leaders, or .whether they
found it prudent to sooth the people by
complying with their inclination, is un-
certain. The reprefecntatives were admitted;
and considered themse2lves, in conjundion
with the governor and afilliants, as the fu-
preme legillative affemblyof the colony. In Exent~of
assertion of their own rights they enaaed, li .ryPi
that no law thould be pass~ed, no tax thould f~l~ame;
be imposed, and no public officer thould bly,
b~e appointed, but in the general assembly.
The pretexts for making this new arrange-
ment were plaufble. The number of fre~e-
men was greatly increased; many resided at
a difiance from the places where the fu-
preme courts were held; personal attend-
ance became inconvenient; the form of go-
vernmnent in their owrn country had rendered
familiar the idea of delegating their rights,
and committing the guardianship of their
liberties to represe~ntatives of their own
choice, and the experiene of ages had
taught them that this i nportant truss might

with

B O O K with safety be lodged in their hands. Thus

f did the company of Maffachuffets Bay, in

les~s than fix years from its incorporation
by the king, mature and perfeft a scheme
which, I have already observed, some of
its more artful and aspiring leaders seem to
have had in view when the association for
peopling New England was first formed.
The colony muff henceforward be con-
fidered, not as a corporation whole powers
were defined, and its mode of procedure
regulated by its charter, but as a society,
which, having acquired or affiumed politi-
cal liberty, had, by its own voluntary deed,
adopted a conflitution or government framn-
ed on the model of that in England.

SpiritoF~ BUT however liberal their iyfiem of civil
fanaticism .
increates. pohecy might be, as their religious opi-

nions were no longer under any refiraint
of authority, the' spirit of fanaticifin con-
tinued to sp~read, and became every day
wilder and more extravagant. Williams,
a miniffer of Salem, in high effimation,
having conceived an antipathy to the cross

of

of St. George in the flandard of England, B Op O
declaimed ag~ainRt it with io much vehe- rJ
mence as a relic of fuperflition and idolatry
which ought not to be retained among a
people so pure and f~anaified, that Endi-
cott, one of the members of the court of
afr~ftants, in a transport of zeal, publicly
cut out the cros~s from the enlign displayed
before the governor's gate. This frivolous
matter interefled and divided the colony.
Some of the militia scrupled to follow
colours in which there was a cross, left
they thouldd do honour to an idol: others
refused to serve under a mutilated banner,
left they thould be f~ulpeded of having
renounced their allegiance to the crown of
England. After a long controverty, car-
ried on by both parties with that heat and
zeal which in trivial disputes fuipply the
want of argument, the contest was termi-
nated by a compromile. The cross was
retained in the ensigns of forts and ships,
but erased from the colours of the militia.
Williams, on account of this, as well as of

p some

B o0 oc Kome other domrines deemed unsound, was

1 '.baniihed out of the colony +.

New ret. THE prosperous slate of New England

was now so highly extolled, and the simple
frame of its ecclefiaffic policy was to much
admired by all whole affeaions were
estranged from the church of England,

1·635. that crowds of new s~ettlers flocked thither.

Among there were two persons, whole
names have been rendered memorable by
the appearance which they afterwards made
on a more conspicuous theatre: one was
Hugh Peters, the enthuf~iaic and intriguing
chaplain of Oliver Cromwell; the other
IVlr. Henry Vane, son of Sir Henry Vane,
a privy counsellor, high in office, and of
great credit with the king; a young man
of a noble family, animated with such zeal
for pure religion and such love of liberty
as induced him to relinqulfh all his hopes
in England, and to fettle in a colony hi-

r Near's Hist. of N. Eng. p. 140, &c. Hutch-

infon, p. 37. Chalmers, p. 156.

therto

therto no farther advanced in improvement B O O K·
than barely to afford fulbfiffence to its
members, was received with the fondest
admiration. His mortified appearance, his
demure look, and rigid manners; carried
even beyond the flandard of precis~eness in
that society which he joined, seemed to in-
dicate a man of high spiritual attainments,
while his abilities and address in business
pointed him out as worthy of the highest
flation in the community. With universal 2636.
consent, and high expedations of advan-
tage from his adminiffration, he was eleaed
governor in the year s~ubs~equent to his arri-
val. But as the affairs of an infant colon3
afforded not objeas adequate to the talents
of Vane, his.bufys pragmatical spirit occu-
pied itielf with theological fubtilties and
s~peculations unworthy of his attention.
Ther~e were excited by a woman, whole
reveries produced such effeats both within
the colony and beyond its precinas, that,
frivolous as they may now appear, they
muff be mentioned as an occurrence of
importance in its· hiffory.

B O O K IT was the cuffom at that time in New

SEngland, among the chief men in every

Antino.
mian rea. congregation, to meet once a week, in

order to repeat the sermons which they
had. hear~d, and to hold religious confer-
ence with refpedt to the doatrine contained
in them. Mlrs. Hutghinfon, whole huiband
was among the most refpeaable members
of the colony, regrettinlg that persons of
her s~ex were excluded from the benefit of
those meetings, ass~embled flatedly in her
houle a number of women, who employed
themselves in pious ex~ercises similar to thos~e
of the men. At first she s~atisfied hers~elf
with repeating what the could recolledt of
the dil~courf~es delivered by their teachers.
She began afterwards to add illuffrations,
and at length proceeded to censure some
of the clergy as unsound, and to vent opi-
nions and fancies of her own. There were
all founded on the fyfitem which is deno-
minated Antinomian by divines, and ting~ed
with the deepest enthufiarm. She taught,
that fandity of life is no evidence of jufi.
fication, or of a slate of favour with God;

and

and that such as inculcated the necefirty of B O O K
manifeffing the reality of our faith by obe- L
dience, preached only a covenant of works :
the contended that the [pirit of God dwelt
personally in good nien, and by inward
revelations and imprefi~ons 'they received
the fulleRt discoveries of the divine will.
The fluency and confidence with which she
delivered there notions gained her many
admirers and prof~elyt~es, not only among
the vulgar, but among the principal inha-
bitants. The whole colony was interested
-and agitated. Vane, whole sagacity and
acuteness seemed to fors~ake him whenever
they were turned towards religion, efpoured
and defended her wildeit tenets. MaIny 1637.
conferences were held, days of fasting and d irnes,
humiliation were appointed, a general iynod a mn.~"
was called, and, after diffenflons so violent general
as threatened the dissolution of the c0- lnd
Jony, Mrs. Hutchinfon's opinions were
condemned as erroneous, and the hers~elf
banished. Several of her dilciples withldrew
from the province of their own accord.
Vane quitted America in dif~uit, unlament-

PR ed

a op o ed even by those who had lately admired

Shim; some of whom now regarded him

as a. mere riflonary, and others as one
of those dark turbulent spirits doomed to
embroil every society into which they
enter SI.

The lec. HOWEVER much there theological con-
wisen er tests might disquiet the colony of Miaffa-
ridence chuiets Bay, they contributed to the more
Irfand. [peedy population of America. Whert

W'illiams was banished from Salem in the
year one thous~and fix hundred and thirty-
four, such was the attachment of his hearers
to a pafter whol~e piety they revered, that a
good number of them voluntarily accom-
panied him in his exile. They direaed
their march towards the south; and having
purchased from the natives a considerable
traGt of land, to which Williazms gave the
name of Providence, they fettled there.
They were joilted soon after by some of
those. to whom the proceedings against

* Mather, book vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 4*

Neal, p. i. 144. 165, &c. Chalmers, p. 163-

Mrs.

Mrs. Hlutchinfon gave difguf1; and by~a B O O K
tranfaaion with the Indians they obtained ."
a right to a fertile island in Naraganfet Bay,
which acquired the name of Rhode Island.
W1~illiams remained among them upwards
of forty years, refpeded as the father and
the guide of the colony which he had
planted. His spirit differed from that of
the Puritans in Maffachulets; it was mild Theirmol

. . deration.

and tolerating; and having ventured him-
self to rejea established opinions, he endea-
voured to s~ecure the fame liberty to other
men, by maintaining, that the exercis~e of
private judgment was a natural and sacred
right; that the civil magiffrate has no com-
pulfive juridiidtion in the concerns of re-
ligion; that the punishment of any person
on account of his opinions, was an en-
croachment o'n conscience, and an a~t of
persecution ". There humane principles
he inflilled into his followers; and all who
felt or dreaded opprefr~on in other fettle-
Inents, resorted to a commuhity in which

'. Neal'6 Hist. of N. Eng. p* 14r.

Pd · uni-

B o oK universal toleration was known to be a

~yfundamental maxim. In the plantations

of Providence and Rhode Island, political
union was eflablifhed by voluntary affo-
ciation, and the eqluality of condition among
the members, as well as their religious opi-
nions; their form of government was pure-
ly democratical, the supreme power being
lodged in the freemen personally assembled.
In ?his slate they remained until they were
mncorporated~ by charter *.

Colony of To limilar caules the colony of Con.
Connedi-

cu. neaticut is indebted for its origin. The

rivalfhip between Mr. Cotton and Mr.
Hooker, two favourite miniffers in the let-
tlement of Maffachuifets Bay, disposed the
latter, who was least fuccefsful in this con-
test for fame and power, to with for some
settlement at a difiance from a competitor
by whom his reputation was eclipled. A
good number of those who had imbibed

# Hutchinfan, p. 38. Neal, ii. I42. Dougl.

Sum. ii. p. 96, & c. Chalmers, ch. ii.

Mrs. Hutchijnfon's notions, and were of- a o o
f-nJed at luch as combated them, offered to L_
accompany him. Hlaving employed pro-
per persons to explore the country, they
pitched upon th~e weft fide of the great
river Connedicut as the moss inviting
flation; and in the year one thousand fix
hundred and thirty-fix, about an hundred
persons, with their wives and families, after
a fatiguing march of many days through
woods and fwvamps, arrived there, and laid
the foundation of the towns of Hartford,
Spring~field, and WVeatherfield. This fettle-
ment was attended with peculiar irregu-
larities. Part of the difiriat now occupied
lay beyond the limits of the territory grant-
ed to the colony of Maffachufets Bay, and
yet the emigrants took a commiion from
the governor and court of afliftants, em-
powering them to exercise jzirifdialon in
that counltrjr. The Dutch from Mlianha-
dos or New York, having discovered the
river Conneticut, and eftablithed some
trading houies upon it, had acquired all the
right that prior poffe~ion confers. Lord

Say

B op o Say and Sele and Lord Brook, the heads of

^·,two illuitrious families, were so much alarm-

ed at the arbitrary measures of Charles I.
hoth in his civil and ecclefiaitical admi-
niffration, that they took a resolution, not
unbecoming young men of noble birth and
liberal s~entiments, of retiring to the New
WVorld, in order to enjoy such a form of
religion as they approved of, and thoer
liberties which they deemed essential to the
well-being~ of society. They, too, fixed on
the banks of the Conneaticut as their place
of settlement, and had taken poffeflion, by
building a fort at the mouth of the river,
which, from their united names, was called
Say Brook. The emigrants from Massa-
chulets, without regarding either the de-
fTeas in their own right or the pretenflons
of other cla mants, kept poffefiion, and
proceeded with vigour to clear and culti-
rate the country. By degrees they got rid
of every competitor. The Dutch, recently
fettled in America, and too feeble to engage
in a war, peaceably withdrew from Con-
pefticut. Lord Say and Sele and Lord

Brook

Brook made over to the colony whatever B O O K
title they might have to ·any lands in that
region. Society was established by a volun-
tary compaGt of the freemen; and though
they soon diielaimed all dependence on the
colony of Maffachuletss Bay, they retained
such veneration for its legislative wisdom as
to adopt a form of government nearly re-
femnbling its inflitutions, with refped both
to civil and ecclefiaffical policy. At a
fublequent period, the colony of Connec-
ticut was likewise incorporated by royal
charter *.

THIE hiffory of the firfl attempts to people or New

the provinces of New Hampshire and Main, "la~~
which form the fourth and most exten- a~
five diviflon in New England, is obscure
and perp,1exed, by the interfering claims of
various proprietors. The company of Ply-
mouth had inconsiderately parcelled out the
northern part of the territory contained in

# Hutchinson, p* 44, &c. Neal, i. r147 Dou-

glTas, ii. I58, &c. Chalmers' Annals, ch. r2.

its grant among different persons: of these
only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain
Malon seem to have had any serious inten-
tion to occupy the lands allotted to them.
Their efforts to accomplish this were meri·-
torious and persevering, but unfuccef~sful.
The expence of fettling colonies in an un-
cultivated country muff necessarily be great
and immediate; the profpe~t of a return is
often uncertain and always remote. The
funds of two private adventurers were not
adeqluate to such an undertaking. Nor did
the planters whom they s~ent out poffefCs that
principle of enthuf~aiim, which animated
their neighbours of Maffachufets with vi-
gour, to firug~gle through 'all the hardships
and dangers to which society, in its in-
fancy, is exposed in a savage land. Gorges
and M~ason, it is probable, must have aban-
<loned their design, if, from the fame
motives that settlements had been made in
Rhode Islan~d and Conneaticut, colonists
had not unexpededly migrated into New
Hampshire and Main. Mr. Wheelwright,
a miniffer of some note, nearly related to

IVrs.

M~rs. Hutchinson, and one of her most a o o a
fervent admirers and partisans, had, on this '
account, been banished from the province of
Mlaffachuifets Bay ". In quest of a new fla-
tion, he took a course opposite to the other
exiles; and advancing towards the north,
founded the town. of Exeter, on a fmnall
river flowing into Pifkrataq~ua Bay. His
followers, few in number, but firmly united,
were of such rigid principles, that even the
churches of Maffachulets did not appear to
them f~ufficiently pure. From time to time
they received some recruits, whom love of
novelty, or diffatisfaation with the eccle-
flaffical inflitutions of the other colonies,
prompted to join them. T`heir plantations
were widely dispersed, but the country was
thinly peopled, and ~its political slate ex-
tremely unsettled. The colony of Massa-
chuiets Bay claimed jurif~di~tion over them,
as occupying lands situated within the li-
mits of their grant. Gorges and Mafoa
asserted the rights conveyed to them as

4 Hiutchinfon> P* 70.

propri-

B op o proprietors by their charter. In several dif--

- .trias, the planters, without regarding the

pretenflons of either party, governed them-
selves by maxims and laws copied from
those of their brethren in the adjacent co-
lonies *. The firit reduation of the poli-
tical conflitution in the provinces of New
Hampshire and Main into a regular and
permanent form, was f~ubfrequent to the re-
volution.

BY extending their iettlements, the Eng-

lifh became exposed to new danger. The
tribes of Indians around Maffachulets Bay
were feeble and unwarlike; yet from re-
gard to justice, as well as motives of pru-
dence, the first colonists were fludious to
obtain the cod~ent of the natives before they
ventured to occupy any of their lands; and
though in such tranfgaaons the confidera-
tion given was often very inadequate to the
value of the territory acquired, it was sus-

* Hutchinfon> PS re3, &rc. I76. Douglas's Sum. ii.
22, &rc. Chalmers' Annals, ch. 17.

ficient

ficient to satisfy the demands of the pro- a o o sc
prietors. The English took quiet posses- .X_
flon of the lands thus conveyed to them, The far-
and no open hoffility broke out between croach
them and the ancient poffeff~ors. But the nh Enot
colonies of Providence and 'Conneaicut liarren'A-

ed by the

soon found that they were s~urrounded natives.
by more powerful and martial nations.
Among these the mos1 considerable were
the Naraganiets and Pequods; the former
seated on the Bay which bears their name,
and the latter occupying the territory which
firetches from the river Pequod along the
banks of the Connedicut. The Pequods
were a formidable people, who could bring
into the field a thousand warriors, not in-
ferior in courage to any in the New World.
They forelaw, not only that the extermi-
nation of the Indian race muff be the con-
sequence of permitting the English to spread
over the continent of America, but that if
meas~ures were not ifpeedily concerted to
prevent it, the calamity would be unavoid-
able. With this view they applied to the
Naraganlets, requesting them to forget

2 ancient

B O OK ancient animoiities for a moment, and

X_ to co-operate with them in expelling a

common enemy who threatened both
with deflrualon. They represented that,
when those strangers first landed, the ob.
jeat of their visit was not ful~peaed, and
no proper precautions were taken to check
their progress; that now, by sending
out colonies in one year towards three
different quarters, their intentions were
manifest, and the people of America muff
abandon their native feats to make way
for unjuff intruders.

But the Naraganfets and Pequods, like

moRt of the contig~uous tribes in America,
were rivals, and there fublified between
the~n an hereditary and implacable enmity.
Revenge is the darling pafflon of savages;
in order to secure the indulgence of which
there is no pres~ent advantage that they will
not sacrifice, and no future consequence

war with which they do not totally disregard. The
qudhe Pe- Naraganlets, inficadl of closing with the
tribes. prudent proposal of their neighbours, dif`-

covered

tovered their hoffile intentions to the go- B o o x
vernor of Maffachulfets Bay ; and, eager to ;
lay hold on such g favourable opportunity
of wreaking their vengean~ce on their an-
clent foes, entered into an alliance with-
the English against them. The Pequods,
more exasperated than discouraged by the
imprudence and treachery of their countryi
inen, took the field, and carried on the war·
in the us~ual mode of Americans. They
s~urpris~ed firagglers, and fecalped them; they
plundered and burnt remote settlements;
they attacked Fort Say Brook without
s~ucces~s, though g~arrisoned only by twenty
men; and when the English began to aca
tf~entively, they retired to faftneffes which
they deemed inacceff~ibe. The different
colonies had agreed to unite against the
common enemy, each furniihing a quota
of men in proportion to its numbers. The
troops of Connedicut which lay most ex-
posed to danger were soon afifembled. The
march of those from Maffachufets, which
formed the mos1 considerable body, was
retarded by the most singular cause that ev'er

o influ-

Bq o oi influenced the operations of a military

'~_.force. WVhen they were muffered pre-

vS~Ti~ ious to their departure, it was found.

army. that some of the officers, as well as of

the private soldiers, were flill under a co-
venant of works; and that the blefling of
God could not be implored or expeaed to
crown the arms of such unhallowed men
with -succes~s. The alarm was general, and
many arrang~ements necessary in order to
cast out the unclean, and to render this
little band fufficiently pure to fight the'
battles of a people who entertained highl
ideas of their own f~asalty *.

Defeat MlEANTWHILE the Conne~icut troops,
da (n" reinforced by a finall detachment from Say

Brook, found it necessary to advance to-
wards the enemy. They were poffed on
a rising ground, in the middle of a iwamp
towards thle head of the river IViffick,
.w~hich they had surrounded with palif~a-
does, the best defence th~at their slender-

* Neal, i. 168.

skill

skill in the art of fortification had diifco- B o o K
vered. Though they knew that the Englii fh ,
were in motion, yet, with the -ifual im-
providence and s~ecurity of savages, they
took no meas~ures either to oblerve their
progrers, or to guard against being fur-
prifed themselves. The enemy, unper- Ivay 20.
ceived, reached ~the palifradoes, and if a dog
had not given the alarm by barking, the
Indians muff have been1 massacred without
resistance. In a moment, however, they
started to arms, and raifingr the war-cry,
prepared to repel the assailants. But at
that early pertod of their intercourf~e'with
the Europeans, the Americans were little
acquainted with the use of gunpowder, and
dreaded its effeas extremely. While some
of the Eng~lish galled them with an in-
ceffant fire through the intervals between
the palifadoes, others forced their way by
the entries into the fort, filled only with
branches of trees; and setting fire to the
huts which were covered with reeds, the
confusion and terror quickly became g~e-
neral. Many of the women and children

a 2 p~erish~ed

B op 0 perithed in the flames; and the warriors,

^ in endeavouring to eieape, were either slain

by the English, or falling into the hands of
their Indian allies, who surrounded the fort
at a diitance, were reserved for a more cruel
fate. After the junalon of the troops from
Maff~achulets, the English resolved to purfhe
their viaory; and hunting the Indians from
one place of retreat to another, some s~ub.
sequent encounters were hardly less fatal
to them than the aalion on the Miitick.
In les~s .than three months the trib~e of
Pequods was extirpated: a few miserable
fugitives who took refuge among the neigh.
bouring Indians, being incorporated by
them, loit their name as a diitinat people.

Cmuelies In this firit essay of their arms, the colo-

Iante nills of New England feemn to have been

Indians. conlduIaed by fkrilful and enterprising offi-

cers, and displayed both courage and per-
severance as soldiers. But they itained their
laurels by the use which they made of
viaory. Inficad of treating the Pequods as
an independent people, who made a gallant
effort to defend the property, the rights,

and the freedom of their nation, they re- a op o
taliated upon them all the barbarities of.
American war. Some they ~massacred in
cold blood, others they gave up to be tor-
tured by their Indian allies, a considerable
number they fold as slaves in Bermudas,
the reft were reduced to servitude among
themselves ",

But reprehensible as this condua of the Emigra.

English muRt be deemed, their vigorous " gand
efforts in this decisive campaign filled all
the s~urrounding tribes of Indians with such
an high opinion of their valour as f~e-
cured a long tranquillity to all their fettle-
ments. At the fame time the violence of
admini~tration in England continued to
increase their population and firength, by
forcing many refpeaable fubjeats to tear
themselves from all the tender conneaions
that bind men to their native country, and

* Hutchinson, p. 58* 76, &rc. MLather, Magnalia,

b, vil, ch. 6, Hubbard's State of N. Eng. p. 5. I26,

a O O K to fly for refuge to a region of the N'ew

-1 World, which hitherto pres~ented to them

nothing that could allure them thither but

Prohibit- exemption from oppression. The number
edbyroyal
proclama. of thos~e emigrants drew the attention of
non. government, and appeared s~o formidable,

that a proclamation was issued, prohibiting
masters of thips from carrying passengers
to New England without Cpecial permifiron.
On many occallons this injundion was
cluded or disr-eg-arded. Fatally for the king,
it operated with f'ull effeGt in one inflance.
Sir Arthur Haflerig, John Hampden, 011-
ver Cromwell, and some othler pers~ons
whos~e principles and views coincided with
theirs, impatient to enjoy those civil and
religious liberties which they firuggre~d in
vain to obtain in Great Britain, hired some
ships to carry them and their attendants to
New England. By order of council, an
emnbargo was laid on there when qn the
point of failing; and Chiarles, far from
furpe~ting that the future revolutions in his
kingdoms were to be excited and dircaed

5 by

by persons in such an humble s~phere of B O O K
life, forcibly detained the men deffined to
overturn his throne, and to terminate his
days by a violent death *.

But, in spite of all the efforts of govern-

ment to check this spirit of migration, the
rneaf~ures of the king and his ministers
were considered by a great body of the
people as so hoffile to those rights which
they deemed most valuable, that in the
course of the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and thirty-eight, above three thou-
sand persons embarked for New England,
choosing rather to expole themselves to
all the cons~equences of disr-egarding the
royal proclamation, than to remain longer
under opprefiion. Exasperated at this con-
tempt of his authority, Charles had recourse
to a violent but effe~tual mode of accom-
plithing what he had in view. A writ of
gue ·warranto was iiTzed against the corpo-

* Mather, Miagnalia, b. i. ch. 5- P* 23. N~eal's

Hist. of N. Eng. i. I152 Chalmers' Annals, i. '55·
I60, &c.

ration

-44

B O O K ration of IVlaffachulets Bay. The coloniits

L had conformed to little to the terms of their

~oa _or charter, that judgment was given againfl
churets them without difficulty. They were found
Bay sued
atlaw,sad to have forfeited all their rights as a cor-
founvd to0 paration, which of course returned to the
feited its crown, and Charles began to take mea,

Sfures for new modelling the political frame

of the colony, and veffing the admini,
thation of its affairs in other hands. But
his plans were never carried into execu-
tion. In every corner of his dominions,
the florm now began to gather, which
soon burit out with such fatal violence,
that Charles, during the remainder of his
unfortunate reign, occupied with domeffic
and more intereff~ing cares, had .not leis~ure
to beffow any attention upon a remote and
inconsiderable province *.

ON the meeting of the Long Parliament,

such a Revolution took place in England,

* Hutchinson, p. 86. 502, Soc. Chahners' Annals,

that

that all the motives for migrating to the 8 o oK
New World ceas~ed. The maxims of the X
Puritans with refped to the government
both of church and Rtate, became predomi-
nant in the nation, and were enforced by
the hand of power. Their oppressors were
humbled I that perfedt fyrtem of reformed
polity, which had long been the objea
of their admiration and desire, was efta-
blithed by law; and amidst the intrigues
and confliats of an obitinate civil war, tur-
bulent and aspiring spirits found s~uch fuRl
occupation, that they had no inducement
to quit a busy theatre, on which they had
risen to aQ a snoft conspicuous part. From
the year one thousand fix hundred and
twenty, when the fuirt feeble colony was
conduated to New England by the Brown., state of:

the cole,

ifts, to the year one thoufagnd fix hundred nies at thi
and forty, it has been computed, that period.
twenty-one thouland two hundred British
fpbjeats had fettled there, The money ex-
pended by various adventurers during that
period in fitting out thips, in purchasing

flock,

a oxo trary. This was afterwards confirmed by

c~the authority of both Houles. Encouraged

1646- by such an extraordinary privilege, induffry

made rapid progrel~s in all the diftrifts of
New England, and population increas~ed
along with it. In return for thos~e favours,
the colonists applauded the measures of par,-
liament, celebrated its generous efforts to
vindicate the rights and liberties of the na-
tion, prayed for the succes~s of its arms,
and framed regulations in order to prevent
any exertion in favour of the king on the
other fide of the Atlantic *,

RELYING on the indulgent partiality witly

which all their proceedings were viewed by
men thus clos~ely united with them in senti-
2nents and wishes, the people of N~ew Eng-
land ventured on a meas~ure, which not only
increafecd their security and power, but may
be regarded as a considerable fiep towards
independence. Under the imprefilon or

* Hutchinson, p. I I4. A~PP 5 x7. Chalmers' An·

Itals, i. I74* 176,

pretext

pretext of the danger to which they were B op o
exposed from the filrrounding tribes of In-
dians, the four colonies of Mlaffachurets, r6 .
Plymouth, Connedicut, and Newhaven, dYfg_
entered into a league of perpetual confe- arfh
deracy, offenfive and defensi;ve; an idea fa- land
rmiliar to s~everal leading men in the colo-
nies, as it was framed in imitation of the
famous bond of union among the Dutch
provinces, in whose dominions the Brown-
ifts had long reflded. It was flipulated,
that the confederates thould henceforth be
dillinguifhed by the name of the United
Colonies of New England; that each colo-
ny shall remain separate and diftina, and
have exclusive jurif~di~tion within its own
territory; that in every war, offenfive or
defensive, each of the confederates fb~all
furnish its quota of men, proviflons, and
anoney, at a rate to be fixed from time to
time, in proportion to the number of people
in each lettlement; that an assembly com-
posed of two commifironers from each co-
lony fhalll be held annually, with power to

deliberate

B op o deliberate and decide in all points of com-

~2_,mon concern to the confederacy;i and every

determination, in which fix of their num-
ber concur, ihall be binding on the whole *.
In this tranfadion the colonies of New Eng-
land s~eem to have considered thems~elves
as independent societies, poffeir~ng all the
rights of sovereignty, and free from the
control of any s~uperior power. The go-
verning party in England, occupied with
affairs of more urgent concern, and no wife
dis~posed to obs~erve the condua of their
brethren in America with any jealous at-
tention, f~uffered the meas~ure to pal~s with-
out animadverflon.

EMBoLDENTED by this connivance the

sp~irit of independence gathered firength,
and soon displayed itself more openly :
some pers~ons of note in the colony of
Maffachuifets, avers~e to the ijyftem of eccle-
flaffical polity established there, and pre-

* Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. i. 202, &c. Hutchinson,

p. r24. Chalmers' Annl. p. ryg.

ferring

ferring to it thle government and dil~cipline B o o K

SX.

of the churches of England or Scotland,
having remonirated to the general court
against the injuilice of depriving them of r646.
their rights as freemen, and of their privi-
leges as Chriitians, because they could not
join as members with any of the con-
gregational churches, petitioned that they
might no longer be bound to obey laws to
which they had not assented, nor be faubjeat
to taxes imposed by an assemb~ly in which
they were not represented. Their demands retitioe

of the

were not only rejeaed, but they were im- Direnters
prifoned and fined as diflurbers of the rejeaea.
public peace; and when they appointed
some of their number to lay their grieve
ances before parliament, the annual vcourt,
in order to prevent this appeal to the
s~upreme power, attempted frirt to seize
their papers, and then to obfhrua their
embarkation for England. Bjut though
neither of these could be accomplished,
fch was the address- and influence of thle
colonies' agents in England, that no in-
quiry seems to have been made into thiiS

tranf~adion.

B op O tradiaalon *. This was followed by art

^' .indication, flill less ambiguouls, of the afpir-

ing spirit prevtalent among the people of
1Vaffachufets. Under every form of go-
vernment the right of coining money has
been considered as a prerogative peculiar to
sovereig~nty, and which no subordinate
member in any slate is entitled to claim.

16ss. Regardleifs of this established maxuim, the

Right of
commig general court ordered a coinage of silver

" 0.~, money at Boflon, flamped with the name

loanis. of the colony, and a tree as an apt lymbol

of its progressive vigour 1-. Even this
usurpation es~caped without notice. The
Independents, having now humbled all
rival s~eas, engrossed the whole direation of
affairs in Great Britain; and lonlg acc~ui
tomed to admire the government of New
England, framed agreeably to thos~e prin·
ciples which they had adopted as the most

SN~eal's Hist. N. Eng. i. 2x3. Hutchninon's Hist.

245, &c. Colle61. 188, &c. Chalm. Ann. I75g.
14lather, Magnal. b. iii. ch. i. p. 3o.

4 Hutchinfon's Hist. 177, 178. Chalmers' Annals,
p. I85.

perfelt

perfea model of civil and ecclefaiafical s oo i
polity, they were unwilling to slain its re-
putation, by cens~uring; any part of its
condua.

WHEN Cromwell us~urped the s~upreme Crom-

power, the colonies of New England con- , i ea,
tinued to Rtand as high in his eitimation. the New

England

As he had deeply imbib'ed all the fanatical colonies.
notions of the Independents, and was per-
petually surrounded by the moit eminent
and artful teachers of that sea, he kept a
conflant correspondence with the lead-
ing men in the American settlements,
who seem to have looked up to him as a
zealous patron ". He in return considered
them as his most devoted adherents, at-
tached to him no les~s by affcalon than by
principle. He soon gave a firiking proof
of this. On the conquest of Jamaica, he Propore,

to tranf.

formed a s~cheme for the se~curity and im- part the
provement of the acqulfition made by his C~'~o lonaia
viaorious arms, suited to the ardour of ca.

SHutchinfon, App. 526, acc. Colleat. p. 233-

a o oK an impetuous fprtthat delighted in

- accomplishing its ends by extraordinary

means. He proposed to transport the people
of New England to that island, and em-
ployed every argument calculated to make
imprefiron upon them, in order to obtain
their confea-t. He endeavoured to rouse
their religious zeal by representing what a
fatal blow it would be to the man of f10, if
a colony of the faithful were fettled in the
midst of his territories in the New World.
He allured them with profpeas of immense
wealth in a fertile region, which would re-
ward the induffry of those who cultivated
it, with all the precious produaions of the
torrid zone, and expressed his fervent with
that they might take poffeflion of it, in
order to fulfil God's promise of making his
people the head and not the tail. He al-
sured them of being s~upported by the whole
force of his authority, and of veffing all the
powers of government entirely in their

coi hands. But by this time the colonists were

acceptis attached to a country in which they had

2 resided

resided for many years, and where, though B O O K
they did not attain opulence, thley enjoyed
the comforts of life in great abundance;
and they dreaded to much the noxious
climate of the Weft Indies, which had
proved fatal to a great number of the Eng-
lifh who sirs1 fettled in Jamaica, that they
declined, though in the most refpeaful
terms, closing with the Protedor's propofi-
tion *.

* Hutchinson, p. I90, &rc. Chalmers, p. 188.

THE END.
