1%

)

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH A VIEW OF THE
progress of 'ociety in europe,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,.

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

BY

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, 4ND,

IISTORIOORAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY. raO SCOTIAND.'

TENTH EDITION.
IN FOUR VOLUMES.

VOL. II.
Embellirhed withfour elegant Engraving.

GLASGOW,
rirtcc bE anwo for Capman anm «mr.

# BOOK I.

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I.

CHARLES V. was born at Ghent on the twenty-fourth
day of February, in the year one thousand five hundred.
His father, Philip the Handsome, archduke of Aufria, was
the son of the emperor Maximilian, and of Mary, the only
child of Charles the Bold, the last prince of the house of
Burgundy. His mother, Joanna, was the second daughter
of Ferdinand king of Aragon, and of Isabella queen of Ca-
tile.

A long train of fortunate events had opened the way for

this young prince to the inheritance of more extensive do-
minions, than any European monarch, since Charlemagne,
had possessed. Each of his ancestors had acquired king-
doms or provinces, towards which their profpe& of fuc.
ceflion was extremely remote. The rich pofleflions of Ma-
ry of Burgundy had been defined for another family, she
having been contra&ed by her father to the only son of
Louis XI. of France; but.that capricious monarch, indulg-
ing his hatred to her family, chore rather to strip her of part
of her territories by force, than to secure the whole by mar-
riage; and by this mifcondu&, fatal to his posterity, he
threw all the Netherlands and Franche Comte into the
hands of a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II. of Ca-
stile, far from having any profpe& of that noble inheritance

which {he transmitted to her grandson, passed the early part
of her life in obfcur'ty and indigence. But the Catilians,
exasperated against her brother Henry IV. an ill-advifed
and vicious prince, publicly charged him with impotence,
and his queen with adultery. Upon his demise, rejecing
Joanna, whom Henry had uniformly, and even on his death-
bed, owned to be his lawful daughter, and whom an assem-
bly of the states had acknowledged to be the heir of his
kingdom, they obliged her to retire into Portugal, and
placed Isabella on the throne of Castile. Ferdinand owed
the crown of Aragon to the unexpected death of his elder
brother, and acquired the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by
violating the faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of
blood. To all these kingdoms, Christopher Columbus, by
an effort of genius and of intrepidity, the boldest and moit
successful that is recorded in the annals of mankind, added
a new world, the wealth of which became one confiderablc
source of the power and grandeur of the Spanih monarchs.

Don John, the only son of Ferdinand and Isabella, and

their eldest daughter, the queen of Portugal, being cut off,
without issue, in the flower of youth, all their hopes center-
ed in Joanna and her posterity. But as her husband, the
archduke, was a stranger to the Spaniards, it was thought
expedient to invite him into Spain, that by residing among
them, he might accustom himself to their laws and manners;
and it was expe&ed that the Cortes, or assembly of flates,
whose authority was then so great in Spain, that no title to
the crown was reckoned valid unless it received their fanc-
tion, would acknowledge his right of fuccefion, together
with that of the infanta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, pas-
sing through France in their way to Spain, were entertained
in that kingdom with the utmost magnificence. The arch-
duke did homage to Louis XII. for the earldom of Flan-
ders, and took his feat as a peer of the realm in the parlia-
ment of Paris. They were received in Spain with every
mark of honour that the parental affetion of Ferdinand and

S3 ós»

Isabella, or the refpe& of their fubjeAs, could devise,; and
their title to the crown was loon after acknowledged by the
Cortes of both kingdoms.

But amidst these outward appearances of fatisfa&ion and

joy, some secret uaeafinefs preyed upon the mind of each of
these princes. The Rately and reserved ceremonial of the
Spanish court was so burdensome to Philip, a prince, young,
gay, affable, fond of society and of pleasure, that he soon
began to express a desire of returning to his native country,
the manners of which were more suited to his temper. Ser.
dinand, observing the declining health of his queen, with
whose life he knew that his right to the government of Ca-
file must cease, easily foresaw, that a prince of Philip's dif-
position, and who already discovered an extreme impatience
to reign, would never content to his retaining any degree of
authority in that kingdom; and the profpe& of this dimiau-
tion of his power awakened thejealoufy of that ambitious
monarch.

Isabella beheld, with the fentimnents natural to amother,

the indifference and neglec with which the archduke treat-
ed her daughter, who was destitute of those beauties of per-
ion, as well as those accomplishments of mind, which fix the
affe&ions of a husband. Her understanding, always weak,
was often disordered. She doated'on Philip with such an-
excess of childiih and indiscreet fondness, as excited difguit
rather than affe&ion. Her jealousy, for which her hus-
band's behaviour gave her too much cause,- was proportion-
ed to her love, and often broke out in the most extrava-
gant a&ions. Labella, though sensible of her defects, could
not help pitying her condition, which was soon rendered
altogether deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt resolution
of setting out in the middle of winter for Slanders, and of
leaving her in Spain. Isabella, intreated him not to a-
bandon his wife to grief and melancholy, which might prove
fatal to her, as {he was tear the time of her delivery. Joan-
na conjured him to put off his journey for three days only,

Vol. II. B

that {he might have the pleasure of celebrating the festival
of Chrilfmas in his company. Ferdinand, after representing
the imprudence of his leaving Spain, before he had time to
become acquainted with the genius, or to gain the affe&tions
of the people, who were one day to be his fubjets, besought
him, at leaf, not to pass through France, with which king-
dom he was then at open war. Philip, without regarding
either the ditates of humanity, or the maxims of prudencee
pcrfited in hit purpose; and on the twenty-fecond of De-
cember set out for the Low Countries, by the way of
France*.

From the moment of his departure, Joanna funk into a

deep and fullen melancholyt, and while Ihe was in that situ-
ation bore Ferdinand her second son, for whom the power
of his brother Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom he at lads transmitted
the imperial sceptre. Joanna was the only person in Spain
who discovered no joy at the birth of this prince. Infenfi-
ble to that, as well as to every other pleasure, (he was whol-
ly occupied with the thoughts of returnig to her husband;
nor did she, in any degree, recover tranquillity of mind, un-
til (he arrived at Brussels next year§.

Philip, in passing through France, had an interview with

Louis XII. and signed a treaty with him, by which he hop-
ed that al the differences between France and Spain would
have been finally terminated. But Ferdinand, whose as-
fairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous in Italy,
where the superior genius of Gonfalvo de Cordova, the great
captain, triumphed on every occasion over the arms of
France, did not pay the lead regard to what his fon-in-law
had concluded, and carried on hoitilities with greater ardour
than ever.

From this time Philip seems not to have taken any part in

* Petri Mrtyris Anglerii Epiftolat, 150-433.
t+d. Epif. s55.
5 urna, lib. z7. c. r. r4. Flechier Vie de Ximen. i. I9g.

the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet till the death either of
Ferdinand or Isabella Ihould open the way to one of their
thrones. The latter of there events was not far diflant.
The untimely death of her son and eldeff daughter had
made a deep impreflion on the mind of Isabella; and as she
could derive but little consolation for the losses which she had
sustained either from her daughter Joanna, whose infirmi-
ties daily increased, or from her fon-in-law, who no longer
preserved even the appearance ofa decent refpe& towards
that unhappy princess,. her spirits and health began grads-
ally to decline, and after languishing some months,. she died:
at Medina del Campo on the twenty-fixth of November
one thousand five hundred and four. She was no less e-
minent for virtue than for wisdom; and whether we confi-
der her behaviour as a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, she
isjuftly entitled to the high encomiums beftowed.on her by
the Spanilh historians*.

A few weeks before her death, she made her last will,-

and being convinced of Joanna's incapacity to aftume the
reins of government into her own hands, and having no in-
clination to commit them to Philip, with whole condu&t he
was extremely dissatisfied, lhe appointed Ferdinand regent or
administrator of the affairs of Castile until her grandson-
Charles should attain the age oftwenty. She bequeathed to
Ferdinand likewise one half of the revenues which thould
arise from the Indies, together with the grand mafier-
flips of the three military orders; dignities which rendered
the person who pofefSed them almost independent, and
which Ifabellahad, for that reason, annexed to the crown+,
But before the signed a deed so favourable to Ferdinand,
{he obliged him. to swear that he would note by a second
martiage, or by any other means, endeavour to deprive Jo-
anna or her posterity of their right of fucceflionto any of
his kingdoms .

* P. Mart. Ep. z79.
t P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar.HiRf. lib. z8. c. Ii.Fer.Hift. Gener..
d'Efpagne, tom. viii. 263. t Mar. Hill. lib a8. c. 14t

B 2

Immediately upon the queen's death, Ferdinand resigned

the title of king of Castile, and issued orders to proclaim
Joanna and Philip the sovereigns of that kingdom. But, at
the fame time, he assumed the charaaer of regent, in coa-
sequence of Ifahella's testament; and not long after he prey
vailed on the Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to
that office. This, however, he did not procure without
difficulty, nor without discovering such f)ynptoms of aliena-
tion and disgust among the Castilians as filled him with
great uneasiness. The union of Castile and Aragon, for al-
xoft thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the ancient
and hereditary enmity which subsisted between the natives
of these kingdoms, that the Castilian pride could rubmit,
without murmuring, to the government of a king of Ara-
gon. Ferdinand's own character, with which the Castilians
were well acquainted, was far from rendering his authority
desirable. Suspicious, discerning, severe, and parsimonious,
he was accustomed to observe the minute ations of his sub-
jess with a jealous attention, and to reward their highest ser-
vices with little liberaL'ty; and they were now deprived of
Isabella, whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her Cafti-
I.an fubjeEs, often tempered his austerity, or rendered it to-
crable. The maxims of his government were especially o-
dious to the grandees; for that artful prince, sensible of the
dangerous privileges conferred upon them by the feudal in-
fitutions, had endeavoured to curb their exorbitant pow-
er , by extending the royal jurifdiaion, by protedcing their
injured vassals, by increasing the immunities of cities, and by
ether measures equally prudent. From all these causes, a
formidable party among the Castilians united againfi Ser-
dinand, and though the persons who composed it had not
lhtherto taken any public flep in opposition to him, he
pl]ainlv saw, that upon the least encouragement from their
new king, they would proceed to the most violent estremi-
ties.

Marian. lib. aS. c. 1z.

There was no less agitation in the Netherlands, upon re,

ceiving the accounts of Isabella's death, and of Ferdinand's
having assumed the government of Castile. Philip was not
of a temper tamely to susser himself to be supplanted by the
ambition of his father-in-law. If Joanna's infirmities, and
the non-age of Charles, rendered them incapable of govern.
ment, he, as a husband, was the proper guardian of his wife,
and, as a father, the natural tutor of his son. Nor was it
sufficient to oppose to thefejuft rights, and to the inclination
of the people of Castile, the authority of a testament, the
genuineness of which was perhaps doubtful, and its contents
to him appeared certainly to be iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's resentment, and new vigour infused
into his councils by the arrival of Don John Manuel. He
was Ferdinand's ambassador at the Imperial court, but upon
the first notice of Isabella's death repaired to Brussels, flat-
tering himself, that under a young and liberal prince, he
might attain to power and honours, which he could never.
have expe&ed in the service of an old and frugal master.
He had early paid court to Philip during his residence in
Spain, with such afliduity as entirely gained his confidence;:
and having been trained to business under Ferdinand, could.
oppose his schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not
inferior.to those for which that monarch was diftinguih.-
ed§.

By the advice of Manuel, ambassadors were dispatched to

require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to resign the:
government of Castile to those persons whom Philip should.
entrust with.it, until his own arrival in that kingdom. Such-
of the Castilian nobles as had discovered any diffatisfastion.
with-Ferdinand's administration, were encouraged by every:
method to oppose it. At the fame time a treaty was con.-
cluded with Louis XII. by which Philip flattered himself,,
that he had secured the friendihip and assistance of that mo-
narch.

S Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. vi. p!-Ial

BD 3

MIeanwhile, Ferdinand employed all the arts of address

and policy, in order to retain the power of which he had
got pofftffion. By means of Conchillos, an Aragonian gen-
tleman, he entered into a private negotiation with Joanna,
and prevailed on that weak princess to confirm, by her au.
thority, his right to the regency. But this intrigue did not
escape the penetrating eye of Don John Manuel; Joanna's
lItter of consent was intercepted; Conchillos was thrown
i:ito a dungeon; she herself confined to an apartment in the
vjlace. and all her Spaniih domestics fecuded from her pre-
fence .

The mortification which the discovery of this intrigue oc.

c5ronred to Ferdinand was much increased by his observing
the progref. which Philip's emissaries made in Castile. Some
of the nobles retired to their castles; others to the towns
in which they had influence: they formed themselves into
cnfed-racies, and began to afemble their vassals. Ferdi-
rnndcs court was almoiR totally deserted; not a person of
ii;fintion but Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, the duke of
Ali2, and the marquis of Denia, remaining there; while the
l.ouies of Philip's ambassadors were daily crowded with no.
biemen of the highest rank.

Exafper2ted at this universal defecaon, and mortified

r-rhaps with feelng all his schemes defeated by a younger
politician, Ferdinand resolved, in defiance of the law of na.
tre, and of decency, to deprive his daughter and her po-
Hierity of the crown of Callile, rather than renounce the re.
-7ency of that kingdom. His plan for accomplishing this
-as no less bold, than the intention itself was wicked. He
c'cmandcld in marriage Joanna, the supposed daughter of
Heny' IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy Isabella's
r:ght to the crown of Caflile was founded: and by reviving
the cla:im of this princess, in opposition to which he himself
hnd forrmerly led armies and fought battles, he hoped once
r'cre to get pofutffion of the throne of that kingdom. But

* P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Annales, vi. p. 14.

Emanuel, king of Portugal, in whose dominions Joanna re-
fided, at that time having married one of Ferdinand's daugh-
ters by Isabella, refused his consent to that unnatural match;
and the unhappy princess herself, having loft all relish for
the objects of ambition, by being long immured in a con-
vent, discovered no less aversion to it*.

The resources, however, of Ferdinand's ambition were not

exhausted. Upon meeting with a repulse in Portugal, he
turned towards France, and fought in marriage Germain
de Foix, a daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the sifter of Louis XII. The war which that mo-
narch had carried on against Ferdinand in Naples, had been
so unfortunate, that he listened withjoy to a proposal, which
furnished him with an honourable pretence for concluding
peace: and though no prince was ever more remarkable
than Ferdinand for making all his pafllons bend to the max-
ims of interest, or become subservient to the purposes of
ambition, yet so vehement was his resentment against his
fon-in-law, that the desire of gratifying it rendered, him re-
gardlefs of every other consideration. In order to be re-
venged of Philip, by detaching Louis from his interest, and
in order to gain a chance of excluding him from his heredi-
tary throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexed to it, he
was ready once more to divide Spain into separate kingdoms,
though the union of these was the great glory of his reign,
and had been the chief obje& of his ambition; he consented
to reltore the Neapolitan nobles of the French fation to
their poffeflions and honours; and submitted to the ridi-
cule of marrying, in an advanced age, a princess of eigh-
teen t.

The conclusion of this match, which deprived Philip of

his only ally, and threatened him with the loss of fo-many
kingdoms, gave him a dreadful alarm, and convinced Don

Sandov. Hist. of Civil Wars in Castile. Lon. 1655. p. .

Zurita Annales de Aragofi, ton. vi. p. 213.
t P. Mart. Ep. 290, 29. Mariana, lib. z8. c. x6, 17.

John Manuel that there was now a necetity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spaint. He accord-
ingly inftru&ed the Flemith ambafladors, in the court of
Spain, to testify the itrong desire which their master had
of terminating all differences between him and Ferdinand
in an amicable manner, and his willingness to consent to
any conditions that would re-eftabliih the friendship which.
ought to fubftft between a father and a fon-in-law. Ferdi-
nand, though he had made and broken more treaties than
any prince of any age, was apt to confide so far in the fin-
cerity of other men, or to depend so much upon his own
address and their weakness, as to be always extremely fond
of a negotiation. He listened with eagerness to these de-
clarations, and soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca [Nov.
24]; in which it .was stipulated, that the government of
Castile should be carried on in the joint names of Joanna,
of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the revenues of the
crown, as well as the right of conferring offices, lhould be
hared between Ferdinand and Philip, by an equal divi-
sion*.

Nothing, however, was farther from Philip's thoughts

than to observe this treaty. His sole intention in proposing
it was towamufe Ferdinand, and to prevent him from taking
my measures for obftruting his voyage into Spain. It
had that efff. Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not
for some time fufped his design; and though when he per-
ceived it, he prevailed on the king of France not only to
remonstrate against the archduke's journey, but to threaten
boftilities if he should undertake it; though he solicited the
duke of Gueldres to attack his fon-in-law's dominions in the
Low-Countries, Philip and his consort nevertheless set fail
with a numerous fleet, and a good body of land forces.
They were obliged, by a violent tempest, to take lhelter
in England, where Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdi.

1 P. Mart. Ep. 293.
* Zurita Annales de Aragon, vi. 9. P. Mart. Ep. 193> 294.

naud's solicitations, detained them upwards of three months*;
at last they were permitted to depart, and after a more prof.
perous voyage, they arrived in safety at Corunna in Ga-
licia [April 28], nor durst Ferdinand attempt, as he had
once intended, to oppose their landing by force of arms.

The Castilian nobles, who had been obliged hitherto to

conceal or to dissemble their sentiments, now declared open-
ly in favour of Philip. From every corner of the kingdom,
persons of the highest rank, with numerous retinues of their
vassals, repaired to their new sovereign. The treaty of
Salamanca was universally condemned, and all agreed to ex-
clude from the government of Castile a prince, who, by con-
senting to disjoin Aragon and Naples from that crown,
discovered so little concern for its true interests. Ferdi-
nand, meanwhile, abandoned by almost all the Castilians,
disconcerted by their revolt, and uncertain whether he
should peaceably relinquish his power, or take arms in order
to maintain it, earnestly solicited an interview with his son-
in-law, who, by the advice of Manuel, studiously avoided it.
Convinced, at last, by feeing the number and zeal of Philip's
adherents daily increase, that it was vain to think of resist-
ing such a torrent, Ferdinand contented, by treaty, to re-
sign the regency of Castile into the hands of Philip [June
27], to retire into his hereditary dominions of Aragon, and
to reft satisfied with the mafterfh;ps of the military orders,
and that (hare of the revenue of the Indies, which Isabella
had bequeathed to him. Though an interview between the
princes was no longer necessary, it was agreed to on both
lides from motives of decency. Philip repaired to the place
appointed, with a splendid retinue of CafRilian nobles, and
a considerable body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared
without any pomp, attended by a few followers mounted
on mules, and unarmed. On that occasion Don John Ma-
nuel had the pleasure of displaying before the monarch,

iuhom he had deserted, the extensive influence which he had

Ferrer. lift. viii. a85.

acquired over his new master: while Ferdinand suffered, in
presence of his former subje&s, the two most cruel mortifi-
cations which an artful and ambitious prince can feel; be.
ing at once over-reached in condu&, and firipped of pow-
ert.

Not long after [July], he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would soon open the
way for his return into CaftRil, he took car to protest,
though with great secrecy, that the treaty concluded with
his fon-in-law, being extorted by force, ought to be deem-
ed void of all obligation a.

Philip took poffefiion of his new authority with a youth,

ful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from whom he derived it,
remained, during all these contests, under the dominion of
a deep melancholy; ihe was seldom allowed to appear in pu-
blic; her father, though he had often desired it, was refuted
iccefs to her; and Philip's chief objet was to prevail on.
the Cortes to declare her incapable of government, that at
undivided power might be lodged in his hands, until his son
flould attain to full age. But such was the partial attach-
ment of the Castilians to their native princess, that though

anuel had the address to gain some members of the Cortes
finmbekd at Vaadolid, and. othro wee wiling to gratiy
their new sovereign in his fir reqieft, the great body of
the representatives rdufed their consent to a declaration
which they thought so injurious to the blood of their mo-
'archst. They were unanimous, however, in acknowledg-
ing Joanna and Philip, queen and king of Castle, and their
son Charles prince of Afurias.

This was almot the only memorable event during Philip's

administration. A fever put an end to his life in the twen-
ty-eighth year of his age [Sept 25,] when he had not en-

t Zurita Annales de Arag. vi 64. Mar. lib. 28. , 19, 20o.
P. Mart Ep. ;04, 305. &c.

Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. Hist. viii. 9go.
$ Zurita Annles de Arag. vi. p. 75j

joyed the regal dignity, which he had been so eager to ob-
tain, full three months*.

The whole royal authority in Castile ought of course to

have devolved upon Joanna. But the Ihock occasioned by
a disaster so unexpeced as the death of her huiband, com-
pleted the disorder of her understanding, and her incapacity
for government. During all the time of Philip's sickness
no intreaty could prevail on her, though in the sixth month
of her pregnancy, to leave him for a moment. When he
expired, however, she did not shed one tear, or utter a single
groan. Her grief was silent and fettled. She continued
to watch the dead body with the fame tenderness and atten-
tion as if it had been alivet; and though at last Ihe permit-
ted it to buried, she soon removed it from the tomb to her
own apartment. There it was laid upon a bed of tate, in:
a splendid dress: and having heard from some monk a le-
gendary tale of a king who revived after he had been
dead fourteen years she kept her 'eyes almost constantly
fixed on the body, waiting for the happy moment of its re.
turn to life. Nor was this capricious affection for her dead
husband less tincured with jealousy, than that which he had
born to him while alive. She did not permit any of her female
attendants to approach the bed on which his corpse was
laid; {he would not susser any woman who did not belong
to her family to enter the apartment; and rather than grant
that privilege to a midwife, though a very aged one had been
chosen on purpose, she bore the princess Catharine without
any other assistance than that of her own domeftics-t.

A woman in such a state of mind was little capable of

governing a great kingdom; and Joanna, who made it her
sole employment to bewail the loss, and to pray for the foul
of her husband, would have thought her attention to public

Marian. lib. 28. c. z3.
P. Mart. Ep. 3i6.
t Mar. Hist. lib. 29. c. 3 & 5. P. Mart. Ep. 318, 324, 3z8,
3j .

affairs an impious neglect of those duties which Ihe owed to
him. But though the declined assuming the administration
herself, yet by a firange caprice ofjealoufy, /he refused to
commit it to any other person; and no intreaty of her sub-
jects could persuade her to name a regent, or even to sign
such papers as were necefiary for the execution ofjullice, and
the security of the kingdom.

The death of Philip threw the Catilians into the greate&

perplexity. It was necessary to appoint a regent, both on
account of Joanna's frenzy, and the infancy of her son; and
as there was not among the nobles any person so eminently
diflinguifhed, either by superiority in rank or abilities, as to
be called by the public voice to that high office, all natu-
rally turned their eyes either towards Ferdinand, or towards
the emperor Maximilian. The former claimed that dignity
as adminiffrator for his daughter, and by virtue of the testa.
,nent of Isabella; the latter thought himself the legal guard-
ian of his grandson, whom, on account of his mother's in-
firmity, he already confidered as king of Castile. Such of
the nobility as had lately been most aAtive in compelling
Ferdinand to resign the government of the kingdom, trem-
bled at the thoughts of his being restored so loon to his for-
ner dignity. They dreaded the return of a monarch, not
apt-to forgive, and who to those defets with which they
were already acquainted, added that resentment which the re-
membrance of their behaviour, and reflection upon his own
disgrace, must naturally have excited. Though none of
these objec&ions lay against Maximilian, he was a firanger
to the laws and manners of Catlile; he had not either troops
or money to support his pretensions; nor could his claim be
admitted without a public declaration of Joanna's incapa-
city for government, an indignity to which, notwithstanding
the notoriety of her distemper, the delicacy of the CaRfilians
could not bear the thoughts of subjecting her.

Don John Manuel, however and a few of the nobles, who
confidered themselves as most obnoxious to Ferdinand's dif.

pleasure, declared for Maximilian, and offered to support his
claim with all their interest. Maximilian always enterprising
and decisive in council, though feeble and dilatory in execu-
tion, eagerly embraced the offer. But a series of ineffecual
negotiations was the only consequence of this tranfadion.
The emperor, as usual, asserted his rights in a high strain,
promised a great deal, and performed nothing*.

A few days before the death of Philip, Ferdinand had

set out for Naples, that, by his own presence, he might put
an end, with greater decency, to the viceroyalty of the
great captain, whose important services, and cautious con-
duc, did not screen him from the suspicions of his jealous
master. Though an account of his for-in-law's death reach-
ed him at Porto-fino, in the territories of Genoa, he was so
solicitous to discover the secret intrigues which he supposed
the great captain to have been carrying on, and to establish
his own authority on a firm foundation in the Neapolitan
dominions, by removing him from the supreme command
there, that rather thandifcontinue his voyage he chose to leave
Caflile in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque, by this delay,
his obtaining poffeflion of the government of that kingdom t.

Nothing but the- great abilities and prudent conduct of

his adherents could have prevented the bad effets of this ab-
fence. At the head of these was Ximenes, archbifllop of
Toledo, who though he had been raised to that dignity by
Isabella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand, and the'
he could have no expectation of enjoying much power un-
der the adminiltration of a mafier little difpofed'to diftin.
guifh him by extraordinary marks of attention, was never-
thelefs so disinterested as to prefer the welfare of his country
before his own grandeur, and to declare, that Castile could
never be so happily governed as by a prince, whom long ex-
perience had renderd thoroughly acquainted with its true
interest. The zeal of Ximenes to bring over his country_

* Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 93.
t Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 85.
Vol. II. C

men to this opinion, induced him to lay aside somewhat of
his usual austerity and haughtiness. He condescended, on
this occasion, to court the difaffeced nobles, and employed
address, as well as arguments, to persuade them. Ferdi-
nand seconded his endeavours with great art; and by con-
ceflions to some of the grandees, by promises to others, and
by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained many of his
most violent opponentst. Though many cabals were form-
ed, and some commotions were excited, yet when Ferdi-
nand, after having fettled the-affairs of Naples, arrived in
Castile [Aug. 21, 1507], he entered upon the adminiitra-
tion without opposition. The prudence with which he ex-
ercifed his authority in that kingdom, equalled the good for-
tune by which he had recovered it. By a moderate, but steady
adminiitration, free from partiality and from resentment, he
reconciled the Castilians to his person, and secured to them,
entirely during the remainder of his life, as much domestic
tranquillity as was consistent with the genius of the feudal
government, which ftll fubfilfed among them in full vigour.

Nor was the preservation of tranquillity in his hereditary

kingdoms, the only obligation which the archduke Charles
owed to the wife regency of his grandfather; it was his
good fortune, during that period, to have very important
additions made to the dominions over which he was to
reign. On the coast of Barbary, Oran, and other conquets
of no small value, were annexed to the crown of Castile by
Cardinal Ximenes, who, with a spirit very uncommon in a
monk, led in person a numerous army against the Moors of
that country; and with a generosity and magnificence till
mrore singular, defrayed the whole expence of the expedition
out of his own revenuest. In Europe, Ferdinand, under
pretences no less frivolous than unjult; as well as by artifices
the nr.of fnameful and treacherous, expelled John d'Albret,
the lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre; and, feiz-

Zurita Annales de Arag. vi p. 87, 94, 109.
Mariana, lib. 29. c. o1. I ld. lib. z9. c. I8.

ing on that kingdom extended the limits of the Spanifih mo-
narchy from the Pyrenees on the one hand, to the frontiers
of Portugal on the othert.

It was not, however, the desire of aggrandizing the arch-

duke, which influenced Ferdinand in this, or in any other of
his ations. He was more apt to confider that young prince
as a rival, who might one day wrest out of his hands the go-
vernment of Castile, than as a grandson, for whose interest
he was entrusted with the administration. This jealousy
soon begot averiion, and even hatred, the symptoms of which
he was at no pains to conceal. Hence proceeded his immo-
derate joy when his young queen was delivered of a son,
whose life would have deprived Charles of the crowns of A-
ragon, Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon the untimely
death of that prince, he discovered, for the fame reason, an
excessive solicitude to have other children. This impatience
hastened, in all probability, the accession of Charles to the
crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to procure a blessing,
of which, from his advanced age, and the intemperance of
his youth, he could have little profpe&, had recourse to his
physicians, and by their prescription took one of those po-
tions, which are supposed to add vigour to the conltitution,
though they more frequently prove fatal to it. This was
its effeic on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of Ser-
dinand; for though he survived a violent disorder which it
at first occasioned, it brought on such an habitual languor
and deje&tion of mind, as rendered him averse from any fe-
rious attention to public affairs, and fond of frivolous amuse-
ments, on which he had not hitherto bellowed much time§.
Though he now despaired of having any son of his own, his
jealousy of the archduke did not abate, nor could he help
viewing him with that aversion which princes often bear to
their successors. In order to gratify this unnatural pallion,

t Mar. lib 30. c. II 2, , 19, 24.
§ Zurita Annales de Arag. vL p. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 53L Ar-
gcunola Anal. de Aragon, lib. i. p 4.

C

he made a will, appointing prince Ferdinand, who, having
beet bon and educated in Spain, ws much beloved by the
Spaniards, to be regent of all his kingdoms, until the ar-
rival of the archduke his brother; and by the fame deed he
fettled upon him the grand-mafterihip of the three military
orders. The former of these grants might have put it in the
power of the young prince to have disputed the throne with
hs brother; the latter would, in any event, have rendered
him almost independent of him.

Ferdinand retained to the last that jealous love of power,

which was so remarkable through his whole life. Unwil-
iEg even at the approach of death to admit a thought of
relinquiihing any portion of his authority, he removed con-
t;nually from place to place, in order to fly from his diftem-
per, or to forget it. Though his strength declined every
dav, none of his attendants durst mention his condition;
nor would he admit his father confessor, who thought such
ilence criminal and unchristian, into his presence. At laR
the danger became so imminent, that it could be no longer
concealed. Ferdinand received the intimation with a de-
cent fortitude, and touched, perhaps, with compunction at
the injiftice which he had done his grandson, or influ-
enced by the honest remonstrances of Carvajal, Zapata, and
Vargas, his moi ancient and faithful counsellors, who repre-
feited to him, that by inveRting prince Ferdinand with the
regency, he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by beRlowing on him the grand-malferfhip-of
the military orders, would frip the crown of its noblest or-
nament and chief strength, he consented to alter his will
vith refpe&t to both these particulars. By a new deed he
left Charles the sole heir of all his dominions, and allotted
to prince Ferdinand, instead of that throne of which he
thought himself almost secure, an inconsiderable eftablifl.
ment of fifty thousand ducats a year*. He died a few

Mar. Hist. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita. Annales de Arag. vi 40r.
P. Mart. Ep. 65, 566. Argenfola Annales de Arag. lib. i. p. iX.

hours after signing this will, on the twenty-third day of
January, one thousand five hundred and sixteen.

Charles, to whom such a noble inheritance descended by

his death, was near the. full age offixteen. He had hither-
to rcfided in the Low Countries, his paternal dominions.
Margaret of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the
lifter of Edward IV. of England, and widow of Charles the
Bold, two princesses of great virtue and abilities, had the
care of forming his early youth. Upon the death of his fa-
ther, the Flemings committed tie government of the Low
Countries to his grandfather, the emperor Maximilian, witl
the name rather than the authority of regentt. Max-
imilian made choice of William de Croy lord of Chievres to
Superintend the education of the young prince his grand-
son*. That nobleman possesed, in an eminent degree, the

t Pontius Heuterus Rcrum Aufiriacarum, lib. xv. Lov. 1549.
lib. vii. c. 2. p. 155.

* The French historians, upon the authority of M. de Bellay,

M/em. p. r1. hare unanimously afitrted, that Philip, by his last
will, having appointed the king of France to have the direction
of his son's education, Louis XII. with a difinterefiednefsfuitablc
ti the confidence reposed in him, named Chievres for that office.
Even the prcfident Hlenaut has adopted this opinion. Abrege
Chron. A. D. 1507. Varillas, in his usual manner, pretends to
have seen Philip's teflament. Prac. de l'Education des Princes, p.
16. But the Spanish, German, and Flcmifh historians concur in
contradicting this assertion of tie French authors. It appears
from Heuterus, a contemporary Flenifh historian of great autho-
rits, that Louis XII. by consenting to the marriage of Germaine
de Foix swith Ferdinand, had loft much of that confidence which
Philip once placed in him; that this disgust was increased by the
French king s giving in marriage to the count of Angouleme his
eldest daughter, whom he had formerly betrothed to Charles,
Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. v. I 1: That the French, a hort time be-
fore Philip's death, had violated the peace which fubfilted between
them and the Flemings, and Philip had complained of this injury,.
and was ready to relent it. Heuter. ibid. All theli circumftan-
ces renw.er it improbable that Philip, who made his wilt a- few
days before he died, Heuter. p. 15 . should commit the education
of his fbn to Louis XII. In confirmation of these plausible con-
jciiures, positive testimony can be produced. It appears fronr
f;cuterus, that Philip, when he set out for Spain,. had intrufled
Chievrcs both with the care of his son's education, and with the go-
vwrnment of his dominions in the Low Countries. Heuter, lib. vii.

C3.

talents which fitted him for such an important office, and
dischargcd the duties of it with great fidelity. Under
Chievres, Adrian of Utrecht aded as preceptor. This pre-
ferment, which opened his way to the highest dignities an
ecclesiastic can attain, he owed not to his birth, for that was
extremely mean; nor to his interest, for he was a ftranget
to the arts of a court: but to the opinion which his courn-
trv-nen entertained of his learning. He was indeed no in-
considerable proficient in those frivolous sciences, which,
during several centuries, assumed the name of philosophy,
and had publiined a commentary, which was highly esteem-
ed, upon Tbe Boso of Ssentence, a famous treatise of Petrus
Lombardus, confidered at that time as the standard system
of metaphyficai theology. But whatever admiration these
procured him in an illiterate age, it was soon found that a
man accustomed to the retirement of a college, unacquaint-
ed w'th the world, and without any tincure of taste or ele-

nRCer, was by no means qualified for rendering science a-

greenble to a young prince. Charles, accordingly, disco-
rrcd an early aversion to learning, and an exceffivefondnefl
for those violcnt and martial exercises, to excel in which
r-as the chief pride, and almost the only study of persons of
rank in that age. Chievres encouraged this taste, either
from a deiire of gaining his pupil by indulgence, or from

p. 53. That an attempt was made, soon after Philip's death, to
have the emperor Maximilian appointed regent, during the mino-
rity of his grandson; but this being opposed, Chievres seems to
hive continued to dicfharge both the offices which Philip had
committed to him. Heut. ibid. I53-S55. That in the begin-
ripg of the year og18, the Flemings invited Maximilian to ac-
cept of the regency; to which he consented, and appointed his
da.ghter, Mbugaret, together with a council of Flemiugs, to exer-
c:e :h, fiprcme authority, when he himself should, at any time
Fe abscnt. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and Adrian
trcech: as preceptor to his son. Heut. ibid 155-157. What
H.cterus relates with refpec to this matter is confirmed by Mo-
rngus in Vita Adriani apud Analeda Cafp. Burmanni de Adriano,
eap. o1; by Barlndus Chronic. Brabant. ibid. p. 5i; and by Ha-
raeus A.nal Bab. vol. ii. 5z, &c.

too flight an opinion of the advantages of literary accom-
plilhments*. He inftru&ed him, however, with great care
in the arts of government; he made him study the history
not only of his own kingdoms, but of those with which they
were connected; he accutfomed him, from the time of his
afluming the government of Slanders in the year one thou-
sand five hundred and fifteen, to attend to business; he per-
fuaded him to peruse all papers relating to public affairs;
to be present at the deliberations of his privy-counfellors,
and to propose to them himself those matters, concerning
which he required their opinion[. From such an educa.
tion, Charles contrated habits of 'gravity and recolle&ion
which scarcely suited his time of life. The first openings
of his genius did not indicate that superiority which its ma-
turer age displayed:. He did not discover in his youth
the impetuosity of spirit which commonly ushers in an ac-
tive and enterprising manhood. Nor did his early obfe-
quioufnefs to Chievres, and his other favourites, promise
that capacious and decisive judgment, which afterwards di-
reeted the affairs of one half of Europe. But his subjects,
dazzled with the external accomplishments of a graceful si-
gure and manly address, and viewing his charater with that
partiality which is always shewn to princes during their
youth, entertained sanguine hopes of his adding lufire to
those crowns which descended to him by the death of Ser-
dinand.

The kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from the view

which I have given of their political constitution, were at
that time in a situation which required an administration no
lcfs vigorous than prudent. The feudal institutions, which
had been introduced into all its different provinces by the
Goths, the Suevi, and the Vandals, subsisted in great force.

* Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 9I. Struvii Corpus Hiif. Germ. ii.

967. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr.lib. vii. c. 3. p. 157.

+ Memoires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 15 73. p. ii. P. Heuter. lib.
viii. c. i. p. 184.

P. Martyr, Ep. 569-655.

The nobles, who were powerful and warlike, had long pof.
.fefed all the exorbitant privileges which these institutions
veiled in their order. The cities in Spain were more nu.
merous and more considerable, than the genius of feudal go.
vernment, naturally unfavourable to commerce and to re.
gular police, seemed to admit. The personal rights, and
political influence, which the inhabitants of there cities had
acquired, were extensive. The royal prerogative, circum-
feribed by the privileges of the nobility, and by the preten.
sions of the people, was confined within very narrow limits.
Under such a form of government, the principles ofdifcord
were many; the bond of union was extremely feeble; and
Spain felt not only all the inconveniencies occasioned by the
defets in the feudal system, but was exposed to disorders a-
riting from the peculiarities in its own conifkution.

During the long adminiltration of Ferdinand, no internal

commotion. it is true, had arisen in Spain. His superior a-
bilities had enabled him to relfrain the turbulence of the no.
bles, and to moderate the jealousy of the commons. By
the wisdom of hs domestic government, by the sagacity with
which he conduced his foreign operations, and by the high
opinion that his fubjefs entertained of both, he had preferv-
ed among them a degree of tranquillity, greater than was
natural to a conffitution, in which the feeds of discord and
disorder were so copiously mingled. But, by the death of
Ferdinand, these restraints were at once withdrawn;. and
faction and discontent, from being long repressed, were ready
to break out with fiercer animosity.

In order to prevent these evils, Ferdinand had in his last

will taken a most prudent precaution, by appointing cardi-
nal Ximenes, archbiihop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Ca-
stile, until the arrival of his grandson in Spain. The fingu-
lar character of this man, and the extraordinary qualities
which marked him out for that office at such a juncture,
merit a particular description. He was descended of an ho-
nourable, not of a wealthy family; and the circumstances of

his parents, as well as his own inclinations, having determin-
ed him to enter into the church, he early obtained benefices
of great value, and which placed him in the way of the high-
eRt preferment. All these, however, he renounced at once;
and after undergoing a very severe noviciate, assumed the
habit of St. Francis in a monastery of Obfervantine friars,
one of the moRt rigid orders in the Romith church. There
he soon became eminent for his uncommon austerity of man-
ners, and for those excesses of fuperifitious devotion, which
are the proper charateriftics of the monastic life.' But not-
withfianding these extravagances, to which weak and enthu-
fiaftic minds alone are usually prone, his understanding, na-
turally penetrating and decisive, retained its full vigour, and
acquired him such great authority in his own order, as raised
him to be their provincial. His reputation for fanaity soon
procured him the office of father-confeffor to queen Isabella,
which he accepted with the utmost reluaance. He preferv-
ed in a court the fame austerity of manners which had di-
ftinguilhed him in the cloister. He continued to make all
his journies on foot; he subsisted only upon alms; his adt
of mortification were as severe as ever, and his penances as
rigorous. Isabella, pleated with her choice, conferred on
him, not long after, the archbishopric of Toledo, which,
next to the papacy, is the richest dignity in the church of
Rome. This honour he declined with a firmness, which no-
thing but the authoritative injuncion of the pope was able
to overcome. Nor did this height of promotion change his
manners. Though obliged to display in public that magni-
ficence which became his station, he himself retained his mo-
naRic severity. Under his pontifical robes he conRfantly
wore the coarse frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he
used to patch with his own hands. He at no time used li-
nen; but was commonly clad in hair-cloth. He slept al-
vays in his habit, most frequently on the ground, or on
boards, rarely in a bed. He did not tafle any of the delica-
cies which appeared at his table, but satisfied himself with

that simple diet which the rule of his order preferibed*.
Notwithstanding these peculiarities, so opposite to the man-
ners of the world, he possessed a thorough knowledge of its
affairs; and no sooner was he called by his station, and by
the high opinion which Ferdinand and Isabella entertained
of hm, to take a principal share in the administration, than
he displayed talents for business, which rendered the fame
of his wisdom equal to that of his san&ity., His political
conduct, remarkable for the boldness and originality of all
his plans, flowed from his real character, and partook both
of its virtues and its defects. His extensive genius fuggeb
e) to him fehemes vai and magnificent. Conscious of the
integrity of his intentions, he pursued these with unremit.
ting and undaunted firmness. AccuRomed from his early
youth to mortify his own pafiions, he ihewed little indulgence
towards those of other men. Taught by his sysem of reli.
gion to check even his moil innocent desires, he was the ene-
my of every thing to which he could affix the name of ele-
gance or pleasure. Though free from any suspicion of cru-
lcty, he discovered, in all his commerce with the world, a
severe inflexibility of mind, and austerity of charader, pecu.
liar to the monastic profefion, and which can hardly be con-
ceived in a country where that is unknown.

Such was the man to whom Ferdinand committed the

regency of CaRile; and though Ximenes was then near four.
score, and perfe&ly acquainted with the labour and difficul-
ty of the office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal for
the public good, prompted him to accept of it without he-
fitation. Adrian of Utrecht, who had been feat into Spain
a few months before the death of Ferdinand, produced full
powers from the archduke to assume the name and authori-
ty of regent, upon the demise of his grandfather; but such
w.3 the aversion of the Spaniards to the government of a
ifranger, and so unequal the abilities of the two competi-

Hiftoire de 1'adminiflration du Card. Ximen. par Mlich. Baa-
dier, 4to. I63j, p. 13.

tors, that Adrian's claim would at once have been rejected,
if Ximenes himself, from complaisance to his new master,
had not consented to acknowledge him as regent, and to
carry on the government in conjunEtion with him. By this,
however, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal. Xi-
menes, though he treated him with great decency, and even
refped, retained the whole power in his own handst.

The cardinal's first care was to observe the motions of the
nfant Don Ferdinand, who, having been flattered with so
ear a profpe& of supreme power, bore the disappointment
f his hopes with greater impatience than a prince at a pe-
iod of life so early could have been supposed to feel. Xi-
nenes, under pretence of providing more effecually for his
afety, removed him from Guadaloupe, the place in which
e had been educated, to Madrid, where he fixed the refi-
ence of the court. There he was under the cardinal's own
e, and his condu&, with that of his domestics, was watch-
d with the utmost attentiong.
The first intelligence he received from the Low-Countries,
ave greater disquiet to the cardinal, and convinced him
ow difficult a talk it would be to condu& the affairs of an
nexperienced prince, under the influence of counsellors un-
cquainted with the laws and manners of Spain. No soon-
r did the account of Ferdinand's death reach Brufiels, than
'harles, by the advice of his Flemish ministers, resolved to
ifnime the title of king. By the laws of Spain, the sole
ight to the crowns, both of Castile and of Aragon, belong-
l to Joanna; and though her infirmities disqualified her
rom governing, this incapacity had not been declared by
n) public a& of the Cortes in either kingdom: so that the
paniards confidered this resolution, not only as a direc vi-
lation of their privileges, but as an unnatural usurpation in
son on the prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her

t Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p. iso. fnl. Compl. 1569.
5 Miniana Contin. Marianae, lib. i. c. 2. Baudier Hist. de Xi-
enes, p. 118.

present unhappy situation, he manifeted a less delicate re-
gard than her fubjets had always expressed*. The Flemish
court, however, having prevailed both on the pope and on
the emperor to address letters to Charles as king of Castile;
the former of whom, it was pretended, had a right, as head
of the church, and the latter, as head of the empire, to con-
ser this title; inftru&ions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail
on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes, though he
had earnestly remonstrated against the measure, as no less
unpopular than unnecessary, resolved to exert all his autho.
rity and credit in carrying it into execution, and immediate.
ly assembled such of the nobles as were then at court.
What Charles required was laid before them; and when,
infead of complying with his demands, they began to mur-
mur against such an unprecedented encroachment on their
privileges, and to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their
oath of allegiance to her, Ximenes hastily interposed, and,
with that firm and decisive tone which was natural to him,
told them that they were not called now to deliberate, but
to obey; that their sovereign did not apply to them for ad.
vice, but expeEted fubmifion; and ", this day," added he,
"t Charles {hall be proclaimed king of Castile in Madrid;
and the reft of the cities, I doubt not, will follow its exam.
ple." On the spot he gave orders for-that purpofet [A.
pril 3]; and notwithstanding the novelty of the pracice,
and the secret discontents of many perssons of diftindion,
Charles's title was universally recognized. In Aragon,
where the privileges of the subjec were more extensive, and
the abilities as well as authority of the archbishop of Sara-
goffa, whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, were far infe-
rior to those of Ximenes, the fame obsequiousness to the
wil of Charles did not appear, nor was he acknowledged
there under any other character but that of prince, until his
arrival in Spain §.

*P. Mat. Ep. 568.

Gometius, p. s15, &c. Baudier Hist. de Ximen. p. Iz1.
P. Mart. Ep. 57z.

Ximenes, though pofleffed only of delegated power, which

from his advanced age, he could not expect to enjoy long,
assumed, together with the charaaer of regent, all the ideas
natural to a monarch, and adopted schemes for extending
the regal authority, which he pursued with as much intrepi-
dity and ardour, is if he himself had been to reap the advan-
tages resulting from their success. The exorbitant privi-
leges of the Castilian nobles circumscribed the prerogative
of the prince within very narrow limits. These privileges
the cardinal confidered as so many unjust extortions from
the crown, and determined to abridge them. Dangerous
as the attempt was, there were circumstances in his situation
which promised him greater success. than any king of Castile
could have expected. His ftrit and prudent economy of
his archiepiscopal revenues furnished him with more ready
money than the crown could at any time command; the
fan&Eity of his manners, his charity and munificence, render-
ed him the idol of the people; and the nobles themselves,
not fufpefsing any danger from him, did not observe his mo-
tions with the fame jealous attention, as they would have
watched those of one of their monarchs.

Immediately upon his acceflion to the regency, several of -

the nobles, fancying that the reins of government would of
consequence be somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their
vaflals, and to prosecute, by force of arms, private quarrels
and pretensions, which the authority of Ferdinand had o-
bliged them to dissemble, or to relinquish. But Ximenes,
who had taken into pay a good body of troops, opposed and
defeated all their designs with unexpeaed vigour.and facili-
ty; and though he did not treat the authors of these difor-
ders with any cruelty, he forced them to aas of submission,
extremely mortifying to the haughty spirit of Castilian gran-
dees.

But while the cardinal's attacks were confined to indivi-

duals, and every aA of rigour was justified by the appearance
of neceflity, founded on the forms ofjutice, and tempered

Vol. II. D

with a mixture of lenity, there was scarcely room forjealou.
(y or complaint. It was not so with his next measure,
which, by firiking at a privilege essential to the nobility,
gave a general alrm to the whole order. By the feudal
contitution, the military power was lodged in the hands of
the nobles, and men of an inferior condition were called into
the field only as their vassals, and to follow their banners.
A king, with scanty revenues, and a limited prerogative;
depended on these potent barons, in all his operations. It
was with their forces he attacked his enemies, and with them
he defended his kingdom. While at the head of troops at-
tached warmly to their own immediate lords, and accustom-
ed to obey no other commands, his authority was precari-
ous, and his efforts feeble. From this state Ximenes refolv-
ed to deliver the crown; and as mercenary Standing armies
were unknown under the feudal government, and would
have been odious to a martial and generous people, he issued
a proclamation, commanding every city in Caflile to enroll
a certain number of its burgesses, in order that they might
be trained to the nfe of arms on Sundays and holidays; he
engaged-to provide officers to command them at the public
expence; and as an encouragement to the private men, pro-
mifed them an exemption from all taxes and impositions.
The frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa, and the
necessity of having some force always ready to oppose them,
furnished a plausible pretence for this innovation. The ob-
je& really in view was to secure the king a body of troops
independent of his barons, and which might serve to countet-
balance their power§. The nobles were not flow in per-
ceiving what was his intention, and saw how effetually the
scheme which he had adopted would accomplish his end;
but as a measure which had the pious appearance of refiting
the progress of the infidels was extremely popular, and as
any opposition to it, arising from their order alone, would
have been imputed wholly to interested motives, they en-

Mhjiana Continuatio Mariann, fol. Hag. 1733. p. 3.

deavoured to excite the cities themselves torefufe obedience,
and to inveigh against the proclamation as inconsistent with
their charters and privileges. In consequence of their infti-
gations, Burgos, Valladolid, and several other cities, rose in
open mutiny. Some of the grandees declared themselves
their protectors. Violent remonstrances were presented to
the king. His Flemilh counsellors were alarmed. Ximcnes
alone continued firm and undaunted; and partly by terror,
partly by entreaty; by force in some instances, and by for-
bearance in others; he prevailed on all the refratory cities
to comply§. During his administration, he continued to
execute his plan with vigour; but soon after his death it
was entirely dropped.

His success in this scheme for reducing the exorbitant

power of the nobility, encouraged him to attempt a dimi-
nution of their possessions, which were no less exorbitant.
During the contests and disorders inseparable from the feu-
dal government, the nobles, ever attentive to their own in-
tereit, and taking advantage of the weakness or distress of
their monarchs, had seized some parts of the royal demesnes,
obtained grants of others, and having gradually wrested al-
molt the whole out of the hands of the prince, had annexed
them to their own estates. The titles, by which most of
the grandees held thefc lands, were extremely defective; it
was from some successful usurpation, which the crown had
been too feeble to dispute, that many derived their only
claim to poffefiion. An inquiry carried back to the origin'
of these encroachments, which were almost coeval with the
feudal fyfiem, was impracticable; and as it would have strip-
ped every nobleman in Spain of great part of his lands, it
mull have excited a general revolt. Such a ftep was too
bold, even for the enterprising genius of Ximenes. He
confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning
with the pensions granted during that time, refused to make
any farther payment, because all right to them expired with

§ P. Mart. Ep. rS6, &c. Gometius, p. I60, &c.

Dz

his life. He then called to account such as had acquired
crown lands under the administration of that monarch, and at
once refimed whatever he bad alienated. The effects of these
revocations extended to many persons of high rank; for tho'
Ferdinand was a prince of little generosity, yet he and Ifa.
bella having been raited to the throne of Castile by a power-
ful faction of the nobles, they were obliged to reward the
zeal of their adherents with great liberality, and the royal
demesnes were their only fund for that purpose. The addi.
tion made to the revenue of the.crown by these revocations,
together with his own frugal economy, enabled Ximenes
not only to discharge all the debts which Ferdinand had
left, and to remit considerable fums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to establish magazines not
only more numerous, but better furnished with artillery,
arms, and warlike fores, than Spain had ever possessed in a-
ny former age*. The prudent and disinterested application
of these fums, was a full apology to the people for the ri-
gour with which they were exated.

The nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks, began to

think of precautions for the safety of their order. Many
cabals were formed, loud complaints were uttered, and def-
perate resolutions taken; but before they proceeded to ex-
tremities, they appointed some of their number to examine
the powers in consequence of which the cardinal exercised
ads of such high authority. The admiral of Castile, the
duke de Infantado, and the Conde de Benevento, grandees
of the RfrRt rank, were entrusted with this commifiion. Xi-
n.enes received them with cold civility, and in answer to
their demand, produced the testament of Ferdinand by
which he was appointed regent, together with the ratifica-
tion of that deed by Charles. To both these they objected;
and he endeavoured to establish their validity. As thecon-
verfation grew warm, he led them insensibly towards a bal-
cony, froi which they had a view of a large body of troops

f Flehier Vie de Ximen. ii. 600.

under arms, and of a formidable train of artillery. " Be-
hold," fays he, pointing to there and raising his voice,
4' the powers which I have received from his Catholic maje-
fiy. With these I govern Castile; and with these I will
govern it, until the king your mailer and mine takes posses.
sion of his kingdom§." A declaration so bold and haugh-
ty silenced them, and astonished their associates. To take
arms against a man aware of his danger, and prepared for
his defence, was what despair alone would ditate. All
thoughts of a general confederacy against the Cardinal's ad-
ministration were laid aside; and except from some flight
commotions, excited by the private resentment of particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no interruption.

It was not only from the opposition of the Spanish nobi-

lity that obstacles arose to the execution of the cardinal's
schemes; he had a Constant ftirggle to maintain with the
Flemish ministers, who presuming upon their favour with the
yoing king, aimed at direcing the affairs of Spain, as well
as those of their own country. Jealous of the great abili-
ties and independent spirit of Ximenes, they confidered him
rather as a rival who might circumscribe their power, than
as a minister, who by his prudence and vigour was adding
to the grandeur and authority of their master. Every corn.
plaint againlt his admininiration was listened to with plea-
fire by the courtiers in the Low-Countries. Unnecessary
obftruEtions were thrown by their means in the way of all
his measures; and though they could not, either with de-
cency or safety, deprive him of the office of regent, they en-
deavoured to lessen his authority by dividing it. They soon
discovered that Adrian of Utrecht, already johted with him
in office, had neither genius nor spirit sufficient to give the
least check to his proceedings; and therefore Charles, by
;heir advice, added to the commission of regency La Chau,
a Flemish gentleman, and afterwards Amcrftorf, a nobleman
of Holland; the former diftinguilhed for his address, the

§ Flech. ii. 'I D. Ferrera3, lfl. Gii. 432

D 3

latter for his firmness. Ximenes, though no itranger to the
malevolent intention of the Flemish courtiers, received these
new aftociates with all the external marks ofdiftinaion due
to the office with which they were inveRted; but when they
came to enter upon business, he abated nothing of that air
es superiority with which he had treated Adrian, and till
retained-the sole direcion of affairs. The Spaniards, more
averse, perhaps, than any other people, to the government
of itrangers, approved of all his efforts to preserve his own
authority. Even the nobles, influenced by this national pas-
lion, and forgetting their jealousies and discontents, chose
rather to fee the supreme power in the hands of one of their
countrymen, whom they feared, than in those of foreigners,
whom they hated.

Ximenes, though engaged in such great schemes of do-z

r.eftic policy, and enbarraffed by the artifices and intrigues
of the Flemish minifRers, had the burden of two foreign wars
to ilipp(rt. The one was in Navarre, which was invaded
bc i's . .ortunate monarch John d'Albret. The death of
Ferd:nal)d, the absence of Charles, the difeord and difaffec-
tion wl;ch reigned among the Spanish nobles, seemed to
prrfci t him with a favourable opportunity of recovering his
dominions. The cardinal's vigilance, however, defeated a
i. rafre so wcl' concerted. As he foresaw the danger to
.hich tihat kingdom might be exposed, one of his first aAs
of adrnitiiration was to order thither a considerable body of
troops. While the king was employed with one part of his
army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port, Villalva, an offi-
cer of great experience and courage, attacked the other. by
surprise, and cut it to pieces. The king inltantly retreated
with precipitation, and an end was put to the war*. But
as Navaire was filled at that time with towns and castles

igh.ily fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being un-
able to refiit an enemy, served only to furnish him with places
-, rcr.rat; Ximenes, always bold and decisive in his mea-

P. Mart. Ep. 57C.

fures, ordered every one of these to be dismantled, except
Pampeluna, the fortifications of which he proposed to ren.
der very firong. To this uncommon precaution, Spain owes
the possession of Navarre. The French, since that period,
have often entered, and have as often over-run the open coun-
try; while they were exposed to all the inconveniencies at-
tending an invading army, the Spaniards have easily drawn
troops from the neighbouring provinces to oppose them;
and the French having no place of any strength to which
they could retire, have been obliged repeatedly to abandon
their conquest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

The other war which he carried on in Africa, againil the

famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, who, from a private
corsair, raised himself, by his singular valour and address, to
be king of Algiers and Tunis, was far from being equally
successful. The ill conduct of the Spanilh general, and the
rash valour of his troops, presented Barbarossa with an easy
viEtory. Many perilhed in the battle, more in the retreat,
and the remainder returned into Spain covered with infamy.
The magnanimity, however, with which the cardinal bore
this disgrace, the only one he experienced during his admi-
niilration, added new lustre to his charactert. Great com-
pofure of temper under a disappointment, was not expe&ted
from a man so remarkable for the eagerness and impatience
with which he urged on the execution of all his schemes.

This disaster was soon forgotten; while the condua of

the Flemifl court proved the cause of constant uneasiness,
not only to the cardinal, but to the whole Spanifl nation.
All the great qualities of Chievres, the prime minister and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with an ignoble
and fordid avarice. The accession of his marter to the crown
of Spain, opened a new and copious source for the gratifica-
tion of this paflion. During the time of Charles's residence
in Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders to offices or to fa-
vour resorted thither. They soon discovered that, without

t Gometius, lib. vi. p. I79.

the patronage of Chievres, it was vain to hope for prefer-
ment; nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing his protetion. Great fums of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal, and dig
poed of to the highet bidder. After the example of Chie-
vres, the inferior Flemish ministers engaged in this traffic,
which became as general and avowed, as it was infamous *.
The Spaniards were filled with rage when they beheld of.
sices of great importance to the welfare of their country,
set to sale by strangers, unconcerned for its honour or its
happiness. Ximenes, disinterested in his whole adminiflra.
tion, and a franger, from his native grandeur of mind, to
the passion of avarice, inveighed with the utmost boldness
against the venality of the Flemings. He represented to
the king, in strong terms, the murmurs and indignation
which their behaviour excited among a free and hgh-fpirit-
ed people, and besought him to set out without loss of time
for Spain, that, by his presence, he might dissipate the
clouds which were gathering all over the kingdoms.

Charles was fully sensible that he had delayed too long to

take possession of his dominions in Spain. Powerful obfta-.
cks, however, flood in his way, and detained him in the
Low-Countries. The war which the league of Cambray
had kindled in Italy, still ubifted; though during its course,
the armies of al the parties engaged in it had changed their
destination and their objets. France was now in alliance
with Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years carried on
hostilities against France, their original ally, to the valour
of whose troops the confederacy had been indebted in a
great measure for its success. Together with his kingdoms,
Ferdinand transmitted this war to his grandson; and there
was reason to expec that Maximilian, always fond of new
enterprises, would persuade the young monarch to enter in-
to it with ardour. But the Flemings, who had long pof-

·* niani , Conin. 1. i. c. a. t P. Mart. Ep. 576.

fefed an extensive commerce, which, during the league of
Cambray, had grown to a great height upon the ruins of
the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with France; and
Chievres, sagacious to dicfern the true. intereif of his coun-
try, and not warped on this occasion by his love of wealth,
warmly declared for maintaining peace with the French na-
tion. Francis I. destitute of allies,- and solicitous to secure
Iis late conquests in Italy by a treaty, listened with joy to
the firfl overtures of accommodation. Chiewres himself con-
duEed the negotiation in the name of Charles. Gouffier
appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each ofthen had
presided over the education of the prince whom he rrepr
sented. They had both adopted the fame pacific fytemjn
and were equally persuaded that the union of the two mon-
archs was the happiest event for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negotiation did not
languilh. A few days after opening their conferences at
Noyonrthey concluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual
defence between the two monarchs [Aug. 13], the chief
articles in which were, that Francis lhould give in marriage
to Charles his eldest daughter, the princess Louise, an in-
sant of a year .old, and as her dowry, should make over to
him all his claims and pretensions upon the kingdom of
Naples; that, in consideration of Charles's being already in
poffeflion of Naples, he should, until the accomplishment of
the marriage, pay an hundred thousand crowns a-year to
the French king; and the half of that fum annually as long
as the princess had no children; that when Charles shall ar-
rive in Spain, the heirs of the king of Navarre may repre-
sent to him their right to that kingdom; and if, after exa-
mining their claim, he does not give them fatisfafion, Fran-
cis shall be at liberty to assist them with all his forces*.
This alliance not only united Charles and Francis, but o-
bliged Maximilian, who was unable alone to cope with the
lrciich and Venetians, to enter into a treaty with those

* Leonard Recueil des Traitez, tom. iL 69.

powers, which put a final period to the bloody and tedious
war that the league of Cambray had occasioned. Europe
enjoyed a few years of universal tranquillity, and was indebt.
ed for that blefing to two princes, whose rivalihip and am-
bition kept it in perpetual discord and agitation during the
remainder of their reigns.

By the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe paflage

into Spain. It was not, however, the interest of his Flemish
ministers, that he ihould visit that kingdom soon. While
he resided in Slanders, the revenues of the Spanish crown
were spent there, and they engrofied, without any compe.
titors, all the effes of their monarch's generosity; their
country became the feat of government, and all favours
were dispensed by them. Of all these advantages they run
the riik of feeing themselves deprived, from the moment
that their sovereign entered Spain. The Spaniards would
naturally assume the dire&ion of their own affairs; the
Low-Countries would be confidered only as a province of
that mighty monarchy; and they who now distributed the
favours of the prince to others, muff then be content to re-
ceive them from the hands of itrangers. But what Chiev.
res chiefly wished to avoid was, an interview between the
king and Ximenes. On the one hand, the wisdom, the in.
tegrity, and the magnanimity of that prelate, gave him a
wonderful ascendant over the minds of men; and it was ex.
tremely probable, that there great qualities, added to the
reverence due to his age and office, would command the re.
fpe& of a young prince, who, capable of noble and gene.
rous sentiments himself, would, in proportion to his admi-
ration of the cardinal's virtues, lelfen his deference towards
persons of another charader. Or, on the other hand, il
Charles ihould allow his Flemilh favourites to retain all the
influence over his councils which they at present poflefied:
it was easy to foresee that the cardinal would remoiftrat<
loudly against such an indignity to the Spanish nation, ani
vindicate the rights of his country with the fame intrepidit)

and success, with which he had aflerted the prerogatives of
the crown. For these reasons, all his Flemifli counsellors
combined to retard his departure; and Charles, unfufpici-
ous, from want of experience, and fond of his native coun-
try, suffered himself to be unnecessarily detained in the Ne-
therlands a whole year after signing the treaty of Noyon.

The repeated entreaties of-Ximenes, the advice of his

grandfather Maximilian, and the impatient murmurs of his
Spanilh subje&s, prevailed'on him at last to embark.' He
was attended not only by Chievres, his prime minister, but
by a numerous and splendid train of the Flemiih nobles,
fond of beholding the grandeur, or of fharng in the bounty
of their prince. After a dangerous voyage, he landed at
Villa Viciofa, in the province of Asturias [Sept. 13], and
was received with such loud acclamations of joy, as a new
monarch, whose arrival was so ardently desired, had reason
to expe&. The Spanilh nobility retorted to their sovereign
from all parts of the kingdom, and displayed a magnificence
which the Flemings were unable to emulate*.

Ximenes, who confidered the presence of the king as the

greatest blefling to his dominions, was advancing towards the
coast, as fast as the infirm ftate-of his health would permit,
in order to receive him. During his regency, and notwith-
flanding his extreme old age, he had abated, in no degree,
the rigour or frequency of his mortifications; and to there
he added such laborious assiduity in business, as would have
worn out the most youthful and vigorous'conftitution. E-
very day he employed several hours in devotion; he cele-
brated mass in person; he even allotted some space for ftu-
dy. Notwithstanding these occupations, he regularly at-
tended the council; he received and read all papers present-
ed to him; he di&ated letters and inftru&ions; and took
under his infpedtion all' business, civil, ecclesiastical, or mili-
tary. Every, moment of his time was filled up with some
serious employment. The only amusement in which he in-

P. Mart. Ep. 599, 6oi.

dulged himfetf, by way of relaxation after business, was to
canvass, with a few friars, and other divines, some intricate
article in fcholatic theology. Wafted by such a course of
life, the infirmities of age daily grew upon him. On his
journey, a violent disorder seized him at Bos Equillos, at-
tended with uncommon symptoms, which his followers con-
fidered as the effe& of poison*, but could not agree whe.
ther the crime ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemilh courtiers.
This accident obliged him t6 Ptop .ihort, he wrote to
Charles, and with his usual boldness advised him, to dismiss
all the strangers in his train, whose numbers and credit gave
offence already to the Spaniards, and would ere long alienate
the affetions of the whole people. At the fame time he
eaeftly desired to have an interview with the king, that he
might inform him of the fate of the nation, and the tem-
per of his fubjeas. To prevent this, not only the Flemings,
but the Spaniih grandees, employed all their address, and
induftrionfly kept Charles at a distance from Aranda, the
place to which the cardinal had removed. Through their
suggestions, every measure that he recommended was re-
jeeted; theutmoft care was taken to make him feel, and to
point out to the whole nation, that his power was on the
decline; even in things purely trivial, such a choice was al-
ways made, as was deemed most disagreeable to him. Xi.
menes did not bear this treatment with his usual fortitude
of spirit. Conscious of his own integrity and merit, he ex-
peaed a more greatful return from a prince, to whom he de-
livered a kingdom more flourilhing than it had been in any
former age, together with authority more extensive and bet.
ter eftablilhed than the most illustrious of his ancestors had
ever possessed. He could not, therefore, on many occasions,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and complaints
He lamented the fate of his country, and foretold the cala.
mities which it would susser from the infolenee, the rapaci.

Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3.

oufnefs, and ignorance of strangers. While his mind was
agitated by these paflions, he received a letter from the king,
in which, after a few cold and formal expressions of regard,
he was allowed to retire to his diocese; that after a life of
such continued labour, he miglt end his days in tranquilli-
ty. This message proved fatal to Ximenes. His haugh-
ty mind, it is probable, could not survive disgrace; perhaps
his generous heart could not bear the profpet of the mis-
fortunes ready to fall on his country. Whichsoever of
these opinions we embrace, certain it is that he expired a
few hours after reading the letter * tNov. 8.] The varie-
ty, the grandeur, and the success of his schemes, during a
regency of only twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether
his sagacity in council, his prudence in condu&, or his bold.
ness in execution, deserve the greatest praise. His reputa-
tion is still high in Spain, not only for wisdom, but for fanc.
tity; and he is the only prime minister mentioned in hifto
ry, whom his contemporaries reverenced as a faints, and to
whom the people under his government ascribed the power
of working miracles.

Soon after the death of Ximenes, Charles tnade his pu-

blic entry, with great pomp, into Valladolid, whither he
had summoned the Cortes of Caltile. Though he assumed
on all occasions the name of king, that title had never been
acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards confidered
Joanna as poflefled of the sole right to the crown, and no
example ofa son's having enjoyed the title of king during
the life of his parents occurring in their hiRory, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refpef for ancient forms, and
that aversion to innovation, which are conspicuous in po-
pular assemblies. The presence,. however, of their prince,
the address, the artifices, and the threats of his ministers,
prevailed on them at last to proclaim him king, in conjunc.

Marfollier, Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gomeriusf lib. vii. so6,

&c. Baudier, Hist. de Ximen. p. 208.

t Flechier, Vie de Ximem. ii.p. 746.
Vol. II. E

tm with his mother, whose name they appointed to be

cd before that of her son, in all public ass. But whe-

they made this concession, they declared, that if, at any fu.
ture period, Joanna should recover the exercise of reason,
the whole royal authority should return into her hands. At.
the fame time, they voted a free gift of fix hundred thoun
land ducats, to be paid in three years, a fum more confidera.
le than had ever been granted to any former monarch*.

Notwitftaiding this obsequiousness of the Cortes to the
'wil of the king, the most violent symptoms of difatisfac.
tion with his government began to break out in the king.
dom. 4Chievre had acquired over the mind of the young
monarch the acendant, not only of a tutor, but of a parent.
Chles seemed to have no sentiments but those which his
miniter inspired, and scarcely uttered a word but what he
put into his mouth. He was constantly surrounded by
Fiemimgs; no person got access to him without their per.
mifion; nor was any admitted to audience but in their pre.
fence. As he spoke the Spanish language very imperfeely,
his answers were always extremely thort, and often deliver.
ed with hesitation. From all these circumfances, many of
the Spaniards were led to believe, that he was a prince of a
flow and narrow genius. Some pretended to discover a frong
refri blance between him and his mother, and began to
whisper that his capacity for government would never be
far superior to hers; and though they who had the best op
portunity of judging concerning his chara&er, maintained,
that notwithstanding such unpromising appearances, he poi
fefed a large fund of knowledge, as wetlas of fagacityt
vet all agreed in condemning his partiality towards the
Flemings, and his attachment to his favourites, as unreason
able and immoderate. Unfortunately for Charles, there fa
ourites were unworthy of his confidence. To amass wealt

iniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 68. Sandov. p
12.

t Sandoral, p. 3S. P. Mart. Ep. 655.

seems to have been their only aim: and as they had reason
to fear, that either their' mater's good sense, or the indig-
nation of the Spaniards, might soon abridge their power,
they hastened to improve the present opportunity, and their
avarice was the more rapacious, because they expected their
authority to be of no long duration. All honours, offices,
and benefices, were either engrossed by the Flemings, or
publicly fold by them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage,
whom Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had imprudently
raised to be chancellor of Castile, vied with each other in all
the refinements of extortion and venality. Not only the
Spanilh historians, who, from resentment, may be fafpe&ed
of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, an Italian,
who resided at that time in the court of Spain, and who
was under no temptation to deceive the persons to whom
his letters are addressed, give a description which is almok
incredible, of the insatiable and ihamelefs covetoufnefa of
the Flemings. According to Angleria's calculation, which
he aifTrts to be extremely moderate, they remitted into the
Low-Countries, in the space of ten months, no less a fum
than a million and one hundred thousand ducats. The
nomination of William de Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young
man not of canonical age, to the archbishopric of Toledo,
cxafperated the Spaniards more than all these exa6tions.
They confidered the elevation of a stranger to the head of
their church, and to the richest benefice in the kingdom,
not only as an injury, but as an insult to the whole nation;
both clergy and laity, the former from interest, the latter
from indignation, joined in exclaiming againl itt.

Charles leaving Castile thus disgusted with his admini-

firation, set out for Saragossa, the capital of Aragon, that
he might be present in the Cortes of that kingdom. On
his way thither, he took leave of his brother Ferdinand,
whom he sent into Germany on the pretence of visiting

t Sandoval, 28-3r. P. Mart. Ep. 608, 6xx, 613, 614, 6a22
6j3, 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8.

E 2

their grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age. To this
prudent precaution, Charles owed the preservation ofthe
Spani;h dominions. During the violent commotions which
arose there soon after this period, the Spaniards would in.
fallibly have offered the crown to a prince, who was the
darling of the whole nation; nor did Ferdinand want am.
bition, or counsellors, that might have prompted him to ac.
cept of the offert.

The Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged Charles

as king, nor would they allow-the Cortes to be assembled in
his name, but in that of the Juftiza, to whom during an in.
terregnum, this privilege belonged*. The opposition Charles
had to li uggle with in the Cortes of Aragon, was more vio.
lent and obstinate than that which he had overcome in Ca-
file; after long delays, however, and with much difficulty,
he persuaded the members to confer on him the title of king,
in conjun&ion with his mother. At the fame time he
bound himfelfby that solemn oath, which the Aragonefe
exa&ed of their kings, never to violate any of their rights
or liberties. When a donative was demanded, the mem.
bers were still more intractable; many months elapsed be-
fore they would agree to grant Charles two hundred thou.
land ducats, and that fum they appropriated so ftri&ly for
paying the debts of the crown, which had long been for.
gotten, that a very small part of it came into the king's hands.
What had happened in Calfile taught them caution, and de
termined them rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow.
citizens, how obsolete soever, than to furnish ifrangers the
means of enriching themselves with the spoils of their coun,
tryt.

During these proceedings of the Cortes, ambassadors ar.

rived at Saragossa from Francis I. and the young king ol
Navarre, demanding the restitution of that kingdom it
terms of the treaty of Noyon. But neither Charles, noi

+ P. Mart. Ep. 619. Ferreras, viii. 460.
*P. TMart. Ep. 6c5. i P. Mart. Ep. 615-634.

the Castilian nobles whom he consulted on this occasion,
discovered any inclination to part with this acquisition. A
conference held soon after at Montpelier, in order to bring
this matter to an amicable issue, was altogether fruitless;
while the French urged the injustice of the usurpation, the
Spaniards were attentive only to its importance§.

From Aragon Charles proceeded to Catalonia, where he

wafted as much time, encountered more difficulties, and
gained less money. The Flemings were now become so o-
dious in every province of Spain by their exations, that the
desire of mortifying them, and of disappointing their ava-
rice, augmented the jealousy with which a free people ufu-
ally condu&ed their deliberations.

The Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the weight

and rigour of the oppressive schemes carried on by the Flem-
ings, resolved no longer to submit with a tameness fatal to
theinfelves, and which rendered them the obje&s of scorn
to their fellow fubjets in the other kingdoms, of which the
Spanith monarchy was composed. Segovia, Toledo, Se-
ville, and several other cities of the first rank, entered into a
confederacy for the defence of their rights and privileges;.
and notwithstanding the silence of the nobility, who, on this
occasion, discovered neither the public spirit,. nor the refo-
lution, which became their order, the confederatea laid be-
fore the king a full view of the tate of the kingdom, and of
the mal-adminitiration of his favourites. The preferment of
firangers, the exportation of the current coin, the increase
of taxes, were the grievances of which they chiefly com;
plained; and of these they demanded redress with that
holdnefs which is natural to a free people. These remon-
firances, prefeited at first at Saragossa, and renewed after-
wards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great nvgle&.
Ille confederacy, however, of these cities, at this junCture,
was the beginning of that famous union among the com-
mnlso of Castile, which not long after threw the kingdoa"

§ P. Martyr, Ep. 605, 633, 640.

E3

into such violent convulsions as Ihook the throne, and almost
overturned the constitution*.

Soon after Charles's arriWl at Barcelona, he received the

account of an event which'interefted him much more than
the murmurs of the Catilians, or the fcrupies of the Cortes
of Catalonia. This was the death of the emperor Maximi.
lian [Jan. 2]; an occurrence of small importance in itself,
for he was a prince conspicuous neither for his virtues, nor
his power, nor his abilities; but rendered by its consequences
more memorable than any that-had happened during several
ages. It broke that profound and universal peace which
then reigned in the Christian world; it excited a rivalfhip
between two princes, which threw all Europe into agitation,
and kindled wars more general, and of longer duration, than
had hitherto been known in modern times.

The revolutions occalioned by the expedition of the

French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had inspired the
European princes with new ideas concerning the importance
of the Imperial dignity. The claims of the empire upon
some of the Italian states were numerous; its jurifdi&ion
over others was extensive; and though the former had been
almost abandoned, and the latter seldom exercised, under
princes of slender abilities and of little influence, it was ob-
vious, that in the hands of an emperor possessed of power or
of genius, they might be employed as engines for stretching
his dominion over the greater part of that country. Even
Maximilian, feeble and unsteady as his conduc always was,
had availed himself of the infinite pretensions of the empire,
and had reaped advantage from every war and every negotia.
tion 'n Italy during his reign. These considerations, added
to the dignity of the fRation, confessedly the first among
Christian princes, and to the rights inherent in the office,
which, if exerted with vigour, were far from being inconfil
derable, rendered the Imperial crown more than ever an oh
jte of ambition.

*P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Ferreras, viii. 461.

Not long before his death, Maximilian had discovered great

solicitude to preserve this dignity in the Austrian family,
and to procure the king of Spain to be chosen his successor.
But he himself having never been crowned by the pope, a
ceremony deemed essential in that age, wvas confidered only
as emperor elef. Though historians have not attended to
that diftintion, neither the Italian nor German chancery be-
stowed any other title upon him than that of king of the
Romans; and no example occurring in history of any person's
being chosen a successor to a king of the Romans, the Gert
mans, always tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to con,
ser upon Charles an office for which their constitution knew
no name, obstinately refused to gratify Maximilian in that
point§.

By his death, this difficulty was at once removed, and

Charles openly aspired to that dignity which his grandfather
had attempted, without success, to secure for him. At the
fame time, Francis 1. a powerful rival, entered the lifts a-
gainit him; and the attention of all Europe was fixed upon
this competition, no less illustrious from the high rank of the
candidates, than from the importance of the prize for which
they contended. Each of them urged his pretefiions with
sanguine expe&ations, and with no unpromising profpet of
success. Charles confidered the Imperial crown as belong.
ing to him of right, from its long continuance in the Au-
flriaif line; he knew that none of the German princes pof-
sessed power or influence enough to appear as his antagonist;
he flattered himself, that no consideration would induce the
natives of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a dig-
nity, which during so many ages had been deemed peculiar
to their own nation; andleaft of all, that they would con-
ser this honour upon Francis I. the sovereign of a people
whose genius, and laws, and manners, differed so widely from

§ Guicciardini, lib. xiii. p. zI. Hist. Gener. d'Allemagne, par

P. Barre, tom. viii. part. i. p. 1087. P. Heuter. Rer. Auitr. lib.
vii. c. 17. p. 179. lib. viii. c. 2. p. 183.

those of the Germans, that it was hardly possible to effablih'
any cordial union between them; he truled not a little to
the effet of Maximilian's negotiations, which, though they
did not attain their end, had prepared the minds of the
Germans for his elevation to the Imperial throne; but what
he relied on as a chief recommendation, was the fortunatt
situation of his hereditary dominions n Germany, which
served as a natural barrier to the empire against the encroach-
ments of the Trkilh power. The conquests, the abilities,
and the ambition of Sultan Selim IL had spread over Eu-
rope, at that time, a general and wellfounded alarm By
his wicories over the Mamaluks, and the extirpation of
that gallant body of men, he had not only added Egypt and
Syria to his empire, but had secured to it such a degree of
internal tranquillity, that he was ready to turn against Christ.
endom the whole force of his arms, which nothing hitherto
had been able to refif. The most effetual expedient for
flopping the progress of this torrent, seemed to be the elec
tion of an emperor, poflefled of extensive territories in that
country, where its first impression would be felt, and who,
bfides, could combat this formidable enemy with all the
forces of a powerful monarchy, and with all the wealth fur-
nmihed by the mines of the new world, or the commerce of
the Low-Countriae Tbefe were the arguments by which
Charles publicly supported his claim; and to men of integri.
ty and refie&ion, they appeared to be not only plufible but
convincing. He did not, however, trust the success of his
cause to these alone. Great fumns of money were remitted
from Spain; all the refinements and artifice of negotiation
were employed; and a considerable body of troops, kept on
foot, at that time, by the states of the circle of Suabia, was
secretly taken into his pay. The venal were gained by pre-
sents; the objections of the more scrupulous were answered
or eluded; some feeble princes were threatened and over-
awed§.

5 Guicc.lib. 13. 59. Skidan, f of the eformat,. 4. Str
Vi Corp. Hil. German. i 971. Not. ao.

On the other hand, Francis supported his claim with e-

qual eagerness, and,no less confidence of its being well
founded. His emissaries contended that it was now high
time to convince the princes of the house of Auflria that
the Imperial crown was elective, and not hereditary; that
other persons might aspire to an honour which their arro-
gance had accuitomed them to regard as the property of
their family; that it required a sovereign of mature judg.
ment, and of approved abilities, to hold the reins of govern.
ment in a country where such unknown opinions concerning
religion had been published, as had thrown the minds of men
into an uncommon agitation, which threatened the most vi-
olent effes; that a young prince, without experience, and
who had hitherto given no specimens of his genius for com-
mand, was .no. fit match for Selim, a monarch grown old in
the art of war, and in the course of vicory; whereas a king
who in his early youth had triumphed over the valour and
discipline of the Swiss, till then reckoned invincible, would
be an antagonist not unworthy the conqueror of the East;
that the fire and impetuosity of the French cavalry, added
to the discipline and liability of the German infantry, would
form an army so irrefiitible, that, initead of waiting the ap.
proach of the Ottoman forces, it might carry hostilities into
the heart of their dominions; that the ele&ion of Charles
would be inconsistent with a fundamental constitution, by
which the person who holds the crown of Naples is exclud-
ed from aspiring to the Imperial dignity; that his elevation
to that honour would soon kindle a war in Italy, on account
of his pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, the effecs of
which could not fail of reaching the empire, and might prove
fatal to it§. But while the French ambassadors enlarged
upon these and other topics of the fame kind, in all the
courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the prejudices enter-
tained againit him as a foreigner, unacquainted with the

5 Guicc. lib. 13. 16o. Sleid. p. 16. Geor. Sibini de Eled.
Car. V. Hifloria apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. . 4.

German langtiage or manners,eudcavoured to overcome there,
and to gain the favour of the princes by immense gifts, and
by infinite promises. As the expeditious method of tranf
mitting money, and the decent mode of conveying a bribe,
by bills of exchange, were then little known, the French
ambassadors travelled with a train of horses loaded with trea
sure, an equipage not very honourable for that prince by
whom they were employed, and infamous for those to whom
they were fentt.

The other European princes could not remain indifferent

fpetators of a contest, the decision of which so nearly afe~.«
ed every one of them. Their common interest ought a.
turally to have formed a general combination, in order to
disappoint both competitors, and to prevent either of them
fom obtaining such a pre-eminence in power and dignity, a
might prove dangerous to the liberties of Europe. But the
ideas with refpet to a proper ditribution and balance of
power were so lately introduced into the system of European
policy, that they were not hitherto object of sufficient at
tention. The passions of ome princes, the want of foresight
in others, and the fear of giving offence to the candidates
hindered such a salutary union of the power of Europe, anm
rendered them either totally negligent of the public safety,
or kept them from exerting themfclvcs with vigour in it
behlf.

The Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the elevation of

either of the contending monarchs, and though they wilhed
to have seen some prince whose dominions were less extensive,
and whose power was more moderate, feated on the Imperial
throne, were prompted, however, by their hatred of the
French nation, to give an open preference to the pretensions
of Charles, while they used their utmost influence to frutratt
those of Francist.

The Venetians easily discerned, that it was the interest

of their republic to have both the rivals set afde; but their
J Memoies de Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296. t Sabius, p. 6

jealousy of the house of Austria, whose ambition a-r. neigh-
bourhood had been fatal to their grandeur, would not per-
mit them to at up to their own ideas, and led them hastily
to give the fandion of their approbation to the claim of the
French king.

It was equally the interest, and more in the power of Hen.

ry VIII. of England, to prevent either Francis or Charles
from acquiring a dignity which would raise them so far a.
bove other monarchs. But though Henry often boasted
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand, he had nei-
ther the fleady attention, the accurate discernment, nor the
dispassionate temper which that delicate funtion required.
On this occasion, it mortified his vanity so much, to think
that he had not entered early into that noble competition
which refleted such honour upon the two antagonists, that
he took a resolution of fending an ambalfador into Germa-
ny, and of declaring himself a candidate for the Imperial
throne. The ambassador, though loaded-with caresses by
the German princes and the pope's nuncio, informed his maf-
ter, that he could hope sot no success in a claim which he
had been so late in preferring. Henty, imputing his difap-
pointment to thattircumftance alone, and soothed with this
ostentatious display of his own importance, seems to have
taken no farther part in the matter, either by contributing
to thwart both his rivals, or to promote one of themt.

Leo X. a pontiff no less renowned for his political abili-

ties, than for his love of the arts, was the only prince of the
age who observed the motions of the two contending mo-
narchs with a prudent attention, or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the public safety. The Imperial and papal
urifdiaion interfered in so many inRances, the complaints of
usurpation were so numerous on both fides, and the territo-
ries of the church owed their security so little to their own
force, and so much to the weakness of the powers arOuad
tem, that nothing was so formidable to the court of Rome
t Memoires de Fleuranges, 3 r4. Herbert, Hilt. of Henry VIII.

as an cperor with extensive dominions, or of enterprising
genius. Leo trembled at the profpea of beholding the Im.
perial crown placed on the headof the king of Spain and of
Naples, and the master of the new world; nor was he less a.
fraid of feeing a king of France, who was duke of Milan and
lord of Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold that
the eletion of either of them would be fatal to the indepen.
dence of the holy fee, to the peace of Italy, and perhaps to
the liberties of Europe. But to oppose them with any prof.
pet of success, required addres and caution in proportion
to the greatness of their power, and their opportunities of
taking revenge. Leo was defetive in neither. He secret.
ly exhorted the German princes to place one of their own
number on the Imperial throne, which many of them were
capable of filling with honour. He put them in mind of
the constitution by which the kings of Naples were for ever
excluded from that dignity§. He warmly exhorted the
French king to persist in his claim, not from any desire that
he lhould gain his end, but as he foresaw that the Germans
would be more disposed to favour the kirig of Spain, he hop-
ed that Francis himself, when he discovered his own chance
of success to be desperate, would be stimulated by resentment
and the spirit of rivalfhip, to concur with all his interest in
railing some third person to the head of the empire; or, on
the other hand, if Francis Ihould make an unexpected pro.
grefs, he did not doubt but that Charles would be induced
by similar motives to aa the fame part; and thus, by a pro
dent attention, the mutual jealousy of the two rivals might
be so dexterously managed, as to disappoint both. But this
fiheme, the only one which a prince in Leo's situation could
adopt, though concerted with great wisdom, was executed
with little discretion. The French ambassadors in Germa-
ny fed their master with vain hopes; the pope's nuncio* be-
ing gained by them, altogether forgot the inftru&ions which
he had received; and Francis persevered so long and with
Goldafli Confitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 167. vol. i. 439.

such obstinacy in urging his own pretenfionsr as rendered all
Leo's measures abortive*.

Such were the hopes of the candidates, and the views of

the different princes, when the diet was opened according to
form at Frankfort, [June 17]. The right of chufing an
emperor had long been vested in seven great princes, diitin-
guilhed by the name of ele&ors, the origin of -whose office,
as well as the nature and extent of their powers, have already
been explained. These were at that time, Albert of Brans
denburgh, archbiihop of Mentz; Herman count de Wied,
archbiihop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffenklau, archbishop
of Triers; Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis, count palatine
of the Rhine; Frederic, duke of Saxony; and Joachim I.
Imarquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithfianding the artful ar-
guments produced by the ambassadors of the two kings in
favour of their refpe&ive maiters, and in spite of all their so-
licitations, intrigues, and presents, the eletors did not for-
get that maxim on which the liberty of the German confRi-
tution was thought to be founded. Among the members
of the Germanic body, which is a great republic composed
of flates almoRt independent, the firit principle of patriotism
is to depress and limit the power of the emperors and of
this idea, so natural under such a form of government, a
German politician seldom loses fight. No prince of confi-
derable power, or extensive dominions, had for some ages
been railed to the Imperial throne. To this prudent pre-
caution many of the great families in Germany owed the
splendour and independence which they had acquired during
that period. To elet either of the contending monarchs,
would have been a gross violation of that salutary maxim.;
would have given to the empire a matier instead of an head;
and would have reduced themselves from the rank of being
almost his equals, to the condition of his subje&s.

Full of these ideas, all the eletors turned their eyes to-
wards Frederic, duke of Saxony, a prince of such eminent

* Guicciar. lib. 13. I6z.
Vol. II. F

virtue and abilities, as to be distinguished by the name of
the Sage, and with one voice they offered him the Imperial
crown. He was not dazzled with that objet, which mo.
marchs, so far frperior to him in power, courted with such
eagerness; and after deliberating upon the matter a (hort
time, he reje&ed it with a magnanimity and difintereftednef'
no les singular than admirable. ', Nothing," he observed,
u could be more impolitic, than an obstinate adherence to a
maxim which, though found and just in many cafes, was not
applicable to all. In times of tranquillity (said he) we wish
for an emperor who has not power to invade our liberties;
times of danger demand one who is able to secure our safety.
The Turkih armies, led by a gallant and vicorious monarch,
rc now assembling. They are ready to pour in upon Ger.
many with a violence unknown in former ages. New con-
juntures call for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre
must be committed to some hand more powerful than mine,
or that of any other German prince. We possess neither
dominions, nor revenues, nor authority, which enable us to
encounter such a formidable enemy. Recourse must be had,
in this exigency, to one of the rival monarchs. Each of
them can bring into the field forces sufficient for our defence.
But as the king of Spain is of German extra&ion; as he is
a member and prince of the empire by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather; as his dominions fretch
along that frontier which lies most exposed to the enemy;
his claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of a franger
to our language, to our blood, and to our country; and
therefore I give my vote to confer on him the Imperil
crown."

This opinion, ditated by such uncommon generosity, and

supported by arguments so plausible, made a deep impression
on the eletors. The king of Spain's ambassadors, fenfibk
of the important fetvice which Frederic had done their mas
ter, sent him a considerable fum of money, as the first tokel

at prince' gratitude. But he who had greatness

mind to refuse a crown, disdained to receive a bribe; and,
upon their entreating that at least he would permit them to
distribute part of that fum among his attendants, he re-
plied, That he could not prevent them from accepting what
should be offered, but whoever took a single florin should be
dismissed next morning from his service*.

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a dignity,

*which Frederic had declined, for reasons applicable to them
all. It remained to make a choice between the two great
competitors. But besides the prejudice in Charles's favour
arising from his birth, as well as the situation of his German
dominions, he owed not a little to the abilities of the cardi-
nal de Gurk, and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bilhop of
Liege, two of his ambassadors, who had conducted their ne-
gotiations with more prudence and address than those en-
trusted by the French king. The former, who had long
been the minister and favourite of Maximilian, was well ac-
quainted with the art of managing the Germans; and the
latter, having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by Fran-
cis, employed all the malicious ingenuity with which the de-
fre of revenge inspires an ambitious mind, in thwarting the
measures of that monarch. The Spanimf party among the
e&ors daily gained ground; and even the pope's nuncio,

P. Daniel, an hitorian of considerable name, seems to call in

uefion the truth of this account of Frederic's behaviour in refuf-
nthe Imperial crown, because it is not mentioned by Georgius
binus in his History of the Eleaion and Coronation of Charles
. tom. iii. p. 63. But no great stress ought to be laid on an omif-
on in a superficial author, whose treatifS, though dignified with
e name of History, contains only such an account of the ceremo-
ial of Charles's election, as is usually publihed in Germany ons
e occasions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. i. p. . The tefli-
ony of Erasmus, lib. 13. epif. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 18. are
press. Seckendorf, in his Commentarius HiRoricus & Apologe-
s de Lutheranifmo, p. laI. has examined this fad with his u-
al industry, and has eflablifhed its truth by the most undoubted
idence. To these testimonies which he has colleaed, I may add
e decisive one of cardinal Cajetan, the pope's legate at Frank-
t, in his letter, July 5 th, 5 19. Epiftres au Princes, &c. recueil-
ar Rufcclli, traduits par Belforeft. Par. xI 72. p. 60.

F 2

being convinced that it was vain to make any farther oppo.
fition, endeavoured to acquire some merit with the future
emperor, by offering voluntarily, in the name of his mafler,
a dispensation to hold the Imperial crown in conjun&ion
with that of Naples.

On the twenty-eighth day of June, five months and ten

days after the death of Maximilian, this important contelt,
which had held all Europe in fufpence, was decided. Six
of the electors had already declared for the king of Spain;
and the archbilhop of Triers, the only firm adherent to the
French interest, having at last joined his brethren, Charles
was, by the unanimous voice of the eletoral college, raised
to the Imperial thronet.

But though the elecors consented, from various motives,

to promote Charles to that high station, they discovered, at
the fame time, great jealousy of his extraordinary power,
and endeavoured, with the utmoi solicitude, to provide, a-
gainil his encroaching on the privileges of the Germanic bo.
dy. It had long been the cuflom to demand of every new
emperor a confirmation of these privileges, and to require a
promise that he would never violate them in any initance.
While princes, who were formidable neither from extent of
territory, nor of genius, possessed the Imperial throne, a ge.
neral and verbal engagement to this purpose was deemed sus.
ficient. But under an emperor so powerful as Charles, o.
thtr precautions seemed necessary. A Capi/itlalion or claim
of right was formed, in which the privileges and immunities
of the elesors, of the princes of the empire, of the cities,
and of every other member of the Germanic body, are enu-
merated. This capitulation was immediately signed by
Charles's ambassadors in the name of their master, and he
himself, at his coronation, confirmed it in the moR solemn
manner. Since that period, the electors have continued to
prescribe the fame conditions to all his successors; and the

Freheri Rer. German. Scriptores, voL iii. 172 cur. Struii
Artc-.tr. 1717. Gianonr Hlft o T Naples, 2, 498. .

\ Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hist. fui Temporis, edit. Bulkley, tite. i.c.9.

capitulation or mutual contra& between the emperor and his
subjects, is confidered in Germany as a strong barrier against
the progress of the Imperial power, and as the great charter
of their liberties, to which they often appealS.

The important intelligence of this eleftion was conveyed

in nine days from Frankfort to Barcelona, where Charles
was Rill detained by the obstinacy of the Catalonian Cortes,
which had not hitherto brought to an issue any of the affairs
which came before it. He received the account with the
joy natural to a young and aspiring mind, on an acceffiou
of power and dignity which raised him so far above the o-
tiler princes of Europe. Then it was that tlofe vail prof.
pe&s, which allured him during his whole administration,
began to open, and from this ara we nmay date the formation,
and are able to trace the gradual progress, of a grand fyitcim
of enterprising ambition, which renders the history of his
reign so worthy of attention.

A trivial circumstance first discovered the efferts of this

great elevation upon the mind of Charles. In all the public
wriits which he now issued as king of Spain, he assumed the.
title of Majesty, and required it from his fubjefts as a mark
of their refpet. Before that time, all the monarchs of Eu-
rope were satisfied with the appellation of Highnefi or Grace;
but the vanity of other courts soon led them to imitate the
example of the Spanish. The epithet of Majesty is no long-
er a mark of pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable mo-
narchs in Europe enjoy it, and the arrogance of the greater
potentates has invented no higher denomination :.

The Spaniards were far from viewing the promotion of their
king to the imperial throne with the fame fatisfadion which.
lie himself felt. To be deprived of the presence of. their
sovereign, and to be fubje&ed to the government of a vice-
roy and his council, a species of administration often op.

t Pfeffel Abrege de 1'Hi. de Droit Publique d'Allemagne, 59o-
Limnei Capitulat. Imper. Epiflres des Princes par Rufcelli, p.-0.

Miniana, Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferreras, viii. 475. Memoirs-
Hi. de la Houffaie, tom. i. p. 53, &c.

F 3

preffive, and always disagreeable, were the immediate and
necessary confcquences of this new dignity. To fee' the
blood of their countrymen lhed in quarrels wherein the na-
tion had no concern; to behold its treasures wafted in sup-
porting the splendour of a foreign title; to be plunged in
the chaos of Italian and German. politics, were effects of this
event alroft as unavoidable. From all these considerations,
they concluded, that nothing could have happened more
pernicious to the Spanish nation; and the fortitude and pa.
blic spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of Castile,
prohibited Alphonfo the Wife from leaving the kingdom,
in order to receive the Imperial crown, were often mention.
ed with the highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely
worthy of imitation at this jun&ture.

But Charles, without regarding the sentiments or mur-

murs of the Spanish fubjeds, accepted of the Imperial dig.
nitv, which the count palatine, at the head of a solemn em-
baffv, offered him in the name of the electors [November];
and declared his intention offetting out soon for Germany
in order to take poffeflion of it. This was the more necef-
firv, because, according to the forms of the German conti-
tltion, he could not, before the ceremony of a public coro-
nation, exercise any at of jurifdi&ion or authority§.

Their certain knowledge of this resolution augmented so

much the disgust of the Spaniards, that a fullen and refrac-
tory spirit prevailed among persons of all ranks. The pope
rhaving granted the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical bene-
f.ces in Castile, to aflift him in carrying on war with greater
*.2-our against the Turks, a convocation of the clergy una.
rimouily refused to levy that fum, upon pretence that it
ought never to be exa&ed but at those times when Christ.
endom was atlually invaded by the Infidels; and though
Leo, in order to support his authority, laid the kingdom
uidcr an interdit, so little regard was paid to a cenfurc

* Sadoval, L p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. I4.

5 Sabinus, P. Barre, mii. Io8j.

which was universally deemed unjust, that Charles himself
applied to have it taken off. Thus the Spanish clergy, be-
fides their merit in opposing the usurpations of the pope,
and disregarding the influence of the crown, gained the ex-
emption which they had claimed§.

The commotions which arose in the kingdom of Valen-

cia, annexed to the crown of Aragon, were more formid-
able, and produced more dangerous and laiting effecs. A
seditious monk having, by his sermons, excited the citizens
of Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to punish
certain criminals in a tumultuary manner, the people, pleas-
ed with this exercise of power, and with such a discovery
of their own importance, not only refused to lay down their
arms, but formed themselves into troops and companies, that
they might be regularly trained to martial exercises. To
obtain some security against the opprefion of the grandees
was the motive of this association, and proved a powerful
bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privileges and in-
dependence were more complete in Valencia than in any o-
ther of the Spanish kingdoms, the nobles, being scarcely ac-
countable for their condu& to any superior, treated the peo-
ple not only as vassals, but as slaves. - They were alarmed,
however, at the progress of this unexpeced infurrefion, as
it might encourage the people to attempt Ihaking off the
yoke altogether; but as they could not repress them with-
out taking arms, it became necessary to have recourse to the
emperor, and to desire his permission to attack them. At the
fame time the people made choice of deputies to represent
their grievances, and to implore the protetion of their so-
vreign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at court
when Charles was exasperated to a high degree against the
nobility. As he was eager to visit Germany, where his
pretence became every day more necessary, and as his Fle-
niifh courtiers were till more impatient to return into their
lative country, .that they might carry thither the spoils

§ P. Martyr, Ep. 462. Ferreras, viii. 473.

which they had amassed in Castile, it was impossible for him
to hold the Cortes of Valencia in person. He had for that
reason empowered the cardinal Adrian to represent him in
that assembly, and in his name to receive their oath of alle.
giance, to confirm their privileges with the usual folemnities,
and to demand of them a free gift. But the Valencian no.
bles, who confidered this measure as an indignity to their
country, which was no less entitled, than his other king.
doms, to the honour of their sovereign's pretence, declared,
that by the fundamental laws of the constitution they could
neither acknowledge as king a person who was absent, nor
grant him any subsidy; and to this declaration they adhered
with an haughty and inflexible obitinacy. Charles, piqued
by their behaviour, decided in favour of the people, and
rahly authorized them to continue in arms. The deputies
returned in triumph, and were received by their fellow-citi.
zens as the deliverers of their country. The insolence of
the multitude increasing with their success, they expelled all
the nobles out of the city, committed the government to ma-
giftrates of their own elecion, and entered into an affoci-
ation distinguished by the name of Germanada or Brother-
bod, which proved the source not only of the wildest dif.
orders, but of the most fatal calamities in that kingdom*.

Meanwhile, the kingdom of Castile was agitated with no

less violence. No sooner was the emperor's intention to
leave Spain made known, than several cities of the firit
rank resolved to remonttrate against it, and to crave redress
once more of those grievances which they had formerly laid
before him. Charles artfully avoided admitting their depu-
ties to audience; and as he saw from this circumstance how
difficult it would be, at this junture, to refrain the muti-
nous spirit of the greater cities, he summoned the Cortes
of Castile to meet at Compoftella, a town in Galicia. His
only reason for calling that assembly, was the hope of obtain-
ing another donative; for as his treasury had been exhaufti

P. Martyr, Ep. 65x. Fccas, viii. 476, 485.

ed in the fame proportion that the riches of his ministers in-
creased, he could not, without some additional aid, appear
in Germany with splendour suited to the imperial dignity.
To appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a province,
and to demand a new subsidy before the time for paying
the former was expired, were innovations of a most dange-
rous tendency; and among a people not only jealous of
their liberties, but accustomed to supply the wants of their
sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited an universal a.
larm. The magitrates of Toledo remonstrated againf
both these measures in a very high tone; the inhabitants of
Valladolid, who expeced that the Cortes hould have been
held in that city, were so enraged, that they took arms in
a tumultuary manner; and if Charles, with his foreign coun-
fellors, had not fortunately made their escape during a vio-
lent tempest, they would have massacred all the Flemings,
and have prevented him from continuing his jourhey to.
wards Compoftella.

Every city through .which he passed, petitioned againit

holding a Cortes in Galicia, a point with regard to which
Charles was inflexible. But though the utmost influence
had been exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a
choice of representatives favourable to their designs, such
was the temper of the nation, that, at the opening of the
assembly [April I,] there appeared among many of the
members unusual symptoms of ill-humour, which threatened
a fierce opposition to all the measures of the court. No re-
presentatives were lent by Toledo; for the lot, according
to which, by ancient custom, the elecion was determined in
that city, having fallen upon two persons devoted to the
Flemish ministers, their fellow-citizens refuted to grant them
a commission in the usual form, and in their itead made
choice of two deputies, whom they empowered to repair to
Compoftella, and to protest againit the lawfulness of the
Cortes assembled there. The representatives of Salamanca
rjfufcd to take the usual oath of fidelity, unless Charles con-

sented to change the place of meeting. Those of Toro,
Madrid, Cordova, and several other places, declared the de.
mand of another donative to be unprecedented, unconlti.
tutional, and unnecessary. All the arts, however, which in.
fluence popular assemblies, bribes, promises, threats, and e.
en force, were employed, in order to gain members. The
nobles, soothed by the refpe&ful assiduity with which Chiev.
res and the other Flemings paid court to them, or inftigat.
ed by a mean jealousy of that spirit of independence which
they law rising among the commons, openly favoured the
prtenfions of the court, or at the utmost did not oppose
them, and at last, in contempt not only of the sentiments
of the nation, but of the ancient forms of the confitution,
a majority voted to grant the donative for which the em-
peror had applied*. Togetherwith this grant, the Cortes
laid before Charles a representation of those grievances
whereof his people complained, and in their name craved re-
dress; but he, having obtained from them all he could ex.
pea, paid no attention to this ill-timed petition, which it
was no longer dangerous to difregardt.

As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he disclosed

his intention with regard to the regency of Castile during
his absence, which he had hitherto kept secret, and nomi-
nated cardinal Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of
Aragon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza; that of Va-
lencia on Don Diego de Mendoza Conde de Melito. The
choice of the two latter was universally acceptable; but the
advancement of Adrian, though the only Fleming who had
preserved any reputation among the Spaniards, animated
the Castilians with new hatred against foreigners; and even
the nobles, who had so tamely suffered other inroads upon
the constitution, felt the indignity offered to their own or-
der by his promotion, and remonstrated against it as illegal.
But Charles's desire of visiting Germany, as well as the im-

P. Martyri Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c.

t Sandoval, 84.

# BOOK II.

patience of his miniflters to leave Spain, were now so much
increased, that without attending to the murmurs of the
Callilians, br even taking time to provide any remedy against
an infurre&ion in Toledo, which at that time threatened,
and afterwards produced, most formidable effects, he failed
from Corunna on the z2dof May; and by setting out so
abruptly in quest of a new crown, he endangered a'more
important one of which he was already in possession t.

BOOK II.

MANY concurring circumstances not only called Charles's
thoughts towards the affairs of Germany, but rendered his
presence in that country neceflary. The electors grew im-
patient of so long an interregnum; his hereditary dominions
were disturbed by intestine commotions; and the new opi-
nions concerning religion made such rapid progress as re-
quired the most serious consideration. But above all, the
motions of the French king drew his attention, and convinc-
ed him, that it was necessary to take measures for his own
defence with no less speed than vigour.

When Charles and Francis entered the lifts as candidates

for the Imperial dignity, they condu&ed their rivalihip with
many profefions of regard for each other, and with repeated
declarations that they would not susser any tincture of enmi-
ty to mingle itflf with this honourable emulation. " We
both court the fame mistress," said Francis, with his usual
vivacity; " each ought to urge his suit with all the address
of which he is master; the most fortunate will prevail, and
the other must reft contented*." But though two young
and high-fpirited princes, and each of them animated with
the hope of success, might be capable of forming such a ge.

t P. Martyr, Ep. 670. Sandoval, 86.

·* uicc.lib. ij.p. IS9.

nerous resolution, it was soon found that they promised up.
on a moderation too refined and disinterested for human na.
ture. The preference given to Charles in the fight of all
Europe mortified Francis extremely, and inspired him with
all the passions natural to disappointed ambition. To this
was owing the personal jealousy and rivalfhip which fubfitl.
ed between the two monarchs during their whole reign; and
the rancour of there, augmented by a real opposition of in.
terest, which gave rife to many unavoidable causes of discord,
involved them in almost perpetual hostilities. Charles had
paid no regard to the principal article in the treaty of Noy.
on, by refuiing oftener than once to do justice to John d'Al.
bret, the excluded monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was
bound in honour, and prompted by interest, to restore to his
throne. The French king had pretensions to the crown of
Naples, of which Ferdinand had deprived his predecessor
by a mot unjustifiable breach of faith. The emperor might
reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of the empire, which
Francis had seized, and fill kept in possession, without hay.
ing received investiture of it from the emperor. Charles
confidered the dutchy of Burgundy as the patrimonial do.
main of his anceflors, wrested from them by the unjust poli
cy of Louis XI. and observed with the greateftjealoufy the
ftri& conneotions which Francis had formed with the duke
of Gueldres, the hereditary enemy of his family.

When the sources of discord were so many and variouo

peace could be of no long continuance, even between prince
the most exempt from ambition or emulation. But as tbi
shock between two such mighty antagonists could not fai
of being extremely violent, they both discovered no fmal
solicitude about its consequences, and took time not onl;
to colle and to ponder their own strength, and to compar
it with that of their adversary, but to secure the friendlhij
or affitance of the other European powers.

The pope had- equal reason to dread the two rivals, ant
- that he who prevailed, would become absolute malft

If it had been in his power to engage them in hostilities,
without rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing
would have been more- agreeable to him, than' to fee them
waste each other's firength in endless quarrels. But this
was impossible. Leo foresaw, that on the first rupture be-
tween the two monarchs, the armies of France and Spain
would take the field in the Milaiefe; and while the scene
of their operations was so near, and the subjet for which
they contended so interelting to him, he could not long re.
main neuter. He was obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan
of condu& to his political situation. He courted and sooth-
ed the emperor and king of France with equal indufiry and
address. Though warmly solicited by each of them to e-
spouse his cause, he assumed all the appearances of entire
impartiality, and attempted to conceal his real sentiments
under that profound dissimulation which seems to have been
ffeced by moR of the Italian politicians in that age.
The views and interests of the Venetians were not dif.

ferent from those of the pope; nor were they less solicitous
tprevent Italy from becoming the feat of war, and their
wn republic from being involved in the quarrel. But thro'
all Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high pretensions
o a perfeE neutrality, it was visible that he leaned towards
he emperor, from whom he had both more to fear and more

hope than from Francis; and it was equally manifest, that
it became necelfary to take a fide, the Venetians would
om motives of the fame nature, declare for the king of
rance. No considerable assistance, however, was to be ex-
esed from the Italian Rfates, who were jealous to an extreme
egree of the Transalpine powers, and careful to preserve
he balance even between them, unless when they were fe-
uced to violate this favourite maxim of their policy, by
he certain profpet of some great advantage to themselves.
But the chief attention both of Charles and of Francis
as employed in order to gain the king of England, from
hom each of them expected affitlance more effecual, and
Vol. II. G

fcorded with less political caution. Henry VII . had a'
scended the throne of that kingdom in the year 1509, with
such circumitances of advantage as promised a reign of di-
linguifhed felicity and splendour. The union in-his per-
son of the two contending titles of York and Lancaster; the
alacrity and emulation with which both factions obeyed his
commands, not only enabled him to exert a degree of vigour
and authority in his domefic government which none of hi,
predecessors could have safely assumed; but permitted him
to take a share in the affairs of the continent, from which
the attention of the Englilh had long been diverted by their
'nhappy intestine divisions. The great fums of money
which his father had amassed, rendered him the most wealthy
prince in Europe. The peace which had subsisted under
the cautious adminittration of that monarch, had been of
sufficient length to recruit the population of the kingdom
after the desolation of the civil wars, but not so long as to
enervate its spirit; and the Englilh, aihamed of having ren.
dered 'heir own country so long a scene of discord and blood.
ihed, were eager to display their valour in some foreign war,
and to revive the memory of the victories gained on the con-
tinent by their anceft6rs. Henry's own temper perfeEtly
suited the fate of his kingdom, and the disposition of his
fubjeas. Ambitious, etive, enterprising, and accomplish.
ed in all the martial exercises which in that age formed a
chief part in the education of persons of noble birth, and in.
spired them with an, early love of war, he longed to engage
in aAion, and to signalize the beginning of his reign by
some remarkable exploit. An opportunity soon presented
itself; and the victory at Guinegate [ 1s 3], together with
the successful sieges of Terouenne and Tournay, though 0a
little utility to England, refleced great lustre on its mo-
narch, and confirmed the idea which foreign princes enter-
tained of his power .ud consequence. So many concurrint
causes, added to the happy situation of his own dominions
which secured them from foreign invasion; and to the for

tunate circumstance of his being in possession of Calais, which
served not only as a key to France, but opened an easy pal-
sage into the Netherlands, rendered the king of England
the natural guardian of the liberties of Europe, and the ar-
biter between the emperor and French monarch. Henry
himself was sensible of this singular advantage, and convinc-
ed, that, in order to preserve the balance even, it was his of-
fice to prevent either of the rivals from acquiring such fupe-
riority of power as might be fatal to the other, or formida-
ble to the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute of the
penetration, and still more of the temper, which such a deli-
cate function required. Influenced by caprice, by vanity,
by resentment, by affection, he was incapable of forming
any regular and extensive fyflem of policy, or of adhering
to it with steadiness. His meaflares seldom resulted from
attention to the general welfare, or from a deliberate regard
to his own interelt, but were dictated by passions which ren-
dered him blind to both, and prevented his gaining that a-
fcendant in the affairs of Europe, or from reaping such ad-
vantages to himself, as a prince of greater art, though with
inferior talents, might have easily secured.

All the impolitic steps in Henry's administration mugs
not, however, be imputed to defets in his own charater;
many of them were owing to the violent passions and infa-
tiable ambition of his prime minister and favourite, cardinal
Wolfey. This man, from one of the lowest ranks in'life,
had risen to an height of power and dignity, to which no
Englilh subjEt ever arrived; and governed the haughty,
presumptuous, and untratable spirit of Henry with absolute
authority. Great talents, and of very different kinds, fit-
ted him for the two opposite Rations of miniflter, and of fa-
vourite. His profound judgment, his unwearied industry,
his thorough acquaintance with the fate of the kingdom,
his extensive knowledge of the views and interests of foreign
courts, qualified him for that uncontrolled direction of as-
fairs with which he was entrusted. The elegance of his

Ga

mnners, the gaiety of his conversation, his ninfuating ad.
dress, his love of magnificence, and his proficiency in tho4t
parts of literature of which Henry was fond, gained him
the affefion and confidence of the young monarch. Wol.
fey was far from employing this vafi and almost royal pow.
er, to promote either the true interest of the nation, or the
real grandeur of his mailer. Rapacious at the fame time,
and profuse, he was insatiable in desiring wealth. Of bound
less ambition, he aspired after new honours with an eager.
ness unabated by his former success; and being rendered
presumptuous by his uncommon elevation, as well as by the
ascendant which he had gained over a prince, who fearceld
brooked advice from any other person, he discovered in hi
whole demeanour the most overbearing haughtiness and
pride. To these passions he himself sacrificed every confi.
deration; and whoever endeavoured to obtain his favour, or
that of his master, found it necessary to soothe and to gratiA
them.

As all the states of Europe fought Henry's friendthip a

that time, all courted his minister, with incredible attention
and obsequiousness, and strove by presents, by promises, o
by flattery, to work upon his avarice, his ambition, or hi
pride*. Francis had, in the year 15 8, employed Bonni
vet, admiral of France, one of his most accomplished and
artful courtiers, to gain this haughty prelate. He himsel
belfowed on him every mark of refpeft and confidence
He consulted him with regard to his moR important affain
and received his responses with implicit deference. By thel
arts, together with the grant of a large pension, Franci
attached the cardinal to his interest, who persuaded his mal
ter to surrender Tournay to France, to conclude a treaty c
marriage between his daughter the princess Mary and th
dauphin, and to consent to a personal interview with ti
French kingt. From that time, the mos familiar-intea

eFiddes's Life of Volfey, 166. R ymer's F iedera, xii. 7x8,
j Herbert's Hilt. of Henry VIII. 30. Rymer, xiii. 624.

course subsisted between the two courts; Francis, sensible
of the great value of Wolsey's friendlhip, laboured to secure
the continuance of it by every possible expression of regard,
bellowing on him, in all his letters, the honourable appella-
tions of Father, Tutor, and Governor.

Charles observed the progress of this union with the ut-

moftjealoufy and concern. His near affinity to the king of
England gave him some title to his friendlhip; and soon as-
ter his acceflion to the throne of Cattile, he attempted to in-
gratiate himself with Wolfey, by fettling on him a pension
of three thousand livres. His chief solicitude at present
was to prevent the intended interview with Francis, the Jtef
feds of which upon two young princes, whose hearts were
no less susceptible of friendlhip, than tlhir manners were
capable of inspiring it, he extremely dreaded. But after
many delays, occasioned by difficulties with refpe& to the
ceremonial, and by the anxious precautions of both courts
for the safety of their refpeaive sovereigns, the time and
place of meeting were at last fixed. Messengers had been
frnt to different courts, inviting all comers, who were gen-
tlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and tournament, against the
two monarchs and their knights. Both Francis and Henry
loved the splendour of these fpetacles too well, and were
too much delighted with the graceful figure which they
made on such occasions, to forego the pleasure or glory
which they expeced from such a singular and brilliant as-
fembly. Nor was the cardinal less fond of displaying his
own magnificence in the presence of two courts, and of dif-
covering to the two nations the extent of his influence o-
ver both their monarchs. Charles, finding it impbnfible to
prevent the interview, endeavoured to disappoint its effects,
and to pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch and
his minister by an aft of complaisance lill more flattering
and more uncommon. Having failed from Corunna, as has
lready been related, he steered his course diretly towards
England, and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for hlis

G3

own safety, landed at Dover [May 26th]. This une.
peaed visit surprised the nation. Wolfey, however, was
well acquainted with the emperor's intention. A negotia.
tion, unknown to the historians of that age, had been car-
ried on between him and the court of Spain; this visit had
been concerted; and Charles granted the cardinal, whom
he calls his mot dearfriend, an additional pension of fever
thoufind ducats*. Henry, who was then at Canterbury,
in his way to France, immediately dispatched Wolfey to
Dover, in order to welcome the emperor; and being highly
pleased with an event so soothing to his'vanity, hastened to
receive, with suitable refpe&, a guest who had placed in
him such unbounded confidence. Charles, to whom time
was precious, Raid only four days in England; but dur-
ing that ihort space he had the address, not only to give
ieurv- favourable impressions of his character and intentions,
but to detach Wolfey entirely from the interest of the
French king. All the grandeur, the wealth, and the pow.
er, which the cardinal possessed, did not satisfy his ambi.
tious mind, while there was one ftep higher to which an ec-
clefiaftic could ascend. The papal dignity had for some
time been the objc& of his wishes, and Francis, as the molt
effectual method of securing his friendship, had promised to
favour his.pretenfions, on the first vacancy, with all his
intereS. But as the emperor's influence in the college of,
cardinals was greatly superior to that of the French king,
Wolfey grasped eagerly at the offer which that artful prince
had made him, of exerting it vigorously in his behalf; and
allured by this profpe&t, which, under the pontificate of
Leo, still in the prime of his life, was a very diltant one, he
entered with warmth into all the emperor's schemes. No
treaty, however, was concluded at that time between the.
two monarchs; but Henry, in return for the honour which
Charles had done him, promised to visit him in some place

Rymer, xii. 714.

of the Low-Countries, immediately after taking leave of the
French king.

His interview with that prince was in an open plain be-

tween Guifnes and Andres [June 7th,] where the two
kings and their attendants displayed their magnificence with
such emulation, and profuse expence, as procured it the
name of the Field of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry,
parties of gallantry, together with such exercises and pas-
times as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant rather
than serious business, occupied both courts during eighteen
days that they continued togethert. Whatever imprefion
the engaging manners of Francis, or the liberal and unfufpici-
ous confidence with which he treated Henry, made on the
mind of that monarch, was soon effaced by Wolsey's artifi-
ces, or by an interview he had with the emperor at Grave.
lines [July so;] which was conducted with less pomp than
that near Guifnes, but with greater attention to what might
be of political utility.

This afiduity, with which the two greatest monarchs in

Europe paid court to Henry, appeared to him a plain ac-
knowledgment that he held the balance in his hands, and
convinced him of the justness of the motto which he had

f The French and EngliSh historians describe the pomp of this
interview, and the various fpeduacles, with great minuteness. One
circumstance mentioned by the marechal de Fleuranges, who was
present, and which mut appear fingularin the present age, is
commonly omitted. " After the tournament," fays he, " the
French and Englilh wrestlers made their appearance, and wrest-
led in presence of the kings, and the ladies; and as there were
many sout wrestlers there, it afforded excellent pastime; but as
tie king of France had negleaced to bring any wrestlers out of
Bretagne, the English gained the prize.-After this, the kings of
France and England retired to a tent, where they drank together,
and the king o tEngland, seizing the king-of France by the collar,
said, " aMy 6rotber, I wmnf vrej/e ith you," and endeavoured once
or twice to trip up his heels; but the king of France, who is a
dextrous wreitler, twisted him round, and threw him on the earth
with a prodigious violence. The king of England wanted to re-
new the combat, but was prevented." Mhemoires de Fleuranges,
10' Paris, 1753, p. 329.

chosen, "That whoever he favoured would prevail." In
this opinion he was confirmed by an offer which Charles
made, of submitting any difference that might arise between
him and Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing could
have the appearance of greater candour and moderation,
than the choice of a judge who was reckoned the common
friend of both. But as the emperor had now attached
Wolfey entirely to his interest, no proposal could be more
insidious, nor, as appeared by the sequel, more fatal to the
French kingt.

Charles, notwithitanding his partial fondness for the Ne:

therlands, the place of his nativity, made no long fay
there; and after receiving the homage and congratulations
of his countrymen, hastened to Aix-la.Chapelle, the place
appointed by the golden bull for the coronation of the em-
peror. There, in pretence of an assembly more numerous
and splendid than had appeared on any former occaifon, the
crown of Charlemagne was placed on his head O&t. 23],
with all the pompous solemnity which the Germans affct
in their public ceremonies, and which they deem essential to
the dignity of their empire*.

AlmoRf at the fame time, Solyman the Magnificent, one

of the moot accompliehed, enterprising, and vitorious of
the Turkilh sultans, a constant and formidable rival to the
emperor, ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the pecu-
liar glory of that period to produce the most illufrious mon-
archs, who have at any one time appeared in Europe. Leo,
Charles, Francis, Henry, and Solyman, were each of them
possesscd of talents which might have rendered any age,
wherein they happened to flourish, conspicuous. But such
a confRellation of great princes flied uncommon lufire on the
sixteenth century. In every contest, great power as well as
great abilities were set in oppoftion; the efforts of valour

t Herbert, 37.
t Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Goldaft. Folit.
Imperial Franc. 16x4, fol.p. 264.

and conduc on one fide, counterbalanced by an equal exer-
tion of the fame qualities on the other, not only occasioned
such a variety of events as renders the history of that period
interesting, but. served to check the exorbitant progress of
any of those princes, and to prevent their attaining such
pre-eminence in power as would have been fatal to the li.
berty and happiness of mankind.

The sirs at of the emperor's administration was to ap.

point a diet of the empire to be held at Worms on the fi-x
tcenth of January, one thousand five hundred and twenty-
one. In his circular letters to the different princes he in-
formed them, that he had called, this assembly in order to
concert with them the mot proper measures for checking
the progress of those new and dangerous opinions, which
threatened to disturb the peace of Germany, and to over.
turn the religion of their ancestors.

Charles had in view the opinions which had been propa.

gated by Luther and his disciples since the year one thou-
sand five hundred and seventeen. As these led to that hap.
py reformation. in religion which refcued'one part of Europe
from the papal yoke, mitigated its rigour in the other, and
produced a revolution in the sentiments of mankind, the
greatest, as well as the most beneficial, that has happened
since the publication of Christianity, not only the events
which at first gave birth to such opinions, but the causes
which rendered their progress so rapid and fuccefaful, de.
serve to be confidered with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief, founded on an-

cient and deep-rooted prejudices, supported by power, and
defended with no less art than industry; to eftablimh in its
room doctrines of the most contrary genius and tendency;
and to accomplish all this, not by external violence or the
force of arms; are operations which historians, the least
prone to credulity and superstition, ascribe to that Divine
Providence which, with infinite ease, can bring about events
which to human sagacity appear impoflible. The interpo-

fition of Heaven, in favour of the Christian religion at its
fi-t publication, was manifested by miracles and prophecies
wrought and uttered in confirmation of it. Though none
of the reformers possessed, or pretended to possess, these fu.
pernatural gifts, yet that wonderful preparation of circum.
tances which disposed the minds of men for receiving their
doltrines, that singular combination of causes which secured
their success, and enabled men, destitute of power and ofpo-
licy, to triumph over those who employed againg them ex.
traordinary efforts of both, may be confidered as no flight
proof, that the fame hand which planted the Christian reli.
gion, prote&ed the reformed faith, and reared it, from be.
ginnings extremely feeble, to an amazing degree of vigour
and maturity.

It was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and from a

source very inconsiderable, that all the mighty effefts of the
reformation flowed. Leo X. when raised to the papal
throne, found the revenues of the church exhauted by tht
aft projects of his two ambitious predecessors, Alexander
VL and Julius II. His own temper, naturally liberal and
enterprising, rendered him incapable of that severe and pa.
tient economy which the situation of his finances required.
On the contrary, his schemes for aggrandizing the family
of Medici, his love of splendour, his taste for pleasure, and
his magnificence in rewarding men of genius, involved him
daily in new expences; in order to provide a fund for which,
he tried every device that the fertile invention of priests had
fallen upon, to drain the credulous multitude of their
wealth. Among others he had recourse to a sale of Ind#l
gence. According to the doctrine of the Romish church,
all the good works of the faints, over and above those which
were necessary towards their own justification, are deposited,
together with the infinite merits of Jesus Christ, in one in.
exhaustible treasury. The keys of this were committed to St.
Peter, and to his successors the popes, who may open it
at pleasure, and by transferring a portion of this fupera-

bundant merit to any particular person, for a fum of money,
may convey to him either the pardon of his own fins, or a
release for any one, in whose happiness he is interested, from
the pains of purgatory. Such indulgences were first in-
vented in the eleventh century by Urban II. as a recom-
pence for those who went in person upon the meritorious
enterprise of conquering the Holy Land. They were after-
wards granted to those who hired a soldier for that purpose;
and in process of time were bestowed on such as gave mo.
ney for accomplishing any pious work enjoined by the
pope*. Julius II. had beflowed indulgences on all who
contributed towards building the church of St. Peter at
Rome; and as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and
extenlive fabric, his grant was founded on the fame pre-
tencet.

The right of promulgating these indulgences in Germa-

ny, together with a ihare in the profits arising from the sale
ofthem, was granted to Albert, eleEtor of Metz and arch-
bishop of Magdeburg, who, as his chief agent for retailing
them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican friar of li-
centious morals, but of an a&ive spirit, and remarkable for
his noisy and popular eloquence. He, aflifted by the monks
of his order, executed the commission with great zeal and
success, but with little discretion or decency; and though by
magnifying excefively the benefit of their indulgences§~

History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.

s Palavic. Hist. Conc. Trident. p. 4.
§ As the form of there indulgences, and the benefits which

they were supposed to convey, are unknown in protestant coun-
tries, and little underflood, at present, in several places where the
Roman catholic religion is eftabli'hed, I have, for the information
of my readers, translated the form of absolution tfed by Tetzel:
" May our Lord Jesus Christ have mercy upon thee, and absolve
thee by the merits of his molt holy parion. And I by his autho-
rit), that of his blessed apostles Peter and Paul, and of the molt
oly pope,.granted and committed to me in these parts, do absolve
thee, frf from all ecclefiatical cenfires, in whatever manner
they have been incurred, and then from all thy fins, transgressions
and excefes, how enornous soever they may be> even from such

and by disposing of them at a very low price, they carried
on for some time an extensive and lucrative trafic among
the credulous and the ignorant; the extravagance of their
assertions, as well as the irregularities in their condu&, came
at last to give general offence. The princes and noble
were irritated at feeing their vassals drained of so much
wealth, in order to replenish the treasury of a profuse pon.
tiff. Men of piety regretted the delusion of the people,
who being taught to rely, for the pardon of their fins, on
the indulgences which they purchased, did not think it in.
cumbent on them either to study the do&rines taught by
as are refered for the cognizance of the holy fee, and as far as
the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to you all punilhment
which you deserve m purgatory on their account, and I reflore yo6
to the holy liaraments of the church, to the unity of the faithful,
and to that innocence and purity which you potfefled at baptism,
lo that when you die, the gates of punishment ihall be {hut, and
the gates of the paradise of delight shall be opened, and if you fla1
not die at prdlent, this grace shall remain in full force when you
are at the point of death. In the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and ofthe Holy Gho." Seckend. Comment. lib. i. p.14.

The terms in-which Tetel and his aflociates described the be-
efits of indulgences, and the necessity of purchasing them, are so
extravagant, that they appear to be almof incredible. If any man
(said they) purchases letters of indulgence, his foul may reft e.
care with refp to its salvation. The fouls confined in purgato.
ry, for whose redemption indulgeces are purchased, as soon as the
money tinkles in the chet, instantly escape from that place of tor-
ment, and ascend into heaven. That the efficacy of indulgences
was so great, that the most heinous fins, even if one ihould violate
(which was impossible) the Mother of God, would be remitted and
expiated by them, and the person be freed both from punilhment
and guilt. That this was the unspeakable gift of God, in order
to reconcile men to himself. That the cross ereaed by the preach.
ers of indulgences, was as efficacious as the cross of Christ itself.
Lo! the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will you
enter? For twelve pence you may redeem the foul of your father
out of purgatory; and are you so ungrateful, that you will not ref-
cue your parent from torment? If you had but one coat, you ought
to strip yourelf inflantly, and fell it, in order to purchase such be-
nefits, &c. There, and many such extravagant expressions, are
feleded out of Luther's works by Chemnitius in his Examen Con-
cilii Tridentini, apud Hem. Vonder Hardt. Hist Liter. Reform.
pars iv. p. 6. The fame author has published several of Tetzel's
discourses, which prove that the e expressions were neither fingu
lr nor eggerated. Ibid.p. 14.

genuine Chrilfianity, or to pratrife the duties which it en-
joins. Even the most unthinking were ihocked at the scan-
dalous behaviour of Tetzel and his aflociates, who often
squandered in drunkenness, gaming, and low debauchery,
those fums which were piously bestowed, in hopes of obtain.
ing eternal happiness; and all began to wish that some check
were given to this commerce, no less detrimental to society
than deftru&ive to religion.

Such was the favourable junclure, and so disposed were

the minds of his countrymen to listen to his discourses, when
Martin Luther firIt began to call in question the efficacy of
indulgences, and to declaim against the vicious lives and
false doArines of the persons employed in promulgating
them. Luther was a native of Eifleben in Saxony, and
though born of poor parents, had received a learned educa-
tion, during the progress of which he gave many indications
of uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. His mind
was naturally susceptible of serious sentiments, and tinctured
with somewhat of that religious melancholy which delights
in the solitude and devotion of a monastic life. The death
of a companion killed by lightning at his fide, in a violent
thunder-storm, made such an impreflion on his mind, as co-
operated with his natural temper, in inducing him to retire
into a convent of Augufinian friars, where, without susser-
ing the intreaties of his parents to divert him from what he
thought his duty .to God, he assumed the habit of that or-
der. He soon acquired great reputation, not only for piety,
but for his love of knowledge, and his unwearied application
to study. He had been taught the scholastic philosophy
and theology which were then in vogue, by very able maf-
ters, and wanted not penetration to comprehend all the nice-
ties and diftinAions with which they abound; but his un.
derftanding, naturally found, and superior to every thing frid
volous, soon became disgusted with those subtile and unin-
ftrucive sciences, and fought for some more solid founda.
tion of knowledge and of piety in the holy scriptures.
Vol. II. H

Having found a copy of the Bible, which lay negleced in
the library of his monastery, he abandoned all other purfuibs
and devoted himself to the Rfudy of it, with such eagernef
and assiduity, as aflonifhed the monks, who were little ac.
customed to derive their theological notions from that source.
The great progress which he made in this uncommon course
of fludy, augmented so much the fame both of his fandity
and of his learning, that Frederic, elecor of Saxony, having
founded an university at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place
of his residence, Luther was chosen first to teach philosophy,
and afterwards theology there; and discharged both offices
in such a manner, that he was deemed the chief ornament of
that society.

While Luther was at the height of his reputation*and

authority, Tetzel began to publimh indulgences in the neigh.
bourhood of Wittemberg, and to acribe to them the fame
imaginary virtues which had, in other places, imposed on
the credulity of the people. As Saxony was hot more en.
lightened than the other provinces of Germany, Tetzel met
rith prodigious success there. It was with the utmost con.
ern that Luther beheld the artifices of those who fold,'and
the simplicity of tbofe who bought indulgences. The opi.
pions of Thomas Aquinas and the other fchoolmen, on which
the doctrine of indulgences was founded, had already loft
mnuch of their authority with him; and the Scriptures,
rwhich he began to confider as the great standard of theolo.
gical truth, afforded no countenance to a pracice, equally
subversive of faith and of morals. His warm and impetu.
ous temper did not susser him long to conceal such import.
ant difcoYvries, or to continue a silent fpetator of the del-.
sion of his countrymen. From the pulpit, in the great
church at Wittemberg, he inveighed bitterly against the ir.
regularities and vices of the monks who publilhed indul.
gences; he ventured to examine the dotrines which they
taught, and pointed out to the people the danger of relying
for salvation upon any other means than those appointed by

God in his word. The boldness and novelty of these opi-
nions drew great attention, and being recommended by the
authority of Luther's personal character, and delivered with
a popular and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep im-
prellion on his hearers. Encouraged by the favourable re-
ception of his doarines among the people, he wrote to Al.
bert, eletor of Mentz and archbiihop of Magdeburg, to
whose jurifdiftion that part of Saxony was subjef, and re-
monltrated warmly against the false opinions, as well as wick-
ed lives, of the preachers of indulgences; but he found that
prelate too deeply interested in their success to corre& their
abuses. His next attempt was to gain the suffrage of men
of learning. For this purpose he published ninety-five the.
fes, containing his fentnients with regard to indulgences.
These he proposed, not as points fully eltablifhed, or of un.
doubted certainty, but as fubjeas of inquiry and disputation;
he appointed a day, on which the learned were invited to
impugn them, either in person or by writing; to the whole
he subjoined solemn protestations of his high refpea for the
apostolic fee, and of his implicit fubmiffioa to its authority.
No opponent appeared at the time prefixed; the theses spread
over Germany with aftouilhing rapidity; they were read
with the greatest eagerness; and all admired the holdnefs of
the man, who had ventured not only to call in quetion the
plenitude of papal power, but to attack the Dominicans,
armed with all the terrors of inquisitorial authorityt.

The friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own order, though
addited with no less obsequiousness than the other monaltic
fraternities to the papal fee, gave no check to the publica-
tion of these uncommon opinions. Luther had, by his pie-
ty and learning, acquired extraordinary authority among his
brethren; he professed the highest regard for the authority
of the pope; his professions were at that time sincere; and

t Lutheri Opera, Jenam, 1612, vol. i. prafat. 3. p. a. 66. Hilf
of Council of Trent by F. Paul, p. 4. Sckend. Con. Apol. p

H

as a fcret enmity, excited by interest or emulation, subsist
among all the monastic orders in the Romish church, the
Augustinians were highly pleased with his invecsives againt
the Dominicans, and hoped to fee them exposed to the ha.
tred and scorn of the people. Nor was his sovereign, the
ele&or of Saxony, the wisest prince at that time in Germa.
ny, dissatisfied with this obftrudion which Luther threw in
the way of the publication of indulgences. He secretly
.encouraged the attempt, and flattered himself that this dif
pute among the ecclesiastics themfclveo, might give some
check to the exacdions of the court of Rome, which the fe.
cular princes had long, though without success, been endeta
vouring to oppose.

Many zealous champions immediately arose to defend o.

pinions on which the wealth and power of the church were
founded, against Luther's attacks. In opposition to his
theses, Tetzel published counter-thefes at Francfort on the
Oder; Eccius, a celebrated divine of Augsburg, endeavour.
ed to refute Luther's notions; and Prierias, a Dominican
friar, mafier of the sacred palace and Inquifitor-generalJ
wrote against him with all the virulence of a scholastic dif.
putant. But the manner in which they conducted the con.
troverfy did little service to their cause. Luther attempted
to combat indulgences by arguments founded in reason, 01
derived from scripture; they produced nothing in support
of them, but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the conclufioni
of the canon law, and the decrees of popest. The decision
of judges so partial and interefed, did not satisfy the people,
who began to call in question the authority even of theft
venerable guides, when they found them itanding in direfl
opposition to the dicates of reason, and the determination
of the divine laws §. *

t F. Paul, p. 6. Seckend. p. 4. Palavic. p. 8.
§ Seckend. p. 30.
* Guicciardini has asserted two things with regard to the firl

promulgation of indulgences; i. That Leo beflowed a gift of the
profits arising from the sale of indulgences in Saxony, and the ad

Meanwhile, there novelties in Luther's do&rines which

interested all Germany, excited little attention and no.alarm
in the court of Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined
pleasures, intent upon great schemes of policy, a stranger to
theological controversies, and apt to despise them, regarded
with the utmofi indifference the operations of an obscure
friar, who, in the heart of Germany, carried on a scholastic
disputation in a barbarous style. Little did he apprehend,
or Luther himself dream, that the effe&s of this quarrel
would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo imputed the whole
to monaflic enmity and emulation, and seemed inclined not
to interpose in the contest, but to allow the Augustinians
and Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with their u-
fual animosity.

jacent provinces of Germany, upon his sifter Magdalen, the wife
of Francefcetto Cibo, Goic. lib. 13, z68.-2. That Arcemboldo,
a Genoese ecclelaflic, who had been bred a merchant, and still re-
tained all the adcivity and address of that profefiion, was appoint-
ed by her to colledt the money which lhould be railed. F. Paul
has followed him in both these particulars, and adds, that the Au-
guftinians in Saxony had been immembrially employed in preach-
ing indulgences; but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping
to gain more by committing this truit to the Dominicans, had
made their bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted
at firfi to oppose Tetzel and his associates, by a desire of taking
revenge for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5. Al-
moA ali historians since their time, popish as well as proteJtantt
have, without examination, admitted these assertions to be true
upon their authority. But notwithstanding the concurring tefti-
mony of two authors, so eminent both for exadnefs and veracity
we may observe,

I. 1 hat Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical archives
of purpose, could not find this pretended grant to Leo's filter in
any of those registers where it mull necesIarily have been record-
ed. Palav. p. 5.-a. That the profits arising from indulgences in.
Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been granted not to Mag-
dalen, but to Albert, archbishop of Mentz, who had the right of
nominating those whopublifhed them. Seck. p. i. Luth.Oper.
i. praef. p. a. Palav. p. 6.-3. That Arcemboldo never had conr
tern in the publication of indulgences in Saxony; his district was
Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seck. p. 14. Palav.
p. 6--4. That Luther and his adherents never mention this grant,
of Leo's to his filler; though a circumflance of which they could
hardly have been ignorant, and which they would have bce..car;t

H3

The solicitations, however, of Luther's adversaries, who

were exasperated to an high degree by the boldness and fe.
verity with which he animadverted on their writings, toge.
ther with the surprising progress which his opinions made
in different parts of Germany, roused at last the attention of
the court of Rome, and obliged Leo to take measures for
the security of the church against an attack that now ap-
peared too serious to be despised. For this end, he fum.
moned Luther to appear at Rome [July 1513,, within
fixtv days, before the auditor of the chamber, and the In-
quititor-general Prierias, who had written against him, whom
he empowered jointly to examine his doctrines, and to decide
concerning them. He wrote, at the fame time, to the elec-
tor of Saxony, beseeching him not to protec a man whose
heretical and profane tenets were so shocking to pious ears;
and enjoined the provincial of the Augustinians to check,
by his authority, the rashness of an arrogant monk, which
brought disgrace upon the order of St. Auguftie, and gave
oiffnce and disturbance to the whole church.

From the strain of these letters, as well as from the nomi.

ful not to fupprefs.-s.The publication of indulgences in Germany
was not usually committed to the Auguflinians. The promulga-
tion of them, at three different periods under Julius II. was grant-
ed to the Francircans; the Dominicans had been employed in the
fame office a short time before the present period. Palav. p. 46.
-6. The promulgation of those indulgences, which first excited
I.uther's indignation, was entrufled to the archbishop of Mentz,
in conriunclion with the guardian of the Franciscans; but the lat-
ttr having declined accepting of that trust, the sole right became
vested in the archbilhop. Palav. 6. Seek. x6, 17.-7. Luther
w-s not infligated by his fuxpriors among the Augufiinians to at-
t3ack the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate indulgences be.
cause they were promulgated by them; his opposition to their
plniicns and vices proceeded from more laudable motives. Seek.
-. 15, 32. Lutheri Opera, . p. 64, 6, 8. A diploma of indul-
gtr.ces is publfihed by Herm. Vonder Hardt, from which it ap-
pears, that the name of the guardian of the Francifeans is retained,
together with that of the archbishop, although the former did not
a.t. The limits of the country to which their commissions ex-
tended, viz. the diocese of Mentz, Magdeburg, Halberfladt, and
the -er:itories of the marquis of Brandenburg, are mentioned in
thba diploma. lift. Literaria Reformat. pars. iv. p. 14.

nation of a judge so prejudiced and partial as Prierias, Lu.
ther easily saw what sentence he might.expe& at Rome. He
discovered, for that reason, the utmost solicitude to have his
cause tried in Germany, and before a less fufpe&ed tribunal.
The professors in the university of Wittemberg, anxious for
the safety of a man who did so much honour to their society,
wrote to the pope, and after employing several pretexts to
excuse Luther from appearing at Rome, intreated Leo to
commit the examination of his dotrines to some persons of
learning and authority in Germany. The elecor requested
the fame thing of the pope's legate at the diet of Augsburg;
and as Luther himself, who, at that time, was so far from
having any intention to disclaim the papal authority, that he
did not even entertain the smallest suspicion concerning its
divine original, had written to Leo a moRt fibmiffive letter,
promising an unreserved compliance with his will, the pope
gratified them so far as to empower his legate in Germany,
cardinal Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for scholastic learn-
ing, and pafionately devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and
determine the cause.

Luther, though he had good reason to decline a judge

chosen among his avowed adversaries, did not hesitate about
appearing before Cajetan; and having obtained the empe-
ror's fafe-condu&, immediately repaired to Augsburg. The
cardinal received him with decent refpe&, and endeavoured
at firif to gain upon him by gentle treatment. The cardinal,
relying on the superiority of his own talents as a theologian,
entered into a formal dispute with Luther concerning the
doctrines contained in his thefest. But the weapons which
they employed were so different, Cajetan appealing to papal
decrees, and the opinions of fchoolmen, and Luther refting

In the former editions I asserted, upon the authority of Father

Paul, that Cajetan thought it beneath his dignity to enter into any
dilpute with Luther; but M. Beaufobre, in his Hiffoire de la Re-
formation, vol. i. p. 1x, &c. has satisfied me that Iwas mifiaken.
See allb Seckend. lib. i. p. 46, &c.

entirely on the authority of scripture, that the contest was
altogether fruitlef. The cardinal relinquished the chara~er
of a disputant, and assuming that of judge, enjoined Lu-
ther, by virtue of the apostolic powers with which he was
clothed, to setrat the errors which he had uttered with re-
gard to indulgences, and the nature of faith; and to abtain,
for the future, from the publication of new and dangerous
opinions. Luther, fully persuaded of the truth of his own
tenets, and confirmed in the belief of them by the approba-
tion which they had met with among persons conspicuous
both for learning and piety, was surprised at this abrupt
mention of a recantation, before any endeavours were used
to convince him that he was mistaken. He had flattered
himself, that in a conference concerning the points in dif-
pute with a prelate of such diftinguilhed abilities, he mhould
be able to remove many of those imputations with which
the ignorance or malice of his antagonists had loaded him;
but the high tone ofauthority that the cardinal assumed, ex-
tinguifhed at once all hopes of this kind, and cut off every
profpe&t of advantage from the interview. His native in.
trepidity of mind, however, did not desert him- He declar-
ed with the utmost firmness, that he could not, with a safe
conscience, renounce opinions which he believed to be true;
nor should any consideration ever induce him to de what
would be so base in itself, and so offensive to God. At the
fame time he continued to express no less reverence than
formerly for the authority of the apostolic feet; he signified
his willingness to submit the whole controversy to certain
universities which he named, and promised neither to write
nor to preach concerning indulgences for the future, provid-
ed his adversaries were likewise enjoined to be filnt with re-
fpea to them*. All these offers Cajetan disregarded or re-
je&ed, and till insisted peremptorily on a simple recantation,
threatening him with ecclesiastical censures, and forbidding
him to appear again in 'his presence, unless he resolved in.

t Luth. Opcr. voL . p. z64, Id. ibid. p. 169.

Rantly to comply with what he had required. This haugh-
ty and violent manner of proceeding, as well as other cir-
cumftances, gave Luther's friends such strong reasons to sus-
pe&, that even the Imperial fafe-condu& would not be able
to prote&t him from the legate's power and resentment, that
they prevailed on him to -withdraw secretly from Augsburg,
and to return to his own country. But before his departure,
according to a form of which there had been some examples,
he prepared [O&ober 18] a solemn appeal from the pope,
ill-informed at that time concerning his cause, to the pope,
when he lhould receive more full information with refpet to
it4.

Cajetan, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, .and at. the

publication of his appeal, wrote to the elecor of Saxony,
complaining of both; and requiring him, as he regarded the'
peace of the church, or the authority of its head, either to
fend that seditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or to banish
him out of his territories. It was not from theological con.
fiderations that Frederic had hitherto countenanced Luther;
he seems to have been much a itranger to controversies of
that kind, and to have been little interested in them. His
protection flowed almost entirely, as hath been already obh
served, from political motives, and was afforded with great'
secrecy and caution. He had neither heard any of Luther's
discourses, nor read any of his books; and though all Ger-
many resounded with his fame, he had never once admitted
him into his presence§. But upon this demand which the
cardinal made, it became neceflary to throw off somewhat of
his former reserve. He had been at great expence, and had
betlowed much attention on founding a new university, an
object of considerable importance to every German prince;
and foreseeing how fatal a blow the removal of Luther would
be to its reputation*, he, under various pretexts, and with

t Sleid. Hilt. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45. Luth. Oper. i.

163.

§ Seckend. p. %. Sleid. Hit. p.
a2. · Seckend. p. 59.

many professions of efleem for the cardinal, as well as of re.
verincc for the pope, not only declined complying with ei-
ther of his requests, but openly discovered great concern for
Luther's safety*.

The inflexible rigour with which Cajetan insisted on a

simple recantation, gave great offence to Luther's followers
in that age, and hath since been censured as imprudent, by
several Popilh writers. But it was impossible for the legate
to at another part. The judges before whom Luther had
been required to appear at Rome, were so eager to display
their zeal againf his errors, that, without waiting for the
expiration of the sixty days allowed him in the citation,
they had already condemned him as an heretict. Leo had,
in several of his briefs and letters, fLgmatized him as a child
of iniquity, and a man given up to a reprobate sense. No.
thing les, therefore, than a recantation could save the ho,
nor of the church, whose maxim it is, never to abandon the
fmaDft point that it has cftabilhed, and which is even pre.
duded, by its pretensions to infallibility, from having it in
its power to do so.

Luther's situation at this time was such as would have fit

led any other person with the moit disquieting apprehensions.
He could not expct that a prince, so prudent and cautious
s Frederic, would, on his account, set at defiance the thun.
ders of the church, and brave the papal power, which had-
crufied some of the moi powerful of the German emperors.
He knew what veneration was paid, in that age, to ecclefi-
aftical decisions; what terrors ecdlefiafical censures carried
along with them, and how easily these might intimidate and
Dhake a prince, who was rather his protector from policy,
than his disciple from conviction. If he 1hould be obliged
to quit Saxony, he had no profpe& of any other asylum, and
mufll and exposed to whatever punifmment the rage or hi.
gotry of his enemies could infli&c Though sensible of his
danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity or remissnesss
*Skid His. p. to. Lut. Oper. 1.71. t Luth. Oper. L 16x1

but continued to vindicate his own conduE and opinions,
and to inveigh against those of his adversaries with more ve-
hemence than ever*.

But as every ftep taken by the court of Rome, particu-

larly the irregular sentence by which he had been so preci-
pitately declared a heretic, convinced Luther that Leo would
soon proceed to the most violent measures against him, he
had recourse to the only expedient in his power, in order to
prevent the effec of the papal censures. He appealed to a
general council, which he affirmed to be the representative
I of the catholic church, and superior in power to the pope,
who, being a fallible man, might err, as St. Peter, the molt
perfea of his predecessors, had erred§.

It soon appeared, that Luther had not formed rash con.

je&ures concerning the intentions of the Romilh church.
A bull, of a date prior to his appeal, was iffued-by the pope,
in which he magnifies the virtue and efficacy of indulgences,
in terms as extravagant as any of his predecessors had ven-
tured to use in the darkest ages; and without applying such
palliatives, or mentioning such concessions, as a more enlight.
ened period, and the dispositions in the minds of many men
at that jun&ure, seemed to call for, he required all Christ-
ians to assent to what he delivered as the docrine of the ca-
tholic church, and fubjeted those who should hold or teach
any contrary opinion to the heaviest ecclesiastical censures.

Among Luther's followers, this bull, which they confider.
ed as an unjustifiable effort of the pope, in order to preserve
that rich branch of his revenue which arose from indulgen.
ces, produced little effet. But, among the reft of his coun-
trymen, such a clear decision of the sovereign pontiff againf
him, and enforced by. such dreadful penalties, must have
been attended with consequences very fatal to his cause
if these had not been prevented in a great measure by the
death of the emperor Maximilian, [January 17, 1519,]
whom both his principles and his interest prompted to fnp-

Seckend. p. 9. Sleid I.
Hi . Luth. Oper. i. 79.

port the authority of the holy fee. In consequence of this
event, the vicariat of that part of Germany which is go.
vernedby the Saxon laws, devolved to the elector of Saxony;
and under the Ihelter of his friendly adminiltration, Luther
not only enjoyed tranquillity, but his opinions were suffered,
during the interregnum which preceded Charles's election,
to take root in different places, and to grow up to some de.
gree of strength and firmness. At the fame time, as the ce
le&ion of an emperor was a point more interesting to Leo
than a theological controversy, which he did not understand,
and of which he could not foresee the consequences, he was
so extremely solicitous not to irritate a prince of such con.
fiderable influence in the deetoral college as Frederic, that
he discovered a great unwillingness to pronounce the fen. i
tence of excommunication againit Luther, which his adver. 1
saries continually demanded with the moit clamorous im.
portunity.

To these political views of the pope,-as well as to his na.

tural averfiop from severe measures, was owing the fufpeno
sion of any further proceedings againit Luther for eighteen
months. Perpetual negotiations, however, in order to bring
the matter to some amicable issue, were carried on during
that space. The manner in which these were conduAed
having given Luther many opportunities of observing the;
corruption of the court of Rome; its obstinacy in adhering
toeftabliihed errors; and its indifference about truth, however
clearly proposed, or strongly proved he began to utter-fome
doubts with regard to the divine original of the papal an.
thority. A public disputation was held upon this imprt
ant question at Leipfic, between Luther and Eccius, one
of his most learned and formidable antagonists; but it wai
as fruitless and indecisive as such scholastic combats ufuall
prove. Both parties boasted of having obtained the viao.
ry; both were confirmed in their own opinions; and no pro.
grefs was made towards-deciding the point in controversy*

Luth. Oper. i. x99.

Nor did this spirit of opposition to the dorines and u-

furpations of the Romilh church break out in Saxony alone;
an attack no less violent, and occasioned by the fame causes,
was made upon them about this time in Switzerland. The
Franciscans being entrusted with the promulgation of indul-
gences in that country, executed their commission with the
fame indiscretion and rapacioufnes which had rendered the
Dominicans so odiou in Germany. They proceeded, ne.
verthelefs, with uninterrupted success till they arrived at
Zurich. There Zuioglius, a man not inferior to Luther
himself in zeal and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them;
and being animated with a republican boldness, and free
from those restraints which fubjeaion to the will of a prince
imposed on the German reformer, he advanced with more
daring and rapid steps to overturn the whole fabric of the
eftablilhed religions. The appearance of such a vigorous
auxiliary, and the progress which he made, was, at sirs,
matter of great-joy to Luther. On the other hand, the
decrees of the universities of Cologne and Louvain, which'
pronounced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded great
cause of triumph to his adversaries.

But the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired additional
fortitude from every inltance of opposition; and pushing
on his inquiries and attacks from one doctrine to another,
he began to Ihake the firmet foundations on which the
wealth or power of the church were eitablifhed. Leo came
at last to be convinced, that all hopes of reclaiming him by
forbearance were vain; several prelates of great wisdom ex-
claimed no less than Luther's personal adversaries, against
the pope's unprecedented lenity in permnnitting an incorrigi-
ble heretic, who during tre years had. been endeavouring
to subvert every thing sacred and venerable, till to remain
within the bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal
fee rendered the most vigorous proceedings necessary; the
new emperor, it was hoped, would support its authoritys

t Sleid. Hilt. z2. Seckend. j9.
Vol. II. I

nor did it seem probable that the ele&or of Saitony would
so far forget his usual Caution, as to set himself in opposition
to their united power. The college of cardinalh was ofte
afembled, in order to prepare the fentunce with ade delibe.
ration, and the ablest canonist wee consulted howr it might
be exprefled with unexceptionable formality. At lat, on
the fifteenth of June, one thousand five hundred and twenty,
the bull, so fatal to the church of Rome, was iltued. For.
ty-one propositions, extrared out of- Luther's works*aer
therein condemned as heretical, fc~ndaous, and offensive to
pious ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writings,
upon pain of excommunication such as had any of them
in their custody are commanded to commit them to the
bames; he himself, if he did not, in sixty days, publicly rei
cant his errors, and burn his books, is pronounced an obfti.
bate heretic; is excommunicated, and delivered unto Satan for
the detrumion of his flesh; and all secular princes are re,
-quired, under pain of incurring the fame censure, to feite
his person, that he might be puniihed as his crimes desert.
ed*.

The publ;cation of this bull in Germany excited vatious

paiions in different places. Luther's adversaries exultedu
as if his party and opinions had been crulhed at once by
such a decisive blow. His followers, whose reverence sot
the papal authority daily diminished, read Leo's anathemas
with more indignation than terror. In some cities, the pea
pie violently obftruted the promulgation of the bulbl it
others, the persons who attempted to publish it were infbl
td, and the bul itself tor in pieces, and trodden undet
foott.

This sentence, which he had for some time expe&ed, did

bot disconcert or intimidate Luther. After renewing hi
appeal to the general council [Nov. 17,] he publilhed r.
narks upon the bull of excommunication; and being now

* Plavic. 2. Luth. Oper. i. 4X3.

f Seckend, p. rx6.

prfuaded that Leo had been guilty both of impiety and
injustice in his proceedings against him, he boldly declared
the pope to be that man of fin, or Antichrist, whose appear-
ance is foretold in the New Testament; he declaimed against
his tyranny and usurpations with greater violence than ever;
he exhorted all Christian princes to (hake off such an igno-
minious yoke; and boasted of his own happiness in being
marked out as the objec of ecclesiastical indignation, be-
cawie he had ventured to assert the liberty of mankind. Nor
did he confine his expressions of contempt for the papal
pover to words alone; Leo having, in execution of the
bull, appointed Luther's books to be burnt at Rome, he, by
way of retaliation, aflembled all the professors and students in
the university of Wittemburg, and with great pomp, in
presence of a vast multitude of fpetators, cast the volumes
of the canon law, together with the bull of excommunica-
tion, into the flames; and his example was imitated in feve-
ral cities of Germany. The manner in which he justified
this aftion was still more offensive than the action itself
Having colleted from the canon law some of the most ex-
travagant propositions with regard to the plenitude and om-
nipotence of the papal power, as well as the subordination of
all secular jurifdi&ion to the authority of the holy fee, he
publilhed these with a commentary, pointing out the impie-
ty of such tenets, and their evident tendency to. subvert all.
civil government*.

Such was the progress which Luther had made, and

such the state of his party, when Charles arrived in Germa-
ny. No secular prince had hitherto embraced Luther's o-
pinions; no change in the established forms of worihip
had been introduced, and no encroachments had been made
upon the poffefions or jurifdiaion of the clergy; neither
party had yet proceeded to a&ion; and the controversy,
though condu&ed with great heat and paflion on both fides,
was itill carried: on with *its proper weapons,, with theses

* Luth. Oper. ii. 36.,

1 z.

disputations, and replies. A deep imprefion, howeva
was made upon the minds of the people; their reverence for
-ancient inlitutions and do&ines was maken; and the ma
terials were already scattered, which kindld into the combuf.
tion that soon fprcad over all Germany. Students crowded
from every province of the empire to Wittemberg; and un.
der Luther himself, Mclanabon, Carloftadius, and other
masters then reckoned eminent, imbibed opinions, which,
on their return, they propagated among their countrymen,
who lifened to them with that fond attention, which truth,
when accompanied with novelty, naturally commands .

During the course of these tranfalioos, the court of

Rome, though under the direction of one of its ablest pon.
tiffs, neither formed its schemes with that profound fagacl
ty, nor executed them with that steady perseverance, which
had long rendered it the moai perfet model of political wis-
dom to the reft of Europe. When Luther began to de-
claim againit indulgences, two different methods of treating
him lay before the pope; by adopting of which, the at.
tempt, it is probable, might have been crufled, and by the
other it might been rendered innocent. If Luther's firt
departure from the doc-rines of the.-church-had inftanly
drawn upon him the weight of its censures, the dread of
there might have refirained the eleEtor of Saxony from pro.
tefcing him, might have deterred the people from lifteniug
to his discourses, or even might have overawed Luther him,
self; and his name, like that of many good men before hi
time,-would now have been known to the world only for
his honest but ill-timed effort to conrect the corruptions of
the Romish church. On the other hand, if the pope had
early testified some displeasure with the vices and exccfles of
the friars who had been employed in publishing indulgences;
if he had forbidden the mentioning of controverted points
in discourses addressed to the people; if he had enjoined
the disputants on both fides to be silent; if he had beet

t Seckend. 59.

careful not to rifque the credit of the church, by defining
articles which had hitherto been left undetermined; Lu.
ther would, probably, have ftopt ihort at his 6rft discoveries:
he would not have been forced, in felf.defence, to venture
upon new ground, and the whole controversy might poffi-
bly have died aay insensibly;. or being eonfined-entirely to
the 4chools, might have been carried: on. with as little de-
triment to the peace and unity of the-Romifl church; as
that which. the Franciscans maintain with the Dominicans
concerning the immaculate conception, or that between the
Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the operations of grace.
But Leo, by flutuating between thefe'ppofite systems, and
by embracing them alternately, defeated- the effects of both.
By an improper exertion: of authority, Luther was exafpe-
rated, but not reltrained. By a mistaken exercise of lenity,
time was given for his opinions to spread, but no progress
was made towards reconciling him to the church; and even
the sentence of excommunication, which at another juncure.
might have -been decisive, was delayed- 'o long, that, it be-
came at last scarcely an obje& of terror..

Such a. series of errors in the measures of: a court seldom

chargeable with.miftaking its own true 4ntereft, is not: more
aflonifhing. than the wisdom which appeared in Luther's
condut. Though a perse fitranger to the maxims tof
worldly wisdom, and incapable, from, the impetuosity of hii
temper, of observing them,- he was led naturally, by the me-
thod- in which he made his discoveries, to carry on his ope-
rations in a manner which contributed more to their success,.
than if every ftep he took had been prescribed by the-moft
artful policy. At the time when he set himself to oppose
Tetzel, he was far from intending-that reformation which he
afterwards effected; and would have trembled.with horror
at the thoughts of what at las he gloried in accomplilhing.
The knowledge of truth was not poured into his mind all
at once, by any. special revelation; he acquired it by indu-
l'y and meditation, and his progress, of consequence, was

3

gradual. The docrines of popery are so clofey conne-ted,
that the exposing of one error conduted him naturally to
the detecion of others; and all the paits of that artificial
fabric were so united together, that the pulling down of one
loofened-the foundation of the reft, and rendered it more ea.
fy to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets
concerning indulgence, he was obliged to inquire into the
true cause of our jfaification and acceptance with God.
The knowledge of that discovered to him by degrees the
inutility of pilgrimages and penances; the vanity of relying
on the interetfion of faints; ther impiety of worthipping
them; the abues of auricular confefion; and the imagina,
ry existence of purgatory. - The detection of so many er.
ors led him of course to confider the charter of the cle.
gy who taught them; and their exorbitant wealth, the ies
were injunction of celibacy, together with the intolerable ri.
gour of monaafic vows, appeared to him the great fourcet
of their corruption. From thence, it was but one fep to
carl in queltion the divine original of the papal power,
which authorized and supported such a system of errors.
As the unavoidable result of the whole, he disclaimed the
infallibiity of the pope, the decfios- of fchoolien, or any
other human authority, and appealed to the word of-God-as
the only ttandard of theological truth. To this gradual
progrefa Lnther owed his fneces. His hearers were not
focked at first by any proposition too repugnant totheir
ancient prejudices, or too remote from etabliled opinions
They were conduAed iafenfibly from onedotrine to another.
Their faith and convi&ion were able to keep pace with his
discoverics. To the fame cause was owing the inattention,
and even indifference, with which Leo viewed Luther's fir
proceedings. A dirte& or violent attack upon the authori-
ty of the church would at once have drawn upon Luther the
whole we;ght of its vengeance; but as this was fa from hi
tholughts, as he continued long to profess great refpe for
the pope, and made repeated ofers of submission to his decc

lions, there seemed to be no reason for apprehending that he
would prove the author of any desperate revolt; and he was
suffered to proceed ftep by tep, in undermining the. conftitu.
tion of the church; until the remedy applied at la 'came too
late to produce any effe. ..

But whatever advantages Luther's cause derived, either

from the mistakes of his ,adversaries, or from his own. good.
condu&, the sudden progress and firm efablifhment.of his
doctrines must not be aferibed to these alone. ,The fame
corruptions in the church of Rome which hecondemned,
had been attacked long before his time. The fame opiniona
which he now propagated, had beenpublithed. in different,
places, and were fupported-by the fame argumeunts. Wal,
dus in the twelfth century, Wickliff in the fourteenth, and
Huss in the fifteenth, had.inveighed against the errors of
popery with great boldness, and confuted them with more
ingenuity and learning than could have been eppe~ed in
those illiterate agea.in which they fourihed. But all these
premature attempts towards a reformation proved.abortive.
Such feeble lights, iucapableofdifpelling the darkness which
then covered the church, were .oon extinguilhed;. and
though the dofrines of these pious men produced rome es-
fe&s, and left some traces in the countries where they taught,
they were neither extenfiye nor considerable. Many power.
ful causes contributed to facilitate -Luther's progrds, which
either did not exist, nor did not operate with full force in
their days; and at that critical and mature junture whea
he appeared, circumstances of every kind concurred in ren-
dering each flep that he took successfuL

The long and scandalous schism which divided the church

during the latter part of the fourteenth and the beginning
of the fifteenth centuries, had a great effe& in diminishing
the veneration with which the world had been accustomed
to view the papal dignity. Two or three contending pon-
tiffs roaming about Europe at a time; fawning on the prin-
ces, whom they wanted to gain; extorting large fums of

money from the countries which acknowledged their attho.
rity; excommunicating their rivals, and cursing thole who
adhered to them; discredited their pretensions to infalibi.
lity, and eposed both their persons and their office to con.
tempt. The laity, to whom all parties appealed, came to
learn that some right of private judgment belonged to thm,
and acquired the exercise of it so far as to chute, among
the infallible guides, whom they would please to follow.
The proceedings of the councils of Constance and Basil
spread this difrefpe& for the Romi~ fee fill wider, and by
their bold exertion of authority in deposing and elefing
popes, taught the wodd that there was in the church a ju.
rifdi&ion superior even to the papal power, which they had
long believed to be supreme.

The wound given on that occasion to the papal authority

was fcardly healed up, when the pontificates of Alexander
VL and Julius IL both able princes, but deteitable ecclefi.
aftics, raied new Icandal in Christendom. The profligate
morals of the former in private life; the fraud, the injufticei
and cruelty of his public adminitration, place him:on a level
with those tyrants, whose deeds are the greateft:eprtbachlto
human nature The latter, though a ftrangerto the odious
pafions which prompted his pedeceffor to commit so many
unnatural crimes, was under the dominion of a reflefs anid
ungovernable ambition, that scorned all considerations bs
gratitude, ofdecency, or ofjuftice, when they obftruted
the execution of his schemas. It was. hardly poffibleto be
firmly prfuaded that the infalible knowledge of a religion,
whose chief precepts are purityand humility, was deposited
in the breats of the profligate Alexander or the overbearing
Julius. The opinion of those who exalted the authority
of a council above that of the pope, spread wonderfully un-
der their pontificates: and as the emperor and French kings,
who were alternately engaged in hostilities with those aiaive
pontiffs, permitted and even encouraged their fubjeAs to cx-
poCe their vices with al the .violence of invecive and al the

petulance of ridicule, men's ears being accustomed to these,
were not ihocked with the bold or ludicrous difcourwes of
Luther and his followers concerning the papal dignity.

Nor were such excesses confined to the head of the church

alone. Many of the dignified clergy, secular as well as re-
gular, being the younger sons of noble families, who had at-
fumed the ecclesiastical characer for no other reason but
that they found in the church stations of great dignity and
affluence, were accustomed totally to neglec the duties of
their office, and indulged themselves without reserve in all
the vices to which great wealth and idleness naturally give
birth. Though the inferior clergy were prevented by their
poverty from imitating the expensive luxury of -their fupe-
riors, yet gross ignorance and low debauchery rendered them
as contemptible as the other were odious*. The severe
and unnatural law of celibacy, to which both were equally
subjeCt, occasioned such irregularities, that in several parts
of Europe the concubinage of priests was not only permitted,
but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so contrary to
the precepts of the Christian religion, is the fironget proof
that the crimes it was intended to prevent were both numc-
rous and flagrant. Long before the sixteenth century, ma-
ny authors of great name and authority give such delcriptions
of the dissolute morals of the clergy, as seem almost incre-
dible in the present aget. The voluptuous lives of ecclefi-

* The corrupt state of the church, prior to the Reformation, i

acknowledged by an author, who was both abundantly able to
judge concerning this mattet, and who was not over-forward to
confess it. " For some years (fays Bellarmie) before the Luther-
an and Calvinitic herefies were publithed, there was not (as con-
temporary authors telify) any severity in ecclefiafticaljudicatories,
any discipline with regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred li-
terature, any reverence for divine things there was not almoi
any religion remaining." Bellarminus Concio xxviii. Oper. tom.
vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. apud Gerdefii Hilt Evan. Renova-
ti, vol. i. p. 25.

t Centum Gravamina Nation. German, in Fafciculo Rer. expe-
tend. & fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i. 36S. See in-
numerable passages to the fame purpose in the appendix, orfecond
volume, published by Edw. Brown. See also Herm. vonder Ha rdt

asies occafoed great scandal, not only because their ma~
nets were inconfient with their sacred charater; but the
laity being accustomed to fee several of them raised from the
loert ations to the greatft affluence, did not shew the
fame indulgence to their execefes, as to those of perfoan po.
fefed of heeditary wealth or grandeur; and viewing their
condition with more envy, they censured their crimes with
greater leverity. Nothing, therefore, could be more ac.
ceptable to Luther's hearer, than the violence with which
he exclaimed againt the immoraitcs of church-men, and
'very person in his audience could, from his own obfervaioq,
confirm the truth of his inveivcs.

The scandal of these crimes was greatly increased by the

facility with which foch as committed them obtained pardon.
In all the European kingdoms, the impotence of the cidl
magifrate, under forms of government extremely irregulr
and turbulent, made it needfary to relax the rigour of jut
tice, and upon payment of a certain fine or composition pre.
fried by law, judges were accustomed to remit farther pu-
nifment, even of the most atrocious crimes. The court ds
Rome, always attentive to the means of augmenting its rev.
HuL Lit. Refrm pas iii and the vast colletion of Walchius
in h four volumes of Mom Medii ~v Gotting. 175

The authors I have quted enumerate the vices of the cier.

When they ventured upon ations manifestly ciminal, we may
conelude that they woold be l6 frupulous with refpet to the dt
corum of behavour. Accordingly their negle of the decent con
d fuikable s their profdfion, seems to have given great offence.
In order to illufate this, I fal traneribe one pa~,e because i
is taken noetfrom any author whose profefed rpo it wa to de-
feribe the improper condut of the clrgy; and who, from preju
dire r artifice, may be ppofed to ag vate the charge aga
them. The emperor C IV. in a letter to the archbihop ol
Mentz, A D. 1359, exhorting him to rform the diforde of the
clergy, thus exprefes bhflf: "De Chrifli patnimonio, ludos, ha
tiludia & tomeamenta exerent; habitum militarem cum pratex-
tis aureis et argenteis geftant, et calceo militares; comam & bar
bam nutriunt, & nihil qnod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiafticu
fpcjat, oftendunt. Miltaribus fe duntaxat & fecularibus asibus,
vita & moribm, in fuae faltis difpendium, & generale populi fean-
dalum, mmifcent." Codex Dipbmaticus Anecdotqun, per Val.
Frd. Gudenum, 4to. voL iii p. 438.

nues, imitated this pratice, and, by a preposterous accom.
modation of it to religious concerns, granted its pardons to
such transgressors as gave a foin of money in order to pur-
chafe them. As the idea of a composition for crimes was
then familiar, this Irange traffic was so far from lhocking
mankind, that it soon became general; and in order to prep
vent any imposition in carrying it on, the officers of the
Roman chancery publiihed a book, containing the precise
fum to be exated for the pardon of every particular fin.
A deacon guilty of murder was absolved for twenty crowns.
A bilhop or abbot might afaffinate for three hundred livres,
Any ecclesiastic might violate his vows of chastity, even
with the mos aggravating circumfRances, for the third part
of that fum. Even such ihocking crimes, as occur seldom
in human life, and perhaps exist only in the impure imagi-
nation of a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate -rate.
When a more regular and perfea mode of dispensing justice
came to be introduced into civil courts, the pra&ice of pay-
ing a composition for crimes went gradually into disuse; and
mankind having acquired more accurate notions concerning
religion and morality, the conditions on which the court of
Rome bestowed its pardons appeared impious, and were con-
fidered as one great source of ecclesiastical corruption 1.

This degeneracy of manners among the clergy might

have been tolerated, perhaps, with greater indulgence, if
their exorbitant riches and power had not enabled them, at
the fame time, to encroach on the rights of every other or-
der of men. It is the genius of fuperfiition, fond of what.
ever is pompous or grand, to set no bounds to its liberality
towards persons whom it esteems sacred, and to think its ex-
pressions of regard defeitive, tnlefs it hath railed them to
the height of wealth and authority. Hence flowed the ex.

t Fafcicul. Rer. expet. & fug. i. 355. J. G. Schelhornii Amenit.
·iterar. Francof. 1725. vol. ii. 369. Didion. de Bayle, Artic,
Banck & Tuppius. Taxa Cancellar. Romane, edit. -rancof.
S6jl. pafinma

tensive revenues and jurifdition poffcfled by the church in
eery country of Europe, and which were become intolera.
ble to the laity, from whose undifcerning bounty they wre
at first derived.

The burden, however, of ecclfiaftical opprefion had si.

len with such peculiar weight on the Germans as rendered
them, though naturally exempt from levity, and tenacious
of their ancient customs, more inclinable than ary people in
Europe to liften to those who called on them to assert their
liberty. During the long contefis ietween the popes and
emperors concerning the right of investiture, and the wan
which these occasioned, most of the considerable German ec.
clefiafics joined the papal faion; and while engaged in
rebllion against the head of the empire, they seized the Im.
perial domains and revenues, and usurped the Imperial jurif.
dition within their own dioceses. Upon the re-eftablith.
ment of tranqillity, they ftil retained these usurpations, as
if by the length of an unjust pofflefion they had acquired a
legal right to them. The emperors, too feeble to wret
them out of their hands, were obliged to grant the clergy
fiefs of those ample territories, and they enjoyed all the im,
munities as well as honours which belonged to feudal barons
By means of there, many bilhops and abbots in German
were net mnly ecclesiastics, but princes, and their chara&c
and manners partook more of thelicence too frequent among
the latter, than of the san&ity which became the former*.

The unsettled fate of government in Germany, and thl

frequent wars to which that country was exposed, contri
buted in another manner towards aggrandising 'ecclefiaics
The odly property, during those times of anarchy, whic
enjoyed security from the oppression of the great, or th
ravages of war, was that which belonged to the church
This was owing, not only to the great reverence for the fa
cred charaer prevalent in those ages, but to a fuperftitiou
dread of the sentence of excommunication, which the cer

* F. Paul, Hfitory of Ecckfiaf Benefices, p. 107.

gy were ready to denounce against all who invaded their
possessions. Many observing this, made a surrender of their
lands to ecclefiaflics, and consenting to hold them in fee of
the church, obtained as its vassals a degree of safety, which
without this device they were unable to procure. By such
an increase of the number of their vasals, the power of ec-
clefiaftics received a real and permanent augmentation; and
as lands, held in fee by the limited tenures common in those
ages, often returned to the persons on whom the fief de-
pended, considerable additions were made in this way to the
property of the clergyt.

The solicitude of the clergy in providing for the safety of

their own persons, was still greater than that which they
displayed in securing their possessions; and their effors to at-
tain it were still more successful. As they were confecrat-
ed to the priestly office with much outward solemnity; were
distinguished from the reft of mankind by a peculiar garb
and manner of life; and arrogated to their order many pri-
vileges which do not belong to other Christians, they natu-
rally became the objeas of excessive veneration. As a fu-
perititious spirit spread, they were regarded as beings of a
superior species to the profane lity, whom it would be im-
pious to try by the fame laws, or to subjed to the fame
punifliments. This exemption from civil jurifdi&ion, grant-
ed at first to ecclefiaftics'as a mark of refpec, they soon
claimed as a point of right. This valuable immunity of
the priesthood is aflerted, not only in the decrees of popes
and councils, but was confirmed in the most ample form by
many of the greatest emperors*. As, long as the clerical
charaaer remained, the. person of an ecclefiatic was in some
degree sacred; and unless he were degraded from his office,
the unhallowed hand of the civil judge durst not touch him.
But as the power bs degradation was lodged in the spiritual

F. Paul, History of Ecclefiaft. Benefices, p. 66. Boulainvil-

lers, Etat de France, tom. i. i69. Lond. 1737.

* Goldafti Conflitut. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92, 107.
Vol. IL. K

cots, the difficulty and expence of obtaining such a fen.
tence, too often secured absolute impunity to offendem.
Many. assumed the clerical chara&er for no other reason,
than that it might screen them from the punishment which
their ations defervedt. The German nobles complained
loudly, that there anointed malefaors, as they called theme,
seldom suffered capitally, even for the most atrocious crimes;
and their independence on the civil magistrate is often men-
tioned in the remonstrances of the diets, as a privilege e-
qualy pernicious to society, and to-the morals of the cler.
gy-

While the clergy asserted the privileges of their own or-

der with so much zeal, they made continual encroachments
upon those of the laity. AU causes relative to matrimony,
to testaments, to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as
those which concerned eccdefiaical revenues, were thought
to be so connected with religion, that they could be tried
only in the spiritual courts. Not satisfied with this ample
jurifdision, which extended to one half of the fubjess that
give rife to litigation among men, the clergy, with wonder-
fil induTr, and by a thousand inventions, endeavoured to
draw all other causes into their own courts*. As they had
engrossed alhnot the whole learning known in the dark ages,
the spiritual judges were commonly so far fIperior-in know.
ledge and abilities to those employed in the secular courts,
that the people at first favoured any stretch that was made
to bring their affairs under the cognizance of a judicature,
on the decisions of which they could rely with more perfet
confidence than on those of the civil courts. Thus the fim.
terest of the churh, and the inclination of the people, con.
curring to elude the jurifdicion of the lay-magiftrate, soon
reduced it almost to nothing §. By means of this, vass pow-

Rymr's FcZdera, vol. x. 53'a
t Centum Gravam. 5 31.

Giannone His. of Naples, book xix. 5 3.
Ccatum Gravam. S 9, 6, 64.

er accrued to ecclesiastics, and no inconsiderable addition was
made to their revenue by the fiums paid in those ages to the
persons who administered judtice.

The penalty by which the spiritual courts enforced their

sentences, added great weight and terror to their jurifdiaion.
The censure of excommunication was instituted originally
for preferring the purity of the church; that obstinate of-
fenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives were a reproach
to Christianity, might be cut off from the society of the
faithful: this ecclesiastics did not scruple to convert into an
engine for promoting their own power, and they inflited it
on the most frivolous occasions. Whoever despised any of
their decisions, even concerning civil matters, immediately
incurred this dreadful censure, which not only excluded them
from all the privileges of a Christian, but deprived them of
their rights as men and citizens* and the dread of this ren-
dered even the most fierce and turbulent spirits obsequious
to the authority of the church.

Nor did the. clergy neglet the proper methods of pre-

serving the wealth and power which they had acquired
with such induatry and address. The pofeffions of the
church, being consecrated to God, were declared to be un-
alienable; so that the funds of a society, which was daily
gaining, and could never lose, grew to be immense. In
Germany, it was computed that the ecclefiafRics had got in-
to their hands more than one half of the national proper-
tyt. In other countries, the proportion varied; but the
/hare belonging to the church was every where prodigious.
These vast possessions were not fubjeft to the burdens impof-
ed on the lands of the laity. The German clergy were ex-
empted by law from all taxes§, and if, on any extraordina-
ry emergence, ecclesiastics were, pleated to grant some aid
towards supplying the public exigencies, this was confider-

' Centum Gravam. § 34 Ibid. § 28.
§ Ibid. § 28. Goldafli Confl. Imper. ii. 79, o8. Pfefel Hi
du Droit Publ. 350, 374.

K

ed as a free gift flowing from their own generosity, which
the civil magistrate had no title to demand, far less to exa&
In consequence of this strange solecism in government, the
laity in Germany had the mortification to find themselves
loaded with exceflive impositions, because such as pof.
sessed the greatest property were freed from any obligation
to £upport or to defend the state.

Grievous, however, as the exorbitant wealth and nume.

rous privileges of the clerical order were to the other mem.
bers of the Germanic body, they would have reckoned it
some mitigation of the evil, if these had been possessed only
by ecdefiaftics residing among themselves, who would have
been less apt to make an improper use of their riches, or to
exercise their rights with unbecoming rigour. But the bi-
shops of Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest that
ever human ambition suggested, of being supreme and infal.
libk heads of the Christian church, they, by their profound
policy and unwearied perseverance, by their address in avait
ing themselves of every circumstance which occured, by
taking advantage of the superstition of some princes, of the
necessity of others, and of the credulity of the people, at
length established their pretensions, in opposition both te
the interest and common sense of mankind. Germany wai
the country which these ecclesiastical sovereigns governed
with most absolute authority. They excommunicated and
deposed some of its most illustrious emperors, and excited
their fubjeds, their ministers, and even their children, tc
take arms against them. Amidst these contests, the pope
continually extended their own immunities, spoiling the fe
cular princes gradually of their most valuable prerogatives
and the German church felt all the rigour of that oppref
sion which flows from fubjeaion to foreign dominion, ani
foreign exa&tions.

The right If conferring benefices, which the popes usurp

ed during that period of confusion, was an acquitition :
great importance, and exalted the ecclesiastical power upoM

the ruins of the temporal. The emperors and other princes.
of Germany had long been in possession of this right, which
served to increase both their authority and their revenue.
But by wresting it out of their hands, the popes were en-
abled to fill the empire with their own creatures; they ac-
cultomed a great body of every prince's fubjeats to depend
not upon him, but upon the Roman fee; they befowed up-
on firangers the richest benefices in every country, and
drained their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign
court. Even the patience of the mos superstitious ages
could no longer bear such oppreflion; and so loud and fre-
quent were the complaints and murmurs of the Germans,
that the popes, afraid of irritating them too far, consented,
contrary to their usual pracice, to abate somewhat of their
pretensions, and to reft satisfied with the right of nomination
to such benefices as happened to fall vacant during fix
months in the year, leaving the disposal of the remainder
to the princes and other legal patrons*.

But the court of Rome easily found expedients for elud.

ing an agreement which put such restraints on its power.
The practice of reserving certain benefices in every country
to the pope's immediate nomination, which had been long
known, and often complained of, was extended far beyond
its ancient bounds. All the benefices poffieied by cardinals,
or any of the numerous officers in the Roman court; those
held by persons who happened to die at Rome or within
forty miles of that city, on their journey to or from it;
such as became vacant by translation, with many others
were included in the number of referredbenefices; Julius II.
and Leo X. stretching the matter to the utmost, often col-
lated to benefices where the right of reservation had not
been declared, on pretence of having mentally referrvedthis
privilege to themselves. The right of reservation, however
even with this extension, had certain limits, as it could be

* F. Paul, Hiit. of Eccles. Benef. 0o4. Gold. Conlit. I~rp
i. 4c8.

K3

exercised only where the benefice was aAually vacant,
and therefore in order to render the exertion of papal pow.
er unbounded, expeative grace:, or mandates nominating
a person to succeed to a benefice upon the first vacancy
that ihould happen, were brought into use. By means of
there, Germany was filled with persons who was servilely
dependent on the court of Rome, from which they had re.
ccived such reversionary grants; princes were defrauded,
iu a great degree, of their prerogatives; the rights of lay.
patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered almost entirely
vain t.

The manner in which these extraordinary powers were

exercised, rendered them still more odious and intolerable.
The avarice and extortion of the court of Rome were be.
come excessive almot to a proverb. The pracice of felling
beneices was so notorious, that no pains were taken to con-
ceal, or to disguise it. Companies of merchants openly pur.
chased the benefices of different diftrits in Germany from
the pope's ministers, and retailed them at an advanced
price i. Pious men beheld with deep regret these fimon-
iacal transactions, so unworthy the ministers of a ChriRtian
church; while politicians complained of the loss sustained
by the exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious
traffic.

The fums, indeed, which the court of Rome drew, by its

Rated and legal impositions, from all the countries acknow-
ledging its authority, were so considerable, that it is not
firange that princes, as well as their fubjeds, murmured at
the smallest addition made to them by unnecessary or illicit
rmeans. Every ecclesiastical person, upon his admission to
his benefice, paid annats, or one year's produce of his living
to the pope; and as that tax was exaded with great rigour,
its amount was very great. To this must. be added, the

f Centum Gravan. § 21. Fafcic. Rer. expet. &c. 334. Gold.

Confl. Imper. i. 391, 404, 405. F. Paul, liiLt of Eccl. Benef
167, 199.
i Faici. Rer. expet. i. 35..

frequent demands made by the popes of free gifts from the
clergy, together with the extraordinary levies of tenths up-
on ecclesiastical benefices, on pretence of expeditions a-
gailft the Turks, seldom intended, or carried into execu-
tion; and from the whole, the vast proportion of the reve-
nues of the church, which flowed continually to Rome, may
be estimated.

Such were the dissolute manners the exorbitant wealth, the

enormous power and privileges of the clergy, before the Re-
formation; such the oppreflive rigour of that dominion
which the popes had established over the Christian world;
and such the sentiments concerning them that prevailed in
Germany at the beginning of the sixteenth century. Nor
has this kicetch been copied from the controversial writers
of that age, who, in the heat of disputation, may be sus-
peced of having exaggerated the errors, or of having mif-
represented the conduC of that church which they laboured
to overturn.; it is formed upon more authentic evidence, upon
the memorials and remonstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly
enumerating the grievances under which the empire groan-
ed, in order to obtain the redress of them. Diifatisfa&ion
muf have risen to a great height among the people, when
these grave assemblies expressed themselves with that degree
of acrimony which abounds in their remonstrances; and if
they demanded the abolition of those enormities with so
much vehemence, the people, we may be assured, uttered
their sentiments and desires in bolder and more virulent
language.

To men thus prepared for ihaking off the yoke, Luther
addressed himself with certainty of success. As they had
long felt its weight, and had born it with impatience, they
liltened with joy to the first offer of procuring them deliver-
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager reception that
his doctrines met with, and the rapidity with which they
Spread over all the provinces of Germany. Even the im-
petuofity and ficrcenefs of Luther's spirit, his confidence in

aflerting his own opinions, and the arrogance as well as con.
tempt wherewith he treated all who differed from him,
which in ages of greater moderation and refinement, have
been reckoned defets in the charaA er of that reformer, did
not appear excessive to his contemporaries, whole minds
were strongly agitated by those interesting controversies
which he carried on, and who had themselves endured the
rigour of papal tyranny, and seen the corruptions in the
church against which he exclaimed.

Nor were they offended at that gross scurrility with

which his polemical writings are filled, or at the low bus.
foonery which he sometimes introduces into his graves dif.
courses. No dispute was managed in those rude times
without a large portion of the former; and the latter was
common, even on the most solemn occasions, and in treating
the most sacred fubjets. So far were either of these from
doing hurt to his cause, that invecive and ridicule had some
effect, as well as more laudable arguments, in exposing the
errors of popery, and in determining mankind to abandon
them.

Besides all there causes of Luther's rapid progress, arising

from the nature of his enterprise, and the jun&ure at which
he undertook it, he reaped advantage from some foreign
and adventitious circumstances, the beneficial influence of
which none of his forerunners in the fame course had enjoyed
Among these may be reckoned the invention of the art of
printing, about halfa century before his time. By this forti.
nate discovery, the facility of acquiring and of propagating
knowledge was wonderfully increased, and Luther's books
which muf otherwise have made their way slowly and with
uncertainty into distant countries, spread at once all ova
Europe. Nor were they read only by the rich and the
learned, who alone had access to books before that invetn
tion; they got into the hands of the people, who, upon thi
appeal to them as judges, ventured to examine and to rejed

many do&rines which they had formerly been required to
believe, without being taught to underhand them.

The revival of learning at the fame period was a circum-

stance extremely friendly to the Reformation. The Rfudy
of the ancient Greek and Roman authors, by enlighten-
ing the human mind with liberal and found knowledge, rous-
ed it from that profound lethargy in which it had been funk
during several centuries. Mankind seem, at that period,
to have recovered the powers of inquiring and of thinking
for themselves, faculties of which they had long loft the
use; and fond of the acquisition, they exercised them with
great boldness upon all fubjees. They were not now a-
fraid of entering an uncommon path, or of embracing a new
opinion. Novelty'appears rather to have been a recom-
mendation of a do&rine; and inRfead of being startled when
the daring hand of Luther drew aside or tore the veil which
covered eftablilhed errors, the genius of the age applauded
and aided the attempt. Luther, though a firanger to ele-
gance in taste or composition, zealously promoted the culti-
ration of ancient literature; and sensible of its being necef-
fary to the right understanding of the scriptures, he him-
self had acquired considerable knowledge both in the He-
brew and Greek tongues. Melan&hon, and some other of
his disciples, were eminent proficients in the polite arts;
and as the fame ignorant monks who opposed the introduc-
tion of learning into Germany, set themselves with equal
fierceness against Luther's opinions, and declared the good
reception of the latter to be the effec of the progress which
the former had made, the cause of learning and of the Re.
formation came to be confidered as closely connected with
each other, and, in every country, had the fame friends and
the fame enemies. This enabled the reformers to carry on
the contest at first with great superiority. Erudition, induo
firy, accuracy of sentiment, purity of composition, even wit
and raillery, were almost wholly on their fide, and triumphed
uith ease over illiterate monks, whose rude arguments, ex-

prefed in a perplexed and barbarous style, were found infuf
£cient for the defence of a system, the errors of which, al
the art and ingenuity of its later and more learned advocates
have not been able to palliate.

That bold sp;rit of inquiry, which the revival of lean.

ing excited in Europe, was so favourable to the Reform.
tion, that Luther was aided in his progress, and mankind
were prepared to embrace his dotrines, by persons who
did not with success to his undertaking. The greater part
of the ingenious men who applied to the study of ancient
literature towards the close of the fifteenth century, and
the beginning of the sixteenth, though they had no inter
tion, and perhaps no wilh, to overturn the established syst
of religion, had discovered the absurdity of many tenets and
pratices authorized by the church, and perceived the fa.
tifity of those arguments by which illiterate monks endea
voured to defend them. Their contempt of these advocate
for the received errors, led them frequently to expose the o.
pinions which they supported, and to ridicule their igno-
rance with great freedom and severity. By this, men were
prepared for the more serious attacks made upon them by
Luther, and their reverence both for the docrines and per
sons against whom he inveighed was considerably abated
This was particularly the cafe in Germany. When the fil
attempts were made to revive a taste for ancient learning it
that country, the ecclefaftics there, who were ftll more ig
norant than their brethren on the other fide of the Alp
et themselves to oppose its progress with more aftive zeal
and the patrons of the new studies, in return, attacked then
with greater violence. In the writings of Reuchlin, Hut
ten, and the other revivers of learning in Germany, the cor
ruptions of the church of Rome are oenfured with an acri
mony of style little inferior to that of Luther himself*.

From the fame cause proceeded the frequent ftri&ure

-Gerdefius His Evaug. Renov. vol. i . .4I4, 7-. Seckend
lib. L p. 103. Yonder Hardt Hi Literar. Reform. pars i.

of Erasmus upon the errors of the church, as well as upon
the ignorance and vices of the clergy. His reputation and
authority were so high in Europe, at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with such uni.
versal admiration, that the effet ofthefe deserves to be men-
tioned as one of the circumstances which contributed con-
fiderably towards Luther's success. Erasmus, having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the knowledge of
ecclefiatical literature, applied himself more to theological
inquiries than any of the revivers of learning in that age.
His acute judgment and extensive erudition enabled him to
discover many errors, both in the docrhine and worlhip of
the Romish church. Some of these he confuted with great
solidity of reasoning and force of eloquence. -Others he
treated as objets of ridicule, and turned against them that
irrefitible torrent of popular and satirical wit, of which he
had the command. There was hardly any opinion or prac.
tice of the Romilh church, which Luther endeavoured to
reform, but what had been previously animadverted upon by
Erasmus, and had afforded him fubje& either ofcenfure or
of raillery. Accordingly, when Luther first began his at-
tack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to applaud his con-
dua; he courted the friendship of several of his disciples and
patrons, and condemned the behaviour and spirit of his ad-
verfaries*. He concurred openly with him in inveighing
against the school divines, as the teachers of a system equal-
ly unedifying and obscure. He joined him in endeavouring
to turn the attention of men to the study of the holy scrip-
tures, as the only standard of religious trutht.

Various circumstances, however, prevented Erasmus from
holding the fame course with Luther. The natural timi-
ity of his temper; his want of that strength of mind which
alone can prompt a man to assume the charater of a reform.

* Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 96.
f Vonder Hardt Hitor. Literar. Reform. pars. i. Gerdef. Hit.
Evang. Renov. i. 147.

cr*; his excellive deference for persons in high flation; his
dread of losing the pensions and other emoluments, which
their liberality had conferred upon him; his extreme love of
peace, and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and by gen.
tle methods, all concurred in determining him not only to
repress and to moderate the zeal with which he had once
been animated againit the errors of the churcht, but to as.
fume the chara&er of a mediator between Luther and his
opponents. But though Erasmus soon began to censure
Luther as too daring and impetuous, and was at last prevail.
ed upon to write against him, he muff, nevertheless, be con.
fidered as his forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the
church. He first scattered the feeds, which Luther cherilh.
ed and brought to maturity. His raillery and oblique cen.
futes prepared the way for Luther's inve&ives and more
dire attacks. In this light Erasmus appeared to the zea.
lous defenders of the Romish church in his own times:t. In
this light he must be confidered by every person conversant
in the history of that period.

In this long enumeration of the circumstances which

combined in favouring the progress of Luther's opinions
or in weakening the resistance of his adversaries, I have a-
voided entering into any difculfion of the theological doc.
trines of popery, and have not attempted to thew how re
pugnant they are to the spirit of Christianity, and how de-
flituteof any foundation in reason, in the word of God, or
in the praaice of the primitive church, leaving those topics

Erainus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:

e Luther," fays he, " has given us many a wholesome doatrinte
and many a good counsel. I with he had not defeated the effet
of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written every thina
in the most unexceptionable manner, I had no inclination to &i
for the fake of truth. Every man hath not the courage requisite
to make a martyr; and I am afraid that, if I were put to the trial
I should imitate St. Peter." Epift. Erafmi in Jortm's Life ofE
rafm. vol. i. p. 273.

t ortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. 258.
Vender liardt HiL Literar. Reform. pars i p. a.

entirely to ecclesiastical historians, to whose province they
peculiarly belong. But when we add the effec of these re-
ligious considerations to the influence of political caifes, it
is obvious that the united operation of both on the human
mind must have been sudden and irresistible. Though, to
Luther's contemporaries, who were too near perhaps to the
scene, or too deeply interelced in it, to trace the cause with
accuracy, or to examine them with coolness, the rapidity
with which his opinions spread appeared to be so unaccount-
able, that fame of them imputed it to a certain uncommon
and malignant position of the flars, which scattered the fpi.
rit of giddiness and innovation over the world', it is evi-
dent, that the success of the Reformation was the natural
effe& of powerful causes prepared by peculiar providence,
and happily oonspiring to that end. This attempt to in-
veftigate these causes, and to throw light on an event so
figular and important, will not, perhaps, be deemed an un-
necessary digreffion.-I return from it to the course of the
filtory.

The diet at Worms conduced its deliberations with that
flow formality peculiar to such assemblies. Much time was
spent in establishing some regulations with regard to the
internal police of the empire. Thejurifdiction of the Im-
perial chamber was confirmed, and the forms of its proceed-
ing rendered more fixed and regular. A council of regen-
cy was appointed to assist Ferdinand in the government of
the empire during any oecafional abefnce of the emperor;
which, from the extent of the emperor's dominions as well
as the multiplicity of his affairs, was an event that might be
frequently expe&ed*. The slate of religion was then tak.
en into consideration. There was not wanting some plau.
bible reason which might have induced Charlesto have de-
dared himself the protetor of Luther's cause, or at least

t Jovii HiRtoria, Lut. 1 53. fol. p. 134.

Pont. Heuter. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. II. p. 19g. Pfefel

Abregc Chronol p. 98.
Vol. II. L

to have connived at its progress. If he had poflefed no other
dominions but those which belonged to him in Germany,
and no other crown beides the Imperial, he might have
been dispose, perhaps, to favour a man, who aferted so
boldly the privileges and immunities for which the empire
had struggled so long with the popes. But the vast and
dangerous schemes which Francis I. was forming againt
Charlcs, made it necefary for him to regulate his condu&
by views more extensive than those which would have suited
a German prince; and it being of the utmost importance
to secure the pope's friendihip, this determined him to treat
Luther with great severity, as the most effetual method of
soothing Leo into a concurrence with his measures. His
cagernefa to accompliih this rendered him not unwilling to
gratify the papal legates in Germany, who insisted that,
Without any delay or formal deliberation, the diet ought
to condemn a man whom the pope had already excomu:
aucated as an incorrigible heretic. Such an abrupt manner of
proceeding, however) being deemed unprecedented and unjust
by the members of the diet, they made a point of Luther's ap.
pearing in person, and declaring whethet he adhered or not
to those opinions which had drawn upon him the censures
of the church*. Not only the emperor, but all the princes
through whose territories he had to pass, granted him a
fafe-condut& and Charles wrote to him at the fame time
[March 6th,3 requiring his immediate attendance on the
diet, and renewing his promises of protection from any injury
orviolencet. Luther did not hesitate one moment about
yielding obedience, and let out for Worms, attended by thi
herald who had brought the emperor's letter and fafe-cos
dui O While on his journey, many of his friends, whom the
fate of Huss under similar circumfiances, and notwithftand
ing the fame security of an Imperial fafe-condu&, filled with
solicitude, advised and entreated him not to rush iantonly
into the midAt of danger. but Luther, superior to (ucb

P. Mart. rp. 72z. t Luth. Oper. ii. 41t.

terrors, silenced them with this reply, ', I am lawfully cal-
led," said he," " to appear in that city, and thither will
I go in the name of the Lord, though as many devils, as
there are tiles on the houses, were there combined againit
me*."

The reception which he met with at Worms was such as
he might have reckoned a full reward of all his labours, if
vanity and the love of applause had been the principles by
which he was influenced. Greater crowds assembled to be-
hold him, than had appeared at the emperor's public entry;
his apartments were.daily filled with princes and personages
of the highest rank§, and he was treated with all the refpet
paid to those who possess the power of direcing the under-
sanding and sentiments of other men; an homage, more
sincere, as well as more flattering, than any which pre-emi-
uence in birth or condition can command. At his appear-
ance before the diet, he behaved with great decency, and
with equal firmness. He readily acknowledged an cxcefs
of vehemence and acrimony in his controversial wnriiiig.,
but refused to retrat his opinions, unless he were convinced
oftheir falsehood; or to content to their being tried by smy
other rule than the word of God. When neither threats
nor entreaties could prevail on him to depart from his refo.
lution, some of the ecclesiastics proposed to imitate the ex-
ample of the council of Constance, and by puuiihing the au-
thor of this pestilent heresy, who was now in their power,
to deliver the church at once from such an evil. But the
members of the diet, refuting to expose the German inte-
grity to fresh reproach by a second violation of public faith;
and Charles being no leSs unwilling to bring a-ftain upon the
beginning of his adminiltration by such an ignominious ac-
tion, Luther was permitted to depart in safety$. A few
days after he left the city [April i6,] a revere edia was
publilhed in the emperor's name, and by authority of the

Luth. Oper. ii. 41I. § Seckend, 156. Luth. Oper. ii. 414.
t . Paul. Hilt. of Counc. p. 13. Seckend. 160.

diet, depriving him, as an obstinate and excommunicated
criminal, of all the privileges which he enjoyed as a subjec
of the empire, forbidding any prince to harbour or protect
him, and requiring all to concur in seizing his person as soon
as the term specified in his fafe.condu& was expiredt.

But this rigorous decree had no considerable effet, the

execution of it being prevented, partly by the multiplicity
of occupations, which the commotions in Spain, together
with the wars in Italy and the Low Countries, created to
the emperor; and partly by a prudent precaution employed
by the ele&or of Saxony, Luther's faithful and discerning
patron. As Luther, on his return from Worms, was pas-
fng near Altenftein in Thuringia, a number ofhorfemen in
mallis rushed suddenly out of a wood, where the elecor had
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and surrounding hit
company, carried him, after difmifing all his attendanth
to Wartburg, a strong cafle not far diflant. There the elec.
tor ordered him to be supplied with every thing necefary or
;_reahes, but the placeof his retreat was carefully concealed,
until the fury of the present storm against himbegan to abate,
upon a change in the political situation of Europe. In this
solitude, where he remained nine months, and which he fre-
quently called his Patmos, after the name of that iland to
which the apostle John was banilhed, he exerted his usual
vigour and industry in defence of his dotrines, or in con-
fiutation of his adversaries, publilhing several treatises, which
revived the spirit of his followers, astonished to a great de-
gree, and disheartened at the sudden disappearance of their
leader.

During his confinement, his opinions continued to gain

ground, acquiring the ascendant in almost every city in Sax-
ony. At this time, the Augufinians of Wittemburg, with
the approbation of the university, and the connivance of the
elector, ventured upon the first flep towards an alteration in
the eilabli;hed forms of public worihip, by abolilhing the

t Gold. Coni. Imperial. ii. 408.

celebration of private masses, and by giving the cup as well
as the bread to the laity in adminiitering the sacrament of
the Lord's supper.

Whatever consolation the courage and success of his dif-
ciples, or.the progress of his docrines in his own country,
afforded Luther in his retreat, he there received informa-
tion of two events which considerably damped his joy, as
they seemed to lay insuperable obstacles in the way of pro-
pagating his principles, in the two most powerful kingdoms
of Europe. One was, a solemn decree, condemning his o;
pinions, published by the university of Paris, the moR an-
cient, and, at that time, the most refpeftable of the learned
societies in Europe. The other was the answer written to
his book concerning the Babyloniih captivity by Henry
VIII. of England. That monarch, having been educated
under the eye of a suspicious father, who, in order to pre-
vent his attending to business, kept him occupied in the ftu-
dy of literature, itill retained a greater love of learning, and
stronger habits of application to it, than are common among
princes of so acive a disposition and such violent pafions.
Being ambitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well as
zealously attached to the Romifi church, and highly exaf-
perated against Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas,
his favourite author, with great contempt, Henry did not
think it enough to exert his royal authority in opposing the
opinions of the reformer, but resolved likewise to combat
them with scholastic weapons. With this view he publish.
ed his treatise on the Seven SacramertJ, which, though for-
gotten at present, as books of controversy always are, when
the occasion that produced them is pall, is not destitute of
polemical ingenuity and acuteness, an4 was represented by
the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of such wonderful
science and learning, as exalted him no less above other au-
thors in merit, than he was distinguished among them by his
rank. The pope, to whom it was presented with the great-
Cft formality in full consistory, spoke of it in such terms, a,

L 3

if it had been dictated by immediate inspiration; and as a
testimony of the gratitude of the church for his extraordina.
ry zeal, conferred on him the title of Defendr of th Faitb,
an appellation which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion
of those from whom he derived it, and which is ftll retained
by his fuccefirb, though the- avowed enemies of those opi.
nions, by contending for which he merited that honourable
diftindion. Luther, who was not overawed, either by the
authority of the university, or the dignity of the monarch,
soon publified his animadversions on both, in a ftyk no les
vehement and severe, than he would have used in confuting
his meanest antagonit. This indecent boldnef, instead of
shocking his contemporaries, was confidered by them as a
new proof of his undaunted spirit. A controversy mana.
ged by cifputants so illustrious, drew universal attention;
and such was the contagion of the spirit of innovation, dif.
fuscd through Europe in that age, and so powerful the evi.
dence which accompanied the do&rines of the reformers on
their firit publication, that, in spite of both the civil andec-
clefiaftical powers combined against them, they daily gain-
ed converts both in France and in England.

How desirous soever the emperor might be to put a stop

to Luther's progref, he was often obliged, during the diet
at Worms, to turn his thoughts-t~matteria'li more inter.
efting, acd which demanded more immediate attention. A
war was ready to break out between him and the French
king in Navarre, in the Low Countries, and in Italy; and
it required either great address to avert the danger, or time-
ly and wife precautions to resist it. Every cireumfance, at
that juncure, inclined Charles to prefer the former meafre.
Spain was torn with intestine commotions. In Italy, he
had not hitherto secured the afiiftance of any one lly In
the Low Countries, his fubjeds tremlded at the thofghts
of a rupture with France, the fatal effe&s of which on their
commerce they had often experienced. From there con-
fdlrations, as well as from the solicitude of Chievres, dut

ing his whole adminitration, to maintain peace between the
two monarchs, proceeded the emperor's backwardness to
commence hostilities. But .Francis. and his ministers did
not breathe the fame pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that
concord could not long fubfiRt where interest, emulation,
and ambition conspired to difkolve it; and he poflefted feve.
ral advantages which flattered him with the hopes of fur-
prifing his rival, and of overpowering-him before he could
put himself in a posture of defence. The Frefch king's do.
minions, from their compat situation, from their fubje&ion
to the royal authority, from the genius of the people, fond
of war, and attached to their Sovereign by every tie of duty
and affecion, were more capable of a great or sudden effort,
than the larger but disunited territories of the emperor, in
one part of which the people were in arms against his mini.
sers, and in all his prerogative was more limited than that of
his rival.

The only princes, in whose power it was to have kept
down, or to have extinguished this flame on its first appear.
ance, either negleced to exert themselves, or were active in
kindling and spreading it. Henry VIII. though he asse.t
ed to assume the name of mediator, and both parties made
frequent appeals to him, had laid aside the impartiality
which suited that charaaer. Wolfey, by his artifices, had
estranged him so entirely from the French king, that he fe-
cretly fomented the discord which he ought to have compos-
ed, and waited only for some decent pretext to join his arms
to those of the emperor*.

Leo's endeavours to excite discord between the emperor
and Francis were more avowed, and had greater influence.
Not only his duty, as the common father of Christendom,
but his interest as an Italian potentate, called upon the pope
to a& as the guardian of the public tranquillity, and to avoid
any measure that might overturn the system, which, after
much bloodihed, and many negotiations, was now eftabliih.

» Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey. za8.

ed ia Italy. Aeeordingly Leo who instantly dfe the
propiety of this condud, had formed a fchtme, upoi
Charle's promotion to the Imperial dignity, of ritdderig
imelf the umpire between the rivanl, by foothiiig them a
ternatey, while he entered into no eofe confederacy with
either; and a pontiff les ambitious and enterprising, might
have faed Europe from may calaities by adhering to
ph. IBut dis high-fpir~te prelate, who was Afii in d

e of life, longed paffionatdy to diftiing his pnti.

cate by some fpledid a~ion. He-was impatient tb wali
away the inamy of having loft Parma and P~aceir the *
quifition of which releed so much latre on. the adtii
tration of his prdeceffor Julius. He beheld, with the i
dignation natral to Italians in that age; the dominio a'hik
the Tranflpine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman at~
gance, denominated them, the barbarou nations, had aestti
ed in Italy. He flattered himself, that after alfiting the one
monarch to trip Loth oth f his poffeions in that country,
he might findmeans of driving ojt the viEtor in his turn,
and acquire the glory of reforieg' Italy to'the li~ey id
happiness which it had enjoyed before the vafiotl bs
Charles VIII. when every fate was governed by its uiie
princes, or its own laws, and nnacquainted-t th a feig
yoke. Eatravagant and chimerical as this petoeat i: y
-eem, it was the favoarite object of alimoft every Itali- e.
minent for genius or enterprise duringgreat part of th fix-
teenth century. Tbhey aily hoped, that by fuperio U

1s

in the artifices and refinements of negotiation, they Ihmad be
able to baffle the efforts of nationl, le peif~ indee& tha
themfeves, but much more powerful and warlik.. :So-.
luring was the profpe~ of this to Leo, that notwrthrtd
ing the gentleness of his difpofitrd, and his fondnif fbr tli
pleasures of a refined and luxurious ease, he hastened to di-
turb the peace of Europe, and to plunge himself into a
dangerous war, with an impetnofity scarcely inferior to bat
of the turbulent and martial Julius*.

Guic. lib. xiv.p. 173.

It was in Leo's power, however, to chufe which of the
monarchs he would take for his confederate against the other.'
Both of them courted his friendhip; .he wavered for some
time between them, and at las concluded an alliance with
Francis. The obje.t of this treaty was the conquet of
Naples, which the confederates agreed to divide between
them. The pope, it is probable, attered himself, that the
brilk and active spirit of Francis, seconded by the fame qua.
lities in his fubjefts, would get the start of the sow and wary
councils of the emperor, and that they might over-run with
cafe this detached portion of his dominions, ill provided for
defence, and always the prey of every invader. But whe.
ther the French king, by discovering too openly his fufpi.
cion of Leo's sincerity, disappointed these hopes; whether
the treaty was only an artifice of the pope's to cover the
more serious negotiations which he was carrying on with
Charles; whether he was enticed by the profpea of reaping
greater advantages from an union with that prince; or whe-
ther he was toothed by the zeal which Charles had manifest-
ed for the honour of the church in condemning Luther;
certain it is, that he soon deserted his new ally, and made
overtures of friendlhip, though with great frerecy, to the
emperor*. Don John Manuel, the fame man who had
been the favourite of Philip, and whose address had difcon-
certed all Ferdinand's schemes, having been delivered, upon
the death of that monarch, from the prison to which he had
been confined, .was now the Imperial ambatidor at Rome,
and fully capable of improving this favourable disposition in
the pope to his master's advantage . To him the condut of
this negotiation was entirely committed and being careful-
ly concealed from Chievres, whose aversion from a war with
France would have prompted him to retard or to defeat it,
an alliance between the pope and emperor was quickly con-

Guic. lib. xiv. p. 175. Mem. de Bellay, Par. 1573. p. %4.
S Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89.

eluded* [Maly- 8]. The hief articles in this treaty, which
proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in Italy, weer,
that the pope and emperor should join their forces to expl
the Fr~ch out of the Milanef, the pofffion of which Ihowl
be granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor,
who had resided at Trent since the time that his brother.
Maximilian had been difpof d of his dominions by the
French king; that Parma and Placentia lhould be refored
to the church; that the emperor hould afift the pope. is
conquering Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by the
kingdom of Naples to the Holy See lhould be inemiad;
that the emperor lhonld take the family of Medici under his
prote ion; that he Ihould grant to the cardinal of that
name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon the alhbifhop.
ric of Toledo; and mhould fettle lands in the kingdom of
Naples to the fame value upon Alexander the. natural fGn
of Lornzo de Medici.

The tranafing an affair of aich moment without hi par.

ticipatio, appeared to Chievres f dccifive a proof f hi
having lot the afendant which he had hitherto maintained
over the mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on tlis account,
added to the melancholy withwhich he was overwhelmed on
taking a view of the many and unavoidable calamities at
tending a war against France, is said to have shortened hi
days§. But though this, perhaps, may be only the conjec.
ture of hiforians, fond -of attributing every thing that befals
illustrious personages to extraordinary causes, and of afieb.
ing even their difeales and death to the effe&t of political pas.
sions, which are more apt to diunrb the enjoyment than to
abridge the period of life, it is certain that his death, at
this critical junEture, extinguilhed all hopes of avoiding a
rupture with Francet. This event, too, delivered Charle

Guic. 1. xiv. I8. Mem de Bellay, p.. 4. u Monts CorT
Diplom. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96.

§ Belcarii Comment ce Reb. Gallic. 483.
t P. Hcuter. Rcr. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. xi. p. 197.

from a minister, to whose authority he had been accuflomed
from his infancy to submit with such implicit deference, as
checked and depressed his genius, and retained him in a slate
of pupilage, unbecoming his years as well as his tank. But
this restraint being removed, the native powelr of his mind
were permitted to unfold themselves, and he began to display
such great talents, both in council and in a&ion, as exceed-
ed the hopes of his contemporariesu, and command the ad-
miration of posterity.

While the pope and emperor were preparing, in confe-

quence of their secret alliance, to attack Milan, hostilities
commenced in another quarter. The children of John d'A-
bret, king of Navarre, having often demanded the restitution
of their hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noy-
on, and CQharles having as often eluded their requests upon
very frivolous pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized
by that treaty to assist the exiled' family. The juncure ap-
peared extremely favourable for such an enterprise» Charles
was at a distance from that part of his dominions; the troops
usually tcationed there had been called away to quell the
commotions in Spain; the Spanish malecontents warmly so-
licited him to invade Navarret, in which a considerable sac-
tion was ready to declare for the descendents of their ancient
monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much as poflible, giv.
ing offence to the emperor or king of England, Francis di-
re&ed forces to be levied, and the war to be carried on, not
in his own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The con-
dua of there troops was committed to Andrew de Foix, de
I'Efparre, a young nobleman, whom his near alliance to the
Unfortunate king, whose battles he was to fight, and what
was still more powerful) the interest of his siser, Madam de
Chateau-Briand, Franeis's favourite mistress, recommended
to that important trust, for which he had neither talents not
experience. But as there was no army in the field to op-
pose him, he became master, in a few days, of the whole king.

11 P. Mart. Ep. 735 t P. Mart. Ep 721.

eluded* [May- 8]. The chief articles in this treaty, which
proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in Italy, wre,
that the pope and emperor should join their forces to expel
the French out of the Milanese, the possession of which mould
be granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor,
who had resided at Trent since the time that his brother
Maimilian had been difpoflded of his dominions by the
French king; that Parna and Placentia lhould be refored
to the church; that the emperor Ihould afift the pope in
conquering Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by the
kingdom of Naples to the Holy See should be incrafed;
that the emperor Ihould take the family of Medici under his
protecion; that he Ihould grant to the cardinal of that
name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon the achbilhop.
ric of Toledo; and should fettle lands in the kingdom of
Naples to the fame value upon Alexander the natural son
of Lorenzo de Medici.

The tranfiaing an affair of nfch moment without his par-

ticipation, appeared to Chievres so decisive a proof of his
having loft the ascendant which he had hitherto maintained
over the mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this account,
added to the melancholy with which he was overwhelmed on
taking a view of the many and unavoidable calamities at.
tending a war againf France, is aid to have mhortened his
dayss. But though this, prhaps, may be only the conjec.
ture of hiflorians, fond of attributing every thing that befahl
illufrious personages to extraordinary causes, and of afcrib-
ing even their diseases and death to the effet of political pas-
sions, which are more apt to dit&urb the enjoyment than to
abridge the period of life, it is certain that his death, at
this critical junture, extinguilbed all hopes of avoiding a
rupture with Francet. This event, too, delivered Charles

Guic. 1. xiv. 18i. Mem de Bellay, p. 24. Pu Mont, Corps
Diplom. tom. iv. suppl. p. 96.

§ Belcarii Comment de Reb. Gallic. 483.
t P. Hcutcr. Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. xx. p. 197.

from a minister, to whose authority he had been accustomed
from his infancy to submit with such implicit deference, as
checked and depressed his genius, and retained him in a state
of pupilage, unbecoming his years as well as his rank. But
this restraint being removed, the native powers of his mind
were permitted to unfold themselves, and he began to display
such great talents, both in council and in aAion, as exceed-
ed the hopes of his contemporariess, and command the ad-
miration of poterity.

While the pope and emperor were preparing, in confe-

quence of their secret alliance, to attack Milan, hostilities
commenced in another quarter. The children of John d'Al
bret, king of Navarre, having often demanded the restitution
of their hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of Noy-
on, and Charles having as often eluded their requests upon
very frivolous pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized
by that treaty to assist the exiled' family. The juncure ap-
peared extremely favourable for such an enterprifeb Charles
was at a distance from that part of his dominions; the troops
usually stationed there had been called away to quell the
commotions in Spain; the Spanifl malecontents warmly so-
licited him to invade Navarret, in which a considerable sac-
tion was ready to declare for the descendents of their ancient
monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much as poflible, giv-
ing offence to the emperor or king of England, Francis di-
re&ted forces to be levied, and the war to be carried on, not
in his own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The con-
dut of these troops was committed to Andrew de Foix, de
PEfparre, a young nobleman, whom his near alliance to the
unfortunate king, whose battles he was to fight, and what
was till more powerful, the interest of his sifter, Madam de
Chateau-Briand, Francis's favourite mifirefs, recommended
to that important trust, for which he had neither talents nor
experience. But as there was no army in the field to op-
pose him, he became mafier, in a few days, of the whole king.

I P. Mart. Ep. 735 t P. Mart. Ep 721.

dom of Navarre, without meeting with any obftruion but
from the citadel of Pampeuna. The additional work to
this fortrfs, begun by Xi~ncn, were fcil unfiaited; nor
would its flight refi~ance have deferred notice, if Ignatio
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been dangerouly
wounded in its defence. During the progress of alingering
cure, Loyola happened to have no other amusement than
what he found in reading the lives of the faints: the effwe
of this on his mind, naturally enthusiastic, but ambitious and
daring, was to inspire him with such a desire of emulating
the glory of there fabulous worthies of the Romith church,
s led him into the wildest and most extravagant adventures,
which terminated at las in instituting the society of Jesuits,
the most political and best regulated of all the monastic or-
ders, and from which mankind have derived more advantages,
and received greater injury, than from any other of those re-
ligious fraternities

If, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Efparre had been

satisfied with taking proper precautions for securing his con-
quel, the kingdom of Navarre might ftil have remained an-
nexed to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in title.
But pufied on by youthful ardour, and encouraged by Fran-
cis, who was too apt to be dazzled with success, he ventur-
ed to pals the confines of Navare, and to lay siege to Lo.
grogno, a small town in Castile. This roused the Cafilians,
who had hitherto beheld the rapid progress of his arms with
greatunconcern,and the dissensions in thatkingdom(of which
a full account shall be given) being almost composed, both
parties exerted themselves with emulation in defence of their
country; the one, that it might efface the memory of paid
mifconduA by its present zeal; the other, that it might add
to the merit of having subdued the emperor's rebellious suo-
jets, that ofrepulfing his foreign enemies. The sudden ad.
vance of their troops, together with the gallant defence made
by the inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the French gene.
ral to adandon his ral enterprise. The Spaniih army, which

increased every day, haraffng him diring his retreat, he, in-
Read of taking {belter under the cannon of Pampeluna, or
waiting the arrival of some troops which were marching to
join him, attacked the Spaniards, though far superior to him
in number, with great impetuosity, but with so little con-
duc; that his forces were totally routed, he himself, toge-
ther with his princpal officers, was taken prisoner, and Spain
recovered possession of Navarre in still shorter time than the
French had spent in the conquest of it*.

While Francis endeavoured to jufiify his invaion of Na-

varre, by carrying it on in the name of Henry d'Albret, he
had recurse -to an artifice much of the fame kind, in at-
tscking another part of the emperor's territories. Robert
&e la Mark, lord of the fmrall but independent territory of
Bouillon, situated on the frontiers of Luxembourg and
Champagne, having abandoned Charles's service on account
vs an encroachment which the Aulic council had made on
his jurifdi&;on, and having thrown himself upon France for
protection, was cafily persuaded, in the heat of his resent-
ment, to fend a herald to Worms, and to declare war against
the emperor in form.. Such extravagant insolence in a pet-
ty prince surpriscd Charles, and appeared to him a certain
proof of his having received promises of powerful support
from the French king. The juinefs of this conclusion soon
became evident. Robert entered the dutchy of Luxem.
bourg with troops levied in France, by the king's conniv-
ance, though seemingly in contradiction to his orders, and
after ravaging the open country, laid liege to Vireton. Of
this Charles complained loudly, as a direc violation of the
peace subsisting between the two crowns, and summoned
Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty concluded at London
in the year r5I8, to turn his arms againit Francis as the
first aggressor. Francis pretended that he was not answer-
able for Robert's condu&t, whose army fought under his
own flandards, and in his own quarrel; and affirmed, that,

* Mem. de Bellay, p. ai. P. Mart. Ep 726.
Vol. II. M

contrary to an express prohibition, he had seduced some sub.
jets of France into his service; but Henry paid so little re-
gard to this evalon, that the French king, rather than irri-
tate a prince whom he till hoped to gain, commanded De
la Mark to dilband his troopst.

The emperor, mcanwhile, was atfembling an army to chaf-

tife Robert's insolence. Twenty thousand men, under the
count of Nassau, invaded his little territories, and in a few
days became masters of every place in them but Sedan. As.
ter making him fee so sensibly the weight of his mailer's
indignation, Nassau advanced towards the frontiers of France;
and Charles, knowing that he might presume so far on Hen.
ry's partiality in his favour, as not to be overawed by the
fame fears which had restrained Francis, ordered his general
to besiege Moufon. The cowardice of the garrison having
obliged the governor to surrender almost without resistance,
Nalau invested Mezieres, a place at that time of no confi.
derable strength, but so advantageously situated, that by
getting pofeflion of it, the Imperial army might have pene-
trated into the heart of Champagne, in which there was
hardly any other town capable of obftruting its progress.
Happily for France, its monarch, sensible of the importance
of this fortress, and of the danger to which it was exposed,
committed the defence of it to the chevalier Bayard, diftin-
guifhed among his contemporaries by the appellation of The
nigbt without fear, and without reproachb. This man, whose
prowess in combat, whose punfilious honour and formal
gallantry,.bear a nearer resemblance, than any thing record-
ed in history, to the charater afcried to the heroes of chi-
valry, possessed all the talents which form a great general.
These he had many occasions of exerting in the defence of Me-
zieres; partly by his valour, partly by his condut, he pro-
traaed the siege to a great length, and in the end obliged the
Imperialits to raise it, with disgrace and loss§. Francis, at

,t Mem. de Bellay,p. , &c. Mem. de Fleuranges, p. 335, &c.
tOcuvre- de Brantometom.viI 4. 5 Mem.de Bclay, p.z s,&c.

the head of a numerous army, soon retook Moufon, and enter-
ing the Low Countries, made several cdnquefts of tall import-
ance. In the neighbourhood of Valenciennes, through an ex-
cess of caution, an error with which he cannot be often charg-
ed, he loft an opportunity of cutting off the whole Imperial
army§; and what was fill more unfortunate, he disgusted
Charles duke of Bourbon, high constable of France, by giv-
ing the command of the van to the duke D'Alen9on, though
this polt of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a prerogative
of his office.

During these operations in the field, a congress was held

at Calais (August) under the mediation of Henry VIII. in
order to bring all differences to an amicable issue; and if the
intentions of the mediator had corresponded in any degree
to his professions, it could hardly have failed of producing
some good effe&. But Henry committed the sole manage-
ment of the negotiation, with unlimited powers, to Wolfey;
and this choice alone was sufficient to have rendered it abor-
tive. That prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the
great obje& of his ambition, and ready to sacrifice every
thing in order to gain the emperor's interest, was so little a-
ble to conceal his partiality, that, if Francis had not been
well acquainted with his haughty and vindictive temper, he
would have declined his mediation. Much time was spent in
enquiring who had begun hoffilities, which Wolfey affeced
to represent as the principal point; and by throwing the
blame of that on Francis, he hoped to justify, by the treaty
of London, any alliance into which his master should enter
with Charles. The conditions on which hostilities might
be terminated came next to be confidered; but with regard
to these, the emperor's proposals were such, as discovered ei-
ther that he was utterly averse to peace, or that he knew
Wolfey would approve of whatever terms /hould be offered
in his name. He demanded the reflitution of the dutchy of
Burgundy, a province, the poffeflion of which would have

§ P. Mart Ep. 747. Mem. de Bellay, 3j

M

given him acce&s into the heart of France; and required to
be relafed from the homage due to the crown of France
for the counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of his
anceflors had ever refused, and which he had bound him.
seif by the treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms,. to
which an high-fpirited prince would scarcely have listened,
after the diafters of an unfortunate war, Francis reje&ed
with great disdain; and Charles shewing no inclination. to
comply with the more equal and moderate propofitionsof
the French monarch, that he lhould restore Navarre to its
lawful prince, and withdraw his troops from the siege of
Tournay, the congress broke up without any other effet
than that which attends unsuccessful negotiations, the ex-
afperating of the parties whoop it was intended. to recon-
-eAt.

During the continuance of the congefs,. Wolfey, on pre.

tence that the emperor himself would be mere willing to
make reasonable concessions than his minifers, made an er-
curfion to Bruges, to meet that monarch. He was receiv-
ed by Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much refpe&
and magnificence as if he had been king of England. But
instead of advancing the treaty- of peace by this interview,
WVolfey, in his master's name, concluded a league with the
emperor against Francis; in which it was stipulated, that
Charles iould invade France on the fide of Spain, and
IHcnry in Picardy, each with an army of forty tboufnd
men; and that, in order to strengthen their union, Charles
ihould espouse the princess Mary, Henry's only child, and
the apparent heir of his dominions * Henry produced no
better reasons for this measure, equally unjust and impolitic,
than the article in the treaty of London, by which he pre.
tended that he was bound to take arms agamift the French
king as the sirs aggressor; and the injury which he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the duke of AlbanT,

t Rymer, FReder. xiii. Herbert.
' P. Mart. Ep. 739 Hcrbert

the head of a faOtioa in Scotland, which opposed the inte-
reft of England, to return into that kingdom. Hewas in.
fluenced, however, by other considerations. The advan-
tages which accruedto his fubjecs from maintaining an ex-
a& neutrality, or the honour that resulted to himself from
ating as the arbiter between the contending. princes, ap-
peared to his youthful imagination so inconsiderable, when
compared with the glory which might be reaped from lead-
ing armies or conquering provinces, that he determined to
remain no longer in a hate of inactvity. Having once
taken this resolution, his inducements to prefer an alliance
with Charles were obvious. He had no claim upon any
part of that prince's dominion^, most of which were so situ-
ated, that he could not attack them without great difficulty
and disadvantage; whereas several maritime provinces of
France had been long in the hands of the English monarchs,
whose pretensions, even to the crown of that kingdom, were
not as yet altogether forgotten; and the poffeflion of Calais
not only gave him easy access into some of those provinces,
but in cafe of any disaster, afforded him a secure retreat.
While Charles attacked France on one frontier, Henry flat-
tered himself that he /hould find little refinance on the o-
ther, and that the glory of re-annexing to the crown of
England the ancient inheritance of its monarchs on the con-
tinent was reserved for his reign. Wolfey artfully encou.
raged these vain hopes, which led his master into such mea-
fures as were most subservient to his own secret schemes; and
the Englifi, whose hereditary animosity againit the French
was apt to rekindle on every occasion, did not disapprove of
the martial spirit of their sovereign.

Meanwhile the league between the pope and the empe-

ror produced great effects in Italy, and rendered Lombardy
the chief theatre of war- There was, at that. time, such
contrariety between the characer of the French and Itali-
ans, that the latter submitted to the government of the for-
mer with greater impatience than they expre:Ted under the

M3

mnio
i of other foreigners. The phlegm of the Ger.

mas and gravity of the Spanairds suited their jealous tem.
per and ceremonious manners better than the French gaiety,
too prone to gallantry, and too tittle attentive to decorum.

ewis XII. however, by- the equity and gentleness of his
administration, and by granting the Milanese more exteon
five privileges than tbefe they had enjoyed under'their na-
tive princes, had overcome, in a great measure, their preju.
dice, and reconciled them to the French government.
Francis, on recovering that dutchy, did not imitate the ex.
ample of his predecefor. Though too generous himflf
to oppref his people, his boundleis confidence in his favoor
rites, and his negligence in examining into the conduc of
those whomaa e entruted with power, emboldened them
to venture upon many ats of oppreo. The government
of Mian was committed by him to Odet de Foix, Mare-
chal de Lautree, another other of Madame de Chateau.

riand, an oicer of great exprience and reputation, but
haughty, imp u, rapiou, and incapable either of lis
tening to advice or of bearing contradiio. His infolenee
and exations totally alienated the affeions ofthe Milafe
from France, drove ay of the eonfiderabe citizens. int
banifiment, and fosced others to retire for their own safety.
Among the aft was Jerome Morone, ice-chancellor of
Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue and enterprise dif-
tingnifhed him in an age and counlu, where violent fc-
tions, as well as frequent revolutions, affordng great. scope
for such talents, produced or called them forth in great a-
bundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza, whose brother
Maximilian he had betrayed; and fufpetig the pope's in-
tention of attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with
the emperor was not yet made public, he proposed to Leo,
in name of Sforza, a scheme for furprifug several places in that
dutchy by means of the exiles, who, from hatred to the
French, and from attachment to their former maters, were
ready for any dedperate enterprise. Leo not only encoa-

raged the attempt, but advanced a considerable fum towards
the execution of it; and when, through unforeseen acci.
dents, it failed of success in every part, heallowed the ex-
iles, who had assembled in a body, to retire to Reggio, which
belonged at that time to the church. The Marechal de
Foix, who commanded at Milan in absence of his brothr
Lautrec, who was then in France, tempted with the hopes
of catching at once, as in a snare, all the avowed enemies of
his master's government in that country, ventured to march
into the ecclefiafiical territories [June 24], and to invef
Reggio. But the vigilance and condu& of Guicciardini
the historian, governor of that place, obliged the French
general to abandon the enterprise with difgracet. Leo, on
receiving this intelligence, with which he was highly pleased,
as it furnilhed him a decent pretence for a rupture with
France, immediately assembled the consistory of cardinals.
After complaining bitterly of the hofile intentions of the
French king, and magnifying the emperor's zeal for the
church, of which he had given a recent proof by his pro.
ceedings against Luther, he decared that he was constrain-
ed in felf-defenc, and as the only expediet for the fccurity
of the ecclefiaical tate, to join his arms to those of that
prince. For this purpose he now pretended to conclude a
treaty with Don John Manuel, although it had really been
signed some months before this time; and he publicly ex-
communicated De Foix, as an impious invader of St. Pe-
ter's patrimony.

Leo had already begun preparations for war, by taking

into pay a considerable body of Swifas but the Imperial
troops advanced so slowly from Naples and Germany, that
it was the middle of autumn before the army took the field
under the command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent
of the Italian generals, whose extreme caution, the effet
of long experience in the art of war, was opposed with
great propriety to the impetuosity of the French. In the

t Guic. lib. xir. 183. Mem. deBcllay, p. 38, &c.

mean time, De Foix dispatched courier after courier to in.
form the king of the danger which was approaching. Fran
ci, whole forces were either employed in the Low Coun.
tries, or assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who did
not em*pe so sudden an attack in that quarter, sent am-
bafldors to his allies the Swiss, to procure from them the
immediate levy of an additional body of troops; and con.
manded Lautrec to repair forthwith to his government.
That general, who was well acquainted with the great ne-
ge of economy in the administration of the king's fina-.
ces, and who knew how much the troops in the MilaneCe
had already suffered from the want of their pay, refused to
set out unlfs the fum of three hundred thousand crowns
was immediately put into his hands. But the king, Louise
of Savoy his mother, and Smblancy, the superintendent
of finances, having promised, even with an oath, that on his
arrival at Milan he ihould find remittances for the fum which
he demanded; upon the faith of this, he departed.. Un.
happily for France, Louise, a woman deceitful, vindictive,
rpacious, and capable of crificing any thing to the grati-
fication of her pafions, but who had acquired.an absolute
afcedent over her son by her maternal tendernef, her care
of his education, and her great abilities, was resolved not to
perform this promile. Lautrec having incurred her dif.
pleasure by his haughtiness in neglectng to pay. court to
her, and by the freedo with which be had talked concern-
ing some of her adventures in gallantry, Ie,. or. order to de
prie him of the honour which he might have gained by a
fuceefsul defence of the Mlanefe, seized the three hundred
thouiand crowns destined for that fervicesand.detainedthem
focher own use. .

Lautrec, notwithfianding this cruel diappointment,

found means to assemble a considerable army, though far in-
ferior in number to that of the confederates. He adopted
the plan of defence most suitable to his situation, avoiding a
pitched battle with the greatef care, while he harassed the

enemy continually with his light troops, beat up their quar-
ters, intercepted their convoys, and covered or relieved every
place which they attempted to attack. By this prudent
condu&, he not only retarded their progress, but would have
soon wearied out the pope, who had hitherto defrayed al-
mo(t the whole expence of the war, as the emperor, whose
revenues in Spain were dissipated during the commotions in
that country, and who was obliged to support a numerous
army in the Netherlands, could not make any considerable
remittances into Italy. But an unforeseen accident difcon-
certed all his measures, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the
French affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swiss served in
Lautrec's army under the banners of the republic, with
which France was in alliance. In consequence of a law, no
Icfs political than humane, etablifhed among the cantons,
their troops were never hired out by public authority to
both the contending parties in any war. This law, how-
ever, the love of gain had sometimes eluded, and private
persons had been allowed to enlist in what service they pleas-
ed, though not under the public banners, but under those of
their particular officers. The cardinal of Sion, who till
preferred his interest among his countrymen, and his enmity
to France, having prevailed on them to connive at a levy of
this kind, twelve thousand Swiss, instigated by him, joined
the army of the confederates. But the leaders in the can-
tons, when they saw so many of their countrymen marching
under hostile standards, and ready to turn their arms againt
each other, became so sensible of the infamy to which they
would be exposed by permitting this, as well as the loss
they might susser, that they dispatched couriers, command-
ing their people to leave both armies, and to return forth-
with into their own country. The cardinal of Sion, how-
ever, had the address, by corrupting the messengers appoint-
ed to carry this order, to prevent it from being delivered
to the Swiss in the service of the confederates; but being
intimated in due form to those in the French army, they, fa.

tigued with the length of the campaign, and murmuring for
want of pay, instantly yielded obedience, in spite of Lau.
trec's remonfirances and entreaties.

After the defcrtion of a body which formed the trength

of his army, Lautrec durst no longer face the confederates.
He retired towards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed his chief -hopes of safety in preventing
the enemy from pasing that river; an expedient for defend.
ing a country so precarious, that there are few inflances of
its being employed with success against any general of expe.
rience or abilities Accordingly Colonna, notwithstanding
Lautrec's vigilance and activity, pafled the Adda with little
lofi, and obliged him to shut himself up within the walls of
Milan, which the confederates were preparing to besiege,
when an unknown person, who never afterwards appeared
either to boast of this service, or to claim a reward for it,
came from the city, and acquainted MoronS, that if the ar-
my would advance that night, the Ghibelline or Imperial
fation, would put them in poffeflion of one of the gates.
Colonna, though no friend to rash enterprises, allowed the
marquis de Pescara to advance with the Spanimf infantry,
and he himsef followed with the reft of his troops. About
the beginning of night, Pescara arrived at the Roman gate
in the suburbs, surprised the soldiers whom he found there;
those posted in the fortifications adjoining to it immediately
fled; the marquis seizing the works which they abandoned,
and puling forward incecflntly, though with no less cau-
tion than vigour, became master of the city with little blood-
shed, and almost without refitance; the viaors being as
much astonished a the vanquiihed at the facility and fuc-
ced of the attempt. Lautrec retired precipitately towards
the Venetian territories with the remains of his shattered ar-
my; the cities of the Milanese, following the fate of the
capital, surrendered to the confederates; Parma and Placen-
tia were united to the eccefiaftical fate, and of all their con-
qtcfts in Lombardy, only the town of Cremona, the caftb

of Milan, and a few considerable forts, remained in the hands
of the French*.

Leo received the accounts of this rapid fucceflion of
prosperous events with such transports of joy, as brought
on (if we may believe the French historians) a flight fever,
which being negleced, occasioned his death on the second
of December, while he was Rill of a vigorous age, and at
the height of his glory. By this unexpected accident, the
spirit of the confederacy was broken, and its operations
suspended. The cardinals of Sion, and Medici left the ar.
my that they might be present in the conclave; the Swiss
were recalled by their superiors; some other mercenaries
dilbanded for want of pay; and only the Spaniards and a
few Germans in the emperor's service, remained to defend
the Milanese. But Lautrec, destitute both of men and
of money, was unable to improve this favourable opportu.
nity in the manner which he would have wilhed. The vi.
gilance of Morone, and the good condut of Colonna, dif-
appointed his feeble attempts on the Milanese. Guicciar-
dini, by his address and valour, repulsed a bolder and more
dangerous attack which he made on Parmat.

Great discord prevailed in the conclave which followed

upon Leo's death, and all the arts natural to men grown old
in intrigue, when contending for the highest prize an eccle-
fiaftic can obtain, were praaifed. Wolsey's name, not-
withstanding all the emperor's magnificent promises 'to fa-
vour his pretensions, of which that prelate did not fail to
remind him, was hardly mentioned in the conclave. Julio
cardinal de Medici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent
than any other member of the sacred college for his abilities,
his wealth, and his experience in tranfacing great affairs,
had already secured fifteen voices, a number sufficient, ac-

* Guic. 1. xiv. 190, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 4a, &c. Galeacii
Capella de reb. gest. pro reftitut. Franc. Sfortie Comment. apt
Scardium, vol. ii. 80o, &c.
t Guic. 1. xwv. S 4.

wpdiag to the foams ofthc onare,lo exclude aiyother
cadidte,- hoogh not to carr his own- eldion. . As'h

aa ftfilin th pineo:

, l:. tbe agcd irdinals ombined

agai him, withot beingmitd-ii Eoowof any other pr.
fn. While .these faios wd eueloiiriag teogaii-to
eorrapt,or to weary out ~ach ~ot , Medici ~a.hib adh-
rents voted one mornig it the: fkctiny, whih irOidiog to
form wa- made. every day, forc~rdin Adriaof Thiet,
who at that ime .gor-ned Spain in the' -pert~'sia.
-This they dil mtirely- o protraa time. ZBt thit dr, r
party infianty closing withthem, to their ovn-amaznent,
and that of all Europe, a firanger to Italy,- unnown to.the
perfdns. who gave their suffrages in his favour, and bnac.
quainted with the manners of the people, or the intreft of
the fate, the government of which they conferred upo him,
was unanimoully raised to-the papal throne [January 9,] at
ajunture so delicate and critical, as would have demanded
all the fagcity and experience of ode of the moil able pre.
lates in the sacred college.: The cardinals themflves, un-
able to give a reason for this itrange choice,.on account of
which, as they marched in procession from the conclave, they
were loadd with iftlts and cuirfs'by the Roman people,
afcribd it to an immediate imnpufe of the .Holy Ghaft. - It
may beimputed withgreater certintyto the influence f DBon
John Manuel, the Impeial'arbaflador,-who by his;ddrdi
and intrigues facilitated the eletion of a person devoted tc
his mater's service, fom gratitude, from interest, and fron
inclination*.

.Beide the influence which Charles acquired by Adrian'i

prmmotion, it threw great lustre on his idnmisittionm - Tc
beftowon his preceptor such a- nobe

- recopence, and tc

._ace O the papal throie one whom .he had- rifted from ohb
-i'crity, were -as of uncommon magnificncne ad power.
Fins' obdrd.wisthbe iAthke fe8bPilityf a riii l, ith prteomi

* emHtn. ing ti Hita Mi;an, aCa^ Bman. in Aa,

k. dc adr.p.p ,
s ConUve Hadrf4Ibl . 144, Ac.-

nence which the-emperor was gaining, and refplved to' exert
*himself with fresh iigour, in order to wrest from hii his late
conquests in Italy. The Swiss, that.they might make some
reparation to'the French king, for having withdrawn their'
troops from hi'army. so unseasonably as to occasion the loss
*of the Miandee,. permitted him to levy ten thousand men in
the republic. Together with this reinforcement, Lautrec
received from the'king a small fum of money, which enabled'
him once more to take the field; and'after seizing by fur-
prise, or force, several places in the Milanese, to advance
wvithin a few miles-of the capital. The confederate army
was in no condition to obftrut:his ptogres; for thongh the
inhabitants of Milan, by. the artfices of Mirohne,;and by the
poplar' declaiations of -a -monk-whom he employed,' were
inflamed with: such enthusiastic -eal against the'-French go-
vernment, that 'they'eonfented to raise extraordinary'contri-
'utions, Colonna nRift foon-have abandonedthe adlantage-
·ous camp which he had-chofen kt Bicocca, and Ihve idlfinif-
fed his troops for want of.pay, if the Swiss in the French
service -had not. once more extricated himn out of his difficul-
ties.

The insolence or caprice -f those mercenaries were o.ften

'no less fatal to their friends, than their valour and diftipine
were formidable to theirtneniies. Having ldow served fie
months without pay, of which they complained loudtly a
fulm destine4 for their tfe was sent frm France under a con-
voy of horse; .bat Morene, 'whose vigilant eye nothing e-
fcaped, pofled a body of troops in their way, so tlat' the
party which efc6rted the money durfi not 'adance. On re-
ceiving intelligence of this, the Swiss lft' all patiencet 'and
officers as well as soldiers crowding around Lautrec, threat-
enedwith one voice instantly to retire, i-he did not either
advance the pay which was due, or proirifed to lead then,
next morning.to battle. In vain did Lautrec remonstrate
againit these dealands, reprefeating to them the inipoffib;li-
ty of the former, and the ralhnefs of the latter, which mu/t

tVo!AL -

-
.. .

be attended with certain deflrution, as the enemy occupied
a camp naturally of great strength, and which by art they
had rendered almost inaccessible. The Swiss, deaf to rea.
son, and persuaded that their valour was capable of furmonnt.
ing every obtacle, renewed their demand with greater fierce.
·ness, offering themselves to form the vanguard, and to begin
the attack. Lautrec, unable to overcome their obstinacy,
complied with their request, hoping, perhaps, that some of
those unforeseen accidents which so often determine the fate
of battles, might crown this rash enterprise with undeserved
success; and convinced that the eflfes of a defeat could not
be more fatalthan those which would certainly follow upon
the retreat of a body which composed one half of his army.
Next morning [May] the Swiss were early in the field, and
marched with the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deep-
ly entrenched on every fide, surrounded with artillery, and
prepared to receive them. As they advanced, they sustain-
cd a furious cannonade with great firmness, and without
waiting for their own artillery, ruhfed impetuously upon the
cntrenchments, But after incredible efforts of valour, which
were seconded with great spirit by the French, having loft
their bravest officers and bes soldiers, and finding that they
could make no impression on the enemy's works, they found-
ed a retreat; leaving the field of battle, however, like men
repulsed, but not vanquished, in close array, and without re-
ceiving any moletation from the enemy.

Next day, such as survived set out for their own country;

and Lautrec, derpairing of being able to make any farther
resistance, retired into France, after throwing garrisons into
Cremona and a few other places; all which, except the cita-
dd of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to surrender.

Genoa, however, and its territories, remaining fubje& to

France, still gave Francis considerable footing in Italy, and
-made it easy for him to execute any scheme for the recovery
of the Mianefe. But Colonna, rendered enterprizing by
pmatinual fuccelfi and excited by the felicitations of the sac.

tion of Adorni, the hereditary.enemies of the Fregofi, who
under the prote&ion of France possessed the chief authority
in Genoa, determined to attempt the reducion of that Rfate;
and accomplilhed it with amazing facility. He became
mailer of Genoa by an accident as unexpected as that which
had given him possession of Milan; and almost without op-
position or bloodshed, the power of the Adorni, and the au-
thority of the emperor, were established in Genoat.

Such a cruel succession of misfortunes affe&ed Francis

with deep concern, which was not a little augmented by the
arrival of an English herald, who, in the name of his fove-
reign, declared war in form againit France [May 29]. This
ftep was taken in consequence of the treaty which Wolfey
had concluded with the emperor at Bruges, and which had
hitherto been kept secret. Francis, though he had reason
to be surprised with this denunciation, after having been at
such pains to soothe Henry and to gain his minister, receiv-
ed the herald with great composure and dignity§; and with.
out abandoning any of the schemes which he was forming
against the emperor, began vigorous preparations for resist.
ing this new enemy. His treasury, however, being exhault-
ed by the efforts which he had already made, as well as by
the fums he expended on his pleasures, he had rccourfe to
extraordinary expedients for supplying it. Several new of-
sices were created, and exposed to sale; the royal demesnes
were alienated; unusual taxes were imposed; and the tomb
of St. Martin was stripped of a rail of massive silver, with
which Louis XI. in one of his fits of devotion, had encircled
it. By means of these expedients he was enabled to levy a
considerable army, and to put the frontier towns in a good
posture of defence.-

The emperor, meanwhile, was no less solicitous to draw

as much advantage as possible from the accession of such a
powerful ally; and the prosperous situation of his affairs, at

t Jovii Vita Perdin. Davali, p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.

§ Journal de Louise de Savoie, p. i99.

N

this time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where his
presence was extremely necedry, he visited the court of Eng.
land in his way to that country. He proposed by this in.
terview not only to frengthen the bonds of friendihip which.
united him with Henry, and to excite him to push the war
against France with vigour, but hoped to remove any disgust
or resentment that Wolfey might have conceived on account
of the mortifying disappointment which he had met with in
the late conclave. His success exceeded his most sanguine
expe&ations; and by his artful addiefs, during a residence
of fix weeks in England, he gained not only the king and
the minister, but the nation itself. Henry, whose vanity
was sensibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the ftu.
died refpet with which the emperor treated him on every
occasion, entered warmly into all his schemes. The cardi-
nal foreseeing, from Adrian's age and infirmities, a sudden
vacancy in the papal fee, dissembled or forgot his resentment;
and, as Charles, besides augmenting the pensions which he
had already fettled on him, renewed his promise of favour.
ing his pretensions to the papacy, with all his interest, he
endeavoured to merit the former, and to secure the accom-
plifhment of the latter, by frelh services. The nation, lhar-
ing in the glory of its monarch, and pleased with the confi-
dence which the emperor placed in the EngMlh, by creating
the earl of Surrey his high-admiral, cfcovered no less incli-
nation to commence hotilities than Henry himself.

In order to give Charles, before he left England, a proof

of this general ardour, Surrey failed with such forces as were
ready, and ravaged the coast of Normandy. He then made
a descent on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt Mor-
laix, and some other places of less confequcnce. After these
flight excursions, attended with greater dilhonour than da-
mage to France, he repaired to Calais, and took the com-
mand of the principal army, consisting of sixteen thousand
men; with which, having joined the FlemifI troops under
the Count de Buren, he advanced into Picardy. The army

which Francis had assembled was far inferior in number to
these united bodies. But during the long wars between the
two nations, the French had discovered the proper method
of defending their country againt the English. They had
been taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle
with the utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing garri-
sons into every place capable of refiftance;,by watching all
the enemy's motions, by intercepting their convoys, attack-
ing their advanced polls, and harassing them continually
with their numerous cavalry, to ruin them with' the length
of the war, or to beat them by piece-meal. This plan the
duke of Vendome, the French general in Picardy, pursued
with no less prudence than success; and not only p'revented
Surrey from taking any town of importance, but'obliged
him to retire with his army greatly reduced by fatigue, by
want of provisions, and by the loss which it had sustained
in several unsuccessful skirmishes.

Thus ended the second campaign, in a war the most gene-

ral that had hitherto been kindled in Europe; and though
Francis, by his mother's ill-timed resentment, by the disgust-
ing insolence of his general, and the caprice of the mercena-
ry troops which he employed', had loft his conquests in Ita-
ly, yet all the powers combined against him had not been
able to make any impreflion on his hereditary- dominions;
and wherever they either intended or attempted an attack,
he was well prepared to receive them.

While the Chriflian princes were thus wafting each other's

flrength, Solyman the Magnificent entered Hungary with a
numerous army, and investing Belgrade, which was deemed
the chief barrier of that kingdom against the'Turkifh 'arms,
soon forced it to surrender. Encouraged by this success,
he turned his vicorious arms againit the'ifand of Rhodes,'
the feat, at that time, of the knights of St. John of Jerufa-
lem. This small slate he attacked with such a numerous ar-
my as the lords of Asia have been accustomed in every age
to bring into the field. Two hundred thousand men, and aX

N3

eet of four hundred tail, appeared againl a town defended
by a garrison confiling of five thouland soldiers, and ix hun.
dred knights, under the command of Vilier de L' Iie A.
dam, the grand master, whose wisdom and valour rendered
him worthy of that station at such a dangerous junaure. No
sooner did he begin to fufpe& the destination of Solyman's
Taft armaments, than he dispatched messengers to all the
Cbriftian courts, imploring their aid against the common e.
aemy. But though every prinee in that age acknowledged.
Rhodes to be the great bulwark of Christendom in the east,
ad traded to the gallantry of its knights as the bes fecuri.
ty against the progref of the Ottoman arms; though Adri.
an, with a zeal which became the head and father of the
church, exhorted the contending powers to forget their pri-
vate quarrels, and, by uniting their arms, to prevent the In,
fidels from deftrying a gQciety which did honour to the
Christian name; yet so violent and implacable was the ani.
mofity of both parties, that regardle of the danger to
which they exposed alb Europe, and unmoved by the intrea-
tces of the grand mast, or the A.dmonitions of the pope,
they fai~red Solyman to carry on his operations againt
Rhodes without disturbance. The grand mater, after in,
credibk efforts of courage, of patience, and of military conw
du& during a siege of fix months;, after fuMtaining many as-
faults, and disputing every pol withk amazing obiinacy, was
obliged at laR to yield to numbers. 'andc having obtained an
honourable capitulation from the sultan, who admired and re-
spe&ed his virtue, he surrendered the town, which was re.
duced to a heap of rubbilh, and detitute of every resources.
Charles and Francis, aAamed of having occafGoed such a
loss to Christendom by their ambltious contests, endeavour.
cd to throw the blme of it on each other, whil all Europe,
with greater jutice, imputed it equally to boath The enm.
yetor, by way of reparation, granted the knights es St. John

t Fontanus de Bello Rhodio, ap Scard. Script. Rer. Germnn
cL ii p. Y8. . Barrc. tifi. d'Alem. tom. 'i.L 57.

# BOOK III.

the final iland of Malta, in which they fixed their refidenccy
retaining, though with less power and splendour, their aa.
cient spirit and implacable enmity to the Infidels.

BOOK III.

CHAaLrS, having had the fatisfaAion of feeing hoftilfitih
begun between France and England, took leave of Henry,
and arrived in Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found
that country just beginning to recover order and strength as-
ter the miseries of a civil war, to which it had been exposed
during his abfencet; an account of the rife and progress of
which, as it was but little conneted with the other events
which happened in Europe, hath been reserved to this place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes aflembled in Ga.

licia had voted the emperor afree gift, without obtaining the
redress of any one grievance, than it excited universal indig-
nation. The citizens of Toledo, who confidered themelves,
on account of the great privileges which they enjoyed, as
guardians of the liberties of the Castilian commons, finding
that no regard was paid to the remonstrances of their depu-
ties agalnft that unconffitutional grant, took arms with tu.
multuary violence, and seizing the gates of the city which
were fortified, attacked the alcazar, or castle, which they
soon obliged the governor to surrender. Emboldened by
this success, they deprived of al authority every person
whom they fupeaed of any attachment to the court, efta.
blilbed a popular form of government, composed of deputies
from the several parilhes in the city, and levied troops in
their own defence. The chief leader of the people in these
infurre&ions was Don John de Padilla, the eldest son of the
commendator of Castile, a young nobleman of a generous
temper, of undaunted courage, and possessed of the talents

seet of foor hundred fail, appeared againlf a town defended
by a gurifon coafiling of five thoutand soldiers, and ix hurn
dred knights, under the coammad of ViIliers de L'lfle A.
dam, the grand maiter, whose wifdor and valour rendered
him worthy of that station at such a dangerous junhure. No
fboner did he begin to fufpe the defination of Solyman's
vast armaments, than he dispatched messenger to all the
Christian courts, imploring their aid against the common e.
many. Bat though every prinee in that age acknowledgd

hodrs to be the great bulwark of Chriltendom in the eafii
and tr~fed to the gallantry of its knights as the best fecuri
ty against the progref of the Ottoman arms; though Adri
a, with a zeal which became the head and father of the
church, ehorted the contending powers to forget their pri
ate quarrels, and, by uniting their arms, to prevent the In.
f&de from deiorying a ftciety which did honour to the
Christian name; yet so violent and implacable was the an.
mnofity of both parties, that regardlef of the dager tc
wlich they exposed al Europe, and unmoved bythe intrea
ties of the grand mair, or the ~daoaitions of the pope:
they fuicred Solyman to cary on his operations again4
Rhodes without difurbance. The grand mater, afte in
credible efforts of courage, of patience, and of military con
dut during a siege of si months, after fInaining many as
faults, and disputing every post with amazing obitinacy, wa
obliged at lat to yield to numberms and having obtained a
bonourable capitulation from the fulta~ who admired and-r
fpeted his virtue, he surrendered the town, wlich was re
duced to a heap of rubbilh, and destitute of every refarcet
Charles and Francis, aiamed of having occafiomed such
loss to Christendom by theic ambitious contefs, endeavotb
ed to throw the blame of it on each other, while al-Europ
with greater justice, imputed it equally to bot The en
peror, by way of reparation, granted the knights of St. Job

t Fontanus de Bello Rhodio, ap Scad. Scr it. Rer. G0cr
TeL ii p. Y8. P. Barrc. His d'Aicm, tomr. vi. j7

# BOOK III.

the small ifand of Malta, in which they sied their residence,
retaining, though with less power and splendour, their an.
cient spirit and implacable enmity to the Infidels.

BOOK III.

CHAlLES, having had the fatisfac°ion of feeing hofilitihi
begun between France and England, took leave of Henry,
and arrived in Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found
that country just beginning to recover order and strength as-
ter the miseries of a civil war, to which it bad been exposed
during his absence'; an account of the rife and progress of
which, as it was but little connefted with the other events
which happened in Europe, hath been reserved to'this place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes assembled in Ga-
licia had voted the emperor afree gif, without obtaining the
redress of any one grievance, than it excited universal indig-
nation. The citizens of Toledo, who confidered themselves,
on account of the great privileges which they enjoyed, as
guardians of the liberties of the Castilian commons, finding
that no regard was paid to the remonstrances of their depu-
ties againit that unconstitutional grant, took arms with tu-
multuary violence, and seizing the gates of the city which
were fortified, attacked the alcazar, or castle, which they
soon obliged the governor to surrender. Emboldened by
this success, they deprived of al authority every person
whom they fupe&ed of any attachment to the court, efta.
blifhed a popular form of government, composed of deputies
from the several parishes in the city, and levied troops in
their own defence. The chief leader of the people in these
infurreóions was Don John de Padilla, the eldet son of the
commendator of Castile, a young nobleman of a generous
temper, of undaunted courage, and possessed of the talents

as well as of the ambition which, in times of eiviT .
mrfe men to power and eminence.

The resentment of the citizens of Scgavia.producedef.

fcs All more fatal Tordefillas, one of the reprefenta'
tives in the late Cortes, had voted for the donative, and
being a bold and haughty man, ventured upon his return,
to cal together his fellow-citizens in the great church, that
he might give them, according to custom, an account of
his condua in that assembly. But the multitude, unable
to bear his insolence, 'in attempting to justify what. t'et
thought inexcufabe, burst open the gates of the church
with the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy Tordfias.
dragged him through the fireets, with a thousnd curffes
and infultstowards the place of public execution. In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in procession with the
holy sacrament, in order to appease their rage. In vain did
the monks of those monasteries by which they passed, conh
jure them on their knees, to spare his life, or at leaf to allow
him time to confess, and to receive absolution of his fins;
Without litcaing to the di&ates either of humanity or reli
gion, they cried out, " That the hangman alone could ab.
solve such a traitor to his country;" they then hurried him
along with greater violence; and perceiving that he had
epired under their hands, they hung him up with his head
downwards on the common gibbetS. The fame spirit feiz-
ed the inhabitants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other
cities; and though their representatives, taking warning
from the fate of Tordefills, had been so wife as to fare
thcmfelvesby a timely flight, they were burnt in effigy,
their houses razed to the ground, and their effects confum-
ed with fire; and such was the horror which the people had
eonceived against them, as betrayers of the public liberty,
that not one in those licentious multitudes would touch any
thing, however valuable, which had belonged to themt.

Sandovr p. 77. P. Mart. Ep. 671.
t Sandov. so3. P. Mrt. Ep. 674.

Adrian, at that time regent of Spaini, had icareely fixed
the feat of his government at Valladolid, when he was a-
larmed with an account of there infurrecions. He immedi-
ately afembled the privy council [June , i sio], to delibe-
rate concerning the proper method offuppreffing them. The
counsellors differed in opinion; some insisting that it was
aeceffary to check this audacious spirit in its infancy by a
severe execution of justice; others advising to treat with
lenity a people who had some reason to be incensed, and not
to drive them beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-timed-
rigour. The sentiments of the former being warmly sup.
ported by the archbishop of Granada, president of the coun-
ci, a person of great authority, but choleric and inpetusos,
were approved by Adrian, whose zeal to support his maf-
ter's authority, hurried him into a measure, to which, from
his natural caution and timidity,, he would otherwise have
been averse. He commanded Ropquillo, one.of the king's
judges, to repair instantly' to Segovia,. which. had let the
firlf example of mutiny, and to proceed against the deline
quents according to law;..and left the people ihould be so
outrageous as to resist his'authority, a considerable body of
troops were appointed to attend him. The Segovians,
foreseeing what they might expe&t from'a judge so well
known for his austere and unforgiving temper, took. arms
with one content, and having mustered twelve thousand
men, (hut their gates againi him. Ronquillo, enraged at
this insult, denounced them rebels and outlaws, and his
troops seizing all the avenues to. the town, hoped that it
would soon be obliged to surrender. for want 0ofproviions.
The inhabitants,.however, defended themselves with vigour
and having received a considerable reinforcement from.Tole
do, under the command of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo, apdt
forced him to retire with the loss of his baggage arid mili-
tary chest*.

Upon this, Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, whom
* Sandov. .
I . PMart. Ep. 679. Mian a, Contia p. 15.

the emperor had appointed commander in chief of the forces
in Castle, to assemble an army, and to besiege Segovia-iu
form. But the inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where
cardinal Ximenes had established a aft magazine of mii;
tary fores, would not susser him to draw from it a train
of battering cannon, or to destroy their countrymen with
those arms which had been prepared against the enemies of
the kingdom. Fonseca, who could not execute his order
without artillery, determined to seize the magazine by
force; and the citizens standing on their defencehe a&auhl
ed the town with great brilknefs [Aug. 213; but h
troops were so warmly received, that despairing of carrying
the place, he set fire to some of the houses, in hopes thai
the citizens would abandon the walls, in order, to fare their
families and effecs Instead of that the expedient to which
he had recourse fererd only to increase their fury, and he
was repulsed with great disgrace, while 'the flames, spread.
ing from fireet to freet, reduced to afles almost the whol
town, one of the most considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufaAures of Segvia and
~cvral other cities. As the warelioufes were then filled
with goods for the approaching fair, the loss was immenfei
and was felt univerally. This, added to the impression
which such a crud a&ion made on a people long unacolf
tomed to the horrors of civil war, enraged the Castilians
almost to madnef. Foneca became the obje& of genel
atred, and was branded with the name of incendiary, and
enemy to his country. Even the citizens of Valladolid,
whom the presence of the cardinal had hitherto refirained,
declared that they could no longer remain inative fpefta.
tor of the sufferings of their countrymen. Taking arms
with no les fury than the other cities, they burnt Fonseca's
house to the ground, ele&ed new magistrates, raised foldlers,
appointed officers to command them, and guarded thei
wals with as much diligence as if an enemy had-been rea.
dy to attack them.

The cardinal, though virtuous and difintereited, and cap.

able of governing the kingdom with honour in, times oftran.
quillity, possessed neither the courage nor the lagacity ne-
ceffary at such a dangerous junture. Finding himself un-
able to check these outrages committed under his own eye,
le attempted to appease the people, by protesting that Son-
feca had exceeded his orders, and had by his ralh conduct
offended him, as much as he had injured them. This con-
descension, the effe& of irresolution and timidity, rendered
the malecontents bolder and more insolent; and the cardinal
having soon afterwards recalled Fonseca, and dismissed his
troops, which he could no longer afford to pay, as the trea.
fury, drained by the rapaciousness of the Flemish minifRers,
had received no supply from the great cities, which were all
in arms, the people were left at full liberty to a& without
controul, and scarcely anyi hadow of power remained in his
hands.

Nor were the proceedings of the commons the cffeds
merely of popular and tumultuary rage; they aimed at obtain-
ing redress of their politicalgrievances, and an eftablilhment
of public liberty on a secure basis, objeas worthy of all the
zeal which they-difcovered in contending for them. The
feudal government in Spain was at that time in a fate more
favourable to liberty than in any other of the great Euro.
pean kingdoms, This was owing chiefly to the number of
great cities in that country, a circumflance I hate already
taken notice of, and which contributes more than any other
to mitigate the rigour of the feudal inititutions, and to in.
troduce a more liberal and equal form of government. The
inhabitants of every city formed a great corporation, with
valuable immunities and privileges; they were delivered from
a tate of subjection and vaftilage; they were admitted to
a considerable (hare in the legislature; they had acquired
the arts of industry, without which cities cannot fubfif;
they had accumulated wealth, by engaging in commerce;
and being free and independent themselves, were ever ready

lo ac& ;s the guardians of the public firedom and indepen.
iace. The genius of the internal government eablifed
-among the inhabitants of cities, which, even in countrie
.where depotic power prevails mos, i democratical and
publican, rendered the idea of lberty familiar and dear to
them. Their representatives in the Cortes were accufomed,
with equal spirit, to chetk the encroachments of the king
and the oppreffon of the nobles. They endeavoured to ex,
tend the privileges of their own order; they laboured to
~hakeoff the remaining incumbrances with which the spirit of
feudal policy, favourable only to the noes, had burdened
them; and, conscious of being one of the most confiderabl
orders in the fate, were ambitious of becoming the mot
powerful

The present junaure appeared favourable for puihing

any new claim. Their sovereign was absent from hisdo.
minions; by the ill condut of his ministers be had lot the
eteem and affe&ion of his fubjcds; the people, exafperted
by many injuries, had taken arms, though without concet
almost by general content; they were animated with rage
capable of carrying them to the most violentextremes; the
royal treasury was exhaufled; the kingdom destitute of
troops; and the government committed to a tranger, d
great virtue indeed, but of abilities urtqual to fuci a truL
The firt care of PadiQa, and the other popular leaders who
observed and determined to iniprove these circunftanceb
was to eftablilh some form of union or afociation among the
malecotents, that they might aft with greater regularity
and pursue one common end; and as the different cities had
been prompted to take arms by the fame motives, and were
accustomed to confider themselves as a diftina body from
the ref of the fubjecs, they did not find this difficult. A
general convention was appointed to be held at Avila. Do
puties appeared there in name of almost all the cities entitled
to have representatives in the Cortes. They all bonnd
themfedves, by solemn oath, to live and die in the service d

the king, and in defence of the privileges of their order;
and assuming the name of the holy Junta, or association,
proceeded to deliberate concerning the Rate of the nation,
and the proper method of'redreffing its grievances. The
irfe that naturally presented hisef, was the nomination of a
foreigner to be regent; this they declared with one' voice to
be a violation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom, and
resolved to fend a deputation of their members to Adrian,
requiring him in their name to lay aside all the ensigns of
his office, and to abstain for the future from the exercise of a
jurifdition which they had pronounced illegal *

While they were preparing to execute this bold refolu-

tion, Padilla accomplilhed an enterprise of the greatest advan-
tage to the cause. After relieving Segovia, he marched
suddenly to Tordefillas [Aug. 29,] the place where the un-
happy queen Joanna had resided since the death of her hus-
band, and being favoured by the inhabitants, was admitted
into the town, and became master of her person, for the fecu-
rity of which Adrian had negleced to take proper precau-
tionst. Padilla waited immediately upon the queen, and ac-
costing her with that profound refpet, which fee exa&ed
from the few persons whom ihe deigned to admit into her
presence, acquainted her at large with the miserable condi-
tion of her Catilian fubjeas under the government of her
Ton, who being destitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with such rigour as had
obliged them to take arms in defence of the liberties oftheir
country. The queen, as if (he had been awakened out of a
lethargy, exprefled great aftonihment, at what he laid, and
told him, that as she had never heard, until that moment, of
the death of her father, or known the sufferings of her people,
no blame could be imputed to her, but that now Ihe would
take care to provide a sufficient remedy; and in the mean

P. Mart. Ep. 691.

t Vita dell' Imper. Carl, V. dell' Als. Ulloa. Ven. 15o9. p. 67.
Miniana, Contin. p. 17.
Vol. 11. 0

time, added he, let it be your concen to do what is n&ecfl
ty for the public welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a
condufion agreeable to his wihies, mistook this lucid inter.
*al of reason for a perfec return of that faculty; and ac.
qainting the unta with what had happened, advised them
to remove to Tordefilas, and to hold their meetings in that
place. This was infantly done; but though Joanna recei.
d very graciously an addrds of the Junta, beseeching her
to take upon hetfdfth government of the kingdom, and in
to&ea of her compliance admitted all the deputies to kifs hr
hand; though Ihe was present at a tournament held on that
ccafion, and seemed highly satisfied with both these cere.
onies, which were condu~ed with great magnificence I
eder to please her, fie soon relapsed into her former nelan.

oly and fulbenei, and could never be brought, by any ar.

guamnts or entreaties, to sign any one papet neceLfary ot
the dispatch of business.

The Junta, concealing as much as pofihble this lat ir.
ftabnce, carried on all their deliberations in the name of

Joanna; and as the Caftlians, who idolized the name of Ia.
bela, retained a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no
sooner was it known that fhehad consented to iffume the rins
of government, than the people exprefled the most universal
and immoderate joy; and believing her recovery to be com.
plete, ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of Heaven, in
Brder to rescue their country from the oppression of foreign.
em The Junta, conscious of the reputation and power
rwich they had acquired by seeming to a& under the royal
authority, were no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to
tefign the office of regent; they detached Padilla to Valla
dolid with a considerable body of troops, ordering him to
fclee such members of the council as were fill in that city, to
cnaa them to Tordefillas, nd to bring away the feals of
thekingdom, the public archives, andtteafury bools. Padil
~a, who was received by the citizens as the deliverer of hi

SndonV 164 . P.Mart. E. 685, 686.

country, executed his commission with great exaanefs; per-
mitting Adrian, however, till to reside in Valladolid, though
only as a private person, and without any shadow of power*.

The emperor, to whom frequent accounts of these tranf-
aAions were transmitted while he was still in Flanderi, was
sensible of his own imprudence and that of his mjniRtrs, in
having despised too long the murmurs aud remonRrances of
the Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a kingdom,
the most valuable of any he' possessed, and in which lay the
firength and sinews of his power, jus ready to disown his
authority, and on the point of being plunged in all the mi.
series of civil war. But though his presence might have a-
verted this calamity, he could not, at that time, visit Spain
without endangering the Imperial crown, and allowing the
French king full leisure to execute his ambitious schemes.
The only point now to be deliberated upon, was, whether
he lhould attempt to gain the malecontents by indulgence
and concessions, or prepare dire&ly to suppress them by force;
and he resolved to make trial of the former, while, at the
fame time, if that lhould fail offuccefs, 'he prepared for the
latter. For this purpose, he issued circular letters to all the
cities of Castile, exhorting them in most gentle terms, and
with alTurances of full pardon, to lay down their arms; he
promised such cities as had continued faithful, not to exat
from them the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offer-
ed the fame favour to such as returned to their duty; he en-
gaged that no office should be conferred for the future upon
any but native CafRilians. Oa the other hand, he wrote to
the nobles, exciting them to appear with vigour in defence
of their own rights, and those of the crown, againif the ex-
orbitant claims of the commons; he appointed the high ad.
miral Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable of Ca-
Rile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of great abilities
as well as influence, regents of the kingdom in conjunction
with Adrian; and he gave them full power and inftruaionsb

Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

02

time, h, dded e, let it be your concern to do what is n6celi
ty for the public welfare. Padifla, too eager in forming a
conclusion agreeable to his withes, mistook this lucid inter.
val of reason for a perfet return of that faculty; and ac-
quainting the Junta with what had happened, advised them
to remove to Tordefilas, and to hold their meetings in that
pace. This was inflantly done; but though Joanna receiv
ed very gracioufy an address of the Junta, beseeching bet
to take upon hel f the government of the kingdom, and in
token of he compliance admitted all the deputies to kifs her
hand; though she was present at a tournament held on that
eccafon, and seemed highly satisfied with both these cere.

ionis, which were conduc ed with great magnificence X
orde to please her, lhe soon relapsed into her former melan
choly and fualned , and could never be brought, by any ar-
guments or entreaties, to sign any one paper neceffiry for
the dispatch of business*.

The Junta, concealing as much as possible this last citr
umftance, carried on all their deliberations in the name of
Joanna; and as the Castilians, who idolized the name of Iia.
bella, retained a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no
Sooner was it known that ihehad consented to assume the reins
of government, than the people expressed the most univeral
and immoderate joy; and believing her recovery to be com-
pletec ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of Heaven, in
order to rescue their country flom the opprefion of foreign-
ea. The Junta, conscious of the reputation and powed
which they had acquired by seeming to at under the royal
tuthotity, were no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to
tdign the office of regent; they detached Padilla to Valla-
dolid *wth a considerable body of troops, ordering him to
fciee such members of the council as were ft1ll in that city, to
can~t them to Tordefllas, and to bring away the feals of
the kingdom, the public archives, and treasury books. Padils
Is, who was received by the citizens as the deliverer of his

Samdovn 164 . .Mat. Ep. 685, 686.

country, executed his commission with great exacnels; per.
mitting Adrian, however, still to reside in Valladolid, though
only as a private person, and without any shadow of power*

The emperor, to whom frequent accounts of these tranf.

aftions were transmitted while he was still in Flanderi, was
sensible of his own imprudence and that of his miniftlrs, in
having despised too long the murmurs and remonstrances of
the Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a kingdom,
the most valuable of any he' possessed, and in which lay the
strength and sinews of his power, just ready to disown his
authority, and on the point of being plunged in all the mi.
series of civil war. But though his pretence might have a-
verted this calamity, he could not, at that time, visit Spain
without endangering the Imperial crown, and allowing the
French king full leisure to execute his ambitious schemes.
The only point now to be deliberated upon, was, whether
he should attempt to gain the malecontents by indulgence
and concefions, or prepare directly to suppress them by force;
and he resolved to make trial of the former, while, at the
fame time, if that ihould fail of success, he prepared for the
latter. For this purpose, he issued circular letters to all the
cities of Catile, exhorting them in most gentle terms, and
with assurances of full pardon, to lay down their arms; he
promised such cities as had continued faithful, not to exa&t
from them the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and offer-
ed the fame favour to such as returned to their duty; he en-
gaged that no office ihould be conferred for the future upon
any but native Castilians. Ox the other hand, he wrote to
the nobles, exciting them to appear with vigour in defence
of their own rights, and those of the crown, againift the ex-
orbitant claims of the commons; he appointed the high ad.
miral Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable of Ca.
file, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of great abilities
as well as influence, regents of the kingdom in conjuntion
with Adrian; and he gave them full power and instructions,

Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

0 2

if the obfinacy of the malecontents ihould render it necefL
ry, to vindicate the royal authority by force of armst.

These concefions, which, at the time of his leaving Spain,

would have fully satisfied the people, came now too late to
prod - e any effe& The Junta, relying on the unanimity
with which the nation submitted to their authority, elated
with the success which hitherto had accompanied all theit
uniertakings, and feeing no military force colleted to de.
feat or obftrtu their designs, aimed at a more thorough re.
formation of political abuses. They had been employed for
some time in preparing a remonstrance containing a large
enumeration, not only of the grievances of which theycrav.
ed redress, but of such new regulations as they-thought ne.
ceffary for the security of their liberties. This remon,
trance, which is divided into many articles relating to. all
the different members, of which the constitution was corn
posed, as well as the various departments in the adminifta.
tion of government, funmifhes us with more authentic evi.
dence concerning the intentions of the Junta, than can be
drawn from the testimony of the later Spanilh hitorians, who
lived in times when it became falhionable and even nccedfry
to represent the conduct of the malecontents in the word
light, and as flowing from the wort motives. After a long
preamble concerning the various calamities under which the
nation groaned, and the errors and corruption in goern-
ment to which these were to be imputed, they take notice
of the exemplary patience wherewith the people had endur.
ed them, until felf-prefervation, and the duty which they
owed to their country, had obliged them to afremble, in or-
der to provide in a legal manner for their own safety, and
that of the constitution: For this purpose, they demanded
that the king would be pleased to return to his Spanifi do.
minions and reside there, as all their former monarchs had
done; that he would not marry but with consent of the
Cortes; that if he thould be obliged at any time to leave

t. P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. i88

the kingdom, it hall not be lawful to appoint any foreigner
to be regent; that the present nomination of cardinal Adri-
an to that office ihall instantly be declared void; that he
would not, at his return, bring along with him any Flemings
or other trangers; that no foreign troops mlall on any
pretence whatever, be introduced into the kingdom; that
none but natives hall be capable of holding any office or be-
nefice either in church or state; that no foreigner hall be
saturalized; that free quarters shall not be granted to fol-
diers, nor to the members of the king's household, for any
longer time than fix days, and that only when the court is in
a progress; that all the taxes shall be reduced to the fame
Rate they were in at the death of queen Isabella; that all
alienations of the royal demesnes or revenues since that
queen's death ihall be resumed; that all new offices created
since that period hall be abolished; that the fibfidy grant-
ed by the late Cortes in Galicia, shall not be exa&ced; that
in all future Cortes each city Ihall fend one 'reprefenLa-
tive of the clergy, one of the gentry, and one of the com-
mons, each to be eleced by his own order; that the crown
shall not influence or direc any city with regard to the
choice of its representatives; that no member of the Cortes
/hall receive an office or pension from the king, either for
himself or for any of his family, under pain of death, and
confiscation of his goods; that each city or community Ihall
pay a competent salary to its representative, for his main-
tenance during his attendance on the Cortes; that the
Cortes shall assemble once in three years at leat, whether
summoned by the king or not, and £hall then enquire into
the observation of the articles now agreed upon, and delibe-
rate concerning public affairs; that the rewards which have
been given or promised to any of the members of the Cortes
held in Galicia, shall be revoked; that it Ihall be declared a
capital crime to fend gold, fiver or jewels out of the king.
dom; that judges shall have fixed salaries afligned them,
and ihall not receive any share of the fines and forfeitures of

03

persons condemned by them; that no grant of the goodss
persons accused shall be valid, if given before sentence was
pronounced against them; that all privileges which the no.
bles have at any time obtained, to the prejudice of the'comn
mons, lhall be revoked; that the government of cities or
towns Ihall not be put into the hands of noblemene that
the poffidons of the nobility hall be subjec to all public
taxes in the fame manner as tliofe of the commons; that an
inquiry be made into the condui of fucbas hae been entrufi
cd-with the management of the royal patrimony since the
accefion of Ferdinand; and if the king do not within thirty
days appoint perEons properly qualied for that service, it
ihal be lawful for the Cortes to nominate them; that indul.
gences fall not be preached or dilperfed in the kingdom un-
til the cause of publitbing them be examined and approved
s4 by the Cortes; that all the money arising fom the sale
of ind. jences lhall be faithfully employed in carrying on
.-ar agaift the Infidels; that fuc prelates as do not refid
in their dioceses fix months in the year, lmall forfeit their ro
venues during the time they are absent; that the ecclefiafti.
cal judges and their offices ihall not exa& greater fees than
those which are paid in the fcular courts;, that the present
archbbihop of Toledo, being a foreigner, be compelled.to
resign that dignity, which fhal be eonferred upon a Caftili.
an; that the king shall ratify and hold,as good fervie done
to him and to the kingdom, all the proceedings of the Junta,
and pardon any irregularities which the cities. may have
committed from an excefi of zeal in a -good eanfe: that he
thall promise and swear in the mos folean manner to ob-
serve all these articles, and on no occasion. attempt either to
elude, or to repeal them; and that he fiall never falieit the
pope or any other prelate to grant him a difpeafation-or ab-
solution from this oath and promise*.

Such were the chief articles prefentedby the Junta to
their sovereign. As the feudal inflitutioas in the fevera

$ Sandov. zo6. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

kingdoms of Europe were originally the fame, the genius
of those governments which arose from them bore a strong
resemblance to each other, and the regulations which the
Caltilians attempted to eftabliih on this occasion, differ little
from those which other nations have laboured to procure,
in their itruggles with their monarchs for liberty. The
grievances complained of, and the remedies proposed by the
English commons in their contests with the princes of the
house of Stuart, particularly resemble those upon which the
Junta now insisted. But the principles of liberty seem to
have been better undertood, at this period, by the Caflili-
ans, than by any other people in Europe;, they had acquir-
ed more liberal ideas with refpe& to their own rights and
privileges; they had formed more bold and generous senti-
ments concerning government; and discovered an extent
of political knowledge to which the English themselves did
not attain until more than a century afterwards.

It is not improbable, however, that the spirit of reforma-

tion among the Castilians, hitherto unrefirained by authori-
ty, and emboldened by success, became too impetuous, and
prompted the Junta to propose innovations which, by alarm-
ing the other members of the constitution, proved fatal to
their cause. The nobles, who, instead of obftru&ing, had
favoured or connived at their proceedings, while they con-
fined their demands of redress to such grievances as had
been occasioned by the king's want of experience, and by
the imprudence and rapaciousness of his foreign ministers,
were filled with indignation. when the Junta began to touch
the privileges of their order, and plainly saw that the mea
fures of the commons tended no less to break the power of
the aristocracy, than to limit the prerogatives of the crown.
The resentment which they had conceived on account of
Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated considerably
upon the emperor's raising the constable and admiral to
joint power with him in that office; and as their pride
and dignity were less hurt by suffering the prince to

poss an etenfive prerogative, than by admitting th(
high pretensions of the people, they determined to gin
their fovergn the aiftance which he had demanded a
them, and began to aime their vaflis for that purpose.

The Junta, meanwhile, expected with impatience tht

emperor's answer to their remonfirance, which they had ap
pointed some of their number to present. The memba em
truted with this commiffon set out immediately-for Geo
many [O. zo], but having received at different places cer.
tain intelligence from court, that they could not venture to
appear there without endangering their lives, they topt
ihort in their journe, and acquainted the Junta of the in.
formation which had been given them*. This excited
such violent palflons as transported the whole party beyond
al bounds of prudence or of moderation. That a king of
Caftie hould deny his fubjefts aceefs into his prefnce, or
refue to liften to their humble petitions, was represented a;
an at of tyranny so unprecedented and intolerable, that no.
thing now remained but with arms in their hands to dri/v
away that ravenous band of foreigners which encompafed
the throne, who, after having devoured the wealth of the
kingdom, found it necefary to prevent the -cries of an in.
jured people from reaching the ears of their foverdgn.
Many insisted warmly on approving a motion which had
formerly been made, for depriving. Charles, during the life
of his mother, of the regal titles and authority which had
ben too rashly conferred upon him, from a false supposition
of her total inability for government. Some proposed td
provide a proper person to afift her in the administration of
public affairs, by marrying the queen to the prince of-Cala
bria, the heir of the Aragorefe kings of Naples, who had
been detained in prison since the time that Ferdinand had
difpofefled his ancetors of their crown. Al agreed, that
as the hopes of obtaining redreis and security, merely by
prefnting their requefta to their sovereign, had kept them

Sadov. 143.

too long in a tate of inaAion, and prevented them from
taking advantage of the unanimity with which the nation
declared in their favour, it was now necessary to collct their
whole force, and to exert themselves with vigour, in opposing
this fatal combination of the king and the nobility againff
their liberties*.

They soon took the field with twenty thousand men.
Violent disputes arose concerning the command of this ar-
my. Padilla, the darling of the people and soldiers, was
the only person whom they thought worthy of this honour.
But Don Pedro de Giron, the eldet son of the Conde de
Uruena, a young nobleman of the first order, having lately
joined the commons out of private resentment againit the
emperor, the refpeA due to his birth, together with a fe.
eret desire of disappointing Padilla, of whose popularity ma.
ny members of the Junta had become jealous, procured him
the office of general [Nov. 233]; though he soon gave them
a fatal proof that hepoffeffed neither the experience, the abi-
lities, nor the fReadinefs, which that important station re-
quired.

The regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as the place
of rendezvous for their troops, which, though.far inferor
to those of the commons in number, excelled them greatly
in discipline and in valour. They had drawn a considerable
body of regular and veteran infantry out of Navarre. Their
cavalry, which formed the chief strength of their army, con-
sised mostly of gentlemen accustomed to the military life,
and animated with the martial spirit peculiar to their order
in that age. The infantry of the Junta was formed entirely
of citizens and mechanics, little acquainted with the use of
arms. -The small body of cavalry which they had been able
to raise was compoeed of persons of ignoble birth, and per-
sea strangers to the service into which they entered. The
characer of the generals differed no less than that of their
troops. The royalists were commanded by the Conde de

P. Mart. Ep. 688.

Haro, the couftabl's cdeft son, an oficer of great experi.
eoce and of diftinguifed abilities.

Giron marched with his army diretly to Riofeco, and

fezing the ilages and patIs around it hoped that the roy.
alif would be obliged either to surrender for want of po
vision, or to fight with disadvantage before all their troop
were aembled. But he had not the abilities, nor his troop
the patience and dicipline necelfary for the execution of
such a scheme. The Conde de Haro found little difficulty
in condueing a considerable reinforcement through all hi
post into the town; and Giron, defpairiag of being able to
reduce it, advanced faddenly to Villa-panda, a place belong.
ing to the confable, in which the enemy had their chief ma
gzie of provisions. By this ill-judged motion, he left Tot.
~deDa open to the royalits, whom the Conde de Ha led
thier in the night, with the ntmoft secrecy and dispatch;
and attacking the town [Dec. 5], in which Giron ad left
no other garrion than a regiment of priess raised by the bi
~hop of Zamora, he, by break of day, forced his way into
t after a desperate refifance, became -master of the queen'
person, took prisoners many members of the Junta, and re
coveed the great (al, with the other enfigms of goer~
ment.

By this fal blow, the Junta loft all the reputation ad

authority which they had derived from seeming to at by the
queen's commands; such of the noble as had hitherto ben
wavering or undetermined in their choice, now joined the
regents with al their forces; and an universal confernatimo
sized the partizans of the commos. This was much in.
crafed by the suspicion they began to entertain of Gioni
whom they loudly accused of having betrayed Tordefilas to
the enemy; and though that charge seems to have been def.
titute of foundation, the success of the royalists being owing
to Giron's ill condut rather than to his treachery, he so

entirely lot credit with his party, that he resigned his corn.
mission, and retired to one of his castles:.

Such members of the Junta as had escaped the enemy's

hands at Tordefillas, fled to Validolid; and as it would
have required long time to supply the places of those who
were prisoners by a new ele&ion, they made choice among
themselves of a small number of persons, to whom they com-
mitted the supreme direction of affirs. Their army, which
grew stronger every day by the arrival of troops from diffe-
rent parts of the kingdom, marched likewise to Valladolids
and Padilla being appointed commander in chief, the fpirita
of the soldiery revived, and the whole party forgetting the
late misfortune, continued to express the fame ardent zeal
for the liberties of their country, and the fame implacable
animosity against their oppteffors.

What they stood most in deed of, was money to pay their
troops. A great *art of the current coin had been carried
out of the kingdom by the Flemings; the fated taxes levied
in times of peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every
kind being interrupted by the war, the fum which it yield-
ed decreased daily; and the Junta were afraid of difgufing
the people by burdening them with new impositions, to
which, in that age, they were little accustomed. But from
this difficulty they were extricated by Donna Maria Pache-
co, Padilla's wife, a woman of noble birth, of great abilities,
of boundless ambition, and animated with the most ardent
zeal in support of the cause of the Junta. She, with a bold-
ness superior to those superstitious fears which often influ-
ence her sex, proposed to seize all the rich and magnificent
ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but left that action,
by its appearance of impiety, might offend the people, Ihe
and her retinue marched to the church in solemn proceflion,
in mourning habits, with tears in their eyes, beating their
breasts, and falling on their knees, implored the pardon of
the faints whose shrines she was about to violate. By this

I Miscellaneous Tradls by Dr. Mich. Geddes, voL i. 278.

artifice, which screened her from the imputation of faeri.
lege, and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal for i
good cause had constrained her, though with reluctance, to
venture upon this ation, the flripped the cathedral of what
ever was valuable, and procured a considerable supply of
money for the Junta. The regents, no less at a loss how
to maintain their troops, the revenues of the crown having
either been dissipated by the Flemings, or seized by the com.
mons, were obliged to take the queen's jewels, together with
the plate belonging to the nobility, and apply them to that
purpose; and when those failed, they obtained a imall fum
by way of loan from the king of Portugalt.

The nobility discovered great unwillingness to proceed to

extremities with the Junta. They were animated with no
less hatred than the commons against the Flemings; they
approved much of several articles in the remonflrance; they
thought the juncture favourable, not only for redrefing pad
grievances, but for rendering the constitution more perfed
and secure by new regulations; they were afraid, that whi
the two orders, of which the legislature was composed, waft.
ed each other's strength by mutual hofilities, the crown
would rife to power on the ruin or weakneTs of both, and
encroach no less on the independence of the nobles, than on
the privileges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the regent
made to the Junta, and the continual negotiations they car.
ried on during the progress of their military operations. Not
were the terms which they offered unreasonable; for on con.
dition that the Junta would pats from a few articles maol
subversive of the royal authority, or inconsistent with the
rights of the nobility, they engaged to procure the empte
ror's content to their other demands, which if he, through
the influence of evil counsellors, ihould refute, several of th
nobles promised to join with the commons in their ende

Sandov. 30o. Did. de Bayle, art. Padilla.

tP. Mart. Ep. 718.

yours to extort itt. Such divisions, however, prevailed a-
mong the members of the Junta, as prevented their delibe-
rating calmly, or judging with prudence. Some of the ci-
ties which had entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that meanjealoufy and diRruft of each other, which rival.
fIhp in commerce or in grandeur is apt to inspire; the con-
itable, by his influence and promises, had prevailed on the
inhabitants of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other no-
blemen had (haken-the fidelity of some of the lesser cities;
no person had arisen among the commons of such superior
abilities or elevation of mind as to acquire the direction of
their affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of popular
qualities, but distrusted for that reason by those of highest
tank who adhered to the Junta; the conduE of Giron led
the people to view, with suspicion, every person of noble
birth whe joined their party; so that the strongest marks of
ilrefolution, mutual distrust, and mediocrity of genius, ap-
peared in all their proceedings at this time. After many
consultations held concerning the terms proposed by the re-
gents, they suffered themselves to be so carried away by re-
fentment agaift .the nobility, that, rejecting all thoughts of
accommodation, they threatened to itrip them of the crown
lands, which they or their ancestors had usurped, and to re-
annex these to the royal domain. Upon this preposterous
I cheme, which would at once have annihilated all the liber-
ties for which they had been Rruggling, by rendering the
kings of Castile absolute and independent on their fubjeas,
they were so intent, that they now exclaimed with less vehe-
mence against the exactions of the foreign ministers, than a-
gainft the exorbitant power and wealth of the nobles, and
seemed to hope that they might make peace with Charles,
by offering to enrich him with their spoil-

The success which Padilla had met with in reveral finall
encounters, and in reducing some inconsiderable towns,
helped to precipitate the members of the Junta into this

t P. Mart. Ep. 695, 7I3. Geddes's Trats, i. 26l.
Vol. II. P

mafure, filling them with such confidence in the valour of
their troops, that they hoped for an easy victory over the
royalist s. Padila, that his army might not remain inative
while fluihed with good fortune, laid siege to Torrelobaton,
a place of greater strength and importance than any that he
had hitherto ventured to attack, and which was defended by
a sufficient garrison; and though the besieged made a defpe.
rate resistance, and the admiral attempted to relieve them,
he took the town by storm [March I, 1531], and gave
it up to be plundered by his soldiers. If he had marched
infantly with his viAorious army to Tordefillas, the head
quarters of the royalists, he could hardly have failed of mak.
ing an effetual impression on their troops, whom he would
have found in aftonilhment at the brilknefs of his operations,
and far from being of sufficient strength to give him battle.
But the fickleness and imprudence of the Junta prevented
his taking this fep. Incapable, like all popular alfociations,
either of carrying on war or of making peace, they litened
again to overtures of accommodation, and even agreed to a
short suspension of arms. This negotiation terminated in
nothing; but while it was carrying on, many of Padilla's
soldiers, unacquainted with the reitraints of discipline, went
off with the booty which they had got at Torrelobaton; and
others, wearied out by the unusual length of the campaign,
defertedt. The constable too had leisure to assemble his for-
ces at Burgos, and to prepare every thing for taking the
field; and as soon as the truce expired, he effected ajunction
with the Conde de Haro, in spite of all Padilla's efforts to
prevent it. They advanced immediately towards Torrelo-
baton; and Padila, finding the number of his troops so di-
mminhed that he durst not risk a battle, attempted to retreat
to Toro, which, if he could have accomplithed, the invasion
of Navarre at that juncture by the French, and the neceffit
which the regents must have been under of detaching men
to that kingdom, might have saved him from danger. But

t Sandov. 336.

Haro, sensible how fatal the consequences would be of sus-
fering him to escape, marched with such rapidity at the
head of his cavalry, that he came up with him near Villalar
[April 23], and, without waiting for his infantry, advan-
ced to the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued and disheartened
by their precipitant retreat, which they could not diftin-
guiih from a flight, happened at that time to be paling
over a ploughed field, on which such a violent rain had fal-
enr, that the soldiers funk almost to the knees at every flep,
and remained exposed to the fire of some field-pieces which
the royalists had brought along with them. All these cir-
cumitances so disconcerted and intimidated raw soldiers,
without facing the enemy, or making any.refifance, they
fled in the utmost confusion. Padilla exerted himself with
extraordinary courage and a&ivity in order to rally them,
though in vain; fear rendering them deaf both to his threats
and intreaties; upon which finding matters irretrievable, and
resolving not to survive the disgrace of that day, and the
ruin of his party, he rulhed into the thickest of the enemy;
but being wounded and dismounted, he was taken prisoner.
His principal officers Ihared the fame fate; the common
soldiers was allowed to depart unhurt, the nobles being too
generous to kill men who threw down their arms.

The resentment of his enemies did not susser Padilla to
lingerlong in expectation of what should befal him. Next
day he was condemned to lose his head, though without any
regular trial, the notoriety of the crime being supposed sus-
ficient to supersede the formality of a legal process. He
was led instantly to execution, together with Don John Bra-
ro, and Don Francis Maldonada, the former commander of
the Segovians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca.
Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm but un-
daunted fortitude; and when Bravo, his fellow-fufferer, ex-

Sandov. 34, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 7zo. Miniana, Contin. p.

^6. Epitome de la Vide y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V. por U.
Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. 4to. Madr. 1627. p. 19.

P

prefled ome indignation at hearing himself proclaimed a
traitor, he checked him, by observing, " That yesterday
wa the time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen, this
day to die with the meekness of Chriflians." Being per.
mitted to write to his wife and to the community of Tole
do, the place of his nativity, he addressed the former with i
manly and virtuous tenderness, and the latter with the exult.
ation natural to one who confidered himself as a martyr for
the liberties of his country*. After this, he submitted

*The frain of these letter is so eloquent and high spirited,
that I have traniated them for the entertainment of my readers.

Tle Letr of Du Jaobn PadiUa to big Wis

" SENORA,

a If your grief did not affliic me more than my own death, r

ihould dee my ls perfedtly happy. For the end of life being
rertain to all men, the Almighty confers a mark of diftinguisf
ing favour upon that person, for whom he appoints a death such
as mine, which, though lamented by many, is neverthele accept-
able unto him. It would require more tnme than I now have, to
write any thing that could afford you consolation. That my e-
nemies will not grant me, nor do I wilh to delay the reception of
that crown which I hope to enjoy. You may bewail your own
loft, but not my death, which, being so honourable, ought not to
be lamented by any. My foul, for nothing else is left to me, 1 be-
queath to you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world
which you valued mos. I do not write to my father Pero Lo-
pez, because I dare not; for though I have Ihewn myself to be
is son in daring to lose my life, 1 have not been the heir of his
good fortune I will not attempt to fay any thing more, that I
may not tire the executioner, who waits for me, and that I may
not excite a suspicion, that, in order to prolong my life, I lengthen
out my letter. My servant Sofia, an eye-witnef, and to whom
I have communicated my mos secret thoughts, will inform you
of what I cannot now write; and thus I reft, expesing the in-
flrumeut of your grief, and of my deliverance."

Hi, Letter to the City of Tl'do.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and the light of the whole

world, free from the time of the mighty Goths: to thee, who, by
shedding the blood of firangers, as well as thy own blood, haft re-
covered liberty for thyself and thy neighbouring cities, thy legiti
mate fan, Juan de Padilla, gives information, how by the blood of
his body, thy ancient victories are to be refrefled. If fate bath
not permitted my actions to be placed among your fucceful and
celebrated exploits, the fault hath been in my ill fortune, not in
my good will. This I request of thee as of a mother, to accept,
"ince God hath given me nothing more to lose for thy Lake, tha

quietly to his fate. Most of the Spanih historians, accuf.
tomed to ideas of government and of regal power, very dif-
ferent from those upon which he aaed, have been so eagert
to teltify their disapprobation of the cause in which he was
engaged, that they have negleced, or have been afraid tq.
do justice to his virtues; and by blackening his memory,
have endeavoured to deprive him of that pity which is Ce.
dom denied to illufrious sufferers.

The vi&ory at Villalar, proved as decisive as it was com-

plete. Valladolid, the moil zealous of all the associated cre
ties, opened its gates immediately to the conquerors, and be-
ing treated with great clemency by the regents, Medina del
Campo, Segovia, and many other towns, followed its ex-
ample. This sudden ditolution of a confederacy, formed
not upon flight difguffs, or upon trifling motives, into which
the whole body of the people had entered, and which had
been allowed time to acquire a considerable degree of order
and confifence by eftablihing a regular plan of govern.
ment, is the strongest proof either of the inability of its
leaders, or of some secret discord reigning among its mem-
bers. Though part of that army by which they had been
subdued was obliged, a few days after the battle, to march
towards Navarre, in order to check the progrcfs of the
French in that.kingdom, nothing could prevail on the de-
jeeed commons of Castile to take arms again, and to em-
brace such a favourable opportunity of acquiring those

that which I am now to relinquish. I am more solicitous about
thy good opinion than about my own life. The Ihiftings of for-
tune, which never flands Aill, are many. But this I fee with
infinite consolation, that I, the leaf of thy children, susser death
for thee; and that thou halt nursed at thy breafs such as may
take vengeance for my wrongs. Many tongues will relate the
manner of my death, of which I am fill ignorant, though I know
it to be near. My end will testify what was my desire. My
foul I recommend to thee as to the patroness of Christianity. Of
my body I fay nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothin
more, for at this very moment I feel the knife at my throat, with
greater dread of thy displeasure, than apprehension of my own
pain." Sando. Hist. vol. i.p. 478.

3P

ights and privges for which they had appeared so zea.
loa. The city of Toledo alone, animated by Donna Ma.
ma Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who, instead of bewuiling
her hulband with a womanilh sorrow, prepared to revenge
Lis death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of which
he had suffered, muff be excepted. Refpe& for her sex,
or admiration for her courage and abilities, as well a fympa.
thy with her misfortunes, and veneration for the memory of
ier hulband, secured her the fame ascendant over the peo.
ple which he had possesed. The prudence and vigour with
which {he aced, justified that confidence they placed in her.
She wrote to the French general in Navarre, encouraging
him to invade Castile by the offer of powerful affiance.
She endeavoured by her letters and emissaries to revive the
fpiit and hopes of the other cities. She raised soldiers, and
exacied a great fum from the clergy belonging to the cathe.
dral, in order to defray the expence of keeping them on
foot*. She employed every artifice that could interest or
inflame the populace. For this purpose she ordered cruci-
fixes to be used by her troops instead of colours, as if they
had been at war with infidels and enemies of religion;
flie marched through the streets of Toledo with her son, a
young child, clad in deep mourning feated on a mule, bayr
ing a fiandard carried before him, representing the manner
of his father's executiont. By all these means she kept
the minds of the people in such perpetual agitation as pre-
vented their pallions from subsiding, and rendered them in-
sensible of the dangers to which they were exposed, by fland-
ing alone in opposition to the royal authority. While the
army was employed in Navarre, the regents were unable to
attempt the redu&ion of Toledo by force; and all their en-
deavours, either to diminilh Donna Maria's credit with the
people, or to gain her by large promises and the solicitations
of her brother the Marquis de Mondeiar, proved ineffetual.
Upon the cxpulfion of the French out of Navarre, part of

· P. Mart. Ep. 71;. t Sandov. 375.

the army returned into Castile, and invested Toledo Eves.
this made no impression on the intrepid and obltinate courage,'
of Donna Maria. She defended the town with vigour, her'
troops in several sallies beat the royalists, and no progrefes
was made towards reducing the place, until the clergy,i
whom /he had highly offended by invading their property,:
ceased to support her. As soon as they received informa-
tion of the death of William de Croy, archbihop of Toledo,
whose poffeilon of that fee was their chief grievance, and-
that the emperor had named a Castilian to succeed him, they
openly turned against her, and persuaded the people that Ihe
had acquired such influence over them by the force of en-
chantments, that ihe was aifted by a familiar demon which
attended her in the form of a Negro-maid, and that by its
suggestions she regulated every part of her condut& . The
credulous multitude, whom their impatience of a long block.
ade, and despair of obtaining succours either from the cities
formerly in confederacy with them, or from the French,
rendered desirous of peace, took arms against her, and driv.
ing her out of the city, surrendered it to the royalists [Oc-
tober 26.] She retired to the citadel, which ihe defended
with amazing fortitude four months longer; and when re.
duced to the last extremities, she made her escape in disguise
[February zo,] and fled to Portugal, where (he had many
relationst.

Upon her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tranquillity

was re-eftablilhed in Castile; and this bold attempt of the
commons, like all unsuccessful infurre&ions, contributed to
confirm and extend the power of the crown, which it was
intended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes still conti-
nued to make a part of the Castilian constitution, and was
summoned to meet whenever the king flood in need of mo-
ney; but instead of adhering to their ancient and cautious
form of examining and redrefing public grievances, before

* P. Mart. Ep. 717.
tSandov. 375. P.Mart. Ep. 7$4. Ferrer.viii. 63.

they proceeded to grant any supply, the more courtly cuf.
tom of voting a donative in the first place was introduced,
and the sovereign having obtained all that he wanted, nver
alowed them to enter into any enquiry, or to attempt any
rformation injurious to his authority. The privileges
which the cities had enjoyed were gradually circumscribed
or abolilted; their commerce began from this period to de.
dine; andbecoming lets wealthy and less populous, they loft
that power and influence which they had acquired in the
Cortes

While Caftale was exposed to the calamities ofcivil war,

the kingdom of Valencia was torn by intestine commotions

ill more violent. The association which had been formed
in the city of Valencia in the year one thouland five hun-
dred and twenty, and which was distinguished by the name
of the Gemanada, continued to subsist after the emperor's
departure from Spain. The members of it, upon pretext of de.
fending the coafs against the descents of the corsairs of Bar-
bary, and under fantion of that pemiflion which Charles had
ralhly granted them, refused to lay down their arms. But
as the grievances which the Valencians aimed at redressing,
proceeded from the arrogance and exaftions of the nobility,
rather than from any unwarrantable exercise of the royal
prerogative, their resentment turned chiefly against the for.
mer. As soon as they were allowed the use of arms, and
became conscious of their own strength, they grew impatient
to take vengeance of their oppressors. They drove the no-
bles out of most of the cities, plundered their houses, wBft
ed their lands, and assaulted their caitles. They then pro-
ceeded to dlet thirteen persons, one from each company of
tradeinen established in Valencia, and committed the ad-
mioiftration of government to them, under pretext that they
would reform the laws, establish one uniform mode of dif-
pensing justice without partiality or regard to the diftinfton
of ranks, and thus retore men to some degree of their ori,
ginal equality.

The nobles were obliged to take arms in clf-defence.

Hoitilities began, and were carried on with all the rancour
with which resentment at oppression inspired the one party,
and the idea of insulted dignity animated the other. As
no person of honourable birth, or of liberal education, join-
ed the Germanada, the councils as well as troops of the con-
federacy were conduced by low mechanics, who acquired
the confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by the fierce-
ness of their zeal and the extravagance of their proceedings.
Among such men, the laws introduced in civilized nations,
in order to refrain or moderate the violence of war, were
unknown or dfpifed; and they run into the wildest excgfecs
of cruelty and outrage.

The emperor, occupied with suppressing the infurreAion
in Castile, which more immediately threatened the subversion
of his power and prerogative, was unable to give much at-
tention to the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of
that kingdom to fight their own battles. His viceroy, the
Conde de Melito» had the supreme command of the forces
which the nobles raised among the vassals. The Genmanada
carried on the war during the years one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty and twenty-one with a more persevering
courage than could have been expe&ed from a body so tu-
multuary, under the condu& of fuchleaders. They defeat-
ed the nobility in several ations, which, though not confi-
derable, were extremely sharp. They repulsed them in
their attempts to reduce different towns. But the nobles
by their superior skill in war, and at the head of troops
more accustomed to service, gained the advantage in most of
the rencounters. At length they were joined by a body of
Cafllian cavalry, which the regents dispatched towards Va-
lencia, soon after their vicory over Padilla at Villalar, and by
their affitance the Valencian nobles acquired such fuperia-
rity that they entirely broke and ruined the Germanada.
The leaders of the party were put to death almost without
any formality of legal trial, and suffered such cruel punish-

meats as the sense of recent injuries prompted their adver.
saries to inflit. The government of Valencia was re-eta;b
lihed in its ancient form *.

In Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame spirit of dif.

affeAion and sedition which reigned in the other kingdoms
of Spain, began to appear, but by the prudent condu& of
the viceroy, Don John de Lanufa, they were so far com.
posed, as to prevent their breaking out into any open infur.
re&tion. But in the island of Majorca, annexed to the
crown of Aragon, the fame causes which had excited the
commotions in Valencia, produced effects no less violent.
The people, impatient of the hardlhips which they had en.
dared under the rigidjurifdition of the nobility, took arnm
in a tumultuary manner [March 19, 1521]; deposed their
viceroy; drove him out of the island; and massacred every
gentleman who was so unfortunate as to fall into their hands
The obtinacy with which the people of Majorca, persised
in their rebellion, was equal to the rage with which they
began it. Many and vigorous efforts were requisite in or.
der to reduce them to obedience; and tranquillity was re.
stablished in every part of Spain, before the Majorcana
could be brought to submit to their fovereignt.

While the spirit of disaffection was so general among

the Spaniards, and so many causes coicurred in precipitat-
ing them into such violent measures in order to obtain the
redress of their grievances, it may appear frange that the
malecontents in the different kingdoms should have carried
on their operations without any mutual concert, or even any
intercourse with each other. By uniting their councils and
arms, they might have ated both with greater force and
with more effect The appearance of a national confederam

Argenfola Annales de Aragon, cap. 75, 90, 99, 118. Sayes

Annales de Aragon, cap. 5, s, &c. P Mart. Ep. .

xxE. b. m

xxxiv. passim. Ferrer. Hii d'Efpagne, viii-54., 564, &c.

t Argenfola Annales de Arragon, c. 113. Ferrer. His. viiu

542. Saves Annales-de Aragon, c. 7. i1 14» 76, 81. Fenrr
fl. d'Efpagne, viii. 579, &c. 609.

cy would have rendered it no less refpetable among, the
people than formidable to the crown; and the emperor, un.
able to resist such a combination, must have complied with
any terms which the members of it ihould have thought fit
to prescribe. Many things, however, prevented the Span.
iards from forming themselves into one body, and pursuing
common measures. The people of the different kingdoms
in Spain, though they were become the subje&s of the fame
sovereign, retained, in full force, their national antipathy to
each other. The remembrance of their ancient rivalfhip
and hoflilities was fill lively, and the sense of reciprocal in-
juries so itrong, as to prevent them from acing with confi-
dence and concert. Each nation chose rather to depend on
its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle alone, than to
implore the aid of neighbours whom they distrusted and
hated. At the fame time the forms of government in the
several kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the griev-
ances of which they complained, as well as the alterations
and amendments in policy which they attempted to intro-
duce, so various, that it was not easy to bring them to unite
in any common plan. To this disunion Charles was indebt-
ed for the preservation of his Spanish crowns; and while
each of the kingdoms followed separate measures, they were
all obliged at last to conform to the will of their sovereign.

The arrival of the emperor in Spain filled his fubjeas who
had been in arms against him with deep apprehensions, from
which he soon delivered them by an a& of clemency no less
prudent than generous. After a rebellion so general, scarce-
y twenty persons, among so many criminals obnoxious to
the law, had been punished capitally in Calfile. Though
trongly solicited by his council, Charles refused to sied any
more blood by the hands of the executioner; and published
general pardon [October 28], extending to all crimes comr
itted since the commencement of the insurrections, from
[hichonly fourscore persons were excepted. Even these he
mans to have aamed, rather with an intention to intimidate

Others, than from any inclination to seize them; for when an
officious courtier offered to inform him where one of the
most considerable among them was concealed, he avoided itb!
a good-naured pleasantry; L Go," fays he," I have nowa(
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some cause to
keep at a distance from me, and you would be better eo
poyed ia telling him that I am here, than in acquainting nu
with the place of his retreat-. By this appearance of mag.
animity, as well as by his care to avoid every thing which
had dfgufted the Catilians during his former residence a.
mong them; by his address in assuming their manners, in
speaking their language, and in complying with all their he.
mours and customs, he acquired an ascendant over them
which hardly any of their native monarchs had ever attained,
and brought them to support him in al his enterprizes with
a zeal and valour to which he owed much of his success and
grandeur *.

About the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian set

out for Italy to take poffeflion of his new dignity. But
though the Roman people longed extremely for his arrival,
they could not, on his first appearance, conceal their furprize
and disappointment. After being accutomed to theprincely
magnificence of Julius, and the elegant splendour of Leo,
they beheld with contempt an old man of an humble deport-
meat, and of austere manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute
of tafe in the arts, and unadorned with any of the external
accompliihents which the vulgar expet in those raised to
eminent iAtiosS.. Nor did his political views and maxims
seem less trange and aftonihing to the pontifical miniltera
He acknowledged and bewailed the corruptions which a-
bounded in the church, as well as in the court of Rome, and

t Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del Emper.Carlos, por Don Juan. An-
ton. de Vera y Zuniga, p. 30.

Ulloa Vita de Carlo Y.. p85.

1 Guic. 1. zx. a3. Jovn Vita Adriani, 177. Bellefor. Epit.
iks Princ. 84.

prepared to iefotm both; he discovered no intention of ag-
grandizing his family; he even scrupled at retainingfuch ter.
ritories as some of his predecessors had acquired by violence
or fraud, rather than by any legal title, and for that reason
he invested Francesco Maria de Rovere anew'in the dutclh
of Urbino, of which Leo had fripped him, and surrendered
to the duke of Ferrara, several places wrested from himn
by the church*. To men little habituated to fee princes
regulate their condua by the maxims of morality and the
principles ofjuftice, these a&ions of the new pope appeared
incontestable proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adri.
an, who was a perfea if anger to the complex and intricate
system of Italian politics, and who could place no confidence
in persons whose subtile refinements in business suited so ill
with the natural simplicity and candour of his own charac.
ter, being often embarrafed and irresolute in his deliberations,
the opinion of his incapacity daily increased, until both his
person and goternment became objecs of ridicule among
his fubje&ts..

Adrian, though devoted to the emperor, endeavoured to
aflume the impartiality which became the common father of
Christendom, and laboured to reconcile the contending prin.
ces, in order that they might unite in a league againi Soly-
man, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered him more formi-
dable than ever to Europe . Butthis was an undertaking
far beyond his abilities. To examine such a variety of pre-
tensions, to adjust such a number of interfering interefis to
extinguish the pailions which ambition, emulation, and nu.
tual injuries had kindled, to bring so many hofle powers to
pursue the fame scheme with unanimity and vigour, requir.
ed not only uprightness of intention, but great fiperiority
both of underflanding and addrels. The Italian dates were

Guic. lib. xv. 240.
tJo. VitaAd. 118. P. Mart. Ep. 74. Ruelli Lettres de

Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, Ior.

: Bellefor. Epitr. p, 86.
Vol. II. Q

ao less deiros of peace than the pope. The Imperial r.
m under Colonna was till kept on foot; but as the em.
peror's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in the Low Coun.
ties, were either exhaufed or applied to fotne other pur.
pose, it depended entirely for pay and subsistence on the Ita.
lian. A great part of it was quartered in the eclefiaftical
fate, and monthly contributions were levied upon the F1%.
rentines, the Mianefe, the Genoese, and Lucchefe, by the
iceroy of Naples; and though all exclaimed against such
oppreflion, and were impatient to be delivered from it, the
read of worse consequences from the rage of the army, or
the resentment of the emperor, obliged them to submit*.

1513.] So much regard, however, was paid to the pope's

exhortations, and to a bull which he issued, requiring all
Christian princes to content to a truce for three years, that
the Imperial, the French, and Englilh ambassadors at Rome,
were empowered by their refpe&ive courts to treat of that
matter; but while they wafted their time in fruitefs nego.
tiations, their maters continued their preparations for war.
The Venetians, who had hitherto adhered with great firm-
nets to their alliance with Francis, being now convinced that
his affairs in Italy were in a desperate situation, entered in.
to a league against hm with the emperor CJune 281] to
which Adrian, at the infligation of 'hiscountrymtn and
friend Carles de Lannoy, viceo of Naples, who pcrfi~a
ed him that the only obfaclesto peace arose from the am-
ition of the French king, soon after acceded. The ohet
Jtalian states foDowed their example; and Fancib was lft
without a single ally to resist the efforts of to many enemiek
wbhoe armies threatened, and whose territories encompafed,
is dominions on every fidet.
The dread of this powerful confederacy, it was thought

would have obliged Francis to keep wholly on the defensive,
Fr at leaf have prevented his entertaining any thoughts of

*-tU;c . 1x. x238.
t Guic. L v. 24i, a48

marching into Italy. But it was the charater of that
prince, too apt to become remiss, and even negligent on or-
dinary occasions, to rouse at the approach of dange., and not
only to encounter it with spirit and intrepidity, qualities
which never forsook him, but to provide against it with di-
ligence and industry. Before his enemies were ready to ex-
ecute any of their schemes, Francis had assembled a nume-
rous army. His authority over his own fubjeas was far
greater than that. which Charles or Henry poflfefed over
theirs. They depended on their diets, their Cortes, and
their parliaments, for money, which was usually granted
them in fpnall fums, very slowly, and with much relutance.
The taxes he could impose were more considerable, and levi-
ed with greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on o-
ther occasions, he brought his armies into the field while
they were only devising ways and means for railing theirs.
Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped to disconcert all
the emperor's schemes by marching in person into the Mi,
lanefe; and this bold measure, the more formidable because
unexpe&ed, could scarcely have failed of producing that cf-
fe&. But when the vanguard of his army had already
reached Lyons, and he himself was hafR.eing after it with a
second division of his troops, the discovery of a domeflic
conspiracy, which threatened the ruia of the kingdqm, o-
bliged him to top short, and to alter his measures.

The author of this dangerous plot was Charles duke of

Bourbon, lord high conotale,. whose noble birth, vait for-
tune, and high offe, raised him to he the moR powerful
subjeC in France, as his great talents, equally suited to the
field or the council, an bhis signal services to the crown, ren-
dered him the mook illufrious and deserving. The near re-
semblance between the king and him in many of their quali-
ties, both being fond of war, and ambitious to excel in man-
ly exercises, as well as their equality in age, and their proxi-
mity of blood, ought naturally to have secured to him a con-
ierable lhare in that monarch's favour. But unhappily

QZ

Louise, the king's mother, had contrated a violent averfioa
to the house of Bourbo~, for no better reason than because
Anne of 'retagne, the queen ofLouis the XII. with whom
Ihe lived in perpetual enmity, had discovered a peculiar at.
tachment to that branch of the royal family; and had taught
her son, who was too susceptible of any impression which
his mother gave him, to view all the conftable's-actions with
a mean and unbecoming jealousy. His diftinguiled merit
at the battle of. Marignano had not been fuficiently reward.
ed; he had been recalled from the government of Milan up.
on very frivolous pretences, and had met with a cold recep.
sion, which his prudent conduA in that difficult lation did
not defrve; the payment of his pensions had been suspend-
tdwithout any good cause; and during the campaign of
one thousand five hundred and twenty-one, the king as has
already been related, had affronted him in presence of the
whole anmy, by giving the command of the van to the duke
of Alenon. The constable, at fir-t, bore these indigliti
with greater moderation than could have been expeAted from
an high-fpirited prince, conscious of what was due to his
tank and to his services. Such a multiplicity of injuries
however, exhausted his patience; and infpiing him with
thoughts.of revenge, he retired from court, and began to
hold a secret correpondence with me of the emperor's ni.
Bisters.

About that ti~ne the dutched of Bourbon happeaed to die

without leaving any children. Louise, of a difpoition no
less amorous than vindictive, and ttll susceptible of the te~
der pafions at the age of forty-fix, began to view the con
table, a prince as amiable as he was accomplifed, with o0
ther eyes; and notwithstanding the great difpariy of their
years, mhe formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon,
who might have expected every thing to which an ambi
tious mind can aspire, from the doating fondness of a wo-
man who governed her son and the kingdom, being incap-
ablecither of imitating the queen i., her sudden tranfitirM

from hatred to love, or of dissembling so meanly as to pre-
tend affe&ion for one who had persecuted him fe long with
unprovoked malice, not only rejeced the match, but embit-
tered his refusal by some severe raillery on Louise's person
and chara&er. She, finding herself not only contemned but
insulted, her disappointed love turned into hatred, and since
she could not marry, she resolved to ruin Bourbon.

For this purpose she consulted with chancellor Du Prat,

a man who, by a base prostitution of great talents and of
superior kill in his profession, had risen to that high office.
By his advice, a law-suit was commenced egainft the confta-
ble, for the whole eflate belonging to the house of Bourbon.
Part of it was claimed in the king's name, as having fallen
to the crown; part in that of Louise, as the nearef heir in
blood of the deceased dutchess. Both these claims were e-
qually destitute of any foundation in justice; but Louise, by
her solicitations and authority, and Du Prat, by employing.
all the artifices and chicanery of law, prevailed on the judges
to order the estate to be sequestered. This unjiuft decifiona
drove the conflable to despair, and to measures which de-
fpair alone could have dictated. He renewed his intrigues
in the Imperial court, and flattering hinmfelfthat the injuries
which he had suffered would jufify his having recourse to
any means in order to obtain revenge, he offered to trans-
ser his allegiance from his natural sovereign to the emperor,
and to assist him in the conquest of France. Charles, as
well as the king of England, to whom the secret was com-
municated*, expeting prodigious advantages from his rc-
volt, were ready to receive him with open arms, and spared
neither promises nor allurements which might help to con-
firm him in his resolution. The emperor offered'him in
marriage his filter Eleanor, the widow of the king of Portu.
gal, with an ample portion. He was included as a princi-
pal in the treaty between Charles and Henry. The: coun-
ties of Provence and Dauphine were to be fettled on himt

* Rymer's Foeder. xiii. 794.

(Q3

with the title of king. The emperor engaged to enter Franee
by the Pyrenees; and Henry, supported by the Flemings,
to invade Picardy; while twelve thousand Germans, levied
at their common charge, were to penetrate into Burgundy,
and to at in concert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise
ix thousand men among his friends and vassals in the heart
of the kingdom. The execution of this deep-laid and dan.
gerous plot was suspended, until the king Ihould trofs the
Alpsawith the only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced in his-march for that purpof,
France was on the brink ofdetrudtion§.

Happily for that kingdom. a negotiation which had now

been carrying on for several months, though cond~ted with
the most profound secrecy, and communicated only-to-a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape the obfea.
tion of the reft of the conitable's numerous retainers,,render.
-cd more inquisitive by finding that fhey were ditfrufed.
Two of these gave the king some intimation of a myterious
correspondence between their mailer and the count de Roeux,
a Flemnih nobleamu of great confidence with the empmer.
Francis, who could not bring himself to fufpc that the ird
prince-of the blood would be so base as to betray the ing.
dom to its enemies, immediately repaired to Moidines,
.where the constable was in bed, feiging-indifpofition that
he might aot he obliged to accompan the kiag into Italy,
and acquainted him of the intelligence which he hid receiv-
ed Bourbon, with great solemnity, and the mo imposing
affc&ation of ingenuity and candour, afierted his-ow inno.
cence; and as his health, he said was now mr~confirmd,
he promised to join the army within a few days. -Franis,
open and-candid himself, and too apt to be deceived by the
appearance of those virtues in others, gave such credit to
what he laid, that he-refufed to arrest him, although advised
to take that precaution by his wisest coufellorsj and sa if

5 Thiani Hist. lib i. c. . 1 Heuter. Rer. AuRr.lib;viii;c. sI.
p. 207.

the danger had been over, he continued his march towards
Lyons. The conflable set out soon after [September],
seemingly with an intention to follow him; but turning fud-
denly to the left, he crofted the Rhone, and after infinite
fatigue and-peril, escaped all the parties which the kingi
who became sensible too late of his own credulity, sent out
to intercept him, and reached Italy in safety"'.

Francis took every possible precaution to prevent the bad

effeas of the irreparable error which he had committed. He
put garrisons in all the places of strength in the constable's
territories. He seized all the gentlemen whom he could
fufpea of being his associates; and as he had not hitherto
discovered the whole extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor
knew how far the infection had spread among his fubjecs,
he was afraid that his absence might encourage them to
make some desperate attempt, and for that reason relinquiih-
ed his intention of leading his army in person into Italy.

He did not, however, abandon his design on the Milanefc,

but appointed Admiral Bonnivet to take the supreme com.
mand in his itead, and to march into that country with an
army thirty thousand firong. Bonnivet did not owe this
preferment to his abilities as a general; for of all the talents
requisite to form a great commander, he pofeffed only per-
fonal courage, the lowest and the most common. But he
was the mos accomplished gentleman in the French court,
,of agreeable manners and insinuating address, and a fpright-
ly conversation; and Francis, who lived in great familiarity
with his courriers, was so charmed with these qualities, that
he honoured him-on all occasions, with the most partial and
distinguishing marks of his favour. He was, besides, the
implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as the king hardly knew
whom to trust at that juncture, he thought the chief com-
mand could be lodged no where so safely as in his hands.

Colonna, who was entrusted with the defence of the Mi-

U Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pafquier Recherches de la France,
P. 481.

lande, his own conquest, was in no condition to resist such a
formidable army. He was destitute of money sufficient to
pay his troops, wlich were reduced to a small number by
sickness or desertion, and had, for that reason, been obliged
to negle& every precaution neceflary for the security of the
country. The only plan which he formed was to defend
the passage of the river Tefino against the French; and as
if he had forgotten how easily he himself had disconcerted a
similar scheme formed by Lautrec, be prorifed with great
confidence on its being effeauaL But in spite of all his cau-
tion, it succeeded no better with him than with Lautrec
Bonnivet paired the river without loss, at a ford which had
been neglted, and the Imperialists retired to Milan, pie-
paring to abandon the town as soon as the French should
appear before it. By an unaccountable negligence, which
Guicciardini imputes to infatuations, Bonnivet did not ad.
vance for three or four days, and loft the opportunity with
wbhich his good fortune presented him. The citizens reco-
vered from their consternation; Colonna, fil aEive at the
age of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity to France ren-
dered him indefatigable, were employed night and day in re
pairing the fortifications, in amassing provisions, in colleft
ing troops from every quarter; and by the time the French
approached, had put the city in a condition to flanda siege.
Bonnivet, after some fruitless attempts on the town, which
harassed his own troops more than the enemy, was obliged, by
the inclemency of the season, to retire into winter quarters.

During these tranfafions, pope Adrian died; an event

so much to the fatisfaAion of the Roman people, whofl
hatred or contempt of him augmented every day, that the
night after his decease they adorned the door of his chief
physician's house with garlands, adding this inscription,
TO THE DELIVERER OF HIS COUNTRY*.
The cardinal de Medici infantly renewed his preteniions
to the papal dignity, and entered the conclave with high exs

t Guic. lib. xv. 2Z4. · Jovii Vit. Adr. z17.

petations on his own part, and a general opinion of the
people that they would be successfuL But though supported
by the Imperial facion, possessed of great personal interest, -
and capable of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption
which reign in those assemblies, the obstinacy and intrigues
of his rivals protraced the conclave to the unusual length
of fifty days. The address and perseverance of the cardinal
at last surmounted every obstacle. He was railed to the
head of the church [November 283, and afitmed the go-
vernment of it by the name of Clement VII. :3The choice
was universally approved of. High expetations were con-
ceived of a pope, whose great talents, and long experience
in business, seemed to qualify him no less for defending the
fprntual interests of the church, exposed to imminent dan-
ger by the progress of Luther's opinions, than for conduct
ing its political operations with the prudence requisite at
such a difficult junture; and who, besides these advantages,
rendered the ecclesiastical state more refpetable, by having
in his hands the government of Florence, together with the
wealth of the family of Medicit.

Cardinal Wolfey, not disheartened by the disappointment

of his ambitious views at the former elecion, had entertain-
ed more sanguine hopes of success on this oceafion. Henry
wrote to the emperor, reminding him of his engagements to
second the pretensions of his minister. Wolfey beftirred
himself with ativity suitable to the importance of the prize
for which he contended, and inftruded his agents at Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain his end.
But Charles had either amused him with vain hopes which he
never intended to gratify, or he judged it impolitic to oppose
a candidate who had such a profpe& of succeeding as Me-
dic; or perhaps the cardinals durst not venture to provoke
the people of Rome, while their indignation against A dri.
an's memory was till fredh, by placing another Ultra-mon.
tane on the papal throne. Wolfey, after all his expe&al

t Guic. 1. xv. z63.

tions and endeavours, had the mortification to fee a pope
eleted, of such an age, and of so vigorous a constitution,
that he could not derive much comfort to himself from the
chance of surviving him. This second proof fully convlJ.
ced Wolfey of the Emperor's insincerity, and it excited in
him all the resentment which an haughty mind feels on be.
ing atonce disappointed and deceived; and though Clement
endeavoured to soothe his vindiftive nature by granting him
a commilig. :to be legate in England during life, with such
ample powers as veiled in him almost the whole papal juxif
diction in that kingdom, the injury he had now received
made such an impression as entirely difolved the tie which
had united him to Charles, and from that moment he medi.
tated revenge. It was necefary, however, to conceal ib
intention from his master, and to fufpeod the exeettion of
it, until, by a dexterous improvement of the incident
which might occur, he fould be able gradually to aliete
the king's affetions from the emperor. For tis reeaon
he so far from epreffing any w~eainefs o. accout qs
the repulse which he had met with, that be abQtnded Q

ery occafon, private as well am pu~ ia declaratiosQ of
his high fatisfaiion with Clement's ppwmotia *.

Henry had, during the camnaig, ulfilled, with g

incerity, whatever be was bound, t perform by the 1tg
again Frace, though more fowly than he could ha
wihed. His thoughtles paofufiou and total .negl of
economy, reduced him often to great trais for maney.
The operations of war were now carried on in ~opein a
manner very different from that which had log p re
infead of armies suddenly aembled, which undsr diftiuA
chieftains followed their prince into the field for a slot
space, and served at their own cost, troops were now levied
at great charge, and received regularly considerable pay.
Intead of impatience on both fides to bring every quarrel
to the ifue of a battle, which commonly decided the fate of

Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 94, &c. Herbert.

open countries, and allowed the barons, together with their.
raffals, to rettrn to their ordinary occupations; towns were
fortified with great art, and defended with much obftina-
cy; war, from a very simple, became a very intricate fci.
ence; and campaigns grew of course to be more tedious
and less decisive. The expence which these alterations inl
the military system necessarily created, appeared intolerable
to nations hitherto unaccustomed with the burden of heavy
taxes. Hence proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious
spirit of the English parliaments in that age, which Henry,
with all his authority, was seldom able to overcome. The
commons, having refused at this time to grant him the sup-
plies which he demanded, he had reconrfe to the ample and
almost unlimited prerogative which the kings of England
then possessed, and by a violent and unusual exertion of it,
raised the money he wanted. This, however, wafted so
much time, that it was late in the season [Sept. 20], before
his army, under the duke of Suffolk, could take the field.
Being joined by a considerable body of Flemings, Suffolk
marched into Picardy, 'and Francis, from his extravagant
tagernefs to recver the Milanese, having left that frontier
almost unguarded, ie penetrated as far as the banks of the
river Oyfe, within eeven leagues of Paris, filling that capi-
tal with contPernation. But the arrival of some troops de-
tached by the king, who was ftil at Lyons; the ative gal-
lntry of the French officers, who allowed the allies no re-
pite night or-day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with fearcity of provisions, compelled Suffolk to
retire [November]; and La Tremouille, who commanded
in those parts, had the glory not only of having checked
the progress of a formidable army with an handful of men,
but of driving them with ignominy out of the French terri-
toriest.

The emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and Guienne
tvere not more fortunate, though in both these provinces

f Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

mFrancs was equally unprepared to refit them. The coo
dul and valour of his generals supplied his want of fore.
fight; the Germans, who made an irruption into one of
thfe provinces, and the Spaniards, who attacked the other,
were repulsed with great disgrace.

Thus ended the year 1523, during which Francis's good

fortune and success had been such as gave al Europe an
high idea of his power and refourcea. He had discovered
and disconcerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author of
which he had driven into exile, almost without an attendant;
he had rendered abortive all the schemes of the powerful
confederacy formed against him, he had proteted his do.
minions when attacked on three different fides; and though
his army in the Milanese had not made such progress as
might havebeen expe~ed from its superiority to the enemy
in number, he had recovered, and ftll kept possession of, one
half of that dutchy.

1i24.] The ensuing year opened with events more difif

trons to France. Fontarabia was loft by the cowardice or
treachery of its governor [Feb. 27.] In Italy, the allies
resolved on an early and vigorous effort, in order. to difpof
fess Bonnivet of that part of the Milanese which lies beyond
the Tefino. Clement, who, under the pontificates of Leo
and Adrian, had discovered an implacable enmity to France,
began now to view the power which the emperor was daily
acquiring in Italy, with so much jealousy, that he refuted
to accede, as his predecessors had done, to the league a
gainft Francis, and forgetting private paflions and animo
fities, laboured, with the zeal which became his chara&er,
to bring about a reconciliation among the contending par.
ties. But al his endeavours were ineffeaual; a numerous
army, to which each of the allies furniihed their contingent
of troops, was aflembled at Milan by the beginning of
March. Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, took the command
of it upon Colonna's death, though the chief diretion of
military operations was committed to Bourbon and the

Marquis de Pescara; the latter the ablef and most enter-
prifing of the Imperial generals; the former inspired by his
resentment with new a&ivity and invention, and acquainted
so thoroughly with the charaters of the French command-
ers, the genius of their troops, and the strength as well as
weakness of their armies, as to be of infinite service to the
party which he had joined. But all these advantages were
nearly loft through the emperor's inability to raise money
sufficient for executing the various and extensive plans which
he had formed. When his troops were commanded to
march, they mutinied agaiaft their leaders, demanding the
pay which was due to them for some months; and difre-
garding both the menaces and intreaties of their officers,
threatened to pillage the city of Milan, if they did not in-
ftantly receive fatisfa&ion. Out of this difficulty the gene.
rals of the allies were extricated by Morone, who prevail-
ing on his countrymen, over whom his influence was prodi-
gious, to advance the fum that was requisite, the army
tookthe fieldt.

Bonnivet was destitute of troops to oppose this army, and

kill more of the talents which could render him an equal
match for its leaders. After various movements and en-
counters, described with great accuracy by the contempora-
ry historians, a detail of which would now be equally unin-
teresting and uninftruaive, he was forced to abandon the
strong camp in which he had entrenched himself at Biagraf-
fa. Soon after, partly by his own mifcondut, partly by
the aaivity of the enemy, who harassed and ruined-his army
by continual inrmilhes, while they carefully declined a bat-
tle which he often offered-them; and partly by the caprice
of 6000 Swif, 'who refused to join his army, though with-
in a day's march of it; he was reduced to the neceflity of
attempting a retreat into France, through the valley of A-
of. Just as he arrived on the banks of the Seffia, .and be-
gan to pass that river, Bourbon and Pescara appeared with

t Guic. L xv. s67. Capella, 19o.
Vol. II. -R

the vangard of the allies, and attacked his rear with bg
fury. At the beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while ea
erting himself with much valour, was wounded so danger.
oufly, that he was obliged to quit the sied; and the con
du& of the rear was committed to the chevalier ,Bayard,
who, though so much a firanger to the arts of a court that
he never roe to the chief command, was always called, in
times of al danger, to the pot of greatest difficulty and
importance. He put himelf at the head of the men at
rms, and animating them by his presence and example to
fusain the whole Ibock of the enemy's troops, he gained
time for the rft of his countrymen to make good their r..
treat. Bat in this service hereceived a wound which he
immediately perceived to he mortal, and being unable to
continue any longer on horseback, he ordered one of his at
tendants to place him under a tree, with his face towards the
nemy; then fixing his eyes on the guard of his 4word,
which he held up instead of a cros, he addressed his prayea
to God, and in this potlure, which became his cbimara
lboth as a soldier and as a Christian, he calmly waited theap.
proach of death. Bourbon, who led the foremof of the a-
nemy's troops, found him in this situation, and expreffed-r
gret and pity at the fight. " Pity not me," cried the.higx
{pirited chevalier, I die as a man of honour ought,. inahe
ifrharg~ of my duty; they indeed are objeAs of p;ty,wlho
fight against their king, their country, and their oath." The
marqus de Pefcarm pasing soon after, manifested hli adml-
ration of Bayard's irtues, as well as his sorrow for hisBit,
with the generosity of a gallant enemy; and finding thath
could not be removed with safety from that fpotorderAd
tent to be pitched there, and appointed proper petfon t
attend him. He died, notwithstanding their care, 0as his
ancestors for several generations had done, in the field of
Iattle. Pescara ordered his body to be embalmed, and ent
to his relations; and such was the refpea paid to mlitsq
jnerit in that age, that the duke of Savoy commanded it to

be received with royal honours in all the cities of his domi-
nions; in Dauphine, Bayard's native country, the people of
all ranks came out in a solemn procession to meet it*.

Bonnivet led back the ihattered remains of his army into

France; and in one short campaign, Francis was firipped of
all he had pofiefled in Italy, and left without one ally i-n
that country.

While the war, kindled by the emulation of Charles and
Francis, spread over so many countries of Europe, Germany
enjoyed a profound tranquillity, extremely favourable to the
reformation, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his retreat at Wartburg,
Carloftadius, one of his disciples, animated with the fame zeal,
but possessed of less prudence and moderation than his ma-
fter, began to propagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly
among the lower people. -Encouraged by his exhortations,
they rose in several villages of Saxony, broke into the church-
es with tumultuary violence, and threw down and destroy-
ed the images with which they were adorned. Those irre-
gular and outrageous proceedings were so repugnant to all
the eletor'scautious maxims, that, if they had not received
a timely check, they could hardly have failed of alienating
from the reformers a prince, no less jealous of his own au-
thority, than afraid of giving offence to the emperor, and o.
ther patrons of the ancient opinions. Luther, sensible of
the danger, immediately quitted his retreat, without waiting
for Frederic's permission, and returned to Wittemberg
[March 6, 152.J Happily for thereformation, the vene-
ration for his person and authority was fill so great, that his
appearance alone suppressed that spirit of extravagance which
began to seize his party; Carlofadius and his fanatical fol-
lowers, struck dumb by his rebukes, submitted at once, and

Bellifor. Epitr. p. q3. Mem. de Bellay, ?S. Oeuv. de Brant.
tom. vi, o18, &c. Pafquier Recherches, p. 5z6.

R

declared that they heard the voice of an angel, not of a
man ¶.

Before Luther left his retreat, he had begun to translate

the Bible into the German tongue, an undertaking of no
less diffculty than importance, of which he was extremely
fond, and for which he was well qualified: he had a com.
petent knowledge of the original languages; a thorough ac.
quaintance with the tyle and sentiments of the inspired
writers; and though his compositions in Latin were rude
and barbarous, he was reckoned a great matier of the purl.
ty of his mother tongue, and could express himself with all
the elegance of which it is capable. By his own assiduous
application, together with the affitance of Melanthon and
several other of hiss disciples, he finiuhed part of the New
Testament in the year 152 z and the publication of it prov.
ed more fatal to the church of Rome, than that of all his
own works. It was read with wonderful avidity and at-
tention by persons of every rank. They were astonished at
discovering how contrary the precepts of the Author of our
religion are, to the inventions of those prielts who pretend.
ed to be his vicegerents; and having now in their hand the
rule of faith, they thought thenfelves qualified, by apply.
ing it, tojudge of the efiablifhed opinions, and to pronounce
when they were conformable to the standard, or when they
departed from it. The great advantages arising from Lu.
ther's translation of the Bible, encouraged the advocates for
reformation, in the other countries of Europe, to imitate hit
example, and to publiih versions of the Scriptures in their re
fpeftive languages.

About this time, Nuremberg, Frankfort, Hamburg, and

several other free cities in Germany, of the first rank, open-
ly embraced the reformed religion, and by the authority of
their magistrates abolished the mass, and the other fuperti-
tious rites of popery t. The eletor of Brandenburgh, Wte

§ Sleid. Hft.Sl. Seckend. x95.
t Seckend. 241. Chytrei Contin. Krantzii, 03.

dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgb, and prince of An-
halt, became avdwed patrons of Luther's opinions, and
countenanced the preaching of them among their fubjets.

The court of Rome beheld this growing defeAion with

great concern; and Adrian's firit care after his arrival in I-
taly, had been to deliberate with the cardinals, concerning
the proper means of putting a stop to it. He was profound-
ly Ikilled in scholastic theology, and having been early cele-
brated on that account, he still retained such an excessive ad-
miration of the science to which he was first indebted for his
reputation and success in life, that he confidered Luther's in-
vectives against the fchoolmen, particularly Thomas Aquinas,
as little less than blasphemy. All the tenets of that doatoi ap-
peared to him so clear and irrefragable, that he supposed every
person who called in question or contradiced them, to be
either blinded by ignorance, or to be acing in opposition to
the conviction of-his own mind: Of course, no pope was e-
ver more bigotted or inflexible with regard to points of doc-
trine than Adrian; he not only maintained them as Leo had
done, because they were ancient, or because it was danger-
ous for the church to allow of innovations, but he adhered
to them with the zeal of a theologian, and with the tena-
cioufnefs of a disputant. At the fame time his own man-
gers being extremely simple, and uninfeed with any of the
vices which reigned in the court of Rome, he was as sensible
of its corruptions as the reformers thimfelves, and viewed
them with no less indignation. The brief which he addref-
fed to the diet of the empire aflembled at Nuremberg [No-
vember j152,] and the inftrutiona which he gave Cheregato,
the nuncio whom he sent thither, were framed agreeably to
these views. On the one hand, he condemned Luther's o-
pinions with more asperity and rancour of expreflion than
Leo had ever used; he severely censured the princes of Ger
many for suffering him to spread his pernicious tenets, by
their neglecting to execute the edi& of the diet at Worms,
and required them, if Luther did not instantly retraFt his er-

R 3

ors, to dftroy him with fire as a gangrened and incable
member, in like manner as Dathan and Abiram had been
cut off by Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by the apostles,
and John Huss and Jerome of Prague by their ancestors*.
On the other hand, he with great candour, and in the most
explicit terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the Roman
court to be the source from which had flowed most of the
evils that the church now felt or dreaded; he promised to
exert all his authority towards reforming these abuses, with
as much dispatch as the nature and inveteracy of the difor-
ders would admit; and he requefed of them to give him
their advice with regard to the moR effetual means of sup.
prefing that new heresy which had sprung up among
themt.

The members of thp diet, after praising the pope's pious

and laudable intentions, excused themfdves for not executing
the edift of Worms, by alleging that the prodigous inereafe
of Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to the court of
R ome among their other fubjets on account of its innumer-
able exactions, rendered such an attempt not only dangerous,
but impolfible. They affirmed that the grievances of Ger-
many, which did not arif from imaginary injuries, but from
impositions no led real than intolrable, as his holiness
would learn from a catalogue of them which they intended
to lay before him, called now for some new and efficacious
remedy; and in their opinion, the only remedy adequate to
the disease, or which afforded them any hopes of feeing the
church rcftored to soundness and vigour, was a geneld
council Such a council, therefore they advised him, after
obtaining the emperor's consent, to assemble without delay
in one of the great cities in Germany, that all who had
right to be present might deliberate with freedom, and pro0
pose their opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous
situation of religion at thisjunEure required:.

* Fai.ci. Rer. expet.& fugiend. 34. t Ibid 345.

tIbid. 346.

The nuncio, more artful than his malter, and better ac-
quainted with the political views and interests of the Roman
court, was tartled at the proposition of a council; and easily
foresaw how dangerous such an assembly might prove, at a
time when many openly denied the papal authority, and the
reverence and fubmiflion yielded to it visibly declined among
all. For that reason he employed his utmoit address in or-
der to prevail on the members of the diet to proceed them.
selves with greater severity against the Lutheran heresy, and
to relinquish their proposal concerning a general council to
be held in Germany. They, perceiving the nuncio to be
more solicitous about the interest of the Roman court, thani
the tranquillity of the empire, or purity of the church, re-
mained inflexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue
of their grievances to beprefented to the pope§. The nun.
cio, that he might not be the bearer of a remonitrance so
disagreeable to his court, left Nuremberg abruptly, without
taking leave of the diet ¶.

The secular princes accordingly, for the ecclelaftics, al.

though they gave no opposition, did not think it decent to
join with them, drew up the lift (so famous in the German
annals) of an hundred grievances, which the empire imputed
to the iniquitous dominion of the papal fee. This lift con-
tained grievances much of the fame nature with that prepar.
ed under the reign of Maximilian. It would be tedious to e-
numerate each of'them; they complained of the fums exad-
ed for dispensations, absolutions, and indulgences; of the
expence arising from the law-suits carried by appeal to
Rome; of the innumerable abuses occasioned by reservations,
commendams, and annates; of the exemption from civil ju-
rifdiaion which the clergy had obtained; of the arts by
which they brought all secular causes under the cognizance
of the ecclesiastical judges; of the indecent and profligate
lives which not a few of the clergy led; and of various o-
ther particulars, many of which have already been mention-

Fafcic. Rcr. expet. & fugiend. 349. ¶Ibid. 376.

ed among the circumstance that contributd the favour.
able reception, or to the quick proges of Luthers doc.
trins.. In the end they concluded, that if the holy fee did
not fpeedly deliver them from those intolerable burdes
they had determined to endure them no longer, and would
employ the power and authority with which God had ena
trusted them, in order to procure relieft.

Intead of such feveities against Luther and his folowen

as the nmico had recommended, the recrf or edict of the
diet [March 6 153] contained only a general injun&io
to all ranks of men to wait with patience for the determina.
tions of the council which was to be aflembled, and in the
mean time not to publish any new opinions contrary to the
eftabliled dortnnes of the church; together with an ad.
monition to all preachers to abstain from matters of contro.
verfy in their difcoures to the people, and to confine them.
feves to the plain and infirumive truths of religion .

The reformer derived great advantage from the tranc-

tions ofthis diet, as they affordedthem the filleft and nip
authentic evidence that grofa corruptioa~ prevailed in the
court of Rome, and that the empire was loaded by the
dcrl y with infupportabc burdens. With regard to the
former, they had now the testimony of the pope himfdf,
that their invetives and accusations were not malicius r
8i-founded As to the latter, the representatives of the
Germanic body, in an aflembly where the patrons.ofithe
new opinions were far from being the moif nunmrou or
powerful, had pointed out as the chief grievances of'the
empire, those very praices of the Romiff church aginft
which Luther and his diciples were accustomed to decaim.
Accordingly, in all their controversial writings afteri is
period, they often appealed to Adrian's declaration -nd
to the hundred grievance, in confirmation of whatever they

t Fafcc. r. expet. & fngiend. 354,

. lbid. 348.

advanced concerning the diflolute manners, or insatiable am.
bition and rapaciousness, of the papal court.

At Rome, Adrian's conduc was confidered as a proof
of the moit childilh simplicity and imprudence. Men train-
ed up amidst the artifices and corruptions of the papal
court, and accustomed to judge of aaions not by what was
jift, but by what was useful, were aftonilhed at a pontiff,
who, departing from the wife maxims of his predecessors,
acknowledged disorders which he ought to have concealed;
and forgetting his own dignity, alked advice of those, to
whom he was entitled to prescribe. By such an excess
of impolitic sincerity, they were afraid that, instead of re-
claiming the enemies of the church, he would render them
more presumptuous, and instead of extinguishing berefy,
would weaken the foundations of the papal power, or stop
the chief sources from which wealth flowed into the
church*. For this reason the cardinals and other ecclesias-
tics of greatest eminence in the papal court industriously op-
posed all his fehemes of reformation, and by throwing obh
jecions and difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or
to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, amazed, on the
one hand, at the obstinacy of the Lutherans, disgusted, on
the other, with the manners and maxims of the Italians,
and finding himself unable to corre& either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and often looked
back with pleasure on that period of his life when he was
only dean of Louvain, a more humble but happier Ration,
in which little was expected from him, and there was no-
thing to frustrate his good intentionst.

Clement VII. his successor, excelled Adrian as much in
the arts of government, as he was inferior to him in purity
of life, or uprightness of intention. He was animated not
only with the aversion which all popes naturally bear to a
council, but having gained his own eletion by means very

F. Paul, HiRt. of Counc. p. a8. Pallavic. Hist. 5&

t Jovii Vit. Adr. p. 118.

uncanonical, he was afraid of an afcmbly that might subjel
it to a scrutiny which it could not sand. He deterined
therefre, by every poffibl means to dude the demands
of the Germans, both with refpet to the calling of a coun.
cl, and reforming abuses in the papal court, which thenblh
ne and incapacity of his predecessor had brought upon
him. For this purpose he made choice of cardinal Ca
peggio, an artful man, often entrufed by his predwceon
with negotiations of importance, as his nuncio to the dit
of the empire afmbled again at Nuremberg.

Capggio without taking any notice of what had pa.

fed in the hit meeting, exhorted the diet f February], in a
long discourse, to execute the edit of Worms with vigour,
a the only effeal means of suppressing Luther's doCrine
The diet, in return, desired to know the pope's intention
concerning the council, and the redress of the hundred griev-
ances. The former, the nuncio endeavoured to elude by ge
nerl and unmeaning declarations of the pope's refolutiom to
pufue such measures as would be for the greatest good of
the church. With regard to the latter, as Adrian was dead
before the catalogue of grievances reached Rome, andofco.
sequence it had not been regularly laid befre the present
pope, Campeggio took advantage of this circumtanIe'to
decline making any definitive answer to them in Clement'
name; though, at the fame time, he observed that their er
talogue of grievances contained many particulars extrenm
indecent and undutiful, and that the publithing it by thor
own authority was highly difrefpetful to the Roman fee.
In the end, he renewed his demand of their proceeding with
vigour againt Luther and his adherents. Bat though, n
ambafador from the emperor, who was at time very folici.
ous to gain the pope, warmly seconded the nuncio, with
many proeffions of his mail's zeal for the honour and dig
nity of the papal fee, the rcefr of the diet [April- 18] wS
conceived in terms of almost the fame import with the for

# BOOK IV.

mer, without enjoining any additional severity against Lu-
ther and his partyt.

Before he left Germany, Campeggio, in order to amuse

and soothe the people, published certain articles for the a-
mendment of orme disorders and abufes.which prevailed a-
mong the inferior clergy; but this partial reformation, which
fell so far short of the expecations of the Lutherans, and
of the demands of the diet, gave no fatisfation, and produ-
ced little effe&. The nuncio, with a cautious hand, tender-
ly lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed a deeper blow,
and by friking at the root wished to exterminate the evil*.

.BOO K IV.

THE expulsion of the French, both out of the Milanese and
the republic of Genoa, was confidered by the Italians as the
terminationof the war between Charles and Francis; and'as
they began immediately to be apprehensive of the emperor,
when they faw.no power remaining in Italy capable either
to controul or oppose him, they longed ardently for the re-
etablifiunent of peace. Having procured the refloration of
Sforza to his paternal dominions, which'had been their chief
motive for entering into, confederacy with Charles, they
plainly discovered their intention to contribute no longer
towards increasing the emperor's fuperioritrover his rival,
which was aeadybecome the object ofa -ir jealufy. The
pope especially, whose natural timidity¥increafed his fufpi-
cions of Charles's defigne, endeavoured by his remonstrances
to inspire him with moderation and incline him to .peace.

But the emperor, intoxicated with success, and urged on
by his own ambition, no less than by Bourbon's delfreof re-
Venge, contemned Clement's admonitions, and declared his

t Seckend. z86. Sleid.-Hifi. 66. Seckend. z92.

resolution of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to in.
vade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions, where, as lie
leait dreaded an attack, he was Icait prepared to refill it,
His mroft. experienced minitlers dissuaded him from under.
taking such an enterprise with a feeble army, and an exhaui.
ed treasury: but he relied so much on having obtained the
concurrence of the king of England, and on the hope
which Bourbon, with the confidence and credulity natural tc
exiles, entertained of being joined by a numerous body of hi'
partizans as soon as the Imperial troops should enter France
that he persisted obilinately in the measure. Henry under
took to furnish an hundred thousand ducats towards defray
ing the expence of the expedition during the firit month
and had it in his choice either to continue the payment o
that turn monthly, or to invade Picardy before the end o
July with an army capable of acting with vigour. The em
peror engaged to attack Guienne at the fame time witl
a considerable body of men; and if these enterprises prove(
successful, they agreed, that Bourbon, besides the territorie
which he had loft, should be put in possession of Provence
with the title of king, and should do homage to Henry a!
the lawful king of France, for his new dominions. Ofal
the parts of this exteniive but extravagant projec, the inva
sion of Provence was the only one which was executed. Foi
although Bourbon, with a scrupulous delicacy, altogethei
unexpected after the part which he had atled, positively re,
fused to acknowledge Henry's title to the crown of France
and thereby absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprise, Charles's eagerness to carry his own plan in
to execution did not in any degree abate. The army whict
he employed for that purpose amounted only to eiglhtcr
thousand men; the command of which was given to the mar
cuis de Pescara, with inftuc.ions to pay the greatest dcfe
rence to Bourbon's advice in all his operations. Pefcal:
pased the Alps without opposition, and entering Provcnc,
[Aug. 19,] laid siege to larfeilles. Bourbon had advioc

him rather to march towards Lyons, in the neighbourhood
of which city his territories were situated, and where of
conrfe his influence was mot extensive; but the emperor
was fu desirous to get polfcffion of a port, which would, at
all times secure him an easy entrance into France, that by
his nauthority lie over-ruled the constable's opinion, and di-
rected Pescara to make the reduction cf Marseilles his chief
ebjcct.-

Fr.nciq, who foresaw, hut was unable to prevent this at-

tmii,*, took the most proper precautions to defeat it. He
llid -aPte the adjacent cotuntry, in order to render it more
d;fEiclt for the enemy to subsist their army; he razed the fu-
burhs of the cit-, fircigthened its fortifications, and threw
i:nto it a numerous garrison under the command of brave and
eperrienced officers. To thete, nine thousand of the citi-
zens, whom their dread of the Spantif yoke inspired with
cottr'mpt of danger, joined thlemfelves; by their united cou-
rae and indufiry, all the efforts of Pescara's militarl lkill,
a:ld of Bourbon's activity and revecre, were rendered abor-
ti<. Francis, meanwhile, h1ad leiiurc to assemble a poceiL.

1 army under the walls of Avignon, and no sooner began
to advance towarlds Marfciillcs, tlian the Imperial troops, ex-
liauiilcd by tle fatigues of a siege which had ladted forty
aris, weakened by difeafec, and ahnoft destitute of provi-
irojus, retired [Sept. 191 with precipitation towards Italyt.

If, Tiring these operations of the army ill Provence, ei-
thr Charles or Henry had attacked France in the manner
driicli they had proje(ted, that kingdom tinut have been ex-
socd t the mods imminent danger. But on this, as well as
et many other occasions, the emperor found that the extent
of hil revenues was not adequate to the greatness of his
chcmcs, or the ardour of his ambition; and the want of
money obliged him, though with much rcluctance, to cir-
cumfcribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted. Hen.

§ (7uiC. 1, xv.

X 73, &C. Mem. de BellaY, p. So.

t Giic. 1. xv. 2;7. Uiloa Vita del! ,irlo V, p. 93.
V. . :. 5

ry, dufti d at Baurbon's Scfgg to rcqgil~ e$i d~ J
the crown of Fram; n alazmd t the m9tuiPof.,WS~tB
whom the folicitationp of the isS ch kinghad-pcra&dd t#.
march towards the borc qs D ngland; and no bggw ij,
cited by his minster, who w.. become cptw y q.op-wjitb
regard to a the emperor' iRtft took no inca ~rt by.,
port an nterprifc of wlich, as of ay iW nw W j~ ,
had been at firt exc~vely fond*.

If the king of France had b -aen,

fst-fitd . hasing,

livered his fiujea. from this fomiidablc iavalf, i h he. q4
thought it anough to blcw al Eurla e the, fóilj~. *i,
which the internal Arcnth o his doma 4ioW~;k ! k4i4 ,
rcfift the inayon offa rgtg cnmy, cup, wmB,. fi4ircyi
by the abilities ad porefl cf9pt q( a rcb~jpcj (WiL,.
the campaign, n otthadng thb loss f t41 Wi ,
would have been si, fio ending in groy, jF$ani
animated with courage oT, . bcomi'ng a, ld~ i t a,g-,
neral; ~nlhcd on by ainbipn, enterpsihg rctbel;uw,,
fidcrate; and to. apt to b. ebatedg wh fpl.ie.c4 wa.$fr,
of erY uandcrtang that, fed boF lfl aypnrB,
Such an d thc i , of h; aR, a, t,
juntyure, aturI.y. pre4Sptcc taq his

cw- -ehadC.uQ

his command one of ths mole poyeful aMi beit appjip~ ,
armies France had. ever brougt..into.the field, Rihi, h
could not think of dIlbandig wrout, having c.nloye"it
in any aivec fcrvice. The Imperial troop had.been ~ 1d
to rtire almot runed by hard duty, and dilfeartend with
ill fucccf; the Milande ha been left atogethr witout
defence; it was not impoib~ to reac that countar,~ W
Pescara, with lis flttere force, could arive the; g if
fear should add Ieed to their retreat they were i. -oqo,~s
dition to make iha againt his. sieh and numerous twtropi
and Milan would now, as in former intaces, fubinit witW;
out r~iftance to a bold- inader. These consid era~ B
which were not dctitute of plauibility, appeared to bis

* Fiddc'~ ife of Wolfy, Append. o. ?70 7?, 7»<

sanguine temper to be of the utmot weight. In vain did
his wife ministers and generals represent to him the danger
of taking the field at a season so far advanced, with an ar-
my composed chiefly of Swiss and Germans, to whose ca-
prices he would be subjeA in all his operations, and on whole
fidelity his safety mut absolutely depend. In vain did
Louise of Savoy advance by hasty journies towards Provence,
that The might exert all her authority in dissuading her son
from such .a rafl enterprise. Francis disregarded the remon-
frances of his subje&s; and that he might save himself the
pain of an interview with his mother, whose counsels he
had determined to rejet, he began his march before her ar-
rival; appointing her, however, by way of atonement for
that neglet, to be regent f- the kingdom during his ab-
fence. Bonuivt by his perfsions, contributed not a lit-
le. to confirm Fracis in- ti resolution. That favourite,
who frongly vefembled his master in all the defe&ive parts
of his chara&er, was led, by his natural impetuosity, warmly
to approve of such an enteprife; and- being prompted be-
ides by his impatie~ e to revifi a Mihnefe lady, of whom
le had been deeply enamoured during his hte epedition, he
is laid, by his flattering defncipt~oa of her biauty and ac-
complifhments, tolbae ifpired Franci, who was extremely
susceptible of ftch.pafioas, with an eqaa desire of Seeing
hero. .

The French pased the Alpr at Mont ;; and as.
the;r success depended on difpatdch thy- advanced-with the
greatest diligence. Pescara, who had been obliged to take
a longer and more difficult route by Monaca and Final, was
loon informed of their intention; and being sensible that
nothing but the prelence of his troops could save the Mi-
lanefe, marched with such rapidity, that he reached Alva
on the fame day that the French army arrived at VercellL
Francis, iafnruted by Bonnivet's error in the former cam--
paign advanced dire&ly towards Milan, where the unex-

i Oeuvr. de Brat. tom. vi. 253.

S 9

peced approach of an enemy so powerful occasioned such
coaftnmation and difordr, that although Pescara entered
the city with some of his best troops, he found that he de
fence of it could not be un~ertaken with any probability of
fucceóG and having thrown a garrison into the citadel re
trd through one gate, while the French were admid at
another*.

These brilk motions of the French monarch diccecrted

all the schemes of defence which the Imperialists d fnrm.
d. Ner, indeed, di general attempt to oppoe a for.
idable iavafion under such cireumiances of difadanage
Thongk Chadei poliefc domibions moze ctenfive. tha
any other primc in usope, ad- had.at tbistime, no .oth
mny but that which was empnoyd in Lombardy, wib
did at amount to fixtecn tluand mnaehia pregae .i
a1 his dlfrent fiates aifa limitcd&aidha lUbj^e
out whafe coint he could nie n tam, difeomed fwch
un-llinqgu. to burden therdvn th. new or.omm
nary aimp~D, that em thi fsal body of taoop~ou
want of payiof aumtntio, of p msiaaw , nd ol daoh
t1 fnah. hation it .aeuired allf te w&om of. Lm~oy
the imudiioii Pdcan, ad the imaplacale isfnt of
Bhahto-pa~ ee

te m fra. faing under depirti, nd

to ialpine the wi th refobstioa to at . or g .
discover, what was ietial to their aety. To the dI
of their-geniar, nadtthe aaiity of thei zeal, the empem
was more indebtd so the preation of his Italia domi
nios than to his own powe. Lannoy, by mortgg the
reen~es of Naples, procmed foaio money, wliesh-was -
mediately applied toward providing th army with-what
ever was most ncel~ryt. Pefcaa, who was bloved and
almolt adored by the Spanii- oops, chorted them to
.he'w the world, by their egaging to Sere the emnpeor.i
that dangerous exigeney, without making any immediate d

M en. de Belhy, p. 8. GuiWc. L . s7T.

t Guic. L ". a8o.

sand of psy, ghat- they were animated wtli' fenttiheats of
bonour very different from. those of mercenary fodiers; to.
.which propofitioa that glJBant body of; mcn,..withban unex-
ampled gf.eroofity, gave their consents. Bourholhaving
raised a cpfieIe fr bypawning bypwn ijevwelsj4 out for
Geuna,,y, w.he h influeaop was great,. thati; his pre-
fencc he .inght ftn. the levyipg.oi troops for the.Imperi-
.al fervicjs

Franfis by. tffital e0rt!otswede l*e.'emperos generals

time to deive advanSage front .l these operations.. In-
fead ofpurfiing.ti epniyY 'bp rwctired .tor.Lodi on the.
Adda,, an. untena*i. poi. which',- P~fe had refolved:to
abandon: on the approachof :tl Freneob he ina~opance
with the, opi-ion, oB onanivit tbhugh contrarr t -that of
.iis.otber?.rf~ .lid. ifgt. to Pavi; on :tbe.-Tefao .[Oa.
28];; aittop.niB4uQd~.of;-g_ eat impprtaece, the pofeffeisn of
which;vou.lhye. opned

. to Him all tho fertile countryly-

ing on .the)rni f

i ht ,

t ri - the-forti'ficati6ns of the

place weretwoagr;it:.was 'dngwr s t,.uaderuke a-diiculs
siege at. f laie atieafion. aW the Im.npeai gneral, sensible
of its. coafctpe e,~ hl .thrown. isnt. te town a garrison
composed ofi- thoufnt d ,vetemrai,ue~ . thee command of
Antonio .de Leys,,aa oficerof high rlrk of great experi-
nce,.of.a .patiqntbut enterprilfg ~ omge, i ile. in refour-
ecs, ambitquou. of; difti.guif~ ng hinfelf, and capable, for
btat reafon,.as wll asfrehbis .having been long-accuftom.
.d'both to .

be ald, tD commanad .of0 fflering br'perform-
ing anything in order to.procure..fuccefe.

Fraacii profiec 'e4:tt siege. with obstinacy equal to the
alihnefs with.whicbh'e bad. undertaken it. During three
months, every thing. known.to the engineers of that age,
or that could be efft ed by. the valour of his troops, 'as
attemptzd,in~der.to-reduce.the place;,while Lannoy and

t JoviiVit. Davali, lib. xr. p. 386. &óndov. vol. i. 61r. Ulloa

Vita dell Carlo V .

p. 94 &c. Vita dell Emper. Carlos V. per Vera
y %luniga, p. 36. it N!e. de nella, p. 83.

8

Pefar, tnable to obftruft his operations, were obliged to
remain in such an ignominious state of inaction, -that a pas
quinade was publiihed at Rome, offering a reward to any
person who could find the Imperial army, loft in the month
of Otober in the mountains between France and Lorn
bady, and which had not been heard of since that time s.

Leva, well acquainted with the dificukies under which

his countrymen laboured, and the impofibility oftheir fae
ing, in the field, such a powerful army as formed the siege
of Pavia, placed his only hopes of safety in hi- own vig.
hnce and valor. Th efort of both were extaordiay,
and in proportion to thes importance ofthe phce, with the
dc~fe of whih he was err e He interrupted the ip
pr-ache of the Freach by frequent and furiis falie
Beid the braches made by their artlery, Berefted new
worcs, which appeaed to be ifaredy infrior in' RregL
to the original fortiicatioas. He repled- the beiegei
in airl r afflbs; and by his own exmple, boht not
ony the gamflao but the inabit , to hea the aS&
ea fti~gu, and to eeowater the gateft dags with
o-t uraumg. The rigef the fefa eafp~ ~ w
bis cdx rsc imn "eading the progre* of the Preti
Fneiactn to beoe mae of the t towni by
wvei tie coun 'o the

Tc e o; whie; w its chf~~Se

on oeidA a fuddca urnidatia of the rivr de by i
one day, the br of many ~e an fwelpt sy dl &t
ma , which his army had aitfed with iuiste' t,

as at great expenaI.
Ntwithf lg tde lw peogrers nthe bordA-I ~ i*a

the~y which Leywa0qired by li gallant dee, it
was *it~fd d ht * -i c teown would at his be ~obig
to fwme.l*- The 13pr who akeay

l onsied the

Frn mnas a bRieaiw- bdy, became im apt to d.
Bagge himfdlfom 1i6

A oae ob a with the emp

Cor
.

-''; 't aniw. L SoS.
* Guic. .. Xln-t.UdiTalot. t. a p

whose defigna he was extremely jealous, and' to enter into
terms of friendihip with Francis. As Clement's timid and
cautious temper rendered him incapable of following the bold
plan which Leo had formed, of delivering Italy from thc
yoke of both the rivals, be returned to the more obvious
and praticable scheme of employing the power of the one
to balance and to restrain that of the other. For this r-
son, he did not diffembe his fatisfaAion at feeing the French
king recover Milan, as he hoped that the dread of fch i
neighbour would be lome check upon the emperor's amb-
tion, which no power in Italy waa now able to controu
He laboured hard to bring about a peace that would feeure
Francis in the pofffio~ of his new conquests; and ai
Charles, wo was always inflexible in the pro-ecution of hs
schemes, rejeted- the proposition with difdaia, aad. with
bitter exclamations-againf the pope, by whole i erfu~fons,
while cardinal de Medici, he had been induced to ivad the
Milante Clement immediately concluded a treaty of neutrae
lity with the king of France, ia which the- republic of Flo
rence wan incudedt.

Fraacis having by this tranfliiobn, 'eplved the emperor

of his two mot powerfu allies, and at the fame time having
fccured a pafge for his own troops through their territo
nes, formed afehee of attaeking the kingdom of Naple
hoping either to oerrun that country, which was left alto-
gether ithout defenee or that at least fuc an unpeed
ianafion would oblige the viceroy to reca} part of thi mpe.
rial anmy o of the Milaefe; for this putpofe he oder
ed fix thouand men to marc under-th e command of John
Stuart duke of Albany. But Pefeara frefeeing that the
efft of this diversion would deped entirely-upon tih ope.
rations of the armies i the Milanese, perfude Lannoy to
disregard Albany's motion, and to bend his who -force
agaift the king himself, so that Franeis not only weakened
]is army very uneafonably by this great detachmnt, but

t Gc. L XT. alz, asJ. Ibid. lSt.

inr~-.red the reproach of engaging too rashly in, chimerical
and extravagant projecs.

By this time the garrio;n of Pavia was reduced to extre.

mity; their armmunition and provisions began to fail; the
Germans, of whc'-.ri it was chieriy comnpofed having received
no pay for seven nmonths3, threatened to deliver the town in.
to the cremy's hands, and could hardly. be refrained from
mutiny by al Leyva's -adrc, and authority.. The Impe-
rial generals, who were no Arangers to his iituation, saw
the tceility oi marching without loss of time to his relief.

15253 This they had now in their power: twelve thou
iard Germans, whom the zeal and activity of Bourbon:
taught to move with unusual rapidity, had entered Lomn.
bardy under his command, and rendered the Imperial army
nearly equal to that of the French,. greatly diminished by
the absence of the body under Albany, as well as by the fa-
tigues of the siege, and the rigour of the season. But the
more their troops increased in number, the more sensibly did
the Imperialists feel the ditreli ariing from want of money;
Far from having funds for paying a powerful army, they
had scarcely what was sufficient for defraying the charges
of conducting their artillery, and of carrying their ammu.
.ition and provisions. The abilities of the generals, how-
ever, supplied every defect. By their own example, as well!
as by magnificent promises in name of the emperor, they
prevailed on the troops of all the different nations which
corrpoed their army, to take the field without pay; they
engaged to lead them directly towards the enemy; and
flattered them with the certain prospect of vicory, which
would at once enrich them with such royal spoils as would
be an ample reward for all their iervices. The soldiers, fen.
ible that, by quitting the army, they would forfeit the
great arrears due to them, and eager to get possession of the
promised treasures, demanded a battle with all the impa-
tience of adventurers who fight only for plundert.

· Gold. Polit. Imperial. 87-.
+ Ervci Peuteani Iiift. Cifa-ria, . G:a:z; i T!:ef. Ani ~. I-
. i i.p. ii. O. -, I 7).

The Imperial generals, without suffering the ardour of

t!:cir troops to cool, advanced immediately toward the
French camp [Feb. 3.] On the first intelligence of their
approach, Francis called a council of war, to deliberate
rThat course he ought to take. All his officers of greatest
experience were unanimous in advising him to retire, and to
decline a battle with an enemy who courted it from despair.
The Imperialists, they obefrved, would either be obliged in
a few weeks to disband an army, which they were unable to
pay, and which they kept together only by the hope of
plunder; or the soldiers, enraged at the non-performance of
the promises to which they had trusted, would rife in some
f.urious mutiny, which would allow their generals to think
of nothing but their own safety: that, meanwhile, he might
encamp in some strong pofi, and waiting in safety the arriv-
sl of frefll troops from France and Switzerland, might, be-
fore the end of spring, take poffcfion of all the Milanese,
without danger or bloodshed. But in opposition to them,
Bonnivet, whose defliny it was to give counsels fatal to
P'rance during the whole campaign, represented the ignoni-
ny that it would reflea on their sovereign, if he thould aban.
d(n a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn h;o
back before an enemy tg whom he was fill superior in nurm-
ber; and infilfed on the necessity of fighting the Imperialifs
rather than relinquish an undertaking, on the success of
which the king's future fame depended. Unfortunately,
Francis's notions of honour were delicate to an excess that
bordered on what was romantic. Having often said that
lie would take Pavia, or perish in the attempt, he thought
himfclf bound not to depart from that resolution ; and ra-
tiher than expose himself to the slightest imputation, he chose
to forego all the advantages which were the certain con-
fequernces of a retreat, and determined to wait for the Impe.
:ialiult before the walls of Pavia*.
Thie Imperial generals found the French so strongly en-

X- Guic. 1. xv. -.9l.

trenched, that notwith.tanding the powerful motives which
urged them on, they hesitated long before they ventured to
attack thenr; but at las the necessities of the besieged, and
the mur.murs of their own soldiers, obliged them to put eve.
rv thing to hazard. Never did armies engage with greater
ardour, or with an higher opinion of the importance of the
battle whizh they were going to fight [Feb. 24 ;] never
were troots more flr-on!v animated with emulation, nation.
al zantipathv, mutual rfcntment, and all the paflions which
inspire cbltinate bravery. On the one hand, a gallant young
monarch, fecorded bx a generous nobility, and followed by
fubiects to whole natural impetuosity, indignation at the op.
pofeiton which thev had encountered, added new force, col.
tended for vi'torv and honour. On the other fide, troop;
mr.ore comrpletelv difci; intd, and conducted by generals of
greater abilities, fo-ught from neceity, with courage height.
cned by despair. The I.periali::s, however, were unable
to refi. the firil efforts of the French valour, and their firm.
es battalions began to give 'way. But the fortune of the
day was quickl.H changed. The Swiss in the service of
France, unmindful of the repltaticn of their country for si.
delity and rrartia! glory, abandoned their poll in a cowardly
marnn-er. Leyva, with his rarrfon, sallied out and attack.
ed the rear of the French. c-.'ring the heat of the a&ton, with
such fury as threw thrn. into contuinon; and PeScara falling
on :heir cavalry with the I!mperial horse, among whom he
had rrudently intermi.ngld a considerable number of Spa.
r.i:h cot, armed with tthe heavy mulkIets then in use, broke
this fo-r.idable body by an unusual method of attack, a.
gaicft ;.vlich they were wholly unprovided. The rout be-
came universal; and refilfance ceased in almost every palt,
but vwere the king was in person, who fought now, not for
famre or vioor-, but for safety. Though wounded in feve.
r-l piaces, and thrown from his horse, which was killed u.-
der hinm, Francs3 defended himself on foot with an heroic
cc.:rage. M -)y cf is braves officers gathering ro:und hir;,

and endeavouring to save his life at the expence of their own,
fell at his feet. Among these was Bonnivet, the author of
this great calamity, who alone died unlamented. The king,
exhausted with fatigue, and scarcely capable of further re-
fitance, was left almost alone, exposcd to the fury of some
Spanifi soldiers, strangers to his rank, and enraged at his
obstinacy. At that moment came up Pomperant, a French
gentleman, who had entered together with Bourbon into
the emperor's service, and placing himself by the fide of the
monarch againfl whom he had rebelled, assisted in proteting
him from the violence of the soldiers; at the fame time be-
feeching him to surrender to Bourbon, who was not far di-
ilant. Imminent as the danger was which now surrounded
Francis,he rejeEted with indignation the thoughts ofan aion
which would have afforded such matter of triumph to his
traitorous fubje&; and calling for Lannoy, iwho happened
lilkewife to be near at hand, gave up his sword to him; which
he, kneeling to kifs the king's hand, received with pro-
i;und refped; and taking his own sword from his fide, pre-
sented it to him, faying, That it did not become so great a
monarch to remain disarmed in the presence of one of the
emperor's fubjeAs*.

Ten thousand men fell on this day, one of the moil fatal
France had ever seen. Among these were many noblemen
of the highest distinction, who chose rather to perish than to
turn their backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken
prisoners, of whom the most illultrious was Henry d'Albret,
the unfortunate king of Nlavarre. A small body of the
'ear-guard made its escape, under the command of the duke
of Alen5on; the feeble garrison of Milan, on the first news
ofthe defeat, retired without being pursued, by another
road; and in two weeks after the battle, not a Frenchman
remained in Italy.

' Guic.. xv. x29. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 5. Mlem. de Bellay,

?P 9 Sandov. Hilt. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 805, 8o. Rul:.
.tlli Lettere de Principi, ii. p. 70. Ulloa Vita del Carlo V. p. 98.

Lanroo, though he treated Faneis with allthe outwai

Mars ofhonoor due to hisrank and characer, guarded hlin
withe utmit attentin. He was solicitous, not only to
pm at ny pobility of his eicaping,:but asid that his
ow troop might seize his pebn, and detain its the eft
fc ity for the paymetof their arrears. In order to pro.
vide againf both thef dangers, he conduded Francis the
day after the battle, to the frong castle of Pizzichitone ear
Cremona, committing him to the custody of Don Ferd
indAlaron, general of the Spanih infantry, an ossieer of
great bravery and of ftrit bonour, but remarkable for tht
Jevere ad ferupulos vigilace which such a trut requ~d.

Francis, who frmed a judgment of the empro's difpo

itioas by his own, was extremely defirons ths Oharle
honld be informed of his situation, fodly hoping that, fom
1s genrofity or sympathy, be mould obtain fpaedy elis.
The Imperal genalsere no lei impatient togive theirfoae-
reign an cary account of the decisive viaory which theyltad
ained, and to recece his inAtru&ion with regard to their
future coudu& As the most certain and expeditious me.
thod of onveying intelligence to Spain, atthat feafo of
the year, was by land, Francis gave the commendador Pe.
alofa, who was charged with Lannoy's dispatches, a pasT-
port to trad through France.

Charles received the account of this signal and unexpea.

ed fucceb that had crowned his arms, with a moderationb
which, if t had been real, would have done him more ho-
aour th th greatef viory . Without uttering one word

nirefire of exultation, or of intemperate joy,-he tetiid

immediatly into his chapd [Mar. io,] and having fpenta
hour in offring up his thankfivings to Heaven, returned
to the predne-chamber, which by that time was filled with
grandees and foreign ambafladors, aifembled in order to con-
gratulate him. He accepted of their compliments with a
uodft deportment; he lamented the misfortune of the cap-
tive king, as a Ariding eumple of the fad reverse of fortunt

to which the 4noft powerful monarchs are fubje&; he for-
bad any public rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on a-
mong Christians, reserving them until he should obtain a
vi&cory equally illustrious over the Infidels; and fcemed to
take pleasure in the advantage which he had gained, only as
it would prove the occasion of retoring peace to Christen-
-domt.

Charles, however, had already begun to formfechemes in

his own mind, which little suited such external appearances.
Ambition, not generosity, was the ruling pafion in his
mind; and the vic°ory at Pavia-opened such new and Un-
.bounded profpe&s of gratifying it, as allured him with irre-
.fiftible force: but it being no' easy matter to execute the vast
designs which he meditated, he thought !it necessary, while
proper measures were -taking .for that purpose, to affe& the
greatet moderation, hoping under that veil to conceal his
real intentions from the other princes of Europe.' -

Meanwhile, France was filled with contemrnation. The

king himself had -early transmitted an account.of-the rout of
Pavia, in a letter to his mother, delivered by Pennalofa,
-which contained only these words, ," Madam, all is loit, ex-
cept our honour." The officers who made their escape,
when they arrived from Italy, brought such a melancholy
detail of particulars as made all.ranks of men sensibly feel
the greatnefs.and extent of the calamity. France, without
its sovereign, without money in her treasury, without an ar-
my, without generals to command it, and encompassed on
all fides by a victorious and adive enemy, seemed to be on
the very brink of deftrud'on. But on that occasion the
great abilities of Louise the regent saved the kingdom,
which the violence of her passions had more than once e-x-
posed to the greatest danger. InRtead of giving herself up
to such lamentations as were natural to a woman so remark-
able for her maternal tenderness, he discovered all the fore-
fight, and exerted all the acivity of a consummate politician,

t Sandov. ift.i. i64. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V.p.Jao.
Vol. IL T

She aflembled the nobles at Lyons, and animated them
by her example no less than by her words, with such zeal in
defence of their country, as its present situation required.
She colleced the remains of the army which had served in
Italy, ransomed the prisoners, paid the arrears, and put them
in a condition to take the field. She levied new troops,
provided for the security of the frontiers, and raised fume
sufficient for defraying these extraordinary expences. Her
chief care, however, was to appease the relentment, or to
gain the friendihip of the king of England; and from that
quarter, the first ray of comfort broke in upon the French.

Though Henry, in entering into alliances with Charles

or Francis, seldom followed any regular or concerted plan
of policy, but was influenced chiefly by the caprice of ten.
porary paflions, such occurrences often happened as recalled
his attention towards that equal balance of power which it
was'necefalry to keep between the two contending poten.
tates, the preservation of which he always boasted to be his
peculiar oi~e. He had expected that his union with the
emperor might afford him an opportunity of recovering
some part of those territories lir France which had belonged
to his ancestors, and for the fake of such an acquifirion he
did not scruple to give his affiRance towards raising Charles
to a considerable pre-eminence above Francis. He had ne.
ver dreamt, however, of any event so decisive and so fatal at
the vitory at Pavia, which seemed not only t have broken,
but to have annihilated the power of one of the rivals; so
that the profpet of the sudden and entire revolution which
this would occasion in the political system, filled him with
the moif disquieting apprehensions. He saw all Europe in
danger of being over-run by an ambitious prince, to whose
power there now remained no counterpoise; and though he
himse!f might at first be admitted, in quality of an ally, to
some /hare in the spoils of the captive monarch, it was easy
to discern, that with. regard to the manner of making the
partitin, as well as his security for keeping poffeflion of

what should be allotted him, he must absolutely depend up-
on the will of a confederate, to whose forces his own bore
no proportion. He was sensible, that if Charles were per-
mitted to add any considerable part of France to the vast
dominions of which he was already maiter, his neighbour-
hood would be much more formidable to England than that
of the ancient French kings; while, at the fame time, the
proper balance on the continent, to which England owed
both its safety and importance, would be entirely loft. Con-
cein for the situation of the unhappy monarch co-operated
with these political considerations; his gallant behaviour ir
the battle of Pavia had excited an high degree of admira-
tion, which never fails of augmenting sympathy; and Hen-
ry, naturally susceptible of generous sentiments, was fond of
appearing as the deliverer of a vanquished enemy from a Rate
of captivity. The passions of the English minister seconded
the inclinations of the monarch. Wolfey, who had not for-
gotten the disappointment of his hopes in two fuccefive con-.
claves, which he imputed chiefly to the emperor, thought
this a proper opportunity of taking- revenge; and Louise,
courting the friendlhip of England with such flattering sub-
milfions as were no less agreeable to the king than to the
cardinal, Henry gave her secret assurances that he would
not lend his aid towards oppressing France, in its present
helpless tate, and obliged her to promise that the would not
consent to difiember the kingdom, even in order to pro.
cure her son's liberty§.

But as Henry's conne&ions with the emperor made it
necessary to a& in such a manner as to save appearances, he
ordered public rejoicings to be made in his dominions for the
success of the Imperial arms; and, as if he had been eager
to seize the present opportunity of ruining the French mo-
narchy, he sent ambassadors to Madrid, to congratulate with
Charles upon his victory; to put him in mind, that he, as
his ally, engaged in one common cause, was entitled to par-

§ Mer. de Bellay, 94. Guic. . xvi. 318. Herbert-

T 2z

take in the fruits of it; and to require that, in eompliance
with the terms of their confederacy, he would invade Gui-
enne vith a powerful army, in order to give him poffeflion
of that province. At the fame time, he offered to fend the
pr;ncefs Mary into Spain or the Low Countries, that {he.
might be.educated under the emperor's direction, until the
coaclufion of the marriage agreed on between them; and ins
return for that mark of his confidence, he insisted that Fran.
cis hould be delivered to him, in consequence of that article
in the treaty of Bruges, whereby each of the contracing
parties was bound to surrender all usurpers to him whose
rights they had invaded. It was impossible that Henry
could expet that the emperor would lifen to these extrava.
gant demands, which it was neither his interest, nor in his
power to grant. They appear evidently to have been made
with no other intention than to furnish him with a decent
pretext for entering into such engagements with France as
the junture required*.

It was among the Italian fates, however, that the victory

of Pavia occasioned the greatest alarm and terror. That
balance of power on which they relied for their security,
and which it had been the constant objet of all their ne-
gotiations and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a
moment. They were exposed by their fituationu to feel the
firt effles of the uncontrouled authority which Charles had
acquired. They observed many symptoms of a boundless
ambition in that young prince, and were sensible that, as em-
peror or king of Naples, he might not only farm dangerous
pretensions upon each of their territories, but might invade
them with great advantage. They deliberated, therefore,
with great solicitude concerning the means of raising such
a force as might obfru& his progrefst. But their consul-
tations, conducted with little union, and executed with less

Herbert, p. 64.
Guic I. xvi 30o. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74, 6, a&c
Thuani Hist. lib. i. c. IX.

Vigour, had no effet. Clement, instead of pursuing the
measures which he had concerted with the Venetians for fe-
curing the liberty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's
threats, or overcome by his promises, that he entered into a
separate treaty [April i,] binding himself to advance a
considerable fum to the emperor, in return for certain emo-
laments which he was to receive from him. The money
was inflantly paid; but Charles afterwards refused to ratify
the treaty; and the pope remained exposed at once to infa-
mnv and to ridicule; to the former, because he had deserted
the public cause for his private interest; to the latter, because
lie had been a loser by that unworthy ac&ion-.

How dishonourable soever the artifice might be which'

was employed in order to defraud the pope of this fum, it
came very seasonably into the viceroy's hands, and put it in.
his power to extricate himself out of an imminent danger.
.oon after the defeat of the French army, the German.
troops, which had defended Pavia with such meritorious cou-
rage and perseverance, growing insolent upon the fame that
they had acquired, and impatient of relying any longer oh!
fruitless promises, with which they had been so often amuf-
ed, rendered themselves mailers of the town, with a refolu-
tion to keep possession of it as a security for the payment
of their arrears; and the refc of the army discovered a much.
stronger inclination to assist, than to punish the mutineers-
By dividing among them the money exa&ted from the pope,.
Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Germans; but though this
satisfied their present demands, he had so little profpe& of
being able to pay them or his other forces regularly for the
future, and was under such continual apprehensions of their-
seizing the person of the captive king, that, not long after,.
lie was obliged to dismiss all the Germans and Italians in the
Imperial fervicell. Thus, from a circumstance that now ap-

§ Guic. lib. xvi. 3os. Mauroceni Hiflor. Venet. ap. Iftorichi
deli cole Veenez. V. 131, 136.
U Guic. 1. xvi. p. 302.

T3

pears very singular, but arising naturally from the conftitu.
rion of molt European governments in the sixteenth centu.
ry, while Charles was fufpe&ed by all his neighbours of aim-
ing at univcrfal monarchy, and while he was really forming
varl projecs of this kind, his revenues were so limited, that
Se could not keep on foot his vi&orious army, though it
did not exceed twenty-four thousand men.

During these transactions, Charles, whose pretensions to

moderation and difiniereftednefs were soon forgotten, deli.
berated, with the utmost solicitude, how he might derive the
greate'. advantages from the misfortune of his adversary.
Some of his counsellors advised him to treat Francis with the
rnagianw ty that became a vicorious prince, and, inflead of
taking advantage of his situation, to impose rigorous condi-
tions, to dismiss him on such equal terms, as would bind'him
for ever to his interest by the ties of gratitude and affe&tion,
more forcible as well as more permanent than any which
coukl be formed by extorted oaths and, involuntary ftipula-
tions. Such aa exertion of generosity is not, perhaps, to
be expeded in the conduit of political affairs, and it was fat
too refined for that prince to whom it was proposed. The
more obvious, but less splendid scheme, of endeavouring to
make the utmofR of Francis's calamity, had a greater num-
ber in the council to recommend it, andfuited better with
the emperor's genius. But though Charles adopted this
plan, lie fems not to have executed it in the most proper
ir.anner. Instead of making one great effort to penetrate
i:ito France with all the forces of Spain and the Low Coun-
:ires; instead of crusing the Italian itates before they reco-
vercd from the coniternation which the success of his arms
had occasioned, he had recourse to the artifices of intrigue
and negotiation. This proceeded partly from neceflity,
part!y from the natural disposition of his mind. The situ-
- on of his finances at that time rendered it extremely diffi
ult to carry on any.extraordinary armament; and he him-
st-s .\li:g r.vcer appeared at the head of his armies, the

command of which he had hitherto committed to his gene-
rals, was averse to bold and martial counsels, and trusted
more to the arts with which he was acquainted. He laid
betides, too much itrefs upon the vicory of Pavia, as if by
that event the strength of France had been annihilated, its
resources exhausted, and the kingdom itself, no less than the
person of its monarch, had been fubje&ed to his power.

Full of this opinion, he determined to set the highest

price upon Francis's freedom, and having ordered the count
de Roeux to visit the captive king in his name, he infructed
him to propose the following articles as the conditions on
which he would grant him his liberty: that he fould re-
flore Burgundy to the emperor, from whose ancetors it had
been unjustly wrested; that he should surrender Provence
and Dauphine, that they might be erected into an indepen-
dent kingdom for the constable Bourbon; that he should
make full fatisfaeion to the king of England for all his
claims, and finally renounce the pretensions of France to
Naples, Milan, or any other territory in Italy. When
Francis, who had hitherto flattered himself, that he mhould
be treated by the emperor with the generosity becoming
one great prince towards another, heard these rigorous con-
ditions, he was so transported with indignation, that, draw-
ing his dagger hastily, he cried out, " 'Twere better that
a king should die thus." Alar9on, alarmed at his vehe-
mence, laid hold on his hand; but though he soon recovered
greater composure, he till declared, in the most solemn
manner, that he would rather remain a prisoner durink life,
than purchase liberty by such ignominious conceflionsf.

This mortifying discovery of the emperor's intentions

greatly augmented Francis's chagrin and impatience under
his confinement, and must have driven him to absolute
despair, if he had not laid hold of the only thing which
could till adminifler any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself, that the conditions which Roeux had proposed

t Mem. de Bellay, 94. Ferreras Hi.t is. 43.

did not flow orginally from Charles himself, but were dic-
tated by the rigorous policy of his Spanish council; and
that therefore he might hope, in one personal interview with
him, to do more towards hastening his own deliverance,
than could be effeced by long negotiations passing through
the subordinate hands of his ministers. Relying on this
fuppclition, which proceeded from too favourable an opi-
nion of the emperor's charater, he offered to visit him in
Spain, and was willing to be carried thither as a fpefacle
to that haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his address
to confirm him in these sentiments; and concerted with him
in secret the manner of executing this resolution. Francis
was so eager on a scheme which seemed to open some prof.
peat of liberty, that he furnished the galleys necessary for
conveying him to Spain, Charles being at that time unable to
fit out a squadron for that purpose. The viceroy, with.
out communicating his intentions either to Bourbon or Pes.
cara, conducted his prisoner towards Genoa, under pre-
tence of transporting him by sea to Naples; though soon
after they set fail, he ordered the pilots to steer directly for
Spain; but the wind happening to carry them near the
French coast, the unfortunate monarch had a full profpe&
of his own dominions, towards which he cast many a for-
rowful and desiring look. They landed, however, in a few
days at Barcelona, and soon after Francis was lodged
[AAug. 243, by the emperor's command, in the Alcazar of
Madrid, under the care of the vigilant AlarSon, who guarded
him with as much circumfpecion as ever*.

A few days after Francis's arrival at Madrid, and when

he began to be sensible of his having relied without founda.
tion on the emperor's generosity, Henry VIII. concluded
a treaty with the regent of France, which afforded him some
hope of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extravagant
demands had been received at Madrid with that negle&
which they deserved,- and which he probably expected.

Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. lib. xvi. 323.

Charles, intoxicated with prosperity, no longer courted him
in that refpe&ful and submissive manner which pleased his
haughty temper. Wolfey, no less haughty than his master,
was highly irritated at the emperor's discontinuing his won-
ted caresses and professions of friendship to himself. These
flight offences, added to the weighty considerations formerly
mentioned, induced Henry to enter into a defensive alliance
with Louise, in which all the differences between him and
her son were adjusted; at the fame time he engaged that he
would employ his best offices in order to procure the de-
liverance of his new ally from a state of captivityt.

While the open defecion of such a powerful confederate

asseted Charles with deep concern, a secret conspiracy was
carrying on in Italy, which threatened him with confequen-
ces till more fatal. The retefs and intriguing genius of
MoronS, chancellor of Milan, gave rife to this. His re-
venge had been amply gratified by the expulsion of the
French out of Italy, and his vanity no less soothed by the
re-eftabliihment of Sforza, to whose interest he had attach-
ed himself in the dutchy of Milan. The delays, however, and
evasions of the Imperial court, in granting Sforza the invef-
titure of his new acquired territories, had long alarmed Mor-
one; these were repeated so often, and with such apparent ar-
tifice, as became a full proof to his suspicious mind that the
emperor intended to strip his master of that rich country which
he had conquered in his name. Though Charles, in order to
quiet the pope and Venetians, no less jealous of his designs
than Morone, gave Sforza, at last, the investiture which had
been so long desired; the charter was clogged with fo-many re-
servations, and fubjeaed him to such grievous burdens, as ren-
dered the duke of Milan a dependent on the emperor, rather
than a vassal of the empire, and afforded him hardly any other
security for his possessions than the good pleasure of an ambi-
tious superior. Such an acceflion of power as would have ac-
crued from the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of

t Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 337.

Naples, was confidered by Morone as fatal to the liberties of
Italy, no lets than to his own importance. Full of this
idea he began to revolve in his mind the possibility of re-
fcuing Italy from the yoke of foreigners; the darling
scheme, as has been already observed, of the Italian politi.
cians in that age, and which it was the great obje& of their
ambition to accomplish. If to the glory of having been the
chief inftument of driving the French out of Milan, he could
add that of delivering Naples from the dominion of the Spa.
niards, he thought that nothing would be wanting to
complete his fame. His fertile genius soon suggested ta
him a proje& for that purpose; a difficult, indeed, and dar.
ing one, but for that very reason more agreeable to his bold
and enterprising temper.

Bourbon and Pescara were equally enraged at Lannoy's

carrying the French king into Spain without their know.
ledge. The former, being afraid that the two monarch&
might, in his absence, conclude tome treaty, in which his in.
terests would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid, in
order to guard again that danger. The latter, on whom
the command of the army now devolved,. was obliged to re
mainin Italy; but in every company, he gavevent to hisin.
dignation against the viceroy, in exprefions full of rancour
and contempt; he accued him, in a letter to the emperor,
of cowardice in the time of danger, and of insolence after
vi-tory, towards the obtaining of which he had contributed
nothing either by his valour or his condu&; nor did he ab.
stain from bitter complaints against the emperor himself,
who had not discovered, as he imagined, a sufficient sense of
his merit, nor bellowed any adequate reward on his services.
It was on this disgust of Pescara, that Morone founded his
whole system. He knew the boundless ambition of his na-
ture, the great extent of his abilities in peace as well as war,
and the intrepidity of his mind, capable alike of undertak-
ing and of executing the molt desperate designs. The can-
tonment of the Spanilti troops on the frontier of the Milan-

efe gave occasion to many interviews between him and Mo-
rone, in which the latter took care frequently to turn the
conversation to the tranfadions subsequent to the battle of
Pavia, a fubje& upon which the marquis always entered wil-
lingly and with pafion; and Morone observing his resent-
ment to be uniformly violent, artfully pointed out and ag-
gravated every circumstance that could increase its fury.
He painted, in the strongest colours, the emperor's want of
discernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring Lannoy to
him, and in allowing that presumptuous Fleming to dispose
of the captive king, without consulting the man to whose
bravery and wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory of
having a formidable rival in his power. Having warmed
him by such discourses, he then began to insinuate, that
now was the time to be avenged for these insults, and to ac-
quire immortal renown as the deliverer of his country from
the oppression of itrangers; that the states of Italy, weary
of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of barbarians,
were at last ready to combine in order to vindicate their own
independence; that their eyes were fixed on him as the only
leader whose genius and good fortune could ensure the hap-
py success of that noble enterprise; that the attempt was no
less pra&icable than glorious, it being in his power so to
disperse the Spanish infantry, the only body of the emperor's
troops that remained in Italy, through the villages of the
Milanese, that, in one night, they might be destroyed by the
people, who having suffered much by their exations and in-
folence, would gladly undertake this service; that he might
then, without opposition, take possession of the throne of
Naples, the station destined for him, and a reward not un-
worthy the restorer of liberty to Italy; that the pope, of
whom that kingdom held, and whose predecessors had dif-
posed of it on many former occasions, would willingly grant
him the right of inveRiture; that the Venetians, the Floren.
tines, the duke of Milan, to whom he had communicated
the scheme, together with the French, would be the gua.

rantees of his right; that the Neapolitans would naturall'
prefer the government of one of their countrymen, whom
they loved and admired, to that odious dominion of ftran
gers, to which they had been so long fubje&ed; and tha
the emperor, astonished at a blow so unexpec&ed, would fin
that he had neither troops nor money to resist such a powe
ful confederacyt.

Pescara, amazed at the boldness and extent of the scheme

liffened attentively to MoronS, but with the countenanc
of a man loft in profound and anxious thought. On the on
hand, the infamy of betraying his sovereign, under whoi
he bore such high command, deterred him from the at
tempt; on the other, the profpet of obtaining a crown a
lured him to venture upon it. After continuing a Ihor
space in suspense, the least commendable motives, as is ufut
after such deliberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphe
over honour. In order, however, to throw a colour of de
cency on his condut, he infifed that some learned casuist
fmould give their opinion, " Whether it was lawful for
fubje& to take arms against his immediate sovereign, in obe
dience to the lord paramount of whom the kingdom itsel
was held?" Such a resolution of the cafe- as he expeAe
was soon obtained from the divines and civilians both c
Rome and Milan; the negotiation went forward; and mea
fures seemed to be taking with great spirit for the speed
execution of the design.

During this interval, Pescara, either mhocked at th

treachery of the acion that he was going to commit, or de
fpairing of its fucoefs, began to entertain thoughts of abat
doning the engagements which he had come under. Th
indisposition of Sforza, who happened at that time to b
taken ill of a distemper which was thought mortal, confirm
ed his resolution, and determined him to make known th
whole conspiracy to the emperor, deemed it more prude,

t Guic. lib. xvi. 3g7. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.d

Brantome, iv. 171. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 9. Thuai
IIit. lib. i. c. ix. P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 207.

to expect the dutchy of Milan from him as the reward of
this discovery, than to aim at a kingdom to be purchased by
a series of crimes. This resolution, however, proved the
source of ations hardly less criminal and ignominious. The
emperor, who had already received full information concern-
ing the conspiracy from other hands, seemed to be highly
pleased with Pescara's fidelity, and commanded him to con-
tinue his intrigues for some time with the pope and Sforza,
both that he might discover their intentions more fully, and
that he might be able to convic them of the crime with
greater certainty. Pescara, conscious of guik, as well as
sensible how suspicious his long silence mnuf have appeared at
Madrid, durst net decline that dilhonourable office; and
was obliged to at the meanet and most disgraceful of all
parts, that of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confi.
dering the abilities of the persons with whom he had to deal,
the part was scarcely lefe difficult than base; but he ated
it with such address, as to deceive even the penetrating eye
of Morone, who relying with full confidence on his finceri-
ty, visited him at Novara, in order to put the Iaft hand to
their machinations. Pescara received him in an apartment
where Antonio de Lcyva was placed behind the tapestry,
that he might overhear and bear witness to their converfa-
tion; as Morone was about to take leave, that officer fud-
denly appeared, and to his'aRonilhment arreited him prison-
er in the emperor's name. He was conduced to the castle
of Pavia; and Pescara, who had so lately been his accom-
plice, had now the affirance to interrogate him as his judge.
At the fame time, the emperor declared Sforza to have for-
feited all right to the dutchy of Milan, by his engaging in
a conspiracy against the sovereign of whom he held; Pefca.
ra, by his command, seized on every place in the Milanese,
except the castles of Cremona and Milan, which the unfor-
tunate duke attempting to defend, were closely blockaded
by the Imperial troops *.
'Guic. li.xvi. 329. Jovii Hit. 319. Capella lib. v. p. aoo.
Vol. II. U

But though this unsuccessful conspiracy, iftead of strip.

ping the emperor of what he already pofefied in Italy, con.
tributed to extend his dominions in that country, it Lhewed
him the necessity of coming to some agreement with the
French king, unless he chose to draw on himself a confede.
racy of all Europe, which the progrefa of his arms and his
ambition, now as undisguised as it was boundleas, filled with
general alarm. He had not hitherto treated Francis with
the generosity which that monarch expected, and hardly
with the decency due to his station. Instead of displaying
the sentiments becoming a great prince, Charles, by his
mode of treating Francis, seems to have a&ed with the mer.
cenary art of a corsair, who, 'by the rigorous usage of his
prisoners, endeavours to draw from them an 'higher price for
their ransom. The captive king was confined in an old
castle, under a keeper whose formal austerity of manners rcn.
dered his vigilance ftif more disgusting. He was allowed
no exercie but that of riding on a mule, surrounded with
armed guards on horseback. Charles,-on pretence of its be.
ing necefiary to attend the Cortes afiembled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and suffered several weeks to e.
lapre without visiting Francis, though he solicited an inter.
.view with the most prefing'and submissive importunity. So
many indignities made a deep impression on an high-fpirited
prince; he began tt-lofe all rTlilh for hisufual amusements
his natural gaiety of temper forsook him; and after lan.
guihfing for some time, he was seized with a dangerous fe-
'ver, duringthe violence of which he complained constantly
of the unexpected and unprincely rigour with which he had
been treated, often exclaiming, that now the emperor would
have the fatisfaf&ion of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face. The phyfici-
ans, at lat, despaired of his life, and informed the empero
that they saw no hope of his recovery, unlefi he were grati.
fed with regard to that point on which he seemed to be so
flmngly bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a life with

which all his prospect of farther advantage from the vito-
ry of Pavia must have terminated, immediately consulted his
ministers concerning the course to be taken. In vain did
the chancellor Gattinara, the moti able among them, repre-
sent to him the indecency of his visiting Francis, if he did
not intend to set him at liberty immediately upon equal
terms; in vain did he point out the infamy to which he
would be exposed, if avarice or ambition ihould prevail on
him to give the captive monarch this mark of attention and
sympathy, for which humanity and generosity had pleaded
to long without effe&. The emperor, less delicate, or less soli-
citous about reputation than his minister, set out for Madrid
to visit his prisoner [Sept. 28]. The interview was hort;
Francis being too weak to bear a long conversation, Charles
accoited him in terms full of affeftion and refpe&, and gave
him such promises of speedy deliverance and princely treat-
ment, as would have refle&ed the greatest honour upon himn
if they had flowed from another source. Francis grasped
at them with the eagerness natural in his situation; and
cheered with this gleam of hope, began. to revive from that
moment, recovering rapidly his wonted health *.

He had soon the mortification to find, that his confi-
dence in the emperor was not better founded than formerly.
Charles returned instantly to Toledo; all negotiations were
carried on by his ministers; and Francis was kept in as ftrif
tuftody as ever. A new indignity, and that very galling,
was added to all those he had already suffered. Bourbon
irriving in Spain about this time, Charles, who had so long
refused to visit the king of France, received his rebellious
subjed with the most studied respect [Nov. 15]. He met
him without the gates of Toledo, embraced him with the
greatest affection, and placing him on his left hand, con-
du&ed him to his apartment. These marks of honour to
him, were so many insults to the unfortunate monarch;
which he felt in a very sensible manner. It afforded him

Guic. 1. xvi. 339. Sandov. Hilt. i 665.

U a

fame confblation, however, to observe, that the sentiments of
the Spaniards differed widely from those of their sovereig.n
That generous people detested Bourbon's crime. Notwith.
ftaoding his great talents and important services, they hfln-
ned all intercourse with him, to such a degree, that Charles
having desired the marquis de Villena to permit Bourbon to
reside in his palace while the court remained in Toledo, he
politely replied, " That he could not refuse gratifying his
sovereign in that request,' but added, with a Castilian dig.
nity of mind, that the emperor must not be surprised if, the
moment the constable departed, he lhould burn to the ground
a house which, having been polluted by the presence of a
traitor, became an unfit habitation for a man of honour-.

Charles himself, nevertheless, seemed to have it much at

heart to reward Bourbon's services in a signal manner. But
as he infiaed, in the rfrt place, on the accomplilhment of
the emperor's promise of giving him in marriage his filler
Eleanora, queen-dowager of Portugal, the honour of which
alliance had been one of his chief inducements to rebel a-
gainit his lawful sovereign; as Francis, in order to prevent
such a dangerous union, had offered, before he left Italy,
to marry that princess; and as Eleanora herself discovered
an inclination rather to match with a powerful monarch,
than with his exiled subjeA; all these interfering circum.
stances created great embarrassment to Charles, and left him
hardly any hope of extricating himself with decency. But
the death of Pescara, who, at the age of thirty-fix, left be-
lind him the reputation of being one of the greatest generals
and ablest politicians of that century, happened opportune-
ly at this juncure [December] for his relief. By that e-
vent, the command of the army in Italy became vacant, and
Charles, always fertile in resources, persuaded Bourbon, who
was in no condition to dispute his will, to accept the office
cf general in chief there, together with a grant of the dut.

Guic. 1. xyi. 335.

chy of Milan forfeited by Sforza; and in return for these to
relinquish all hopes of marrying the queen of Portugal*.

The chief obstacle that flood in the way of Francis's li-

berty was the emperor's continuing to insist so peremptori-
ly on the restitution of Burgundy, as a preliminary to that
event. Francis often declared, that he would never consent
to dismember his kingdom; and that, even if he should so
far forget the duties of a monarch, as to come to such a re-
solution, the fundamental laws of the nation would prevent
its taking effet. On his part he was willing to make an ab-
fulute ceflion to the emperor of all his pretensions in Italy
and the Low Countries; he promised to restore to Bourbon
all his lands which had been confiscated; he renewed his
proposal of marrying the emperor's sifter, the queen-dowa-
ger of Portugal; and engaged to pay a great fum by way of
ranfor for his own person. But all mutual esteem and con-
fidence between the two monarchs were now entirely loft;
there appeared, on the one hand, a rapacious ambition la-
bouring to avail itself of every favourable circumstance; on
the other, suspicion and resentment, standing perpetually on
their guard; so that the profpe&t of bringing their negoti-
ations to an issue seemed to be far distant. The dutchess of
Alengon, the French king's sifter, whom Charles permitted
to visit her brother in his confinement, employed all her ad-
dress, in order to procure his liberty on more reasonable
terms. Henry of England interposed his good offices to the
fame plrpofe; but both with so little success, that Francis
in despair took suddenly the resolution ofrefigning his crown,
with all its rights and prerogatives, to his son the dauphin,
determined rather to end his days in prison, than to purchase
his freedom by concessions unworthy of a king. The deed
for this purpose he signed with legal formality in Madrid,
empowering his sifter to carry it into France, that it might
be registered in all the parliaments of the kingdom; and at
the fame time intimating his intention to the emperor, he

Sandov. Hist. i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 249.

U3

dcired him to name the place of his confiement, and to as-
sign him a proper number of attendants during the remain,
der of his daysl. .

This resolution of the French king had greatefe&;

Charles began to be sensible, that by puflhingrigoiurto ex.
refs he might defeat his own measures; and infieadof. the
vast advantages which he hoped to draw from ranioming a
powerful monarch, he might at last find in his hands a prince
without dominions or revenues. About the iame time, one
of the king of Navarre's domeifics happened, by an extraor.
dinary exertion of fidelity, courage, and address, to procure
his master an opportunity of escaping from the prison in
which he had been confined ever since the battle of Pavia.
This convinced the emperor, that the molt vigilant atten.
tion of his officers might be eluded by the.ingenuity or boldW
ness of Francis or his attendants, and one unlucky hour
might deprive him of all the advantages which he had been
so solicitous to obtain. By these considerations, he was in.
duced to abate somewhat of his former demands. On the
other hand, Francis's impatience under confinement daily in-
creased; and having received certain intelligence of a power.
ful league forming againit his rival in Italy, he grew more
compliant with regard to conceifons, trusting that, if he
could once obtain his liberty, he would soon be in a condi-
tion to relume whatever hehad yielded.

1526.] Such being the views and sentiments of the two

monarchs the treaty which procured Francis his liberty was
signed at Madrid, on the fonrteepth of January one thouw
sand five hundred and twenty-fix. The article with regard to
Burgundy, which had hitherto ereated the greatest difficulty,
was compromised, Francis engaging to restore that dutchy
with all its dependencies in full- fgvreignty to the emperor;
and Charles consenting, that this reflitution should not be
made until the king was set at liberty; in order to secure

: This rper is publilhed in Mcmoires iifloriques, &c. par M.
l '.i;:I I .a., an;. ii. p. 15s .

the perforaneetlrf thiseas well Wsthe othier conditionis in
the treaty, Francis agreed that at the fame inifnt ilwhen he
himself should be released, he would deliver at hostages to
the emperor, his eldest on the dauphin, his second font the
duke of Orleans, or-in lieu of the latter, twelve of hisprin'
cipal, nobility, to be named by Charles. The other arti-
des fwelld to a great number, and, though not bs such im-
portance, were extremely rigorous. Among these the mob
remarkable were, that Francis hould renounce all his pre-
tensions in Italy; that he hould disclaim any title which he
had to the sovereignty of Slanders and Artois; that, within
fix weeks after his release, he mhould restore to Bourbon,
and his adherents, all their goods, moveable and immoveable,
and make them full reparation for the damages which they
had sustained by the confiscation of them; that he Ihould
use his interest with Henry d'Albret to relinquish his pre-
tensions to the crown of Navarre, and hould not for the fu-
ture assist him in any attempt to recover it; that there
should be established between the emperor and Francis a
league of perpetual friendlhip and confederacy, with a pro.
mise of mutual afiftance in every cafe of neceflity; that, in
corrobation of this union, Francis hould marry the empe.
ror's fiiter, the. queen;dowager of Portugal; that Francis
Ihould cause all the articles of this treaty to be ratified by
the states, and registered in the parliaments of his kingdom;
that, upon the emperor's receiving this ratification, the
hostages should be set at liberty; but in their place, the
duke of Angouleme, the king's third son, hould be deliver-
ta to Charles, that, in order to manifest, as well as to
strengthen the amity between the two monarchs, he might
be educated at the Imperial court; and that if Francis did
not, within the time limited, fulfil the fipulations in the
treaty, he hould promise, upon his honour and oath, to re-
turn into Spain, and to surrender himself again a prisoner
to the emperor*.

Recueil des Trait. tom. ii. xz. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p.
102, &e.

By this treaty, Charles flattered himself that he had not

only effetually humbled his rival, but that he had taken
such precautions as would for ever prevent his re-attaining
any formidable degree of power. The opinion, which the
wisest politicians formed concerning it, was very different;
they could not persuade themselves that Francis, after oh.
taining his liberty, would execute articles against which he
had flruggled so long, and to which, notwithstanding all
that he felt during a long and rigorous confinement, be
had consented with the utmost reluctance. Ambition and
resentment, they knew, would conspire in prompting him
to violate the hard conditions to which he had been con-
frained to submit; nor would arguments and casuistry be
wanting to represent that which was so manifestly advanta-
geous, to be necessary and just. If one part of Francis's
condu& had been known at that time, this opinion might
have been founded, not in conjeture, but in certainty. A
few homrs before he signed the treaty, he assembled such of
his counsellors as were then in Madrid, and having exacted
from them a solemn oath of secrecy, he made a long enume-
ration in their pretence of the dishonourable arts, as well as
unprincely rigour, which the emperor had employed in or-
der to ensnare or intimidate him. For that reason, he took
a formal protest in the hands of notaries, that his consent to
the treaty should be confidered as an involuntary deed, and
be deemed null and voidt. By this disingenuous aitifice
for which even the treatment that he had met with was no
apology, Francis endeavoured to satisfy his honour and
conscience in signing the treaty, and to provide at the tame
time a pretext on which to break it.

Great, meanwhile were the outward demonstrations oflove

and confidence between the two monarchs; they appeared
often together in public; they frequently had long confer.
ences in private; they travelled in the fame litter, and join-
ed in the fame amusements. But amidst thefefigns of peace

tRecueil des Trait. tom. ii. p. 107.

and friendship, the emperor fill harboured suspicion in his
mind. Though the ceremonies of the marriage between
Francis and the queen of Portugal were performed soon as-
ter the conclusion of the treaty, Charles would not permit
him to consummate it until the return of the ratification
from France. Even then Francis was not allowed to be at
full liberty; his guards were still continued; though caressed
as a brother in-law, he was fill watched like a prisoner and
it was obvious to attentive observers, that an union, in the
very beginning of which there might be discerned such fymp.
toms of jealousy and ditruft, could not be cordial, or of long
continuanceS.

About a month after the signing of the treaty, the re-

gent's ratification of it was brought from France; and that
wife princess, preferring, on this occasion, the public good
to domestic affetion, informed her son, that, instead of the
twelve noblemen named in the treaty, she had sent the duke
of Orleans along with his brother the dauphin to the fron-
tier, as the kingdom could susser nothing by the absence of
a child, but mutf be left almost incapable of defence, if de-
prived of its ablest ifatefnen and most experienced generals,
whom Charles had artfully included in his nomination. At
last Francis took leave of the emperor, whose suspicion of
the king's sincerity increasing, as the time of putting it to
the proof approached, he endeavoured to bind him still faster
by exating new promises, which, after those he had already
made, the French monarch was not flow to grant. He cet
out from Madrid, a place which the remembrance of many
afflicting circumstances rendered peculiarly odious to him,
with the joy natural on such an occasion, and began the long-
wifhed-for journey towards his own dominions. He was e-
fcorted by a body of horse under the command of Alargon,
who, as the king drew near the frontiers of France, guarded
him with more Scrupulous exaAnefs than ever. When he
arrived at the river Andaye, which separates the two king-

J Guic. 1. xvi. 353.

doms, Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank with a guard
of horse equal in number to Alaron's. An empty bark was
mooted in the middle of the stream; the attendants drew
up in order on the opposite banks; at the fame initant,
Lannoy with eight gentlemen put off from the Spanish, and
Lautrec with the fame number from the French fide of the
river; the former had the king in his boat; the latter, the
dauphin and duke of Orleans; they met in the empty veifdel
the exchange was made in a moment: Francis, after a Ihort
embrace of his children, leaped into Lautrec's boat, and
reached the French flore. He mounted at that instant t
Turkish horse, waved his hand over his head, and with a
joyful voice crying aloud several times, " I am yet a king,"
galloped full speed to St. John de Luz, and from thence to
Bayonne. This event, no less impatiently desired by the
French nation than by their monarch, happened on the
eighteenth of March, a year and twenty-two days after the
fatal battle of Pavia*.

Soon after the emperor had taken leave of Francis, and

permitted him to begin his journey towards his own domini.
ons, he set out for Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage
with Iabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late king of Por-
tugal, and the fifler of John II. who had succeeded him in
the throne of that kingdom. Isabella was a princess of on.
common beauty and accomplishments; and as the Cortes,
both in Castile and Aragon, had warmly solicited their so.
vereign to marry, the choice of a wife, so nearly allied to the
royal blood of both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable to
his subje&s. The Portuguese, fond of this new connefiod
with the first monarch in Christendom, granted him an exa
traordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting to nine hundred
thouland crowns, a fum which, from the situation of his as-
fairs at this juncture, was of no small consequence to the em.
peror. The marriage was celebrated [March iz] with
that splendour and gaiety which became a great and youth.

Sandov. WiLL 735. Guic. Lxvi. 355

fll prince. Charles lived with Isabella in perfet harmony,
and treated her on all occasions with much diftin&ion and
regard *.

During these tranfa&ioas, Charles could hardly give any

attention to the affairs of Germany, though it was torn in
pieces by commotions, which threatened the most danger-
ous consequences. By the feudal'inftitutions, which still
fubifted almost unimpaired in the empire, the property of
lands was vested in the princes and free barons. Their vas.
fals held of them by the ftriaeft and most limited tenures;
while the great body of the people was kept in a slate but
little removed from absolute servitude. In forne places of
Germany, people of the lowest class were so entirely in the
power of their masters, as to be subjet to personal and do.
meltic slavery, the most rigorous form of that wretched fate.
In other provinces, particularly in Bohemia and Lusatia, the
peasants were bound to remain on the lands to which they
belonged, and making part of the efate, were transferred
like any other property from one hand to another. Even
in Suabia, and the countries on the banks of the Rhine,
where their condition was most tolerable, the peasants not
only paid the full rent of their farms to the landlord, but if
they chafe either to change the place of their abode, or to
follow a new profieon, before they could accomplish what
they desired, they were obliged to purchase this privilege at
a certain price. Besides this, all grants of lands to peasants
expired at their death, without descending to their poffterity.
Upon that event, the landlord had a right to the bet of
their cattle, as wel as of their furniture; and their heirs, in
order to obtain a renewal of the grant, were obliged to pay
large fums by way of fine. These exaaions, though griev-
ous, were born with patience, because they were customary
and ancient: but when the progress of elegance and luxury,
as well as the changes introduced into the art of war, came

* Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. xo6. Belarius Cor. Rer. Gallic.
P. 565. Spalainus ap. Struv. Corp. Hit. Germ. ii. 1081.

to increase the expence of government, and made it neceffar
for princes to levy occasional or flated taxes on their fubjeas
such impositions being new, appeared intolerable; and i
Germany, these duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine
and other necefaries of life, afeted the common peopie
in the most sensible manner. The addition of such a load
to their former burdens, drove them to despair. It was t(
the valour inspired by resentment againt impositions of thi
kind that the Swiss owed the acquisition of their libty ii
the fourtenth century. The fame cause had excited the
pafants in several other proinces of Germany to rebel a
gaint their superiors towards the end of-the fifteenth and
beginning of the fitteenth centuries: and though these infur.
reion s were not attended with like success, they could not
however, be quelled without much difficulty and blood
hed t.

By these checks, the spirit of the pealants was overawed

rather than subdued; and their grievances multiplying con
tinuady, they ran to arms, in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty fix, with the most frantic rage. Thci
firt appearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The peasants i
the adjacent country locked to their flandard with the ar.
dour and impatience natural to men, who having groaned
long under opprffon beheld at last some profpet of dcil
erance; and the contagion spreading from province to pro
vince, reached almost every part of Germany. Wherevc
they came, they plundered the monaftries; wafted thelandt
of their fuperors; razed theircaftles, and mafficred withou
mercy al persons of noble birth, who were so unhappy as to
fall into their hands*. Having intimidated their opprefors
as they imagined, by the violence of these proceedings, the
began to confider what would be the most proper and effec
tual method of ecuring themnelves for the future from thoe

tSeckend. lib. i p. , 6.
* Petr. Crinits de .belo Ruficano, ap. Freer. Script. Rer
Germ. Argent. 7177 vToLiii p. 243.

tyrannical exa&ions. With this view, they_ drew up and
publilhed a memorial, containing all their demands, and de.
clared, that while arms were in their hands, they would ei-
ther persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full fatisfac-
tion with regard to there. The chief articles were, that
they might have liberty to chooft their own pallors; that
they might be freed from the payment of all tithes exccpt
those of corn; that they might no longer be confidered as
the flavesor bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty of
hunting and firhing might be common; that the great so-
relts might not be regarded as private property, but be open
for the use of all; that they might be delivered from the
unusual burden of taxes under which they laboured; that
the administration of justice might be rendered less rigo-
rous and more impartial; that the encroachments of the
nobles upon meadows and commons might be reflrained*.

Many of these demands were extremely reasonable; and

being urged by such formidable numbers, should have met
with some redress. But those unwieldy bodies, assembled in
different places, had neither union, nor conduc, nor vigour.
Being led by perfoRs ofthe lowest rank, without skill in
war, or knowledge of what was necessary for .accomplishing
their designs; all their exploits were distinguished only by a
brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose this, the princes
and nobles of Suabia, and the Lower Rhine raised such of
their vassals as till continued faithful, and attacking some of
the mutineers with open force, and others by surprise, cut
to pieces or dispersed all who infested those provinces; so
that the peasants after ruining the open country, and losing
upwards of twenty thousand of their associates in the field,
were obliged to return to their habitations with less hope
than ever of relief from their grievancest.

These commotions happened at firt in provinces of Ger.

Sleid. Hilt. p. 90.

t Seckend. lib. ii. p. 10. Petr. Gnodalius de Rufticanorum
Tumultu in Germania, Scard. ap. Script. vol. ii p. 3 i, &c.

Vol II. X

many where Lather's opinions had made litte progress; and,
being excited wholly by political causes, had no connection
with the disputed points in religio. But the frenzy reach.
ing at last those countries in which the reformation was e;
stablished, derived new frength from circumtances peculiar
to them, and roee to a till greater pitch of extravagance
The reformation wherever it was received, increased that
bold and innovating spirit to which it owed its birth, Men
who had the courage to overturn a system supported by e-
very thing which can command refpea or reverence, were
not to be overawed by any authority, how great or vene-
rable soever. After having been accustomed to confider
themselves as judges of the most important docrines in reli.
gion, to examine hefe freely, and to rejet, without scruple,
what appeared to them erroneous, it was natural for them
to turn the fame daring and inquisitive eye towards govern.
ment, and to think of retifying whatever disorders or im.
perfecions were discovered there. As religious abuses had
been reformed in several places without the permission of the
magifrate, it was an -easy transition to attempt the redreft of
political grievances in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of re olt break out in Thu.

ringia, a province fubjeot to the dektor of Saxony, the in-
habitants of which were mostly converts to Lutheranifn,
than it afiumed a new and more dangerous form. Thomas
Muncer, oae of Luther's disciples, having established himself
in that country, had acquired a wonderful ascendant over
the minds of the people. He propagated among them the

-ildeft and moftenthufraftic notionsbut such as tended ma-
snifefly to inspire them with boldnels, and lead them to fe.
dition. "' Luther, he told them, had done more hurt than
service to religion. He had, indeed, rescued the church
from the yoke of pope, but his doErines encouraged, and
his life set an example of, the utmot licentiousness of man-

an. In oide- toavoidvic, (fays he,) men muf pratife
perpetnal mofication. q-cy muds put on a grave coua-

tenance, speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious in
their whole deportment. Such as prepare their hearts in
this manner, may expe& that the Supreme Being will direa
all their Reps, and by some visible sign discover his will to
them; if that illumination be at any time withheld, we may
expoRulate with the Almighty, who deals with us so harih-
ly, and remind him of his promises. This expofulation and
anger will be highly acceptable to God, and will at last pre-
vail on him to guide us with the fame unerring hand which
condu&ed the patriarchs of old. Iet us beware, however,
of offending him by our arrogance; but as all men are equal
in his eye, let them return to that condition of equality in
which he formed them, and having all things in common,
let them live together like brethren, without any marks of
subordination or pre-eminencet."

Extravagant as these tenets were, they flattered so many

passions in the human heart, as to make a deep impression.
To aim at nothing more than abridging the power of-the
nobility, was now confidered as a trifling and partial reforma-
tion, not worth the contending for; it was proposed to le-
vel every diftin&ion among mankind, and by abolishing pro-
perty, to reduce them to their natural state of equality, in
which all Ihould receive their subsistence from one common
flock. Muncer assured them, that the design was approved
of by Heaven, and that the Almighty had in a dream afcer-
tained him of its success. The peasants set about the exe-
cution of it, not only with the rage which animated those of
their order in other parts of Germany, but with the ardour
which enthusiasm inspires. They deposed the magifirates
in all the cities of which they were maiters, seized the lands
of the nobles, and obliged such of them as they got into their
hands to put on the dress commonly worn by peasants, and
instead of their former titles, to be satisfied with the appel-
lation given to people in the lowest class of life. Great
numbers engaged in this wild undertaking; but Muncer,

t Seckend. lib. ii. p. 13. Sleid. Hist. . 83.

X 2

their leader and their prophet, was destitute of the abili.
ties necefrary for conducing it. He had all the extrava.
gance, but not the courage, which enthusiasts usually pof.
fess. It was with difficulty he could be persuaded to take
the field; and though he fooa drew together eight thou.
land men, he suffered himself to be surrounded by a bo-
dy of cavalry, under the command of the ete~or of Sax.
ony, the landgrave of Hesse, and duke of Brunswick.
These princes, unwilling to sIed the blood of their delud.
ed fubjeas, feot a young nobleman to their camp, with the
offer of a general pardon, if they would immediately lay
down their arms, and deliver up the authors of the fedi.
tion. Muncer, alarmed at this, began to harangue his fol
lowers with his usual vehemence, exhorting them not to trult
these deceitful promises of their oppressors, nor to desert the
cause of God, and of Christian liberty.

But the sense of present danger making a deeper imprel.
ion on the peasants than his eloquence, confnfion and terror
were visible in every face, when a rainbow, which was the
emblem that the mutineers had painted on their colour,
happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with admirable
pretence of mind, laid held of that incident, and suddenly
railing his eyes and hands towards heaven, "' Behold,"
cries he, with an elevated voice, " the sign which God has
given. There is the pledge of your safety, and a token that
the wicked hall be destroyed." The fanatical multitude set
up infIantly a great shout, as if vitory had been certain; and
passing in a moment from one extreme to another, massacred
the unfortunate nobleman who had come with the offer of
pardon, and demanded to be led towards the enemy. The
princes, enraged at this shocking violation of the laws of
war, advanced with no less impetuosity, and began the attack
[May 5 i1; but the behaviour of the peasants in the com-
bat was not such as might have been expested either from
their ferocity or confidence of success; an undisciplined irab
ble was no equal match for well-trained troops;, above five
thoufaid were flaiu in the field, almost without making re-

fiftance; the reft fled, and among the foremost Muncer their
general He was taken next day, and being condemned to
such punishments as his crimes had deferred, he suffered them
with a poor and dastardly spirit. His death put an end to
the infurreEions of the peasants, which had filled Germany
with such terror*; but the enthufiafic notions which he had
scattered were not extirpated, and produced, not long after,
effe&s more memorable, as well as more extravagant.

During tiefe commotions, Luther a&ed with exemplary

prudence and moderation; like a common parent, solicitous
about the welfare of both parties, without sparing the aults
or errors of either. On the one hand, he addressed a moni-
tory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to treat their
dependents with greater humanity and indulgence. On the
other, he severely censured the seditious spirit of the peasants,
advising them not to murmur at hardships inseparable from
their condition, nor to seek for redress by any but legal
means t.

Luther'a famous marriage with Catharine a Boria, a nun

of a noble family, who, having thrown off the veil, had fled
from the cloister, happened this year, and was far from meet.
ing with the fame approbation. Even his most devoted fol-
lowers thought this ftep indecent, at a time when his coun-
try was involved in so many calamities; while his enemies ne-
ver mentioned it with any softer appellation than that of in.
ceftuous or profane. Luther himself was sensible of the im-
pression which it had made to his disadvantage; but being
satisfied with his own condu&, he bore the censure of his
friends, and the reproaches of his adversaries, with his usual
fortitude§.

This year the reformation loft its first protecor, Frede-

ric, eleftor of Saxony; but the blow was the less sensibly felt,
as he was succeeded by his brother John [May 5 ], a more

Sleid. Hilt. p. 84. Scckend. lib. ii. p. z1. Gnodalius Tumult.

Ruftican. 15.
t Sklid. lift. p. 87. § Seckend lib. ii, p. Is.

X3

avowed and zealous, though less able patron of Luther and
his do&inns.

Another event happened about the fame time, which, as

it occasioned a considerable change in the fate of Germany,
muf be traced back to its source. While the frenzy of tht
Crusades pofffed all Europe during the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, several orders of religious knighthood were
founded in defence of the Christian faith againRf heathens
and infidels. Among these the Teutonic order in Germa-
ny was one of the most illutrious, the knights of which di.
ftinguifled themselves greatly in all the enterprises carried
on in the Holy Land. Being driven at las from their set.
tdenents in the eaf, they were obliged to return to their na.
tive country. Their zeal and valour were too impetuous to
remain long inative. They invaded, on very flight preten-
ces, the province of Pruffa, the inhabitants of which were
till idolaters; and having completed the conqueR of it about
the middle of the thirteenth century, held it many years as
a fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce contests
arose during this period, between the grand mastes of the
order and the kings of Poland; the former firuggling for in.
dependence, while the latter asserted their right of sovereign-
ty with great firmness Albert, a prince of the house of
Brandenburgh, who was eleed grand malfer in the year
one thousand five hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in
this quarrel, maintained a long war with Sigismund king of
Poland; but having become an early convert to Luther's
doctrines, this gradually lessened his zeal for the interests of
his fraternity, so that he took the opportunity of the coo-
fuwions in the empire, and the absence of the emperor, to
conclude a treaty with Sigismund, greatly to his own pri-
vate emolument. By it, that part of Prufia which belong-
ed to the Teutonic order, was ereded into a secular and he-
reditary dutchy, and the investiture of it granted to Albert,
who, in return, bound himself to do homage for it to the
kings of P.hand as their vasfd. Immediately after this he

made public profession of the reformed religion, and married
a princess of Denmark. The Teutonic knights exclaimed
so loudly againit the treachery of their grand mailer, that he
was put under the ban of the empire; but he still kept pot.
fefllion of the province which he had usurped, and transmit.
ted it to his posterity. In process of time, this rich inheri-
tance fell to the ele&oral branch of the family, all depend.
ence on the crown of Poland was lhaken off, and the mar-
graves of Brandenburgh, having assumed the title of kings
of Pruflia, have not only risen to an equality with the firfi
princes in Germany, but take their rank among the great
monarchs of Europe*.

Upon the return of the French king to his dominions, the

eyes of all the powers in Europe were fixed upon him, that,
by observing his first motions, they might form a judgment
concerning his subsequent conduc. They were not held
long in fufpence. Francis, as soon as he arrived at Bayonne,
wrote to the king of England, thanking him for the zeal
and affection wherewith he had interposed in his favour, to
which he acknowledged that he owed the recovery of his li-
berty. Next day the emperor's ambafiadora demanded au-
dience, and, in their maRier's name, required him to issue
such orders as were necefiary for carrying the treaty of Ma-
drid into immediate and full execution; he coldly answered,
that though, for his own part, he determined religiously to
perform all that he had promised, the treaty contained so
many articles relative not to himself alone, but affecing the
interests of the French monarchy, that he could not take any
farther ftep without consulting the flates of his kingdom,
and that some time would be neceflary, in order to reconcile
their minds to the hard conditions which he had consented
to ratifyt. This reply was confidered as no obscure disco-
very of his being resolved to elude the treaty; and the corn

* Sleid. Hist. p. 98. Pfeffel Abrege de l'Hi. de Droit Publ. p.
605, &c.
t Mtm. de Bellay, p. 97.

pliment paid to Henry appeared a vry proper fep towards
securing the afliftance of that monarch in the war with the
emperor, to which fach a rfolution would certainly give
rife. Thef circumstances added to the explicit declarations
which Francis made in secret to the ambassadors from feve.
ral of the Italian powers, fully satisfied them that their con.
je&ues with regard to his condut bad been just, and that,
inRfead of intending to execute an unreasonable treaty, he
was eager to seize the first opportunity of revenging those
injuries which had compelled him to feign an approbation of
it. Even the doubts, and fears, and scruples, which used,
on other occasions, to hold Clement in a tate of uncertain.
ty, were dissipated by Francis's seeming impatience to break
through all his engagements with the emperor. The situ.
aton, indeed, of affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow
the pope to hesitate long. Sforza was till besieged by the
Imperialists in the cafle of Milan. That feeble prince, de-
prived now of Morone's advice, and unprovided with every
thing necefary for defence, found means to inform Clement
and the Ventians, that he must soon surrender if they did
not come to his relief. The Imperial troops, as they had
received no pay since the battle of Pavia, lived at difcretioa
in the Milanele, levying such exorbitant contributions in that
dutchy, as amounted, if we may rely on Guicciardini's cal-
culation, to no les a fum than five thousand ducats a-day*;
nor was it to be doubted but that the foldiets, as soon as the
cafle Ihould submit, would choose to leave a ruined coun-
try which hardly afforded them subsistence, that they might
take possession of more comfortable quarters in the fertile and
untouched territories of the pope and Venetians. The as-
fiftance of the French king was the only thing which could
either save Sforza, or enable them to protec their own do.
minions from the insults of the Imperial troops.

For these reasons, the pope, the Venetians, and duke of
Milan, were equally impatient to come to an agreement with

Guic. 1. xvii 360.

Francis, who, on his part, was no less desirous of acquiring
fich a considerable acceflion both of strength and reputation
as fiuch a confederacy would bring along with it. The chief
obiects of this alliance, which was concluded at Cognac on
the twenty-fecond of May, though kept secret for some time,
were to oblige the emperor to set at liberty the French
king's sons, upon payment of a reasonable ransom; and to
re-eftablilh Sforza in the quiet poffeflion of the Milanese.
If Charles should refuse either of these, the contraaing par.
ties bound themselves to bring into the field an army of thir-
ty-five thousand men, with which, after driving the Span-
iards out of the Milanese, they would attack the kingdom
of Naples. The king of England was declared protecor
of this league, which they dignified with the name of Hol,
because the pope was at the head of it, and in order to al-
lure Henry more effeually, a principality in the kingdom
of Naples, of thirty thousand ducats yearly revenue, was to
be fettled on him; and lands to the value of ten thousand
ducats on Wolfey his favourite*.

No sooner was this league concluded, than Clement, by

the plenitude of his papal power, absolved Francis from the
oath which he had taken to observe the treaty of Madridt.
This right, how pernicious soever in its effets, and deftruc-
tive of that integrity which is the bails of all tranfaaions a.
mong men, was the natural confequencesof the powers which
the popes arrogated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ
upon earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended preroga.
tive, they had often dispensed with obligations which were
held sacred, the interest of rome men, and the credulity of
others, led them to imagine, that the decisions of a fove-
reign pontiff authorised or justified actions. which would, o-
therwife, have been criminal and impious.

The discovery of Francis's intention to elude the treaty

*P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. 17. Recuel des Trait.

il. 124.
t Coldaft. Polit. Imperial. p. 1oo0. Pallav. Hifl. p. 70.

of Madrid, filled the emperor with a variety of disquieting
thoughts. He had treated an unfortunate prince in the
most ungenerous manner; he had displayed an insatiable am.
bition in all his negotiations with his prisoner; he knew
what censures the former had drawn upon him, and what
apprehensions the latter had excited in every court of Eu.
rope; nor had he reaped from the measures which he purfu.
ed any of those advantages which politicians are apt to cenfi.
der as an excuse for the most criminal condut, and a com.
peafatioa for the feveref reproaches. Francis was now out
of his hands, and not one of all the mighty consequences,
which he had expeed from the treaty that set him at liber.
ty was likely to take place. His raBhefs in relying so far
on his own judgment as to trust to the sincerity of the
French king, in opposition to the sentiments of his wiset
minite, was now apparent; and he easily conje&ured, that
the fame confederacy, the dread of which had induced him
to set Francis at liberty, would now he formed against him
with that gallant and incensed monarch at its head. Self.
condenmation and ihame, on account of what was padi, with
axioas apprehensions concerning wha might happen, wee
the eceflary result of these refletios on his own condut
and situation. Charles, however, was naturally firm and
inflexible in all his measures. To have receded suddenly
from any article in the treaty of Madrid, would have been a
plain conffion of imprudence, and a palpable symptom of
fear; he determined, therefore, that it was most suitable to
his dgnity, to mlift, whatever might be the consequences, on
the ftrit execution of the treaty, and particularly not to ac-
cept of any thing which might be offered as an equivalent
for the restitution of Burgundy*.

In consequence of this resolution, he appointed Lannoy

and Alarcon to repair, as his ambassadors, to the court of
France, and formally to summon the king, either to execute
the treaty with the sincerity that became him, or to return

Guic. I. xvii. 366.

according to his oath, a prisoner to Madrid. Initead of
giving them an immediate answer, Francis admitted the de-
puties of the ifates of Burgundy to an audience in their
presence. They humbly represented to him, that he had
exceeded the powers vfted in a king of France, when be
consented to alienate.their country from the crown, the do-
mains-of which he was bound .by his coronation oath to pre-
serve entire .and unimpaired. Francis, in return thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and intreated them,
though very faintly, to remember the obligations which he
lay under to fulfil his engagements with the emperor. The
deputies, assuming an highertone, declared, that they would
notobey commands which they confidered as illegal; and,
if he mhould abandon them to the enemies of France, they
had refoived.to defend themselves to the bes of their power,
with a firm purpose rather to perifhthan submit to a foreign
dominion. Upon which Francis, turning towards the Im-
perial amba~dors, represented to them the impossibility of
performing what he had undertaken, and offered, in lieu of
Burgundy, to pay the emperor two millions of crowns.
The viceroy and Alarcon, who easily perceived, that the
icene to which they had been witnesses, was concerted be-
tween the king and his fabje&s ,in order to impdfe upon
them, signified to him their master's fixed resolution not to
depart in the iialleft point from the terms of the treaty,
and withdrew -. Before they left the kingdom, they had
the mortification to hear the holy league against the empe-
ror publifhd with great solemnity [June I 3.

Charles no sooner received an account of this confederacy

than he exclaimed, in the most public manner, and in the
harshest terms, against Francis, as a prince void of faith and
of honour. He complained no less of Clement, whom he
solicited in vain to abandon his new allies; he accused him of
Ingratitude; he taxed him with as ambition unbecoming his
claraaer; he threatened him not only with all the ven-
t Belar. Comment. de Reb. Gal. $73. Mem. de Bellay, 97.

J

geance which the power of an emperor can inflit, but, by
appealing to a general council, called up before his eyes all
the terrors ariling from the authority of those assemblies so
formidable to the papal fee. It was necessary, however, to
oppose something else than reproaches and threats to the
powerful combination formed against him; and the emperor,
prompted by so many pafione, did not fail to exert himself
with unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies, not only of
men, but of money, which were fill more needed, into
Italy.

On the other hand, the efforts of the confederates bore

no proportion to that animosity against the emperor, with
which they seemed to enter into the holy league. Francis,
it was thought, would have infused spirit and vigour into
the whole body. He had his loft honour to repair, many
injuries to -revenge, and the station among the princes of
Europe, from which he had fallen, to recover. From all
these powerful incitements, added to the natural impetuosity
of his temper, a war more fierce and bloody than any that
he had hitherto made upon his rival, was expe&ed. But
Francis had gone through such a scene of distress, and the
imprefion it had made was till so freh is his memory, that
he was become diffident of himself, distrustful of fortune,
and desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release of his
sons, and to avoid the restitution of Burgundy by paying
some reasonable equivalent, were his chiefs obje&s; and for
the fake ofthefe, he would willingly have sacrificed Sforza,
and the liberties of Italy, to the emperotn He flattered
himself, that the dread of the confederacy which he had form-
ed would of itself induce Charles to liken to what was
equitable; and was afraid of employing any considerable
force for the relief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their own interest
than pun&ual in fulfiling their engagements, Chould aban-
don him as soon as the Imperialists, were driven out of that
country, and deprive his negotiations with the emperor of that

weight, which they derived from his being at the head of a
powerfullagigue. In the mean time the castle of Milan was
preffed'moreclofely than ever, and Sforza was now reduced
to the lat extremity. The pope and Venetians, trusting to
Francis's concurrence, commanded their troops to take the
field, in order to relieve him; and an army more than fuffi-
cient for that service was soon formed. The Milanese,
passionately attached to their unfortunate duke, aid no less
eiafperated against the Imperialists, who had uppreffed them
so cruelly, were ready to aid the confederates in all their en-
terprifes. But the xduke d'Urbino, their general, naturally
flow and indecisive, and restrained, besides, by his ancient
enmity to the family of Medici, from taking any flep that
might aggrandize or add reputation to the pope*, los frome
opportunities of attacking the Imperialists and raising the
'siege, and refused to improve others. These delays gave
Bourbon time to bring up a reinforcement of frelh troops
and a flpply of money. He immediately took the com-
mand of the army [July 24], and pushed on the siege with
such vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to surrender, who re-
tiring to Lodi, which the confederates had surprised, left
Bourbon in full pofflion of the reft of the dutchy, the in-
veftiture of which the emperor had promised to grant
himt.

The Italians began now to perceive the game which

Francis had played, and to be sensible that, notwithitanding
all their address, and refinements in negotiation, which they
boasted of as talents peculiarly theirown, they had for once
been over-reached in those very arts by a tranontane prince.
He had hitherto thrown almool the whole burden of the
war upon them, taking advantage of their efforts, in order
to enforce the proposals which he often renewed at the
court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty of his sons.- The
pope and Venetians expoftulated and complainedl; but as

* Guic. lib. xvii. 382. t Ibid. 376, &c.

$ Rufcelli Lcttere de Priacipi , ii . s

7, &C. 19, z60-o-66.
Vol. II. Y

they were not able to rouse Francis from his ina&ivity,
their own zeal and vigour gradually abated, and Clement,
having already gone farther than his timidity usually permit.
ed him, began to accuse himself of rahnefs, and to relapse
into his natural slate of doubt and uncertainty.

All the emperor's motions depending on himself alone,

were more britk and better concerted. The narrowners of
his revenues, indeed, did not allow him to make any sudden
or great effort in the field, but he abundantly supplied that
defect by his intrigues and negotiations. The family of
Colonna, the most powerful of all the Roman barons, had
adhered uniformly to the Ghibeline or Imperial faction, dur-
ing those fierce contentions between the popes and empe-
rors, which, for several ages, filled Italy and Germany with
discord and bloodshed. Though the causes which at firt
gave birth to these deftrutive faftions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated was in a great
measure spent, the Colonnas fRil retained their attachment
to the Imperial interest, and by placing themdelves under the
prote&tion of the emperors, secured the quiet possession of
their own territories and privileges. The cardinal Pompeo
Colonna, a man of a turbulent and ambitious temper, at that
time the head of the family, had long been Clement's rival,
to whose influence in the las conclave he imputed the dif-
appointment of all his schemes for attaining the papal digni-
ty, of which, from his known connection with the emperor,
be thought hinffelf secure. To an aspiring mind, this was
an injury too great to be forgiven; and though he had dif-
fembled his resentment so far as to vote for Clement at his
delcion, and to accept of great offices in his court, he wait-
ed with the utmost impatience for an opportunity of being
revenged. Don Hugo de Moncada, the Imperial ambaffa-
dor at Rome, who was no firanger to these sentiments, easily
persuaded him, that now was the time, while all the papal
troops were employed in Lombardy, to attempt something,
which would at once revenge his own wrongs, and be of

essential service to the emperor his patron. The pope, how-
ever, whose timidity.rendered him quick.fighted, was so at.
tentive to the operations, and. began to be alarmed so early,
that he might have drawn together troops sufficient to have
disconcerted all Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused
him so artfully with negotiations, promises, and false intelli-
gence, that he lulled asleep all his suspicions, and prevented
his taking any of the precautions necessary for his safety;
and to the disgrace of a prince possessed of great power, as
well as renowned for political wisdom, Colonna at the head
of three thousand men, seized one of the gates of his capi-
tal, while he, imagining himself to be in perfect security,
was altogether unprepared for refifing such a feeble enemy.
The inhabitants of Rome permitted Colonnaes troops, from
whom they apprehended no injury, to advance without op-
position [Sept. 29]; the pope's guards were dispersed in a
moment; and Clement himself, terrified at the danger, a-
shamed of his own credulity, and deserted by almnot every
person, fled with precipitation into the castle of St. Angelo '
which was immediately invested. The palace of the Vati-
can, the church of St. Peter, and the houses of the pope's
ministers and servants, were plundered in the most licena
tious manner; the reft of the city was left anmolefted.
Clement, destitute of every thing necessary either for fubfiit-
ence or defence, was soon obliged to demand a capitulation '
and Moncada, being admitted into the castle, prescribed to
him, with all the haughtiness of a conqueror, conditions
which it was not in his power to reje&. The chief of these-
was, That Clement (hould not- only grant a full pardon to
the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and immediate-
ly withdraw all the troops in his pay from the army of the
confederates in Lombardy t.

The Colonnas, who talked of nothing less than of depof-

ing Clement, and of placing Pompeo, their kinsman, in the

t Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xvii. 407. Rufcelli Let-
tere de Principi, i. p. Io4.

Y a

racant chair of St. Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty
which left them at the mercy of a pontiff jully incensed a-
gainfR them. But Moncada, attentive only to his mater's
interest, paid little regard to their complaints, and, by this
fortunate measure, broke entirely the power of the confede-
rates.

While the army of the confederates suffered such a con-

fiderable diminution, the Imperialifs received two great re-
inforcements; one from Spain, under the command of Lan-
noy and Alarcon, which amounted to fix thousand men; the
other was raised in the empire by George Fronfperg, a
German nobleman, who having served in Italy with great re-
putation, had acquired such influence and popularity, that
multitudes of his countrymen, fond on every occasion of en-
gaging in military enterprises, and impatient at that june-
ture to escape from the oppression which they felt in religi.
ous as well as civil matters, crowded to.his ifandard p so that,.
without any other gratuity than the payment of a crown to
each man, fourteen thousand enlisted in his service. To
these the archduke Ferdinand added two thousand horse,
levied in the Austrian dominions. But although. the em-
peror had raised troops, he could not remit the fums necef-
fry for their support. His ordinary revenues were exhaust-
cd, the credit of princes, during the infancy of commerce,
was not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though every
art had been tried to gain them, and some innovations had
been made in the constitution, in order to secure their con-
currence, peremptorily refused to grant Charles any extraor-
dinary supply *; so that the more his army increased in num-
ber, the more were his generals embarrassed and diRreffed.
Bourbon, in particular, was involved in such difficulties, that
he Rood in need of all his address and courage in order to
extricate himself. Large fums were due to the Spani/h
troops already in the Milanese, when Fronfperg arrived with
sixteen thousand hungry Germans, dcftitute of every thing.

$ Sando. i. 814.

Both made their demands with equal fierceness; the form.
er claiming their arrears, and the latter, the pay which had
been promised them on their entering Lombardy. Bour.
bon was altogether incapable of giving fatisfadion to either.
In this situation, he was constrained to commit ass of vio-
lence extremely mhocking to his own nature, which was ge-
nerous and humane. He seized the principal citizens of
Milan, and by threats, and even by torture, forced from
them a considerable fum; he rifled the churches of all their
plate and ornaments; the inadequate fiipply, which these as.
forded, he diftn'buted. among.. the foldiert,. with so many
soothing expressions of his sympathy and affetion, that,
though it fell far. short of the funs due to them, it appeaf-
ed their present murmurs -t;

Among. other expedients for raising money, Bourbon

granted' his life- and liberty to Morone, who having been
kept in- prison since his intrigue with Pescara, had been
condemned to die by the Spanibh judges empowered to try
him. For this remission he paid twenty thousand ducats;
and such were his singular talents, andithe wonderful ascend-
ant which he always acquired over the minds of those to
whom he had access, that, in a few days, from being Bour-
bon's prisoner, he became his prime confident, with whom
he consulted in all affairs of importance. To his infinu-
ations must be imputed the suspicions which Bourbon be-
gan to entertain, that the emperor had never intended to
grant him the investiture of Milan, but had appointed Ley-
va, and the other Spanish generals, rather to'be spies on his
condu&, than to co-operate heartily towards the execution
of his schemes. To him likewise, as he fill retained, at the
age of fourscore, all the enterprising spirit of youth, may be
attributed the bold and unexpe&ed measure on which Bour.
bon soon after ventured $.

Such, indeed, were the exigencies of the Imperial troops

tRipanond. Hist. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.

O Guic.l. xvii. 419.

Y 3

in the Milancfe, that it became indispensably necessary to
take some immediate ftep for their relief. The arrears of
the soldiers increased daily; the emperor made no remittan-
ces to his generals; and the utmost rigour of military extor-
tion could draw nothing more from a country entirely drain.
ed and ruined. In this situation there was no choice left,
but either to diiband the army, or to march for fubfiitence
intothe enemy's country. The territories of the Venetians
lay nearest athand; but they, with their usual foresight and
prudence, had taken such precautions as secured them from
any insult. Nothing, therefore, remained but to invade the
dominions of the church, or of the Florentines; and Cle-
ment had of late ased such a part as merited the severest
vengeance from the emperor. No sooner did the papal
troops return to Rome, after the infurretion of the Colon-
nas, than, without, paying any regard to the treaty with
Moncada, he degraded the cardinal Colonna, excommuni-
cated the reft of the family, seized their places of strength,
and wafted their lands with all the cruelty which the smart
of a recent injury naturally excites. After this, he turned
his arms against Naples, and, as his operations were second-
ed by the French fleet, he made some progress towards the
conquest of that kingdom; the viceroy being no less deSfi-
tute than the other Imperial generals of the money requisite
for a vigorous defence .

1527.) These proceedings of the pope justified, in ap-

pearance, the measures which Bourbon's situation rendered
necefiary; and he set about executing them under such dif.
advantages, as furnimhed the strongest proof both of the de-
fpair to which he was reduced, and of the greatness of his
abilities which were able to surmount so many obstacles.
Having committed the government of Milan to Leyva,
whom he was not unwilling to leave behind, he began his
march in the depth of winter [Jan. 30,] at the head of
twenty-five thouland men, composed of nations differing

Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xviii. 4Z4.

from each other in language and manners; without money,
without magazines, without artillery, without carriages; in
1hort, without any of those things which are necessary to the
smallest party, and which seem essential to the existence and
motions of a great army. His route lay through a country
cut by rivers and mountains, in which the roads were almost
impra&icable; as an addition to his difficulties, the enemy's
army, superior to his own in number, was at hand to watch
all his motions, and to improve every advantage. But his
troops, impatient of their present hardships, and allured by
the hopes of immense booty, without confidering how ill
provided they were for a march, fqllowed him with great
cheetfulnefs. His firif scheme was to have made himself
master of Placentia,, and to have gratified his foldicrs with
the plunder of that city; but the vigilance of the confede-
rate generals rendered the design abortive; nor had he bet-
ter success in his projea for the redution of Bologna, which
was seasonably supplied with as many troops as secured it
from the insults of an army which had neither artillery nor
ammunition. Having failed in both these attempts to be-
come mailer of some great city, he was under a necessity of
advancing. But he had now been two months in the field;
his troops had suffered every calamity that a long march,
together with the uncommon rigour of the season, could
bring upon men destitute of all necessary accommodations in
an enemy's country; the magnificent promises to which
they trusted, had hitherto proved altogether vain; they saw
no profpet of relief; their patience, tried to the utmost,
failed at last, and they broke out into open mutiny. Some
officers, who rashly attempted to restrain them, fell vicims
to their fury; Bourbon himself, not daring to appear dur-
ing the firit transports of their rage, was obliged to fly fe-
cretly from his quarters*. But this sudden ebullition of
wrath began at last to subside; when Bourbon, who posses-
fed in a wonderful degree the art of governing the minds of

Guic, . xviii. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon. I63.

soldiers, renewed his promises with more confidence than
formerly, and alfured them that they would be soon accom.
plihed. He endeavoured to render their hardlhips more
tolerable, by partaking of them himself; he fared no better
than the meanest centinel; he marched along with them on;
foot; he joined them in singing their camp ballads, in which,.
with high praises of his valour, they mingled many firokes
of military rallery en his poverty; and wherever they came,.
he allowed them, as a foretaste of what he bad promised, to
plunder the adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged by
all these soothing arts, they entirely forgot their sufferings-
and complaints, and followed him with the fame implicit con-
fidence as formerly t.

Bourbon, meanwhile, carefully concealed his intentions..

Rome and Florence, not knowing on which the blow would
fall, were held in the most disquieting fate of fufpence.
Clement, equally foicitous for the safety of both, fluctuated:
in more than his usual uncertainty; and whilethe rapid.
approach of danger caled for prompt and decisive measures,
he spent the time in deliberations which came to no iflue, or
in taking resolutions, which, next day, his reflefs mind,
more sagacious in discerning than in obviating difficultiesi-
overturned, without being able to fix on what should be
substituted in their place. At one time he determined to
unite himself more clofdy than ever with his allies,-and to
pulh on the war with vigour; at another, he inclined to
bring all differences to a final accommodation by a treaty
with Lannoy, whd, knowing his passion for negotiation, so.
licited him inceffintly with proposals for that purpose. His
timidity at length prevailed, and led him to conclude an
agreement with Lannoy [Mar. 15,] of which the following
were the chief articles: That a suspension of arms should
take place between the Pontifical and Imperial troops for
eight months; That Clement (hould advance sixty thou-
said crowns towards satisfying the demands of the Imperi.

t Ocuvrcs de Brant. voL iv. p. 146, &c.

al army; That the Colonnas should he absolved from cen-
sure, and their former dignities and possessions be reflored to
them; That the viceroy should come to Rome, and pre-
vent Bourbon from approaching nearer to that city, or to
Florence*. On this hasty treaty, which deprived him of
all hopes of assistance from his allies, without affording him
any solid foundation of security, Clement relied so firmly,
that, like a man extricated at once out of all difficulties, he
was at perfect ease, and in the fulness of his confidence
disbanded all his troops, except as many as were sufficient to.
guard his own person. This amazing confidence of Cle-
ment's, who on every other occasion was fearful and fufpi-
cious to excess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciardini,
who, being at that time the pontifical commiffary-general
and resident in the confederate army, had great opportuni-
ties, as well as great abilities, for observing how chimerical
all his hopes were, that he imputes the pope's condut, at
this juncure, wholly to infatuation, which those who are
doomed to ruin cannot avoidt .

Lannoy, it would seem, intended to have executed the

treaty with great sincerity; and having detached Clement
from the confederacy, wished to turn Bourbon's arms againfi
the Venetians, who, of all the powers at war with the em-
peror, had exerted the greatest vigour. With this view he
detached a courier to Bourbon, informing him of the fufpen-
sion of arms, which, in the name of their common malter,
he had concluded with the pope. Bourbon had other
schemes, and he had prosecuted them now too far to think
of retreating. To have mentioned a retreat to his soldiers
would have been .dangerous; his command was independent
on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man whom be had
seasons to hate; for these reasons, without paying the leaf
regard to the meflage, he continued to ravage the ecclefi-
aftical territories, and to advance towards Florence. Upon.
this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning with new

Guic. 1. xviii. 436. t Guic. L xviii. 446.

force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and intreated and con.
jured him to put a stop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy
accordingly set out for his camp, but durst not approach it;
Bourbon's soldiers having got notice of the truce, raged and
threateed,' demanding the accomplimunent of the promises
to which they had tranfed; their general himself could hard.
ly refirain them; every person in Rome perceived that no-
thing remained but to prepare for refiring a storm which it
was now impofible to dispeL Clement alone, relying on
some ambiguous and deceitful professions which Bourbon
made of his inclination towards peace, funk back into his
former security*.

Bourbon, on his part, was far from being free from folici-

tude. All his attempts on any place of importance had hi-
therto miscarried; and Florence, towards which he had been
approaching for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke
d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his power at de-
fiance. As it now became neceflary to change his route,
and to take inflantly some new resolution, he fixed with-
out hesitation on one which was no less daring in itself,
than it was impious, according to the opinion of that
age. This was to aifault and plunder Rome. Many rea-
sons, however, prompted him to it. He was fond of
thwarting Lannoy, who had undertaken for the safety of
that city; he imagined that the emperor would be highly
pleased to fee Clement, the clief author of the league against
him, humbled; he flattered himself that, by gratifying the
rapacity of his soldiers with such immense booty, he would
attach them for ever to his interest; or (which is Rill more
probable than any of these) he hoped that by means of the
power and fame, which he would acquire from the conquest
of the first city in Christendom, that he might lay the founda-
tion of an independent power; and that, after flaking off
all connecion with the emperor, he might take poiffedio

^Guic. 1. xvii 437,, &c. Mem. dc Belay, p. loo.

of Naples, or of some of the Italian' states, in his own
name-.

Whatever his motives were, he executed his resolution

with a rapidity equal to the boldness with which he had
formed it. His soldiers, now that they had their prey full
in view, complained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want
of pay. No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany
towards Rome, than the pope, sensible at last how fallacious
the hopes had been on which he reposed, started from his
security. But no time now remained, even for a bold and
decisive pontiff to have taken proper measures, or to have
formed any effectual plan of defence. Under Clement's
feeble condu&, all was consternation, disorder, and irrefolu-
tion. He colleced, however, such of his disbanded soldiers
as fill remained in the city; he armed the artificers of Rome,
and the footmen and train-bearers of the cardinals; he re-
paired the breaches in the walls; he began to ere& new
works; 'he excommunicated Bourbon and all his troops,
branding the Germans with the name of'Lutherans, and the
Spaniards with that of MoorsS. Trufling to these ineffec-
tual military preparations, or to his spiritual arms, which
were fill more despised by rapacious soldiers, he seems to
have laid aside his natural timidity, and, contrary to the ad.
vice of all his counsellors, determined to wait the approach
of an enemy whom he might easily have avoided by a time.
ly retreat.

Bourbon, who saw the necessity of dispatch, now that his

intentions were known, advanced with such speed, that he
gained several marches on the duke d'Urbino's army, and
encamped in the plains of Rome on the evening of the fifth
of May. From thence he shewed his soldiers the palaces
and churches of that city, into which, as the capital of the
Christian commonwealth, the riches of all Europe had flow-
ed during many centuries, without having been once vio-

tBrant. iv. 171. vi. 189. Belcarii. Comment. 594,

Seckend. lib. ii.p. 68.

kated by any hoRilk hand; and commanding them to re-
frih themselves at night, as a preparation for the assault next
day, promised them, in reward oftheir toils and valour, the
poffefion of all the treasures accumulated there.

Early in the morning, Bourbon, who had determined to

diftinguih that day either by his death or the success of his
entcrprife, appeared at the head of his troops, clad in con.
plete armour, above which he wore a vest of white tissue,
that be might be more conspicuous both to his friends and
to his enemies; and as all depended on one bold imprefion,
he led them instantly to scale the walls. Three diftin& bo-
dies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards, and the las of
Italians, the three different nations of whom the army was
composed, were appointed to this service; a separate attack
was afigned to each; and the whole army advanced to sup.
port them as occasion {hould require. A thick mist conceal-
ed their approach until they reached almost the brink of the
ditch, which surrounded the fuburbsa having planted their
ladders in a moment, each brigade rushed on to the assault
with an impetuosity heightened by national emulation. They
were received at first with fortitude equal to their own.; the
Swiss in the pope's guards, and the veteran soldiers who had
been assembled, fought with a courage becoming men to
whom the defence of the nobles city in the world was en-
trufRed. Bourbon's troops, notwithstanding all their va-
lour, gained no ground, and even began to give way; when
their leader, perceiving that on this critical moment the fate
of the day depended, leaped from his horse, pressed to the
front, faatched a scaling ladder from a soldier, planted it a-
gainfit the wall, and began to mount it, encouraging his
men with his voice and hand to follow him. But at that
very inflant, a musket bullet from the ramparts pierced his
groin with a wound, which he immediately felt to be mor-
tal; but he retained so much presence of mind, as to desire
those who were near him to cover his body with a cloak,
that his death might not dishearten his troops; and soon 4-

ter he expired with a courage worthy of a better cause, and
which would have entitled him to the highest praise, if he
had thus fallen in defence of his country, not at the head of
its enemies$.

This fatal event could not be concealed from the army;

the foldiers.foon miffed their general, whom they were ac-
customed to fee in every time of danger; but, inRfead of be-
ing difiheartened by their loss, it animated them with new
valour; the name of Bourbon resounded along the line, ac.
companied with the cry of blood and revenge. The veterans
who defended the walls were soon overpowered by numbers;
the untrained body ds city recruits fled at the fight of dan-
ger, and the enemy, with irreiiftible violence rnlhed into th
town.

During the combat, Clement was employed at the high

altar of St. Peter's church in offering up to Heaven unavail-
ing prayers for vitory. No sooner was he informed that
his troops began to give way, than .he fed with precipita-
tion; and with an infatuation Rill more amazing than any
thing already mentioned, inRfead of making his escape by
the opposite gate, where there was no enemy to eppofe it,
he slut himself up, together with thirteen cardinals, the so-
reign ambassadors, and many persons of diftinccion, in the
caffle of St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, he
might have known to be an insecure retreat. In his way
from the Vatican to that fortress, he saw his troops flying
before an enemy who pursued without giving quarter; he
heard the cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and
beheld the beginning of those calamities which his own cre-
dulity and ill tondu& had brought upon his fubjeftst.

It is impoflible to describe, oreven to imagine, the misery

and horror of that scene which followed. Whatever a city
taken by torm can dread from military rage, unrefRrained

t Mem. de Bellay, zor. Guic. lib. xviii. p. 445, &c. Ocuv. dc

Brant. iv. 257, &c;

t Jov. Vit. Coloa. I6,.
Vo II. Z

by discipline whatever excels the ferocity of the Germanso
the avarice of the Spaniards, or the licentiousness of the Ita-
lias could commit, there the wretched inhabitants were o-
bliged to susser. Churches, palaces, and the houses of pri-
vate persons, were plundered without diftinion. No age,
or chaaer, or sex, was exempt from injury. Cardinals
nobles, pries, matrons, virgins, were all the prey of soldiers,
and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor
did there outrages cease, as is ufal in towns which are car-
ried by afiault, when the first fury of the storm was over;
the Imperialists kept poffeflon of Rome several months; and,
during all that time, the infolenee and brutality of the fol-
diers hardly abated. Their booty in ready money alone a-
mounted to a million of ducats; what they raised by ran-
foms and exations far exceeded that fum. Rome, though
taken several different times by the northern nations who
over-ran the empire in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous and heathen
Huns, Vandals, or Goths, as now by the bigotted subje&s
of a Catholic monarch§.

After Bourbon's death, the command of the Imperial ar-

my devolved on Philbfert de Chalons prince of Orange, who
with difficult prevaled on as many of his soldiers to desist
from the pillage as were neceflary to invest the castle of St.
Angelo. Clement was immediately sensible of his error in
having retired into that iR-provided and untenable fort. Bttt
as the Imperialifs, scoring discipline, and intent only on
plunder, pushed the siege with little vigour, he did not de-
fpair of holding out until the duke d'Urbino could come to
his relief. That general advanced at the head of an army
composed of Venetians, Florentines, and Swiss, in the pay
of France, of fnfficient frength to have delivered Clement

S Jo. Vit. Colon. 166. Guicib. xvill. 440, &c. Comment.

de Capt Urbe Rome, ap. Scardium, ii. 130. Ulloa Vita dell
Carlo Y.p. XI &c. Gianon HitLof Nap. l xxgi. c. 3. P-
5o7.

from the preset danger. But d'Urbino, preferring the in-
dulgence of his hatred against the family of Medici to the
glory of delivering the capital of Christendom, and the head
of the church, pronounced the enterprise to be toohazardousa
and from anexquifite refinement in revenge, having marched
forward so far, that his army being seen from the ramparts
of St. Angelo, flattered the pope with the profpeEt of cer.
tain relief, he immediately wheeled about and retiredt. Cle-
ment, deprived of every resource, and reduced to such extre-
mity of famine as to feed on asses fleth , was obliged to capi-
tulate [June 6] on such conditions as the conquerors were
pleased to prescribe. He agreed to pay four hundred thou-
sand ducats to the army; to surrender to the emperor all the
places. of strength belonging to the churchi and, besides giv-
ing hostages, to remain a prisoner himself until the chief ar-
ticles were performed. He was committed to the care of
Alarcon, who, by his severe vigilance in guarding Francis,
had given full proof of his being qualified for that office; and
thus, by a singular accident, the fame man had the custody
of the two most illuitrious personages who had been made
prisoners in Europe during several ages.

The account of this extraordinary and unexpeaed event

was no less surprising than agreeable to the emperor. But
in order to conceal his joy from his fubjets, who were filled
with horror at the success and crimes of their countrymen,
and to lessen the indignation of the reft of Europe, he de.
dared that Rome had been assaulted without any order from
him. He wrote to all the princes with whom he was in
alliance, difclairning his having had any knowledge of Bour-
bon's intention *. He put himself and eourt into mourn-
ing; commanded the rejoicings which had been ordered for
the birth of his son Philip to be tfopped; and employed an
artifice no less hypocritical than gross, he appointed prayers
and proceflions throughout all Spain for the recovery of the

t Guic. I. xviii. 4so. § Jov. Vit. Colon. 167-

* ul'celli Lettere di Principi, ii. -34.

pope's liberty, which, by an order to his generals, he could
have immediately granted himt.

The good fortune of the house of Austria was no left

conspicuous in another part of Europe. Solyman having
invaded Hungary with an army of three hundred thousand
men, Lewis II. king of that country and of Bohemia, a weak
and inexperienced prince, advanced rashly to meet him with
a body of men which did not amount to thirty thousand.
With an imprudence fill more unpardonable, he gave the
command of these troops to Paul Tomorri, a Francilcan
monk, archbifop of Golocza. This awkward general, in
the dress of his order, girt with its cord, marched at the
head of the troops; and, hurried on by his own prefump-
tion, as well as by the impetuosity of nobles who despised
danger, but were impatient of long service, he fought the
fatal battle of Mohacz rAuguft 29, 1526], in which the
king, the flower of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of
twenty thousand men, fell the vietims of his folly and ill
condua. Solvman, after his viAory, seized and kept pof.
feflion of several towns of the greatest strength in the south-
ern provinces of Hungary, and, over-running the reft of
the country, carried near two hundred thousand persons into
captivity. As Lewis was the last male of the royal family
of Jagellon, the archduke Ferdinand claimed both his
crowns. This claim was founded on a double title; the one
derived from the ancient pretensions of the house of Aufiria
to both kingdoms; the other from the right of his wife, the
only filer of the deceased monarch. The feudal inftitu-
tions, however, subsisted both in Hungary and Bohemia in
such vigour, and the nobles poffeifd such extensive power
that the crowns were still eletive, and Ferdinand's rights,
if they had not been powerfully supported, would have met
with little regard. But his own personal merit; the refped
due to the brother of the greatest monarch in Christendom;

t Slid. 1c9. Sandov. i. 8Xz. Mauroc. Hist. Veneta, lib. iii.
arc.

the necessity of chufing a prince able to afford his. fiibjets
some additional prote&ion againit the Turkiih arms, which
as they had recently felt their power, they greatly dreaded;
together with the intrigues of his fiter, who had been mar-
ried to the late king, overcame the prejudices which the
Hungarians had conceived against the archduke as a foreign-
er; and though a considerable party voted for the Vaywode
of Tranfilvania, at length secured Ferdinand the throne of
that kingdom. The states of Bohemia imitated the exam-
ple of their neighbour kindom; but in order to ascertain
and secure their own privileges, they obliged Ferdinand, be-
fore his coronation, to subscribe a deed which they termed a
Roverfe, declaring that he held that crown not by any
previous right, but by their gratuitous and voluntary dec.
tion. By such a valt accefiion of territories, the hereditary
poffeTfion of which they secured in process of time to their
family, the princes of the house of Austria attained that pre.
eminence in power which hath rendered them. o formidable
to the reft of Germany§.

The dissensions between the pope and emperor proved ex.

tremely favourable to the progrefa of Lutheranifm. Charles,
exasperated by Clement's condu&, and fully employed ia
opposing the league which he had formed against him, had
little inclination, and less leisure, to take any measures for
suppressing the new opinions in Germany. In a diet of the
empire held at Spires [June 25, 1526], the fate of religion
came to be confidered; and all that the emperor reqpired of
the princes was, that they would wait patiently, and with-
out encouraging innovations, for the meeting of a general
council which he had demanded of the pope. They, in re-
turn, acknowledged the convocation of a council to be the
proper and regular ftep towards reforming abuses in the
church; but contended that a national council held in Ger.

§ Steph. Broderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in Campo.

Mohacz, ap. Scardium, ii. Z18. P. Barre Hilt. d' Allemague,
tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

many would be more effecual for that purpose than what he
had proposed. To his advice, concerning the discourage-
ment of innovtions, they paid so little regard, that even
daring the meeting of the diet at Spires, the divines who
attended the elector of Saxony and landgrave of Heffe-Caf
fel thither, preached publicly and administered the facramente
according to the rites of the reformed church *. The em-
peror's own example emboldened the Germans to treat the
papal authority with little reverence. During the heat of
his resentment agai~ Clement, he had published a long re-
ply to an angry brief, which the pope had intended as an
apology for his own conduc. In this manifesto, the em.
peror, after having enumerated many instances of that pon-
tiffs ingratitude, deceit and ambition, all which he painted
in the strongest and most aggravated colours, appealed from
him to a general council. At the fame time he wrote to
the college of cardinals, complaining of Clement's partiality
and injustice; and requiring them, if he refuted or delayed
to cal a council, to. Ihew their concern for the peace of the
Christian church, so lhamefully neglcted by its chiefpaftorr
by summoning that assembly iu their own name :. This
manifesto, little inferior in virulence to the invectives of Lu-
ther himself, was dispersed over Germany with great indus-
try, and being eagerly read by pedons of every rank, did
much more than counterbalance the effet of all Charles's
declarations against the new opinions.

*Sleid. zoj. t Goldaf. Pelit. Imper. p. 984.

BND Or THRE ICOND VOLUMt.
